
*'*<<*«■ ?! 



— . 











% 



000357 
APR 2 4 1999 



The Philippine Revolution and Beyond 
l olunie l 












i 









The Philippine Revolution and Beyond 

Volume I 



Papers from the International Conference 
on the Centennial of the 1896 Philippine Revolution 



Elmer A. Ordonez 

EDITOR 

Bernard ita Reyes Churchill 
Serafin D. Quiason 
Samuel K. Tan 

EDITORIAL CONSULTANTS 



PHILIPPINE CENTENNIAL COMMISSION 
NAPIONAI. COMMISSION FOR CULTURE AND THE ARTS 
MANILA. PHILIPPINES 
1 098 




-Pczp 
\qov 
If. j 

Copyright © 1 998 

Philippine Centennial Commission / Rimer A Ordonez 

ISBN 971-92018-1-9 



ORGANIZING COMMITTEE 2k 

CHAIRMAN 
Salvador H. Laurci 



CO-CHAIRS 

Carmen D. Padilla Scrafin I) Q mason 

CON F EREN CE DIR EC 7\ C j R 
Samuel K. Tan 



BUDGET AND FINANCE 
Quintin P. Pastrana 
Ricardo V. de Villa 

SPONSORS COMMITTEE 
LuisJ. Morales 



PROGRAM C ( )MMFI TEE 
Bernardita R. Churchill 
F.melita V. Almosara 

SOCIALS CO M M IT I ' KF. 

Danny T. Corpu/ 



P ROJ ECT COC ) RD IN ATO RS 
Mat-Lien R. Quiaoit L.ita Ang de Jesus 



S PUBLICATIONS COMM I I PEE £ 

CHAIRMAN 
Bias Ople 

VICE-CHAIRMAN 
Adrian E. Cristobal 



MEMBERS 

Enrique M. Fernando Carmen Guerrero-Nakpil 

Isagani A. Cruz Serafm D. Quiason 

Florangel R. Braid Teodoro L. Locsin Jr. 

Jose David Lapuz 



S SPONSORS 
San Miguel Brewing Phils. 
MBf Mastercard 
Coca-Cola Bottlers Phils., Inc. 
Federal Express 
LaTondena Distillers, Inc. 



Book design and printing by Paragraphic^® 



Contents 



Prefaratory Note i\ 

Ulmer A. ( )rdonez 

Notes on tlu* Conference xi 

Rernardita Reyes ( hurehill 

Foreword xiv 

Salvador 1 1. Laurel 

The Philippine Revolution: The Past is Present \\i 

President Ridel V. Ramos 

Introduction of Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim xxi 

Salvador H. Laurel 

The Birth of the Asian Renaissance xxiii 

Anwar Ibrahim 

PERSPECTIVES 

The Filipino Revolution in Our Collective Mentorv 3 

Onofre D. Corpuz 

Utopia and Revolution: The Philippine experience 44 

Jose S. Arcilla, S.J. 

The Revolution of 18 % and the Mythology of the Nation State 61 

Reynaldo C. lleto 

Revolutionary Ideology and Culture Circa 18 % 72 

Elmer A. Ordonez 

Political Philosophy of the Philippine Revolution 88 

Rafaelita Hilario-Soriano 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AM) BE Y< )NI) 



CONTEXTS AND PERSONAGES 

Principales v Conquistadores: Why it Took the Filipinos So Long 

to End Spanish Domination I<>5 

Luis Camara Dery 

The Decline of Spanish Dominion in the Philippines 125 

Enrique Baltar Rodriguez 

Spanish Politics and the Philippines in the 19th Century 1 1 1 

Lourdes Diaz-Trechuelo 

Materials Ligeros vs. Materials Fuertes: The Conflict Between 

Nipa Huts and Stone Buildings in 19th-century Manila 1 (>() 

Xavier Huetz de Lemps 

The State of International Politics and Relations in the 19th Century 1 ~ 

Jose David Lapuz 

Capitalism and Welfare in 1 9th-century Philippines 1^1 

Norman G. Owen 

Land and the Philippine Revolution: An Ecologist’s Perspective I () - 

Felix I. Rodriguez 

Landed Estates in Colonial Philippines and Mexico » 1 ^ 

Nicholas P. Cushner 

In Search of the Masses: Non-confrontational Forms of Dissent 

in Late 19th-century Philippines 229 

Gregory E.A. Bankoff 

The Native Clergy From the Late 19th Century to the Early 2()th Century 245 

Antolin V. Uy, S. V.D. 

Faustino Villafranca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 271 

Perfecto M. Terra Jr. 

Marcelo H. del Pilar: His Religious Conversions 294 

Fidel Villarroel, O.P 

Ferdinand Blumentritt and the Philippine Revolution 326 

Harry Sichrovsky 



VI 



( on tents 



Mason r\ and tilt* Philippine Revolution 55 - 

Reynaldo S. Fajardo 

How and W in was tin* Dale* of tlu* Philippine Revolution 

Advanced to 21 August 18%? .555 

Isaeio Rodriguez Rodriguez. ( l S.A. 

THE REVOLUTION UNDER 
WESTERN AND ASIAN EYES 

The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands 

and the Indies Press. 18%/%: A Study in “Localization" 385 

Otto run den Muijzenberg 

The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 

Plus Two British Army Officers -t()8 

Sent fit i D. Quiuson 

The Philippine Revolution Mewed from Shanghai. 1 895- 18% 44O 

Frederick G. Hoyt 

The Philippine Revolution. Jose Rizal. and Philippine Independence 

in the Malay Nationalist Movement 46O 

Rutt iLt!) Adam 

The Chinese Perception of the Revolution 469 

Chit Hong-yuan 

ART, LITERATURE, MUSIC 

Art in the Service of History: The Spanish Legacy in Francisco Goya’s 

Painting of the Junta I)e La Real Companfa I)e Pilipinas, 1815 483 

Teresita Miranda- Tchou 

The Past Is No Longer Only What It Used To Be 50.5 

Leonard C. Casper 

The Novel as Historical Document of Revolution 508 

Belinda Fy- Casper 



vii 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND Bl YOND 



The Music of the Philippine Revolution s 1 > 

Antonio C. Hila 

Music and Constructions of Nationalism 

During the American Era (1898-1945) : Filipino and American Initiatives sj * 

Ricardo D. Trimillos 






viii 



Prefatory Note 



T.I MI R A. Orponiv. 

University of the Philippines Lyceum of the Philippines, Philippines 



T his publication derives its title from the theme of the International Confer- 
ence on the Centennial of the 1896 Philippine Revolution held on 21-23 
August 1996 at the Manila Hotel. The Philipp ine Revolution and Beyond ’ strictly 
speaking, does not constitute the proceedings of the conference — which would 
normally include the off-paper discussions of the various panels — but onlv repre- 
sents a substantial part (about 70 percent) of the conference output. Hence, as the 
subtitle says, papers from the conference. 

The parameters of this publication were, of course, set by the editorial com- 
mittee, which saw the necessity of reducing the number of papers to be included 
for practical reasons. 1 he editor then took on the task of providing some kind of 
coherent order — a typology if you may — to the papers given tags in the conference 
program. Things began to fall into place, as it were, for the editing and book de- 
sign. 

Reading and rereading the papers became a journey into time zones — back 
and forth — indeed not just within a century but centuries earlier and beyond. The 
historian knows this, but one also realizes that tracking down the story of the Phil- 
ippine revolution is not just the historiographers task — for in the conference were 
people from various disciplines and concerns who were by no means playing sec- 
ondary roles in what might be earlier conceived as the historians domain. Beyond 
nationality and professional background the participants were all one in their abid- 
ing interest in the first nationalist revolution in Asia and its aftermath. 



IX 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOl.L'l K )N AM > Bl Y< »M > 



The publication as a visible product of the conference ov.es its genesis ;< » • in 
Philippine Centennial Commission beaded by l )r. Salvador 11 I ante the 
Commissions Publication Committee led by Senator Bins P ( )plc and tin imua 
tive of a conference group composed of I )r. Bernardita Keyes < hurchill Mrs 
Carmen D. Padilla, Dr. Serafin D. Quiason, I )r. Samuel K. Ian. and 1 )r. Ma l msa 
Camagay. Logistical and technical support came from both the staffs <>f the I’hihp 
pine Centennial Commission and the National Commission for < ulture and the 
Arts. 



Notes on the Conference 



Bi kna roita Rim s Curiumi l 
University of the Philippines, Queron City, Philippines 



T lie Internationa] Conference on the Centennial of the 1896 Philippine Revo- 
lution was almost two years in the making — it was conceived of in November 
1 994 when the Committee on Historical Research of the National Commission 
for Culture and the Arts submitted a proposal to convene an international confer- 
ence to the Philippine Centennial Commission. I he conceptual framework and 
plan for the conference were put together by Dr. Samuel K. Tan and myself, both 
of us in our capacity as members of the NCCA-Committee on Historical Research. 

In adopting the conference theme — “The Philippine Revolution and Be- 
yond — the organizing committee hoped that the papers would reflect not simply 
the events of the revolutionary period (1896-1902), commencing with the out- 
break of the revolution in August 1 896, but also historical developments or condi- 
tions in the century preceding this momentous event — social, political, economic, 
cultural, intellectual — that might have contributed to the Revolution of 1896 
which culminated in the declaration of Philippine independence on 12 June 1898 
and the establishment of the first Philippine republic in Malolos on 23 January 
1899. The historiography of the Philippine revolution is extensive but it has been, 
until recently, narrowly focused on the tlustrado leadership of the revolutionary/ 
nationalist movement and the events that unfolded in Manila, Cavite, and 
Malolos. We do know that the Katipunan and the revolution played out also in 
other regions in the Philippines and we would like to see what happened as well in 
the towns and provinces outside the heartland of the revolution in Luzon and how 
the masses of Filipinos felt about and responded to the movement. 



XI 



THE PHILIPPINE, REVOI.LTK )N AN I ) HI- Vc >' .1 > 



The Philippine revolution, the first against colonial rule in Asia, w as an c\ 
of international significance and we wanted that momentous period disc u cd in 
the context of the revolutions and nationalist movements of other countries, espe- 
cially in Asia. We also wanted to see the reactions/reporting on the event b\ toieign 
countries aware of what was going on in the Philippines or concerned about Phil 
ippine affairs. 1 he martyrdom of Jose Rizal in December 189b was a landmark 
event in the Filipinos’ struggle for liberation from colonial rule, and so the last da\ 
of the conference focused on papers on this national hero. 

As the Philippines commemorates a hundred years since the launc hmg < >t the 
revolution against Spanish colonial rule, we felt it would be useful for Filipinos t<> 
en g a g e m a national assessment of the state of the nation and its nat lonal life in t he 
past 100 years so we can have a vision of where the future will lead us. \\ ith the 
legacy of the revolution as starting point, we hope we can arrive at a concept of 
freedom “a century hence.” This was the reason why there are papers whn h deal 
with more contemporary events and developments beyond the time-frame of the 
revolution itself. 

There were91 papers presented during the conference. As a cardinal rule, we 
accepted for presentation only those papers that had not been presented in am 
conference, national or international, unless revisions had been made so that a new 
paper was being presented. It will be noted that the line-up of speakers includes old 
and established names in Philippine studies as well as up-and-coming new and 
young Filipinists doing important work on the Philippines and presenting re- 
searches based on archival materials that are not available in the Philippines or have 
not been used previously by other scholars. 

The speakers and participants came from Europe, Asia, the Americas and the 
Caribbean, Australia, and New Zealand — countries whose histories have been 
linked to ours or whose historical experiences have been similar to our own. From 
the Spanish-speaking countries, we had speakers from Spain, Cuba, Mexico, and 
Puerto Rico. These countries are themselves celebrating their own centennial of 
1898, and their participation, especially Cuba and Puerto Rico, connected the 
P ilippines for the first time with their academics. From Europe, we had speakers 
rom England, France, Russia, Germany, the Netherl ands, Austria, and the Czech 
epublic. We are fortunate, especially for the attendance of Austin Coates, a noted 
Rizal biographer, for that would be the last time we would have the privilege and 
onor of his participation, for he passed away recently. From Asia, we had sc holars 
rom the Peoples Republic of China, Hong Kong, India, Malaysia, Taiwan, Thai- 
and, and Singapore. The rest of the foreign speakers came from the United States, 
some of whom have not been back to the Philippines in a long while. Ihe majority 
o t e speakers were resident Filipino scholars and Filipinos abroad who came 
ome or the conference. In summary, there were 47 foreign speakers and 4 1 Fili- 
pinos, including those from abroad. In general, we can say that the papers gave 
solid information that were useful in providing new data or perspective on many 
aspects of Philippine history. 



Xll 



( HI Kc Hll l Xore* on the ( onfrnrnee 



I Ik- papers cover a broad range of topio. not just on the revolution itself, but 
also art, literature and culture, and the “other revolutions during this period. A 
few of the papers present the revolutionarv movement elsew here in the Philippines 
and the view of the resolution from the outside. And some others present a tele- 
scopic view of the present looking back to the past a hundred vears ago. There are 
IS papers on Ri/al. Needless to saw the wealth of information provided by these 
papers has been enormous. I he sessions at the conference were described as excit- 
ing as they were provocative and instructive, and for mam, trulv a learning experi- 
ence. 

booking back, I cannot help but feel that the conference was indeed a memo- 
rable e\ent of the Philippine centennial. 1 he opening ceremony was a moving 
event, ke\ noted by no less than President bielel \. Ramos, who elelivered an elo- 
ejuent speech on the significance of the centennial and this conference, with wel- 
come addresses by NC;c:A bxecutive Director Carmen O. Padilla and PCC Chair- 
man Salvador I I. l aurel, and ending with a peace ritual led by the Philippine Kdu- 
cational Theater Association that touched all of us and made us all swell with pride 
as Tihpmos. I he climax of the last day was the inspiring message from the Depurv 
Prime Minister of Malaysia, the Honorable Anwar Ibrahim, Challenging all of us 
to respond to t he need to work for the economic freedom of our people". 

• he conference was, I hope, an unforgettable experience— for the organizing 
committee who attended to all the details of the conference, for the secretariat from 
the Philippine Centennial Commission, the National Commission for Culture 
and the Arts, and the National Historical Institute, for the speakers who provided 
the highlights of the conference and the moderators who managed the sessions ef- 
ficiently, and for the participants from abroad and all over the Philippines. Our 
thanks and appreciation go to all of them. 



Foreword 



Salvador H. Laikii 

Chairman, Philippine Centennial Commission 



O n 21-23 August 1996, more than a thousand participants from the Philip 
pines and abroad attended the International Conference on the ( Centennial 
of the 1896 Philippine Revolution at the historic Manila Hotel. The participants 
represented various disciplines of the academe, the literary community, the press, 
and the government — all interested in the events, personages, contexts, and issues 
of that great historical conjuncture: the 1896 Philippine Revolution that led to the 
declaration of independence at Kawit, Cavite, on 12 June 1898, and the establish- 
ment of the first constitutional democracy at the Malolos (Congress on 2 } January 
1899. 

The conference was the fruition of the joint efforts of the Philippine ( Centen- 
nial Commission and the National Commission for Culture and the Arts and it is 
only fitting that the proceedings thereof be published and made available to the 
public. The Philippine Centennial Commission has, therefore, decided to under- 
write the publication of the proceedings with the very theme of the conference as 
its title — The Philippine Revolution and Beyond. 

The Philippine Centennial Commission acknowledges the initiative of the 
historical research committee of the National Commission for Culture and the 
Arts in conceptualizing the conference and in bringing together leading historians, 
scholars, and writers who constituted the different discussion panels. No less than 
the president of the Philippine Republic, His Excellency, Fidel V. Ramos, deliv- 
ered the keynote address. And to reciprocate the great honor extended to the Phil- 
ippines by Malaysia for sponsoring a conference on Jose Rizal at Kuala Lumpur in 
1995. Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, the prime mover of the 



XIV 



IAl'RM ForrwonJ 



Kuala I umpur conference* and himself an ardent Rizalist, was invited to deliver a 
speech on how Ri/als ideas and the Philippine revolution influenced subsequent 
national liberation movements in Asia. 

I he Manila conference covered a wide range of topics about the 1896 Phil- 
ippine Revolution. 1 he panelists did not mince words nor avoid controversv in 
their discussions. I he livelv, spirited, and sometimes heated discussions during the 
workshops and the open forums that followed everv lecture and speech were 
equallv interesting. There was indeed free and unhampered discussion on several 
controversial issues in Philippine history. 1 his was of course expected from an as- 
semble of scholars and writers to whom we are grateful for sharing with the public 
the results of their judicious study and research on the 1896 Philippine Revolu- 
tion. If there seemed to be an imbalance or apparent neglect of important histori- 
cal figures, we w'ere assured by the conference committee that the response to the 
call for papers was the basis for constituting the panels. Still, the papers attest to a 
comprehensive coverage of the Philippine revolution well bevond 1896-1898. 

The Philippine Revolution and Beyond as well as another forthcoming publi- 
cation, Toward the hirst Asian Repuhlie , the product of another international con- 
ference held in Jakarta in August 1997, mav well be two of the touchstones of the 
Philippine centennial celebration this year. 



xv 



The Philippine Revolution 

The Past is Present 



President Fidei V. Ramos 

Pepublic of the Philippines 



W e begin with words of thanks for all of you who arc making, this 
happen — for the international scholars who have traveled great distances to 
take part in this dialogue; for the Filipino historians who have been engaged all 
these years in the reconstruction and interpretation of our history; and for the or- 
ganizers, who were not daunted by the task of gathering this many brilliant minds 
under one roof. 

1 he calendar defines the significance — and the timeliness — of this confer- 
ence. This year we mark the centennial of the Philippine revolution. This week 1 6 
to 22 August, we celebrate Peace and Freedom Week. Two days f rom now on Fri- 

day, 23 August — our people and our country will commemorate the ( Tv of Putiacl 
Lawin, which signaled the start of the Philippine Revolution of 1 896. 

It is striking that our revolution started — neither with a “shot heard round 
the world’ nor with the spilling of blood — but with the singular act of Andres 

Bonifacio and his fellow Katipuneros tearing up their cedillas or tax certificates 

the symbol of Spanish sovereignty over the Filipinos. 

On 30 December, we will mark the centennial of the martyrdom of Jose 
Rizal, whose life and work more than anything else inspired our national revolu- 
tion, which led to General Emilio Aguinaldo’s proclamation of independence from 
Spain on 12 June 1898. From these revolutionary beginnings the first republic in 
Asia was born. 

Rizal wrote on the eve of his execution, in his “Mi Ultimo Adios” (Mv Last 
Farewell): When my death is forgotten, my grave unmarked, let the plow turn the 



xv 1 



RAMOS The Philippine Revolution: The l\tst is Present 



earth where 1 lie. Mav mv dust make fertile the fields. \\ here the grass throws 
thieklv. there I dwell. W hen night comes and my grave in darkness lies, break not 
the peace, kneel before the mystery. If you hear the sound of music, be not afraid." 

Ri/als death is not forgotten, and the spot where he fell, on the old 
Bagumbavan Park near this historic Manila Hotel, is for us Filipinos, hallowed 
ground, lo commemorate the centennial of Ri/als martyrdom. 1 app roved yester- 
day the commissioning and minting of a special P500 silver coin. 

Noting Men Born to be Heroes 

Of the qualities of our heroes of the Propaganda Movement and the resolution, 
the most strikin'; was their youth. At 26, Rizal had finished his incendiary novel. 
Noli Me Tangere, which was followed quickly by its sequel, El Eilibustcnsmo — and 
he was dead at 35. 

Andres Bonifacio founded the secret society Katipunan when he was 26 years 
old. When the revolution began. Bonifacio's faithful deputy. Hmilio Jacinto, was 
still four months short of 2 1 . Emilio Aguinaldo, at age 2", was the victorious gen- 
eral of the revolution and. at 26. president of Asias first republic. 

Not coincidentally we also commemorate today the 13th anniversary of the 
martyrdom of Benigno “Ninov" Aquino Jr., whose assassination on 21 August, 
1983 set off the “People Power Revolution" that freed our country from dictator- 
ship in February 1986. 

In the speech he had prepared for his homecoming- a speech he ik\ci deli\ 
ered because he was taken off the plane he flew in and shot dead on the tarmac- 
Ninoy wrote: 

The Filipino asks for nothing more, but will surely ask for nothing less 
than all the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution... the most 
sacred legacies from the founding fathers. 

In the same manner that Jose Rizals martyrdom paved the way for Philip- 
pine independence in 1898, Ninov inspired the awakening and unification of our 
people towards the restoration of democracy and the rule of law in our country. 
Now that Ninoy’s dream of a truly democratic society is well on the wav to realiza- 
tion. we can redirect our collective efforts to working for the development of our 
nation and the upliftment of the lives of our people. 

This conference is a vivid reminder that we — the grateful countrymen of 
Bonifacio, Rizal, Aguinaldo, and Ninoy Aquino — have not forgotten their word 
and their example. The nation they founded and strengthened abides and endures 
because we as a people have kept faith with them. 



XV 11 



THF. I’HII.IPI’INI’ RI-A'C >11 I K )N AN I > Hi Y< )M ) 



An International Dimension to the Revolution 

But there is yet another dimension to this conference on the Philippine re\ < >lut i< >n 
With all of you, I share the conviction that this landmark period in our 1 1 1 st < » i \ 
deserves — and has long deserved — international attention and impure. | <>r it is not 
tor nothing that the Philippine revolution gave birth to the first tree republic in 
Asia. 

As we retrace the onset of independence struggles in the old colonial world, 
we find, again and again, echoes, reverberations, of what took place in the Philip 
pines a hundred years ago. 

For instance, in his historical novel Awakenings, the well-know n Indonesian 
writer Pramoedya AnantaToer mem 0 riali 7 .es what our forebears did at the turn ot 
the century. In a lengthy passage, one of Pramoedya’s characters speaks ot the situ 
ation in the Philippines at the time, and of how he fervently hopes that somedas 
the peoples of the Netherlands Indies will follow the example of the I ihpmc >s. 

1 he more European science and learning natives obtain, whatever then 
race or nation, the more it is certain they will follow in the footsteps ot the I 1I1 
pino natives, trying to free themselves from European rule. The filipmo n., 
tives wanted to stand up themselves as a free nation, acknowledged In all the 
civilized nations of the world. 



The “Hidden History ” of the Revolution 

Yet much of the significance of the Philippine revolution lies in what historians 
call “hidden history” because most historical writing was written from the western 
viewpoint, with its unavoidable prejudices, omissions, and self-praise 

Even the honorific terms of national struggle have been denied us. ( ) ur revo- 
lution has often been described as a mere “rebellion” and the war we waged against 
the Americans almost immediately afterwards in 1899 — to preserve the freedom 
we had won from the Spaniards — has been termed an “insurrection." 

I assure you we have no desire to inflate the significance of our revolution; we 
seek only to know all the facts and to learn its true measure. And these onlv you as 
scholars can supply. 

The Past in the Present 

What significance other peoples and other nations may find in this exercise of 
probing the Philippine revolutionary past we can only dimly imagine. But for our 
country and the Filipino people this is of transcendent meaning and importance. 

William Faulkner once said: “History is not ‘was,’ it’s ‘is.’” The past is always 
in the present and it will be in the future. 



xviii 



RAMOS The Philippine Revolution: The Past is Ihrsent 



In a similar vein, Ri/al wrote: “\\ e are anxious to learn of the Philippine past, 
which we need to understand... so that we can [dan intelligently for the future.'' 

Nothing in the past tells us more about ourselves — of what we as a people are 
capable — than the great acts of courage and faith that made us a nation. And no 
event in our historv lifted our peoples sights more to the future than the Revolu- 
tion of 1 896. 

It has often been said that the Philippine revolution ended in failure because 
we Filipinos succeeded in overthrowing Spanish rule only to fall into the hands of 
an American republic seeking its “manifest destiny. It has also been said that since 
1896, our historv has been one long, unfinished story of completing our revolu- 
tion. 

The Revolution's Relevance to Our Own Tunes 



Without presuming to do the work of scholars and historians, 1 believe that in this 
conference lies the abiding relevance of the Revolution of 1896 to our own times 
and the living connection of our people to the taproot of nationhood. 

At one end, we have alwavs known the continuity of our revolutionary 
struggle: our struggle for independence and national sovereignty; our struggle for 
democracv and human rights; and our struggle for peace and development. 1 he 
struggle against foreign domination started with chieftain Lapu-Lapus cry at 
Mactan after defeating Magellan in April 1 52 1 : “I bow to no man, I bow allegiance 
only to my people." 

At the other end, we acutelv feel the tension between the claims of tradition 
and the dynamics of modernization. At every stage in our history, and in every 
sphere of our lives, we have constantlv struggled to make past and present coex- 
ist — to be harmonized in a united whole as we face the challenges of the 21st cen- 
tury. 

As we make our way toward the future, we are more than ever conscious of 
the revolutionary dreams we must redeem and the balance we must strike between 
tradition and modernization. 

In our striving to modernize our national society and to win our place of 
dignity in the world community we need more than ever to renew ourselves in the 
roots and sources of our nationhood. We need to return afresh to the parent stem 
of our republic and to derive inspiration from the life and work of our heroes. 

The dangers to a nation are not only violence and force from within and 
without. Peril to the nation can also come from forgetting. 

As one Filipino proverb puts it: “Ang di marunong lumingon sa pinang- 
galingan, ay di makararating sa paroroonan." (He who does not look back where 
he came from will never get where he wants to go.) 



xix 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND B! Y< )ND 



The Struggle for Peace and Development in Our Time 

Thisiswhywe regard history as a seamless web — and why wc who lead this nation 
today see ourselves as heirs to heroes. 

My administration continues to promote our heroes cause of national units. 

I have just returned from a peace mission in Lanao del Sur in southern 
Mindanao where a Muslim secessionist movement has been lighting the Philip 
pine state for nearly 30 years at the cost of more than 1 20,000 lives, last Mondav. 
I met the movement’s leader, Nur Misuari, chairman of the Moro National 1 abera- 
tion Front (MNLF), and we forged a commitment to create a new /one of peace 
and development (ZOPAD) in the south. 

Mr. Misuari and I agreed to seize the chance our patient negotiators have 
created — to take bold steps together, to reshape the future of Mindanao, to turn 
conflict into reconciliation, mutual distrust into unity, stagnation and poverty into 
economic growth, social cohesion, and sustainable development. 

In this way — by building peace and unity — we carry on the work of our he- 
roes of modernizing the Filipino nation. 



We Will Complete the Revolution 

At the time of the Philippine revolution, we were a colonized country of some D 2 

million people. Today, 100 years later, we are a free, open, and democratic republic 
of 69 million people. 

One hundred years ago, the Filipino nation was born of the heroism of voting 
patriots like Jose Rizal and Andres Bonifacio. Now, through the collective efforts 
and resilience of the present generations, we will complete the revolution bv realiz- 
ing its vision of freedom and peace, of sharing, caring, and daring 

Today, we would be able to tell Jose Rizal and our entire pantheon of heroes: 
We, your grateful people, have not forgotten your sacrifice. We now use the plow 
to turn the earth of your legacy, so that enduring peace and sustained development 
may reign throughout this land we love.” 

Thank you once again for honoring us in Manila with your light of knowl- 
edge and to help us win a brighter future. 

Mabuhay and God bless you all. 



xx 



Introduction of 

Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim 



Saivador H. Lal rm 

Chairman of the Philippine Centennial Commission 



yVTe arc honored to have with us this afternoon a very distinguished 
VV leader and scholar — predictable the next Prime Minister of Malaysia — who 
has come to participate in this historic conference. 

I first met him some eight years ago in Kuala Lumpur. He was then the up- 
and-coming minister of education and 1 was immediately impressed by his erudi- 
tion, his innovative ideas, and his tremendous popularity among the youth. 

1 met him again in Kuala Lumpur last October during the International 
Conference on Jose Rizal, of which he was the moving spirit. And I was amazed at 
his vast knowledge and familiarity with the life and writings of Jose Rizal. Lhe 



Ateneo University recently conferred upon him a Doctorate in Humane Letters, 
honoris causa , acknowledging that his is “the influential voice and the vibrant po- 
litical will which is now inspiring other leaders of his generation to translate Rizal’s 
ideas into reality.” 

His meteoric rise from student leader to deputy prime minister and finance 
minister of his country is perhaps attributable to his Rizalian standards of hard 
work, devotion, and discipline, and to his inspired and inspiring vision of where 
his country and his region ought to be in the next century. 

There are a number of similarities between Anwar Ibrahim and Jose Rizal. 
Like Rizal, our guest speaker started out as a young student activist who spoke out 
boldly against political corruption, rural poverty, and abuse of authority. Like 
Rizal, he was also detained for two years without trial for championing the human 
rights of his people. And like Rizal, he has not confined his time and his talents to 



XX 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Yc )NI ) 



parochial interests, hut has reached out to promote greater inierculturai under 
standing amongst all peoples. 

He envisions a more cohesive Southeast Asian region through closer mu ra! 
and economic interaction. During his visit to Manila last April, we launched tor 
our two countries the Jose Rizal Asian Fellowship Program in honor of our national 
hero in order to ensure greater dissemination of Ri/als ideas on human dignrtv. 
peace, and freedom, not only in Asia hut all over the world. I his fellowship pro 
gram will establish a continuing exchange of scholars in the fields of Instore . sul 
ture, arts, politics, economics, finance, and medicine within the Southeast \sian 
region and we have called upon other Southeast Asian nations to join and support 
this program. 

Ladies and gentlemen, it is my honor, my pride, and tnv privilege to present 
to you the inspired Rizalist of the Malaysian people, His I.xeelleiiev. I )at Sen 
Anwar Ibrahim. 



Di rt ty Primi Minim i k Anw ar Ibrahim 

Federation of Malaysia 



T he Philippine revolution, whose centenary we celebrate, has a signifi- 
cance far beyond the shores of these islands. It was the first revolution of its 
kind in Asia, opening the floodgates of liberation against western imperialism, pro- 
claiming the birth of the Asian Renaissance. But more than merely freeing our- 
selves from physical bondage, it was supposed to release 11s also from the chains of 
mental captivity. In the words of Jose Ri/al: “We must win our freedom by deserv- 
ing it, by improving the mind and enhancing the dignity of the individual, loving 
what is just, what is good, what is great, to the point of dying for it. \X hen a people 
reach these heights... the idols and tyrants fall like a house of cards and freedom 
shines in the first dawn.” 

The fathers of the revolution, the Katipuneros, were fully conscious of the 
contagious character of their uprising, ‘ having within its womb the seeds of a dis- 
ease that is mortal to their [Spaniards] colonial interests a dam to then ovei flow- 
ing ambitions, in the not far away future. 1 heir intellectual luminary, Apohnano 
Mabini, declared that the final aim of the struggle was to maintain alive and ie- 
splendent the torch of'liberty and civilization in Oceania, to illuminate the gloomy 
night in which the vilified and degraded Malay race finds itself, in order that it may 
be led to the road of social emancipation.” 

'fheir program for political emancipation was not only for their own patna , 
but for the rest of Asia. Their articulation of the idealistic foundations of an inde- 
pendent nation — liberty, human dignity, and moral uprightness — was unprec- 
edented. These ideals of the Malayan revolutionaries remain relevant even to 11s 
today and they resonate as powerfully as ever. Their realization is a never-ending 



xxiii 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.LTI IC )N AM ) BEY* )NI ) 



struggle; for even as independent nations Asians continue to sutler from intellec 
tual dispossession and the onslaught of economic domination. I hus v.e unn 
memorate this revolution as a celebration of awareness ot its ideals. ( hir fouiuiuu; 
fathers did not fight a foreign oppressive power merely to have it replaces! In a new 
form of tyranny, indigenous or otherwise. The only justification tor national sell 
government is the restoration of the dignity of the people. Anti this digmts w ill 
continue to elude us as long as abject poverty, rampant corruption, oligarchs. and 
encomenderos remain stark realities of our society. These evils w ill not be defeated 
until we liberate ourselves from the chains of mental incarceration. ( )nlv upon 
such release can we recover our own virtues and be, in the words ot Ri/al. , ,nce 
more free, like the bird that leaves the cage, like the flower that opens to the air. 

A decade ago the people of the Philippines revived the spirit ot the 
Katipuneros, declaring that they would not allow themselves to be trampled upon. 
Our Asian tolerance should not be misconstrued as meekness. We are not bio., ks 
not stones, not senseless things. There are those who believe that the diunitv ot the 
human person can he sacrificed at the altar of the “god ' called Society, thus justits 
mg oppression and excesses in their various guises. But abuse of office, corruption, 
nepotism, and cronyism are only symptoms of a virulent disease. Invariable this 
disease, this malignant cancer, will take its toll on the people and inflict sir h pain, 
agony, and ruin that even if they do free themselves from such a yoke in the end. it 
may take generations for them to become whole again. 

Mabini in his “ Irue Decalogue” conceived the architecture of the civil soci- 
ety as a blueprint for societal regeneration. The struggle to realize this remains the 
imperative of our time, its fulfillment being a prerequisite for humane governance. 

It is essential that power be vested in a democratically constituted authority rather 
than in the hands of the individual. Power personalized is power plundered from 
the people. Democracy is not a luxury that Asians cannot afford, as some would 
have us believe. On the contrary, it is a basic necessity for responsible and ethical 
governance. The fact that democracy is often abused, leading to chaos and paraly- 
sis, does not mean that dictatorship is the answer. Rather, the solution lies in purg- 
ing democracy of its excesses, such as unbridled individualism at the expense of the 
rights and the legitimate interests of the majority. Thus democracy must he revital- 
ized by infusing it with ethical principles and moral uprightness. Unless our soci- 
ety nurtures these ideals, the practice of democracy will degenerate into pandering 
to the whims and fancies of the mob. We must therefore reacquaint ourselves with 
the Asian civilizational ideals and intellectual legacies. As the l agalog proverb goes, 
Ang hindi marunong lumingon sa pinanggalingan, ay Hindi makararating sa 
paroroonan”— he who does not know where he came from will never reach his des- 
tination. I his cultural and intellectual rediscovery will prevent us from following 
the west blindly into a morass — social, economic, or political. 

The Asian way is to reach consensus on national goals within a democratic 
framework, to take the middle path, the Confucian ('.him Yuug or the Islamic 
awsatuha , to exercise tolerance and sensitivity toward others. 1'his spirit of consen- 



XXIV 



I BRA I II M The Birth of the A>utn Refutissttnce 



sual musyawarah is very much at pla\* as wc progress towards a cohesive regional 
community. Of course there are potential flash points. However, the common 
bond of shared values has put us on a steady course as we stay focused on our com- 
mon interest of ensuring a better life for the people. In Southeast Asia, this spirit 
has enabled us to overcome irritants and artificial barriers imposed upon us bv erst- 
while colonial masters. 

W e in Asia must reach into our past and remain true to the ideals of the revo- 
lution it we are to construct a lasting legacv for the future generations. Our labors 
have resulted in tli e creation of a region that is multicultural vet peaceful, stable vet 
vibrant. We must now progress to the next stage of the revolution: the economic 
empowerment of our people, which begins with a definite economic agenda for 
societal development. The so-called Hast Asian economic miracle cannot disguise 
the fact that a majorin' of our people continue to live a hand-to-mouth existence. 
Opportunity must be available to all, not appropriated by a select few. l he inequi- 
ties in the distribution of wealth must be redressed; it is incumbent upon 11s to 
institute affirmative action, grounded on the principle of al-adl wal ihsan — equi- 
librium and goodness — to ensure distributive justice among all citizens. Under no 
circumstances should anv group or communin' be marginalized on account of 
their ethnicity or religious persuasion. The root cause of most political and mili- 
tary conflicts is more often than not economic rather than ideological. Often, com- 
munal and religious passions are aroused merely as the expedient to achieve what 
are essentially economic goals, to redress perceived imbalances, and to gain the 
upper hand in the contest for markets and resources. It is therefore crucial that we 
in the region see ourselves as inheritors of a common homeland — one that has been 
handed down to us to share and to develop together in peace and harmony, and to 
bequeath as the proud patrimony of coming generations. In this regard, we must 
ensure that economic growth does not derail the process of human development; 
growth must be balanced with equity. Environmental degradation and erosion of 
the quality of life should not be the price that society has to pay for progress. 

Let us be clear, too, that the message of the Asian Renaissance should be 
heeded not just by the people of this region, but also by our erstwhile colonial 
masters. It is not enough that they merely express regret and remorse over the treat- 
ment meted out to those they once lorded it over. Contrition is but the first step 
toward owning up to past sins. It lacks conviction when old prejudices against the 
indios persist. When they hector us on issues such as human rights, patronize us on 
the matter of values, impose conditionalities on trade, we cannot help but suspect 
a hidden agenda — a new form of domination in place of the old. T hese actions are 
tantamount to an attempt to frustrate our efforts to build a just and equitable so- 
ciety. I he true test of their sincerity is whether they will continue to treat us as mere 
pawns to be maneuvered according to their dubious designs, or join us as equal 
partners in actualizing a new moral vision for the world. 

For us in the region there should be no room for mutual suspicion. We sub- 
scribe to the idea that nations in the region ought to treat each other as members of 



XXV 



ITU I’HII.IITINT. RI.VOI I I ION \NI ) HI V< >N! ' 



an extended family. There should not he two Southeast \sias. one tub ami the 
other poor. The richer nations must feel the pain and misery ol their pom hroth 
ers. It is our collective moral duty to wage a jihad, a holy war. against poserr. and 
destitution in the region. This will require a radical paradigm shift. 1 he old 
mindset — one which secs nations, even neighbours, as rivals must give \sa\ to 
one which promotes cooperation and mutual support. 

Only with economic empowerment and overall prosperitv throughout the 
region, can we legitimately expect the emergence of a civil society, when- theie will 
be a reflowering of culture and the flourishing of the arts and sc iciices which con 
stitute the Asian Renaissance. This will not happen when vast numbers <>t t lie- 
population continue to live in poverty and destitution. Societies suttering from 
such ills demand social engineering to harness the latent energies ot the people lor 
productive and creative use. As conceived by Rizal and expounded in \labim. the 
sine qua non for the establ ish men t of a civil society and humane governance is free 
dom, moral responsibility, and the safeguarding of fundamental liberties. \ pas 
sion for knowledge should be aroused and a vibrant intellectual tradition ctilti 
vated. Tolerance, understanding, and mutual respect will teach us to apprec i.ue the 
mosaic of our multiculturalirv and to perceive it as a positive and integrating force. 
We must therefore continuously pursue interfaith dialogue, intercultur.il engage- 
ment, and productive cooperation. These are the building blocks of a regional cc u 
menical community, al-madinah al-jadhilah, a community with the ability to trail 
scend racial, cultural, and confessional differences. The immense diversity of the 
region will not become a cause of dissension; rather, it will be the life blood from 
which our ecumenical community draws its sustenance. 

Rizal’s final word were: Consummatum est. For us, the journey has only just 
begun. 



xxvi 



PERSPECTIVES 



The Filipino Revolution 
in Our Collective Memory 



Onofre D. Corpuz 

Notional Historical Institute, Philippines 



T he fighting men of the revolution stated their aims clearly: “We place 
our lives in danger a thousand times, they would say, "in order that the Fili- 
pinos will govern the children of God in this land." 

The constancy of our patriots, and the righteousness oh their cause, carried 
the Revolution of 1896 to victory. In October 1897, the Spanish governor-general 
reported to Madrid: the insurrection could no longer be suppressed, he said, be- 
cause in his view Spain was not fighting an army, but an entire people. Indepen- 
dence was proclaimed on 12 June 1898, when our people exulted in the faith that 
“the Filipino Nation begins on this day to have a lile ol its own. On 1 5 September 
1898, President Emilio Aguinaldo declared in Malolos that the revolution as a 
contest of arms for the recovery of the Motherland had ended triumphantly, and 
he expressed praise for the valor of the leaders and men ol the Army ol Liberation 
of Filipinas. 

We have a postscript. The Spanish garrisons in Cebu and Iloilo delivered 
these key towns to the revolutionary authorities on 24 and 26 December 1898, 
respectively. The garrisons were the last remaining troops ol Spain in Filipinas; they 
then sailed for Zamboanga and the final voyage home to Spain. 

But the victory against Spain did not end the revolution. Its course was 
complexed by an intervening Fate. On 1 May 1898, the Spanish fleet. Far East, 
was destroyed in Manila Bay by Commodore George Dewey’s naval squadron. 




THK PHILIPPINK RKVOI 1 I K )N \ND HI Y< >'.!> 



At this time Aguinaldo and a number of other leaders or /cfc <>t the r . <>Iu 
tion were in self-exile in Hong Kong pursuant to the truce of Ihak na P>.m> I hev 
decided all major issues as a junta. On 4 Maw the junta convened to p«>:uh : the 
implications of the American victory. Would the l nited States be a pr<>c\ tor or 
ally, or a new enemy? 

I he junta had already repudiated the truce hack in I ehruars 1 V>s It v. as 
decided that the revolution be resumed; rifles and cartridges were to be pur. based 
for the renewed struggle. Now, we read in the minutes of their * Mas meeting, that 
they decided to go home; Aguinaldo would lead the I ihpinos against am possible 
designs of the United States to colonize their count rv: and. if need be. the*, would 
wage a Titanic struggle for their independence, even if thev were to succumb in 
the course of rejecting the yoke of the new oppressor. 

They were right. On 19 May, U.S. President William McKmles instructed 
his war, navy, and treasury secretaries to place the archipelago under rniln.tr \ ( k c u 
pation and government. 

The decision of our leaders on 4 May and McKinlev's orders of 1 { ) \la\ redi 
rected the course of the revolution. McKinlev’s orders meant war against our 
people. 

The community of nations during that era was dominated In impel ialist 
colonialism. Every Filipino plea for recognition of our independence, and later, our 
republic, evoked no support. 1 he balance of power svstem among the world pow 
ers favored McKinley. 

An article in the London Spectator titled “'The Tate of the Philippines/* repro- 
duced in the Singapore Free Press of 7 June 1898, said it all. I be writer noted that: 

The chancelleries of Europe... are already twittering with excitement 

and putting out little feelers, and looking at Manila like children at a cake 

which they want badly but think it decorous not to ask for or see. 

But, the article stated, the brutal fact was that no European power could 
take the Philippines without England s permission, which she would not give, be- 
cause otherwise the balance of power in the Far East would be disturbed. 1 low ever, 
the United States, a non-European power and an English-speaking nation to boot, 
was welcome to take the Philippines, and hence to share in the “white mans bur- 
den. The article was an invitation to the United States to join the imperialist club. 

And so our patriots who were fighting for independence from Spain were 
fated, ultimately, to fight for the same ideal against a new enemy. 'The Revolution 
of 1896 flowed seamlessly into the Christian Philippine-American War, bitterly 
fought in Luzon and the Visayas. (McKinleys imperialism expanded the revolu- 
tion into the Moro Wars, fought against the Muslims in Mindanao and Sulu 
from 1899 to 1912.) 

During the peace treaty negotiations in Paris to end its war with Spain, the 
United States panel was directed by McKinley to demand that Spain cede the PhiL 



4 



(. ( 1KPI V / he hihpnw Revolution in ( htr C oilmen re .Memory 



ippine archipelago to the United States. I he Spanish panel objected: then the 
Americans offered a “sweetener of S20 million the Spaniards accepted, and the 
peace treaty was signed on 1 0 December 1 898. McKinleys orders of 1 9 May could 
now be implemented. 

The hostilities in the Christian Philippine-American W ar were started by the 
Americans on Saturday, ^4 February 1899. 

Admiral Dewev, who had been a w itness to the unfolding events since 1 May 
f rom Manila Bav and Cavite, lamented in his Autobiography ( 1 9 1 3) that the Ameri- 
can negotiators in Paris: 

....scarcely comprehended that a rebellion was included in the purchase... 

Now, after paving twenty millions for the islands, we must establish our au- 
thority bv force against the very wishes of the people whom [we claimed] we 

sought to benefit. 

Events proved Dewev right. The Christian Philippine-American War lasted till 
1906. In 1907, American estimates of the money costs to the American people of 
McKinleys adventure in the Philippines were, in addition to the S30 million that 
had to be paid for the cession, at 8308,369, 1 S 3. In December 1900 alone, 
McKinley had no less than 74,094 troops in the islands. 

It is sad and incredible that today, a full 100 years after the beginning of that 
noble and historic struggle, we still have no full-length history of the revolution in 
its full compass from 1896 to 1906. 

Instead, we have incomplete and uneven accounts of episodes and events, a 
few of these serious, others at best cunosiu Some works totally miss the point of the 
revolution; they depict its greatest leaders in deep personal conflict with each other. 

1 hus, when put together, these works leave us in ignorance of the revolution in its 
true light: the epic struggle that today remains the watershed of Filipino national- 
ism. 

That we still have no adequate history of the revolution is sad. It is histories 
that weave the diverse strands of a people's experience into the fabric of their col- 
lective memory. It is from the remembering of that shared memory that a people 
image and face their persona as a nation, the persona that enables them to sense the 
common good, the good that means order and purpose in our civic life. It is a co- 
herent collective memory that enables us all to perceive a clear destiny in the fu- 
ture, and forges our will to attain that destiny. 

The fragmented literature we do have does not even record the end of the 
revolution against Spain, nor tell us whether that end brought with it victory or 
defeat. Nowhere do we find an explanation of how Andres Bonifacio's Katipunan 
uprising, the revolution of what he called the “Tagalog Nation," had to give way to 
a true Filipino revolution under a new leadership. We find no narrative of the revo- 
lution as a military struggle, of the enemy forces our people fought against, of the 
actions won or lost. We do not find any record of the Army of Liberation of Filipi- 



S 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< >N! > 



nas — the Katipunan was abolished in July 1898 to give way to this armv. hut h.ui 
to be revived in late 1899 to support the guerrilla forces against the l V Arms. 

We find no account of the revolution as a human drama: of the dreams, tne 
discipline, and the protracted sacrifices that lifted and burdened our people during 
the many years of struggle. 

And we have no Filipino narrative, anywhere, of the ( hristian Philippine- 
American War, the official American record of which goes to great lengths t<> be- 
little our people and their patriotism. 

The Filipino people have, since the revolution, achieved less than they other 
wise could have achieved because, I think, their histories have long been less than 
the collective memory to which they are entitled. 

I hope that our conference agenda will permit us to adopt a resolution res 
ommending to the honorable chairman of the National ( x-ntenni.il ( ommissioiu 
who comes from a family of known patriots, that the commission sponsor 
or undertake the writing of a full history of the Filipino revolution from 1 SOb 
to 1906. 

My paper contains material consisting of data, analysis, and perspective that 
illustrate what that future history might cover and discuss. I present it as a humble 

contribution. 

I cannot close without stressing the great need for caution in the assessment 
and use of the official American record of the Christian Philippine-American War 
(and of the Moro Wars). That record is part of American history. But it is f ull of 
denigratory views about our people, only partly due to ignorance; and of the de- 
ception and mendacity that were part of the politics of the McKinley era to conceal 
from the American conscience the barbarities perpetrated upon hundreds of thou- 
sands of noncombatants during the Christian Philippine-American War. 

We live in a different time. We must discover our history and cleanse our 
memory of those elements, not because we need to re-construc the past in order to 
redeem our honor, but because we owe the justice of truth to our heroes of the revo- 
lution, and to our youth, whom we must guide and educate in the knowledge that 
they belong to a nation of worth, a people of fortitude. 

The “Katipunan Revolution” Doomed to Lose in Manila 

From its founding on 7 July 1 892 until the close of 1 895 the Katipunan was led by 
traditional reformists. Together with Andres Bonifacio, they busied themselves try- 
ing to reduce Rizal’s Liga Filipina, founded by him on 3 July 1892, into a mere 
fund-raising arm of the reformist paper La Solidaridadm Madrid. In fact, in 1 89 K 
Rizal had adjudged La SolidaridacCs reformism as futile. He left the paper; after a 
brief sojourn in Hong Kong he returned to Manila and founded the Liga as a ve- 
hicle for a “more vigorous crusade,” but was ordered exiled to Dapitan on 7 July- 
Bonifacio’s close work with the reformists ensured that, by the end of 1892, the 
Katipunan had no more than 30 members. 



6 



t i >Kl*l / l hr l ihpitw Revolution m ( )ur ( ollrctivr \lmior\ 

I lie katipunan began to have a revolutionary spirit atul grew in membership 
only after 1 Vcember 1 893, when Bonifacio took over the leadership of its supreme 
council, with able support from the voting stiulem Pmilio laeinto and IV. Rio 
\ alen/uela. laeinto published KiiLi\iiii)i (Freedom), with patriotic Katipunan 
teachings and messages, in January 1896. The paper was produced on an old press 
bought by Francisco del C astillo and Candido Iban of C api/; thev were sea divers 
come home from Australia; they obtained the equipment from a shop on C arriedo 
Street in Quiapo and donated it to Bonifacio. 

I he result of the single number of KiiLi\ihni was a ground swell of patrio- 
tism. I hrongs of new recruits and applicants made their wav lo Katipunan safe- 
houses for initiation as members. 

Fortuitously, a secret police watch on suspicious persons and groups, includ- 
ing gatherings of men in fiesta and cockpit crowds, had been ordered bv the Span- 
ish C iovernor-C icneral Ramon Blanco since lanuarv 1 896. I he Katipunan w as vul- 
nerable to exposure. 

Bonifacio called for a meeting of Katipunan chapter heads for 3 Mav 1896, 
relying on the traditional pilgrimage to the shrine of the Virgin of Antipolo as 
cover. Around 60 chapter heads responded; many assembled at the foot of the old 
Colgantc or suspension bridge in Quiapo and boarded boats as if on the up-river 
Pasig route to Antipolo. 

I he main meeting was held that evening and the next morning in the house 
of Valentin Can/ in back of the church in the town of Pasig. Bonifacio told the 
assembly that the authorities had come to know of the secret existence of the 
Katipunan; the latter was like a woman w ith child, he said, who had to deliver 
prematurely. He called for a vote on an immediate rising. An alternative move, pro- 
posed by some delegates including those of the Magdiwang and Magdalo chapters 
in Cavite (the chief Magdalo delegate was Pmilio Aguinaldo), won the vote; it w as 
decided that Rizal, then in exile in Papuan, first be consulted. 

In any event, on 18 |ulv 1896, the Maghiganti chapter of the Katipunan, 
made up virtually of all the employees in the printing plant of the paper Diario dc 
Mtviila in Pondo, was discovered. Its membership lists and other records were 
seized; that same evening and during the next daws the Maghiganti Katipuneros 
were arrested or hunted by the Cuardia Civil. (The version of this discovery in the 
friar account of Jose del Castillo y Jimenez, HI Katipinnui o HI Hilibusterismo en Hi/- 
i p in ns ( 1 897), sets the date of the discovery at past mid-August and credits it to the 
Augustinian friar-curate of Pondo. Phat this story is adopted by some historians is 
inexplicable; it is an apologia for the Spanish friar orders; it is analytically faulty; 
and conclusive evidence against it is available in collateral accounts and memoirs. 
Santiago V. Alvarez, Aug Katipunan at Paghihhnagsik [ 1 927- 1 1 )28), and Hmilio 
Aguinaldo, Mga Ciunita tig Hitnagsikan 1 1 964] both set the month of the discovery 
in July.) 

1'he continuing manhunt and wave of arrests drove Bonifacio into hiding, 

e* O 

contacting and consulting with Katipuneros, thinking out options. The latter's 



I HI. mil.lI'l’INT. Kl.Vt )| I I II )N ANI> III i< )NI , 



patriotic sentiments moved Bonifacio to decide to begin the revolution I I .died 
for a general assembly for the night of Friday, 21 August ISDN, m K.iiooh.m 

Gathering in a general assembly was risky; everv man bad to ss til .uni the 
meetings had to be moved a number of times in order to lessen tin , batu e <>t dis 
covery. On Sunday morning the Katipuneros numbered about 400 m the altei 
noon about 500. On Monday, 24 August, the assembly bad 1 .000 men. and Bum 
facio and the other leaders adopted the decision that the revolution begin at mid 
night of Saturday, the 29 th, with an assault on the Spanish capital, the lot t amut< >s 
Four leading Katipuneros were designated brigadier generals; e.u h was authot i/ed 
to name his own officers, decide on which tactics to be followed, and e\en to at 
tack before the 29th, as seemed best. 

I he most definite plan, evidently developed later, called for a link up >>t tin 
troops of Ramon Bernardo, one of the brigadier-generals, and the column of Bom 
facio. I he rendezvous hour was to be at I I p.m., Saturdav. the place Santa Mesa, 
from where the two forces were to march for the midnight assault on the capital. 

I he plan did not work out. Bernardo and his men took P.md.uun e.u her in 
the evening of the 29 th, then marched to Santa Mesa for the rende/sous with Bom 
facio. J hey waited in vain. The Bonifacio column did not appear. After a Smul.n 
morning breakfast of tinolang manokm Santa Mesa, Bernardos nun wcie attacked 
by an enemy force of Guardia Cavil veterans and nniibninas. re-enforced In regu 
lar infantry, cavalry, and artillery troops. Bv 8 a. m. only some 50 of the 1.000 man 
Bernardo force remained; outside of casualties, the rest presumable bail been dis 
persed or fled. I he enemy retired in good order. 

Bonifacio left the Kalookan general assembly on Tuesdav. At noon on 20 
August he and his men rested in Balara Viejo, near Krus-na-I .igas (present das site 
of the University of the Philippines). From Balara to Marikina, it was marches, 
marches, all the way, with a number of small skirmishes. Then Mandaluyong on 
Saturday, receiving contributions, meeting local Katipuneros and dispensing in- 
structions and inspiration. By the early evening of Saturday the 29th Bonifacio had 
more than 1,000 men with him. 

I he Mandaluyong Katipuneros took the town hall soon after the church 
bells pealed at 9 p.m. Bonifacio and his men left Mandaluyong at I 1 p.m., bound 
for San Juan, from where they would march to Santa Mesa to join up with 
Bernardo. He was already late; his troops fought two minor skirmishes in San Juan. 
Here he decided to await a group of 300 men from Santolan under Valentin C .ru/; 
this group had 17 precious f irearms. 

Bonifacio rested his enlarged column; the hours passed; and when he thought 
to look at his timepiece it was 4 a.m. of Sunday morning. Bonifacio dec. deaf to 
march his men back toward his base in Balara, and to reset the assault on Manila 
for 10 p.m. later that night— with disastrous results. Before they reached Balara, 
the noise of gunfire was heard from the direction of Santa Mesa; Bonifacio guessed 
that Bernardo was engaged with the enemy, and he hurried hack to support 
Bernardo. He did not reach Santa Mesa. In San Juan the same force that had routed 



8 



c c >Kl’l / l lw li/ipmo Revolution m Our ( olleciive Memory 



Bernardo attacked him. At 10 a.m. onlv about SO men remained of the Bonifacio 
column. 

1 he Katipunan was a brotherhood of [Patriots. Its members were organized 
in the separate local chapters ol a secret society. It had no military organization, 
and neither its leaders nor chapter officials had expert military sense or skills. I hat 
four ol them were named briiiadier-iienerals on Mondav for the assault against 
Spanish Manila on Saturday did not mean that they would command troops orga- 
nized in battalions or even companies. 1 hat Bonifacio was insouciant about tim- 
ing and coordination was fateluk 

1 he Katipunan lighting forces were bands or urban irregulars; the men were 
craftsmen, small tradesmen, clerks in the regime, or employees and service workers 
in the multifarious businesses in the foreign trade port of Manila. I he members of 
a Katipunan town chapter could overrun the local Cuardia Civil platoon, often 
onlv a squad, bv sheer numbers. But most chapters did not even have a single firearm. 
And so, in entitlements auainst enemv forces of companies of regular and well- 
armed troops, the hastily mobilized Katipuneros of Manila were doomed to fail. 

Indeed, while the outbreak of the revolution must properly be credited to 
Bonifacios Katipunan, the ideology of the latter was wanting in the essentials to 
sustain a truly bilipino revolution. 1 he urban Katipunans teachings did not ad- 
dress the most basic grievances of the vast majority of Filipinos: agrarian injustice 
in rural society. Moreover, to Bonifacio, the Motherland or hiting Btiytin was the 
lagalog Nation or Ang Kiitiigtihtgiw. 

Agrarian Society, not Urban Manila, the Base ol the Revolution 

The fighting forces of the revolution in Cavite were agrarian workers, unlike the 
urban Katipuneros of Manila. Not only was the bulk of the population of Ca\ite 
agrarian (except the workers in the Spanish naval base at the hook oi L\urito f the 
province); its agricultural landholdings had a special and irksome sectoi. the haci- 
endas of the Spanish friar orders. 1 he other lagalog provinces also had haciendas, 
but Cavite was unique. CM its total surface area of about 2S0, ()()() hectaies, encom- 
passing mountains, forests, brushlands, rivers, and ravines, ovei 43,000 hectaies of 
its finest agricultural land were in the haciendas of the fiiai orders. 

Most of the haciendas began as royal land grants to the fiiai oiders (except 
the Franciscans) during the early period of the conquest. I he haciendas, located in 
the lagalog provinces, became profitable supply sources for the Manila maiket. In 
time, profits moved the friar orders to expand then haciendas, and the process of 
expansion, mostly via land grabbing of the nearby land parcels of the natives, pro- 
duced agrarian unrest. During the 1730s and 1740s Cavite and the other lagalog 
provinces were restive. 

Land grabbing by the haciendas produced three new classes in lagalog pro- 
vincial society. The first was made up of the dispossessed native families, most of 
whom became sharecroppers in the haciendas. 1 he second was a smaller group: 



III! mil IITINI KIM >1 I i l< )N AM) Hi V< >S| > 



strong-willed men who refused to work on land stolen from them ami : •<> •.> 

to the hills; they came to be called lulisanes. outlaws. Accounts ot the i - iik mold 
that the Cavite, Batangas, and Laguna lit It son groups o| the period cm 
C avitenos. 

In time the friar orders learned that they could avoid labor rcc r u 1 1 1 neiu pt < >|> 
lems by leasing out tracts of their haciendas to local upper-class families, names, 
and Christian-native mestizos who had assembled landholdings of then <>v.n from 
usurious money-lending. I hese lessee-families were c. died iiujutiitm uni made up 
the third class. I hey brought in their own workers by recruiting du n pool iclames 
and landless followers, collectively called kasamahan. to w< >rk then b ased n.nts 
I he inquilinos and their kosonuitutu were bonded m a paternal telatiotiship. the 
inquilinos extending advances and loans to tide over their l\i .nn.il'.in dm in.-, lean 
months and hard times. 

f he friar orders on the one hand, and their sharecroppers ami the mqmlnio > 
and their kasamahnn on the other, were fated to he in conflict. I he tnai oideis 
mindlessly harassed the inquilinos on the suspicion that the latter sscie fomenting 
anti-friar sentiment among the hacienda workers. The most notorious h.uassment 
cases was that against the family of Rr/.al, the leading nujm ! t no turnih in the I tn 
minican hacienda in Calamba up to the latter 1880s. 



I he revolution not only fuelled sentiments of patriotism, as m Manila. Inn 
also stirred the deep-seated and smoldering fires of agrarian discontent m the has i 
enda provinces. I hat the regime favored the friar orders against the dispossessed 
lies unci hacienda workers turned the latter against the govci iimeiit 
I he ideological literature of the urban Katipunan in Manila, inspired In the 
ropaganda Movement in Hurope during the 1 880 s to the earlv 1800 s, contained 

r L !J CC '^ tS to address the grievances of the rural folk, the overwhelming majnriix 
or rilipino society. 

I he core of the fighting forces of the revolution in ( iavite was made up of 
r * rmc . re - ktiscimu, and the inquilinos , and even the titlisun\ vho came down 
rom t e hills to settle their old grievances against the friar orders. Some tnhnin 
leaders became officers in the Cavite revolutionary forces. 

None of the leaders in the provinces had military experience. But unlike the 
oose bands of Katipuneros in Manila, the Cavite fighters were the tight and cohe- 
, . § )U P-» of rural society. I he enemy forces in Cavite consisted mostlv of small 

. . .. Ia sc ]uads in each town; they were easily overrun hv the Katipuneros. 

t-re was the Cavite naval base, but most of the personnel were natives the 
workers in the arsenal had mutinied in 1872. 

J" ora time ' the Cavitenos seemed strengthened by having two rival province- 
7 L ■ ,n P u " an organizations, the Magdiwang under Mariano Alsarez (whose 
niece bon, lac, o married) and the Magdalo under lire Aguilialdos. I heir rival, -v 
would eventually prove be a weakness. I inally, ,he ( iavitenos were blessed by 
g rrune. On 3 September 1896, hmilio Aguinaldo, who would shortly be- 



lt) 



( ( MvPt V l he l ihpnw Revolution /// ( )ur ( ollectire Memory 



conic the leading Cavite military leader, engaged an enemy force bound tor Imus 
and captured a rich haul of T Remington rifles. 

Bv September the Magdiwang and the Magdalo had each organized a formal 
revolutionary government. Both groups even crossed into Batangas to attack en- 
emv garrisons. Bv the close of October, the C avitenos had made their province the 
first liberated prov ince in Pilipinas. Bonifacios rallying proclamation at the start of 
the revolution closed with the exhortation: “l ong lave the Sovereign Nation of the 
Tagalogs!" On 31 October 1846, Aguinaldo issued an evidentlv different mani- 
festo: “To the Filipino Nation: l.ibcrtv, hquality, and Fraternitv'; it is the first for- 
mal address to the Filipinos collectively as a people. 

Covernor-C ieneral Blanco resolved to erase the loss of Cavite trom his record, 
and took to the field to lead a land-and-gunboat campaign to retake the province. 

I he enemv offensive began in the second week of November. 1 he new challenge to 
the Cavite fighting men was the arrival in C avite of 6, dab troop reinforcements 
from Spain from 1 October to 3 November 1846. 

TheCaviterios repulsed the Blanco offensive, and he reported to Madrid that 
2S, ()()() more troop re-enforcements would be needed to suppress the revolution. It 
was during this campaign, for the first time since the revolution began, that the 
Spaniards and the Filipinos fought in pitched battles from established positions, 
not in the minor skirmishes that had marked earlier actions. 

Blanco was recalled and replaced as governor-general by C ieneral Camilo 
Polavieja in December. From 14 November 1 846 to 20 January ISO a total of 
10,214 troop re-enforcements arrived from Spain to strengthen Polavieja. Cavite 
was reconquered during a hard-fought campaign that lasted from IS Februaiv to 
Mav ISO . But Polavieja resigned in April ostensibly because of ill health. 1 he fact 
was that he had asked Madrid for 20 more battalions (about 16,000 new troops) 
that he estimated would be needed to keep his gains in the campaign, but Madrid 
could send no more troops because it had already sent SS,()()0 troops against the 
rebels in Cuba. It was against this background that Cieneral Fernando Pnmo de 
Rivera, who succeeded Polavieja, recovered Cavite by May ISO . 

(The execution of Andres Bonifacio in May 1 SOT after a court-martial con- 
viction, essentially for violations of orders of the revolutionary government estab- 
lished earlier in March 1 S07, was a major tragedy. But the available accounts of the 
episode treat it as the fruit of a personal conflict »vith Aguinaldo, rather than pre- 
senting it as an incident in the larger drama of the Filipino revolution.) 

Nevertheless, from September to December 1S06, the revolution had spilled 
over into the other provinces: Tondo, Morong, l aguna, Batangas, Br’acan. Trem- 
ors were sensed in Nueva Hcija, Pampanga, Tarlac, Bataan, andTayabas. Zambales, 
Pangasinan, Camarines Stir, Albay, and the Visavan provinces of Iloilo, Cebu, 
and Negros were expected to follow suit. The enemy had thrown most of his 
forces against a single province, Cavite; how, now, could the revolution be sup- 
pressed? 



Tin. mn \ms\-. hi v< >i i i i< >n \ni> iu t » 



From Biak-na-Bato to the Revolution in the Visayas 

The Spanish land forces and their deployment by mihr.irv distrut in ivh> 
the outbreak of the revolution were as follows: 



Units 


Deployment 


1 heavy artillery regiment of 


Staff and 1 battalion in Manila. 


2 battalions 


1 battalion in Jolo and 


1 light mountain artillery battalion 


Ma gumdanao 
In Lanao 


Infantry Regiment No. 68, the ‘Legaspi 


In Jolo 


Infantry Regiment No. 69, the "Iberia 


In Maguindanao 


Infantry Regiment No. 70, the “Magallanes" 


Staff in Manila, troops in 


Infantry Regiment No. 71, the "Mindanao" 


Northern Luzon highland 
region 

In Zamboanga 


Infantry Regiment No. 72, the ‘Visayas" 


Divided between Manila and 


Infantry Regiment No. 73, the "Jolo" 


the Visayas 

) 


Infantry Regiment No. 74. the “Manila" 


) In Lanao 


1 Disciplinary Battalion 


) 


Plus Support Elements 
1 sanitation brigade 
1 supply brigade 
1 cavalry squadron 


In Manila and Lanao 


1 engineering battalion 


In Manila and Lanao 


The reported strengths in officers and 


men were as follows: 


Heavy artillery regiment 


1,495 Spanish officers and men 


Light mountain artillery battalion 


153 Filipinos 

567 Spanish officers and men 


7 infantry regiments and support units 


52 Filipinos 

953 Spanish officers and men 


Total 


14,449 Filipino junior 
officers and men 
3,005 Spanish officers and men 


Plus a marine infantry battalion 
of 900 men on garrison duty 
in the Cavite naval base 


14,654 Filipino junior 
officers and men 



( i )RI*l / I he liliptno Revolution in ( hir ( o/leettve Alernor) 

1 'lie* Spaniards were oeeupied in putting down the perennial risings in Mus- 
lim Mindanao and Sulu, particularly in the Maranao district, in 1893 . 1 'his was 
why no less than five of the mfantrv regiments were deployed in th e southern mili- 
tarv districts, latch infantry regiment consisted of two battalions of four compa- 
nies. In the scattered \ isayan islands, a prosperous region because of the profits 
from export agriculture, only a single battalion was deploy ed. In 1 u /on, far north 
of Manila, the Magallanes regiment kept the peace in the northern highland dis- 
tricts, and the regiment's staff enjoyed their postings in the capital. 

C iovcrnor-C icncral Blancos police surveillance on suspicious individuals and 
groups in the Manila area having detected intensified Katipunan initiations by 
Mav 1896, a cautious but minor redeployment can be seen from the tact that ele- 
ments of the light mountain artillery battalion and of the Magallanes regiment 
were part of the force that routed the Bernardo and Bonifacio groups in late Au- 
gust. Later, during Blanco's November campaign against C avite, elements of the 
Magallanes, )olo, and Manila regiments, as well as fresh troop re-enforcements 
from Spain, were involved. 

I he first expedition of troops from Spain embarked in C adi/ and arrived at 
the navv port in Cavite on 3 October 1896. 1 'hiring October until 3 November the 
arrivals totalled 8,243 troops of marine infantry, c/ Isidores (literally, hunters, for 
pursuit of outlaws), an artillery battalion, and a squadron of caxaliy. 

I hree expeditions of marine infantry and citz-iuiofc* ai 1 1\ ed m Decem- 

ber. In January 1897, six more expeditions brought 12,461 officers and men. It 
was this added strength that gave victory to the Polavieja otfensi\e against Cavite, 
hxclusive of casualties and some defections to the revolution, the 1 ,839 enemy 
forces in August 1896 and the 23,438 troop arrivals thiough January 189 added 
up to an impressive total of 43,1 1"7 

But the numbers were not decisive. This is indicated by two facts. For one, 
the troops that arrived in January 189" were no longer iefened to as oiganic units 
of specific service branches; instead, they were now docketed only as office is and 
soldiers. I his means that thev were replacements foi casualties and othci losses. 
Secondly, a large number of the January arrivals were iaw youths of 18- and 1 )- 
year-olds. I hey were the last men that Spain could send foi the \ llipmas campaign. 

In May 1897, after the loss of Cavite, Aguinaldo was invited to come to 
Bulacan bv Ceneral Mamerto Natividad Jr. 1 he lattei was a title i evolutionary and 
had fought with the Cavitehos during the Polavieja campaign; in May 1897, he 
was the top rebel leader in central Luzon. 

Aguinaldo and a strong force made the long march to Bulacan, reaching the 
remote district of Biak-na-Bato in the town of San Miguel de Mayumo on 24 June. 
Biak-na- Bato, inaccessible to the enemy due to its location, was a major camp of 
the rebel groups north of Manila. Here Aguinaldo established his new headquar- 
ters. 

In I ul v, he issued a manifesto that, among others, prescribed new tactics in 
field actions. He acknowledged that the frontal engagements into which the 



13 



i m. mu imsi ri voinion \ni> hi v< *ni> 



Cavitenos had been drawn against Polaviejas massed regular fortes war a mistake, 
instead, he called for adoption of the tactics of guerrilla warfare Aguinaldo ned 
the methods used by the Cubans in their revolution against Spain. I he mamte sto 
closed with a summary of the revolution s most immediate polit ico sot ial reform 
goals of the time, including the recovery of the lands in the friar hat uiuias m ta\ , M 
of the families who worked them. 

The deference with which Natividad and his fellow leaders or /,•/< m the , en 
tral Luzon provinces received Aguinaldo prefaced significant developments m tin- 
revolution. In Biak-na-Bato the revolution expanded bevond the tontines of tin- 
southern Tagalog provinces. It was also in Biak-na-Bato that an overall 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 a t \ 
leadership began. Here, rebel jefes from lagalog and non- lagalog prosunes could 
come to formalize their command statuses with the leading general of the ie\oUi 
tion and receive his directives. It was very different from the situation in ( a\ite 
brought about by the old Katipunan organizational rules, where troops of 
Katipunan chapters fought as such, often in competition and rivalrv. In Ihak n i 
Bato, although most of the commanders would, up to this time, call themselves 
Katipuneros, a growing number had not been members of the Katipunan 

d he leaders who came to Biak-na-Bato recognized Aguinaldos leader ship not 
because of intra-Katipunan loyalties, but because they were Filipinos. I heworkin*' 
rule in the old Katipunan that status in the supreme council or in the ) or 

town chapters of the society sufficed to qualify one as a miliiarv cominandei w is 
gradually weakening. The revolution had to develop into a I ilipino resol tit ion. mu 
remain a mere Katipunan uprising; there was also need to replace the Katipunan is 
a secret society in favor of an open fighting force that had to be more and more- 
organized as the military arm of the nation. 

I he Biak-na-Bato provisional constitution for a I ilipino republic \s is 
adopted on 1-2 November 1897 by more than 50 revolutionary leaders, including 
Filipinos who had come home from hurope to work for the revolution I hcv 
elected a supreme council with Aguinaldo as prcsicletitc (chairman ) and command- 
ing-general. (Aguinaldo was not vet 29 years old.) 

General Primo de Riveras task since May 1897 was threefold: to bold ibe 
gains in Cavite; contain the revolution in the provinces of londo, Batangas, and 
Laguna; and cope with the expanded revolution in central Luzon. The task proved 
to be beyond his ability and resources. In August and September, the Spanish gar- 
risons in Bulacan were repeatedly attacked. This rekindled the revolution in C av- 
ite, Batangas, Laguna, and Nueva Lcija. The fighting spread into Pampanga and 
layabas. In October, there were engagements in Tarlac and Pangasinan. 

In a report early that month Primo de Rivera informed Madrid that be bad 
incurred 8,000 casualties since the previous May, and added that replacing the ca- 
sualties would mean no relief because, he estimated, half of the replacements 
would, in due course, he “rendered useless.” On 5 ( )ctober, he offered bis resigna- 
tion. He explained that the revolution could no longer be suppressed; this was be- 



14 



( I mri Y l he l : lip i no Revolution in ( )ur ( o/leetire Memory 

cause Spain was not fight ini; an army hut an entire people resolved t o win their 
liberty and independence. 

Madrid replied on 10 October by directing Primo de Rivera to effect one of 
his recommendations, that of negotiating a truce with the rebels. He was to do so 
‘in the utmost secrecv and with the "greatest possible haste. 

Aguinaldo and his j eft's in Biak-na-Bato had no knowledge of Primo de 
Riveras assessment of the militarv situation. Fhe 1 i I i pi nos had held against the 
enemy in 18 months of fighting; the governor-general at the outbreak of the revo- 
lution had been recalled; his successor had resigned; and now Primo de Rivera had 
concluded that the revolution could not be suppressed. But, without a working 
military intelligence service, Aguinaldo accepted the offer of a truce. I he terms 
were worked out bv Pedro Paterno, member of a rich Filipino family, who was an 
old acquaintance of Primo de Rivera in Madrid. I he truce of Biak-na-Bato and its 
implementing documents were signed in November and December 189 . 

Aguinaldo and several of his jefes went into voluntary exile in Hong Kong 
pursuant to the terms of the truce. But they had not left the Motherland to watch 
the revolution wither and die from afar. The truce suspended hostilities but did 
not end the revolution. Powerful political forces in Madrid and Manila opposed 
the reforms that the Filipino leaders thought were guaranteed under the terms of 
the truce. 'The exiles organized themselves into the Hong Kong junta and repudi- 
ated the truce on 14 Februarv 1898. 

I he repudiation of the truce in Hong Kong sparked new hostilities back 
home. On 19 Februarv, rebels engaged an enemv force not far from Manila. The 
next month the Filipino troops in the 74th Infantry Regiment, the “Manila," 
which had been redeployed from Fanao, refused orders to attack the rebels, and 
eight corporals were executed bv musketry before the regiment. Fhe following day, 
2S March, all the Filipinos in the regiment defected with their arms to the revolu- 
tion. 

Fhe future was nevertheless uncertain. Many firearms had to be surrendered 
tinder the truce of Biak-na-Bato, and there was a dire shortage of arms and ammu- 
nition for the renewed struggle. Jose Alejandrino had joined the Hong Kong junta 
after his studies at the University of Ghent in Brussels; Aguinaldo appointed him 
arms buyer; but time was needed for contacts with dealers, for contracts, and ship- 
ments. 

And now fate and historv intervened. The Hong Kong junta knew of the 
outbreak of the war between Spain and the United States, and of the Fitters deci- 
sive naval victory in Manila Bay on 1 Maw I he American war presence in their 
country upset the equation of the truce of Biak-na-Bato, and the junta met on 4 
May to discuss the complications and to decide on a course of action. The meeting 
considered the view that the American constitution was an established check 
against the United States venturing into colonialism. But the members of the junta 
would not entrust their country's fate to American tradition; they regarded the 



IS 



I I IK PHII.IPIMNI Rl-.VOII 'I ION \M)hlinM» 

United States as a possible “new oppressor : thev dec ided to return borne a:.d : i / in 
a new war, if it came to that, and they were read v to lav dov. n their live^ in th.it ness 
struggle. 

r he junta dissolved; Aguinaldo and the jefes made their wav borne 
Aguinaldo arriving in Cavite on 19 May 1898. Me issued orde r , tor tin n uimp 
tion of the revolution by the end of this month. 

I he situation of the Spaniards in Manila was unenviable. 1 lies bad to tight 
not only a resurgent revolution, but also a powerful new enemv. Worse tin s be 
lieved that the Filipinos and Americans were in an alliance. 

J he fourth Spanish governor-general since the outbreak of the resolution. 
General Basilio Augustin, had replaced Frimo de Rivera on 1 1 April Lv>s I h s 
authority as captain-general or commander-in-chief of the Spanish forces would 
be limited. After war broke out between Spain and the l nitcd State s Liter that 
month, Madrid designated General l)iego de los Rios, who bad fought in I u/on 
until 1897, captain-general ofa consolidated Visavas-Mindanao command. I V h» s 
Rios command was extensive and spread out, but bis force numbered onl\ about 
4, 1 00 troops, serving primarily as garrisons in the towns of Iloilo and ( ebu t b i s 
indicates that the bulk of the remaining Spanish forces had been redeplovecl to 
Manila and Luzon. This meant, furthermore, a radical twist m the lnst<>j\ <>f the 
archipelago — that Spain had finally, after 300 years, given up its ambitions of c( >n 
quering Muslim Mindanao and Sulu. 

Augustins strategy was to co-opt the Filipinos and engage them against the 
Americans. loward this end he decreed, on A May, the orgam/at ion nt a volunteer 
militia. I he volunteers were to be issued firearms by the regime, and the volunteer 
officers were to have assimilated ranks in the Spanish army. By the end of the 
month the militia was some 1 2,000 to 1 4,000 strong, inc ludi ng a less units in the 
Visayas by June. On 22 May 1 898, Augustin, through a Filipino emissary, of feted 
Aguinaldo the post of chief of the armed forces of Filipinas, with the rank of brigu 
dier-general in the Spanish army. Aguinaldo had the emissary arrested. 

The creation of the militia was a gamble that backfired. Most of the men we re- 
rebels, and many of the leading generals of the revolution accepted commands, 
almost all as colonels, including Baldomero Aguinaldo, Mariano I rias, Arteinio 
Ricarte, Francisco Makabulos, Rio del Filar, I.icerio (icrommo, C.asimiro Finio. 
and, in Fanay, Roque Lopez and Quintin Salas. The militia troops and the approxi- 
mately 12,000 rifles issued to them became part of the revolution. 

An interesting engagement took place in the barrio of Alapan in kawit, C Am- 
ite, on 28 May 1898. I he first batch of rifles contracted for in I long Kong hue! 
arrived the previous week, with most of the arms allocated by ( ieneral Aguinaldo 
to his Kawit townsmen. The enemy commanding-general in ( iavite province, C ien- 
eral Nicolas de la Fena, ordered a marine infantry troop to attack a Kawit force* 
armed with the new rifles. The fighting lasted five hours, after which the enemy 
survivors surrendered. It was at the surrender ceremonies in town that afternoon 
where (ieneral Aguinaldo unfurled, for the first time, the Filipino flag. 



16 



( ORIH ’/ I hr l ilipmo Rn 'olunou :n ( )ur ( o/Ircrirr 4 /r ‘tnory 



On 30 Mav, Generals Irias and Ricarte proceeded co attack General Pena, 
commanding the depleted Infantry Regiment No. ”H. A relief column tailed to save 
1 V la Pena after heavy fighting. C )n 1 (tine, the regiment s adjutant, C olonel \ lan- 
uel Sitvar (a Tilipino-Spanish mestizo who was head of the Cuiardia C i \ i 1 in Pas is; 
in August 1806) defected to Ricarte with the regiments funds, and three officers, 
and 300 soldiers. I he next dav He la Pena himself surrendered; he had 32 officers, 
the remaining infantrvmen of the regiment, with onlv 3^3 rifles among them, and 
3-0 attached marine infantry troops. 

These and other early successes in the held moved Aguinaldo, on 8 June, t o 
fix 12 June 1808 as the date for the proclamation of Pilipino independence. He 
designated Ambrosio R. Bautista of Bihang, 1 aguna, a member of the C omite de 
Reformadores during the late 1860s, to draft the proclamation, which was read in 
Raw it. 

12 June was preceded and followed by victories in the field. On 14 June, 
C General Monet, Spanish commanding-general in Pampanga, abandoned San 
Ternando and his command after a two-week siege by Oeneral Maximino 1 li/on. 

1 he kev towns of Galamba, 1 aguna, and 1 3 pa, Batangas, fell on 16 and 18 June, 
respectively, to the forces of General Paciano Rizal. 

General hrancisco Makabulos began the active siege of the town of larlac on 
23 June. The garrison here was, on paper, strong; it included an all-Spanish infan- 
try battalion, and two battalions of Infantry Regiment No. 3, the Jolo. 1 his 
indicates that it was a hodgepodge force, and it was under the command of two 
Spanish majors; on 10 Julv they surrendered the garrison. 

1 he enemy force on the island province of Mmdoio capitulated on ~ Jub. 
On 18 |ulv, the 300-man enemy garrison in the town of Ai ingay. La l mon, sui- 
rendered. On the 22nd, the regimes troops in Dagupan smiendeted, and the pio\- 
ince of Pangasinan was liberated by Makabulos on 2 J li 1 \ . On the last da\ of that 
month, the town of San Isidro, Nueva Lcija, fell to the forces of C.asimiro 1 inio 
and Manuel Tinio after a short siege. Trom here the 1 inios pushed noithwaid t c') 
take Vigan in I locos Stir. 1 he rising in the province of Iayabas was led b\ C .olonel 
Manuel Arguelles in June; the province was recovered in August. 

The provinces of Isabela and Nueva Vizcaya were recovered in September. In 
the middle of that month Cieneral Vicente Tukban began operations in the two 
G amarines provinces, established control m Octobei, and then proceeded to Sa- 
mar and Leyte, where he met only minor enemy resistance. On — 8 October, Gen- 
eral Vito Belarmino assumed command m the (.amarines, in addition to Alba\ and 
Sorsogon. 

(It will be evident from the foregoing summary that, for the most part, the 
triumphs of the revolution in the provinces during this period were in the form of 
relatively peaceful capitulations and surrenders of enemy garrisons after sieges by 
revolutionary forces. I his does not detract from the wisdom of the leaders of the 
revolution. During June-July 1848, General Aguinaldo had placed Augustins 
Manila under a tight and complete siege, so that the provincial garrisons were to- 



I HI I’MII.II’I'INT. Rl.Vt )I t 1 1 < )N AM ) HI Y< »NI » 



tally cut off from communications and support from the capital: as .1 result the 
Spanish garrisons in the provinces were dispirited and without hope of relu t 

Meanwhile, early in April 1 898, a new front had opened in the \ is.ivas I he 
rising took place in the town of San Nicolas adjoining ( ebu < its. It v. .is Rd |>\ 
Leon Quilat (apparently pursuant to a written order of I uis I lores, who signed as 
“Chairman ”). The men of the neighboring towns joined in. and the moment um of 
the rising led to an attack on the city, driving the resident Spanish population and 
the garrison to take refuge in the stronghold of fort San Pedro. Within a week, 
however, an enemy gunboat and some troops from Manila recovered the c it\, Hm 
the revolution was in control in the towns outside the capital. I he ( ehu rcvolu 
tionary leaders acknowledged Aguinaldoscentr.il leadership: dies organized then 
towns in late November 1898 under the latter’s decree of I 8 |une 1 898 on niunici 
pai governments. 

1 he revolution in Iloilo was deliberate, unlikethat of Bonifacio's Katipunan 
in Manila. I he province was the most populous in Pilipinas. The leaders w ere well 
to-do, many of them educated in Lurope and Manila, flies had planned then 
struggle since July, asvaiting instructions from Luzon, meantime i.ikinu user the 
tosvns in the populous southern half of the province. In August 1898 . ,m oseinll 
revolutionary committee was established in Molo. a rich suburb of lloil,,. Wl ,h 
plans for a similar committee in each of the other tosvns. 

In September, the Ilonggo leaders sent a delegation to Malolos to Brief .\<>u 
inaldoon the developments in Pan ay, receive instructions, hits- rifles, and to recpic-st 
that an expedition be sent to Pa nay. Aguinaldo acted on their rec|itest and direc ted 
General Leandro Fullon and General Ananias Diocno to sail for Antique ttul 
Gapiz, respectively, each svith a contingent of Tagalog troops. 

On 17 November 1898, the Ilonggos replaced the Molo rcvolu 1 ionars com- 
mittee with a Revolutionary Government of the Visavas, based in Santa B.irhirt 
I he officers of the governing council were elected in a general meeting: Roque 
Lopez as chairman; Vicente Franco vice-chairman and counselor for administra- 
tion; Venancio Concepcion counselor for finance; Julio I lernandez counselor for 
war; and Ramon Avancena assigned the tsso portfolios of counselor for state and 
counselor for church and judiciary. Quintin Salas was designated sec rctarv-<>eneral 
of the government, while Martin Delgado was commanding general of the .trim-. 

I he change to the new government was designed to enable the Ilonggos to 
deal with De Los Rios with a more formal personality. Relations with the latter 
were almost cordial. Manila had been delivered to the American forces the prec ious 
August, and Delos Rios saw that Spain’s centuries-long presence in Pilipinas would 
soon come to an end. He and the Ilonggos agreed to a truce on 2 I November. 

I he distinctive feature of the revolution in Iloilo was that it produced a re- 
gional government scheme for the Visayan islands, within an overall concept of a 
federal form of government for the entire archipelago. The constituent states were 
to be Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao and Sulu with, the Ilonggos explained. 



18 



( ( MvPl / / he 1'ilipnio Revolution m ( hir ( ollective .Memory 

the ' political administration and the armv centralized in the Clovernment of I u- 
zon. 

I he concept had been presented to Aguinaldo in Malolos bv the delegation 
from Iloilo the previous September. Aguinaldo gave his approval, with instructions 
to the Iloilo leaders to contact the Muslim sultans and present them with the idea 
of an all-bilipino Christian-Muslim federal union. ( I he idea of a Filipino federal 
republic had f irst been advanced bv Rizal in / it SoluLiruLui in February 1890.) 

I he Ilonggos formally established the Federal Council of the Yisavas on \2 
December 1898, with provisions for council members for Iloilo, Cebu, Negros 
C Accidental, Negros C Ariental, C 'a pi/. Antique, and the district of C Concepcion. The 
C Christmas season saw the last remaining Spanish troops in Filipinas leaving for 
Spain. 

From the Siege of Manila to the Constitution of the Filipino Republic 

I he militarv progress of the revolution against Spain closely reflected the develop- 
ment of the righting forces into a revolutionarv armv. 

As in Manila, the katipunan started the revolution in Cavite. But it was not 
long before the ranks of the fighting men came to include non-katipuneros. In- 
deed, on the eve of the revolution, the elaborate and solemn katipunan rites for 
initiating hundreds of applicants had to be abbreviated and simplified daily to 
minimize the risk of discoverv bv the friars and the Cuardia Cavil. I hen, in the 

rush of the risings, the rites were as often as not simply dispensed with. The ab- 
e* ..... 

sence of initiation rituals facilitated the growth of the revolutionary forces via the 
draft of non-katipuneros; one did not have to be a katipunero to fight for the 
Motherland. Not onlv were non-katipuneros becoming part of the revolutionary 
forces but victorv in the field drew defectors from the Spanish infantry regiments, 
who were welcome because thev brought their military experience and rifles with 
them. 

These trends transformed the katipunan uprising into a larger struggle, the 
Filipino revolution. FCdilberto FCvangelista attended the University of Cihent in 
Brussels along with Jose Alejandrino and Antonio Luna; they were contemporaries 
with Rizal in FCurope. FCvangelista finished his civil engineering and architecture 
studies at the head of his class; he came home in November 1896 and joined the 
revolution in Cavite under Aguinaldo. As a general in December, he told his troops 
that, like many of them, he was not a katipunero, but that the revolution was the 
struggle of all Filipinos who were willing to make sacrifices for the redemption of 
the Motherland. Aside from Alejandrino, Luna, and FCvangelista, other Filipinos 
who worked in the Propaganda Movement in FCurope during the 1 880s to the early 
1890s, all non-katipuneros, became officers of the revolution in 1898; leodoro 
Sandico and Fernando C Canon became generals — Canon was a full-blooded Span- 
iard, but he was born in Filipinas and saw himself as a Filipino. 



19 



I MI. PHIUPPINK RI-A'C )H IK )N AND Hi Y< »NI > 



It fell to Aguinaldo to shape the loose fighting forces inn* t r< ■ « it \ 
army. The Katipunan forces had been structured so that the fighting wmts were 
composed of men who were members of their respective lfaruwja\ and n >v. : Lap 

ters. These forces fought with very few firearms: virtualh all the guns the-. had 
consisted of pieces captured from the enemy. These charac teristu s lasted r< >t a i« »ng 
time and influenced the measures adopted toward military < >rgam/ai n >n 

By 1897 the revolutionary forces had come to be organized mm two 
branches: the first, the Sandatahan, generally composed of Katipmuu > without 
rifles and armed with bolos; the second was sometimes called the regular arms, 
made up of men who had been issued firearms. 

I he rules issued by Aguinaldo in November 1 89~ retained the old w stein of 
the Sandatahan forces being organized by btirangiiy \\\\ its. I.acli town unnu d. a ^ 1 
vilian body, was to be responsible for organi/mg the towns Sandatahan utinplc 
ment; the council was to see to it that the youngest unmarried men he m the* 
Sandatahan active service, while the older and married men were to Ik m the re 
serve service. I he Sandatahan units were under the authority of the ^ hair man and 
vice-chairman of each town council. The units were to he in companies, eac h s < >m 
pany having three “sections of 50 men each, with each section organized mm 
squads. Promotions to commissioned ranks in the regular arms were to he- <u\ in to 
Sandatahan officers who captured specified numbers of rifles in ac turns against the 
enemy. 

I he Sandatahan units were primarily engaged in actions near then tow ns. In 
time, a system evolved governing Sandatahan roles in the field: the men formed a 
line behind the troops armed with rifles, and each Sandatahan lighter ad\ anced to 
take the place of any fallen rifleman. The Sandatahan also performed useful sup 
port roles in the construction of trench works and in the hauling < >f am mum t ion 
and supplies. 

Measures toward a more regular military organization for the troops w ith 
rifles naturally coincided with the increasing supply of firearms. The first shipment 
of arms contracted for under the arms-buying project of the I long Kong junta was 
unloaded in Cavite on 23 May 1898: 2,282 rifles and 176,550 can ridges. I he sec- 
ond shipment would arrive on 6 June: 1 ,992 rifles and 200,000 rounds of ' ammu- 
nition. Still more rifles eventually some I 2,000 — would come wi t h t he clef ce tors 
from the militia that Augustin organized on 4 May 1 898. 

Back when he was in Hong Kong, Aguinaldo had directed Mariano Ponce, 
the latter having left Europe to work with the revolution, to draft a constitution for 
a provisional Filipino republic. The draft, finished in April 1898, featured the con- 
cepts of a federal republic and of an hjercito Iabertador (Army of Liberation). It i* s 

certain that the latter concept influenced Aguinaldo s decree ( >f 3 (line 1898, w hich 

was explicitly aimed at attaining a more military organization of the revolut ion ary 
army. 

But the inertia of the Katipunan tradition was enduring; the army units were 
to be town-based, as before. However, the decree spelled out squad, platoon, and 



20 



( c > Iv I * l / The hihpmo Revolution in Our ( olleetire .^frrnory 

company strengths, and provided for unit officers up to the rank of captain. A 
company was to he composed of 100 soldiers; the men would elect their corporals 
and sergeants, lieutenants, and captain by secret ballot. The local basis of unit or- 
ganization, and election of officers by soldiers, ensured that the Army of Libera- 
tion was to be a true peoples army, not uncommon in many revolutions. An atten- 
dant result was that the officers whom the soldiers would elect would tend to be 
their own local leaders, men who could furnish them with clothes, food, and basic 
weapons, f inally, ranks above captain were to be filled by appointment by the cen- 
tral government. 

In June and July 1 898, Aguinaldo decreed the organization of provinces into 
military zones: Cavite, Bulacan, and Nueva beija. 1 he other provinces would be 
similarly organized into zones as thev were recovered, bach province was to have 
up to six military zones, depending on its number of towns; each zone was to be 
led by a zone commander. The ranking zone commander in a province was to be 
th e overall military authority of the province as well as politico-military governor. 
Zone commanders were to be appointed bv the central government. Manila was a 
special case. Its zones and zone commanders were named on 20 June, although the 
capital itself had not vet been taken. Nevertheless, the decree suggested that Manila 
was a strategic objective — the zones were tentative and subject to modification, the 
decree stated, “after we capture the capital Manila. 

I he formal organization of the revolutionary government was decreed on 23 
(line 1898. Relative to military concerns, it was provided that revolutionary com- 
mittees be set up in some foreign countries, hach committee was to have a section 
on military affairs. The section was to “study military tactics and the best methods 
for the organization of a general staff, the artillery, and the engineer corps, and 
other matters that would place the Filipino army “in the state required by modern 
conditions." 

The July decree on the army was more advanced and significant than the 
earlier issuances. It began on a socioeconomic note. 1 he revolution had drawn 
many farm workers, tradesmen, artisans, and business and factor)’ laborers into the 
fighting forces, with the result that shortages and hardships weighed dow n the folk 
of the towns who had to support them. Aguinaldo felt that the remedy would be to 
reduce the size of the army by releasing some men for nonmilitary employment. 

For this purpose, the superior military commander in each province was to 
visit every army detachment in his jurisdiction. 1 he membeis of the militia who 
volunteered to remain in the army were to report to him, and he would determine 
the total number of men required for the provincial garrison, considering the needs 
for both defense and strategic actions. The superfluous members of the militia 
would be disbanded but their arms retained for the army. Complete service records 
of all troops were to be kept and copies sent to the war department. 

The provincial garrison strength was fixed at one battalion of six companies 
for Cavite, Bulacan, Batangas, Laguna, Tayabas, Zambales, Pampanga/1 arlac, and 
Manila. There would be garrisons of four companies in Morong, Bataan, and 

21 



THh PHILIPIMNT HI V< >1 1 I l< )N \M ) HI Y< > v .l > 



Nueva Ecija, rwo companies for Mindoro, and one company tor Marmduqiu I he 
garrison strength in provinces that were still unliberated would Ik* fixed alter tbe\ 
had been recovered. 

The rank of the provincial superior commander would depend < »n t he gar r i 
son size, a brigadier-general or a colonel it at full strength. \ compam was n» be 
composed of 1 10 men, inclusive of privates, noncommissioned ottu c is one sea 
ond lieutenant, one first lieutenant, and a captain. 

In addition to the provincial garrison forces, the provinces were t<> lonmh 
ute forces for a 3, 000- man central army corps that would be under t be di u\ t e*m 
mand of the president of the government as general-in-c hiei. 

On the basis of the foregoing numbers, t he total regular anm st u-mgth in the 
liberated provinces plus the central army corps would be approximated lO.Snn 
men. In the provinces that were not yet recovered by M) |ulv ISOS, the fudging 
forces of the revolution would include the volunteer militia and, at the core, tlu Ac 
facto regular army men with rifles. I hese provinces included the llokos and neailn 
provinces, the Bikol provinces, Samar and Leyte, and Iloilo, ( ebu. and Negros. 

I heir total forces actually in place would exceed the reduced regular anm stre ngth 
of 10,500 (inclusive of the central army corps) in the liberated pros hues. 

In his 6 August 1 898 message to foreign govern merits asking tor recognition 
of the belligerent status of the revolution and of the independence of I ilipmas, 
Aguinaldo affirmed that the revolutionary government had a force of s( ),()()() men 
on war footing organized as a regular army. 

In late September 1898, the general officers were: Aguinaldo as general in 
chief; Baldomero Aguinaldo, war secretary, with the rank of lieutenant general: An- 
tonio Luna, director-general, with the rank of major-general; Art emit > Ricarte, Vito 
Belarmino, and Emiliano Riego de I )ios, “generals of division ; and the following 
brigadier-generals: Tomas Mascardo, Lantaleon ( iarcia, Mariano I lanera, Mariano 
Noriel, Isidoro Torres, Miguel Malvar, Paciano Ri/.al, Lascual Alvarez, lose Ignacio 
Pawa (a Chinese who joined the revolution), Gregorio del Pilar, and franc isco 
Makabulos. 

I he 30 July decree provided for various rules of military conduct and pre- 
scribed the oath to be formally sworn to by all troops and officers, as follows: 

In the name of God and on my honor, I swear to defend unto death the 
flag, which symbolizes the independence of the country; I swear to observe the 
military discipline and the laws of the Revolution, and to faithfullv discharge 
the duties appertaining to my office, under the penalty of dismissal from the 
service in disgrace, and other penalties fixed by said laws. So be it. 

1 he colors for the services were: black for the infantry; red for the artillery; 
green for the cavalry; violet for the engineer corps; blue for the general staf f ; w hite 
for the judge advocate service; yellow for the quartermaster corps; and the regula- 
tion red cross for the medical corps. 



( ( >KI’l V 1 hr hi/iptno Rrrolution in ( )ur ( ollrctivr Mrtnon 

Appended to the 30 July decree was a table of pav scales. The salary of the 
highest-ranking; field officer, general of division, was P60 each month; followed bv 
that of brigadier-general and lower ranks down to captain, the latter at P2S; then 
down to support officers (c.g., surgeon) and lieutenants, at P2S to PIS; sergeants 
and corporals, at P6 and P-4, respectively; and privates at P3.2S. The privates and 
noncommissioned officers were also issued rice rations, cooking fuel, and one oil 
lamp per 20 men for lighting. 

An American report on the rifles held bv the bilipinos, dated late August 
1898, estimates the number at about * 4 0 , 000 . Phis was composed of 12,000 
brought in bv the defectors from the volunteer militia; 8,000 that had either 
been captured or been brought in bv defectors from the Spanish infantry regi- 
ments; another 2,S0() captured from the Spanish arsenal in Cavite; and more than 
17,000 other pieces, including those contracted tor in Hong Kong. It is almost 
certain that the 40,000 total is an overestimate, since it had to be inclusive of 
guns that were defective — each battalion in the armv had gunsmiths or master ar- 
morers. 

The Spaniards had realized as early as October 1 89"* that they could not sup- 
press the revolution. Since 1 Mav 1898, when the Americans arrived in Manila Bay, 
it had become plain that the Spaniards options had been reduced to two: w hether 
to surrender Pilipinas to the Filipinos or to surrender it to the Americans. 

After Aguinaldo and his jefes returned home in late May 1898, they had to 
address two evident tasks: to recover the territory of the Motherland through mili- 
tary operations and to establish a government. 

But over these two tasks loomed the dark shadow of American colonial de- 
signs. The Filipinos felt that shadow' and took care that their military operations 
and the government that they established met every standard of civilized warfare 
and political institutions that the outside world could require. In these tasks the 
Filipinos scrupulously observed reason and culture; but at no time did they enjoy 
support from the community of nations. 

I he military campaign in the provinces was an unbroken series of successes. 
Only Manila remained as the prime prize. The bulk of the remaining Spanish land 
forces and the substance of Spanish authority were holed up in Manila, under 
Deweys naval aims in Manila Bay since Mav. But the major blockade was from 
land-side, bv the Filipino forces. 

Manila’s outer land defense works at the time was a system of 1 S strong con- 
crete and wooden blockhouses, connected to each other bv a trench. Blockhouse 
No. 1 was in Kalookan, just south of the railroad depot: from here the others 
formed an arc inland and around the capital east by south and re-curving west- 
ward, via San Juan and Mandaluvong, through San Pedro Makati, and ending in 
Blockhouse No. IS at Fort San Antonio Abad in Malate. The Filipinos had strong 
points facing each blockhouse all along the arc. In the words of Brigadier-General 
Francis V'. Greene (arrived in Cavite from San Francisco on 1 ~ July 1 8 C ),S), the Fili- 
pinos’ siege was so complete, that "all supplies were cut off” and the residents as 



TH I* PH 1 1 IPP1NI- RI V( )| ( IK >\ \M ) IU*H > 



well “as the Spanish troops, were forced to live on horse .mil buffalo nu.u and tlu 
Chinese population on cats and dogs. 

But the capital proved to be an elusive pri/c. ( iencral P.mtale< »n < .ar < . « >m 

manding, fourth military /one of Manila, reported to Aguin. ddo on Ini. ; ii.n lie 
was preparing for the attack on the capital. Aguinaldo also direc ted ( »eiu i ai Ru arte 
to make ready for the assault. On 16 Julv, ( iencral Mariano Noriel w ired A-umaUh » 
that he and Ricarte would attack Manila at 6 o clot k the follow mg muimnr Noth 
ing came out of these reports. 

Indeed, Aguinaldo had written ( iencral Augustin on |ul\ 1-V>S. inciting, 
him to surrender the capital to the Hlipinos. I le proposed generous ^ apnulation 
terms and informed Augustin that the Filipino negotiators on tlu- matter \\< mid be 
Ricarte and Garcia. 

Augustin did not reply. Aguinaldo could not know that Madrid had m 
structed Augustin the previous 8 June and again on 29 |une, due to \ugustms tc 
ports of the desperate military situation in Manila, that, il surrender Betaine na 
essary, he could capitulate to the Americans, but under no circumstances to the 
Filipinos. 

On 22 July 1898, Madrid sued for peace with the Americans. I he piotocol 
suspending hostilities between Spain and the United States was signed m \\ ash i ng 
ton in the afternoon of 1 2 August by the French ambassador in behalf < >f t he Span 
ish government. The protocol provided, among others, that: 

Art. III. I he United States will occupv and hold the cits, bav and ha i hoi 
of Manila, pending the conclusion of a treats' of peace wluc h shall detei mine 
the control, disposition and government of the Philippines. 

Meanwhile, the negotiations for the surrender of Manila to the Americans 
had also been underway for some time through intermediaries. In |ulv, the British 
consul in Manila, Rawson- Walker, was the middleman between Dewey and 
Augustin. Augustin was replaced in early August by ( ,eneral Perm in | a tide ties an ch 
Rawson-Walker having died meanwhile due to illness, the Belgian consul M- 
Andre served as the new intermediary. Jaudenes insisted that the conditio dme r//o/ 
non for any capitulation was an American attack, according to I )c\vcv, “for the sake 
of Spanish honor." 

The Americans obliged with a mock attack on the Intramuros in the morn- 
ing of 13 August, and the Spaniards promptly raised the flag of surrender. ( 1 3 
August in Manila was 12 August in Washington, when the peace protocol was 
signed, but news of the signing reached Manila only on 16 August because the 
submarine cable to Hong Kong had been cut in May.) The American Major-C ien- 
era! Wesley Merritt took the surrender. He had told his brigade commanders be- 
fore the mock battle: “It is intended that these results shall he accomplished with- 
out the loss of life." 



24 



( i Mvl’t '/ l he I'tlipiuo Revolution m ( htr ( olleetire Memory 

I he relations between the Filipinos and the Americans after the latter's occu- 
pation of Manila will be reviewed later. 

The loss of Manila, long an objective of the revolution, was a deep disap- 
pointment to the Filipinos. Merritt would not agree to a joint occupation of the 
capital. Weighing fresh options and looking ahead, Aguinaldo moved the capital 
of the revolutionary government from Bacoor, Cavite, to Malolos, Bulacan, in Sep- 
tember. From here he directed the recoverv of the I uzon provinces and the kev 
\ isavan islands over the weeks until late October. 

I he move from Bacoor to Malolos also meant a shift to political moves bv 
Aguinaldo to establish a constitutional iiovernment that would influence world 
opinion and the coming negotiations between the Spaniards and the Americans 
toward a peace treaty. 

In Malolos, on 1 5 September 1898, Aguinaldo inaugurated the congress pro- 
vided for in his earlier decrees m June. In his address, he told the delegates that they 
were “chosen to assemble for the purpose of' establishing the Congress which will 
guarantee our Fibertv... 1 le formally declared that the revolution against Spain 
“has just ended, and our armv has acquitted itself with credit and glory. 

Aguinaldo then delivered a second brief address to open the dclibeiations of 
the congress. He began bv stating that the w r ork of the resolution had concluded in 
the victor\ r of the Filipinos, and that “the present time calls foi a solemn document 
expressive of the high aspirations of the* Motherland, accompanied b\ all the pies- 
tige and all the grandeur of the Filipino race... He noted that the delegates weie 
assembled: 

...in the name of peace, perhaps close at hand, to unite the suffrages of our 

thinkers and our politicians. .. to write with their votes the immortal book of 

the Filipino constitution as the supreme expression of the national will. 

Aguinaldo paid homage to the illustrious Filipinos who first conceptualized the 
Filipino nation, to those who suffered for the Motherland, and to the genciation 
that won liberty in the contest of arms. But more than by arms, he said, the nation's 
glorious victory was won with “the eternal, living spirit of liberty which burns like 
a holy flame in the Filipino soul — 

The story of modern Filipino constitution-making begins with the prov i- 
sional constitution for the Filipino republic, formally adopted b\ an assembb in 
Biak-na-Bato in November 189 . It was followed b\ a constitutional efiaft dated 
April 1898, written in Hong Kong bv Mariano Ponce undei the direction of Agu- 
inaldo. The next document was drafted by Apolinario Mabini in Bay, Laguna, and 
presented to the revolutionary government in early June 1898. I he last Filipino 
constitution before the American occupation regime was the provisional constitu- 
tion adopted in Malolos for the Filipino republic, promulgated by Aguinaldo on 

21 (an nary 1899. 



THE PHILIPPINE REV( )\i l K )N V.l> hi *j • >M > 

These documents arc worthwhile reading for our legal sjmi.ns and «»nstitu 
tionalists. Some of their formulations arc superior in litcrarv stvlc .uni precision to 
that of many provisions in our constitutional documents dm nu; tii \mcrn in re 
gime and reflect traces of our rich European tradition, along \suh prm ismns from 
our intellectuals of the time that are modern even codas 

I he delegates to the congress in .Malolos were aware that tin Spaniards and 
American commissioners negotiating a peace treats in Ear is had hern meet in:; situ e 
1 October 1898. rhey expected an early promulgation of then proposed hasn law 
by Aguinaldo, so that the Filipino republic, with a proper must it in n >n . would he 
in place before the Paris treaty would have been signed. 

But Aguinaldo and his adviser \labini saw that the fundamental law adopted 
by the congress was for a republic and a society at peace. I here were a foreien nasal 
squadron and troops in the territory of the Motherland, and the \rncinaiis and 
Spaniards were discussing the political fate of their count r\ m Paris, without their 
participation. Aguinaldo sent remedial amendment proposals m the e onyjess o\er 
late December to 1 January 1899. 

I he needed amendments were adopted In the congress as n ansi tors pm\i 
sions. One major amendment proposal remained; Aguinaldo had hoped that the 
Filipino republic would embrace all the people of the arc hipclago. including the 
Muslims, in a federal state. I his was why he approved the Ilonggo concept of the 
Visayas as a state in a federal union. Now he asked for an amendment authorizing 
him to negotiate with the Muslims for the purpose of establishing national soli 
darity upon the basis of a real federation and of absolute respect foi then beliefs 
and traditions.” 

But Aguinaldo had not shared his thoughts with t he delegates, win > t In night 
only of a unitary state. I he Ireaty of Paris had now been signed. Wat clouds were 
looming, and the delegates had done what they believed was then task. Aguinaldo 
deferred what could be done in the future and decided to promulgate t he* c oust it u 
tion. Fie wrote the sultans of Jolo and Maguindanao on 19 January 1X99 about the 

founding of the Filipino republic, citing the ties of "race, interests, and regional 
defense and security that bound the Christians and Muslims. I le also wrote 
Raymundo Mellizaofthe Federal Council of the Visavas, urging the llonggos to 
support the new constitution in order to present Filipino solidarity before the 
world and giving assurances that the government would adopt correct ive const itu- 
tional measures in the future. 

The first republic was inaugurated in Malolos on 23 January 1X99. I wo 
weeks later the republic was at war with the new enemy. 

From Occupation to the Paris Peace Treaty Negotiations 

American President McKinleys orders of 1 9 May 1898 were the most rabid impe- 
rialism. He ordered that an army of occupation be sent to the Philippines to pro- 



26 



t i >KIH / The Filipino Revolution m ( htr ( olleetire Memory 



vide order and security “while the Philippines were in the possession of the United 
States’^!) The orders named Major-Ceneral Wesley Merritt commanding general 
of the occupation army; he was also to serve as military goyernor of - the archipelago. 

McKinleys orders, although not then known to the Filipinos, meant war 
against them. 1 he orders could not he implemented right away and the war would 
not come immediately, hut the revolution would flow seamlessly into a defensive 
war against a new enemy. 

Filipino contacts with American officials had begun in early November 
189T immediately after the founding of the republic in Biak-na-Bato. Aguinaldo 
had a foreign agent in 1 long kong, Felipe Agoneillo; the latter called on the Ameri- 
can consul there a few times. Agoneillo showed prescience; in his view the l nited 
States would declare war on Spain before long. He therefore offered an offensive- 
defensive alliance, under which the United States would provide 20,000 rifles and 
200,000 rounds of ammunition to his government, on terms that would return 
20- to 30-percent profit to the Americans. 1 he consul reported on the matter to 
his superiors favorably, but he was straying beyond his authority as a consul and 
was told to refrain from acts that might commit the l nited States government 
politically. 

In late April 1898, upon the United States declaration of war against Spain, 
the American consul in Manila went to Hong Kong to brief Commodore Dewe\ 
on the situation in his post. A few hours before Peweys squadron departed foi 
Manila Bay, the consul and his colleague in 1 long Kong received a delegation from 
the Hong Kong junta and arranged for two of the latter, Jose Alcjandrino and An- 
dres F. de C larchitorcna, to sail with the squadron. 

Aguinaldo himself had just traveled to Saigon and Singapore to seek news 
and contacts in view of the brewing war between the Spaniards and Ameiicans. In 
Singapore he met with Howard W. Bray, a former businessman in Manila w ith pio- 
Filipino sentiments. Bray arranged for Aguinaldo to meet with W.Ci. St. Cdaitc, 
editor of the Singapore Tree Press, and with the American consul in Singapoic, on 
24 and 25 April. The newspaper (4 May) described the meetings as having resulted 
in a "secret political agreement that led to direct political relations with Dewey. 
Shortly thereafter, the consuls in Hong Kong and Singapore made arrangements 
with Dewey for Aguinaldo s return to Manila. Aguinaldo sailed on one of the 
squadrons ships, the U.S.S. AIe( Ji/loeh, and arrived in Cavite on 19 May. (In his 
Autobiography Dewey savs: "1 requested him to come. ) 

Aguinaldo and his colleagues felt encouraged by the reception accorded them 
by the American consuls. I he reports in the Straits Times, Singapore Free Press , and 
Hongkong Telegraph in late April until early May showed sympathy to Aguinaldo 
and the Filipinos. It is certain that the Filipinos welcomed support and, with luck, 
protection of their country — after its independence — from the United States. But 
it is even more clear that they would not deliver the ideals of their revolution to 
another colonial subjugation. 



nil. I’HII.II’l’INI K1 V< )I ri [( )N AND HI ,« >NI> 



Then in June the Filipinos learned about the realities <.| Big IWci politics. 
On the 7th the Singapore Free Press re printed an article titled I he I ate . >t tin I Mill 
ippines” from the London Spectator. In brief, the analysis limped «»n the powers a 
tion or disturbance of the balance of power among the colonial possets m 1 
East. The premise was that the Spaniards had already lost Manila, and the Philip 
pines was “newly acquired property” of the Americans. I lie question w.«s ssould 
the Americans eventually give up the Philippines and. it so. vdm h ot the Hig Loss 
ers would get them? “Already,” the writer supposed, tierce jealousies and t.u ,e.n h 
ing ambitions have been awakened throughout Europe. 

But England could not take possession of the Philippines to, the basn tea 
son that she “already had too much.” And one by one ( .ermam Kusm.i. I ,., IK e 
and Holland were eliminated for this or that reason. As for |apan. it was out ot the 
question because she was a “pagan power” and the Filipinos were < htisti.ms 

Fhe conclusion was that the United States would keep possession ot the ,s 
lands. I he Americans defeated Spain, a mere second-class power, but would I, ,se 
lost to France or England. And so. the article said, the United States would entci 
tain Big Power ambitions; she would build up a strong navy In diuttm u all the 
shiftless hoys ofthe Union/’ 

The writer was hopeful that the United States would hold on to the arc In 
pclago. England would like another English-speaking power to share her W hite- 
Man’s Burden”; and, “to put the truth in its most brutal form, no I urope.m power 
could attack them without our permission.” But would the Americans fec i mlub 

ited by their constitution? Fhe writer dismissed this as "rubbish. And finally. the 

United States would have no problem raising an occupation force; she could build 
a Sepoy army from her blacks; and the Filipinos would not "feel insulted because 
such an occupation force would be “white-skinned onlv at the top " 

, T KmlCy did nm havc a la "‘i in i I k- IM„I, 

until July IXJH when rwn regimcnls „/ volunteers ,„ul live comp.,, m . s ,,, ' 

, al1 tro °P s - dnembarked in Cavhc. In umiras,. Aguinuhlo h.,,1 ,,,,1,7,- 

ken good fortune- since the end ok May: in June , be Spanish .ntlnu; OT , m | 

in -avite province surrendered and Ins coumerparl in I'anipanga p„, s ince .,1, 

doned his command; over the rest of June and into July u.ss-n alier mss „ ssould | ,11 
to the riJipinos. 

Why then did Aguinaldo not take Manila? I he problem was not simple. 
Most ofthe victories of the revolution in the provinces had been against immobile 
enemy garrisons that were totally cut off from communication w ith ,\1 mil t 1 he 
arrival ofthe first U.S. Army troops on I July must then have galvanized Aguinaldo 
into action Bur at this point it is clear that he had already decided on a strategy to 
take Manila not by assault, but by negotiated surrender. I he Filipino sie/ of 
Manila had begun by mid-June and drawn tight by early July. Aguinaldo invited 
Augustin to capitulate on 7 July, but the latter had been under orders from Madrid 
since June {supra) not to surrender to the Filipinos. 



28 



i ( )RIH V I'hc lilipmo Revolution in ( )ur ( olleetive Memory 

Aguinaldos options were thinning out. I le could have arranged with Oewev. 
and later with the senior American commander (Merritt would not arrive until 28 
|ulv), fora coordinated joint attack and occupation of Manila. But no American 
commander had authoritv to enter into any such arrangement under McKinley's 
instructions of I 1 ) May. 

Another alternative for Aguinaldo was an armed assault and capture of Ma- 
nila. This was not practicable. The earlier decision to take Manila by negotiated 
surrender meant that an attack would be mounted only some time after ~ July; but 
a few davs later the second American troop expedition would arrive, stronger than 
the first, and Aguinaldo did not have the general staff capability to plan out the 
complex contingeneies. Moreover, Manila was hostage to I )cwcv s nas al guns; Agu- 
inaldo could not risk an action that would lead to destruction of'the historic 16th- 
century e'ttv, where mans' bilipinos lived. 1 he involvement of the' U.S. Aims foiee's 
was certain, because the Americans and Spaniards weie ne’gotiating the - capitula- 
tion of Manila to the former. Moreover, it should be' botne' in mind that 
Aguinaldos decree to regularize the revolutionary forces ss'oulel not be issueel until 
30 July. 

There svas a last option for Aguinaldo: a defensive alliance with Augustin 
against the Americans. Augustin hael in fact maele an offei to Aguinalelo back in 
May to join the Spaniards against the Americans; Aguinaldo would be named chief 
of the armed forces of l ilipinas with the assimilated rank of hi igadiei -genual in 
the Spanish army. But this option is speculative; Aguinaldo could not seek an alli- 
ance svith the cnemv of his people now, as he could not be in alliance ssith him 
then. 

On I July 1 898, the hirst California and Second Oregon Volunteer regiments 
and five companies of'the Fourteenth U.S. Infantry Regiment, under the com- 
mand of Brigadier-General Thomas Anderson (USV), disembarked in Cavite. 
Anderson, like all the American commanders who arrived latet, puisued the 
same line toward Aguinaldo: while making it clear that they wanted the coopera- 
tion of'the bilipinos in the “American offensive against the Spaniards,” they ad- 
dressed Aguinaldo simply as a military leader and never as the political head of 
the revolutionary government of a people that had already declared their inde- 
pendence. 

On 17 |uly, a second U.S. Army troop expedition arrived under the com- 
mand of Brigadier-General Francis V. Greene (USV), consisting of the 1 iist Colo- 
rado, First Nebraska, and Tenth Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry regiments, four 
companies each of'the Eighteenth and Twenty-Third U.S. Infantry regiments, and 
two battalions of the Utah Volunteer Artillery. 

On 23 July, the third U.S. Army troop expedition arrived, with three arttl- 
lerv battalions and the designated commander of the U.S. Army expeditionary 
forces, Major-General Wesley Merritt. And on 31 July, Brigadier-General Arthur 
MacArthur (USV) docked with the First Idaho, Thirteenth Minnesota, and First 



29 



THh mn.imNI H\ VC )I I IK )N AM > IM K >Ml * 



North Dakota, Volunteer Infantry regiments: four companie s c.u h. <»r . 

teenth and Twenty-Third U.S. Infantry; a battalion of tfu* \Vvommg \ < ;? * wr In 

fan try; two batteries of the Third U.S. Artillery: and a mm pan*, ot <n • 
four expeditions were made up of 470 officers and I 0 i V men 

The relations between the Filipinos and the Americans were at be * « >mpU*\. 

The Filipinos had general political goals, known to the Americans, the iatiet had 
clear and specific tactical orders, unknown to the I ilipmos. I he \iiu ik ins e\ 
ecuted their orders and the Filipinos would anah/e the Aineruan actions against 
the aims of their revolution, so that the lilipinos moves were ‘gene -rails ic.uiise in 
nature. 

On the other hand, the American military commanders con hi nni afford to 
provoke Aguinaldo by rash actions or cavalier treatment that would lead him. m 
the Americans thinking, to join forces with the Spaniards. 

I he Filipinos deeply resented their being left out of the- Amcin.m planning 
of and then the Spanish-American agreements on the capitulation of Manila. I he 
capital was, after all, their city. I heir land siege of more than a m< >nt h had w n he >ut 
a doubt helped the Americans. It is clear that the capital would base fallen to the 
Americans in a real battle, but the Spaniards could then have fallen b.u k c ast and 
north to the siege positions of the Filipinos and joined forces with the 1 a t tei . with 
serious difficulties for the Americans. 

Furthermore, the Filipinos had thought that the Americans had dnu ti into 
Manila in a real battle; in this belief they invested many cl i si i ic ts south of the I\ism 
River, especially Pandacan and Paco, and expected to he in joint occupation with 
the Americans. 

On 14 August, Merritt issued a proclamation, To the People of the Philip- 
pines, in Fagalog, Spanish, and Fnglish, declaring the establishment of a govern- 
ment of military occupation. 

I hat the occupation government was to encompass the entire archipelago 
was meaningless. Ihe 12 August peace protocol signed in Washington had pro- 
vided in Article III that the United States was to hold and occ upy the “c i t y, bay and 
harbor of Manila until the peace treaty determining the disposi t ion of t he 1 Mi i I ip- 
pines would have been concluded. Merritt could not extend the territorial jurisdic- 
tion of his military government without violating international law. 

And if Merritt had thought of extending his jurisdiction as a /,/// ticconipli, 
this was feasible only by taking territory held by the revolutionary government. 
I his would push McKinley into the risk of a new war, a war against the Filipinos, 
while the United States was still legally at war with Spain. 

Ihe fifth U.S. Army expedition arrived in Manila on 21 August, including 
Major-General hlwell S. Otis, who would replace Merritt on .AO August. After 
fruitless attempts demanding that Aguinaldo withdraw all the Filipino forces that 
had occupied districts in the Manila area, and threatening force in case of noncom- 
pliance by 1 5 September, Otis was persuaded to modify his demand into a request. 
Aguinaldo then issued withdrawal orders, on the rationalization that the Filipinos 



30 



( ORPl'/ The Filipino Revolution in ()ur ( olleetire Menion 



retire to positions where contact and conflict with the Americans would be 
avoided. 

From Mav to August was a period of mixed fortunes tor the revolution. Inde- 
pendence had been proclaimed, accompanied by successes in the recovery of the 
provinces. On the other hand, Manila had been lost and the Americans had pre- 
tended to have a military government over the archipelago. Aguinaldo could not 
wage war — the Army of I iberation of Pilipinas, still basicallv organized as provin- 
cial siarrison forces, was not at strength for a contest against the U.S. Armv. But 
neither was the United States in a position to make war on the Filipinos. What was 
hurting was the fact that soon Spain and the United States would be meeting to 
negotiate a treatv that would determine the fate of Filipinas. 

In this knowledge, Aguinaldo began to turn to assessments of the larger pic- 
ture of international power politics. 1 le concluded that: 

1 he International poliev of the Cireat Powers is decided only by the de- 
mands of their selfish interests. Right, Duty, Paw, Religion, Morality, etc., are 
(involved] onlv to cover ambition, forming a garment of diplomacy to cover 
exploitation and conquest. 

Aguinaldo expected that the Huropean powers would oppose American ambitions 
in the Pacific. He believed that the Filipinos could still gain true independence by 
threading their wav through the maze of the conflicting interests of the Americans 
and Fairopeans. One course chosen bv Aguinaldo, cited here only as an illustration 
of several others, was: 

111. lo offer aid to the United States in then piesent ambitions m the 
Pacific, to assist them in taking other Alalayan islands provided that wt ain giim 
COMPITTH independence. 

I hese and other thoughts were simplistic and chancy. I he more realistic of 
Aguinaldos options, which in fact he pursued over the following months, were: ( 1 ) 
to continue the recovery of the provinces of the Motherland and assert dc facto 
control over them by the revolutionary government; (2) to transform the latter into 
a constitutional republic; and, the latter in place, (3) to hope to influence the forth- 
coming peace treatv negotiations. 

Aguinaldo moved his capital from Cavite to Malolos early in September, and 
here the congress drafted the constitution. 

The scene next shifts to Paris, where the initial session of the peace treat}’ 
negotiations was held on 1 October. The issue of the Philippines would be taken 
up on the 27th. But the five-man United States panel was divided on the issue as 
late as 25 October: three members were for taking the entire archipelago; the chair- 
man favored getting Luzon only; George Cray, the Democratic senator, was against 
taking any part of the archipelago. McKinley directed the panel to demand cession 



THI. mil Il’I’INT Rl Yc )|l ||l >N \M > Hi •< >'.I > 

of the whole lot because, he explained, the United St. ires . mild mu map - p..n 
sibiliry “for the interests of the people involved. 

The American panel made the demand on 2" < kmbci. I he Spanish panel 
predictably objected; they asked for adjournment until ■» NovcmU i: tin \mcn 
cans then asked for adjournment; more postponements lolloped until .’ 1 \..wm 
ber, when the American panel offered 820 million and the Spaniards altei a dc.o 
rous delay, acceded to the demand for cession on 28 Novcmbci I lie I ’.ms pease 
treaty was signed on 1 0 December 1 898. 

From McKinley’s Instructions to Battlefield Actions. 

Guerrilla Warfare, and Barbarities 

The United States Senate vote on the I real y of Pa ns was held on ( > I eb 1 1 1 a i \ IS') 1 ); 
the vote was the narrowest, with a margin of just one vote more than the ic.juticd 
two-thirds to approve. The exchange of ratifications was effected on 1 > \p M |. 

lo McKinley, however, the United States had .dreads .u .pined s<>\eici.;n 
rights over the Philippines upon the signing of the peace treats < >n 2 1 I >e. ember 
1898, he issued instructions to his war secretary, saying that it had become imme- 
diately necessary to extend the U.S. military occupation to the entue au lupelugo. 

J he senior U.S. military commander in Manila (( .eneral < his) ssas to publish a 
proclamation informing the Filipinos that "we come, not as invaders oi coiupier- 
ors, but as friends... Furthermore, the military administration ssas to 

...svin the confidence, respect, and affection of the inhabitants ..I the Philip 
pines by assuring to them in every possible way that f ull measure of uuhsidu.il 
rights and liberties which is the herit age of free* peoples. . . . 

1 he instructions reached Manila more than a week later. 

Meantime, on 26 December, Otis sent (.eneral Marcus P. Miller to Iloilo, in 
command of an expedition of two infantry regiments and a light .millers- battery 
aboard two warships. He was to relieve the Spanish garrison in Iloilo and establish 
a military government in Panay. The expedition arrived on the 28th. Hut the Span- 
iards had already delivered the town to the llonggos and were en route home to 
Spain. The Uonggo leaders refused the Americans permission to land. Miller for- 
mally asked whether they would resist if he decided to land. 

On 30 December, the llonggos sent Miller a written reply. They reiterated 
their refusal for Millers troops to land; nor could they submit, in the absence of 
instructions from General Aguinaldo, 

to any foreign interference without express orders from the ( ientral ( iovern- 
ment of Luzon. ..with which we are one in ideas, as we have been until now in 
sacrifices 



32 



( ( >RI'l '/ l he hi/ipino Revolution in ( )ur ( o/Ieetire Memory 



Meanwhile Otis received the 2 1 December instructions. He sent a copv post- 
haste to Miller, who had a copy sent to Roque 1 ope/, chairman of the federal coun- 
cil ol the Visavas. Miller had the instructions printed and circulated in Iloilo on 3 
January 1899. I I is transmittal letter to Lope/ stated, in part, that 

the inhabitants of the island of Panay ought to obey the political authorin’ of 
the United States, and thev w ill incur a grave responsibility if, after deliberat- 
ing, tliev decide t o resist said authority. 

Lope/ studied Millers letter and the instructions and replied on 9 January, observ- 
ing, in sum: 

So the council of state of the Visavas region is, at the present moment, 
between the authority of the United States, that you try to impose upon us, 
and the authority of the C entral (lovernment of Malolos. 

The supposed authority of the United States began with the treaty of 
Paris, on 10 December ISOS. The authority of the Central Lovernment of 
Malolos is founded in the sacred and natural bonds of blood, language, usages, 
customs, ideals, sacrifices — 

The simple matter of informing the Filipinos about MeKinleys instructions 
was working out poorly. The copy that Otis had sent to Miller in Iloilo bore the 
origin; il McKinley text. The Ilonggos sent copies to Malolos. However, in Manila, 
Oris decided that the instructions contained passages and words provocative of 
war. He deleted these and issued a “sanitized" version in Tagalog, Spanish, and 
English on 4 January 1 899. Prints of this version were posted on the walls of build- 
ings in Manila. 

That this was milder than the version printed in Iloilo did not matter to the 
Filipinos. Both were declarations of war. The bills in Manila were torn or pasted 
over with Aguinaldo’s counter proclamation, addressed to the civilized powers, 
dared 5 January 1899. It stated: 

The government of Pilipinas has considered it its duty to set forth to the 
civilized powers the facts determining the ruptuie of its amicable relations w ith 
the army of the United States of America in these Islands — 

[We also) took for granted that the American forces would necessarily 
sympathize with the revolution which they had managed to encourage, and 
which had saved them much blood and great hardships; and above all, we en- 
tertained absolute confidence in the history and traditions of a people which 
fought for its independence and for the abolition of slavery, which posed as the 
champion liberator of oppressed peoples.... 



33 



THK PHILIPPINE KI-.VOII IK )\ V.Hhn <*'.!> 

Aguinaldo added that he had hoped that the Paris pease treat-, 
would recognize the independent status of Pilipinas. But. and her: \ • *.«» as 

the blame on the U.S. Army generals in Manila, the I’.S. Arim ordered t«»r , e^ to 
Iloilo “with the purpose of acquiring for themselves the title of « >m p: : • >: < »t that 

portion of the Philippine Islands occupied In' rnv government V- Vd. > 4 »'cd 

bitterly: 



My government cannot remain indifferent in *. icv. «>f u> h a *.• i:.ii 
a ggressive seizure ofa portion of its territorv In a nation v. m : : - •• : 

itself the title, champion of oppressed nations. I hir. iris tii.it rn • n # 

is ready to open hostilities if the American r roops tempt n * t a l * • ■ r p< * 

session of the Visayan Islands. I denounce these .k t 1 >« t « » r ' tb v. «»tld . : : i 

that the conscience of mankind mav pronounce its infallible <rdi ' .».*•- ■. . » 

are the true oppressors of nations and the tormentor of hum. inland 

J he Christian Philippinc-Amcrican War began on i lebmarv 1 soo 1 bat 
evening, Captain Fernando H. C irey v l ormentos, adjutant to ( olonel I ini.nu> Vm 
Miguel, commanding the San Juan del Monte sector of the I lord Milit.it \ /one id 
Manila, sent notice of the first shots in the war bv telegram to the \\ at depat t ment 
in Malolos: 



Capt. Adjutant C ,rey to War I )ept. San Juan del Monte. I rb it b . ‘ ) : s > 
p.m. At exactly 9:00 p.m. tonight, American camp opened tire. Kepb \c.is 
made by our troops. All hold their positions without fear. 1 await ordeis. 

Grey also sent a wire to San Miguel, who was then in Malolos, and another 
to General Pantaleon Garcia in Kalookan. Prom the first Militat e /.one, ( icncral 
Mariano Noriel, commanding, sent a telegram to ( icncral Artemio Kicat te about 
the firing in San Juan. Noriel was staying in his Paranaquc headquarters, waiting, 
out the hours till his wedding the next day. Ricarte, commanding in the Second 
Military Zone and chief of operations in the towns around Manila, headquarters 
in Santa Ana, was in Malolos. His aide Captain Xialcita forwarded Noriel s wire to 
Malolos. 

San Miguel and Ricarte had taken the train for Malolos carlv on Saturday on 
a summons from President Aguinaldo. A joint commission had been set up by 
Aguinaldo and Otis in January to discuss the deteriorating situation. The 
commission’s first session was held on 9 January, their sixth on the 29th. The 1 t li - 
pino members had been instructed to be in Malolos on 4 lebmarv to give a brief' 
ing on the status of the commission s discussions. Many civilian and military ofh- 
cials had been called by Aguinaldo to be present at the briefing. ( 1 he panel s report 
was deemed unencouraging.) 

In the afternoon, General Antonio buna, director for war of the war depart- 
ment and in charge overall of military operations, left on a 24-hour leave to San 



( OKPt / I he fill pi no Revolution :u Our C Ol/eetire Memory 

K-rnando, Pampanga, to he with his family. Ricartcand San Miguel missed the last 
train haek to Manila and stayed in Malolos for the night — and, with numerous 
others, for the festive hall that evening. 

Richard Brinsley Sheridan was an Fnglish barrister who had an interview 
with President Aguinaldo and witnessed the events in Malolos that Saturdav. He 
caught the train for Manila in time for a night out with his wife and three other 
British couples that evening. On the first shots fired in the war, he writes: 

Ii was well known to the residents of Manila, and admitted bv the 
Americans, that the first shot was fired bv them, with the result that large num- 
bers of' men, women, and children were killed. . . 1 he fate of the treaty of peace 
was to he decided on the (>th dav of Pebruarv, and it is said that the conflict was 
commenced for political reasons to insure the ratification of the American 
treatv with Spain... The semiofficial and other papers of Manila of the lath 
instant have since admitted that the aggression came from the American side. 

There are other neutral, third-party reports on who fired the first shots. 

I lenri *Iu rot of lour du A lo ude writes: 

Understandably, the Americans alleged that [the first shots] came from 
the lines of Aguinaldo. Since then, it is well known that an Ameiican sentry, 
with premeditation, fired this shot inasmuch as all the A me i leans w l il ready at 
their battle stations while the li I i pi nos were surprised and could hardly defend 
t hemselves. . . . 

The rifle shot of Pebruarv 4, on the eve of the day when the [United 
States] Senate would vote, was too opportune not to ha\c been piemeehtated 
aiul noboelv can seriouslv denv the absolute responsibility of the' Ameiicans on 
this first elav of the war. 

I he American forces in Manila in January 1899 consisted of 20, SSI officers 
and men. But on 4 December 1898, Washington had directed Otis and Dewey to 
advice McKinley on the equipment and forces that will be necessary. 

I he budget estimates for the war department under the first republic were 
transmitted to the cabinet and Congress on 4 February 1899 by Baldomero Agu- 
inaldo, war secretary. In his statement of transmittal he lamented that the last years 
of what was called the “century' of enlightenment were characterized by the "tri- 
umph of force over calm reason and our rights, lo preserve its independence and 
integrity, P'ilipinas had to have a military organization that would at the same time 
help secure recognition from foreign powers. Secretary’ Aguinaldo noted the loom- 
ing clouds of a new war. 

The estimates were derived from plans toward a regular armv of "approxi- 
mately' 25, ()()() men, still in a formative stage," with amounts for supplies and 
materials and contingency requirements. (It is almost certain that this planned level 



THK PHILIPPINE HI V< )I I I \< >N \Nl > ill »< > 

of regular army strength was related to previous measures ba i al.. mat «»l lub 
1898, toward a regular army by reducing the then large but loose t: 
through assignments to the reserve or inactive service. We d« » m >t : table data 

on the strength of the Filipino forces from here on. 

On the other hand, the strength of the enenn forces stead:’.-. •*.: •’ \ regt 

ment of U.S. Army regulars arrived in February 1S9‘). .uul another Mauh \ 
strong force of six regiments of regulars arrived in May 

In the third week of February, C icneral Antonio 1 una Finn bed • nat would 
be the last effort bv the Filipinos to take Manila. It did not sir eeU. par * 1 . In\ ause 
of the withholding of support by the Kawit companies, men v. ho took then orders 
only from Aguinaldo. 

General Miller had Iloilo bombarded on 1 1 February. I be llonggos ra/ed 
their capital town by fire and retreated into the interior t < >v. ns ( ,eiural Martin 1 
Delgado led the resistance here, but there were no major battles. ( elm was siiiten 
dered after negotiations on 21 February, brokered bv the 1 nglisb consul betsscen 
the commander of the enemy gunboat Petrel and the ( ebu leaders 1 be surrender 
took place the next day. Arcadio Maxilom, one of the leaders, led a holdout group, 
but the resistance in Cebu had no strength against the enenn s nasal guns. 

Malolos, capital of the republic, was taken by t he enenn on ( iood 1 r ula \ . the 
end of March, after heavy fighting all the way from Kalookan. 

1 he fight for Bulacan province pitted lama against (icneral Mac \tihur. 
General Wheaton, and ( icneral 1 I ale; flanking support was pr< >\ ideal 1 1 oin the east 
by General Lawton. The main battle lasted from 24 April to S May. 

Luna was the only Filipino general who could fight against t lu- Amei u ans in 
actions involving forces larger than battalions. But the severe disc ipline be imposed 
in shaping up the troops — and his military skills- earned him enemies. 1 le met 
his death in Cabanatuan on 5 June 1899 at the hands of the men of the Kawit 
companies who had denied him support in the assault on Manila the pre\ ions Feb- 
ruary. (Aguinaldo had summoned lama to the formers ( .aban.it nan headquarters 
by telegram on 2 June, but was on his way to Iarlac when lama arrived.) After 
Lunas death, the actions fought by the Filipinos were smaller-sc ale engagements. 

By June, the enemy pressure forced Aguinaldo to move his headquarters f rom 
Cabanatuan to Iarlac, and on 12 June, the anniversary of the proclamation of in- 
dependence, he made a brief speech. The months from February to |une had been 
marked by losses to the enemy, but, he said: 

...We affirm that Filipinas is for the Filipinos. 

We have never concealed our aspirations; land) we have declared to the 
world, calling upon the Almighty as our witness, that we aspire but to our in- 
dependence, and that to obtain it we will struggle on without faltering until we 
achieve it, perhaps from those who are now our enemies, and tomorrow will be 
our allies, as they were for the overthrow of the power of Spain. 



36 



( ( Mvl’l V The Tiliptno Revolution :n ( )ur ( olivet n c Memory 



We might well .icccpt this autonomy that America oilers us, hut what 
can we do with it. il our ambition is Independence, the goal of the aspirations 
ol all peoples, in obedience to a law of the Supreme C reator? 

...I ong live independence! Long live the union of the Filipinos! Long 
live the Army of liberation! 

By cnd-July 1 899, Otis had a reported 29, ud - ' enlisted men in his forces, w ith 
a slightly increased 30,863 officers and troops bv cnd-August. These numbers have 
to be read as excluding troops unfit for action, manv in hospital. 

W e have a report, as of late Julv 1809, of the Filipino military commanders 
and their stations; soon after the outbreak of the war, Luzon was divided into two 
military zones: the Northern 1 uzon Military Zone north of the Pasig River, and 
south of it the Southern Luzon Military Zone: 



Northern Luzon Military Zone 

Colonel Pacheco 
General Pio del Pilar 

Colonel Maximo Kabigting 
General Servillano Aquino 
General Luciano San Miguel 
General Tomas Mascardo 
General Francisco Makabulos 
General Gregorio del Pilar 
General Manuel Tinio 
General Daniel Tirona 
General Fernando Canon 

Southern Luzon Zone [and Visayas] 

Generals Mariano Trias 
Artemio Ricarte 
Mariano Alvarez 
Baldomero Aguinaldo 
Generals Paciano Rizal 
Juan Cailles 
General Miguel Malvar 
Generals Licerio Geronimo 
Salvador Estrella 
General Vito Belarmino 
Colonel Wenceslao Viniegra 
General Vicente Lukban 
Colonel Ambrosio Mojica 



Angat, Bulacan district 

San lldefonso. San Miguel, San Isidro. 

Nueva Ecija 
Arayat. Pampanga 
Mexico. Pampanga 
Calulut, Pampanga 
Bacolor, Pampanga 
Tarlac 
Pangasinan 
llokos 
Cagayan 
Nueva Vizcaya 



Cavite 

Laguna 

Batangas 

Morong 

Camarines, Albay, Sorsogon 

Samar 

Leyte 



nu. mu iiM'iNf hi \ < >i r n< >n 



AM > HI *i< >M > 



General Pantaleon Garcia was commanding general <>t the norm 
General Mariano Trias of the southern. I.u/on /one. It a judgment ui.uk «»t the 
foregoing list, it will be that most of the seasoned generals of the tes « » . 1 1 r or. were m 
the southern zone. 

A sidelight of the enemy campaign from |ulv m \ugtist v. .is the *»ntlut «»n 
the issue of censorship, between newsmen covering the war tor their p. t ;v : s m th<-' 
United States and General Otis. This is normal in wartime, hut in this , .ise the 
newsmen were forced to take the unusual step of tiling a round r<»bm «>i i<>mt 
dispatch and sending it bv messenger to 1 long Kong and thetue to the l ruled 
States. Part of the newsmen s complaints was the obvious temletu \ in the oftki.d 
dispatches to Washington to portray the Filipinos as demurah/ed aiul t<» dew t i he 
their army as having a “brigand character. Moreover, thenffui.il dispan lies 
veyed the notion to the Americans at home that the in stir ret non v ould he e.isib 
and speedily ended without greatlv increased l .S. forces. 

In his northward advance through August I 899 the- enetm tool, and «kcU 
pied many towns, forcing many Filipinos from their homes, hack in (mu 1 S 4 >S 
during the revolution against Spain, Aguinaldo would authori/e the u liet of men 
at the front in order to allow them to go home «md harvest the n oops. Now. on 
August 1899, he issued a proclamation informing the dislocated families that dies 
were free to return to their towns, even if these were under enetm < >c c upat ion . 1 le 
requested of them, however, 

...that they shall observe the strictest neutrality, and in the e\ rut t bat t be nniu 
rialist party should endeavor to obtain their adhesion, either bv threats <>t In 
other means, I leave to their judgment the police thev should pursue, .is I am 
convinced of the patriotism of every one of them. 

At end-October 1899, the enemy effectives (excluding the sick) were at 
35,683, and by end-November at 40,033. The enemy’s great offensive during these 
two months drove through Pampanga, Tarlac, Nucva I'cija, Xuev.i Vi/eava, and 
Pangasinan. The campaign was led by General MacArthur, with Wheaton, 
Lawton, Young, and Golonel J.I ; . Bell. 

I he campaigns major objective was to capture Aguinaldo, who had moved 
his headquarters to Bayambang in early October. But he eluded the* enemv, a ncl 
made an arduous trek eastwards, up and down across the rough country from the 
China sea coast of northern l.u/.on, until he and a small retinue arrived in Palauan. 
Isabela, by the Pacific coast in September 1900. A courier system kept in touch 
with patriots in Manila and with the commands in the northern l.u/.on /one. He’ 
was dogged by pursuing detachments of the enemy most of the wav. 

The battlefield phase of the campaign in this /.one was just about to end. By 
the end of November 1899, the republic no longer had a scat of government, a con- 
gress, a cabinet, or a treasury. 



38 



( i MvIH / The l ilipnw Revolution in ( )ur ( ollectivc Memory 



On 5 I )ecember 1 899, in his first message to the l .8. C Congress since the war 
began, McKinley explained to the representatives of the American people that, in 
Paris, Spain ceded the Philippines and that the L nited States accepted the eessicMi. 
1 le believed, he said, that ' this transfer of sovercigntv was in accordance with the 
wishes and the aspirations of the great mass of the Filipino people. 

But, McKinley went on, the Filipinos had repeatedly perpetrated manv ag- 
gressions since the Americans took Manila, and they began the fighting with 
an “attack, evidently prepared in advance... all along the American lines." 
McKinlcv continued rcmorsclcsslv; indeed, he said, there was not a war at all, onlv 
a “ Iagalo [sic) rebellion, a minor insurrection that the l .S. Army would speedilv 
suppress. 

McKinlcv was [preparing the minds of the American people and their C Con- 
gress for 1 900, w hen he would be a candidate for reelection. Fie was reelected, and 
he now had to make good on his assurance that the insurrection would be ended 
speedily. 

But the C Christian Philippine-American War would not end. 1 his was be- 
cause among Aguinaldos last orders during the retreat of November 1899 was one 
directing resistance bv guerrilla warfare. I he Filipinos had acquired some experi- 
ence in this tvpe of war from July to November 189 . 

In 1900, after their victories in the positional battles in the northern Luzon 
militarv /one, the enemy forces (about 55, 000-strong after November 1 899) ought 
to have been free to shift to the new’ battle areas in the south, i.e., in the southern 
1 agalog region and further down to the Bikol pro\inccs. Blit this was not to lx. 
The enemy not only had to fight in the southern zone, but also to provide occupa- 
tion troops in many kev northern /one tow ns to keep them horn the gucmllas. B\ 
December 1900, McKinlcv had more than 4,000 troops in the 1 hilippines. 

Guerrilla warfare was a different mode of war. Actions by the Filipinos were 
fought by relatively small units, they chose their targets, the\ enjoyed the initiati\e, 
hit and ran, and then, when pressed, the men who could not retile to theii bases 
melted among the folk of the nearby towns. General Makabulos reminded leaders 
of guerrilla units in an order of 16 November 1899 that it was not their mission to 
defeat the enemy force; this would be difficult, owing to the latter s superiority in 
numbers and arms. Instead, the guerrillas must seek to inflict on them constant 
losses, to the end of discouraging them and convincing them of our rights. 1 his 
last point carried with it the calculation that the enemy, weighed down by losses 
from unending actions that promised no end to the war, would be wearied and 
leave the Philippines. Makabulos stressed that guerrillas must always strive to cul- 
tivate harmony with the townsfolk. General Pantaleon Garcia added specific tacti- 
cal objectives for the guerrillas: to capture weapons, rifles, and prisoners; and to 
mete out justice to spies, thieving bands, and other lawbreakers. 

It is axiomatic that guerrilla units cannot last long unless they have a reliable 
base of popular support. This was precisely what the barrio and tow nsfolk pro- 



}9 



THh mn.iPiMNh Kf.voirnoN 



. AN I ) HI j< »N! » 



vidcd. To mobilize the people for this role, ( »cncr.ii 1 iu i.m«» s a: M: • ; ’ 
orders on 6 December 1 899, reviving the Katipunan in Ins . oimn.ir • i • : • I *a*i 

gasinan and Zambales. After General Garcia issued similar orders a lev. * biter. 
Katipunan chapters would be set up in almost everv town, and tin. : . : . n .entu 
ally reach the Visayas. 

I he common requirement of the orders was tin setting up <>i .* K.iupun- 111 
organization in every town. Some L.S. Armv garrisons .it tin time had b* cn an 
thorized to conduct elections to select town officials. Nov. the orders required each 
town president*? or mayor, and the vice mavor and council members. ;<> serve 
Katipunan officers. I hey were to see to it that the townsfolk gathered aitnim.itiun 
on the size and movements of the enemy garrison, served as < < »ur its t < > pass < >n t he 
intelligence to the guerrillas, and supplied food and sundry pros isiorr I he toss n s 
people did all these and more; they sheltered guerrillas who needed hidme. places, 
and treated the wounded and sick. 

If the elected officials demurred, or could not discharge the duties required 
due to various reasons — such as, in rnanv cases, close wan h In the- c riems garri- 
son — an alternative set of local men would constitute the Katipunan leadership. 

I he resulting Katipunan was therefore unlike the- old soum. I he* ness 
Katipunan was not to be a fighting force. It operated as a "shade >w g< n cm men t in 
each town. It levied and collected taxes ( apart from those colics ted In the formal 
government), maintained peace and order, and severely punished traitors and spies, 
on top of its services to the guerrillas. The support of the townsfolk toi the guerril- 
las prolonged the Christian Philippinc-Amcrican War, and parth explains why 
McKinley had more than 74,000 troops in t he* Philippines in late 1 l M )( ). 

The guerrilla war did not case in 1901. I he American militate historian 
J.R.M. raylor summarized the situation as follows: 

I here were more fights, more attacks on wagon trams, more i asualt ics, 
and more activity on the part of the insurgents in the autumn of inoi than 
there had been for a year before. . . hi the opinion of General ( ha flee ( .encial 
MacArthurs replacement) and of General Bell the condition ‘was without a 
parallel in the history of any country long occupied bv an invading and son 
quering army.” 

Iheyear 1901 saw two major events: the first was the capture of President 
Aguinaldo on 23 March— he had just turned 32 years old the day before; the sec- 
ond was McKinleys death by assassination in September. Aguinaldo s capture did 
not result in weakening the guerrilla resistance, which had acquired a momentum 
of its own and did not depend on central direction, but on the resolve of the guer- 
rilla leaders and the people’s patriotism. 

On the other hand, McKinleys death had basic consequences. I le had as- 
sured the American people in late 1899 that the little “Tagalo rehell ion won 1 a be 



40 



c ( )KI’t '/ The Filipino Revolution in Our t Collective Memory 



speedilv quashed bv the U.S. Armv; blit it was now well into its third year; and his 
successor, Theodore Roosevelt, had to feel awkward about it all. 

It must be noted that General Makabulos had wisely admitted that the guer- 
rillas would not defeat the enemy. Indeed during 1 900, many of the veteran leaders 
were without recourse blit that of surrender or capture. General Garcia was cap- 
tured in Mav, followed bv General Pio del Pilar and General Makabulos in June 
and General Ricarte in July. Nonetheless, the Filipinos had demonstrated, in an 
unequal struggle, that thev deserved the independence they were defending. But 
Roosevelt was in a bind: if he recognized the valor of the Filipinos and the justice 
of their cause, he would have to write oft the American casualties and frustrate the 
U.S. Armv generals in the Philippine campaign. He was a true-blue American and 
supported his army. 

What followed next was the third phase in the Christian Philippine-Ameri- 
can War. As the months passed into late 1 90 1 , there were only three active Filipino 
generals left in the field: Miguel Malvar in Batangas and Laguna; \ icente Lukban, 
Samar and Levtc; and Luciano San Miguel, Bulacan and Morong. 

Malvar had succeeded General Mariano Frias as commanding general in the 
Southern Luzon Zone after Trias surrendered on IS March 1901. Although Mal- 
var was operating as a guerrilla commander, his rank and his commands proximity 
to Manila belied the U.S. military regimes claims of successful “pacification. But 
all attempts bv contact or negotiation to persuade him to suneiuki failed. 

Now General J.F. Belf, commanding the enemy forces in Malvars zone, 
turned to unconventional warfare to cut off Malvar from the support of the towns- 
folk. He issued orders that by 25 December 1901, the population of each munici- 
pality in the provinces of Batangas and Laguna men, women, children weie to 
be herded into a designated zone within the poblacion or town center. Each such 
zone was defined bv a boundary line, fittingly called the Mead line ; anyone who 
crossed the line was shot. Families from the barrios were covered by the orders and 
had to haul everything they could into th e poblsuion. W hate\er they left 
crops and orchards if any, poultry or animals, tools and fishing nets 

boats — were burned by the U.S. Armv. 

Bells strategy against Malvar was a barbarism. It herded the civilian popula- 
tion into concentration camps, which the official American recoids termed be 
nevolent protection zones,” ostensibly to protect the noncombatant population 
from the guerrillas. 

In the Visayas, meanwhile, 45 men of G Gompany of the )zh Infantry, com- 
posed of three officers and 66 troopers garrisoning the town of Balangiga at the 
southern end of Samar island, were massacred by the towns Katipuneros and guer- 
rilla elements under General Lukban on 28 September 1901. 1 he retaliation by 
the enemy was thorough, featured by kill-and-burn, and kill everything 
over ten years old” orders. Lukban did not escape, and was captured on 19 Feb- 
ruary 1902. 



-houses, 
carts or 



41 



i hi: mu ii'iMNi*. hi v< >: * 



Back in Batangas and Laguna, crowding and 


1 


.1*. k <i| Join 


i it: the v niucil* 


tration camps produced disease and death as the rnon 


t bv 


> passe it i n f « 


i > 1 >i 1 9 M ab ar. 


the good soldier that he was, was also humane, and •. - 


Ull 


tl not bear 




noncombatant people were going through. On IS A 


pr i 


1 1 ‘X iu- 


stir r c rule red 


The surrender was welcome; on * julv I‘)02 


R. 


k ISC'S el t cle*. 


hired flu* cxi^t- 


ence of a “state of general and complete peace m t 


in- 


Philippine 


S 1 Ins was toL 


lowed by a report by the Philippine ( .ommission. th 


e c 


ivilian .in:. 


nt r be • k v wpa- 


tion government, stating that: “The insurrection as . 


in 


< >rga 1 1 1/4*1 i 




vert the authority of the United States in these island 


* is 


entire!-, at 


an end. and the 


whole Christian Lil i pi no population. . . are enjoviru: 


C ! % 


il >\ cm rn 


,enr 


I he declaration that general and complete pe.i 


, C' 


obtained ai 


id t liar the 1 ih- 


pinos were enjoying civil government had logical 


t msec jiieiu (a 


Siru e the 1 ill 



pino resistance had ended, according to the regime, tlx Lit ter .mi rli.it :.<>w there 
were only disturbances, minor problems of tr.incpiillits \tul it the in >ur u\ non 
was over, there could no longer be any misguided in nrm to . so t be ic/iiiu- dec hired 
that the disturbances could only be the acts of Lnuironr robbers, bandits. cut 
throats, assassins, murderers, highwaymen, marauders, and othe r e .il people. I he 
disturbances in the Visavas were indiscriminately attributed In the regime to the 
pulajaneSy ignorant folk of a religio-superstitious nature. 

None of these epithets applied to ( leneral San Miguel, a ( as item > educated 
in Manila. He was not captured, and did not surrender; not el id lie- take- ad\ ant age 
of the amnesty offered under the declaration of a July 190.L I le u.is then com 
manding a guerrilla force operating in Bulacan and Ki/al. and was latei elected as 
national head of the revived Katipunan. ( )n March 1 9(H, a joint force of the 
I hilippine Constabulary and Philippine Scouts engaged him in the- hills district 

called I ugat-Babuy in Rizal. Here the last active general of the- revolution tell in 
action. 

i hat the occupation government should employ the- l .S. military the 
I hilippine Scouts were an element of the L .S. Arm v eliei n< >t s 1 1 p p< >rt t he- regi me s 
claim that it was a wholly civilian system. 

In 1 ) 03, the noncombatant population of Albas- -.ill men , women, and chil- 
dren was herded by the U.S. Army into concentration c.unps in order to cut oft 
the lifeline of the guerrillas. A I bay had been in ( icneral Vi t ( > Bela rm mo s command; 
after he surrendered in July 1901, Major Simeon ( )la. Major Agust in Saria, and 
Major Lazaro Iolero continued the guerrilla war. I he camps took then toll on the 

people from March to October 1903. Ola and hundreds of others were captured 
or surrendered. 

But even ugly things come to an end. In 1 905, the U.S. Army had its last go 
ar herding noncombatants into concentration camps, this time in the provinces of 
Ba tan gas and Cavite. I he Philippine Commission had identified Cornelio 
Felizardo, Julian Montalon, a man named Oruga, Lticio de Vega, I ruetuoso Vito, 
and Macario Sakay as ladron leaders. Sakay surely was not a bandit, for he was one 
of the secretaries of the Nacionalista Party when it was founded in 1901. After the 



c ‘ORPl’Z The Filipino Revolution in Our ( ollective Memory 



townsfolk were crowded into the camps, the L.S. Army pursued the Lidron lead- 
ers. \ he people were let out of the camps in Julv, but Sakaw the main target, eluded 
capture. After May 1906, he was persuaded to surrender and stand trial. He was 
convicted of the crime of bandolerismo , as offense concocted by the Philippine 
Commission, and duly executed. 

The vear 1906 was the eighth year of the Christian Philippine-American 
W ar, the eleventh since the outbreak of the revolution against Spain. l ime, weari- 
ness, and the worse things that wars bring had taken their toll on the Filipinos. A 
few pockets of resistance remained in north central Luzon, in Negros-Cebu, and 
Samar-1, eyte. For all practical purposes, the Christian Philippine-American War 
ended in June 1906, when five regular U.S. Army battalions occupied the island 
province of Leyte. 



43 



Utopia and Revolution: 

The Philippine Kxperience 

Josi. S. Ar< I! i A, S. I . 

Aieneo de W^mlo Quezo'' r .\. ^ l >y^e^ 



U topian literature has not been characteristic of traditional 1 ) li 1 1 1 ppi no 
writing. I his is not to say that the Hlipinos have not been idealists. Ihcv 
have been; but unlike the Greeks who gave us a picture of an ideal state in Plato's 
Republic., or the British whom Thomas More criticized in bis l ’ tophi , the 1 * i 1 i pi nos 
were colonial subjects for most of their known history. ( )nlv after three and a half* 
centuries of Spanish rule when, in Mabini s words, they bad already reached "Li 
plenitud de la vida”d\d they dare to explicate dreams of freedom and self rule. By 
then, they had become conscious of who they were and what they wanted, and were 
openly asking recognition of what they claimed they were. But Spain turned a deaf 
ear and the only option left was for them to rise up in arms, for growth is the lass' 
of life, and one is always justified in destroying whatever blocks this growth. 

I hilippine history has been shaped by an idealistic Spanish colonial policy. 
The first law of the famous Spanish colonial code declares that, since the* Spanish 
crown has a greater duty than others to "strive that the true ( iod he known and 
adored all over the world, it enjoins and commands all those living in the colonies 
to receive Christian baptism and to "firmly believe and openly confess the mystery 
of the Most Holy Trinity... and all that our Holy, Roman, Catholic, Mother 
Church holds, teaches, and preaches...." 2 

Such a lofty aim has never been attained, either bv the Spanish colonizers or 
by others. 1 he Rccopilacion , admittedly a noble vision of society, has Been criti- 
cized, perhaps rightly, as hardly more than a grand compendium of Benevolent 
intentions" only partly realized/ 



44 



ARC 1 1 I. A l tophi and Revolution: The Philippine Txpenenee 



At the start of Spanish rule in the Philippines, the first Manila Synod (1 ^82- 
1 S86) convoked to set right the socioeconomic dislocation following the conquest, 
drew up what it considered an ideal colonial administrative system. Spanish rule, it 
declared, was merely ancillary to the basic task which the pope had laid on the royal 
crown: to preach the gospel and plant the church. If the Philippines could guaran- 
tee that the gospel could be preached in peace, and no danger threatened either the 
preachers or their prospective Christian converts, the king had no right to displace 
the local chiefs, even if unbaptized, because the “gospel does not remove what one 
already has; rather it preserves and perfects it." Any attempt to change existing 
governments would be "tirania. But since the Philippines was not this ideal place, 
the Spanish crown could displace pagan rulers with Christian officials and estab- 
lish its own government. But the essential colonial task of Christianizing the indig- 
enous population remained. Anvthing less was to fail in the discharge of the royal 
conscience. ‘ 

Ideals by themselves, of course, are not reality, lo avoid a repetition of the 
bloodv confrontations during the conquest of America, Kang 1 hihp eschewed the 
word conquer and chose the euphemism pacify - when referring to the conquest 
of' the Philippines. Had the royal mandate been followed, it would have produced 

a colonv "flow ing with milk and honev. 

In Spanish legal tradition, the king was the only source of law - and colonial 
officials could never enact, but only implement, the royal laws. 1 he ideal king 
promoted not only the temporal welfare of his subjects, but also theit eternal salva- 
tion. 1'hat is whv Spanish colonial rule tended to be paternalistic, while colonial 
service meant loyalty to the crown through an exact interpretation of royal w ishes 
in fulfillment of' the oath to "serve God and His Catholic Majesty. Por their part, 
the ideal colonial subjects where a grateful people and loved their king such as to 
die for him. 

But the Philippines was two oceans removed, quite different in culture and 
climate from Spain. Unlike South America, it had neither silver nor gold, not even 
the spices for which Magellan had died. It turned out to be an economic night- 
mare, and the royal council urged the king to give up his new colony. 1 he fust mis- 
sionaries eyed mainland China and the millions of Asians to be converted rather 
than the Filipinos also in need of evangelization until Philip 11 stopped all that 
speculation and reiterated his desire to occupy in order to Christianize the 1 hilip- 
pines, even if he had to sell his crown jewelry to build a chapel where at least one 
soul could be baptized. 6 

Happily, Spanish Manila hit upon the equivalent of a gold mine: the Chinese 
silk and other Oriental goods which the Spanish traders transshipped to Acapulco 
on the yearly galleon. Since then, there was no longer any talk of abandoning the 

colony. 

To entice people to try their fortune in faraway Philippines, royal law re- 
served the extremely lucrative galleon trade to Spanish residents in the Philippines. 



4S 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< )U IU )' . 



And colonists did come, although not in the numbers the g< • . * u i h» »;>cd. 

But in the Philippines, these colonists stayed in Manila, soon duhb 
entaL ” instead of spreading out to open untouched iamls w he : * : too. 

awaited them, provided they engaged in backbreaking and time v onsim 
cultural pursuits. 

The result." Until the middle of the 19th century, the Philippines remained 
largely unexploited, its natural resources untapped and .is the mes ire 

quently observed, the people continued to live in povcri . m the midst <>t plenty. 
Unproductive, the colony managed to float on the strength <>t th m utfuient 
sitnado or yearly subsidy from the taxes imposed on the go< >d . < »f the me h * >n t r.ule. 
For lack of economic incentives, the only huropean in the rurai areas •.*. as the Span 
ish missionary, a factor that explains why the Filipinos l»e- a me do*. < »t rd ( h r ist tans 
although, to a great extent, politically naive. Since lie was the <»ni\ Spaniard out 
side of Manila, the missionary was roval and ecclesiastical agent at tlu same* time. 

I his anomalous situation became a vexatious question In tlu- second halt <>t the 
1 9th century. 

Precarious economically, the Philippines also hobbled s m iaIF. ami ; u >ht u alls. 
There were never enough resources in the colony tor basic government set \ u es and 
infrastructure. Salaries were inadequate or paid late. Allocations tor the nu\\ to 
fight the seemingly unending Moro raids or to tight criminality wcic paint nils in- 
adequate. Prison cells were generally nipa and bamboo st rue t tires from which es- 
cape was extremely easy. No ports, no roads or bridges united the- colons oi pro- 
moted internal economy. I he archipelago was frequently battered In typhoons it 
not shaken by earthquakes, and the climate was enervating toi 1 iiropcans. 

Naturally, appointment to the Philippine colonial offices did not necessarily 
turn the mind unless one wanted to enrich himself on the slv. I his was the prob- 
lem and the end of the Philippine colonial dream. 

Very few of the poorly paid regional officials or alcaldes nia\nns assigned to 
posts at a distance from Manila could resist the temptation to enrich themselves. 

I hey made sure they had more than their share of the tribute and cornered the 
market. It was so bad that the government tried to control the practice by requiring 
the alcaldes while in office to obtain a license to trade, or nulidto dc co))icycio. The 
measure worsened the situation, and it was soon cancelled, only to lie revived in 
1751, until Governor Narciso Claveria (1843-1849) finally revoked it.' 

This is not the place to catalogue the flaws of the Philippine colonial admin- 
istration. But it is impressive how almost every governor-general attempted to rem- 
edy the abusive situation he found on taking office. C ilose to the middle of the 17th 
century, for example, Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera (1635-1649) codified the 
first ordenanzas debuengobiemo aimed at rationalizing the colonial administration. 
About 50 years later, Fausto Cruzat y Gongora (1690-1701) revised his 
predecessor’s ordenanzas and, in turn, Manuel de Arandia (1754-1759) and Jose 
Raon (1765-1770) issued their own ordenanzas , the latter with even stricter mea- 



46 



ARC 'll l .A l tophi und Revolution: The Philippine Experience 



sures to punish erring colonial officials, finally, as late as 1801, Rafael Maria dc 
Aguilar (1793-1806) reprinted 100 copies of Raons orelenanzas." 

One can conclude that the reissue and revision of the ordenanzas would indi- 
cate that thev were a dead law. But it can also be said that the desire t o continually 
amend them shows that the Spanish crown never ceased to look for the best ad- 
ministrative system for the Philippines. 1 his explains the frequency of the royal 
bans or cancellations of supposedly long-standing privileges of colonial officials, 
for example, the governor-general, who headed the junta de repartimiento or com- 
mittee that allotted the boleta or title to engage in the galleon trade was soon 
stopped from himself investing in the trade. 

Nonetheless, administrative abuses continued. When Ciovcrnor Manuel 
Crespo ( 1834-1836) arrived in the middle of the 19th century, he was faced with 
long-standing dissensions among the a i dares of the Audiencia. W hatever the ren al 
government decided provoked a reaction from either the reformers or the conser- 
vatives among them. In Crespos words, these rivalries degenerated into personal 
conflicts, due to “habitos v la practica adquirida cn la intriga, hija natural de las 
pretensiones del pandillage. 

Rafael Izquierdo took office toward the end of 18~1. About four months 
later, in february 1872, he wrote a letter to a close friend to unbuiden himself of 
the problems he had immediately encountered on taking office. He had ahead) 
alerted the Madrid government in official reports, but now he was waiting openb 
“w ithout reservations or inhibitions, as a friend to anothei. 

The Spanish government was paying absolutely no attention to the 1 hilip- 
pines, unless to aggravate the* situation, he began, and cated not a bit about a 
colony which could be a true gem for Spain. It ignored the governor ‘crying in the 
desert," and who was accordingly losing his influence and authority, whose hands 
were "tied, incapable of either doing good or causing evil. Despite his w arnings, 
ert olios were named justices in the provinces. In Albay the alcalde mayoi was also 
justice of the peace. But he was "an immoral concessionaire, an embezzler who sells 
the government services and justice. Governor Izquierdo recalled him to Manila, 
but Madrid disapproved the transfer and ordered him to reassign the alcalde to his 
original post. Bravely, Izquierdo ignored the order for he was readying a legal case 
against the man who "deserves to go to jail. 1 

More critical was the continued bankruptcy of the colonial treasury, boi the 
last 10 years, government expenses had continued to exceed its income, and the 
public debt had reached the enormous sum of 1 7 million pesetas. Instead of cash, 
the tobacco growers in northern Luzon had been receiving promissory notes which 
in normal times were worth only half of their true value but lately had been deval- 
ued between 130 and 200 percent. Or they received rice or cloth, but at inflated 
prices. During the first 18 months of Izquierdos term, they should have been paid 
14 million pesetas, but the peninsular treasury appropriated only 4.23 million pe- 
setas for its needs. To repair the ravages of the "Gloriosa” of 1 868, Spain took from 



47 



THK PH I I.IPPI Nh Kf VO! (I ION AM) Hi • NO 

the colonial funds 7 million reales. And from l<S()S to 1 *S ’ 1 . thro 
been sent and recalled in rapid succession. This continu.il ban;.- <>• • 

Izquierdo pointed out, “without considering their qualities or h.o k:*:« ;:H. :::ilc ss 
it be political expediency, has brought about expenditures In tin tr , >r their 

transfers, immense losses in the revenue, and no less in the promot i< ; viiim* >n- 
and administration of the most important revenue source here t:..e « >t luisuo'- 
disturbance of the country, and bitter accusations on the part of our m.-mu-s I hi^ 
was to invite trouble, according to Izquierdo. 

As Izquierdo had guessed, a mutiny exploded in the ( a\itc hip. . t r i i in |.uui 
ary 1872. Although the mutiny was unexpected by most. I/quicrdo mnui no t .it 
all surprised. 14 

For, he wrote, “the three years following the revolut ion of Sept ern bn ] M>S m 
Spain, the on-going insurrection in Cuba, the aspirations of the- sec uiar c \cw\\. the 
mestizos, and the educated indios(\n the Philippines; had provoked sufficient de- 
ments to disturb the peace and the moral and material progress < >f the , < )lon\ But 
unrelieved discontent and malaise had become widespread among the 1 dipmos 
and Spains enemies exploited it. For the mutiny was a prodiu t <>t a plan .uueed on 
by elements within and without these islands, together with stub impoit.mt sec- 
tors as the native clergy, the lawyers, and the bureaucrats residing m Manila, most 
of whom figured in the conspiracy. Involved were a great part of the % uttL 

although “fortunately for our fatherland, the least involved in that infamous move- 
ment was the indigenous armv. 

I he mutiny was quickly squelched but more serious were t he eft ec is brought 
about by the official reaction. I he execution of three proha hi v innocent priests and 
the exile of the several suspects spared the death sentence f urthei alienated t lie- 
people from the government. ' And of much greater transcendence was the t raiima 
suffered by an 1 1-year-old boy from Calamba, whose life changed direction be- 
cause of those executions. He would have become a Jesuit, he recalled years later, 
and instead of the Noli Me Yangerewou\d have written the opposite, but the injus- 
tices he had not only witnessed but also suffered in childhood stirred his imagina- 
tion and though I was still a boy, I resolved to dedicate mvself to avenge one clav 
so many victims, and with this ideal I have been studying. This can be seen in all 
my works and writings,” he wrote. 

Contemporary observers and later historians agree that ( iombur/a s was a 
terrible political blunder from which Spain never recovered, traditional writing- 
however, is unclear why a mutiny occurred or who plotted it. but, as I/.quierdo had 
correctly foretold, it was born of discontent that desperately needed some relied. 

If the Octavo testimony cited above is any indication, the mutineers at (Cav- 
ite were dreaming of a new society. He testified that their instructions were to kill 
the Spaniards “so that the natives of the Philippines would he inclepc *ndent. Not 
only that, after the uprising, they were promised they would pay the tribute of only 
five instead of 10 reales and those who had taken part would he promoted. 1,1 



48 



ARC ‘II I A ( tophi and Revolution: 1 "he Philippine Fxper 



I hey might not always have list’d sophisticated language, but the Filipinos 
had always dreamed of a better life. And they expressed their desires in any wav 
thev could, like the outraged native who when the Spaniards first reached Manila 
climbed to the top of a coconut tree and shouted with all his might. “Spaniards, 
what did our fathers do to vou, or what debt did they owe you, that you now come 
to rob us?” J " Or as lose Ri/al did in poetic rhapsody when he wrote that even as a 
child he dreamed of a happy country “without sadness, without wrinkles, without 
the reddish blush of shame. 

The message was the same: the desire to be free from suffering, from abuse, 
and from subjection. But the Filipinos, by and large, were neither schooled nor 
skilled with the pen or the spoken word. Instead they expressed their grievances 
with the bolo and gun in several uprisings. 

But we would hesitate to call them national political movements. It was only 
in the 19th century that the first expressions of an inchoate Philippine nationalism 
emerged. 

In 1821, a manifesto signed only by Itidio agyavtado accused the Span- 
iards of continually oppressing the Filipinos. 1 hey refused, the manifesto read, to 
teach the latter Spanish lest they “turn out to be satirists and scholars who will 
understand... dispute... write things" against their teachers. They kept the Filipi- 
nos poor and ignorant in order that they could “call them thieves and they will have 
nothing to say in their defense because they will be thieses. 

The polemic, however, did not prosper. It was too early for that. But Philip- 
pine society was ailing, best seen in the continuing prejudice against native-born 
priests By the second half of' the 19th century, it was unexpressed but official 
policy to limit if not altogether get rid of native-born priests. Spam did not want in 
the Philippines a repetition of the American wars of independence initiated by a 
Mexican-born priest. But to continue to keep the Philippines through military 
means was too expensive. Yet, as the governors kept reporting from Manila, every 
peninsular priest or missionary, was as effective as a battalion whose dedication and 
loyalty no one could question. Hence, although Philippme-born priests could be 
as good and sometimes even better than peninsular priests, the government was 

bent on minimizing the role of the native cleigv. 

This was the meaning of Gomburza, the story of three Filipino priests who 
led the fight for justice and equal treatment for the Philippine clergy. I his was also 
the meaning of the life of the boy from Calamba— Rizal— who articulated the 
dreams of a long-silent and long-suffering people, and stirred them to decisive ac- 
tion. He was not the only one who took up the pen, but he gave direction and 
greater cohesion to the legal campaign in Spain for justice foi the 1 hilippines. 

What did this campaign seek? Soon after the first issues of the Philippine 
propaganda fortnightly. La Solidaridad came off the press, Ferdinand Blumentritt 
wrote to congratulate its editors. Marcelo H. del Pilar acknowledged the gesture 

and added: 



THE PHILIPPINE HI.VOM IK 



. . .our aspirations are not much: identify our interests v. irh th« 
sula, think and feel like it, respect whar it respr tv rcr . r .».!.. »• * . 

word, forge our duties and our rights with the dune .ir.d riy* * 
lis.Theonly obstacle is the monastic inter t 

of its progress. And Spain insists on ignoring rim ;r>K * • t * 
loyalty of the suffering and faithful Filipino. 

Not much later, on 30 August 1802 O.irniu-ro. Ki/.ti s yward n 1 >apitan. 
reported to Governor Despujol in Manila how, in their conversations, the national 
hero expressed what he had alwavs wanted for his country. I irst Ki/.il v. anted ba 
sic administrative reforms, which meant representation in tin- < <>r* t<>r a ilistant 
colony which spoke a different language. Io avoid turiher abuses and n»tu\t 
wrong or ill-conceived policies, the colonial voice should Ik Ik an! 1 lniu st\ in 
government was essential and government posts should b< ope n equalls to both 
peninsulars and insulars, provided they qualified tor them. 

Second, parishes should he secularized. Ri/al was not advocating the expul 
sion of the friars, for he believed thev too had a role in the* c omit r v. hut t he\ should 
act and live according to their vows. 

I hird, Ri/.al wanted an improved primary school system. I here shouUl he 
vocational schools in provincial capitals with at least If), 000 inhabitants. And 
teachers’ salaries should be raised. 

Earlier, in a long essav, Ri/.al described wh.it he believed would solve the s i it i- 
cal relations between the Philippines and Spain. Spain, be insisted. w < uild do well 
to introduce changes. I he government should take the initial i ve and grant reforms 
rather than be faced with a movement from below which it might not he able to 
control. 

Spain could try to block reforms in four ways: suppress and brutalize the* 
people into submission; keep them poor; keep them ignorant; and limit their 
population. None of these would succeed, Ri/.al warned. 

Suppress and brutalize the Filipinos? 1 hat would incite a desperate mob. 
Impoverish them." I he poor who had nothing to I ose would do anything to end 
their poverty. Keep the Filipinos ignorant, then. The policy had tailed in the past; 
it would fail again in the future. Despite inadequate facilities, the Filipinos had 
educated themselves and would continue to educate themselves. Finally, Spain 
could not limit the population. Despite wars, famine, and chronic epidemics, the 
Philippine population had not diminished but grown. 

What reforms, then, should Spain approve? The same ones the Filipinos had 
always been asking; representation in the Cortes, honesty in the government, the 
freedoms of democracy, peace and security for families. 

I his was not enough, however. Ri/.al envisioned a parallel program of reform 
for the Filipinos. Above all, they should learn at least the* basic social virtues of 
transigencia and economiar 



50 



AK( II I A ( topia dud Revolution: lhc Philippine Kvpenenee 



IriMsigenciii. the opposite of intransigence, was the quality which would 
make people discuss and come to an agreement on the best solution available and 
not stubbornly impose their opinion on the rest. For if modern democracy implied 
intelligent cooperation, the Filipinos should be able to accommodate one another, 
not in principles, but in accidentals. Unfortunately, for a people as sensitive as the 
Filipinos, this was not going to be easy. But they had to try and learn to live to- 
gether and to cooperate with one another. s 

b.conoMhU was the virtue of making the best use of limited means. 

Perhaps the last chapter of Rizals second novel, El Filibusterismo , gives us the 
clearest expression of his ideals. Frustrated in his plan to start a revolution to de- 
stroy the Philippines and build a new nation from its ashes, Simoun, the hero, 
commits suicide before the law can catch up with him. but before d\ mg, he makes 
his sacramental confession to It. Florentino, a retired priest. Apparently, the dia- 
logue between him and the minister of Ciod satisfies Simoun s anguished query 
whv he had failed to purge the Philippines and renew it. 

Violence would not help, the priest says, lo spread good ideas, the just and 
the worthy must suffer, like the jar that must be broken to release the peitume oi 
the stone struck to raise a spark. 1 his is not to say, he continues, that fieedom 

must be won at the point of the sword; the sword now counts for very little in 
the destinies of our times; but I do say that we must win our freedom by de- 
serving it, by improving the mind and enhancing the dignity of the individual, 
loving what is just, what is good, what is great, to the point of dying for it. " 

The Filipinos were suffering because they had been complacent. Had they 
been “less tolerant of tvrannv and readier to fight and suffei feu theii lights, Spain 
would be the first to give the Filipinos their freedom. But till then, the Filipinos 
did not have 

sufficient vigour to proclaim, head held high and chest bared, theii light to a 
life of their own in human society, and to guarantee it with their sacrifices and 
with their very blood; as long as we see our countrymen feel ashamed, heaiing 
them growl of their rebelling and protesting conscience's, while in public the\ 
keep silent and even join the oppressor in mocking the oppressed, as long as we 
see them wrapping themselves up in their selfishness and praising with forced 
smiles the most despicable acts, begging with their eves for a share of the booty, 
whv give them independence? With or without Spain they would do the same, 
and perhaps, perhaps worse. NVhat is the use of independence if the slaves of 
today will be the tyrants of tomorrow?'" 



'Then comes the famous apostrophe that sums up Rizals idealism: 



THF f'HII.IPPINf Ri.Vt )l.( ’ 1 1< )N" AN I > Hi 



Where arc the youth who will dedicate their mm. • •• - 

their enthusiasm to the good of the countrv? Where arc tin 
erously of their blood to wash away so much sh.imc, nr:.- : 

Where are you, young men and young women, who .ire to cn • ■ • . 
selves that life-force that has been drained trom our -.cm . tisi ; .• ■ .. 

have grown strained in our minds, the fiery enthusiasm that h.i • • ; . • 

in our hearts? We await you 

More than a superficial political reform, Ri/al wanted a dc epet ., ru l m , , u . ; is( 
ing moral regeneration of the Philippines, a Spanish colon-. | <u • >l< >m/.u ion 
would never succeed through naked force but by the moral super no it . . , t t he «. olo 
nizers. J here was no stronger force to uphold political authority than the idea of 
justice, serene, without hatreds or animosities, just as the surest u.r. n>dcsiro\ it 
was to tolerate injustice and the angry animosities it occasioned 

It is well known that Rizal had not envisioned a Philippines separate trom 
Spain.” Blumentritt, who knew the national hero more than unyhodv else except 
perhaps RjzaJ’s older brother, said that his I ilipino friend was cons lined political 
independence would he achieved at the cost of much blood. I he In-si men and 
women would die on the battlefield, while the result would he eit Ini thee out mued 
enslavement or the total ruin of the people, for the revolm lon.u \ spirit would 
never die but would live on for generations. Ri/al was often said to base .pioted 
Bismarck many times: “Blood is a costly liquid. ( >od lias not intended it to he shed 
in order to realize political ideas.” ’ Besides, Ri/al believed everyone had a role to 
play in his country. Getting rid of the Spaniards was relatively easy, a negat ivc mun; 
but something positive and lasting w'as needed. Meantime, as he had the philoso- 
pher fasio say in his first novel, the field was “not yet reach- lor sowing, n is f ull of 
weeds.’”' And to Mariano Ponce he wrote, comparing the Pilipinns to tiles that 
they were “still mud and the house cannot he built with them. 

Unfortunately, the decision-makers in Manila misunderstood him. 1 lis legal 
campaign for reforms they considered subversion. Io criticize or expose the weak- 
ness of the government was to undermine the principle of authority, diminish its 
influence, and endanger the existence of the state. That is why Ri/al became sus- 
pect, a marked man even before he had published his first novel in 1 MS -- 1 

But Rizal’s writings stirred the Filipinos. Antonio I una, still a st udent at the 
Jesuit school in Manila, recalled how, in contrast to Ri/al who courageously ex- 
posed the ills of the Philippines, he and his classmates felt like “cowards and hypo- 
crites,” as though it were a felony to love one’s country. They idolized Ri/al, whose 
works pointed to the young Ateneo students the “road to progress." P.very now and 
then, Luna continued, “like leaves before a hurricane, brotherly winds blew before 
us pieces from his pen which we read with admiration, or heard in unbroken si- 
lence, as we digested his ideas, mulled over his thoughts, in no time enthusing 
ourselves as in our midst an echo, though timid, answered his voice. Ms 



52 



ARC II LA l 'tophi and Revolution: lhe Philippine hxpener, 



People seemed to gravitate around Rizal and seek his leadership. Kven after 
he had decided to end his political activities, people still consulted him in Hong 
Kong and Dapitan. Unknown to him. people used his name and Andres 
Bonifacio's secret societv, the Katipunan, installed his portrait in their meeting hall. 
Pmilio Jacinto, supposedlv the “brains” of the society, extolled him as their “hon- 
orary president. "' During the interrogations of the first prisoners following the 
outbreak of the uprising in August 1896, Rizal was implicated by a number of 
witnesses whom the hero had neither known nor even met. And although perhaps 
exaggerated, the court that condemned him to death was not far from the truth 
when it declared that Rizal was the “Word Incarnate of the Revolution, the most 
intelligent leader of the separatist movement, the idol... 

For Rizal was a man of ideas. W hile in Spain he made his position clear, even 
after Marcelo H. del Pilar had arrived as the official agent of the propaganda lead- 
ers in Manila. “We want happiness feu* the Philippines, he wrote to blumentritt, 
“but we want to obtain it through the noblest and the fairest means. Reason is \\ ith 

us and we, therefore, ought not to do evil. 

That is whv violent revolution did not attract Rizal. At the same time, his 
program sorelv tried people who wanted quick results. And this explains his heioic 

death. 

Soon after returning home in 1 892, he founded a secret society, the laga Fil- 
ipina. Its purpose was to promote unity and socioeconomic growth. Bur because 
Rizal was exiled to Papuan, the I.iga died just a few days after its establishment. 
Rizal's friends bravely tried to continue but, unknown to them, Andres Bonifacio 
went around recruiting men to his own secret societx aimed at the \io ent o\ei 
throw of the colonial government. Lest the\ be implicated, tit l.i^a num xts 
agreed to disband, leaving the field open for Bonifacios Katipunan. 

There was no stopping the Katipunan. Its dream was an independent 1 h.hp- 
pines. The ordinary members might not have full) understood its imp ications, sut 
there is no denying they wanted self-rule. Pater, 1 r. Ulpiano Herreio, C . ., e 
rained during the revolution, wrote: 

The native masses welcomed with wild enthusiasm the victories of the 
Revolution, attracted bv the idea that in the future none hut Indios would be 
in command, and that they would constitute a nation, although the majority 
did not really understand the meaning of the nat ion. But they did understand 
their being in charge and being the ones to govern. . . We do not believe that in 
the first months their victories there would have been a single Indio who was 
not overwhelmed with joy and pride on considering themselves indepen- 
dent. ... The people complained of the numberless forms of oppression and ex- 
ploitation, of the favoritism of the Tagalogs and the intrigues of scoundrels with 
no other merits than their own boldness, and the pack of rogues with them; 
they poured out words of anger against the | revolutionary] government. But in 



I HI. PHILIPPINE Rf V< )li IK >\ \M > W • 



their souls the burning love of being self-governed soil BA/ : 
the people is still with the defenders of independence 

But a revolution is only as good as the changes it Bring tB<> ;• !-.•.»> quc' 

tions, then, need to be answered, f irst, what legal provisions are the: •«> «msoh 

date the changes any revolution occasions? Second, who are th i > c : . • of 

these changes — the entire society, or the few smart fellows who re-ini. v.:*»ngh 
claim leadership in the movement? I he first is a technical or legal pr< > i > '. — m >U cd 
by a proper constitutional mandate, and the second is the moral problem «>t the 
kind of government that must he installed. 

I he polio-stricken Mabini. known for liis mtransigeiue and refusal to take 
the oath of allegiance to the new American government until reahf. ton d him to 
change his mind, severely criticized Aguinaldo who. lie churned. dcstios cd the 
revolution. A bloody revolution occurs, the Sublime Paralvtn wrote. | H \ .unc of 
the unsatisfied desires of the people. I he Filipinos had tried to talk w nh tlu span 
iards, who had refused to listen. I he l ilipinos were forced to fight tor then honor 
and dignity, for diplomacy had failed. Hut they lost, for in am fight onk. t he si r a > ng 
wins. 45 Was ir then a case of might made right." W hat happened to tlu- 1 dipinos’ 
idealism, their dream of an independent republic they would theinseh.es po\crn? 

It energized them. It gave them the courage to fight for then i tide pet uIcikc. 
In doing so, they became a nation. 

For a revolution to take place, at least four tilings arc- needed: a < unplaint . a 
leader, the means, and the occasion. If one of these is missing, a re\ ohmon will not 
happen. 

Complaints there were aplenty, so many that tliev gave birth to the- notorious 
leyenda negra of Spanish cruelty. Starting from Solirnan or \lagat S.d. un.it of Ma- 
nila when the Spaniards first imposed their rule, the indigenous population had 
always tried to drive them away. The institutionalized justification of Spanish rule 
through the Patronato realised the situation but did not remove pretexts and oc- 
casions for abuse. As Rizal indicated, colonial rule could he justified nnlv on two 
grounds: an excess of population, and to promote the good of the colony. I nfortu- 
nately, Spain missed its chance and failed to develop the Philippines, Paltering a 
neighbors house to take advantage of what is available inside, Rizal wrote to lMu- 
mentritt, was violently unjust, unless one accepted that force was the rule of life. If 
a state failed to make its colonies happy, it should abandon them, for no one had 
the right to inflict misery on anybody. ** 

The Filipinos had their leaders, too, some of whom are now honored as he- 
roes: Burgos, Rizal, Del Pilar, Mabini, Bonifacio, Agumaldo, etc. I hey wrote* and 
fought for “more respect for human dignity, more guarantees for the ’individuals 
safety, less power to the armed forces, less privileges for this bodv which easily 
abuses its power. ’* 1 

Their followers included both the unschooled and the learned. Some as- 
tounded the Americans who saw how, during a skirmish bv the Pasig ris er, one af ter 



54 



\K( II I \ l tophi *ni({ Revolution: l "he Philippine l wpenenee 



ch c other, four or five of them laid aside their bolos to pick up the rifle a fallen 
comrade had dropped. Some were simple people who believed that Ri/ul, the fa- 
vorite disciple of the Jesuits, had received from the latter the power to travel 
through space and give orders to the Katipunan leaders in Manila.'" No matter; 
they died and a new nation came to be. 

But though primed to overthrow the government, the Katipunan did not 
have the means to carrv out its plan nor did Bonifacio have the support of other 
leaders. Ri/al, for example, to whom he had sent an emissary to win his support for 
a revolution, condemned it as premature. I hat is why had not bray Mariano (Ail 
discovered the evidence of the subversive plot, fighting would not have started 
w hen it did in August 1896. Without guns or ammunition, Bonifacio and his 
group were still waiting for the proper occasion. 

As for the government, Ciovernor Blanco at first refused to act on what he 
was told were subversive activities in and around Manila. But when evidence 
forced him to act, he discovered that the government was unprepared to face the 
rebels, for the next 1 6 months, and after two new governors had taken over, the 
results of fighting were unpredictable. I owns lost to the rebels were soon recon- 
quered and then retaken bv the revolutionaries, finally, Madrid agreed to a com- 
promise and approved the Pact of Biak-na-bato of Occcmbci 189 . 

We cannot say what might have happened had not the Cuban crisis brought 
Admiral Devvev to Cavite to destroy the decrepit Spanish fleet. On 19 May, Agu- 
inaldo arrived from exile and rallied the people to his side. Three months later, on 

13 August, Manila fell to the Americans. 

The Pilipinos felt deceived. They had been made to believe they were taking 
over from the Spaniards. But if we are to believe Mabini, there had been no agree- 
ment between the Filipino leader and Dewey beyond a verbal assurance that the 
United States needed no part of the Philippine Islands. Aguinaldo must have heard 

more than what he was told bv the Americans. 

Th c sequel is well known: a cosrlv fight between the American occupation 
forces and the Filipinos for more than two years. But despite the revolutionaries' 
bravery and the odds against an invading force unfamiliar to the Philippines, the 
end was not long in coming. Harassed by the unstoppable American war machine, 
Aguinaldo kepbmoving his capital to various places and finally resorted to guer- 
rilla warfare. 

The strategy backfired. Traitors disguised as a guerrilla unit supposedly an- 
swering his call for reinforcements surprised him in his hideout at 1 alanan in 
northeastern Luzon. His surrender marked the end of the fighting, although spo- 
radic resistance in various points continued for a few years more. 

Once again, the Filipinos' hopes for an independent Philippines were 
crushed. But what Mabini said about "human prudence” to avoid total annihila- 
tion in any fight was verified. The Americans came to bring about the "well-being, 
the prosperity, and the happiness of the Philippine people and their elevation and 
advancement to a position among the most civilized peoples of the world.’'** And 



I HI PHII.imNf HI V< )! I 1 I< >\ \M > hi n I 

the Americans tried to fulfill the promise— hm on one basic :>r m: that the 

United States would fulfil) the “solemn obligations it has assumed loss .ini the fam- 
ily of nations by the acceptance of sovereignty over the Philippine I Pmds 

Here was the problem. Once again, the I ilipmos were utuier a r « * r c : ; : : mu s 
ter. In one fell swoop in the wake of the uprising of August the \«>ung Hli- 

pino intelligentsia disappeared. Their place was taken In others who mm.ht have 
been good military leaders but who did not necessarily base the abihr. to .uiinm 
ister a government and consolidate whatever could have been gamed through m 1 1 1 - 
tary victory. Mabini was co-opted into the Agumaldo cabinet prec iseiv in cause* he 
seemed to be one of the first to envision a political program for the Philippines. 
But he refused to accept American sovereignty and be did not fit m with the \meri- 
can plan for the Philippines, a plan legitimized by the American victors 

ft was an American, not a Filipino plan, and therefore onh second lust tot 
the Philippines. I he Filipinos had used the shortcut to their utopian ideals and 
dreams, a violent revolution. Unfortunately, they were not fulls reads to tii;ht. \nd 
they lost. Besides, in order that reforms might lead to lasting results, a faith com- 
prehensive program of basic socioeconomic initiatives must precede them. 

I his was Rizal’s view. The people svcrc not ready, still unmindful < >f then dm \ 
to the country, moved only by family sentiments. I he Spanish government was 
not selfish, he indicated in Noli , and it was svorking to mt roduc e refot ms. But I isio 
retorted, 



I know, and that is the svorst part. I he reforms that c omr f n >m ab< >\ e arc- 
rendered null in the lower spheres, thanks to everyone’s v ices, tor example, the 
avid desire to enrich oneself in a short time, and the ignorance of the people 
who acquiesce in it. 

Hindsight tells us Rizal was right. 



Notes 

1. Apolinario Mabini, La Revolution hilipino (Man ila: Bureau of Print ini;, 1 03 1 ) 1, 2”0. 

-2. decopdacion de Leyes de los Reynos de Ins huh as (Madrid: F.dicioncs ( iiltura 1 lispaiuca 
[facsimile cd.], 1973), Lib. I, Tit. 1, ley 1. 

3. Genaro V. Vasquez, Doctrina y re alidades eti la legislation para los nuhos (Mexico, 
1940) cited in Jose Ma. Font and Ramon hsquerra, d.eves dc Iiulias," l )i ( l lOnaria dc 
His tor ia de Espana (Madrid, 1968) 2:274. 

4. Surna de una junta que se luzo a rnanera de conn ho el a no / / , para dar asicnto «/ Ns 

cosas tocantes al aumento de la je, y justificat ion de las eonqiusttis hcehtis : y tjac cti 
adelante se hicieien por los espanoles in Jose Puis Porras ( .anninez (cd.), Sinodo dc 
Manila de 1 5H2 [ V Gen ten a no del I )cscubn m icn t o de America, N mod os A me r i cans, 
8: Coleccion Tierra Nueva e Giclo Nuevo, 27] (Madrid: ( PS I C 1 98<S) 302 03. lhc 
Manila Synod had little impact on subsequent Philippine history. But as an historian 



56 



ARC II I A l tophi iirui Revolution: The Philippine livpenenee 



aptly remarked, “...it was something to have made so bold a bid for justice, when 
silence and conformity would have been bv tar the easier course. 1 loracio de la 
( 'osta, N.J., /esters in the Philippines , / 5<S* / - / "YnS* (C ambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1 962) 3b. 

3. Spanish colonial rule was indeed absolute, but not arbitrary. Although the king was 
the exclusive source of law, he was bound by the traditions of the realm. Thus, in 
medieval Aragon, the nobiluv made sure that a new king acknowledged their privi- 
leges and usages, or thev would repudiate their oath to him, tor they were “as good 
men as he. C .olomal policies were decided solely by the king, who signed royal mea- 
sures with the famous )o. el Rey. but he listened to a council, the' C.-onsejo dc* Indias, 
for overseas matters. (Tbviouslv, bec»iuse ot dittc'iences in climate and culture not .ill 
royal enactments could be implemented in the colonies. In this case, the colonial of- 
ficials suspended the law, while making the proper representations before the throne. 
This led to the legal axiom, “</ In ley se aeauu no se rumple." Meantime, the colonial 
government remained in some sort of suspended animation. And yet. despite every- 
thing. Spain ruled the Philippines for more than three centuries. 

6. The storv of the royal plan to do “business" in order that in the Philippines at least 
one soul could he baptized is preserved in Juan Solorzano de Pereira. Dr Indianan 

hire (Madrid: Francisco Martinez, 1639) I. x\ i, 10(’. 

7. H. de la C Tsta summarizes other reasons for holding on to the Philippines in Jesuits. 
77-106. See also William I.. Schurz. The Manila Galleon (New York: h.P. Hutto, t. 



8 . 



9. 



10 . 



1939). _ , 

The indnlto, equivalent to a years salary, was actually a fine. In 184 . C.overnor 
Claveria extended the ban to cover all provincial heads. At the same time, he stan- 
dardized their salaries. The head of a province dr asrrnso (develop, ng) recetved a sal- 
ary of PI. 500; that of a province dr trrmhto ( lull) doclopcd), 1 1,600. 
based on a new classification of the provinces: dr rntrada (newly founded), dr asrrnso 
de term i no. But the problem of maladministration remained, lor generally, the aha r r 
mayor was the executive officer, the regional treasurer, and the mm.ster of ptsttce. 
For an Hnglish translation of one of these ordenanzas . see James A. Blair and mima 
H. Robertson (eds.). The Philippine Islands. I49S-1898 ‘(Cleveland: Arthur 1 I. Clark 
1903-09) '0:203-64. A copy of Cruzat’s ordenanzas is m the Blblioteca Naciona 
(Madrid), manuscript section, “Papcles de las misiones de Pilipinas. Stglos X\ I- 



XVII, Ms. 1 1014, ff. 283-329. 

We have a picture of an abusive colonial official in the repot t of the Franciscan 1 athst 
Custodian, dated at Santa Ana, Manila, 10 June 1 04. 1 rancisco Cuetucla, a jud._,c 
of the Royal Audiencia, was sent as Visitor to the Bicol region to alleviate the plight of 
the poor. He did nothing of the kind. Instead. Cueruela claimed powers of pope and 
king. At mass, the Franciscan superior, wrote, “He had himself escorted by two com- 
panies of women dressed shamefully enough, their hair loose, and he entertained 
himself amid their angelic' prattle. Besides this squadron, he had fifty armed men 
and others to guard him, unpaid, not even with food. All of his family is indebted to 
the province. 1 omit the receptions he had ordered, the women to shoulder him on a 



37 



Mil PHII IITINT Kl A ( >1 t f |« » 



mt.* «l»c 

, 'l|)f ^ • 

t >r iciital 

.. >, i»t 

l,, u: their 
• »r »pp rc 
.unl the 

SI > pu s| l 

tJu\ * lfC 



litter from town to town. I leave our the panic « ! 1 1 . 
night... In forme del Provincial dc S ,/;/ ( 9 rr'/ono ( , ■ r ... 

Oidor Clueruela contra framin' ann dr ( amarine \r • *• 

(Madrid) 94/M. A worse case, perhap i rh.it <>: M. . i • '. 

Camarincs, guilty of “...now forcing him Hf on n. e . .• 

parents, exiling them to other places toi.irr, «.ur : : ; * : 

bending husbands to abuse and intimidate rh :r .• I 

false testimony he suhrnirted against rlie Iran *1 

lanimous that even when tilings are confi atrd. rh* ... p . . ■ 

done by someone in power. / Jet Linn ton dr don \I: ut dr ■ < 
y Rector de la catedral dc ( .aniarmc /fordo / . nun r .!>:*• > >. / * . 

contra don Miguel de hi day a. 2~ de ( )< tuber <l< 1 : \l I< * 1 d 

Archivo Historico National 'Madrid i. ( Irramar Uobkrno i 
Rafael I/.quierdo to Admiral Juan I >a . lopete Manila I i » r . i 
lormo San/, (ed.) IR7J (.Manila: Hi stork al ( miser •. at ion S< > u t . 

I/.quierdo to the C )verseas Ministrv. urgent and re r . d Manila 
AH\\ Ultramar, (jobierno. jegajo 5242. 

For a new study of the Uavite rnutinv. see rh< two i . ..e. of I < mdn 
Bishop Volonteri: Fellow Passenger of Ki/al. and 1 In ( a . in \bmm 1 i\e l n 
known Earlier (rials in Jose S. Arc ilia. S.|. 'ed / 'nda tandni" tlu \<»li /.o / h^tor: 

cal Context and Literary Influences (Que/on ( itv: Phoenix Pn . piss 1 i ». i^ 
I/.quierdo to the Overseas Ministry, reserved. Manila, dl lebmars Is d Sci\ kh 1 
Historico Militar (Madrid j Armario IS. labia 1 legajo I fold w\\ 

For an analysis of the probable innocenc e of sr\ era I of iliose i nm u tal a i u 1 executes!, 
or penalized otherwise, see the essav alre.ub- c ited of I oi mo San/. I be ( avite Mu 
tiny: Five Unknown Earlier Trials, 18~2. See also t be test imom of homf.iun (V- 
tavo, a sergeant who apparently had been forced to join t be minim, but who esc aped 
on the eve of the mutiny itself. ( .apt tired several months later, be was ( u 1 1 t mu i t m led 
in September 1 872 in Torino San/., (ed.) ! (Manila: I listoi u a I ( onset \ m ion So- 
ciety, 1 973; 152-68. 



] s 



I < b 



xpcai 1 V 

l e.itulro 

dd 1 3 '■ 

US 1 S * d : 



tollin' 
t I f P 



san> 



Jose Ri/.al to Mariano Ponce, Paris, 1 8 April 1 889: I '/nstol, trio Ri .*,/ / 1 tin ( Manila : Bu- 
reau of Printing, 1931 ) 2:166. 

Io Filipinos, (jomburza, or the execution of Mariano ( iome/, lose- A. I^urgos, unci 
Jacinto Zamora, Philippine-born priests implicated in the minim but not clearly 
proven guilty, has become a symbol of Spanish in just ic e and bureaucratic inept ness. 
It also signaled the beginning of the end of Spanish presence in the bar 1 ust. 

lestimonio del Proceso del Sargento Bonifacio ( )ctavo, I 8 September 1 S~"2 in 
lormo San/., IR72, 154-161. 

(.ited in H. de la Costa, S.J., Readings in Philippine History (Manila: Bookmark, 

1965) 22. 



Ri/.al, l j Itimo Re nsa mien to, in Wcnceslao I.. Retail, i, 17 da )• pscritos dr! I )r. lose /\. 
(Madrid: Victoriano Suarez, 1907) 422. 



\R( II I A l tophi t ni({ Revolution: 1 he Philippine Iwpenenee 



22. W.i . Retana believes this could have been written onlv l"»\ an nu/io. See his prologue 
to the fifth volume of his Archiro riel Hiblioftlo hilipino (Madrid: \ ietoriano Snare/, 
I 0()S). 

23. Op. eit., 1 0^-48. 

2 t. Del Pilar to Blumentritt, Barcelona, Madrid, 10 March 1 880 , in IzspistoLirio de 3 Lir- 
celo del PtLir ( Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1031 ) I. 8a. 

28. ( died in Retana. 1 uii r hscritos dc Riz^iL 280-8~~. 

26. Pilipinas dentro de C ien Anns, l <i Soli(Liri(Lid (Madrid) (30 de Septiembre de 
1880- 1 de Pebrero de 1800). 

2 A Ri/.al to the hilipino Solidnrios \\\ Barcelona, 1 ondon, 28 January 1880, in h'pistoLirio 
Riz^dino ( Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1031) lb 112-13. 

28. Informed that he had been voted the honorary president of a new association of the 
Filipinos in Barcelona, Ri/al wrote from l ondon to thank them for their congratula- 
tions for a piece of writing published on 31 December 1888 . At the same time he 
encouraged them to greater union and mutual cooperation, while criticizing their 
bickering and pettv gossip. “Union, he emphasized, is worth more than literary or 
oratorical talents... Laong-Laan to friends m Barcelona, New Aeai 1880 ; Op. eit., 

Ih 08. 

20. /;/ hilihi/strrisn/o (Ciiicrrero tr., I ondon: Longmans Ciieen and C o., 1068) 20 . 

30. I oc. eit. 

31. /:/ l ilihustcri.ono . 208. 

32. Seamos (ustos, l.n SolidnyuLuL IS April 1800. 

33. In an interview with Ciovernor Lulogio Despujol soon after his return to the 1 h 1 1 i p - 
pines, Ri/al admitted he had started to think of an indepc neb nt l hihppuics w he n lus 
family was forcefully ejected from their home in Oalamba. See the governor's report 
to the Overseas Ministry, Manila, 14 November 1802, in AHN, Ultramar, 
Ciobierno, legajo 2308. 

34. Retana, Vidiu 136. 

33. Noli Me Ittngere (Guerrero tr.) 160. 

36. Ri/al to Ponce, London, 2~7 June 1888, in l:pist oLirio RiZuilmo, II, -0. 

3 . At a bane] net to honor two hilipino painters, helix Resurrcccion 1 bdalgo and Anto- 
nio Luna y Novicio, for their prize-winning entries at the 1 me Aits Lxposition in 
Ba rcelona in 1884, Ri/al gave a speech extolling Filipino talent in general. Some 
Spanish newspapers publicized the speech and soon, from Oalamba, Paciano wrote 
his brother that rumors had spread that he would never be able to return to the Phil- 
ippines. His mother, worried, warned him against involvement in affairs that bring 
dark clouds over my heart'' ( HpistoLirio Rizttlnnu L 1 22-23, 1 28, 1 30-3 1 ). A few years 
later, Ri/al recalled that after he had finished the arts course at the Jesuit college in 
Manila, his mother had opposed further schooling for him lest, like every learned 
man in the Philippines, he also end up in the gallows (op. eit., V, 1:328-26). 

LS. I aga- 1 log (pseudonym of Antonio Luna), U lojas ultimas, I d SohdaridiuL 31 March 
1801. 



80 



TWK f’HII.IPl’INI RfVOU IH)N \M > itf :< •'.!> 



39 . 



40. 

41. 

42 . 

43 . 



44 . 

45 . 

46 . 



47 . 



48 . 

49. 

50. 

51. 



The peroration of a speech of Jacinto reads: In the tnc-.mtimr i<-t ; • ; . ; r pints 

up with these battle cries: Long live the Philippines! i ong live I ibcrts 1 I .>i h\e- Dr 
Rizal! Unity!” Fhere were almost the same words whu h ended .< >pe **! .motlicr 
Katipunan member, Jose Jiiriano Santiago: let us ..!! bout with 1 ,, M g 

live the Philippines! Pong live l iberty! l ong live the gte.it I >i l-'i/.e 1 • the 

oppressor Nation!” Horacio dc la Costa. S.J. -.-<1 .. tr. / hr trial nf \d. m ,|.i \t c 



nco de Manila University Press. 1901 i 93-9-t. 

Op. fit., 137. 

Rizal to Blumentritt, I.ondon, 31 Jantiarv 1 889 m / /•/ tolarm ...o. \ ;o ( , 

Ulpiano Herrero y Sampedro, O.P., Nuestra pn n,n ,n pndr> <tr h> • >/ u< 

filipinos (Manila; Imprenta del ( iolegio de Sto. loin. is 1900 SMI 
Strictly, this is not correct. I he filipinos did not lose .mil tin Spaniard ,ln| n. ,t ss m 
Rather, fighting ended with the Pact of Biak-n.t bato ,m honor. > 1 > I , ss.,. out v.fivn it 
was clear the Spaniards could perhaps win the battle but not the good ssill ,,t ,| u . [ , | , 
pino people. On the other hand, the filipinos could not win oset tin \ nu t n .ms. a 
fact confirmed by Aguinaldos surrender in 1 90 I . 

Rizal to Blumentritt, I.ondon. 18 November 1889 m /y >/ toLirm Pi.-alm,, \ ! v|S 

Noli Me 'Pangere (I.ocsin tr., .Manila: Bookmark. I990i N! i 

Rizal was at this moment in Dapitan. See Apuntas ofic tales solue los stuc-sos de la 
insurreccion de filipinas, facilitados por las ( )rdenes tcligiosas al sei nombiudo 
Governador general del Archipielago [el ( .etieral ( amiln PoI.imc i.i. . llu | \puntes 
rclattvos a la Revolucibn, A(d. Diversos, legajo 27, exped. 2. lcga|o s exped. 3 
respectively. 



Because the question continues to be a subject of debate, n might be good to cite 
Mabini s words in the original language. ( )n accepting Aguinaldos mvn.uion to form 
Part of his cabinet, the former asked about a convent" with the l mu d State s. Mabini 
wrote: “...con gran sorpresa mia supe que no exitia ninguno y epic el consul l>,,m de 
Singapore y el Almirante Dewey le habian asegurado sblo de pulabrn de epic cl 
Gobierno de los Pstados Unidos no necesitaba parte algnn.i de las | s |.,s y epic sti 
proposito era solo el deayudara losislcriosen la destn.cccibn del despot isnu, cspanol. 
Para que los filipinos pudiesen disfrutar de las bciulieioncs dc tin gobiemo fibre.” 
Mabini, I.a Revolucibn Pilipina (Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1931 ) II, 3<). ( 

Report of the Philippine Commission to the President (Washington: ( .ovcmnicnt Print- 
ing Office, 1 900) I, 4. 

Ibid. 



Como se Gobiernan las Pilipinas,” I.a Solidaridad. 15 December 1,S9<). 
Noh Me Pangerei I.ocsin tr.) ch. 26, p. 170. 



The Revolution of 1896 and the 
Mythology of the Nation State 

j C 



Ri vnai no C. hi to 
Asian History Centre, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 



T | 1C r C C an he no doubt that the events set in train by the Revolution 
of I 896 are the foundation of any modern Philippine history. 1 he revolution 
both removed the Spanish church from its previous central position in society and 
politics and provided a new set ol events and chat actus- now called national 
heroes'— that serve as the origin-myth of the nation state. Through the inclusion 
of Ri/als martyrdom in December 1 896 and the subsequent cieation of a 
pino Christ,” most of the elements were in place for the development of a new 
social epic of the nation state, to ultimately replace, peihaps, the pdsyon of Spanis i 
times. 

Just think of what we regard today as some of the most important events of 
this century: the independence movements led by Quezon, the R.zal.sta and so- 
called Colorum movements, the socialist and communist movements, even tie 
Ricartista efforts to enlist the support Japan. 1 hink of the iionv of 1 ilipino gtiei i il 
las resisting superior Japanese forces for the independence of their countrv, while 
expecting the return of the Great Redeemer, General Douglas MacArthur. Think 
of those momentous events in the postwar period, such as the Huk rebellion, the 
radicalization of the studentry leading to the First Quaitei Storm, the Marcos 
Democratic Revolution, the Aquino assassination or martyrdom and its aftermath. 
None of these events involving the suffering Mother Country ( hnvig Bayan) and 
various calls to action by her children, could have assumed the intensity thev el i el 
without the meaning-matrix provided by the 1896 Revolution. 

As I write this in centennial year 1996, the question that comes to mind is 
why this event — laden as it is with contradictions, ironies, and ambiguities — has 



61 



I HI I'HII Il'I’INI Kl Volt ||o\ V.[) fl i< > 

been so important to us. Are the reasons all that self-evident.' I I"-’, did • ..me 
such an inseparable part of our national consciousness or un.igin.it n >• . i h >v. did 
those events become woven into the f ou tula t ion mvths of t he c in tent na: n : state, 
and what were the silences and contestations th.it accompanied tins ptose s, I he 
approach I take in this paper is to examine how the 1 896 Re. olut nm tinned m the 
construction of history textbooks as soon as the Aiikth an ediii.ition.b . st. m was 
introduced. In many subtle ways even we here todas base intet nali/ed and v.>n 
tinue to reproduce the basic meanings of the revolution a presented m u nhooks 
introduced many decades ago. 

I his study is only a beginning. I focus on two histories ot the Philippines 
written for public-school use. The first, by I )avid Marrows, first sav. punt in I '»<)->. 
was reprinted soon after in 1907, and reappeared in a ness edition m l 1 ).’ i | he 
second, by (ion ratio Benitez, came out in 1920 and v. as suhstant i.ills u-stsed in 
1954. I realize that there were competing textbooks from otbei se. tots, sm h as t lie- 
private schools. In fact Barrows in his 190" edition refers to In as \ uituism ..I Ins 
first edition by the Catholic church; however, lie refused to budge tn.ni his inter 
pretations. It is fair to say, though, that the official textbooks lot public sv h..«>l use 
were much more influential than their rivals in shaping national consciousness 
through this crucial period of nation-state formation. 

David Barrows wrote A History of the Philippine, at the suggestion «,| educa 
ttonal authorities for the use of public high school students. I Ins is n< >t sui pi ising. 

for he was director of education for the Philippines from 1901 to 1909. | | K - | N90 
Revolution is treated in chapter I 2, titled Progress and Revolution. iSi ' IS')"." 

What Barrows calls “the rebellion of 1896 is blamed on the great mistake- 
committed by the Spaniard” in blocking "the further progress of the native popu- 
lation. I he friars are singled our for being "the center of opposition to the general 
enlightenment of the race." Opposition, however, began at the higher levels of ///- 
dio society. lo Barrows the Katipunan phenomenon itself was the outcome of a 
trickle-down process; “the ideas which had been agitated [sic] by the wealths and 
educated Filipinos had worked their way down to the poor and humble classes. 
1 hey were now shared by peasant and fisherman. 

The events of I 896 arc narrated as follows: 

...there now grew up and gradually spread, until it had its branches and mem 
hers in all the provinces surrounding Manila, a secret association composed 
largely of the uneducated classes, whose object was independence of Spain, and 
whose members, having lirtle to lose, were willing to risk all. This was the so 
ciety which has since become famous under the name of “Katipunan." I bis 
secret organization was organized in Manila about 1892. Its president and 
founder was Andres Bonifacio. Its objects were frankly to expel the friars, and. 
if possible, to destroy the Spanish government. 



62 



Ill I O I he Revolution of /« S l )(y .nui the lytholo^y of the Wition St. ire 

At first glance this passage seems innocuous enough. I'll rough this narrative 
a whole generation or two ofTilipino high school students became acquainted with 
tlie Katipunan and the Revolution oM896. But let ns put this brief episode in the 
context of the textbook as a whole. 1 low did Filipinos get to place 1 896 within the 
big picture of Philippine or even world history? \\ hat are the implications of this 
structuring of the revolutions memories? 

Barrows states in the in trod net ion to the 1 92-4 edition that he wrote the hook 
for I i li pi no students seeking information not onlv of their own race and island 
home hut of the place of that raee in the history of the har hast and of Kurope... 
how progress and struggle elsewhere affected the human spirit on the shores of 
1 u/on and the Bisavas. It is quite clear from this and other statements that Filipi- 
nos were Being educated to think of themselves as belonging to a raee that has its 
ow n place — not just a habitat, or “island home, hut a place in a racial hierarchy. 
Students were to locate the position of the Filipino race on an evolutionary ladder 
that features the most advanced (or huropean) at the top to the most primitive (as 
found m areas like the har hast ) at the bottom. 

1 inked to the discourse of race is the discourse of progress, specifically the 
development of “the human spirit,” an allusion to Hegel. Filipino readers of Bar- 
rows were made to reflect on “how progress and struggle elsachen'" affected the 
human spirit on their soil. The rebellion of 1896, like just about everything else 
that Barrows finds worth mentioning about the Philippine past, is an effect, a fol- 
lowing up, a repetition, of happenings c /sen 'here, and this “elsewhere is Kurope. 
For Barrows, and his successors both American and Filipino, Kurope is the subject 
of all histories. And I submit that the history of the 1896 Revolution, insofar as it 
has be cn instilled in the public through the colonial educational system and its 
successor, is itself still largely framed bv the metanarrative of huropean history, bet 
us examine more closely the big picture within which the Philippine past is lo- 
cated, and how this structuring of the past is reproduced in Benitezs work, and 
perhaps even today. 

According to Barrows, a race can only progress if it has a history. But not just 
any kind of history will do. “ 1 he white, or huropean, race is above all others, the 
great historical race,” Barrows asserts, because it was the first to experience the tran- 
sition from the medieval to the modern age. It was in F.urope that religion gave 
way to science, feudal loyalties gave wav to national allegiances, and powerful states 
emerged with the consent of the governed. I he secular state, as the highest expres- 
sion of the “human spirit, was born in F.urope, and the process of this historical 
transition was to be the template for the rest of world history. 

In a most profound sense, then, the history of the Philippines constructed by 
Barrows is a history of the “alreadv-happened. Late 19th- and early 20th-century 
Philippine history is a repetition or replay of Huropean history in an Oriental set- 
ting. For the Orient, the Fast, is imagined as a place where, in terms of world his- 
tory, time came to stand still. 1 he exotic, despotic, childlike, and eternal Orient 
was the negative opposite of post-Knlightenment Fdirope. Fortunately there was 



63 



IHH PH 1 1 IPPINI-. HI Y< nr l U .\M > hf Y< »M > 

the Philippines, the old, Christianized Spanish colons, utm b was r < » h;* m is t he 
initial site for the replay of Huropean history, in the hope that tin v. rude «>r the 
Orient would be incorporated into r h is process. 

I he ilustrados , of course, had been arguing this since the 1 S«S(K. hut Bar r< >\% s 
was the one empowered to wn te into an official icxtbottb i he 1 1 he r a I interpretation 
of Philippine history, f he Spanish period, he wrote, had alreadv raised the f ihpino 
race to a reasonably high level of civilization, but the liberal cnliitbienmcnt \an 
guard of the world spirit was blocked from entering the Philippines In v * nisei \ a 
tive Spain. So Europe’s enlightenment had in the end to be t r.m\p< >r ted t« > t be Or i 
ent via America: 



l he modern ideas of liberty, equality fratermtv. .md ilcimu r.u . h.r. 
ing done their work in American and Europe \ are here at work m tin Philip 
pines today. It remains to he seen whether a society can be rebuilt lu r «>n these 
principles, and whether Asia too will he reformed under their intlu. rue 

Given the European master-narrative outlined above, certain features of the 
textbook representation of the 1 896 Revolution are better understood. It iSth cen- 
tury European history was to repeat itself in the Philippines a hundred seats later, 
then Philippine society in the late 19th century would have to be consulted as 
medieval or feudal. I his is precisely what Barrows does. 

Writing just a few years after the U.S. takeover, Barrows described the l ib 
pi no race as being still family- and communally oriented. I here is no sense of be- 
longing to a state or acting for “the public good.” Religion still has a powerful grip 
3 ver society. Social ties are based on master-serf relations (the precursoi of patroll- 
ed 1 " ties.). Leaders acted out of private/family rather than public interests. W ar- 
fare and violence were endemic, often conducted in an uncivilized manner. Above 
all, people, even leaders, were ruled by their passions rather than In reason. 

Most of you will probably think: hut what Harrows said is all true! Hut that's 
not the point: any society, Filipino, American, certainly Australian (from my own 
experience), can exhibit these features even today. The effect of Harrows' characier- 
tzation, or caricaturing, is that it enabled the Philippines to he slotted into the cat- 
egory feudal or medieval.” And any society that was labeled m no uncertain 
terms as me ieval in the context of world history could not be an vt h ing but flawed, 
lacking, and inadequate. Conclusion: this race could not possibly act on its own; it 
needed superior guidance or tutelage. 

Barrows’ view of Filipino society facilitated his interpretation of the 1896 
Revolution as somehow lacking and inadequate. Barrows acknowledges that the 
revolution was an expression of visions of freedom, justice, and equal, t'v. Hut these 
were raw, untamed visions. On the contrary, “ideal life for man is found only in 
governed society, where there is order and protection, and where there also should 
be freedom of opportunity. I he Katipunan revolt was inadequate because it was 
an expression of untamed violence from the masses who were governed by passions 



M 



II ! I O /hr Revolution of 1 »X*96 nnd tin' .Mythology of rhe A \ition St.irr 

rather than reason. Moreover, it did not lead to a viable state: it was a secret associa- 
tion; it was only when Aguinaldo captured power that the movement began to 
evolve into a state. 

•o Barrows, the budding Republic of 1898 was bound to fall to the Ameri- 
cans. \\ her Because Philippine society was still feudal: Filipinos still lacked "politi- 
cal experience and social self control. Aguinaldos army often conducted irregular 
warfare w hich sometimes featured the letting loose of “the verv worst passions" in 
men. In any case, the war with America was only a great big misunderstanding, 
says Barrows. If only Filipinos realized sooner that only with American guidance 
could thev enter the modern era 

Barrows' History of the Philippines exhibits the First textbook plotting of Phil- 
ippine history along the medieval-to-modern axis. It is, in effect, a narrative of 
transition that makes the reader see failure, or at least lack and inadequaev, in the 
thoughts and actions of Filipinos, until their race has become fully hitched to the 
bandwagon of Furopean historv. In textbooks of this genre, American tutelage or 
fatherhood Fits in naturallv: leading Filipinos out of the medieval age through the 
development of a modern state peopled bv modern individuals, or citizens. Nei- 
ther of these — a modern state or modern citizens — are seen to have been generated 
by the Philippine Revolutions of 1896 and 1898. 

Some 20 years after Barrows , a new' textbook appeared, this time authored 
by a Filipino. Conrado Benitez had been an instructor in history and government 
at the Philippine Normal School before becoming head of the Department of Eco- 
nomics and dean of the College of Liberal Arts of the University of the Philippines 
(U.P.). 1 I is 1926 History of the Philippines was adopted by the Board ofTexts of the 
Philippine government for use in public schools. I he foreword was written by no 
less than U.P. President Rafael Palma. 

I suppose it should not come as a surprise that Benitezs textbook builds upon 
the framework established by Barrows. After all, Benitez himself says, he was a 
product of the American educational system; unlike his father, he learned his his- 
tory in F'nglish. Let us examine just how educated Filipinos of this generation 
viewed their history and the revolutions place in it. 

1 he first few pages of the textbook indicate the belief that the spirit of 
progress has at last been established in the Orient. A map preceding page 1 shows 
“the central position of the Philippines in relation to neighboring islands and to 
Asia — from being a great commercial market and a great religious centei in the 
past, it now is the nerve center of the spirit of democracy and progress in Asia. In 
other words, Benitez reflects a consciousness of the Philippines as being finally lo- 
cated in History which, I have argued, is really European history as it marched on 
to the Orient. 

Benitez also reflects the Filipino internalization of the discourse of Race. No 
one then could deny that the Malav/Filipino race was still down there among the 
less developed (or primitive) races of mankind. But now Benitez can confidently 
announce that the future faced by the Malay race is not a hopeless future... the 



mi PI III IH'IM HW( >i I I K >\ WI> \k\ 

Filipinos, unlike some other peoples, arc not disappearing .is . « r .« c \\ K r ] v t 
ing recent trends in ethnology, Benitez points to the mcni.il .ui.ipt.ti »: ! . the 

race, its success "in absorbing and assimilating the useful elerm-nt . >* : -m c ill 

tures with which he has come in contact. Whereas Barrov. s st re smt| : ; . | ; > !n » 

shortcomings and deficiencies as a race, Benite/ argued tor the d\ :ian. ; , m «»! that 
race as it was confronted with external challenges. It real), is a min..: mm u tue. 
however. Both authors agree that Filipinos had to gross up and main:: t t people 

in order to become part of History. It is just that, tor Benitez. I dipim.s v.cic al 
lowed a more active role in the process. 

So what does the 1896 Revolution look like in Benin z n ..iBook \s m 
Barrowss textbook, it is a replay of Furopean historv. f he ideas ot I .u 1. \j,, ntt - s 
quieu, and Rousseau which underpinned the French and \mni. .m u . ohitions. 
trigger a similar set of events in the Philippines a hundred seats kitei 



On the whole, the specific reforms s*.Iir h the pr*»|).ig.mda at h. , m .uni 
abroad aimed to attain were, in truth, no other than tin legitimate . k muni , ,t 
a people growing into social and political maturits ami nnl.ihine ||| UI .,| u p , s 
from the countries of Fa i rope and America. 



1 he image here is a biological one: the Filipino as a child gross s arui matures 
whilst fed with liberal nourishment from F.urope and America. I he u.msition from 
medieval to modern would have been gradual and peaceful, except tli.u Spain tailed 
to continue the nurturing. The friars in particular, says Hemic/, lough, to keep 
the Filipinos in the Middle Ages. The wheels of Progress would hau- come to a 

halt if Andres Bonifacio and the Katipunan had not given thcc.iri of Progress a big 
push. 



Reflecting some new research by hpifanio tie los Santos, Hcnitcv sac s a lot 
more about Bonifacio than Barrows does. We are told, for example, that die "first 
cry of rebellion” was held at a place “now marked with the Halim aw. tk monument." 
Nevertheless, the main compliment that he can render to the Kaiipmi.m's founder 
is that he “was imbued with the ideal of the Irench Revolution." Honifac in is given 
some sort of recognition because he sparks a set of events which real I v is a replay or 
rerun ofa revolution against the feudal order that took place in I .mope some I 00 
years earlier. 



Bonifacio, however, falls short of becoming a hero on the world historical 
stage. I his honor Benitez reserves for Jose Ri/.al. I or the replav of the French revo- 
lution in the Philippine context has a downside to it. As Harrows had pointed out 
earlier, the French revolution brought the modern era to France, Inn only .//in " the 
bloody acts of the years from 1793 to 1 795”— the years of anarchy brought about 
by the unruly f rench masses. Similarly, the Philippine revolution in Benitez's text- 
book also signifies a moment of disorder and chaos in the steads march of Philip- 
pine Progress. So while Benitez acknowledges the spirit of the French revolution 
working in Bonifacio’s activities, he also keeps these events at a distance. The Phil- 



66 



II ! U ^ I he Revolution of /<S’96 uiul the .Mythology of the Witioti Suite 

ippinc revolution in this 026 high school textbook becomes another sign of Fili- 
pino kick atul inadequacy. 

On the subject of the revolution, Benitez openlv takes his cue from the 
American scholar, lames I eRoy. In DOM LeRov argued that Bonifacio's "ideas of 
reform came from reading Spanish works about the French revolution. More than 
that, Bonifacio "imbibed also a notion that the methods of the mob in Paris" were 
best suited for the Filipino situation. Based on all the evidence he was able to se- 
cure. I eRoy saw "a socialistic character in the Katipunan's "propaganda from be- 
low, for this contained "an element of resentment toward the wealthw upper-class 
Filipinos, the landed proprietors in general, as well as toward the friar landlords 
and the whole fabric of government and societv resting on them. 

I he Katipunan, however, like the mob during the French revolution, was t o 
I .eRov and his protege Benitez, a sign of political immaturitv, where passions rather 
rh an the rule of reason and law prevailed. Katipunan leaders are described as filled 
with self-importance, with the "grandiloquent (but presumably empty) thoughts, 
"who led their humble followers in the towns around Manila most affected bv the 

propaganda to indulge in futile and ridiculous dreams of a coming millennium 

I .eRov sums up the Katipunan revolt as follows: 

Though in a sense this was a movement for independence, we have seen 
that only vague ideas of a political organization were in the minds of the lead- 
ers, while the deluded masses who followed them... had virtually no idea of 
such an organization except that Filipinos should succeed Spaniards. 

I here are two wavs we can read these descriptions by LeRo\ : fust, that the 
Katipunan was a socialistic threat from below that needed t o be contained, and 
second, that the behavior of the Katipuneros rather paradoxically betrayed thc'ii 
immature, medieval character. 

Benitez., in order perhaps not to agitate Filipino students (since the seeds of 
socialism and Bolshevism were already being sown at that time in cential Luzon), 
does not repeat LeRov s characterization of the Katipunan as fundamentally sub- 
versive. What he does is shift the topic to Rizal: Rizal, in contrast to Bonifacio, as 
chief spokesman of the sterner ]iulgi)icnt of the stviev element among the people , 
Rizal, in contrast to the localized affair that the 1806 Revolution was, as unifying 
the people through his death. Rizal, in other words, is a more effective, more ad- 
vanced, agent of the world historical spirit. 

In the context of the mcdieval-to-modcrn transition nai native, Bonifacio s 
loss to Aguinaldo in the struggle over leadership is almost inevitable. \X bile Boni- 
facio insists on preserving the secret society, Aguinaldo wants to combine all revo- 
lutionary factions into a government. Is this not the first step toward state foima- 
tion, and is not the state the highest manifestation of the Vvoild Spuit? Of couise, 
almost all textbooks of the American era repeat the following sentence from 
Agumaldos manifesto of 31 October 1 806: 1 he form of government will be simi- 



mi; mn.imsi ri voii nos \mihi p >si» 

lar to that of the United States of America. based essentially mi tin nn.st ,to. : prm 
ci pies of Liberty, Fraternity, anti Equality.' Agumalcln. as .1 sign <■! nudem. is 
the link between two crucial periods in the transition narrative 

Filipino students reading the Benitez textbook were first uni r. . : most In ing 
trained to be citizens of the nation-state which was being nurtured under \mcri- 
can guidance. And so the Philippine-Amcrican War is. as m Bar mss >. nob. »ok. re- 
garded as some kind of unfortunate misunderstanding. When tes . dut 1 . . 11 . it s lead 
ers finally realize that their goals could be attained svtth the aid ..t tin l mted 
States” they lay dosvn their arms and began a ness tspe of struggle ssithm the 
bounds of law and order. Within the bonnets of law atwi nrric> this . ei [.mils is not 
how the Revolution of 1 896 proceeded, thus the deep desire t<> plan uui contain 
it within the transition narrative and exorcise its threatening tc.ituies 

I he rest of Benitezs textbook is about social, religious, uul ecomunic 
progress under U.S. colonial rule. It is a narrative of development toss. ml nuulern 
citizenship, where the self is split into two: the communal and t. mills domain, 
which represents the feudal past, and the domain of the public good, citizenship 
in the nation-state and the regime of the lass. 

In the concluding paragraph Benitez again reminds the tcadet that the I ilipi 
nos are not a dying race. Far from it, this people is destined to | H ,m agent of 
History, “destined to carry on as an independent detune raev m tlu- I at 1 ast the 
political idealism of America— -her greatest contribution to human progress...." 
Filipino students in the mid- 1 920s were encouraged to dunk that theirs ssas a ds 
namic race that, having become part of the great chain of modernits emanating 
from post-Enhghtenment Europe and extending through America, would now- 
carry the light to the medieval lands of the ( )ricnt. 

I o a great ex ten t this svas the f eel 1 ng of the getier.it ion of lilipmos ss It teb 

experienced the granting of “independence" in 1946 after the trauma of the Japa- 
nese occupation. It is certainly reflected in the revised 1954 edition of Benitez's 
history. In Part Six, dealing with the post- 1 946 period, Benitez cpiotcs f rom Man- 
uel Roxas inaugural speech: our independent nation state is the Imit of "the west- 
ward surge of the pioneers of liberty. They planted its seeds in tins land. . . seeds 
which bear today their richest fruit.” 

...So as we embrace our national freedom, we must see in it, .is other 
peoples of the world do, not alone the product of Our struggles and strivings, 
not alone the altruism of America, but also the fhidl product of the world'* agy- 
olcl quest for liberty. 

Independent Philippines is the “final product” of a quest, a history, that 
started in Europe. Now, in the 1950s, its role is to help incorporate the rest of Asia 
into that history: thus Benitezs characterization of his country as “the interpreter 
of the East to the West as well as vice versa," its services to he “in demand as the 
honest broker in disputes between conflicting civilizations. In fac t the hook ends 



68 



Ill I ( ) I he Revolution of /<V96 otui the .Mythology of the A \ttion Store 



with a rather quaint passage, which to be sure was a dead serious belief in the mid- 
l c )S()s: “We stand at the crossroads of the Pacific, the bulwark of democracy in the 
Orient, the citadel of human freedom in the bar hast. 

What was rcallv going on at that time, and how was the revolution repre- 
sented in this P)>i rev ised edition of the Benitez textbook? By this time, it was no 
longer appropriate for Benitez t o cite James he Roy as his mentor on the 
revolutions historv. Instead he acknowledges the help of new characters like 
Garlo.s P Romulo, General Douglas MacArthur, and in particular a certain “Mr. 
Ieodoro Agoncillo, w ho pointed out certain errors of fact in the first draft of this 



revision . 

C hapter IS of this edition states in no uncertain terms that it is about a 
national revolution against Spain. It is striking how much space is devoted to a 
discussion of Bonifacios l ^ccti lot^ttc and Jacintos A urtilyu. 1 hese are said to con- 
tain, not just the teachings of the Katipunan founders, but principles “enunciated 
by the bathers of our Revolution and handed down to 11 s as a legacy. 1 hey are still 
valuable guides in our present-dav problems.... 1 he move here is to rcpicscnt the 
1 896 revolution as part of the heritage of the newly independent nation-state. Just 
as the brench and the Americans have their national revolutions and national he- 
roes (or bounding bathers), so do the bilipinos have theirs. 

In this 1 954 textbook Bonifacio and Jacinto are made out to be tine libcial 
democrats, advocating love of Ciod, love of country, and love of ones fellow (do- 
zens. I he unit of the family is to be “the bulwark of social solidarity and national 
strength ; the good citizen is one who works hard and is imbued with social ie- 
sponsibilitv. Whether Bonifacio and Jacinto actually preached these things is be- 
side the point. 'These key texts of the 1896 Revolution are made to serve as charters 
of the state and its citizens; the revolutions ambiguous and threatening feat 111 es aic 
cast aside. Benitezs reading of the Decalogue and hitrtilya enables him to accom 
plish the previously impossible feat of conflating Bonifacio and Kizal . Sav s he, 
“both the Katipunan and Rizal believed in an intensive campaign of reeducation of 
the people for civic purposes. In all confidence, Benitez is able to add this ieview 
question at the end of the chapter: “Write one or two paragraphs on the P air 
Bonifacio in laying the groundwork for the Philippine Revolution of IS )6. 

The great pains taken to harness the revolution for civic purposes reflects, as 
we have seen, the importance of state-building in the progress of the world histori 
cal spirit. But in this 1954 textbook it also betrays anxieties about threats to the 
unitv of the new Filipino nation-state. I he strongest hint of this is in the chaptei 
on “problems of peace and order, where for the first time communism is men 
tioned. Benitez refers to the Huks as originally an agrarian movement influenced 
by communism, which came "from the outside via Soviet Russia and C.hina. Such 
internal problems reflect a troubled world which 



seems to be dividing itself' more and more into two opposing camps — on the 
one side, the countries defending the right to live a free, democratic life under 



69 



Till-. mil.imNI HI V< >K IK \M > hf • 

constitutional processes of government: on tin other, r:.- -m:.* : 

iron heel of (Communism, determined to impo r • . t » . ? : 

autocratic system of government in which no freedom or m. . . : 
the individual. 

A.s noted earlier, Benitez, in the tradition of Harrow x. ionstr ik nd I'luhppmc 
history in order to make a necessity of the Spanish and -\mcti. an uu. t sent ions, 
which brought the Philippines into line with I mopes histors. tin iiist.us <>t the 
world spirit. But the march of Progress just happened to ,plu mu, tv.,, ,.ml.x f fis 

torv was also marching to a different tune, composed l>\ Mat s and I |, u , u .dlv 

a variation on Hegel’s. The Philippines gets caught in In-tween t\s.> ns.il 
metanarratives of Progress. 

Clearly Benitez is on the side of the I rev World poi 1 1 a\ mu Hi is , , nint i \ in 
no uncertain terms as the torchhe arcr of cicmoc r.ic\ .ig.ii nsi (lu'fi>Kcsi>t i ( >i .il 1 1 .iri 
anism. I his is the specific context in which the Philippines figures. ns st.iuwl e.u licr. 
a.s the bridge between Hast and West. Try ns h.ird .is he might though, )Vmuv in 
unable to fully harness the Revolution of IH ( ih to his emsr. ( )n g) * , n c In- 

scribing the Army’s campaign against armed dissidents, he su\s; 

But the [dissidents] had the advantage of surprise .md. m , mi ■ , t Sl ■ , , 
halfhearted support of those in rural sections who liwd in (nim «,t t ) lc | \ n i s 
I he depredations came to a head with the simultaneous and v. ( II pic g.uc d 
attacks on August 26, 1 950, timed to coincide with ihehistorn.il ( w <>t 
Balintawak” I )av. ... 

Somehow the Huk “enemy, too, was reading the historv ol t| K - 1 S l )(> Revo- 
luuon in a way that would legitimate and inspire us own revolm nmai \ .Rtivities. 
The socialistic and subversive Katipunan alluded to by I.eRov. Inn censored In- 

Barrows and Benitez, appears in the form ol the I Inks to haunt this text hook of" 
1 954. 

Benitez’s reference to the Huk appropriation of the ( rv of H.dint.iw.ik is a 
reminder that other narratives of the 1896 Revolution continued to thrive outside 
of the public-school system. After all, there were still a lot of Kaiipmieros and 
insurrectos around until the 1940s and even 1950s. And there were other forms in 
which unofficial” memories could circulate, such as literature and drama in the 
vernacular and popular religious cults incorporating heroes of the revolution into 
their pantheons. Rizal could be hailed as a martyr for the revolutionary cause and 
a Christ-figure, rather than the pacifist educator official textbooks made him out 
to be. Labor and peasant unions certainly took a different view of Bonifacio, con- 
structing him as the model of the man of action, the voice of the masses, rather 
than as an incompetent leader or a liberal democrat. 

We have seen through this brief study of old textbooks that the state — colo- 
nial or independent — certainly has had a stake in the reproduction of certain 



70 




HI l * ' / I\i : <>! titioti of 1S‘)(, ^nul the Mythology of the Wition St*tte 

meanings of 1 890 that served to underwrite it. If Bonifacio and Rizal can both, 
together, be seen as crucial to the birthing [Process of the modern Philippine na- 
tion-state, then there is no problem. A government-sponsored event such as the 
picsent centennial celebration is a good example of the state's interest in promot- 
ing etitain meanings of 1890. I he trend in recent decades, however, has been for 
tlu 1 890 Revolution to produce meanings for those intent upon subverting or 
destroying the l .S. -backed, <7/r/V///<^dominated state. We might say that Benitez's 
1 ^ a edition was the best example of the tame, civics-oriented interpretation of 
I 890. But j n { | K . i aS() s it competed with more radical readings of that event: Boni- 
facio-centered and class-struggle-oriented. I eodoro Agoncillos Revolt of the AL/ssrs 
(IdS ) produced a new master-text of the revolution, later fine-tuned by Renato 
^ onstantino, who also initiated an attack on Rizal-centered textbook histories. 

I his radical rereading of the 1890 Revolution, and its transmission to a gen- 
eration of students in the 1900s and early 1 9~0s, gave historical depth to student 
participants in the so-called hirst Quarter Storm oh the early 19~0s. It is striking 
how so many oh the students saw themselves as latter day Andres Bonifacios, 
Kabataang Makabayan and SHK (Samahan ng Hemokratikong Kabataan) 
blanches as latter-day Katipunans, and anti-Marcos rallies as replays of the Cay of 
I tigad Pavvin and/or Balintawak. Above all, the interpretation of the 1896 Revolu- 
tion as a revolt of the masses facilitated among the studentry the spread of new 
appeals for joining with the peasantrv and the working classes and, later, foment- 
ing People Power. Naturally, Amado Cluerrero saw his new C>ommunist Party as 
continuing the unfinished revolution of 1896. And berdmand Marcos himself 
joined the frav bv hooking his ow n Oemocratic Revolunon onto the 1896 Revolu- 
tion (by negating its supposedlv anarchic tendencies). 

I he crucial cjuestion that emerges from this paper is whether the post- 
Benitez interpretations of the 1896 Revolution really constitute a break from the 
discourse of Progress, hail lghtenment, and Historv that has framed the naiiatives 
of the revolution from the beginning of this century. Have Philippine textbook 
histories really eared to listen to radicallv different interpretations of 1896? Oi do 
we stall cling to Barrows view of history as, m essence, the work of Reason, to be 
based solely on reliable written documents? Unless we interrogate oui traditional 
ideas of history, a legacy of the 19th century, and write against the grain of the 
Enlightenment, all histories of the 1896 Revolution will, I submit, continue to be 
variations on a European theme. 






Revol u ti o n arv I cleo 1 o < >\ 

- n, 

and Culture Circa 1896 



Hi mi r A. Ordom / 



I 



T he 1896 Revolution was, in the words of a nationalist historian, the 
“expression of a nation being horn the culmination of (he quantitative 
series” of rebellions and uprisings since the arrival of the Spanish < <ni,ju ot.ulnrc* into 
a “qualitative leap — the revolution of a nation. 

It is axiomatic that a revolution of this scope does not |ust < K t u , ; ,, ; s no( 
spontaneous uprising of the oppressed against the oppressor. A resolution which 
gave birth to a nation suggests an ideological direction which mas he called a 
heightened sense of social and nationalist consciousness developed over time 1 'his 
ideology is generally accepted as Filipino nationalism, and it mas he seen within 
the context of an emergent culture seeking to displace the hegemons of the ruliim 
establishment. 

This paper looks into the nature, specificity, and continuitv of this revolu- 
tionary ideology and culture that motivated ill-equipped Katipuneros in 1 S96 to 
take up arms against Spanish authorities. 

Ideology here is used in the sense of ideas or beliefs which “arise f rom a given 

set of material interests or from a definite class or group." | lencc, the ideology of 

r*. 

the dominant or ruling class or the ideologies of the emergent classes, c.g. the ihts- 
trados or the plebeians. Ideology is also the ensemble of ideas and belief s which 
“organize masses of people and create the terrain on which persons move, acquire 
consciousness of their position, struggle, etc. 



i Mxl H >\l / 



;V. : :.:n .nui ( uhutr ( 'm\i IS K) (-> 

( ulturc is used here in the sense ot material production and the production 
of meaning iik ludmg systems ot signification. ' It is also the expression ot ideology 
or ‘the conception ot the world implicitlv manifest in art, in law, in economic ac- 
tivity, and in all mdmdual and collective manifestations ot life. 

I he two principal views about the Philippine revolution may he represented 
thus: (a) that “organic intellectuals (like hr. lose Burgos, lose Ri/al, and M.H. del 
Pilar) of the ilu>ti\i(lo class (the Filipino social and economic elite) articulated the 
nationalist ideas seen to he at the core ot resistance t o Spanish hegemony, and (M 
that the masses or the people below were tor some time alienated and expressed 
this alienation m the «//r//and p*i<xoit -the verv vehicle used by the colonial rulers 
in proseb ti/mg the names. I he “organic intellectuals of this class (like branciseo 
Balagtas ,ind later Andres Bonifacio ot'ihe Katipunan) appropriated the traditional 
cultural forms tor expressing popular sentiments or aspirations. 

Bonifacio is perceived to represent the masses in articulating their aspiration 
for kiiLiXihin (rooted m the long standing grievance ot the oppressed indio ) while 
hmilio Agumaldo is said to svmboli/c the prnicipiilui* (it not the tlustrados ) desire 
for i)i(lcp( )uL')n Li as a derived western concept, w hich Ri/al did not spell out in 
what is generally accepted as his reform agenda — assimilation and equality with 
the Spaniards before the law. 

Both Ri/al and Bonifacio posited the existence of a lost hden prior to the 
coming of the Spaniards or the existence ot an equal relationship between the ion- 
quistiu/orcs and the inhabitants ot the islands as symbolized in the blood C ompact 
between Lega/pi and Sikatuna — rendered in the famous painting ot Juan buna. 

I he premises held b\ both Ri/al and Bonifacio were: (a) that the paiadise that 
was the islands (i.e. the existing wav of life) was destroyed by the Spanish interlop- 
ers, and (b) that I .ega/pi and his successors betrayed the islanders, subjugated them, 
and subjected them to abuse and tyrannical rule. 

While Ri/al initially sought to correct the injustice through assimilation of 
the natives in what he considered the acceptable aspects of the cultute and politics 
of the ruling establishment — e.g. better education in Spanish for the bilipinos and 
representation in the Spanish C'ortes — Bonifacio demanded kaLiytum (libcin), a 
radical break from Mother Spain, for all inhabitants of the islands. 

This is not to sav that the ilustrados were limited to the idea ot assimilation, 
which Ferdinand Blumentritt, an Austrian friend of the Propagandistas in Spain, 
defined as “measures which respect the Filipino as a man equal to the Spaniards ot 
the same rank and of class. s Speaking for his Filipino friends, Blumentiitt pie- 
dieted that the bigotry of the friars “leads to the effectiveness of the iadical \icws 
not now but sometime later surely, not be legislative means, but by armed ie\olt. 

These two tendencies — assimilation and separation — would be manifested 
in two political associations: l a Liga Filipina and the Katipunan. 

La Liga Filipina (founded bv Jose Ri/al on his return from hurope) was for 
assimilation based on equality plus unitv of “the entire archipelago into one com- 



I HI PHII IPIMNT Kl V< )I I IK )N AM > Kl '»< >M > 



pact, vigorous and homogeneous body. ( ).I F ( orpu/ sees I .1 I cm 
assimilationist socictv... for it challenges the Mother Spam ouucpt 
other hand, the Katipunan founded by Bonifacio was for t\ila\aan means 

freedom and separation from Spain. Bonifacio spelled <>ut this aspiration in Mis 
Kalayaan manifesto “What lagalogs Should Know. I he effect <>t kalayaan would 
he the resurrection or rebirth of the suffering race following the logic of the 
pasyon. 

I he narration of the Philippine revolution thus hovers between the two per 
spectives cited above, depending on sources used or class bias. I here is more ot less 
a standard narrative with the following sequence: ( a) the overt ideas for social 
change including secularization and assimilation Oioi hidden or imbedded in the 
reading of the awit like Francisco Balagtas l lorante at I aura and the Pasvon 
Pilapil”) are articulated bv the educated mestizos and names Hailing, themseUes 
Filipinos); (b) the alienated masses are moved by the Propaganda Movement and 
RizaFs and other ilustrado writings through the mediation ot the Katipunan lead 
ers; (c) the long-suffering masses with secular leadership finallv use in revolt on a 
scale never seen before; (d) the revolution is ultimatelv betrayed b\ the ilunmdos 
who cross over to the enemv lines and the ^;v//c/^///</ who arc cn opted in the co- 
lonial bureaucracy; (e) the war does not end right away, for Kat ipuneros like 
Macario Sakay and Artemio Ricarte continue the struggle on the* 01 iginal premise 
of kalayaan. 

In any case the consolidated ideals of the Philippine* resolution such as 
kalayaan (liberty), kaginhawaan (prosperity), pafskaku/su (unity), /;/</;/ g Huyan 
(Mother Country), social justice, and national sovereignty hav e been pursued since 
the defeat of the first republic. I he struggle has taken myriad forms siu h as reviv- 
als, c.g. Bagong Katipunan, messianic or millenarian movements such as 1 apiang 
Malaya of Valentin Santos, parliamentary struggles beginning with the First Phil- 
ippine Assembly and independence missions, nationalist campaigns such as the 
Recto-inspired Second Propaganda Movement, and revolut ionarv struggles (like 
the Sakdal, Huk, and New People’ Army) among workers, [feasants, and other dis- 
possessed or oppressed sectors. The ongoing national democratic struggle is, in the 
view of those waging it, a continuation of the 189b Revolution under different 
material conditions and leadership of a new type. 

If one were to follow the efforts of the ilnstrarlos , one would note that a seg- 
ment (the Federalistas) turned their backs on indepeiulcneni and sought annexation 
to the United States. A larger segment (Nacionalistas) pursued the goal of indepen- 
dence, won the election for the 1907 Philippine Assembly, sent missions to the 
United States, but in the process were themselves co-opted into the colonial bu- 
reaucracy. Many of them became surrogates of the American masters long after 
independence was granted. 



74 



i M\ l H 1\ | . 









ultu rr ( 



lS k >h 



11 

At this point, it m.n be useful to look at the larger context ot the Philippine revo- 
lution, the vulture In I S l >o in terms ot the connection between material produc- 
tion and the product ion ot meaning including sv.Mem.s ot signification. It, as sug- 
gested In \\ illiams. culture is the “whole social process, we have a comprehensive 
term that ma\ account toi the development ot social consciousness integral to 
the nationalist idcologv oi aconsoousiiessot the natives as a class (or classes) and 
as nation. I Ins emergent idcologv and culture. In no means homogeneous, would 
challenge the dominant idcologv and culture ot the colonizers. 

I lie dominant idcologv and c ultu re was feudal and theocratic. I he relations 
of material production involved hit; small landlords and haciendas owned bv the 
religious orders, tenants and (those who leased lands trom the friar ha- 

ciendas or big landlords). I he big nnjtt:Inio< like the l\i/al taniilv had tenants work- 
ing the leased lands. \gumaldo belonged to the itujuilino class in hacienda-domi- 
nated ( avite w hose //><///</, as in other provinces, were mostlv itujtulmos and 

held positions like mimic i pa 1 captains or Ctibc^is. 1 hose who led the C avite revolt 
in t he various tow ns, \ lagdalo or \ Pigdivv ang, were in these positions. In Imus and 
Kawit the* leading; I reemasoiis (largclv principitlcs) later became the officers ot the 
Mai;dalo C 'ounc il of the katipunan. 

In Manila there had grown a si/cable working; class since factories and com- 
mercial establishments cropped up as a result ot trade expansion during; the latter 
part of the l l )th centurv. Bonifacio, a school dropout, held a number ot jobs in- 
cluding; as a worker in a printing; shop, and rose to become a supervisor ot a tor- 
eign-owned warehouse. In the Katipunan there were some ilnsrnit/os in the 
Katipunan like Dr. Pio Valenzuela and l niilio Jacinto and members ot th c prnici- 
palia like those in C av ite and Bulacan, but most members were plebeian, worker 
and peasant. Membership rose to an estimated 30,000 by 1800. 

In C 'avite, the patron-client relationship in the initially successful conduct ot 
the war against Spain was evident, for most of the top Katipunan leaders were 
municipal captains and landowners or inquilino s, with constituencies among; the 
masses. Thus the organization of the ( av ite revolt was relatively easy; there was co- 
ordination among; the municipal captains w ho led the uprisings in their respective 
towns, hornier Imus C lobcrnadorcillo Picerio lopacio, tor one, could issue, as 
Ministre cle bomento (Director of Production) ot the Magdalo revolutionary gov- 
ernment, directives to other municipal captains on urgent matters such as financial 
contributions for the revolution. “ 

With the general outbreak of the 18% Revolution the other provincial elites 
played leading roles. I his was expected in a colonial and feudal society where the 
classes just below those of the rulers were interested in supplanting the national 
and local authorities. Phe constituents of the landed principalia were the tenants or 
kasama whose utatig na loob compelled them to follow their superiors in their en- 






mi milllTINI RIVOII I IMS' \M> IU *e v.: . 

terprise. This is not to say that many of the followers did not kn t dies were 

fighting for. 

That a substantial number of the foot soldiers among the p 
ucd the struggle after their principal and iliotradn leaders and <»m -is decided to 
stop fighting is attributed to the other ideology and culture based •: notions ot 

kalayaan, social justice and hump Hay an (Mother couriers I lere where asser- 

tions of betrayal of the masses bv the elite leadership find fertile ground 

III 

How did revolutionary ideas, i.e. ideas of radical social change come about in the 
period prior to the 1896 uprising? These radical ideas rna\ be divided into those 
emanating from the emergent ilustrarln class, and those deiised from the popular 
consciousness manifested in the common tans reading of the- an :t ami the pa>ynn. 

Speaking of t he first reform movement led bv the- I il ipi no c let g \ . ( esat \ lajul 
secs the execution of three Filipino priests on I lebniar\ IS d as 1 1 1 c -beginning of 
the rise of Philippine nationalism, hr. Jose Burgos, one of the* three mam i priests, 
was quite vocal about the issue of seculari/at ion and I ilipim/ation of the* parish 
clergy. Unquestionably, friar domination or “ wbcrtima )wninait as MI I del Pilar 
described it, was at the root of this conflict , which assumed mote than a racial or 
parochial character. 

In a letter to a Madrid newspaper La Discusinn in answer to 1 i. loaquin cle 
Corias severe criticism of the mainly native secular clergy of the- Philippines, hr. 
Burgos wrote that the history of revolts showed that all uprisings (except tot one in 
Novales) took place in the parishes of the regular clergy or friar priests from the 
religious orders — suggesting pent-up grievances of the* nulin \ oppressed bv the fri- 
ars. I<; 

hr. Burgos was among the first to criticize openly the religious orders, noting 
that they have the largest parishes, the best country houses, and the most com- 
fortable and spacious houses of this capital, and accusing them of “spreading 
rumours of attempted revolts” which always coincided “with the questions of re- 
form of the parishes. I here is the suggestion here that the f riars manufactured 
these rumors when secular priests became vocal in their desire for parochial re- 
forms. 

In his “Manifesto addressed by the loyal Filipinos to the noble Spanish na- 
tion,” Fr. Burgos identified his people as “Filipinos” (a term derisively used by the 
peninsulares or Iberian-born Spaniards on the iusuLircs or Pilipinas-born Span- 
iards). I he new meaning of the term Filipino to apply to the “ mchos or natives 
“began to enter common usage... in the patriotic and reform literature.” 1 

I he archbishop of Manila reported to Spain that the feeling of native priests 
against the friar orders were “now taking on an anti-Spanish character.”" He 
warned that the resentments of the priests would spread “to their parents, relatives, 
and to the whole Filipino people. ” M 



76 



* 'KIH '\i / Rrioius ; t »r i :r<-./ /«S*96 

It. Burgos led the formation of a Momitede Reformadores ' to seek equality 
in law aiul u\ tl aiul political rights uiuler the 1 80S Spanish C onstitution. 1 he 
(Somite put out a paper in Madrid, / / hco MituLis w hich countered the triar pub- 
lication. I <1 l cuLui. whose attach on the Filipino clergy had been answered by Bur- 
nos m I S ( > i . I he t omite s vomij: members from the l Diversity of Santo lomas 
assisted m circulating / . / <o \UiuiLi and formed / juvciitud bscoLir l tbn\il (l ib- 
eral Student Vmth). 

Spanish liber a Is in Manila, part lcularly the C reoles (wsi<l*nrs). who felt them- 
selves discriminated against in favor of the pefunsu Lnrs in terms of positions, made 
common cause with the Filipino reformists: the gobc'nhuiorctllos principiiL'* and 
leading natives and ( hincse ftu'sttzvs ol the lower middle and middle classes also 
joined in peaceful demonstrations such as a parade and serenade for the liberal 
Ciovcrnor dc la lone. But 1 \* la lone \ added to the friars and the pt f fiifisuLn'c> 
demand tor the repression ot the reform movement, counseling Madrid against 
implementation ot laws on secularization of friars and nuns, as well as that on the 
abolition ot the triar orders properties. 

I )c la I ones successor, Ciovcrnor Ratacl dc' l/c]iiierdo, would cam out the 
full suppression ot ihc first rc'torm movement, using the C. avitc* Mutmv (an upns- 
ini; ot some 28() native* soldiers and arse'nal workers m IS -3 as the* pictcxt. On 
trumped - up c barges ot complicate in the uprising, three priests were garroted: hun- 
d reds were* i m prison ed and e'\i le'd . A reign ot terror crippled the re'toi m movement. 

I he martyrdom ot the three* priests would later inspire* the ne*\t se*t ot tctoi mists 
who would launch the* Propaganda Movement. 

IV 

The period between island the outbreak of the 18% Revolution saw the devel- 
opment and coming of a^c ot the* ilusn\ulos who vve'ie* the* beneficial ics ot the 
educational reforms of 1 8(>3 and exponents of liberalism brought horn l.uiopc bv 
Spaniards themselves and returning Filipino students. 

What were the features of the educational reforms? 1 he royal electee on eeiu- 
cation, dated 20 1 December 1 863, was issued on the ground that there was no orga- 
nized primary school svstem and that Filipinos were ignorant m Spanish. In its 
justification, the elccrcc cited a “remarkable condition of impel fection and back 
ward ness in the propagation of the most elementary ideas of education. 

While primary schools were to be established in all the pueblos or towns with 
compulsory attendance for the pupils and Sunday schools for the adults, the palish 
priest was the ex-officio inspector of schools in every pueblo. Schooling was not 
free except those “whose parents are not known to be wealth)'. Ieachers and the it 
assistants were exempted from the polos o r forced labor and were able to aspite after 
years of service to prnicipidia status. Fifteen years after the establishment of a school 
in a pueblo, no native could be a member of the pruicipolui unless he could read, 
write, and speak the Spanish language.'" 



III! 1*1 ill 1 1*1*1 N I R1 V< >1 l IK >\ \M ) Kl *n >'•: * 

I Respite the apparent secularization of the schools, t r i .i r .niitm’ < »r iiu anon 
was assured since he inspected the schools and enforced the mi. I* Sos. A n c *u 
order was issued banning the use of all publications in the native lain: veepi 

prayer books and other religious material like the pit yon \«» nat .mgii.inc 
textbooks could be used in schools. 

Somehow, the educational reform produced graduates and opened the doors 
of higher institutions of learning to many natives and mestizo I he\ , ould now 
study law, medicine, or pharmacy. Many young men from prosperous ( hinese 
mestizo and native families studied in Manila. \\ call hie i familie s sent their sons to 
Spain. 

Constantino saw the cultural merger of these two sectors the < hinese >ne> 
tizo and the native); their economic status assured them social and politu.il influ- 
ence. “Eventually they became the disseminators of Spanish culture and ot liberal 
thought. 

I he ilustrados were in a position to art i c ulate for the people as a w hole those 
resentments that had motivated their centuries of struggle . \s wnters the\ knew 
the power of printed knowledge. I hey created the outlets pamphlet s «>i journals 
like hi Eco Manila or La SolirlarifLul. I hey made use of the aits hteiatuie Ei/als 
novels) and painting (Elina and Midalgo) and music ( |ulm Nakpili n> e xpress 
I i 1 i pi no sentiments. I hey formed associations and wrote petitions. I he\ raised 
funds for the Propaganda Movement and enlisted foreign suppoii. 

As Constantino points out, I he interaction between liberal ideas tn>m the 
continent and the growing ambitions of the rising c lasses plus t he- expei u ik es of 
the masses in struggle contributed to the emergence of a nation with using expec- 
tations and common grievances. 

I here is another reality that deserves mention. I his is the nature of’ social 
relations among the colonized. It has been pointed out that a good number of* the 
principalia and the rising economic elite (particularlv the mestizo) the sectors 
from which the ilustraclo came from — were invoked in the exploitation of the 
masses. I he Sarrat Revolt of 1815 was against the rich prineipalia w ho cheated the 
poor Ilocano weavers by claiming inferior quality and reducing pavment of' the 
woven cloth 

I he mestizo traders acquired lands for cheap through the juteto de rctroventiU 
or contract by which the borrower gave his land to the lender (the trader) with the 
condition that he could repurchase it for the same amount of money that he bad 
received (usually one third of the lands market value). In practice the borrower 
who had become the tenant or lessee of the lender could not raise the amount to 
exercise the option to repurchase. Thousands of small landowners lost their lands 
in this way/ 6 

Various land laws, particularly those of 1 880 and I 804, enabled those cogni- 
zant of the laws to expand and consolidate their landholdings in effect through 
land-grabbing. The Maura Law of 1804 gave only one year for landholders to se- 
cure legal titles to their lands. After the deadlines, untitled lands were considered 

78 



i >KlM'\i , A V: n .;/;//( ulttnr ( :i\\j IS^O 

forfeited. Main small landow tiers did not even know that such laws (roval decrees) 
existed. \n estimated *00.000 ot them lost their lands because thev tailed to ac- 
quire title to them. I hc\ found their lands included in the titles of big landowners 
including friar h.u lendas. and //;«/. The small landowners were re- 

duced to the status of tenants. 

I lowcvcr. dining the intellectual ferment and social unrest characterizing the 
period between IS 1 and the outbreak o t the revolution, the sons of the native 
principiilhi and motuo elite did [Participate in the movement tor political it not 
social change which the Spanish friars branded as filtbustcrismo. The ilustrados 
begun as assimilat lomsts invoking the 1 S 1 2 C adiz C onstitution, w hich provided 
for representation ot the subject colonies in the Spanish parliament. Abroad thev 
organized themselves into a I ilipino association, appropriating tor themselves the 
name “Filipino that Burgos ulrcadv used to appl\ to the native priests, lose Rizal 
was acknowledged as their leader he who had alreadv written the first social-real- 
ist novels, the A 'oh and the /•;/;, exposing the social malaise in the count rv. Rizal 
stood out among the voting [propagandists as having “the larger and loftier na- 
tional vision. 

I hough t hev w ere derided as nu/ios (hence they called themselves Indios Bra- 
vos) and mistaken for C hinese or lapanese bv huropeans, thev asserted themselves 
as equals with the westerners. I hev were reformist but in the context ot the times 
thev were revolut ionarv in challenging the feudal and theocratic establishment. 

I lowcvcr, the definitive idea ot separation or hu/cprm/rndti) would come 

not from the i/nsmulo ranks but from the mass-based Katipunan, many ot whose 
members did not have the [privilege ot schooling in the universities ot Manila and 
Iuirope. 

Andres Bonifacio would exemplifv the new breed ot revolutionary. A school 
dropout who had to work to support his brothers and sisters, he read the writings 
of the Propaganda Movement, the novels of Ri/ak as well as books about the 
French and American revolutions. I le wrote not in Spanish as the ilu<n\uios usually 
did but in a native lamiuatie, Iagalog. 

I alter Bonifacio would get the intellectual support ot a young prelaw student, 
Funilio Jacinto, who would write the Katipunan primer or kiirtilyiL the teachings 
of the secret societv. Bonifacio, it is said, withdrew his own version “in recognition 
of Jacinto’s superior expression." ' I he primer was in Fagalog. So was the language 
of the Katipunan that Bonifacio founded after Rizal was banished to Dapitan fol- 
lowing the establishment of Fa Figa Filipina. By then Rizal had already disengaged 
himself from l.ii SoluLiruLul in Barcelona — which he felt had limited use because 
of its distance from the home front where he now wanted the struggle to be waged. 

Rizal wanted to trv a new form of struggle because “he believed that the SOFs 
reformist campaign was a failure."* 0 While in Hong Kong before returning to the 
Philippines, he drafted the statutes of Fa Figa Filipina and sent them to a compa- 
triot (( )njungco) in Tondo. I le also circulated in the Philippines a handbill printed 
in both Fagalog and Spanish, titled “Ang Mga Karapatan ng Fao, a translation of 



mi mu ii'piNf kiaoii ii< )N \m> m 

the French “Declaration of the Rights of Man’ of 1 SO str.u ;h: :n>: *u d<KU- 

ments of the French revolution. The authorities saw right av.,r. connection 
between the Piga and the revolutionary document, and forthw nh hrar.iied the I iga 
as a revolutionary society.* 

After trying out propaganda work which he thought v. .is n«» i»*n : effective. 
Rizal wanted to do organizing work through the I iga Reside s scckim; national 
unity and providing “mutual protection of its members in a regime that gave 
them neither protection nor aid, the I iga would create peoples councils m the 
pueblos or districts. I his gave a popular ba.se for the I iga partu ularK when Boni- 
facio recruited plebeian members of the counc ils, nun from his home disttic ts of 
rondo and Irozo, fellow Katipuneros. As a result, the supreme c omu d ot the I iga. 
now headed by Deodato Arellano, “got cold feet and c|uickl\ dissoUed tlu society, 
in fear of discovery by the authorities. 

By then the Katipunan was already in place though it did m >t <o» *w lapnlb m 
the first two years because of the reformist leadership unde i \rel I a no. a member of 
the Propaganda Committee that subsidi/cd l.ti ^nluLn 'teLul. Arellano was earlier 
horrified by the entry of Bonifacio's plebeians in the- I igas rolls, \idl.mo did not 
pursue earnestly the expansion of the secret soc iety t hat w as plebeian < >t pn >letar i.m 
in character. However, Bonifacio devoted himself to full tune organizing from 
1894 to 1895, going into the pueblos and gaining adherents until he* became the 
Katipunan Supremo in December 1895. 

I he Katipunan broadened its membership. I.milio Agumahlo, the Munici- 
pal Captain of Kawit and a freemason (Pilar Podge in I mus) u.is ac c < >m pan reel bv 
Santiago Alvarez to Manila to be sworn in as a Katipunem. In turn Agmnaldo 
would recruit his brother Masons and other ( .aviteho />;///< i/uilcs tot he Kat ipunan. 
Pio Valenzuela, a medical doctor, was a prominent Katipunero (who together with 
Bonifacio and Jacinto constituted the Secret Chamber); be was tasked to seek 
counsel from Rizal in Dapitan on the idea of an armed uprising.' 

Much has been said about the vacillations of Rizal vis-ii-ris the resolution, 
particularly in his manifesto of 15 December 1896, two weeks before Ins execu- 
tion, when he disowned any role in the outbreak of August, calling it highly ab- 
surd and plotted behind my back, which dishonors the Pilipinos." I le called on 
the rebels: Co back then, to your homes, and may ( iod pardon those who acted in 
bad faith. “ Agoncillo saw Rizal as basically a defender of “upper class interests," 
the interests of “the class to which he belonged." ’ 

On the other hand, Corpuz believes that “it is more plausible to presume that 
Rizal only hoped to influence the newly arrived governor-general (Blanco), per- 
haps towards a more sympathetic disposition of the case of treason lodged against 
him.” 46 

Rizal s manifesto apparently had no effect on the revolutionaries, who re- 
garded Rizal in high esteem, a “national symbol." Aguinaldo and the generals in 
the field vowed reprisals after his execution on 30 December 1 896. The indepen- 
dence proclamation of 12 June 1898 in Kawit cited his “heroic martyrdom and 



80 



i >K1 H >\1 .* A'. : n !<iroh\'\ .;*;//( uiturr ( n\\l 1 A 96 

inspiring vision. 1 li\ death anmversarv would he commemorated in towns during 
the revolution and the Philippine \meriean War, even hy Aguinaldo while being 
pursued bv the \meruans until li i ^ capture in RH)1. later the Americans co- 
opted the veneration ot Ri/al m their own psy-war and pacification campaign. 

1 ’he like Ri/al aiul the Katipuneros like Bonifacio and Jacinto must 

share the red it lor art ic ulat mg the concept ot the Filipino nation on the eve ot the 
revolution. I atcr. others. notabU Pmilio Aguinaldo, Ambrosio Rian/ares Bautista, 
Apolinario Mabini. \urcho lolentino and the other so-called seditious play- 
wrights, and the stall of / </ hi({c'pc m ud<'Wi'i*i *w\i\ l'! Roitict nuento would contribute to 
this artic ulat ion. 

C orpu/ savs that the concept ot a nation transcending geographical and eth- 
nohnuuistK boundaries was mttiallv developed b\* students m X lamia and latci b\ 
its “more developed counterpart . . . in the l ilipino colony in hurope, made up o* 
voting men coming from the various regions back home such as Craciano l ope/ 
Jaena from Iloilo. the 1 unas from llocos, lomas Areiola trom Bicol, and Julio 
I lorente f rom C elm. 1 low ev er, thev came trom only one social class, the tlustnuio. 
and were not representative ot all the classes m bilipmo society. 

| he Katipunan, on the other hand, had commoners trom the uiban and ru- 
ral pueblos as well as some of the principalis like those in C avite. C orpu/ sees the 
Katipunan as the “first concrete embodiment of the Christian Filipino nation, 
composed of Filipinos from the various social classes and geographical regions and 
ethnolmguistic groups associated m one union. 1 he lebellion that the Katipunan 
would ignite would be the first Filipino rebellion. s Bonifacio, Jacinto, and other 
Katipunan writers expressed in more popular language and meanings tlu ievolu- 
tionarv aspirations of the people. 

In time the ilmtrados in F.urope would join the armed struggle. Some ot them 
became generals of the revolution Fdilberto Fvangelista, Jose Alejandrmo, Anto- 
nio lama, Teodoro Sandiko, Fernando Canon, and Julio 1 lorente. Many served m 
the Malolos Congress and the cabinet of the first republic. 

What some of the ilustrados later did during the Philippine-Amerkan War 
when the tide of battle turned perhaps savs something about the nature ot that 
class. In no time Hustrndo members of the Malolos Congress began to collaborate 
with the new colonial power. 1 he Federalista Party, formed in 1 C H)0, when the vvai 
was still going on, is a case in point. Hven the Philippine Assembly ot RHC, made 
up mostly of Nacionalistas who won cm the platform of absolute and immediate 
independence, were to be co-opted into the new colonial buicaucracv. 

It has also been noted that the revolution shifted from the plebeian or prole- 
tarian leadership of Bonifacio to that of the landowning elite led by a pumipaL 
Aguinaldo. As head of the Magdalo revolutionary government in Cavite, Agu- 
inaldo issued a manifesto in October ltS c )6 addressed to the Filipino people, justi- 
fying the revolution as founded on justice and right as show'll by all civilized na- 
tions/’ He called on the “Citizens of Pilipinas and refuted the Spanish argument 
that the Filipinos were ungrateful bv citing the Spanish contribution but regarding 

81 



k 



I HI I’M 1 1 1 1*1*1 N I HI V< >1 I I ION \N I » It I 1 1 ; 

it from the perspective of time and condition t < » which the I limit ,.id been re- 
duced over the centuries. Aguinaldo acknowledged the elfotts • i .f.’.uuiiNt >. 
the 'handful of hi I i pi nos, who merely on act. •unit ol their mi , : , i: . noVk v u . 

tims of persecutions by the government. 

rhis manifesto was issued at a time when K.itipiin.m resolution. mes m t is 
ite were winning battles against the Spaniards atul did so Irom s. : - ; v i hl(l 

February I 897 until the tumultuous 'lejeros < onsentioti which h-.i ; j K - u 

tion of Bonifacio. I his weakened the resolution atul Agum.ihh > ss .is t, «*mc 

to terms with the Spaniards in Biak-na-Bato and go into .,ii ; | |y t : n i 

however, Aguinaldo shifted from the essenti. ills retormist demands m tin t \ i«»ber 
I 896 manifesto to clearly separatist aims m the prosismn.il constitution .»t the 
“Republic of the Philippines. After six months m I long Kong f u t ct ui tied to t he 
Philippines in May 1898 under the aegis of the l s. Nas s. I le pro, i.mned IMulip- 
pine independence on 12 June 1898 tinder the [iron s (mn of tlu \ 1 1 ; • h t \ and I hi 
mane North American Nation. 

It is said that Aguinaldo was then advised in his puhln statements In •- 

clos like Ambrosio Rian/ares Bautista, thus accounting lot the manifestations of 
mendicancy. Apolinario Mahini svould ensure, sshen he became \,. mn dilo’s 
adviser, that there svould he no more references to the gnat \tnetic.in n uion m 
Aguinaldo’s subsequent proclamations. 

V 

I he revolutionary ideology and culture of the masses in the I 8‘H, Resolution or 
what Ileto calls "the largely rural or uneducated Filipinos svlm const nine the 
revolutions mass base — may he deduced from studies that focus on the I itter's 
perceptions of the situations in the I 9th century, thecpiasi religious language used 
the emblems and symbols “that often tools on a magical significance to the 
masses.” 

While David Sturtevant tries to show the conditions of rural life as influenc- 
ing the “masses' style of action,” Ileto sees the relationship between the conditions 
and the “style of action” as not “deterministic.” In other words, the ideology and 
culture of the masses, as “superstructure” in Marx's terms, has “some autonomy 
relative to the material life’” (or economic conditions) of the masses. As Ileto 
points out, “in early revolts. . . certain types of behavior often regarded as fanatic tl 
irrational, or even ’feudal’ can be interpreted as peasant attempts to restructure the 
world in terms of ideal social forms and modes of behavior. ” 

Ileto rejects the model of Philippine soc iety as pat ron-c I lent -oriented 
“wherein the patrons or elites are the source not only of money and taxors but of 
‘culture’ as well,” that is to say, the educated elite (the ilustuido) are the articulators 
of Filipino values and aspirations while the masses are regarded as passive accep- 
tors of change. ” 1 



82 



I >K i K >\| . 



Ideology and ( u/runr ( V/va / cS'96 



I his model or assumption about Philippine society, to Ueto, has led to il us- 
trado- based accounts of the 1 Revolution, with the elite leading the masses in 
overthrowing the Spanish colonial government. Ueto also cites the tvpe ot available 
documentation, sources that are produced in an elite-dominated culture — pub- 
lished articles, journals, books, proceedings or minutes ot meetings, lists ot del- 
egates, diaries, notebooks, manifestos, letters, etc. — that project a print-oriented 
and ultimately dominant class biased picture of the 18^0 Revolution. (Generally, 
historians do not consider serioush am account not based on written or printed 
documents. 

| he alternative sources tor a “history from below, as Ueto points out, would 
have to include poems, songs, folk savings, testimonial writing like autobiogra- 
phies and confessions, interviews, praver books, folk sayings, and a good deal ot 
oral literature. Some of these are utilized bv historians "only in so tar as they lent 
themselves to the culling of facts or the* reconstruction ot events. 

1 low the pa>\on as an example ot the religious literature during the Spanish 
period became a vehicle for the revolutionary ideology of the masses is the notable 
contribution of Uetos study. I 'hat Bonifacio was able to internalize the potentials 
of a traditional or indigenized cultural form to arouse popular sentiment and to 
actually use it in both structure and content for his manifesto "What lagalogs 
Should know’’ demarcates him from the republican or western-influenced decla- 
rations and "stvle of action of the dustrado or pritu 'ipal leader of the revolution. 



VI 

The revolutionary ideology and culture in 18% was thus twofold: that of the dus- 
trado and priucipalia, and that of the masses. 1 his differentiation does not imply 
mutually exclusive aims and d i reel ions at the' h istoncal j unc tui e, the' e\ en ts lc ading 
to the outbreak of the revolution. The general unity ot the two classes, forced if 
vou will, bv the exigencies of the times, enabled the spread of the revolution 
throughout the country, save for Muslim Mindanao. 

The divergence of the two ideologies and cultures is seen in the struggle tor 
power in Oavite, the perceived sellout in Biak-na-Bato, and the events following 
the capture of Aguinaldo and the end of the republic. 1 he dustrados or prnicipales 
were co-opted and assimilated in the ideology and culture ot the new colonial re- 
gime. On the other hand, Katipunan writers like Aurelio Iolentino would con- 
tinue the nationalist struggle through the writing and production of plays or 
zarzuelas , branded as seditious and resulting in the arrests of authors and casts. 
Other Katipuneros — Macario Sakav, Lucio San Miguel, Julian Montalan, and Ar- 
temio Ricarte — continued to be active in the guerrilla resistance and would be 
branded bandoleros ox bandits by the authorities, now including the co-opted ilus- 
trados and prnicipalia . 

The mass-based ideology of the Katipunan may well be the precursor of the 
working-class or socialist ideology that would be introduced by ilustrados caught 

83 






I Hi. PHli II’IMNI Rl VOU IK »N \M > HI 'i > ■ 

in Spain during the 1896 Revolution. ( )ne was Isahelo de los Re>. e v.iimc m-;nis 
onment in a Barcelona prison brought him in mnt.it. t v. uh i.uled .mate iusts. radi- 
cal syndicalists, and social extremists' Who taught him his first lessons on the class 
struggle, socialism, communism. I le and I lomni.ulm < .omez on their return to 
the Philippines became active in the trade union movement duim the earls sears 
of American occupation. ( )n 1 May 1 903. an estimated lOH.OUU 1 rh;>mo workers 
marched to Malacahang; their slogans stated that the workers struggle . ould not he 
separated from the struggle for the liberation of the motherland from Xniertcan 
imperialism. 

By 1930 the proletarian ideology svas consolnlated in a < ornmunist Puts 
that continued the nationalist struggle against l \S. hegemons landlordism and 
elite collaboration with the American rulers as well as the ssorkets stru«>gle I he 
peasants were organized by the rural-based Socialist Pans I he ssorkets ami , s . 
ants would form an alliance with the merger of the < ornmunist and So, edict pi- 
ties in the 1 930s. 

A study has shown that within the socialist movement there ssas a melding of 
the people’s tradition, including the Katipunan spirit ssuh rad, cal soc lalisni. '"ex- 
pressing an emergent ideo logs' and culture. The svorkers and peasants sseie p,,|jti- 
ci zed by a literary piece titled “Pasion ding I alapagobra ( Pass on of tin- WnikcrO " 
I he “red pasyon of the peasant rebels in Pampanga as well as tl u res olut lonarv 
“ composo" ' of the organized sugar svorkers in Negros are examples of boss u idi- 
tional cultural forms are appropriated for the nationalist struggle-. 

I he failure of the I fuk rebellion led to the* tise < > f a ness mass moscmc-nt in 
the 1 960s and the reestablishment of the workers parts m | 9(g) ( onsidered the 
organizing primer of the new revolutionary struggle is Hull/ >/,,„<■ Society uui Revo - 
lution by Amado Guerrero who asserts that the 1896 Resolution ssas the first ni . 
tional democratic revolution, directed against colonialism and participated in bv 
the broad mass of the people, and that the second and ongoing national demo- 
cratic struggle is being waged under new material conditions and under proletar- 
ian leadership. 

I bus the spirit of the 1896 Revolution is kept alive by those who believe that 

the basic problems of Philippine society— particularly the land question have 

not been resolved. Remembering the nationalist and revolutionary ideals of the 
1 896 Revolution without the corresponding attempts to change exploitative soc i il 
relations that gave rise to the revolution in the first place would at best be involving 
oneself in curatorship — preserving the ideals in a museum of the past with no rel- 
evance to the present. 



Notes 

1. Renato Constantino, Ihe Philippines: A Past Revisited, 19T, p. l-p). 

2. Raymond Williams, keywords: A Vocabulary of ( atlture aiul Society, London, 1 9~’(->, p. 
1 56. 



84 






V >Kl n >\l . AV: <u::on.sn Ideology ,snd ( uhurr ( :n\t IS VO 

3. Xmonio ( .r.imsv i s /*> von .is cited in ( olutnhu Dictionary of Modern I. iter- 

,/ry ,;/;// ( u.tur.i. ( ritnvw New V>rh. POS, p. 250. 

•I. Ibid.. p. 00. 

5. l : ne\elopcdm of ( onteoipor.m literary theory. loronto. PTX pp. 3 t-35. 

6. Ihul. 

( {. Revnaldo Ileto. I\v\on .:nd Revolution. Quezon C itv. P^T 
«S. Ihul.. p. 

9. ( )notie I V C oipu/. /'/»e Root* o* the 1 iltpmo A. ///<>//. IK p. 2(h). 

10. ( I. Ke\ n.iLlo Ileto. op. v. n. 

1 1. ( t \m.ulo (metiero. Philippine Soeiety und Revolution. POT 

1 2. ( 'olumbta l >:enon.:n of Modern l iteniry und ( ritieul ( ritieism. pp. 09-00. 

1 y IVdro V \c luitemii. V|. .uul Miguel \. Bemad. S.J., Aguituldo and the Revolution of 
/tS’96. Quezon ( uv. 1 i)_ ~2. 

1-1. Ihul. 

1 5. Ileto. op. s it. 

10. ( Cesar Majid. / /v Pohtieul and ( oivtitutionu I ldeo> of the Philippine Revolution . Qu- 

e/on ( itv. 1 90 • 

1"\ Teculoro AiumkiIIo. lilipmo X.it:on.di>>n: ISM-l^lO. Manila. PM, pp. 9-t-OS. 

1 8. Ibid., [v l )S. 

1 0. Ihul. 

20. ( Corpuz. op. s n .. p. 

21. Ihul. 

22. The priest members ol the (Somite included Mariano home/, Jacinto Zamora, and 
lose Burgos as then leader. The lav memhers were Amhrosio Rian/ares Bautista (said 
to he the author of the Raw it declaration of independence read hy Aguinaldo on 1- 
(line I (SOS), |o.u]iiin Pardo de lavera, Maximo Paterno, Jose Maria hasa, hnrique 
Paraiso, Manuel Natividad, Alltel C larchitorena, Jose Cion/ales, hsquivel de hsquivel, 
Martin de Alpa, Manuel C ienato, lose Bonifacio Roxas, Andres Ciarchitorena, hruto 
Maniquis, and \ icenie Salcedo. Ihul., p. 5. 

23. I'he youth memhers included Sansian^co v Cioson, Paciano Ri/.al (his brother Jose 
was then eipju vears old), Ciiet;orio \lapa, Bernahe \ ictonno, hlorentino \ lllarucl, 

I Iermogenes del Rosario, hduardo Milliards, Manuel de 1 eon, and Basilio leodoro. 
Three voting priests w ere also memhers: X . C anda, Agustin hstrella, and Juan Aniag. 

Ibid., pp. 5-0. 

24. Ibid., p. IS. 

25. Ibid., pp. 1 6- 1 T 

26. ( Constantino, op cit., p. 21. 

27. C Corpuz, op. cit., I, p. P9. 

28. Ibid., p. 500. 

29. Ibid., p. 501. 

30. ( Constantino, op. cit., p. 1 2T 

31. Ibid. 

32. Ibid. 

85 






i m mu ii'i’iNf u\ M hi 



33. Ibid. 

34. Ibid. 

35. Ibid. 

36. Ibid. 

37. Corpuz, op. cit.. II. p. 31 V 

38. Ibid., p. 21 1. 

39. Ibid., [x 209. 

40. Ibid., p. 2 1 1 . 

41. Ibid., p. 213. 

42. Ibid., p. 20 1 . 

43. Ibid. 

44. Ibid., pp. 202-203. 

45. Ibid., pp. 221-223. 

46. Ibid., p. 226. 

47. Ibid., p. 230. 

48. Ibid., II, p. 21 1. 

49. Constantino, op. ur.. p. 208. 

50. Ileto, op. ur., p. 5. 

5 1 . Ibid., p. 8. 

52. Ibid. 

53. Ibid., p. 1 0. 

54. Ibid. 

55. Ibid. 

56. Nod V. Icodoro, Radical Philippine I it era run*. 190 19 Vj m Xatnninlvt l item- 

ture, cd. by hlmer A. ( )rdonez (Que/on ( 1 1 \ . 1 990 i.p. S-i. 

57. Ibid., p. 55. 

">8. Jeresita Cimene/.-Maceda, 7\ng Pagsamh ng Iradisvon ar R.ulikal ismo s .j Sosialis- 
tang Partido ng Pilipinas, l )ilnnan Review. \ 61. VS. NO. 1 ( 199m, ^ 1 op 
59. I 'or the st lid V' of the composo, see Rosa no ( ru/ I ik ems Ph . 1 ) thesis (l n i \ ersi t v ot 
the Philippines, 1988) on peoples theater in \ egr< >s. 

Bibliography 

Achutegui, Pedro S. S.J. and Miguel A. Bemad, S.J. Agn t nah/o t ind the Revolution of IS 96: 
A Documentary History. Quezon ( a tv: Ateneo de Manila, 19 ""2. 

Agoncillo, leodoro A. hilipino Nationalism. Quezon ( .itv: R.P. ( iui\ia Publishing, 19"M. 

. The Revolt of the Masses. Quezon ( .itv: l niversitv of the Philippines. 1936. 

Bernad, Miguel A. S.J. M he Birth of Pilipino Nationalism, Philippine (Irtiphic Weekly 
Magazine ( 1 7 June 1996), 22-23. 

Childers, Joseph and ( iary Hentzi. Columbia University of Modern l iterary iind C ultural 
Criticism. New York: (Columbia University Press, 1995. 

Constantino, Renato. I he Philippines Revisited: A Past Revisited. Quezon Ciiv: ’lala Pub- 
lishing, 1975. 



86 



OR PONT/ Revolutionary Ideology and Culture Circa 1896 



Constantino, Rcnato and Lcti/ia R. C onstantino. The Philippines; The Continuing Past 
Quezon C ity: Lhc Foundation tor Nationalist Studies, 19^8. 

Corpuz, Onotrc D. “ lhc Formation ot the Filipino Nation.” The Search for Historical Truth* 
cd. hv I cslic I . Bauzon. Quezon City: Philippine National Historical Society, 1992. 

The Roots of the Filipino Nation. Yols. 1-11. Quezon City: Aklahi Foundation, 

1989. 

Sturtevant, David R. Popular l p risings in the Philippines 1840-1940. Ithaca and London: 
Oxford l niversity Press. 19"~6. 

Guerrero, Amado. Philippine Society and Retvlution. Manila: Tala Publishing, 19”"0. 

Guerrero. Milai;ros C Immanuel N. 1 ncarnacion, and Ramon N. \ illegas, “Andres Boni- 
facio and the 1896 Revolution. Suly.ip Kidtura\’o\. 1. No. I (1996), 3-12. 

Ileto, Rcvnaldo. Pas yon and Revolution: PoptiLir Movements in the Philippines. 1840-1910. 
Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 19“*9. 

Laui re I, Salvador 1 L. "One 1 lundred Nears of Philippine Nationalism,” Philippine Graphic 
(June IN 1990), 16- IN 

Maceda, Tcresita Gimcncz. "Ang Pagsanib ng lradisyon at Radikalismo sa Sosyalistang 
Partido ng Pilipinas,” Diliman Review, Yol. 38, No. 1 (1990), 8 1-61. 

Majul, Cesar A. The Political and Constitutional Ideas of the Philippine Revolution. Quezon 
Citv: Cnivcrsitv ot the Philippines Press, 196N 

Nationalist l iterature: A ( entennial Forum . ed. by blmcr A. Ordonez. Quezon City: Na- 
tional Commission lor Culture and the Arts/University ot the Philippines Press, 
1996. 

Ordonez, Llmcr A. “Prom Indio to Filipino: 1 he Lducation ot the Native, Education jbr 
Development Quarterly (June 1996), ""-14. 

Quaison, Seratin D. “ 1 he Revolutionary Ideals and Nationalism, Philippine Graphic (June 
17, 1896), 18-21. 

Schumacher, John N. The Making of a Nation. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University 
Press, 1991. 

Williams, Raymond, keywords: A \bcahtdary of Culture and Society London: Fontana Press, 
1976. 



Political Philosophy 
of the Philippine Revolution 



K.\l Al III A I III A KM > S< > K I \-.< > 
KAANAK 1896. V-anib. h 



W ith a deep sense of pride I join you today in sour clloit at evaluat- 
ing the historical facts and events vvhic h c ulnunated in t lie pun l.imat ion of 
the Philippine republic in 1 898, the first in Asia. W hat we ate 1 1 ying to ,u hieve at 
present is a step toward the fulfillment of the dreams of Apolinatio Mahini. the 
“brains” of the Philippine revolution, who said, " I 'he Malav Rase. though vilified 
and degraded, will one day join and hold high the ton. h of lihei tv and s is di/ation " 
I he Piiipinos were the first in Asia to achieve their independence after the 
early colonization of their country by the west. Spain d isi t >vered the I ’ll il ippines in 
1521, and by 1565 it was ready to occupy the art hipelago. 



It will be recalled that the Spanish explorers and colonizers svere alsvas s joined bv 
Catholic missionaries in their expeditions. Spain was then the most powerful 
champion of Catholicism in P.urope. The Spanish friars, in their zeal to convert 
the natives whom they found during these missions, taught them boss to read and 
write in the western way. The best of these students were accepted into the semi- 
naries they established. But with better education, the l ilipinos became ever watch- 
ful of the friars. I hey noticed that they took charge only of the choicest parishes in 
spite of the fact that the Council of Trent specifically objected to this practice. Phis 
was the beginning of the series of confrontations between the l ilipino ilmtrados 
and the friars, which became a feature of the Spanish regime in the islands. 



88 



Mil \RIO SOK1 \Ni > Politn.il Philosophy of the Philippine Revolution 



I hrouuh i I k* efforts of these friars, higher education started early in the Phil- 
ippines. I he l ’niversitv of Santo l’omas was founded by the Dominicans in lfrll. 
Nineteen vears later, the same order founded the C olegio de San Juan de 1 etran. 
But these institutions of higher learning were not for the native Pihpinos but tor 
the children of Spaniards and the wt'srws. 

It took almost a ccntun and a half before the ituitos* as the Spaniards called 
the 1 ilipmos, could enter the portals of these institutions. It had t o be no less than 
the minister of war and colonics in Spam who decreed that a universal system of 
primarv education be established and that the Spanish language be taught. A C om- 
mission on I ducat ion, which included the governor-general and the archbishop, 
was appointed. Provincial Boards, headed by the provincial friar superiors, were 
also organized. I he towns were to have a school tor boys and another tor girls. 1 he 
town friar was to serve as the* school inspector. Much as the tnais helped to imple- 
ment the educational decree of 18(0, thev knew that they no longci had the mo- 
nopolv of the Philippine educational system. 1 Icncc they gave these state schools 
onlv their halfhearted support . I p t o 1 SS(s, hilipmo families had to hire tutois to 
teach their children the ( \trtilLi . Although these primary schools were limited m 
what thev accomplished, the opening of the university and colleges to 1 ilipinos was 
a boon to the /;////^.' who were looked down upon by the friars. It is tiue that the 
humble children of laborers in remote pueblos were still neglected, but at least the 
sons of the well-to-do could study m the best colleges of Manila. 11 k Atciuo 
Municipal was established in 18(o, about a century after the Jesuits wete expelled 
from the Philippines in 1 6 k Ihe universities and colleges produced lawyers, 
medical doctors, teachers, pharmacists, botanists, journalists, surveyots, and men 
who could take charge of public affairs. I hey became the core of the intellectual 

hidios and the leaders of the lulipino people. 

Parents all over the archipelago worked hard to send their sons to the best 
schools in Manila, provincial, regional, anel language barriers weie bioken down. 
The students felt that thev belonged to one nation. They compared notes about 
the friars, how thev took charge of the tax lists, education, judicial) pioeeeelm^s, 
and about their avarice in collecting the best Philippine ait objects. 

Liberalism and Nationalism in the Philippines 

Two developments in Hurope affected the growth of Philippine nationalism. 1 he 
first was the overthrow in 1869 of Isabela II and the introduction of libcialism, the 
political philosophy of democracy. 1 he second was the opening of the Suez C,anal 
the following year. 

The Spaniards, tired of their governments broken promises, frequent consti 
tutional changes, the confusion brought about by ambitious friars and designing 
subalterns, overthrew Isabela II and established a liberal form of government. I his 
brought reforms, ineluding universal suffrage, liberty of conscience, fteedom of as 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI I 'I K >N AM > HI V< >N| > 



sociation, assembly, and the press. The administration appointed ( .trios dc la 
Torre, a liberal, as governor-general (1868-18~1 » of the Philippines \ true demo- 
crat, he treated the Filipinos as his equals, thus gaining their rcsix-ct. I V la Ibrrc 
met other liberal Spaniards exiled because of their liberal ideas M.il.uanang was 
opened to Filipinos and the intellectual clergy found ness hope for then demand to 
secularize the parishes. 

The opening of the Suez Canal shortened the trip from I utope to the Philip- 
pines. Philippine products could now compete favorably m F.uropean markets 
especially in Spain. Our farmers and entrepreneurs enjoyed unprecedented wealth 
Families in Manila, Bulacan, and Pampanga were able to send then sons f, n U J. 
vanccd education in Europe where they imbibed liberal ideas I hi.uirh their cor- 
respondence with their families and friends at home, thev inspired m them i \ c un 
ing for liberty. Masonry was also brought here and it bee aim a s elude of liberal- 
ism. 



In Spain, however, the pendulum swung once mote tow. ml autoct.ics 1 he 
friars became more visible once again, not only m the mother couture but also in 
the Philippines. After enjoying freedom, the Filipinos felt even mote n.-lub h 
nessed by the friars. 

A headlong collision occurred in 18~2. when the soldiets m t , UIU . (>n . 
most loyal to Spain, plotted to overthrow their colonial masters. | he ( or s ,] 
diers agreed with those of Manila to stage a revolt on the night of 20 |.,nuar\ ix~-* 
Rockets were to be fired within the walls of Manila, as a signal to ( 1U - soldi r • 

but the soldiers in Manila failed to do their part. Instead, firecrackers durum the 
fiesta in Sampaloc were mistaken as their signal by the ( avite troops. I wo hundred 
guar di as civil under Sergeant I.a Madrid attacked the garrison. Several Spmiirds 
were killed but reinforcements from Manila arrived on time and the rebellion w 
suppressed. 

I he Spanish friars took this opportunity to implicate the Filipino intellec- 
tual clergy who demanded secularization of parishes. They claimed that i E rm 
ciscan monk, Fr. Jose Burgos, had roused the people of ( iavite to rebel against 
Spain. Frs. Burgos, Pedro Carillo, Feliciano Gomez, Mariano ( iomez. and | .K in to 
Zamora were arrested. Distinguished men like Jose Maria Baca, Mario Inocencio 
and Crisanto de los Reyes were rounded up. A Council of War condemned Frs 
Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora to death, while the others were sentenced to impris- 
onment and exile. On 17 February 1892, the three priests were executed U,. , 

, t cccuikci n\ garrote 

at Bagumbayan (Luneta). All the accused professed innocence until the end The 
archbishop of Manila refused to defrock them. 

The Filipino students in Manila — the cream of Filipino intellectuals fol- 

lowed closely the trial of the three priests. Some witnessed the actual execution. All 
became conscious of the injustices committed against their countrymen Fhe Fili- 
pinos reacted as one in their sympathy for the priests. 

f he Spaniards thought that by obliterating the native intellectual opposition 
they could silence the people. Fhe period from 1872 to 1896 was, however, just 



90 



Mil \RIO SORI \Ni > Political Philosophy of the Philippine Rerolutton 



the lull before the storm. Undetected, the college students continued to communi- 
cate with each other. Ihev went home after graduation and zealously worked to 
alleviate the lot id their people. I hev defended them in the courts; thev wrote on 
church banalities; and much later they prepared troops for combat. They became 
more determined and more militant, and their nationalism supplanted the hope- 
lessness and darkness of 18^2. 

Ihe friars, however, continued their evil wavs. 1 hey titled the lands of the 
ignorant poor, registering them in the names of religious orders, bilipinos who 
cultivated land rented from the friars where charged more rent as their earnings 
increased. In one instance, the friars sued some Calamba farmers who refused to 
pav more rent. As expected, the Spaniards won the case. 1 hat was the Calamba 
land dispute of 188"). I he tenants, including members of the Rizal family, were 
violently ousted f rom their farms and driven from their homes, their furniture and 
other belongings thrown into the streets. 



The Propaganda Triumvirate 

Of the intellectuals who became reformists, some went to Spain for advanced edu- 
cation; others had to flee their homes to escape friar persecution. 1 he most capable 
of these propagandists were Craciano Lopez Jaena, Marcelo Hilario del Pilar, 
and Jose Ri/al. Thev became known as the Triumvirate for the Conipania 
Pros; resist a. 

All presented the plight of their countrymen, pointing to the friars as the 
main culprits for the suffering of their people. In the beginning all had the same 
demands: representation in the Spanish Cortes and respect for their liberties as a 
people. 

Lopez Jaena and His Quest for Assimilation of the Philippines by Spain 

Lopez Jaena was the f irst to arrive in Spain. He started his career for the priesthood 
in Iloilo. Due to his intimate knowledge of monastic life, he wrote Fray Bo tod, in- 
censing the friars who felt that the lecherous potbellied Pray Botod alluded to 
them. 

He wrote articles dealing with various aspects of Philippine life, particularly 
the intolerance and fanaticism of the friars. In 1889, he founded the fortnightly. 
La Solidaridad . ’ In its 17 February issue, Lopez Jaenas editorial stated 'that the 
purpose of their effort was to combat reaction, stop all retrogressive steps, and 
adopt liberal ideas for the greater cause of autonomy. 

The Philippines, he wrote, should be represented in the Spanish Cortes and 
the reformists should demand its assimilation into Spain. His country of 8 million 
people, he further stated, should not be the exclusive preserve of the friars. A great 
orator, he stressed that liberalism should seep down to the Spanish officials in 
Manila. 



91 



mi 1*1 111 Il’I’INI KI VOM I l< >N \N!>hl M >Nt • 



Del Pilar’s Attacks on Friar Abuses 

I he greater political thinker of the three propagandists is ofte n thought t,, be nd 
Pilar. Icodoro Agoncillos A Brief History <>f the :r- l g Piiar s 

writings against the Spanish friars as rid it. tile with bat l >ol wit. s|«u ; -.i w : ; h w i titer- 
ing satire. 

By participating in (lupin and speakmgat cockpits and t: sta iu made a di 
reel appeal to the masses. A fiery w riter in both I agali >g atul Spanish, he w as also a 
witty polemicist. I ike I .ope/ Jaetia. he considered flu spam h ft i.n : in . .hxt.u | t to 
good government in his country. I lis first etu ountei with them was due to an al 
tercation he had with the San Miguel parish priest in lsoo when he ie.;uested an 
explanation for the increase in haptisrn.il fees. I his let! to his suspension tiom the 
University of Santo lomas where he was ahout to •i.du.in (torn lus law coutse 
I he exile to ( main of his brother. It. loribio I lil.uio del Pilai. in the afteimath of 
the Cavite rebellion did not improve Ins impression <.t the trials | | u , ( >nun lus 
brother suffered and his subsequent deportation shortened his mothei s hu 

*<> fight effectively against corrupt officials. | )d IM.ii founded m 1 SS.’ m 
Manila a daily newspaper. I )utryonfc lilipiun. Ih edited the I a ; • . 1 1 » » . - section It 
lasted three months. I lc published a I agalog 1 1 ansl.it ion ■ >f Ki/al , a i tie U 1 v of 
Country.” 

I >el Pilar, due to his legal training, confined his wmmgs and speeches md 
even his actions to issues which he thought he could defend in e . mi t Ini NSS, he 
instigated the aihezas de hnrnupny of Malolos to resist a government oidci 
undue authority to Spanish curates to revise the tax lists. Iw<> tears late i. | u - per- 
suaded Manuel C Visostomo, goberttiulon llln of Malolos. to denounce la I cltpe 
Carcia, the town curate, who violated the government direcme piohilutmg the 
exposure of corpses in churches. In I H8C lie- also sided with names Rmondo 
against their priest, hr. I levia de C iampomanes, w ho disc i immatcd against 1 ilipi- 
nos, reserving the best pews of his church to the nicsti.as. 

tic prepared various manifestoes for the governor general and the queen re- 
gent of Spam, which agitated for the expulsion of the friars. ( )ne of these manifes- 
toes was that of] March 1888, when 800 people from Manila staged a public dem- 
onstration led by Doroteo Cortes against the friars, titled Mr./ / \'/rn hi 

Benin! Vtvn el lijercilo! huern Ins I -miles! 

Ihs versatility as a propagandist and Ins impassioned appeals and persuasive 
arguments made him the idol of the masses and the target of persec tit ion. I V C iarcia 
and his government spies implicated Del Pilar in certain alleged plots against 
Spam. A relative from Pampanga, I ibureio I lilario, heard of his impending arrest, 
and that evening Del Pilar left for Manila. Jose Anacleto Ramos succeeded in book- 
mg him that night on a ship bound for Spain. ( )n 2S ( Vtober I 888, he reluctantly 
c r iis wife and six children, the youngest of whom was then onlv one year and 
our months old, never to see them again. 



92 



HU \KIO M >RI \Ni > /*>/;;/*.;/ Philosophy of the Philippine Rnvlutton 



Del Pilar's / o> Fraillcs. AUrto, Paisano, Hibik ng Pilipinas, Hanggang Kailan 
l\i . and liayan^ lagalog were published by Ramos / a linprenta \neva . A Mason 
like del Pilar, Ramos assumed the name Socorro, and true to his name, his shop 
stored Del Pilar s pamphlets and copies of Pa Solularulad . 

Main historians claim that del Pilar was not a separatist but tor assimilation 
with Spam. Phis is due to his statement upon his arrival in Barcelona: “1 have come 
here not to fight the strong but to solicit reforms tor my country. 

After a brief sojourn m Barcelona, he moved to Madrid and edited lit S oi 
dandad. I le was the best journalist among the propagandists. I I is editorials casti- 
gated Spanish administrators. I hs writings were trank and to the point. Among his 
pamphlets w ere f\aiih*iif A</m. m w hich he defended through same lose Kazal s A oh 
Me Tant*crc against the attacks of It. Rodrigue/; Dasalnn at luksuhan , a mock 
praver booklet and catechism or parodies ridiculing friars, Pasiong Dapat IpagA/ay 
sa Paso n^ laon% IhibiiSti; and Sit got ng ksparia sa Hibik thing Filipinos, His pen 
names were Dolores Manapat, Siling 1 abuvo, Peping Dilat, Carmelo D.A. 
Murgos, and 1 A \ ( rame. 

In his la Sobrrania Monacal cn Pilipinas, w hich he w rote in bebruarv 1SS° 
in I long Kong en route to hurope, he presented a detailed indictment of the triars, 
describing their harmful activities against both church and state. He started his 
work with the blood compact between l ega/pi and Sikatuna in 1 ^( 0 , a token ot 
friendship and allegiance between both rulers. Hlipino nationalists considered the 
pact an agreement between equals. But the truth was that Sikatuna was a iikk 
tribal chief' and so the Spanish rights in the Philippines were granted by a local 
chief. Del Pilar added: “The time has passed without consolidating that fusion. It 
only strengthened Spain and force became the basis of the domination of 1 ilipmos 
by monasteries, which converted the Islands into a colony for Monastic exploita- 
tion.” The Philippines, he went on, “has no other aspiration but t o identify heisclt 
wholly with the Mother country and she proved this by sharing the blood of her 
sons for Spain throughout the centuries of her occupation. Since Spain has no de- 
sire to keep the friars herself', Del Pilar said, they should not leave the Philippines 
in their hands.” Then Del Pilar enumerated the friars' abuses, such as the control 
of provincial elections and municipal governments, their great say in public educa- 
tion, their power to procure administrative deportation. 

Del Pilar pointed out that the large estates were arbitrarily rented out at exor- 
bitant rates. 1 le also mentioned the large sums spent by the people on fiestas and 
novellas, fees collected bv them in excess of officially fixed rates and the traffic in 
scapulars, rosaries, and other pious objects, the method of giving the paiish piicsts 
a percentage of predicted revenues from ccduhi taxes rather than on actual taxes and 
the list of taxpayers remaining under their control. 

Del Pilar said that the friars in the 16th century refused episcopal jurisdic- 
tion and in the 18th centtirv opposed the establishment of training centets foi the 
native clergy. ( ontrarv to the provisions of the Council of lrent, the trial s kept fot 



THE PHILIPPINE REV( >1 1 'I K )N AM ) HI V» >M » 



themselves the choice parishes, reasoning that there were too main native secular 
priests. The secularization of parishes was a step that would have been g<> t >d not 
only for Filipinos hut also for Spain. Del Filar insisted that the Philippines should 
be closer to Spain. His specific demands included the secularization of parishes, 
the removal of the friars, representation in the Spanish ( ones, cqualus before the 
law, freedom of assembly, press and speech, ail amounting to a request tor assimi- 
lation with Spain. Spain, however, was too preoccupied with her own domestic 
problems to pay attention to the long-suffering Filipinos, Even the Spanish liberals 
with their great sympathy for the Filipinos could do no more 

Del Filar, like Lopez Jaena, failed in his demands tor reform; but he had m 
alternative in mind. Prior to his departure tor Spain, he had organized Dc 1 os 
Cinco, a secret subversive organization intended to overthrow Spam, lour Mansi i 
lawyers joined him in this plan; Sotcro Diurel of Batangas, lose Wr of ( a\ite (. Tr- 
ios Gatmaitan, and Liberate) Manuel, the last two from Bui. nan li would line 
attracted hundreds of followers were it not for I )el Filar's ones pec ted impending 
arrest and his subsequent escape to Spain in I B89. ( .overnoi General Ramon 
Blanco was right when he said that Del Filar was the most intelligent person the 
real soul of the separatists. 

Rizal’s Justification for Revolution 

I he third propagandist was Jose F. Rizal. If I )el Filar was the best political thinker 
of the Propaganda Movement, Rizal was the best political philosopher. 1 le exposed 
his people’s misery in his novels, Noli Me langerc and /:/ lilil/mtensmo. I lis c h ir ic- 
ters suffered in the hands of corrupt Spanish officials and unfeeling, powerful 
Spanish friars. 

Rizal was a multifaceted genius, an excellent ophthalmologist, poet, writer 
teacher, linguist, farmer, and surveyor who could have earned good monev if lie- 
had given priority to material things. But his greatest obsession was to alleviate the 
suffering of his people. 

He had two aims: to instill in Filipinos a sense of dignity and to appeal to 
Spain for the grant of certain human rights. To Rizal, freedom meant a condition 
under which man could have self-respect. He described man as basically good ca- 
pable of developing his intellectual and moral potential, with a material tendency 
toward progress and full development. He had a responsibility to develop the di- 
vine spark in his being with which ( iod had endowed him. 

Rizal’s philosophy of education of the masses was the centerpiece of his po- 
litical beliefs. Education, he said, was a tool against abuses. I le tried to inculcate 
civic consciousness in the Filipino people. In blaming the Spaniards for the repres- 
sion of his countrymen, he also pointed to the faults of the Filipinos which he said 
they acquired from the Spaniards. 

He described the relationship between the government and the people. He 
pointed out that the citizens have a responsibility to deserve liberty. They must be 



94 



Mil \ K 1 1 > SORIANO Pokin' jI Philosophy of the Philipp: no Revolution 



prepared to make sacrifices tor the country, to give up even their lives for its well- 
being. A good government, on the other hand, especiallv when there is unitv be- 
tween the government and the people, should reach out to the citizens. It the citi- 
zens were unconcerned, it was their fault it thev had bad rulers. 

Some authors claim that when Rizal founded the 1 iga Filipina, he was al- 
readv aware ot the futility of reforms through legal means. In 1842, he decided to 
organize this society to serve as a medium tor political education and tor the real- 
ization ot economic projects. One principle ot the l iga was that a citizen should 
never submit to humiliation or treat anyone with contempt; members were ex- 
horted to cooperate with each other. 1 ike Oel Pilar, Rizal knew that it the wishes ot 
the people were not granted, there would be a revolution. lie said: “We fight tor 
more justice, and tor more liberty, tor the sacred rights ot men. 

Some historians claim that Rizal was no revolutionary because when Bonifa- 
cio instructed Pio \ alenzuela to get his opinion on a plan tor the start ot the revo- 
lution, he rejected it: it was not timely and their chances ot victory were slim. But 
in a letter to Blumentritt he said: “1 assure vou that 1 have no desire to take part in 
conspiracies w hich seem to me too premature and riskv. But it the government 
drives us to that, that is to say, when no other hope remains tor us but to seek our 
destruction in war, when the Filipinos would prefer to die rather than endure 
longer their miseries, then 1 will also become a partisan to violent means. 

Rizal returned to the Philippines in (line 1842 to visit his family and to orga- 
nize Pa Riga Filipina. Unknown to him, however, he was followed during his visit 
to central Luzon by the Cuardia C ivil. L he homes ot the provincial leaders he vis- 
ited, were inspected and the pamphlets he had left behind confiscated. I he gover- 
nor-general decided to deport Rizal to napitan. On ’" July 1842, the very day when 
he was deported, the aggressive and fiercely nationalistic elements ot the popula- 
tion became more determined to proceed with their revolutionary plans. Andres 
Bonifacio, Padislao Diwa, and Peodoro Plata organized the Kataastaasan, 
Kagalanggalangan, Katipunan ng mga Anak ng Bavan. From this group a man ot 
the masses appeared on the political horizon: Andres Bonifacio. In the organiza- 
tion ot the Katipunan, he adopted a unit ot three men instead of the five which the 
De los (unco provided. Bonifacio was an excellent organizer and, above all, he 
knew when to strike. His armed rising was timelv: the Spaniards were not ready; all 
they had were 2,000 men from the Peninsula. With no formal education and the 
breadwinner at the age of 14 for his five orphaned brothers and sisters, he avidly 
read books, especially on the French revolution, which enabled him to stand up at 
the Tejeros Convention with dignity in spite ot insults hurled against him by the 
Aguinaldo camp. 

1 he objectives of the Katipunan were political, moral, and civic. Politically 
its plan was to separate the Philippines from Spain. Morally, its objectives revolved 
around the teaching of good manners, hygiene, and good conduct, and an attack 
on obscurantism, religious fanaticism, and weakness of character. The civic aim in- 
volved the principle of self-help and the defense of the poor and the oppressed. 



n H 1*1 ill \VV\S\ HI Vc >11 IK >'. \ 



Like I )cl Pilar and other revolutionaries Bomf.u m was a \\a ,< *: It . be rc„ .illcd 

that Masonry became a vehicle of liberalism in this at hip t •« » 

lo increase the Katipunan membership, tin unit of tin; as supplanted 
later with a plan by which any member ouid bring as mans k\ n; he w ished. 

Upon reaching a membership of 100. an election w a li U: was 

Deodato Arellano, blit due to ins inaction Homt.i m i : *c .* r eicvCion 
This time Roman Basa was elected. As earls as ISOS. how . r. B ,» v ailed 

another meeting to depose Basa. In th.it election. \nd: Bon.:: » i«> :> arne the 

supremo. 

A man whom Bonifacio knew since Ins birth on ’ ' i >e cm:>. : 1 s was 
Emilio Jacinto, who became his closest adviser. I lie Bomt.n io j . ^ v mto\ were 

family friends. When Andres sister hspiridoma was h<>rr, it ssas |.e mio\ mother 
who breast-fed her since tier own mother was aireaO . riousp. \.. \ be toiiowm^ 

day, Jacinto was born. 

Jacinto was the youngest member of the Katipunan. I ie was i>.u . . ! o \ears 
old when he joined rlie revoiut lonarv society but be an. <u his abilits and 
Bonifacios trust in him, he was appointed to high positions m the niosenient 

In spite of his parents poverty, jaemto was sent m the i m\eisit\ ,»t s anto 
Lomas. He enrolled in law' t ) u r ins studies were interrupted when he lomed the 
Katipunan in 1896. 

Emilio’s enthusiasm, ideas, and spirit soon guided the course ot tf u - sev re: 
society. He wrote the Kartilya , which served as the primer of tin katipunan lie 
edited the Katipunan paper, KaLiyaan, whic h c arne out toi tin fust tmu in |anuar\ 
1896. He also wrote the article Io My ( omp.nriots and the Mani- 

festo). He authored a collection of political and social css.ivs, /,/ /!//;/,/. w |ik1i he 
wrote in Santa Uruz, Laguna, on 8 ( )etober I 89b. I Used on Ki/als XL Ultimo 
Adios, he titled it Dimas I law. I I is literary model w.is Ri/al ,iiul his political idol 
was Del Pilar. Rafael Palma appraised P.milio Jacinto as one sent In t 1() d U) lMVC , 
directing hand to our revolution. 

Mabini’s Concept of a Good Government 

Apolinario Mabini was the most outstanding political philosopher ot the Philip- 
pine revolution. Por this reason, he was called the “brains ot t he Philippine res olu- 
tion and the sublime paralytic.” 

In his writings, Mabini discussed the relationship between the individual, 
society, and the government. 1 lc said that man was a creation ol ( .od, possessed of 
certain inalienable rights, based on natural law and discernible through reason. 
Consequently, man had the right to seek the means necessary to maintain and per- 
petuate his life, and he had to work for what was good and just. 

Io Mabini, the real meaning of liberty was the full enjoyment of man's natu- 
ral rights which must, however, he enjoyed with sobriety, intelligence, and a sense 
of responsibility. Liberty was only for good and never for evil, always in accord with 

l X> 



Mil \KH ' Si >RI \\i > i\ 



r; ' : ‘<"oph of the Philippine h'av/urn 



mans reason, with his upright and hononKI. , , • • , . 

v • . r 1 n °rahk conscience. In claiming that the 

paniariis aiul latei on. the \tnericans nrcvvnr . 1 ri r r • c • " • . • 

, 1 P KN c nted the rihpinos from cnjovmg their 

n ‘ Ullr *h rights. he accused them o| stifluw K; „ i • |V x \ . • 

I ... 1 m r> ,Us peoples effort to progress. Mahtni 

•*is« explained that because man had divers*- I i* n i v i i i 

Ul needs, his well being was possible onlv 
,n M>ciet\-. I hcrctorc. people should clivi ,1m i , ,, v , . • ,, . 

t a leader who would he oheved m all that 

^MUst, offering him all their strength unlr^M,, n . , • i 

I ‘ ^ ‘ l,ul Ks oukes. hut since the leader is human, 

*K* might disregaid moral limitations uni i r i r i i i 

anu act at hitranlv. lo prevent such a possible 

tvrannv, it is nccessarv that the nienilvr\ x ■ i i i c 

111 tls souetv should nominate a group of 

nu ' n who would represent them before rh^ lllff u i i cm 

* u K inis authoritv with the purpose ot deter- 
mining the limitations ot the leadet uni rh<- -w , Vi j 

. , ; * llul extent ot his power and resources to 

hilt ill his mission. 

U.b.m i Inis Ik-Ik-vccI in .Ik- possthUttv oftlu- U-isl.uurc representing the 
people s interests. It was .1 belief not eontr.uliaorv to hi.wssertion during the crisis 
<>f tlK cuns, i ,ul '°" 1,1 X1 - ,lolos "'lu-n the executive in the person ofAguinaldo pre- 
dominated over the t on-iess. But then. M.tbini never believed that the Malolos 
( nn ^ ,Vss w - ls lmK 1 s present.n i\ e ot the I ilipino people. He believed in a strong 
exes tit i ve and a legislature representing two aspects ot'whai M.tbini termed as the 
authority in socetv. I le also favored a Senate where the nations best talents would 
be harnessed. It would not be a legislative body but an adv isorv group for the presi- 
dent and ( ongress. 

I k m ged that the c\ccutt\c, legislative, and judicial powers he separated. 

I Inis, he favored the principle of checks and balances. In the final analysis, all 
btaiK lies of the government should he responsible to the people. The disruption ot 
the haimony among the thiec branches would bring about the ruin ot rhe bod\' 
politic. 

Mabim said the government nuis f guarantee to the citi/cn the highest degree 
of pei sonal secuiitv, the gieatest number ot rights, the maximum satisfaction ot 
economic wants, and the best possible education. In return, the' citizens should be 
law-abiding, obedient to authority, virtuous, and eminently patriotic, lie also 
u ,() te that a government that favored a social sector or v iolated the rights ot the 
individual would forfeit its claim to exact obedience and the right to govern. And 
should such government refuse to abdicate its power, revolution against it would 
be thoroughlv justified. 

Mabini defined a revolution as the violent step used by a people to regain 
their natural and inalienable rights bv overthrowing the government and substitut- 
ing it with another more in consonance w ith reason and justice. I le also said that 
th e revolution would become inevitable when a government brought about the 
stagnation of a people by perpetuating its own interests or that of a special class. 

Due to his experience during the earlv wars of the republic, Mabini arrived 
at the conclusion that independence was the fundamental prerequisite, though not 
the sufficient condition, to bring about individual freedom and social and national 
progress. I le also emphasized that the war remained primarilv a revolutionary one 
since the bilipinos had not been able to recover or enjov those natural rights which 



I HI I'HII II'IMNf HI V( )| l I l< >N A N I > hi \i )NI ) 



Spain had withheld from them, f Ic also accused the Americans of presenting the 
Filipinos from enjoying their liberties. 

Independence, according to Mahini. was not the oniv condition that would 
make possible the well-being of the Filipino. It was imperative. Mabim said. that 
each Filipino should be guided bv reason and lead a virtuous life. v. h.ir.u teri/cd bv 
consideration for his neighbor, the absence of exploitation, and a lose lor country 
so deep that he would give his life if needed. In the tradition or some of the greatest 
political philosophies, for Mabim politics and ethics were mtimatclv intertwined. 

Mahini also believed that the Filipino people hail an important roic to [>las 
in Asia. He pointed out that they should move forward along the path of freedom 
and their aspirations should be guided by the tenets of natural lav. 

Initially, Mabim only had national independence m mind, but later he stated 
that the struggle of the Filipinos should go beyond national frontiers. Mabim as- 
serted that the Philippine revolutions sole aim was the mamtenaiK e of the tor, h of 
liberty and civilization in Oceania which should illuminate the gloomv night in 
which the vilified and degraded Malay race found itself, m order that Asia mav be 
led to emancipation. Filipinos were not yet reads* to integrate themselves into a 
national community, but when this was achieved tbev would be able to lead the 
other Malay peoples by example. I he const iousness tli.u Filipinos belonged to the 
Malay race enabled Mahini to conceive of future cooperation, it not units, among 
different peoples of the race. 

Mahini was the first reformer in Asia to advocate womens suffrage. C >n this 
score, according to Gregorio /aide, Mahini svas ahead of Ki/al, 1 >el Pilar, and the 
other great reformers of Asia. In article 1 , sections 1 and 1 of Ins l\inorama 
Politico de la Republica kilipina, Mahini proposed the follosving: 1 i women should 
be allowed to vote in elections; 2) they should be elected to public office; }) thev 
should be allowed to enter any college or university in the Philippines; and \ ) thev 
should be allowed to practice their chosen profession. I le also pointed out that 
respect for womanhood would make the nation great since the children of such 
women would develop qualities enabling them to perform acts of* heroism. 

Mahini was not a chauvinist; he did not have a narrow concept of* national 
community. An independent national community was for him a tool neccssarv to 
bring about the well-being of the Filipinos. Mahini also stated that the revolution 
in the Philippines would be successful in the long run. But the people must he vir- 
tuous and willing to undergo great sacrifice, and the leaders must be dedicated and 
not guided by personal or class interest. If the energies of all were directed to a 
definite road, the construction of a new social order where patriotism would reign 
supreme would result. 

I hese views on the revolution and natural law and the historical process were 
written in 1899, a few months after Mahini left political office. It was in Guam 
that he began to apply his theoretical principles to the understanding of the events 
of the revolution, principally its failure. 



98 



\ ill .A Kit > sc M\IANO Political Philosophy of the Philippine Revolution 



Mabini singled out Aguinaldo as having contributed to the failure of the 
revolution. lor Mabini. to gain the respect ot the enemy, in spite of weaker re- 
sources, was a moral victory. 



Conclusion 

1 ) The most outstanding political thinkers ot the Philippine revolution were Ma- 
bini, Ri/al, and Pel Pilar, in this order. 

Mabini stands out as the best political theoretician partly due to his writings, 
which were completed shortly after he resigned as the longest-governing prime 
minister of the erstwhile Philippine republic. Mabinis training in law, his erudi- 
tion, and his experience in establishing local governments in areas left by the Span- 
iards gave him a better grasp of political philosophy. 

2) Ri/al and Del Pilar wrote their ess a vs on politics earlier, when the frailoc- 
racy held sway in the archipelago. Both had to veil their real ideas. I he friars per- 
secuted them for agitating for individual reforms. Pel Pilar had to flee the country 
to escape arrest and Ri/al was deported to Papitan. Pater, Pel Pilar died of pov- 
erty, deprivation, and sickness in a cold room in Barcelona while Ri/al was ex- 
ecuted in Bagumbayan (1 uneta). 

3) Mabini and Ri/al believed in a state of nature. Mabini stated that indi- 
viduals were endowed bv Clod with inalienable rights while Ri/al stated that indi- 
viduals should use the divine spark in them and their inalienable rights for their 
development. 

4) Both Mabini and Ri/al believed in the ritih t of 'revolution. The former said 

s' 

that when a government favors only a few individuals or class in society, revolution 
is forthcoming. Ri/al on the other hand said that when a government is unable to 
allow its citizens to fully develop, as was the case during the Spanish regime, revo- 
lution would result. 

5) Ri/al laid great stress on the education of the masses. He believed that 
education would prevent abuse of power. He also wanted to eradicate some of the 
flaws in the Filipino character which were due to the influence of the Spaniards. 

6) Del Pilar wrote about the compact between Legazpi and Sikatuna as the 
basis of the Spanish rule over the Filipinos, but in this arrangement the Filipinos 
poured out their blood in support of Spain’s conquests although the latter had not 
given Filipinos any benefit in return. 

7) Mabini was ahead of Rizal, Del Pilar, and other Asian leaders in espousing 
women’s suffrage. 

8) Mabini believed that the Philippines should be a model for the emancipa- 
tion of the rest of Asia and he urged unity among peoples of the Malay race. 

9) Cesar Majul in his book Political and Constitutional Ideas of the Philippine 
Revolution was positive in his belief' that Andres Bonifacio’s Katipunan was the or- 
ganization responsible for the revolution, this being the sole achievement of the 



99 



nu mu iitini ki v< »i i i i< \M»iirmM» 

masses. It is true that in any revolution <»r war. the support of the in 
but guidance and direction have to be contributed In leaders with good education. 
One can only point to four out of a total of <) mix . t- a<! r at. »*? sshom can l>c 
identified with the common mass because they hail no formal ed . at ion: Andres 
Bonifacio, Francisco Macabulos. Pio del Pilar, and I i 

10) The liberalism which was imbibed in the Philippines from Spam came 
from France as distinguished from the Anglo Saxon variets I he hooks on resolu- 
tion which Andres Bonifac io read were on t he I reiu h \ • »iution I h tu e t he stress 
by Filipino revolutionaries on individual freedoms 

In the quest for individual freedoms, the propagandists must base been in* 
fluenced by John Ix>ckes ideas on thesoci.il compact and tlie consent <»t the gov- 
erned and by Jean Jacques Rousseaus S nihil < inithu: 

C )ur heroes died about a cent urs ago. I he Spa mar ds and \meiu a ns base also 
left our shores. But have we ful I v developed as a people." We progressed tint 1 1 World 
War 1 1 , which turned our count rv into a bat t let ield . and ss e found on t seh es bin Id- 
ing anew from the ruins of that holocaust . I rom the 1 o S< )s i < > the \ K) ’( K. with the 
help of our excellent diplomats, our international prestige soared to ness heights 
not commensurate with our si/e nor our natural resources. Suddenls, however, we 
were plunged into a dictatorship that violated out human tights. It took “people 
power to reinstate democracy'. Slowly and painfully, we inched mu was forward 
from being the beggars of Asia to a position as the* equals of oui tel loss \si.uis, no 
longer under the close surveillance of the World Bank. ( )ut divisions and our 
wounds are slowly healing. All that is left now is a group with an alien ideology 
with which the president now deals with compassion and uiulei standing. 

Peace and order must be restored immediately, graft and corruption com- 
pletely eradicated, dangerous drugs dest r< >ved , and our workers, w ho seem t o be in 
every corner of the world, return to develop our natural resources. 

When we recall how Del Pilar had to leave Ins wife and children to work 
abroad for our emancipation, or when we remember how Ri/nl, a genius and a 
great Malayan, died in the prime of his life, it is for us the living; to continue the 
great legacy of our heroes. Our homes, our churches, and our schools should 
jointly mold the new Filipino: a person with high moral values, of great integrity, 
and with the courage of his convictions. All should join hands to develop the new 
Filipino who, having learned of our glorious past, can now idem ify with the whole 
nation. I hen he will learn to love his country with as much fervor as our heroes did 
us forget for a while our great yearning for material riches and 
to make this country great again. 



a century ago. I ,ct 
comfort and strive 



100 



Mil \KU > M >KI Wi ' / 



Philosophy of the Philippine Revolution 



Bibliography 

A trie . 1 . Bernabe. I he Political \ ten- of R::ai Manila: Juan l mu Press, 19(>l. 

Al/ona, I iH.un.K ion lose Ri al. 1 defender of Human Right. Solidarity* nos. 1 0 * 1 - ION 
1 9SN 

I ernande/. I eandro III Brief Hi.aon of the Philippines. Boston Clinn N l'o.. l v) 32. 
Tiliptnos in Hilton. Vok 1 and II. Manila: National Historical C ommission. HUH. 
(iuerrero. I eon Ma. I he l :^t h'tliptno. Manila: National 1 listorieal Commission. HHH. 
The / etter> of. \f*ohnano M. thin: Manila: National 1 listorieal C ommission. RKo. 

Majul. Cesar Adih. Apoltnano Malnni Ret\duttonan \ Manila: National Henx's Commis- 
sion. 1 9(> i . 

Orosa. Sixto Y., cd. Manila Bulletin . Yol. \ 111, lime September 19(vl, nos. 2 and 2. Mabini 
1 listoi ical ( entenai v. 

Palma. Rafael. Bto^raphta <ie Ricai Manila: Bureau of Printing. RM9. 

Rhvs, I rnest, ed. /ohn looked ( in! ( tot c nwent. I ondon: I M Pent N Sons, 1929. 

Rhvs, Krnest, ed.. lean lactjues Rousseau's The Social ( ontract. I ondon: j.M. Hem N Sons, 
192-1. 



101 



CONTEXTS AND PERSONAGES 






V- 



i 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
OFF? C E C F Till p R LSIDENT 
j PHILIPPINE CEr-.'T t Ni COMMIS! 



* ? * sr v ^ ^*4 » f TV.-- r 

$ ifciS L&jT » Si> »'» ,d.C?iO\ « £_D i 



f i r* ^w* ” n - ' . 

V U!ti .. * » *r * r* ! 



Priucipales v Conqu istcui ore s: 
Why it Took the Filipinos So Long 
to End Spanish Domination 



1 ris C \m \ra Him 
Do In Salle University, Manila. Philippines 



R arely do we read in Philippine history textbooks extended dismissions 
on the preeoloni.il native prineip.il families during and after the Spanish con- 
quest of the Philippines. Raha Tupas. Raha Matanda, 1 akan Pula, to name a ft\\. 
are simply mentioned in passing. Their historieal importance is often neglcctcc. 
especially in relation to the establishment and sustenance of colonial rule. .Spanish 
military superiority, religion, and the efforts of the fnar-missionat ics ,uc the u. n. 
explanations for success. Cilossed over but equally important are the conn ihutions 
of the ruling native elite. Their role in the conquest and Christianization of the 
Philippines and in the rebellions throughout Spanish rule shall be the focus of this 
paper. 

The Native Principal Families and the Spaniards: Royal Instructions 

Detailed instructions accompanied ever}- Spanish expedition sent to exploie f.u- 
away lands. The cotHjuisttulores were ordered to befriend the local chiefs as a \sa\ of 
achieving Spanish aims. The 1 ST’S Renal Ordinance on Pacification, in paiticulai. 
gave them the following instructions: 

Thev are to gather information about the various tribes, languages and 
divisions of the Indians in the provinces and about the lords whom the} obc\. 

They are to seek friendship with them through trade and barter.. . Difficulties 
may be avoided if the children of the caciques and nobles are brought to the 
Spanish settlements and are kept there as hostages under the pretext of enter- 



i m mu iitim hi v< )n ii< >v 



i > iu > 



raining them and reaching them In areas when th 
( Christian doctrine peacefully ... an arrangement .Imuh 
cipal lord who is a proponent of pea* e so that Ik .-.ill 
dians to his territory on one pretext or another If it 
cation o f th e natives will he accomplished more- < m|-, 

ing them from tribute payments or In grantin'/ t f i :: ; 
done; and whatever is promised should b< t r r : « d . .• 

The Spanish conquistadorcs did as the\ were t 
adopting harsh measures to subjugate the recuknruni 

Guido dc I .avczarcs in 1 574 laconically replied that 

His Majesty’s orders. I he granting of ranks, prr. il< 
various native chiefs and f>rnu ifxtlr< we re wavs of keep 
ish administration. I be use of natives against names t 
became a recurrent pattern in colonial poln\. 



imn.ms reins 


< m .uve pt 


1 be nun It- ■ t 


ti tin pt in 




ir.n, in In 


.it . tb.it 


tbr p.u 1 1 1 


Mr. ik /< . tin 


k v\t mpt 
s xh**iiki he 


< »kl Sc \ eu | 


% X I I t !v 1 /cd t or 


n.u i \ c s ( 


u c 1 n« m t icticral 


v i .mu Ik-u 


1,1 ‘ >l>edieiK C tO 


gcs. .md i'\i 


inptiiMis to t be 


mg tlu m k» 


\ .d t » » tbc Span- 


< » ‘'W Iu Mill 


du n u sist.iiKe 



1 c i s and 



The Christianization of the Philippines 

briar accounts of the Spanish com niest and ( Imst i.m i/.u ion , a t 1 i >i i 

1 1 v n 1 1 1 ppi nes em - 

phasi/.e the- Spanish role and downplay die c mu i ihui i< ,,, , , , t | u , ( H j ( 

pccially the women, to the propagation of ( hi ist i.init \ 

l or three years following their entry into the pm\ , lu ml |> m ,,, Mn , n m , s - s 

the Dominicans could not convert the n.mu-s Because of d, ,, ,, l( 

. . . ■ . , I , stiti resistance. 

Manv Dominican friars lost their lives to native artows //. ./>•/, i. , , 

- ^ . . Uti> l "'l\ w hen 

Dona halo, wife of Dato ( .asipit. a powerful name Duel of ll,„,|. ll(lll! , (n , m S (n 

Carlos Citvj and Mangaldan, requested conversion that the 1 ) ( , mmums e\ 

cal activities prospered. Through I )otia I alo. I ).uo ( asipn , llu | | 1|s | () || (1 

kin accepted conversion. 

The Batanes islands were also evangelt/ed when Vn.mdnni. the wife of' the 

chief of Basco island, accepted conversion m I S i. She was insimmeni.il m the 

conversion of her Imshand. C ihesques. I hey took the- names I \|. UI , | ) uni , an 

and Don Manuel Chesc|ties. Bv USS, some l.KH) mhalm.mts of ihe BatancsV 
lands were converted.’ 

In C alga van Valley, northern l.u/.on, the friars' evangelical , K tiv ities were like- 
wise hindered By stiff opposition. Several friar-mission. tries lost their lives eitlier 
speared or shot with arrows. It was only when the Trials conve rted Don ( 1 uist 
Bali nan, sister of Don Tuis Pagulavan, who was powerful chief in ( agavan. that 
rhe spread of the ( impel prospered. Dona l iusa Became "the leader and guide of 
her people in word and example,” said the friars. 

On Bohol island, friar evangelical activities grew rapidly when the daughter 
of Don Juan Batto, chief of a Big village named I linaguana, was converted. 'The 
chief and many of his followers were then hapti/cd. 



106 



PI KN Principals v C 'nnquistadorcs 



In Biuii.m, northern Mindanao. two women principnlin . Doha \savcl and 
Doha I uisa ( aliman. were appointee! bcutus or lav workers bv the trials. Many in 
Human followed their example and aeeepted conversion. 

( )n the ( alumiancs islands mow Palawan), the trials proselytizing aetiv -i ties 
were boosted w hen the\ converted a named Dona Magdalena lling. Also 

famous tor hei beaut\ and virtues. no less than the Spanish alcalde mayor o t 
C'alamiancs several times \ainl\ tried to win her love. A devout woman, she de- 
voted her life teaching the girls m lav t a v tow n the C hristian tenets. She died in 
1DM. 

What insured the trial missionaries success was their emphasis on the con- 
vl i sion ot the vounget general ion. espec talk the c hildren ot prominent families ot 
the village. "Since thev were tile newest plants.' bray Juan de Medina eommented, 
“nee essarilv thev would receive the teaching better, and the new eustoms would be 
impressed more casilv upon them than on those already hardened and petrified in 
their old eustoms. 

( lathered w ithin the hearing distance ot the ehureh bells, the daily life o t the 
people became one ot worship and pi av er. All v illagers were grouped into 
"schools," “companies ot the rosarv, oi "congregations ot the Blessed \ irgin. In 
their houses, on tlu- streets, and while thev are sailing, l r. Pedro Murillo \elarde 
happilv noted, manv Indians hear mass, recite the' losaiv, sing... the S././t ie- 
soundmg m everv d i rec 1 1 o n . I rav \ 1 a reel o ele' 1\ i bade' ne'i i a , ele'Se 1 1 bi ng kabt kola n 

toward the end ot the Kith eenturv, commented that to see the Hikolanos pray, 
fast and keep the commandments of C iod and the C hureh, any visitor would think 
( .amarines as one big religious community. 

The Conquest of the Philippines 

The Pega/pi expedition was no more than sOO men when it came to the Philip- 
pines in ]s6S, but it laid the foundation ot Spanish rule in the Philippines. 
Pega/pi s taet and astuteness in using the natives to advance Spanish aims was ac- 
knowledged bv his predecessors and was the reason he was called PI Adclantado. 



Raha lupus and His Descendants 

Raha I upas is first mentioned in Spanish accounts as the chief ot ( ebu when 
Pega/pi arrived in 156S. The negotiations that transpired between them were 
capped by an agreement that exemplified the Spanish method of dealing with the 
native chiefs thereafter. I he most important provision of the agreement was the 
following: 



hirst, thev [Raha I upas, lus descendants and followers] make submis- 
sion, and find and (dace themselves under the dominion and royal crown of 
( 'as t i 1 la and of his majestv, as his natural vassals, promising to he faithful and 



10 



i m mu ipriNi ki-v( >i t no 



\\i > hi *t< » 



loyal in his services, and not to displease turn in .mv v. r. I h . m . »l> 

serve, fulfill, and obey Ins royal commands as t lieu kmr uni lord, m i t. * » *he\ 
in his royal name, the governor and captain residing in chest isLunlv and to 
receive the latter whenever he shou i«i come to their islands towns, and 
houses — whether he were angry or pleased, whether at night <»r da. wlu tlu r 
for peace or for war, without any resistant e or hostility, to tullill Ins v ■ unmaiuls. 
and not to withdraw themselves from this dominion, now or in th lutin I his 
they promised for themselves and their future d< endam uinier t: k <>t tall 
ing under and incurring the penalties whit h should Ik impost <i m ls , ,>! 
treachery and treason against their king and lord 



As he had done with Raha Katnnao and I akan I )ula. I cp.a/pi at oikc en- 
joined Raha Tupas to prove his friendship by helping c mu pic i .uul H »n\nt the in- 
habitants of the other islands. I hus, several boat loads of Raha I upas km . U ul fol- 
lowers were with I.cga/.pi in the conquest of kabikolan uul Manila. \tiei these 
incidents, nothing more was mentioned .thout Raha I upas and Ins dew ciulants. It 
may be presumed that his descendants faithfulK kept I upas piomiscto 1 oaa/pi as 
they were awarded privileges. 

On 1 2 May 1692, Don Rhclipc I upas, son of Macstrc dc( amp.. 1 ),, n | , , n . 
cisco lupas, petitioned the colonial government to alloss him t<> sluiced to the 
encomienda composed of 30 tributes of vagabond families rtreima mlnttos dc 
vagamundos”), which was awarded to his late fathet in U>(,3. I lie doi mneni men- 
tions that father and son were the former chiefs of ( elm and lligan Cqtic |,> es ac- 
tual de los Nat u rales de las Rrovincias de Zebu y Yligan"). I licit militarv rank of' 
maestre de campo and the grant of the small encomienda ( the Spaniards tailed it casas 
de reservas) dearly showed that they were Raha I upas descendants, for these privi- 
leges were reserved by the Spanish colonial government for i bids and their descen- 
dants who had served Spain faithfully. It is interesting to note, however, bow much 
Raha lupas’ descendants had declined as for them to receive as remuneration for 
their services an encomienda of 30 vagabond families— a far erv from then once 
vast domain which was the entire island of Cebu, liigan, etc. 



Raha Katnnao and His Descendants 

Better known as Sikatuna, Raha Katnnao was the chief of Bolu >1 island who made 
a blood compact (sandugnan) with l.egazpi. After this affair, nothing more was 
mentioned about him except that he was converted to ( ihrist ianily in I 397 at the 
age of 120 just before his death." bon unatcly, a Jesuit chronicler, b'rancisco 
Combes, published a work in 1667 where he described Katnnao and his descen- 
dants and how they helped the Spaniards conquer and ( diristiani/.c the Visavas and 
Mindanao. 

father Combes narrated that when Legazpi arrived in Oebu in ISOS, many 
chiefs came and befriended him. One of them was Dam Pagbuava, chief of Hapi- 



108 



IM KN 1'nruip.ilcN v C onquist.icfores 



tan, northern Mnulanao. aiul a son ot Raha Katunao. Presumably, Pagbuava chose 
prudence over valor after \\ i messing a demonstration ot Spanish military firepower 
opted to be friendly with the Spaniards. Pagbuava then brought 1 ega/pi to Panglao 
island, off C elm, which was the seat ot Ins father's realm. It was here that Katunao 
and 1 ega/pi made their historic blood compact. 

rhe astute l ega/pi at once exploited his new found Boholano ally by asking 
him to help the Spaniards. I Inis, several boatloads of Katunaos km and followers 
joined 1 ega/pi in several militarx campaigns. 1 aria, one ot Katunaos grandsons, 
ably aided the campaigns in Malacca and lernate and at least seven military expe- 
ditions against the sultan of Sulu. 1 le was killed fighting the lcrnatans as were the 
children ot Pagbuava. Don Pedro Manook and Pona Magdalena Baloyog. 
Manook was with 1 ega/pi in the Spanish conquest ot the Bikol region, Manila, 
and Mindanao. In one ot the battles in Sulu, the sultan was allegedly almost cap- 
tured bv Manook. Manook was also converted to Christianity and when he died 
he was buried m the C athedral ot C elm as he had willed. 

Dona Magdalena Ralovog, Manooks sister, also actively aided the Spaniards. 
Through her influence, the Spaniards succeeded in subjugating the Subanons ot 
Mindanao. She was also instrumental in helping the Spaniards pacify the discon- 
tented inhabitants of Butuan. 

It was Dona Maria Draw a daughter of Manook, who personified what the 
Spaniards, especially the friar missionaries, sought in the native inhabitants. She 
was a paragon of ( hnstian virtue. 1 ler conversion greath aided the* Spanish con- 
quest and conversion of the \ isavas and Mindanao. hflorts of hei kin who wcic 
enemies of the Spaniards to win her over to their side proved fruitless. 1 he sultan 
of Sulu thrice proposed marriage and thrice she turned him down, much to the 
delight of the Spaniards who were worried bv the prospect of an alliance between 
the Jolo ans and the Boholanos, w ho were both much feared for their valor and fe- 
rocity in battle. 

Dona Maria Drav married her second cousin, Don Con/alo Maglcnti, the 
son of Manooks fist cousin, 1 aria, l ike his preelecessors, Maglenti faithful 1\ 
served the colonial government, from the age of seven, he accompanied his fathei 
on Spanish military campaigns. In his 30 years of serving the Spaniards, his recoid 
was unequalled among the allies of the Spaniards; he allegedly killed in a single 
battle more than 200 foes, l ather Combes commented that no less than Rajah 
Buisan of Magumdanao, also a feared fighter and the father of the famous Sultan 
Kudarat, had a healthy respect for Don Con/alo Maglenti. Maglenti subjugated 
for the Spaniards more than 240 square miles of territory in Mindanao, from 
Pangil Bay to Zamboanga, besides providing the colonial government mam men 
who served as sailors, soldiers, and navigators for the Spaniards. 

Don Con/alo and Dona Maria had a son named Don Pedro Dabelin, who 
also served the Spaniards in various capacities. More than a century later, a certain 
maestre cle canipo from Dapitan, northern Mindanao, Don Ignacio Cabling, 
served with distinction under the famous fighting priest, the Jesuit Jose Ducos. hr. 



104 



mi mu iitim ri v< >i i in 



Ducos was the missionary assigned to Ihg.in and mi* * e . • :i'.\ » r r \toro at- 

tacks in northern Mindanao during the calamitous . .its fr«>m ’S . t,» 1 
Don Ignacio (dabiling must have been a descendent <»r I >«»n IVdr<* ( aK Im 

Rah a Kattinao and Ins descendants refused t « » »s cpt rew.ud pa . ment. pre- 
sumably aware that tile Spaniards had nothing t<» :;i\e the m it :Le outset ot their 
rule. Later, privileges such as exemptions from tributes, pers* »nal set \ es. atul ap- 
pointments to military ranks, such as ;//,/< tre d< w : . bestow, d on Raha 

Katunaos descendants, for by then the- Spaniards were in a position t<» reward them 
and the chiefs, in turn, were impoverished bv the numerous expenses the\ shoul- 
dered in waging Spains wars. 

Raha Matanda and His Descendants 

Raha Matanda s identity is now c I ear. 1 le was Raha V he who. as a south, was ^ ap- 
t u red by I iga f et tain 1 5 2 . 1 in Borneo. I le wa s t he t' i a n d so n « » f Si d t a i i 'sitipada I » or 
Bolkeiah l) of Hornet) and the sultans kapitan Lint or c or n in am lei in Duet of the 
naval forces. I le was also identified as a son of the km" « > t I u/on. one ot Sultan 
Siripada s sons. Spanish c h roniclers in >t e< I Raha \ la t an da s preeminent posi t ion r;*- 
cl-vis the other ruling rahas of Manila and neighbor mg pr o\ i iu is. des^nbirw lum 
as ‘the acknowledged Absolute Master and Principal Ruler of theothei i tilers of 
the inhabitants of these Islands and to whom all paid him tributes (“Dueno 
Absoluto y Principal ( iave/a de otra y de vasallos de estas N skis \ l]lk - solo no pagaba 
tributo anade sino antes se le pagaban a el... j. 

As the other chiefs had done, Raha Matanda also proffered friend ship to the 
Spaniards. He, together with his kin ( iat Pulentang of Bulacan, Sahlaxa (or Sali, 
the Raha), and the magmuoo Marlanavay, welcomed I ega/pi when he armed at 
Manila Bay in May 1571. Raha Matanda was the first of the rulers w horn I ega/pi 
gifted in recognition of his offer of friendship and of Ins preeminent position over 
the chiefs in Manila and neighboring provinces. In fact, the- Spaniards proudly 
claimed that Raha Matanda was the first to recogni/e Spanish authority and the 
first to be converted to ( Jiristianity among the raha* ( due el primero pile rec ivio el 
Sancto Bauptismo ). It was also through his efforts that main of his relatives and 
followers accepted conversion. 

Raha Matandas cordiality and conversion made the Spanish conquest of 
Manila and environs less sanguine than that of Kabikolan or the Ilokos and also 
precluded the spread of anti-Spanish feelings among his kin and followers. In 
1571, for example, when some of them plotted to rise in arms against the Span- 
iards, Raha Matandas opposition guaranteed tlu* plans failure, easing the Span- 
iards’ anxieties. In return, Lega/.pi allowed Raha Matanda to continue to receive 
for the rest of his life a third of all the tributes he had previously received from his 
followers in Manila and elsewhere. It is important to note that I .ega/pi did not give 
this concession to the rest of the chiefs who sided with him, including I .akan l Mia, 
who outdid all in serving the Spaniards, for the simple reason that Raha Matanda 

1 H) 



. M KN PniK ip.ilcs \ C oiu]inM.ulorc\ 



was already vcrv old. In fact. Ik* died in mid D'd and tailed to enjoy l ega/pi s 
"magnanimous act. I ega/pi followed him to the grave a tew months later. \X hen 
Kaiia Mataiula died. I ega/pi made another grand gesture which overwhelmed the 
local raha* and then tolloweis: he and t \s v > other senior Spanish officials personally 
carried and inteiied Raha Mataiulas mortal remains in tront ot the main altar ot 
the cathedral in Intranuiros dwho \delantado v dos eapitanes le llevaron a 
emerrai en la X glesia Mavoi de esta C iudad junto al altar mavor ). 

Raha Mataiulas two sons. Ron \mhrovio Mag isa 1 advangbata and Don 
I uis Mao. and daughter. Mona Maria Rolactala, were lukewarm toward the Span- 
iards because I ega/pi s successors conveniently forgot to keep lega/pis promises 
to Raha Mataiula until main vears later. It was onlv in 1 (*> 1 d and again in 1(M2 that 
the Spanish colonial authorities redeemed 1 ega/pi s promises, and only after Raha 
Mataiulas grandchildren and great grandchildren repeatedly petitioned tor the 
promised privileges and exemptions. 

I rom then oiue vast domains m Manila and Bulacan, Raha Mataiulas de- 
scendants moved to the tow ns ot Malate, I lemma, and laguig since the Spaniards 
had taken over their ancestral domains. 1 'heir appointments as maestre de eanipo. 
capitau de nifantena . <aroento mayor. ^ohemadoreillo , and eaheza de barangax gradu- 
ally i ni pc >v dished them as thev were forced to shoulder innumerable expenses and 
obligations ot the Spanish colonial government — shortfalls from their tribute col- 
lection, the cost of providing men and materiel and ot building and repairing co- 
lonial edifices, and so on which the colonial authorities tailed or conveniently 
forgot to repav. Their impoverishment gradually led to their dispossession from 
their domains when main of their lands were mortgaged or sold or taken away and 
given as enconiiendas to Spanish individuals or religious orders. 

The passage of time found the descendants ot the principal raha of Manila 
and environs, the kapitan-laut and grandson ot the sultan ot Borneo, and son ot 
the king of 1 u/on so destitute that thev could not even pay the media anata (title 
fee) necessary to enjov their privileges and exemptions. In their 16% petitions t o 
the colonial authorities in Manila, tor example, Raha Mataiulas descendants 
pleaded that thev be allowed to enjov the privileges that their illustrious ancestor 
once enjoyed — at least exemption from the tributes and the polos y servieios 
personates . 

Lakan Dula and His Descendants 

Lakan Dula (or Don ( arlos I.acandola, his Christian name) was the ruling raha oi 
Tondo when Lega/pi came. I le was 

Lord and most principal of the town of londo, and ot the other surrounding 
towns, whose inhabitants paid him tribute and vassalage and other recognition 
as their natural lord, and when ships from China came to this Bay, they simi- 
larly paid him duties and anchorage fees, he removing their sails and rudder 



I m mil 11*1*1 N I Kl V< Ml IK V.l > Kl u »' . * 

for this purpose, and taking their inert h.mdive b. p.-> 
other half the next year, without am other name-. b n.. v*. - 

from the Sanglcys but only from the said I -it .md«>I.» t:«*rn 
profit 

I he Spanish account further mentions that mi* h pr n» at . s were ^ eded" 
by Lakan Dula to the Spanish colonial government h >D ; g In oMncrsion and 
that he and his kin became collectors of t rilnites and d u 1 i< t< >r ins \ la jest \ 

Lakan Dula and his kin who were chiefs of nc.nin tov. ns welcomed I ega/pi 
Legazpi and the Spaniards were delighted as I .akan I )ula had done what no chief 
had done before. Upon I xrga/pi s request . I akan I >ula built a bouse and a tort for 
the Spaniards. He also surprised Ix'ga/pi, by giving him 1 t pieces « > r ar tillers and 
12 big jars of gunpowder although Ix-ga/pi had not asked tor them I he gift sealed 
the natives’ doom for it proved invaluable, enabling the Spaniards to v ompier Lam 
panga and Bulacan, the center ot resistance to i olomahsm 

Lakan Dula and Ins sons Don I )iomsio ( a pi 1 long and Don | uis ladnun to 
accepted (Christianity and Spanish sovereignty. I akan I )ula was giadualU lediued 
to a mere subordinate ol the Spaniards and lost Ins prerogatives .is Did and T priti 
cipal ol Jondo. John foreman comments that I .k andoki appears to have been 
regarded more as a servant by the Spaniards. . . than as a tree alls 

Legazpi fully utilized I .akan I )ula and bis km to ail vatu e Spanish aims \\ ) u . n 
Martin de Cioiti prepared to cone (tier Lam panga and near In pku es. I ega/ pi v died 
for Lakan Dula and told him to prove bis fidelity to the Spanish ( row n In joinino 
de ( xoiti, for the presence of the great chief w< mid ensure that the c oiupiest would 
be less bloody than usual and secure the Lampmgos allegiance to the Spanish 
crown. Lakan I )ula not only agreed to I .ega/pi s request , but he also pio\ uled two 
joangas (a seacraft capable of carrying more than M)() nun) of his km and follow- 
ers. I he success of this enterprise was abetted by the fac t that his eldest son, 1 } on 
Dionisio Capulong, was the chief of ( andava and Aiavat, I 'am panga. 

In 1 574, Limahong invaded Man iki and a I iik >s t dest n )\ed the I leclgl i ng Sp m- 
ish colonial outpost. I he timely and invaluable aid extended In 1 akan 1 Ldu uul 
his kin averted disaster for the Spaniards, m spite of the- fact that in the- confusion 
two young rah as, Lakan Dula’s grandnephews, were killed In the Spaniards. 

Legazpi, always farsighted, treated Lakan Dula and his kin with tact and 
promised to keep them as faithful allies. The lakini , hovvev eg died before the Span- 
iards could fulfill Legazpi s promise. Legazpi died a few months after. 1 ega/pis 
successors used Lakan Dula’s descendants to support the Spanish colonial govern- 
ment. I bus, Don Dionisio Capulong joined the Spanish military campaigns 
against the inhabitants of Cagayan, Ytuy (now Nucva Vi/cava), Xambalcs, the 
C amarines, and Camboja. Don Luis Iaelocmao, died helping the Spaniards put 
down the 1603 Chinese rebellion. Don Lrancisco C.aliuag, husbaiul of Doha 
Monica Hina, a granddaughter of Lakan Dula, also rendered manv invaluable scr- 



1 7 



IM K'i IViiuip.ilo v C onquist.ulorcs 



vices for the Spaniards. 1 le joined the Spaniards in the military expedition against 
Singapore and in several encounters with the Put eh, who invaded Manila in 1610. 

It was I )on luan Macapagah chief ot *\ravat and Pandava and a great-grand- 
son of I akan 1 hila. who retulered outstanding services for the Spaniards. After a 
series of broken Spanish promises, he sulked in Aravat to show his displeasure. 
Then. rebellions of I 060 1 66 1 broke out in Pampanga, Pangasinan, lloeos. and 
C agavan. In C Xtober !(>(>(). Pon I rancisco Maniago, wacstre dc catnpo ot the Pam- 
pangos, revolted. Pon \tulres Malong. nuicstrc dc catnpo of the Pangasinenses, fol- 
lowed and raised the standard of rebellion in Pangasinan in Pecember 1660, as did 
Pon |uan Magsanop in Ilocos and Pon l ristobal \mbaguin in C agayan the next 
year. I he Spaniards were forced to turn to their native allies tor help. No less than 
the Machiavellian C iovernor C icncral Sabiniano Manrique de 1 ara came and per- 
sonallv asked for 1 bn luans help. Once more, the governor-general reassured Pon 
Juan that the promised privileges and exemptions would be forthcoming. 1 le also 
heaped upon 1 bn luan other honors and recognitions, notablv his elevation to the 
grand title of ALiotrc dc ( ampo v (icncral dc /os Xatnra/cs del Pueblo dc Ara km. 
(landava v Apalit x todo> sits altos dc Sambalcs x .1 etas (Master of C amp and Cicneral 
of all the inhabitants of the towns of Aravat, (andava, Apalit and all the moun- 
tains of Sambales and the Aetas). Inexplicable, Pon )uan believed the governor and 
even sent his wife and children to Manila and placed them under the protection ot 
the Spaniards. I le and his followers helped the Spaniards suppress the rebellions ot 
Maniago, Malong, Magsanop, and Amhaguin from October 1660 to September 
1 66 1 . 

Don Juan's assistance was vital as the 1 660- 1 66 1 rebellions almost put an end 
to Spanish colonial rule. It was a period when the Spaniards were beleaguered and 
harassed on all sides. I he C hinese koxmga threatened to invade Manila in 1660. 
In 1662-1663, the C hinese in Manila revolted, l he Pinch launched a series ot 
attacks in several places in the countrv w hile the Moms and their allies destroyed 
several coastal areas in the \ isavas and Mindanao. 1 here were widespread plagues 
and calamities. Their existence threatened, the Spanish colonial authorities once 
more forgot their promises to 1 akan Pula's clan. 

1 ike the other principal families, the clan declined and became impoverished 
due to their numerous obligations to the colonial government. In fact, when Pon 
Juan Macapagal and his kin petitioned on 23 November 1660 for exemptions from 
the tributes and personal services, thev mentioned that they were unable to enjoy 
the privileges because thev could not pax the media anata due to their extreme 
poverty (“cuya reserv'd no a tenido efecto para su gosa por aver no podido en tiempo 
de su concesion enterrar la media anata aque desean pagaron causa de la mucha 
pobresa... ). It appeared that it was onlv in 1602, 1603, 160 , and 1608 that 
Lakan Pula's descendants enjoved the promised privileges and exemptions. Per- 
haps tired of broken Spanish promises, one branch of the clan — that of Pon Pedro 
Madlangbayan — left Pampanga and migrated to Mauban, lavabas, where Pon 



i m f 'f in ii'hM hi . < >i i 



Pedro accepted the inferior position of mdu' ./ /;<.* * ; uci . tic 

Mauban (caretaker of the hur (. of M.mban to.*. * 



The Ixicsamanas of Pampanga 



\ he Pacsamanas of Pampanga v. re mot he 
served the Spanish coiom.i! gou rmiK tit i n 
laesamana means commander in hief of tin 
Lacsamanas grandfather and hr. rati: ma« r 

also served the colonial government Mo: 
maestre di cctmpo general of all the Par 
mem. I )on brancisco aiso ucce s:\eb. : . • : 



ish forces in the military cam; : , 
Para chose him to command 
rebellions. In 1662 -166/5 \J aest re dc 
role in crushing the ( .hinese rebellion 



services, he wa 



: : 

Pi 



a m p< » 



pango revolt. 



i. it !\ e 


p • n 1 1 i p .i 


t fatiid. that fauhtuilv 


u tan 


u i •. fiail 


«n illust t i»mi v inuagc: 


suit a 


r i v . ;ain: ! 


* »t Mon 1 t aiu hco 


f . . j . 


a : n po I > 


« *' Mat t m 1 .u samatu, 


\ 1 a r t 


It. I .K s. 


1 -nai a w as appointed 


t r < m i j 


; ’ mn 


• » 1 » Miial g« »\ ern- 


as s< >i 


bin: , . . / 


' a and 


•d to 


* i 

\ i anila 


i i. s as w u ii t he Span- 


ate ( 


i < n ( t ! n » f 


( » n < i a i \ i.m t njuc dc 


p o f t oop t a a. 


• ’• > MipptesN : be said 


1 r an 


v IS. o | ,| 


unana pla\ ed a s ital 


i la I < 


a i i III i ’ > I 


u 1 1 ‘.mipangj » soldiers. 


/i all 


th < i 1 1 r , 


s id'ds u ho csv. aped 


Sat i 


s; in (i a 


mi \ n 1 1 pob > I ot his 


mat l 


) ( , ./>> 


'( ?]( t t Si fit ../ tj.ictOfl 


oin t 


1 U a 1 1 1 1 1 


an 1 1 estate s at l \>n 


si l o w 


ale III \ o 


K eil in tin I (><>() 1 *am- 



Other Pampango Families Who Served the Spaniards 

J he people of Porac, Pampanga, led In then n/ t ir\/r ( d ( Ki nnpn. l\>n \tulres 
Manacuil, helped the Spaniards suppress the- 1662 I 66 s ( Imusc tehellion. 1 he\ 
also helped crush the C .hinese re I >els i n t he m< >u n t a i ns t >f San \ la t ei ) and A n t ipolo. 

I hey were rewarded by the colonial g( >vermnen t with a wai s exemption from pay- 
ing the tribute. 

Other Pampangos also distinguished themselves and died defending the co 
Ion ial government against its enemies, especially the Muuh. In 16-iN, the Mutch 
occupied the town of Abucaw Bataan. Its inhabitants, with reinforcements from 
Pampanga, fought back and suffered many casualties. Among those who were 
killed were Ayudante Alonso bagman of ( iiiagua, ( aptain Alonso ( aros of 
Bacolor, (.aptain Prancisco Manlapa/ of Mexico, ( .apiain I )omingo 1 tines and 
Alferes Juan Aceo of Macaveve. Tile colonial government rewarded the n widows 
and children with exemptions from the tributes and personal services for the rest 
of their lives. * 



1 



'\ 



PIRN Pritu ip.ilo \ C onqiiist.Klorcs 



Andres Malang of the 1660 Pangasinan Rebellion 

Hon Andres Malong. principal ot Binalatongan (now San Carlos Cite), Pangasi- 
nan, also served (he colonial government tor mam years. Me started in 1630 when 
he was appointed /mv dc >cnicntcrn>* tcnioito dc gohernador dc las natural?** and 
gohernador dc los natural?* ot the town of Mangaldan, Pangasinan. \X hen the 
Igorrotcs trom the mountain ot eastern Pangasinan launched a series ot attacks 
against various isolated towns ot Pangasinan. the colonial authorities appointed 
him to the rank ot capitan dc infantcna to augment the colonial forces that were 
sent to chastise the Igorrotcs. In this campaign, he killed seven Igorrotcs leaders 
and in another encounter he killed two and captured five more, lo protect the 
frontier tow n ot Mangaldan. he was appointed head ot a M)-man force raised form 
Binalatongan to guard Mangaldan trom Igorrote attack. 1 le was also with the co- 
lonial forces in the campaigns against the inhabitants ot \tuv and Paniqui. l or his 
efforts he was raised to the rank ot nincstn ' dc campo and granted an cncomicnda 
composed ot 36 non ( hristian and vagabond trihutarv families whom he had to 
subjugate in the mountains ot Pangasinan. Perhaps due to the insufficient recogni- 
tion ot his services and the maltreatment he and his followers su tiered trom the 
Spaniards, Malong led the ill fated 1 061) 1 (s(s 1 Pangasinan rebellion. He was shot 
and beheaded, his bod\ quartered and each piece placed in a basket atop a pole and 
prominent I v displaced with a sign warning that the same fate awaited anvonc who 
dared oppose Spanish rule. 

The Hon iquet -Sol ibnens of I locos 

The Boniquct-Solibucn families of \ igan faithfullv served the Spaniards at the 
outset of the Spanish coin] nest of the I locos. C 'apitan Mon Alonso Bon iquet served 
the colonial government in various capacities. 1 le was copitnn dc nifantcna ot llo- 
cano troops from \ igan, later their n/mstre dc c*nnpo. and thrice gobcnuidorciHo ot 
Vigan. I le led mam militarv campaigns against the interior inhabitants of Ilocos 
and Pangasinan, compelled the recalcitrant inhabitants of Pasuquin to accept 
Spanish rule, and drove awav the Japanese pirates who made the Ilocos coast their 
base of' operations. I le also fought the Mutch who invaded \ igan in 1648. 

('.apitan Alonso Boniquifs brother and the Litters son, ( apitan Alonso 
Solibuen, also faithfullv served the colonial government. On 30 May 1636, 
Capitan Alonso Solibuen petitioned and was granted an cncomicnda of 30 non- 
Christians families to help him cultivate his ratichcria* in sitio* Parras, Vitales, 
Bacauit, and Sinalogan. But the colonial authorities took back these ranchcnas 
when Don Alonso Solibuen died in 1 6S0. ° 



I HI mil 1 1*1*1 N I- HI %■( )l I I |( )N VM » Ml It >'.! > 



The Enriqtieses of Bataan 

Don Rodrigo Enriques, native principal of Samal. Bataan started ser s in.; the colo- 
nial government in I 665 as juez de sementerus ( supervisor • >t croplands <>f Samal. 
The following year, he and his son. I )on Juan I nriques. ser s < d as . supers rsor) 
of gangs of men sent to the interior of Bataan to cur wood used n> repair the gallc- 
ons San Antonio de Padua, Sun lelssio, and S antu limn In 1666. |)..n l\<»dr tgo ss.is 
appointed to the rank of maestro de ensnfso de Ins siutm.de de S.nnul \ \i>;u u\ I tom 

1673 to 1685, he served as gobernador de siutur.de . .»t tin said n.ssns | ),,n Rian 
succeeded Don Rodrigo to the said posts, and seised unnl l6‘>n 1 ) U ung these 

years, they helped subdue the Xambals of Bataan. In 1 r > V as /nb ( < siudnr de nnttt- 
rales of Samal town, Don Juan Enriques reduced to submission the recalcitrant 
mountain inhabitants of Bataan, lor these services, he requested that his daughter 
Doha Maria Enriques and her husband Don Nicolas Veles. residents m the tossn 
of I’ondo, also he exempted from the tributes and /sain j ,, ; / /<//;. nerussiu/ r« as thev 
were destitute, f he colonial authorities approved Don |uan I nriques request on 
20 November 1696. 

Don Juan Magsano]) of /locos 

A native principal of Bangui, Ilocos province, I )on |uan Magsanop had also seised 
the Spanish colonial government for mans- years. In l6-»6. he and his Hoc. ino fol- 
lowers fought the Dutch svho attacked the Ilocos c oasts, and killed oi c apt U red 1 9 
of them. In November 1646, he led 50 Ilocano soldier s and guarded the f rontier 
towns of Santa C.ruz, Hangar, and lagudin. for his set s ices, lu- ssas ass aided "4 
families of I inggianes, whom lie had to subjugate from the interior of Ilocos. to 
help him cultivate his rancherias us Bigan and Bangui. I ike Malong, Ik- led the ill- 
fated 1661 Ilocos rebellion and suffered execution In hanging. 



Don Pedro Vincay of Laguna 

One of the native chiefs who helped the Span ia ids < n ere omc the nat is e resistance 
in Eaguna was Don Eedro Vincay and his wife Dona Ysavel Malaman, both native 
principals of I.umban town, l or their material services, ( ios et not -C ieneral |uan de 
Silva granted them and their descendants on 2 May 1615 exemptions from trib- 
utes and personal services. In 1704, their descendants, Don IVdro Sanganbavan 
and Don Juan de Mendosa petitioned the colonial government to extend these 
privileges to them, too, being descendants of I )on Eedro Vincay and to recompense 
their many years of services to the colonial government. The governor-general ap- 
proved their request on 26 December 1704. "’ 



PI m I'nncipalcs v C'onquiscadorcs 



Don I nincisco Fulton of Cagayan 

To advance the Spanish conquest ot faraway places, the colonial authorities relied 
on individuals who were willing to do it at their own expense. In return, these in- 
dividuals such as Pon hrancisco Lillian, principal of the towns ot Aiming and 
Tulaquc in C agavan pro\ ince enjoyed the conquered areas as their cnconticnda de 
nicrced for the rest of their lives. On It'* October 1619, Governor-General Alonso 
Fajardo de Tensa authorized l \m I rancisco to subjugate and colonize the Batanes 
islands of Batan, Babuvan. and t 'aruva, and turn them into ports to ease travel 
between Manila, Macao, and adjacent areas. Don Francisco carried out this project 
at his own expense. In return, he was allowed to enjoy the Batanes islands as his 
encomtcnda for the rest ot his life. 

Don Matbeo Pilac of Pangasinan 

In the Cordilleras, the Spaniards met tenacious resistance. Fheir efforts to subdue 
the lgorots and exploit their gold mines often failed. Again, chiefs and their fol- 
lowers from other places were enlisted to help this Spanish enterprise. One of - them 
was Don Matheo Pilac, principal of Mangaldan, Pangasinan. He served the colo- 
nial government for more than 30 years starting in 1010 when Governor-General 
Juan de Silva appointed him capitan dc infantcria o f the men drafted from the town 
of Mangaldan. In 1020, Governor-General Alonso Fajardo promoted him to 
capitan y cava. 1 le joined various Spanish campaigns to subjugate the lgorots and 
assisted various attempts to explore the Igorot gold mines. In 102"’, he petitioned 
for the authority to convert to Christianity the lgorots in the mountains ot 
Mangaldan and to take 300 of them to cultivate his lands. The governor-general 
approved his request on the condition that he would shoulder the expenses of the 
project/ 1 

Don Pedro Tugani of I locos 

In return for his many years of service, especially in the subjugation ot the 
Iinggians of Abra, Don Pedro Iugani was granted on 2 April 1642 the services ot 
75 families of I inggians whom he could subjugate.'*' 

Spanish Rule and the Native Principales 
from the 18th to the 19th Centuries 

The 1 8th and 1 9th centuries found colonial rule again threatened from many sides. 
The inhabitants of the hinterlands, especially those in northern Luzon, continued 
to harass newly converted natives in Cagavan and Abra. The Moros of Mindanao 
and Sulu launched devastating attacks against many areas in Luzon and the Visa- 



I HI PMIIJPPINF HI V< )I n K >N \ N I > hi u INI » 



yas. The British came and occupied Manila in 1 (>1 1 '( > * and in.un neighboring 
provinces became arenas of battles between the British .uui tlu* Sp.mi.uits and their 
native allies. In 1763, the Palaris revolt broke out in Pangasman aiul the Silang 
revolt in the I locos. The 1 9th century .ilso saw numerous rebellions appal bv the 
Philippine revolution of 1 896. The colonial gover ninrtii again desperateb needed 
native allies. Exploiting the disunity existing among the names, the Spaniards 
found many willing and eager to serve the Spanish cause 

On 13 July 1748 and 18 (tine I~H9, the bishop of Nucva Segovia teporied 
on the progress of conversion of the natives in Ytm and I\mu|iu. which was at- 
tained with the help of a principal from luao, ( agavan. named Don t >uarto 
Maddela. I le raised a regiment and helped the c olomal gc >v er nment sublimate Ytuv 
and Paniqui. He was rewarded with a lifet i me exempt ion t tom the tributes a tul per- 
sonal services; Ins troops were given a years tribute exemption. Mon Ouarto 
Maddela eventually died fighting for the Spaniards. 

for serving in the military campaigns against the Palai is and Silang ubelhons 
as well as for leading, arming, and feeding the men drafted to augment the Spanish 
forces, Capitan Don Thomas tie Aquino, Don Antonio de ( )nate. and Don 
Domingo Talatag, and their wives, all nat ive //;,//, of Put. ( agavan province 
were exempted for life from tributes and personal services. I he same pn\ ilexes 
were granted to one of I )iego Silangs lieutenants, I )on I Velio Bee bee . and his fam- 
ily, for betraying Silang. 

Also for helping suppress Silangs followers in ( agavan, 1 bn Pedro de Santo 
Domingo, gohernadorcilln and a native principal of Amulong, ( agavan. and his 
wife were exempted for life from tributes and personal serv ices. In his petition to 
the colonial government to reward his services, I bn Pedro claimed that he st u ted 
serving since he was 22 years old, that he had served five times as ^ohcrnarlorcillo of 
Amulong, and that during the Silang rebellion he raised a force composed of his 
relatives and followers, and fought the Silang rebels in ( 'agavan and I loc os In t hese 
campaigns, he captured one of Silangs fiercest lieutenants a man named Pucol 

Many chiefs and their followers and relatives served the Spaniards duritm the 
British occupation of Manila, often demonstrating greater valor than their Spanish 
masters. 

Don Cregorio Bernardo de Vi ray, native secular priest from Bohol, raised a 
regiment of Boholano lancers and brought them to Manila where he distinguished 
himself in fighting the British. The Spanish ruler rewarded him with 1MS0 annual 
pension for the rest of his life. Don brancisco Mangalindan, principal of Samal 
town, led a regiment of flecheros (archers) from the province of Bataan and fought 
the British in Pampanga and Bulacan. The Pampangos plavcd a special role in the 
Spanish fight against the British. Simon de Anda v Salazars bodyguards were all 
Pampangos. A Pampango principal named Don Joseph Manalastas penetrated 
General Drapers lodging house but was wounded and captured bv the generals 
guards. I he Spanish ruler awarded to Bacolor town the royal title of villa on 9 No- 
vember I 765/ 



! >1 K N . Pruu ip.ilcs \ C oiujuist.ulorcs 



I he Ilocos u^nmuk J to simmer with discontent even after the suppression 
of the Silang rebellion m I *(>.\ In I ~SS, I aoag inhabitants led bv ^ baran- 

^/ybon Antonio de la C ru/. Pon t ornelio Binuva, and Mon Andres Bugarin re- 
volted against e\^essi\ e road works required ot them bv the colonial authorities. In 
180b- ISO \ Ilocos inhabitants again lose m opposition to the colonial monopolv 
imposed on b<i>t (an Horatio w me made from cane sugar), l hev dest roved manv 
government wine storehouses. In 1 S 1 J 181b, Ilocos Norte inhabitants, especially 
in Sarrat, rose seeking to restore then freedom from the polos v scrricios personalis* 
tributes, and tanona. In all these llokano rebellions, the principals helped the colo- 
nial forces put down the rebels. 

In the bloodv decades which witnessed violent Moro retaliations against the 
Spaniards the colonial government used surrendered, captured, or converted Mo- 
ms to tight Moros. In I ’SI, the a lea bio ///mmot lloilosent to Manila a Moro chief 
named I Xuu Him and his ( hristian w ite. C omened to t hristianitv, Patu Him was 
baptized Don Joseph Mariano del C armen. I he colonial authorities in Iloilo ap- 
pointed him capitan provisional de marina and commander ot the coastal forces 
guarding the Visavan areas. I le led mam campaigns against the Moro forces who 
attacked Iloilo and ncarln islands. I le was the heir-apparent ot the sultan ot Magu- 
indanao. 

The colonial authorities also used chiefs ot tribes, such as the Manobos ot 
Mindanao, who were hostile to the Moros. 1 he Manobos ot Butuan and their 
chief, Patu Balan/ag, were pa rt of the colonial forces that participated in the 1 SO l 
Spanish military campaigns against the Moros in l inao, Pandag, and C'ateel. 1 he 
local Spanish authorities advised their superiors in Manila to sustain Patu 
Balanzags friendship as his word alone sufficed for the inhabitants in the area to 
obey.' 1 " ^ 

I)on Pedro hstevan, pri nci pal and a descendant of the precolonial ruling 
families of Albay province, served the Spanish colonial government in the Bikol 
region from 1780 to 1827. I hrice gobcrnadorcillo of Tabaco, Albav, he capped his 
long years in the colonial service as chief of the anti-Moro force in Kabikolan by 
defeating a strong Moro force led bv Prince Nunc, a son of the sultan of Mind- 
anao, in the battle at I abogon Bav, w estern Albav, on 25-2b October 1818. He was 
awarded a medal of valor and a small pension for the rest ot his life.* 1 

Id finance their anti-Moro campaigns, the colonial authorities liberally 
tapped the Chinese in Manila and suburbs not onlv tor funds but also for man- 
power. Don Antonio Iuason, cabccilla or head of the Oremio de Mestizos de 
Binondo, was frequently asked to raise funds from the Chinese, both mestizo and 
non-Christian. He himself contributed substantially to manv Spanish fund-raising 
campaigns which raised a total of Pb, 3^3 f rom 1751 to 1771. In P55, the year the 
Moros launched a series of devastating attacks against Luzon and the Visavas, Pon 
Antonio raised a regiment of mestizos de Sangleyee and non-Christian Chinese from 
the suburbs of Sta. Cruz and Binondo to fight in the anti-Moro campaigns. I his 
force was assigned to guard the Manila Bay against the Moros. In 1772, he spear- 



mi miumsi ki-voii iu>n \ni > hi *»< mi > 

headed another fund-raising campaign and raised PM JO v u > imanu a mihtarv ex- 
pedition against the Moros in Mindanao. Recognizing his immense services, the 
governor-general appointed him on \ { ) I ebruarv 1*0 * to the tank ot . *roncl del 
regimiento real principe de ?a ilicias urbana < de In * //.;✓/ Yc linwtuin 

1 o suppress the Cavite Mutiny of 1 J. the colonial am hot mes also set na- 
tive against native. In his 10 March 1 8~J report to his supctiots m 1 otulon. the 
British consul in Manila noted: 

But whatever may have Been the motives that pr«>m< >ted this tno\ement. 
it is evident that it was without orgam/ation and hut \er\ limited in tamilua 
lions; (or we find that the native troops sent from Manila fired on then hrei h 
ren in arms at Cavite instead of assisting them as the\ might easilv have done 
had they been so disposed; that no rumours ot tumults were heard o! m am ot 
the towns or villages in the interior: that no mam lest at ions against the gov ern 
ment took place among the portion ot the native population ot Manila, and 
that the people even ot the town ot ( .avite remained throughout passi\ e s|h\ 
tators of the scene ' 

Ivven during the Philippine Revolution of 1 <S00, the colonial government 
raised volunteer companies composed of natives svmpathetic to Spain to tight the 
revo luci o na rios. 

I he Americans later pursued the same divide et ca/pcra policy tor it was eco- 
nomical not only materially hut also in terms of American lives. William 1 loward 
laft categorically stated that At is politically important that hilipmos should sup- 
press hilipino disturbance ” 

Conclusion 

Aware of their inferior number in a hostile environment far from their homeland, 
the Spaniards fully utilized the classic strategy of div iding and conquering the Fili- 
pinos. Powerful native chiefs were wooed with promises, rewards, grand titles, high 
positions, exemptions, and privileges. In turn, their services personal or other- 
wise sustained colonial rule for more than three centuries. Phis explains whv the 
Philippine revolution took place only toward the end of the 1 0th century although 
the South American Spanish colonies had already cast off the colonial yoke some 
70 years earlier. 

Yet many principal families suffered a sad fate, for carrving out the manv 
tasks required of them, they were reduced to poverty and declined from their once 
illustrious origins. A mere shortfall in their tribute collections earned many of them 
long imprisonment, frequently accompanied by lashes and stints in the shipyards 
or even exile with little or no prospect of ever seeing again their towns or families. 
J heir many petitions to ease their lot were often cavalierly treated bv callous offi- 
ci als who were concerned only with protecting their own or roval interests. Some 

I 20 



PI IvN Principals v Conquistadorcs 



coloni.il officials svmputhi/cd w ith their plight hut were constrained by their du- 
ties to maintain the colonial system m the Philippines “in the services ot 1 lis Maj- 
esty.” I he passage ot time found the descendants ot the precolonial principal na- 
tive families reduced to a mere shadow of their former greatness as they pleaded tor 
privileges granted their ancestors. I heir efforts to he tree from colonial bondage 
failed miserably as thc\ themselves were also concerned only with their own Nested 
interests. 

The effects ot the divide-and-coiu|iier policy were felt long after the end ot 
Spanish rule. 

Notes 

1. I ewis I l.mkc. ed. . Histon of l Min American ( ivdizMion: Sourees muI Interpretations 
(Boston: I mle, Brown and ( ompanv, 1 0(0, \ is| . 1, pp. 123- 12S, 1-PMS2. 

2. ' lvc*pl\ to I rav Radas *l)pmion. (nude de 1 ave/ares and Others; Manila, lime 
ISO, Blair and Robertson. /Ac Philippine Is Lin (is, \ol. 111. p. 2 ( 0 . 

3. Pablo bernande/, (PP.. Oonumetn Oonde .\</cc /:/ Sol: / hstorm de Li Prormem del Snio. 
Rosnno ( le kilipnms de Li ( )rden de Predieodores (barcelona: OOP p. 3o. 

4. ( 'onsidtiis, 1 PS’ /. ( iobernador Ceneral Baseo v \ argas a Su Magestad] conuinica los 
proi;resos \ estado actual del nuevo establecimiento y conquista espiritual de las \ slas 
Batanes. Manila. 10 de |miio de 1 SS. 

5 . John N. Schumacher, S.)., Readings in Philippine ( hureh History (Quezon City: Ate- 
neo de Manila I’niversitv Press. PPSM, 2nd ed., p. O. 

6 . Pablo Pastells, S.|., ( \it<dooo de los Ooemnentos ReLitiros tiLis IsLis kilipnhis exitentes en 
el Arehiro de Indhis de SevilLi por /). Pedro /ones y l.iinz<is preeedido de mid Hi storm 
(Icnevid de hi/ipiims por el P Pddo I\isteHs , S.J. (Barcelona: 192SP lomo 1\, p. cwv. 

7. “Recollect Missions, l(vi 6 - 0 (). 1 n is de Jesus and Pi ego de Santa 1 heresa, IPS. A. 
(Recollect), Blair and Robertson, l he Philippine IsLinds . \ol. 06 , pp. 100-1 12 . 

(S. “Recollect Missions in the Philippines, 1 (s(s 1 - 1 12. Pedro de San brancisco de Assis: 

17S6. |uan de la Concepcion: OSS, Blair and Robertson, l he Philippine IsLinds, 
Vol. 4 1 , pp. 1 OS - 1 90. 

9. “I listoria de la Orden de San Agustin de estas 1 slas Pilipinas, by bray Juan de Medina, 
O.S.A.; Manila, 1 S 1 H,“ Blair and Robertson, Ihe Philippine IsLmds, Vol. 23, p. 1 S 1 . 
10 . “Jesuit Missions in the Oth Century. Pedro Murillo Velarde, 1 -l9, Blair and 
Robertson, l he Philippine IsLinds . Vol. •*•*, pp. 100-1 12 . 

1 1 . Marcelo de Ribadeneira, (PPM., History of the Philippines and Other kingdoms, tr. 
by Pacita Cuevarra Fernandez (Manila: Historical Conservation Society, 19 0 ), p. 
347. 

12. “Pxpedition of Miguel 1 ope/ de 1 ega/pi, 1 S04-68. [Resume of Contemporaneous 
documents, 1SS9-6S], Blair and Robertson, Ihe Philippine IsLinds, \ ol. 11, p. 133. 

13. ( ieduliirw , I M0- 1 M2. I itulo de subcesion en segunda vida alos 30 tributes que 
gosava en primera vida el Maestre de Campo 13. Francisco lupas el Maestre de 
Campo 1). Phelipe lupas su h i jo, Manila, Agosto 21 de 1692. 



THf\ PHII.1PPINI KIVOH I ION WDHhuM) 

14. Pablo Pastel Is, S.J., op. cit.. p. cxxvii. 

1 5. Miguel A. Bernad, S.J., History Again t the I atuhntpe Manila S* >lniar ulai I Publish- 
ing Mouse, 1968), p. IS”'. 

16. Prancisco Combes, S.J.. I hstoria de .\InuLifnm > jnln Madrid loo P Pablo Pas tells, 
ed., Madrid: 1897), ( Columns ”01 ”55. 

17. Cedulario, 1696y-16VH. Reserva tie tributos polos % scrtuios.i I ). ,n |,,. v p0 Puiisakm v 
Dona Ynes de Robles naturales del pueblo dc • Malate (urisdr mn ( | ( I,, n do Manila. 
2 de Mayo 1696: Reserva de tribute) polos v semuns person. des a I )<»n I h.uico de 
Merrera, Don Dionisio de 1 os Santos v Dona ( athalma 1 1 1 % . » s \ mnsnrtes |>or 
dcsccndientes dc I.adya Matanda Priruipales del Pueblo de l.i-m Manila 's de 
Noviembre 1696. 

18. John Poreman, The Philippine Island* 1 Manila: I ihpim.ma book < ,uilil. ] l )S(h ,> 

19. Luciano R. Santiago, 1 be Houses of Lakandula. Matanda. and Solunan 15“*]- 
1898): Genealogy and ( iroup Identity. Philippine (Jnarterh <>f ( ulture and S v ry 
Vol. 18 (March 1990), p. 44. 

20. Cedularw , /69/-/6P5. Mandarniento paraepie se entienda la icseisa sotueduli de 
tribute) polos y servicios personales a Don < .arlos I .uandola \ Maestre de ( U11 p 0 
Don Juan Macapagal, Maestre Don Agustin ( apulong. I )<> n Pe dro Madlanubavan 
Dona P.usebia (Lathalina Bulindauan corno sus dcsccndientcs Icgmmos \1 ln ,| t | s 
de Octubre 1692; Cedulario, 16VH-l~~02. Reserva de mbutos polos v servicios 
personales y otras cualesejuier contribuciones y repart imientos al die ho M lestre de 
Campo Don Juan Makapagal v otros descendientes de Don ( arlos lacaiulolij Mi 
nila, 22 de Di/.iembre 1693. 

21. “Invents in Manila, 1662-63. [Unsigned; July 1663)/' Blau and Robertson, / he Phil- 
ippine Islands* Vol. 36, pp. 236-237. 

22. Cedularw , 1 65V- J 664. Maestre de Gampo Don Pram i sen I as saman.i ineaed de 100 

cabalitas de tierra de las c]ue poseia v ejiiedaron por inuerte de I )on Xoto\ \\ \j uu . 0 

0 de Don Nicolas (Laima. 

23. Cedularw , 1661-1664. Naturales del pueblo de IWac v sus \ i si t .is reserva de tributo 
por un ano acausa de aver salido a pelear con los Sangleyes sublevados que se retiraran 
a los montes de San Matheo. Manila, 23 de Mayo 1663. 

24. Cedularw , 1 645- 1 64V. Dona Balentina Badvi viud.i del Avudante Alonso I umii m 

que murio peleando en el pueblo de Abucay con el enemigo ( )landes reserva de seis 

tributos de esclavos o cabangcas v reservados de tributos polos y servicios. M mil a 

1 0 de Marso 1 648. 

25. Cedularw , 1656 1660. Oil i „impo Don Andres Malong su titulo e\c VvKKlc'd 

dc 56 \A\Vq\q\ (k* ncgrillos cristianos e inflcles del pueblo de Tclvan Visita del c\c 

Binalatongan. Manila, 27 de Noviembre 1656. 

26. Cedularw , 1 656>- 1 6)6>0. Maestre de ( aimpo Don Alonso Solibuen su titulo de 
merced de los 20 indios infieles que se an ranebeado en sus tierras en terminus de 
1 arras, Vitales, Bocauit y Sinalongan que hacen 10 tributos. Manila, 20 de Mavo 
1656. 



122 



PI Principales v C'onquistadorcs 



27. ( cduLirw . :o°o /6‘AV. Reserva de D. Nicolas Veles y rcvaja del padron. Manila, 

Noviembre 20 dc 1(D(>. 

2(S. ( rduLino. l(>i^ Ih-i'l Pon luan M.ipanop principal del pueblo dc Bangui su titulo 

Ac merced Ac los I ingmanc\ que asisten cn las ranchcrias digo ccrranias dc Rigan 
hasta cl pueblo Ac Bangui cn side ranchcrias cn la Provincia Ac Y ’locos que son ~5 
tribmos I\ko p or muerte del \ lacstrc Ac C ampo Hon Pedro lugani. Manila, 16 de 
I Icncro 1 (> I S. 

20. ( cduLiruK /6% I ~7JS Reserxa Ac Principalia dc tribmos polos v scrvicios pcrsonalcs 

(apn. Pedro Sanganbavan \ Hon Ilian de Mendosa su hermano por descendiemes 
del C apn. Hon Pedro \ inca\ v Pona Ysavcl Malaman su mujer y sus lit jos 
descendiemes. Manila. 20 dc Di/iembre 1MM. 

30. ( cduLiro, 1(^0 i /oAJ Merced a Don Prancisco Tuliau yndio principal de los pueblos 
de l ulaque \ Aiming cn la Provincia cle C agavan. Manila, 16 cle Octubre 10 10. 

31. ( cduLirw . /6J 6 l(\W. Merced al C apn. 5 Sagento Mayor Don Mathco Pilac 5()() 
hombres de los ncgnllos v golotcs que ubiere cn los monies y serranias del pueblo de 
Mangaldan. Manila. 5 Ac Mayo l (>2 ^ . 

32. (. cduLino . / (yfO- 1 6 5 •/. I imlo de merced de los Tinguiancs por asisten desde las 
serranias de Bigan hasta el pueblo dc* Banguii con siete ranchcrias al Maestro cle 
(ampo Don Pedro lugani natural dc la provincia dc Mocos. Manila, 2 de Abril 10**2. 

33. CcduhiruK 1 ~/<S ’- / A) /. Real C edilla que acusa reeibo a esta Ciovierno de la carta cn 
que dio cucnta cle la gran conversion que hacen cn C hina los Religiosos Pominicanos 
de sus Micioncs v sc aprueva las relcvas temporales cle tributo concedido a varios 
Yndios. Aranjue/, 3 de lunio 1 ^2. 

34. ( 'cduLnio, 1 ^(y()- 1 ~Y>6. Reserva de tribmos y scrvicios pcrsonalcs a Don l homas cle 

Aquino v asu muger naturales v principales del pueblo cle Pia Provincia cle C.aga\an. 
Manila, 1 l Ac Marso 1 ""65; Reserva de tribmos v scrvicios pcrsonalcs a Don Antonio 
de Onate v asu muger naturales v principales del pueblo de Pias Provincia de C a- 
gayan. Manila, •* dc* Marso 1 65; ( .onsnltti-( .cduLivuK 1 0/-/ 0 A. Da quenta dc 
haverse relebado de tribmos polos v scrvicios pcrsonalcs y concedido dos casas cle 
reserva para el ciudado cle una cstancia a Don Domingo lalatag en premio de sus 
scrvicios a conscqucncia de la Real Carden de 16 de Di/iembre 1 4. Manila, 10 dc 

Mavo IMS 2. 

35. ( 'cduLnio, /"'AS*. Real Ordcn lo aprobando pm* el Ciobernador Don Simon cle 
Anda sobre que a Don Pedro Bicbic \* asu descendiemes se les relevase cle tribmos 
por el memo que contrajo en la pa/.il'icacion cle \ locos con motivo del alsamiento 
que promobio el ndio Silan en lo demas que espresa. San 1 oren/.o, 1 1 de Octubre 
1765. 

36. (ledulario, / MV A 1 M>6. Reserva cle tribmos y scrvicios pcrsonalcs a Pedro del Sto. 
Domingo \' a su muger natural v principal del pueblo de Amulung Provincia de C ,a- 
gayan. Manila, Marso I de 1 -T 65. 

37. Ccdularw , /Mw-/^MA Real Cedilla de 0 de Noviembre de 1 65 participandole 
haberse concedido titulo de Villa al pueblo de Bacolor cavecera de la Provincia de 



123 



I HI I'f III II'I’IM R! V< >1 I IK>N WDIWiOM- 

Pampanga y remit icndolc nomina dc I* >s sti jct< »s cjm .»!.« s order: t : . )«>n Sinion dc 

Ancla contribuycron ala defensa dc cstas \ slas para epic les m.mil:. sn a K, al gratnud 
con lo dcma.s que sc espresa. 

Varias Prov/ncias-Uocos, 1 796- Kspedrente sobre las umini a tones del Al- 
calde Mayor dc Ylocos v ( )bispo dc Nueva Scgobi.i nianil rccclos que 

tenian dc unas sublcvacioncs dc parte dc los Nat males dr .icjucll.i Pros uk ta. 1 *88 
( J)nsiiltas-( .edulario, I 81-/ H2. I )a c ucnt.i dc h.tscrsc ar ho |ui/.ui« » un I >ato \Ioro 
cj Lie sc titulada cl Principe dc \ Inn rccibirndo con cl Mo B.mptismo cl nomhre dc 
I )on Joseph Mariano del barmen a <jmcn conhrio a nomhic tic S M el grado dc 
C.apitan provisional dc csta .Marina. Manila. S dc |umo tit 1 '.s.' 

Mindanao y Sulu, 1800 1 \ nfornu sohre no ser miivcnu im- las < apimlac iotu*s 

con los Moros por no cnmplir si is r rat ados v lo mm \ c n t.i|os< > que sci ta lot m ir uni 
armada contra c 1 1 r > s a fin dc castig.tr sus lice h os hor rorosos que sc- 1 1 an \ land i dc 

Noviembre 1801. 

lireccwn dc Pucblos-Albay 1 1 Htf>. I oino I Mamin de l ( .ohemador ( .cnctal lose 

Basco y Vargas. Manila. 2 \ dc Scpticrnbrc 1 '8V Alcalde Mavot de \lha\ Don 
J iburcio dc (xorosti/a (to) ( iohemador ( icncral lolgucras. \lha\. dc \ ?os(0 
1820; Don Pedro hstevan, C.apitan Provisional dc manna \ Principal del pueblo de 
fabaco [testimonios] por cl Sr. I )on Jorge ( icrommo, Alcalde ac tual dc- Nairn lies on 
clC .om u n dc Pri nci pales y C .a I )c/.as dc Ba ra ngay, vo n ic t cs 1 1 go I i h u t > id \ 

1788. 

Oficins, ! 72-1 i. I)a enema tie haver contnbuido el ( , remix de Mestizos de It 
Provmua tie lontlo ton tinto mil y tlostiemos y othema pesos p.ir.i expedit ione.s 
contra Moros y recomentla mni partieularmente el ( ioronel tie Mestizos Don Anto- 
nio luason y su I amilia. Manila, 10 de l .nero de I — A. 

Horacto tie la (,osta, S.J., Readings in Philippine History (Makati: Bookmark Inc 
l%5), pp. I 57-158. 

United States War Department. Third Annual Report of the Philippine Commis- 
non, 1902, part Up. 205; Charles B. Hliot. The Philippines m the h nd of the Com- 
mission ( lovernment (Indianapolis: I he Bobbs-Merrill ( Company. 101 M. see loot note 



no. 9. 



The Decline of Spanish Dominion 
in the Philippines 



1 NRIOl 1 B \l I \R RoPRKilTZ 

Umve'Mt\ of Havana. Cuba 



A fter a “fertile truce of 1 S years, the C uban patriots resumed the war against 
Spanish colonialism. I he uprising; of 2 4 February 189S marked the begin- 
ning of the last stage of independence struggles that eliminated the remnants of the 
decadent Spanish overseas empire, t hese independence struggles were not solely 
Latin American. In 18%, the distant and frequently forgotten Philippine colony 
was also shaken bv an armed insurrection that [nit the metropolis in an extremely 
precarious situation. Spain was compelled to fight on two fronts while the Spanish 
economy was beine, drained vis a result of the costly pacification of Cuba. 

As Spanish colonial policy in Philippines had important analogies in the 
American continent, the Philippine political movements — especially those of the 
19th century — also combined the influence of tradition and Spanish-Amcrican 
political practices with the particularity of an ethno-cultural environment of het- 
erogeneous autochthonv that was only partly Spanish. 1 he resulting paradox gave 
Philippine historical development a distinctive stamp: the Philippines was the 
overseas territory where Spanish policy was more conservative and where an or- 
ganically structured separatist ideal appeared much later. 




Since 1492, the colonial campaigns had been justified by civilizing pretensions. 
During the 16th and 17th centuries, Portuguese-Spanish expansion was protected 
by the “Christian evangelizing duty. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the conquest 
pursued a humanist “modernizing" objective. In all cases, the annexing of barbar- 



mi mirimsi KivoimoN wuhiiom) 



ian ’ territories and populations to western civilization v. as the imperialist aim in 
the era of the rise and development of capitalism. 

I he results, however, have shown considerable de tic icik ics m the fulfillment 
of th c transforming mission. I hat is if wc accept this mission .is the real objective 
or colonialism and not a mere pretext. In any case, the generated c < >nt i ad n turn gave 
rise to a controversy in the political, cultural, and sc lent i tic areas m the i apac uy of 
colonialism as the transmitting agent of western progress I lie solution to the 
problem is complex because generalizations frequentb lead t<> unilateral plans 
which may be interpreted according to the interests that inornate the analysis, as 
was demonstrated in the “V ( Centennial in 1662.' 

Iwo factors are essential in placing the problem in a lustorii.il perspective 
toward a concrete analysis of Spanish colonial policy in the Philippines: first, the 
development level represented by each coloni/ing power in its relations not onlv 
with the conquered territory but also with respect to the ttends of universal 
progress; second, the extent to which each metropolis permitted the transference 
of that progress by means of its colonial policy. I lie interaction between both ele- 
ments is constant and can result in substantial variations in the course of tune. And 
so it was with Spanish colonialism. 

When the Philippine archipelago became a Spanish colons in the second half 
of the 16th century, Spain was enjoying an era of great splendor and of prestige 
among the principal Huropcan powers. Although witlnn its structure then- was al- 
ready the seed of its subsequent decline, much more time would pass for it to be- 
come apparent. Jn the first stage, Spanish colonial power, through its forced reli- 
gious policy, transmitted a cultural and educational influence (even though not 
enough to justify the brutal system of exploitation of the native population) and 
introduced advanced practices of government and administration to much more 
primitive forms of social organization. 

However, three centuries later the situation was totally different. Spain had 
agged behind the more advanced Huropcan countries and in the 1 6th century the 
i erences were distinctly noticeable. Spanish absolutism still had sufficient 
strength to resist frequent liberal outbursts, which did not have the energy to lead 
pani.sh society toward change, for one, the royalists and the liberals were in com- 
p etc accord m their conservative attitude toward reforms in their overseas territo- 
ries. If a country cannot solve its own development problems, much less can it 
provide its colonial possessions with any kind of progress. 

During the long Spanish occupation in the archipelago, the pillars of the es- 
tablished regime remained unshakable. There were several reasons for the conser- 
vative Spanish colonial policy in the Philippines: 

D the isolation imposed by the distance between the colony and the me- 
tropolis; 

the low economic value of the islands for the Royal Treasury; 

T the lack of capable officials interested in making a career in such distant 
and inhospitable regions; and 



126 



Ki M >K U »l I . ... V. .: r .v S/\; ;r; jhf Philippines 

■H the aonomu. political. ideological. and cultural power ot the religious 
orders. 

1 he conservatism ot the Spanish colonial police in the Philippines was 
present in the material and spiritual aspects ot the process ot Hispanicizarion. 
Apart trom the partial results .uhicxcd with ( hristianization, transformation 
through colonization was quite lacking and limited. l*he degree of economic 
progress in countries is the primary tact or dictating power relations between them; 
the Spaniards neglec ted to [Promote economic progress in the Philippines except in 
Manila and a tew cities ot some importance. 

1 during more th an three centuries ot domination. large sums were invested 
and large numbers ot indigenous people subjected to forced labor in order to for- 
tify strategic points in the archipelago and to protect it from pirate attacks and 
from Puropean rivals. However, urbanization and the construction ot highways 
and roads, aqueducts, ports, railroads, etc. were neglected. Onlv four vears before 
Spains withdrawal from the islands, in 1S V M. Pon bnrique Altamirano v Salcedo, 
last governor of the province ot ( agavan on the island of 1 u /on, sadly wrote ot the 
deplorable state of living conditions in the provinces, the absence or deterioration 
of communication between these provinces, and lack ot or bad administration ot 
public works. I he economic development of the 1 lispanicizing process never 
reached the vast regions ot the interior, for whose inhabitants domination only 
meant oppression by the friar, the ferocity of the soldier, and the brutality ot hard 
labor. These were the real reasons for the numerous revolts that occurred in nearh- 
all the Philippine provinces and for the persistent hostility of some peoples whose 
territories were able to escape temporarily from Spanish authority. 

In a multi-ethnic and multilingual society such as the Philippines, where, ac- 
cording to the 1 003 census, there existed 1 1 1 ethnic and tribal groups, the devel- 
opment of a dominant culture required a wide diffusion of the Spanish language. 
However, Spanish was used by the peninsular elite to guarantee their monopoly of 
power. Kxcept for a small group of criollos , the immense majority of the Philippine 
population did not have a knowledge of the Spanish language, the learning of 
which remained under the control of the regular clergy. At the end of Spanish 
domination, less than 10 percent of the people could speak Spanish, the majority 
concentrated in Manila, (Suite, and Zamboanga. 10 Then fewer were those w ho 
could write it correctly, as demonstrated bv the scanty Philippine literature in 
Spanish published from the IMh to the 10th centuries. The 1 Oth-century re- 
formers, who were assimilationists rather than separatists, unsuccessfully advocated 
the propagation of Spanish. 

I he declaration of independence by the Spanish-American territories in the 
first quarter of the 10th century was a severe blow to Spain and unequivocal evi- 
dence of the decline of a colonial model. 1 lowever, Spanish politicians preferred to 
keep Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines than to implement real reforms that 
would revitalize what remained of their overseas empire. 



I HI mil II'IMNI HI V< Ml I I< > 



I he rcconqucst plans of l ern.mcfo \ 1 1 .mil the leesiahlishment in the 1 S20s 
of a more severe absolutism in the metropolis and in the colonu s demonstrated 
that the lesson had not been assimilated and that Spanish polu\ continued to be 
extreme! v conservative. I he liberal alternative, however, did not seem to be the wav 
to effect a radical change in the colonies. 

J he two liberal intervals of this period M tt 1 0 1 tt 1 * and 1S.M is.' 3 had as 
their main outcome the represen tat ion of the < »\ erseas pnnnues in the ( ones, but 
also served to demonstrate that the egalitarian principles, expressed in the 1S12 
Constitution of Cadi/, were conceived for the citi/rns of the metropolis and not 
for the subjects of the colonics. 

I he Constitution of ( aidiz was published wit h all s< >lem mi \ in Manila on 1 
April 1813. But the euphoria did not last because it soon become e\ idem to the 
population that equal rights did not mean the elimination of obligators work nor 
exemption from onerous taxes. In 181 * there occurred icwolts m seseral points 
of the archipelago, mainly in I locos Norte, claiming the iclcasc of the population 
from the /)o /os and Servians or the obligation of working in c omimmal piojects. Ihe 
first reaction to the news of the Valencia decree of I crnaiulo VII (•* \la\ IS la), 
abolishing th e constitution and the ( .ortes, was that it was a mancmci of t lie Phil- 
ippine government to prevent tile establishment of ihu constitution. il lights. Asa 
consequence of this, on 3 March I 8 1 3, another revolt exploded in the province of 
Ilocos involving 1,500 persons who for three davs resisted the army. 

With respect to representation in the Spanish ( ones, the benefit was ques- 
tionable. According to what was expressed in the ( .oust it ut ion of ( adi/ autho- 
rizing the election of a deputy for every 60,000 inhabitants t he Philippines might 
have had no less than 20 deputies. I lowever, due to the tost of the trip and the 
stay in the 1 eninsula, there never were more than four representatives and. on sev- 
eral occasions, the Cortes met without Philippine participation because the depu- 
ties were not able to attend the sessions on time due to the huge distance they had 
to travel and to the narrow time margin separating the summons to elections and 
the convening of each legislature; or because their mandate did not reach the estab- 
lished bureaucratic requirements and they were not approved by the Powers Com- 



mission. 



1 erhaps because of the unimportance of constitutional practice in the Philip- 
pines, the decree of I ernando VII (25 December 1823) communicating to its over- 
seas domains the reestablishment of his absolute sovereignty went practically un- 
heeded. In reality the Pacific colony had not experienced significant changes be- 
tween 1810 and 1 823 or thereafter. 

In two other instances, political changes in the metropolis did not result in 
corresponding reforms in the colonies, not only because the authorities in the me- 
tropolis had planned it so but also because of the tenacious resistance to changes in 
the most conservative sectors of colonial society. 

I he first occasion was the reestablishment of the constitutional regime after 
the death of I ernando VII in 1835. I he return to a constitutional regime meant 



1 28 



Ki >| >KH .1 i / 



//V / V. . ; \p t ;f::*h I ^orrnwor: :>l the Philippine'? 

the complete exclusion from the Spanish C ortes ot deputies originating trom the 
overseas territories, which were governed from 183~ hv “special laws/ as was es- 
tablished in article 2 ot the .uldeiulum to the new Spanish constitution, promul- 
gated on IS |une 183A 1 he Philippines, like C uba and Puerto Rico, lost its repre- 
sentation in t he C ones; that right was never returned to them, even when the Span- 
ish were forced to ^oiucde reforms to C uba in order to end the 10-year war, or 
when the Philippine reformists demanded similar treatment. 

The change ot regime in Spain also alerted the conservative forces in the 
Philippines. Phe first governor ot the archipelago under the new svstem was field 
Marshal 1 )on Andres ( ,ai\ ia l amba. a Spaniard resident in the Philippines tor 1 0 
years and elected depute to the C ortes in 1838 and 1830. His appointment was 
accepted with great enthusiasm bv the Spanish elite in the colony, but when the 
new authoritv made it clear that he was representing the interest of the power con- 
stituted in the metropolis (Isabel 111 and that he was not prepared to tolerate the 
conspiracies in support of the almost all the clergv and manv magistrates 

declared war using all the available resources in the Philippines and in Spain. 1 he 
libelous campaign against t amba accused him of granting “preferences to the na- 
tives of the countrv against those of the Peninsula. " A short time later Don 
Andres Garcia Gamba was relieved of his appointment and the clergy emerged as 
the real power in the Philippines. 

Phe second occasion was during the 1808 Revolution. Once the events that 
took [dace in the metropolis were made public, the prosecutor of the Justice Gourt 
of Manila issued a regulation — dated ~ Januarv 18(A) — forbidding the newspapers, 
by superior order, to publish news referring to the Spanish revolution. But more 
interesting were events during the government of Hon C arlos Maria de la lorre, 
first representative of the new regime in the Philippines. " \\ it h some new though 
moderate ideas. He la lorre tried to w in over the Philippine reformists, but like 
Gamba before him, he was also up against the resistance ot the peninsular elite 
who saw in the more liberal methods of government a threat to their political 
monopoly. 

Phe most relevant project of De la Torres government was conceived by 
Minister of Overseas Moret. It dealt with the secularization of education in the 
Philippines, especially the conversion of the Royal and Pontifical University of 
Santo Tomas in Manila into the University of the Philippines. 1 his was practically 
a declaration of war upon the clergv and interference in a field where they had 
exercised absolute control from the beginning. The project was immediately 
challenged bv the archbishop and bv the religious orders, causing great tension in 
their relationship with Governor De la Torre, who tried to implement it. However, 
the appointment of Don Abelardo Tope/, de Avala as new overseas minister ended 
the conflict, as he decreed the elimination of the reforms conceived by his pre- 
decessor. 

In Cuba, ever since 1842, the “General Plan of Public Instruction for the Is- 
lands of (Alba and Puerto Rico" had secularized the Universitv of Havana, which 



1 2 C ) 



i m mu iitim i'i v< >n 1 1< > 



previously had been under the I )ommic.m < >rdcr. I tui<>u:>: : . -in- micrcMx and 

the power of the regular clergy in the colonics as well as tin- attitude ot the me- 
tropolis in relation to reforms differed considerable. Between . son and 1 S9,S. the 
Spanish authorities made no further serious at tempt s t< > . ban-.-, the I Mu 1 1 pot nc situ- 
ation. 

Philippine "Filibusterism" in the Second Half of the 1 9th ( entun, 

f he Spanish authorities used the word filibuster t> > refer t< > a pets* >n stispcc ted of' 
activities or conduct considered disloyal to Spam I he definitions ot the "mis- 
feasance were general and various and could be- interpreted as am demonstration 
that subverted the values established by the colonial powei. I bus. under the avali- 
sation of “filibusterism” any native who rebelled against toned lahoi. oi a Philip- 
pine soldier who had committed mutiny, or a person with progressive ideas, or sim- 
ply any person opposed to clerical views could be proses uted. 

During the second half of the 19th ccntuiv. reformism pnnidcd the main 
political and ideological basis of Philippine filibusterism. I he ideal of indepen- 
dence from Spain or the formation of a sovereign national state was . Icarlv seen 
only in the dynamics of the I 896 events. The political thought and even the politi- 
cal action of the principal Philippine figures of that period f|<>sc Ki/al. Marcclo H 
del Pilar, hmilio Aguinaldof were substantially reformist, although w uh differences 
in methods and forms of expression. 

Regrettably we do not have sufficient data to studs in depth t lie evolut ion of 
19th-century Philippine political movements. In not a lew works references are 
made to the most outstanding moments of the time like the I 8” 2 ( tl \ ite Mutiny 
and the Revolution of I 896; in other works history is subordinated to biographical 
interest in prominent personages, f fowever, they do not link facts or identify gen- 
eral trends. • ^ 

Some factors militated against the development of strong nationalism and 
con. sec] uen tly a solid anticolonial movement. 

I he Philippine archipelago is composed of about ~, ()()() islands and islets, 
many of which are uninhabited. I hrcc mountain chains cross 1 u/on, the most 
important of all the islands, and continue from north to south in other parts of the 
archipelago. Although there are rivers of certain importance, they arc not navigable 
for most of their length. 1 his geography and the absence of communication tend 
to isolate communities. 

f he ethnocultural factor is also very important. Apart from the territorial 
scattering there are also marked ethnic and tribal divisions, with dif ferent sociocul- 
tural development levels and divergences in customs, religion, and even in lan- 
guage. With so much diversity there did not exist any all-encompassing element 
during the pre-Pfispanic period that could have given rise to a national spirit. 

Spanish domination imposed Christianity on the islands and put them un- 
der a single administration, but the unifying effect was imperfect. Hispanicizing, 

130 



KOI Mvli .1 I . ' I 'he / V. re of Sp.tntsh l\mumon :n the Philippines 



as a process of /;•<///.'* tdturatton. w as superficial and unequally distributed geo- 
graphically. Its prodiu is the ov (t/!th and mesti^as — were said to be the cornerstone 
of a potential nationalism, but the majority felt socially closer to Spain than to the 
larger “indigenous population. 

The name populace did not passively accept Spanish domination. On the 
contrary, they resisted the colom/crs in a series of revolts between the l th and 
19th centuries. But gcncralb they were no more than local uprisings with limited 
regional involvement. at the most m a few provinces. A strong revolt in llocos 
Norte hardlv had am repercussions m Manila; the expulsion of the Spaniards from 
the island of Bohol, and the resulting loss of authority in this territory, in no way 
endangered Spanish supremacy in the archipelago. In order to have serious conse- 
quences, an insurrection had to be m the seat of colonial power in the Philippines, 
such as the C avite Mutiny of 18^2 and the Revolution of 1 896. 

L nt il the C “avite Mutinv of 1 8*0. anticolonial demonstrations in Philippines 
could be classified into three different groups. 

1) Revolts resulting fiom colonial exploitation. In nearly all the provinces 
there appeared numerous spontaneous revolts caused by enforced hard labor, ex- 
cessive taxes and contributions, arbitrariness of the clergy and colonial authorities, 
etc. Hxamplcs were the ones that occurred in llocos Norte in 1 80 A due to the 
government's wine monopoly and the prohibition of manufacturing bast (the local 
drink), and those of 18 I t and 1818 in protest against forced labor in communal 
works. Perhaps one of the most serious was that of the mountain folk of Bohol, 
who revolted against the hardship imposed by the Jesuits in O-w, and maintained 
their belligerency until 1828. 

2) Revolts resulting from religious dominance. 1 hese emerged as an autoch- 
thonous reaction against the dogmas of C diristianity or as a challenge to the power 
of the Spanish clergy. Religious bigotry and clerical abuse pushed the natives into 
armed confrontation. In 1811 there was an uprising organized by the town heads 
or cabezas de barangar. who attempted to create a new religion with their own min- 
isters, and with a god that thev called I ungao. 1 he revolt was resolutely quelled by 
the colonial authorities. ls More important vet was the Confraternity of San Jose, 
founded by Apolinario de la C ruz in 1840. I he C .onfraternity gained many fol- 
lowers in the provinces of Iavabas (Quezon), Batangas, and l aguna, but even so it 
could not make the ecclesiastic authorities nor the Court of Justice legalize its ex- 
istence. On the contrary, it was suppressed and its leaders incarcerated. In October 
1841, no less than 3,000 or 4,000 supporters of Apolinario de la Cruz revolted for 
several days in those three provinces until they were ruthlessly crushed by the 
army. 1 '' 

3) Conspiracies and insurrections within the Philippine army . During the 
19th century insurrections were organized bv subordinate officers in the colonial 
army for various reasons. On 2 June 1823, 800 soldiers took over the kings garn- 
son, the Royal Palace, and the C a tv Hall. How ever, this attempt, which was effec- 
tively suppressed, was more American than Philippine, as the crown immediately 



131 



I MI PIIII II'I'INf RI V< >! I I !< > 



N \NI » HI t < >' 



put Spanish officers in place of American officers who up t<> that moment had 
been solidly established in the army). I he former had t<» he rnoie reliable than 
the officers from the already independent colonies. I his insurrection did not 
have the support of the Philippine population. ( )n JO |.mu.ir\ 1 s i >. there oc- 
curred another revol t in \ \ an i la , of less importance although t o t a 1 1 \ Philippine. \ n 
infantry regiment of soldiers from the province of lavabas msc up t,> avenue the 
death of their countrymen in t he ( .ontr.it emits < >1 S.in |< >st- In hi >t h «. .i\es t lie Span- 
ish were supported hv native infantry and . millers from other ptosiiucv \nother 
example was the revolt in 1854 hv the security lieutenant lose ( uesta. a I lispanic- 
Philippine mestizo in San Isidro, lutt this had no better link than the others. 

I he Cavite Mutiny of I 8~2 may he included in the thud uioup. although 
some of its elements make it a borderline case in whn h are mixed elements of con- 
tinuity and change. The elements of change inc hide: (list, that the immii re«. t ion was 
preceded by organizational work, inside and outside of the army, more meticu- 
lously than on previous occasions; second, that it was totalis Philippine in nature 
and its objective directed clearly against the power of the Spanish elite; third, that 
for the first time a military revolt had civilian ramific at inns, suppoitcd hv some 
representatives of the clergy and of the Philippine middle class; lomth. that tor the 
first time they tried a concerted effort, in a simultaneous operat ion, to .. )j n t ] K . two 
principal sites of Spanish power, Manila and ( Cavite. 

I he insurrection was frustrated because the plan was discovered in Manila, 
and the insurgents of Cavite, believing that the simultaneous upi ism*; would suc- 
ceed, rose by themselves. I he failure of the insurrection discouraged am further 
armed demonstrations against the colonial government fora longtime; in fact this 
was the last important action executed by troops of the colonial armv. I lowever, 
the events of Cavite constituted an important milestone, cspcc ially for the educated 
middle class. I he execution of several native priests, supposedly involved in the in- 
surrection, had a dramatic impact on the Philippine population who, from then 
on, began to speak more frequently of the need for change. 

I he next 20 years (1872-1892) were characterized by peaceful reformism.* 0 
However, the colonial laws prohibited the formation of political parties and im- 
posed censorship; therefore, the reformists had to count on the exile community 
for its platform.* 1 La Solidaridad was the principal means of spreading reformist 
ideas, with Jose Rizal as collaborator during the years 1 882- 1 885, and Marcelo H. 
del Pilar as publisher from December of 1889. In its pages appeared the demands 
of the reformists: secularization; elimination of the power of the church and expro- 
priation of their holdings; freedom of expression, of the press, and of assembly; 
participation in government; political and social freedom; legal ecjuality; assimila- 
tion (free Spanish-language education, among others); and representation in the 
Spanish Cortes. 

La Liga bilipina, a Masonic-type society, was organized by supporters of 
reforms. Around the end of 1891, Jose Rizal wrote and published the bylaws of 
the Liga during his stay in Hong Kong, sending hundreds of copies to Manila for 



132 



Ki M >KU ,11. . - ■. . V. .:t;r s r. l\*w:n:or: in ;/v Philippines 

distribution. On Id I chm.irx 1S V) 2. after tour years ot traveling in several coun- 
tries, Ri/al returned to the Philippines in order to consolidate the recently con- 
ceived 1 iga, hut he was immediately arrested and accused ot being an agitator and 
a filibuster and deported to Papuan, Mindanao. V he temporary disappearance of 
Ri/al from the political arena practicalh disabled the 1 iga. and most ot its tollow- 
ers lost hope ot Obtaining retorms b\ pcacctul means and began to think ot armed 
revolt. 

I lardlv had Ciovernoi Pon l ulogio Pcspujol decreed the deportation ot 
Ri/al w hen Andres Bonifauo established the Katipunan. a more radical Masonic- 
tvpe association whose full name was Kataastaasan Kagalanggalang Katipunan ng 
m i»a Anak in; Bavan (.Supreme and Venerable Association ot the Children ot the 
Nation). At the beginning of 1 the Katipunan stepped up its recruitment. In 
many places it established Popular Councils (Sanguniang Bavan), with an hxecu- 
tive Board formed bv a president pnngulo . a secretary ( tiigningdt ng lihim l a pros- 
ecutor (tiityt'ttsig). a treasurer t rngn/ngnr ng v<nnjn), and sentinels (uiliba) in charge 
of the inner door and the outer door. I he councils had sections (biiLmgay) in the 
municipalities or m the provinces. 

In August 1890, the society was exposed; it had 10,000 members in several 
provinces in I u /on. On 23 August, the Katipunan met in Balintawak and agreed 
to be*un armed operations. I wo days later, lmilio Aguinaldo, a municipal captain, 
and others of the middle classes began the uprising in Cavite.” 

In spite of its premature uprising, the insurrection had begun under favor- 
able circumstances. 1 ittle more than a year before, another war had begun in C uba 
and the Spanish armv was under extraordinary pressure. At this moment the 
struggle was extended all over the island aftei the success ot the' invasion under 
taken bv Maximo C iome/ and Antonio Maceo, and the western /one was besieged 
by the forces of the two nhnnbiscs chiefs. \ aleriano \\ eyler, already known in Cuba 
and the Philippines, replaced Martinez Campos with the order of unleashing a war 
without quarter until "the last man and the last peseta. In fact, by the autumn ot 
1896, Spain had in Cuba 223,000 soldiers and had requested foreign credits for 
593 million pesetas. Under those conditions it was difficult tor Spam to send a 
large number of troops to crush the Philippine revolution. 

Governor Don Ramon Blanco, who afterward became the last general cap- 
tain of Cuba and in charge of deliv ering the island to the Americans, tried to wipe 
out the revolt by intensifying the repression, but he could not prevent the first vic- 
tories of the insurgents, among them that of Binakayan, 1 1 November 1896, where 
Aguinaldo and his Cavite rebels defeated the regular Spanish troops. 

In December of the same year, Blanco was replaced by a famous veteran of 
the big war in Cuba, General Camilo Polavieja. 1 he former governor of Santiago, 
and in 1890 of all the islands, undertook numerous military operations in the 
provinces of Manila, Bulacan, Bataan, Pampanga, Batangas, and Cavite. Before 
this onslaught, the rebels waged guerrilla warfare, thus avoiding frontal battles with 
the army. Because of his experience in Chiba, Polavieja knew that this kind of war 



133 



I HI I'HII MMMNI HI V< >M 1 |< )N \N| ) HI t< >NI ) 

required greater reinforcements, especially after he- ordered the execution of lose 
Rizal without concrete evidence of his participation in the insurrection. Rizal’s 
death inflamed even more the spirit of independence in the Philippines. On 13 
April 1897, Polavieja resigned and transferred his command t « > the Second C abo 
Don Rafael Lachamhre, who soon transferred it formalh to the new g«»\ernor. Don 
Fernando Primo de Rivera. 

I he strategy of Primo de Rivera, who was familiar v. ith the Philippine situ- 
ation because of his governorship in 1880 1883. was different \\ hile launching 
successful military attacks against the insurgents, he negotiated tow. ud peace, as 
did General Martinez Campos in Guha 20 years before \nd fin.ilh he also 
achieved his “Zanjon. By mid - 1 89 ~ the reve >1 1 1 1 ioiiar\ f ore es w er e seriousb w eak- 
ened by internal differences. Andres Bonifac io, once atprctnn of \ he Kat ipun.m. was 
accused of dividing the movement, and for that reason was executed on 10 Mav 
1897, by orders of the Provisional Revolutionary ( lovernmeni and its president 
Hmilio Aguinaldo. Fhus prevailed in the revolution the interests of the middle 
classes of Cavite. 

On 14 December 1897, Primo de Rivera and 1 imho Aguinaldo signed the 
controversial Agreement of Biak-na-Bato that put an end to the tiisi stage of the 
Philippine revolution. Through the agreement , Spain permitted Aguinaldo and ^5 
others to leave for Hong Kong, with the guarantee of their sale conduct and the 
amount of P400,000 ’ in exchange for the surrender of the rebels. In the text of 
the agreement there were no allusions made as to the political aspirations of the 
Philippines, but it was understood that Spain would undertake reforms. Because 
°f nonfulfillment of its terms, the truce lasted onlv a few months. 

I he War of 1898 and the Frustration of Independence 

f he four years between 1898 and 1902 had extraordinary importance in Philip- 
pine history. I he period decided the fate of the archipelago in the 20th centurv. 

I here seemed to be three possible alternatives then: to remain under the Spanish 
flag, to be under American dominance, or to establish an independent republic. In 
reality they were not options. The Spanish power was praetieallv finished and the 
Philippine revolution begun in 1 896 as a struggle for independence had to pay the 
fatal price for its place within the context of a worldwide shift in the balance of 
power. 

As in Cuba, the involvement of the Philippine revolution in the Spanish- 
American War of 1898 generated a complex process of transition characterized by 
a rapidly changing structure and the interaction of various factors. Four moments 
are considered fundamental to a synthesized evolutionary vision of the events. 

1) February to 25 April 1898. The United States ( Amgress formally declared 
war against Spain. After the explosion of the Maine in the bay of I favana on 15 
February, the hostilities between the two countries became imminent. A few weeks 
before, the Spanish naval attache in V7ashington alerted bis government to the fact 

134 



j 



Kt U >KI< .1 I / 



• ! V. /; f.r ' s;\; ' h l 'dominion in the Philippine* 

that, in the e\ cm of a w a\ w ith the l ‘nited States, the Philippines would be the first 
military objective. Simuh.mcousb. I .S. fomnudore Dewey received secret in- 
structions from the V\rctar\ of the Naw 1 heodore Roosevelt, to move his fleet to 
Hong Kong and be prepared for an assault on Manila. 

Meanwhile, the Philippine revolution was still hound by the truce agreed 
upon in the P.k t of Biah na Baio and w ith its junta in 1 long Kong. But Philippine 
support would he a dec isi\ e t.K ioi in the imminent confrontation. I his was known 
bv the t lined States, aiul its diplomatic atul intelligence services began to establish 
contacts w ith the revolutionary leaders. Spain was on the verge of losing its colony 
in the Pacific. In the second half of 1 S v >~\ there had occurred important changes in 
the Spanish government. \\ ith the assassination of the conservative integrationist 
Antonio C.inovas del c astillo in earlv August, the presidency of the council was 
handed to the head of the l iberal Part)-, Praxcdes Mateo Sagasta. One of the first 
measures of the new cabinet was the proclamation of an autonomous regime tor 
Cuba and Puerto Rico in late November 1 8^ . In the case of C uba the grant came 
too late and the patriots, m arms since lS^N preferred to continue the struggle tor 
their independence, t hi the other hand, the Philippine revolutionaries might have 
readily accepted, at least for a while, a Spanish commitment to an autonomous re- 
gime. But at that moment the obdurate metropolis did not make that otler to the 
Philippines, and when at last it decided to concede, the' Philippine independence 
movement was again in full swing. 

During this period, b.milio Aguinaldo held several interviews with the 
American consuls in I long Kong and Singapore. Aguinaldo was asked to renew 
the struggle against Spain, for which he could count on the "disinterested help of 
the U.S. government. I lowever, Aguinaldo could not obtain a written agreement 
whereby his American “allies would guarantee Philippine independence. " Never- 
theless, in the end he believed that the Inited States would give the Philippines the 
same treatment as Cuba, and he agreed to fight with the I nited States against 
Spain. In the flagship of Commodore Dewey departing for Manila also traveled 
Philippine Ceneral Jose Alejandrino, bearing the necessary armaments for the 
rebels who were to assault the citv bv land. 

2) 1 May 189 8 to 10 December 1898. Phis crucial stage of the war begins 
with the naval battle off Cavite and ends with the signing of the lreatv of Paris. 
Although the declaration of war was announced on 2S April, it was on 1 May that 
military operations began with the battle in Manila Bay, a small skirmish in which 
Commodore Dewey only needed two hours to achieve the surrender of Spanish 
Admiral Patricio Montojo. In spite of the easv victory, Dewey did not risk taking 
the city until new reinforcements arrived. Meanwhile, the Philippine rebels began 
attacks on land and completely surrounded Manila, together with U.S. troops on 
13 August. According to what was agreed upon, the American troops occupied the 
interior of the city and the Philippine forces were concentrated on the outside. 

hven though the military actions were not of much importance, the political 
machination that accompanied them w as extraordinarily complex and dangerous. 



13S 



I HI milll'I'INI KIVOll I I< )N \N I ) HI « > 



At this time the key issue was no longer the present but the tumre of the archi- 
pelago, and in this, the Americans and the 1 ihpinos had u i \ liiMuuni plans. 

According to the document signed on 1 2 \ugiist with Spain, the l nited 
States would only occupy the city, bay and port of Manila, while a peace ireatv 
was signed which determined the control, arrangement and government of the 
Philippines/ Ivvo months before, on 12 June, I nnho Agum-ilth, issued a Decla- 
ration of Independence and established the Republu of Philippines, wnh himself 
as president. He also began to take measures for its mst it ut lonah/at i< »n. n K | lK |j ril , 
a constitutional project later approved b\ the Malolos ( ongress Bui. k. in 
verted into a C Constituent Assembly. I be l nited States, be >w ever, did m >t recognize 
the republic, nor did it issue any statement binding it to Philippine independence 

Before the signing of the treaty of peace, the balance of fences m the Philip- 
pines was as follows: American troops occupied the c 1 1 \ of Manila, while 
Aguinaldo’s forces controlled nearly all the rest of the archipelago But m spue of 
their military advantage, the Philippine forces were not allowed to participate in 
the Paris talks — which was also .in indirect way of not recogm/in«; die existence of 
the republic. 

I he period from September to I )cccmbcr saw steps taken In d K . Amtin tldo 
government to have Philippine independence as a topic of discussion m p,- 
However, they all failed because of the duplicity ot the Americans. \\ | 1( | c | c |ipe 
Agoncillo, plenipotentiary minister of the Philippine republic, was inform ills re- 
ceived bv U.S. President McKinley. who authori/ed some members of the Ameri- 
can delegation to Paris to listen to him without an official nature " .1, . „„ , 

1 resident McKinley was giving his commissioners (on IB September) c | car j nsmu> 

tIons to demand the unconditional cession of the island of I u /011 to t | K . ^! n j tc J 
States. 

Around the end of October the Paris talks took a new turn. Because ofcom- 
mcrctal interests, the United States demanded the turnover of the entire uchi- 
pclago. It was decided that the Philippines should become the springboard from 
where the United States could effectively launch its “open door" police in ('him 
announced officially in 1899W This American demand was a violation of the ex- 
isting document because according to international practice it was not acceptable 
to reclaim a territory which had not been effectively occupied. The issue was solved 
in the Ireaty of Paris with a simple transaction, through which the United States 
bought the archipelago from Spain for $20 million. 

finally U.S. policy toward the Philippines became lulls' coherent. I I owever, 
the signing of the dreary of Paris, at the same time that it formally ended the Span- 
tsh-American War, created the conditions for a new conflict with their previous 
“allies.” 

3) 10 December 1898 to 4 February 1899. Philippinc-Amcrican relations 
deteriorated as a consequence of the Ireaty of Paris and the proclamation of Presi- 
dent McKinley of U.S. sovereignty over the archipelago. The government of Agu- 
inaldo did not accept the results of the negotiations because the treats’ did not rec- 



136 



KOI >KU .1 \ . ' / 'v / V. Vu >;:»/> Dominion the Philippi):?* 

ognize the independent e ot t he eiumtrv w hen, in tact, there existed a republic with 
full power in most ot the territory At the same time Philippine troops in different 
regions rejected the disembarking ot American soldiers occupying strategic posi- 
tions, unless thev were ordered to do so bv Cicncral Aguinaldo. 

The situation became cxtrcmelx tense, but the two sides agreed to create a 
commission to Imd an end to the dispute. On 6 February 1890, the Ireaty ot Paris 
was approved b\ the l .V Senate in the face ot strong opposition against imperial 
expansion. It the \merican forces were to begin the conflict, the Philippine resis- 
tance would denv the argument that the people wanted the l .S. presence in the 
archipelago. Phis could ncgativclv influence the voting of the Senate. At the same 
time, it the Treat \ ot Paris were rejected, there existed the possibility that President 
McKinlcv would Imallv recogni/e Philippine independence. Apparently, what was 
more convenient for all was to wait. 

I lowever, a fortuitous incident came to taxor the supporters ot l .S. ex- 
pansionism. t )n t Tebruarx 1899, a Tilipi no soldier ct\isse«,l the American lines, 
starting a skirmish that serxed as a pretext tor the beginning ot hostilities. 1 he 
U.S. press launched an anti Philippine campaign that blamed the Philippines 
for provoking the conflict and at the same time guaranteed a taxorable vote in the 
Senate. 

4) 4 February IS 99 to */ July 1402. At the beginning ot the confrontations 
the Philippine forces were three times the number of American troops (bob offic- 
ers and 20, 000 soldiers),' but thev were interior in arms, organization, and logis- 
tical resources, which later worked in taxor ot the occupation army. 

From the arrival of theSeluirman Commission in Manila on 9 March 1800, 
the Aguinaldo government tried to negotiate an armistice in order to attain an 
understanding xxith the Philippines without granting independence. But Uover- 
nor-( leneral F.lxvcII S. Otis answer xxas alxvaxs the same: unconditional surrender. 
Meanwhile, the national resistance xxas weakened by the war eflort and the deser- 
tion of those xvho flnallv accepted amnestx*. 

After 4 J u I x r 1 00 1 , the xvar entered a nexv phase. 1 he military government xxas 
taken over by a civilian one with W illiam I 1. laft as the first governor ot the nexv 
colonial regime. I his was cvidentlv a paradox: while the American citizens were 
celebrating the anniversary of their independence, the ITS. government xxas insti- 
tutionalizing its domination in the Philippines. W ith the capture of Aguinaldo in 
March 1901 total "pacification” was onlx’ a question of time. 

On 4 Julv 1902, the Philippine-American War ended officially. For this vic- 
tory tlie United States, in little more than three years, employed 4,067 officers and 
122,401 soldiers; of these 140 officers and 4,234 soldiers died in combat or of dis- 
ease, while 204 officers and 2,81 8 soldiers were wounded.' 1 he total cost of this 
war for the U.S. taxpayer was more than $600 million." 

Thus ended what some historians call the first real nationalist movement in 
Asia/' American intervention frustrated several years of struggle of the Philippine 
people to achieve their liberation, favoring an imperial transition in which the 

1 3’ 7 






i m mu i imm si- ki Vi >i r i k >n \m > hi v »m > 



archipelago went from the hands of the most backward colonial power to the 
one which would become the most developed power <>f the 30 th ventnrv. I hc 
Philippines had to wait 45 years in order to obtain their independence from the 
United States. 

Notes 



b Generally this analog)' is explained only In the rigidnv <>t Spanish oilnm.il policy. 

I lowever, it is a fact that a good mini her of the- prmc ip.il miht.u \ . c i \ ll . and religious 
authorities that governed the life of the arc hipclago from the coiujuest to the begin- 
ning of the 19th century were either of Spanish origin who had st.ned in Sp.inish- 
America for a long time or were native Americans from the Ww Spam vuernvship 
and therefore not strangers to American influence during their sta\ m the Philippines. 
See Antonio M. Molina Mernije, Amcrtca ni hlipnut\. 1 ditotial MAPI KI Madrid. 
1992; hnrique Baltar Rodrigue/, I ilipinas en el contain del sistem.i colonial 
cspanol,” Revista Tzintzun, Institute) de Invest igac lones I hstoi u as. I tm ersidad 
Michoacana de San Nicolas de Hidalgo, Mexico. No. IS. |,iho I >ic lemhre de 1 99 \ 
pp. 92-100. 

2. Hnriquc Baltar Rodrigue/, op. cit.. pp. 89-92. 

3. Marxist thinkers of the 20th century have generally assumed a c ritual position m this 
regard, obviating sometimes the fact that Marx also defended that point ot view upon 
judging the British domination in India. See Karl Marx, I a domination britanica 
cn la India v huturos result. idos de la domination britanica el la India/' Accrca del 
colonialismo. hditorial Progreso, Mscu, s/a/. 

4. Manfred Kossok, ' ;I fa inventado ( iristobal ( iolOn el Icrrcr Mundor" la lormacion 
del ! listoriador. Universidad Michoacana tic San NkoI.is dc I Iidalgo, Morelia 
Mtchoacan, Mexico. No. 6. Invierno IW2-IW. 

5. Htstoria del Mundo en la l : .dud Moderna, eds. Ramon Sopcna, S.A. Barcelona. 194 A 
tomo XI, pp. 422. 

6. I hspamci/.ing, ar least in the Philippine ease, stood for a wirier concept which also 
implied Christianization" but was not limited to it. See Knrk|iic Baltar Rodriguez, 
op. cit., pp. 90-91 . 

7. Bernard Moses. Spain Overseas ( New York, 1929), p. HO and ss. 

H. 1 .nrique Altamirano v Salcedo, h'ilipinas ; relato historieo de ados y lurhos read didos en 
los ultimas dins de nuestra domtnacian, Madrid, Imprcnta de ( 2 Perrin, 1 902. 

9. Ducionarto hnciclopedico IJ. I.I-..H.A., Union Tipografka Hditorial 1 lispano Ameri- 
cana, Mexico, 1951. 

1 0. Bernard Moses, op. cit., pp. 8 I 

1 1. kneuiopedta Universal llustrada Europeo-Americamn v. XXIII, p. 1377. 

12. See Jose Montcro y Vidal, op. cit., v, II, pp. 408 and ss. 

13. Ibid., pp. 406-407. 

1 4. By royal certificate of 23 April ] 826, Hernando VII conceded the city of Manila the 
stamp of a Royal (.town on account of the praise and readiness with which the 



138 



KOI >K U * l \ . ' 1 • v / \ . s u tush l lor tu ttto n in the Philippines 



cessation ot the abolished constitutional system and the reestablishment ot mv legi- 
timate C .o\ eminent had taken place, lose Montero y \ idal. op. cit., v. 11. pp. *481. 

15. |ose Montero \ \ ulal. op. cit.. \. 111. pp. 20. 

16. I hs mandate was extended from 23 |une 1 8(>9 to 3 April 18~1. 

1 It was w ith that name that lose Ri/al designated the continuation ot his famous novel 
A ’oh Me Tm^ere. published in 1 89 1 and dedicated to the Philippine priests executed 
alter the insurrection ot t ante in 18^2. Xolt Me L and hi hdihttstensnio be- 
came a symbol loi the Philippine patriots at the end ot the 1 Mh century, both books 
were published in Cuba bv the Art and l iterature Publishing Mouse in 1983 and 
1 08a . respec lively. 

18. It is necess.ir\ to emphasize two interesting aspects: first, that the leader ot the re l i - 
l »i ( ,us movement called himselt “new C hrist" and his most devoted followers 
“Apostles, which shows a Meat intluence ot Christianity. Second, together with re- 
demption there appeared promises ot treedom from tax payment and monopolies. 
See |ose Montero \ \ idal. op. cit.. \. II. p. *t01. 

10. It is interesting to compare two versions on the same events: that ot a Spanish con- 
servative and ot a french journalist. See lose Montero y \ idal. op. cit.. v. 111. pp. 3”- 
88 . 

2(). h is interest ini; to know that this coincides w ith uufonornisni in Cuba. In reality the 
status conceded to the island alter the Xanjon Pact was precisely the political model 
the Philippine reformists wanted to follow. 

21. \\ ithin the colonv attempts were also made to create a space, but this was very dan- 
gerous. In 1882, tor example, Marcelo 1 1. del Pilar established the Ditiriong 'Ligti/og 
and through it he began to spread democratic and liberal ideas, but in 1888 he had to 
migrate to Spain in order to escape from his clerical enemies. See 'The Me(jnnc-Hi/1 
Tmyelopeelin of World Biogrup/y OAP v. 3, p. 33”. 

22. In The Mc(iiiUr-l Till Tncyclopedia of World Biography 19“\P there appears the bio- 
graphical synthesis of the principal Philippine patriots ot this period, as well as a bib- 
liographical recommendation of the better works that have been written on them. 

23. Historic del Minido en hi I. dud Modenin, p. *oA 

24. There are some discrepancies as to the date of the agreement and the quantity ot 
money agreed upon. Some authors assert that it was signed on 18 December and 
others on the 23rd. They also speak of IMOO.OOO, P800.000, and ot Si million. See 
Antonio M. Molina Memije, op. cit., p. 138: Scott Nearing y Joseph freeman. Lu 
Diplomaeia del Ddhir. f.ditorial de Ciencia Sociales, Pa Habana, 1 9 3, p. 238; 
Diccwnarw de Historic de hspafnu Reyista de Occidente, Madrid, 1 982, v. I, pp. 4 1 6- 
417; Historic del Minido en hi Tdnd Moderna , p. 460. 

28. Antonio M. Molina Memije, op. cit., p. 123. 

26. Ibid., pp. 1 24- 1 27. 

27. Cited by Scott Nearing and Joseph f reeman, op. cit., p. 242. 

28. Antonio M. Molina Memije, op. cit., p. 143. 

29. Scott Nearing and Joseph freeman, op. cit., p. 2*42. 

30. Ibid., pp. 62-63; 310-312. 



139 



TUI. PHII 1ITINI RI V< )I t I K )N AN I > HI *»< >\I > 



31. Antonio M. Molina Mcmije, op. tit., p. IS] 

32. Scott Nearing and Joseph I reeman, op. cit p. 3 f 1 

33. Antonio M. Medina Memije. op. cit.. p. 2 * 1 

34. I.ucicn Bianco, Asut ( .otitciuporiincti. Si^lo \cititiun<>. \l.uirul. 



140 



Spanish Politics and the Philippines 
in the 19th Century 



1 Ol RIM s I'M \/-Tui i lllTl O 

Umversidad de Cordoba, Spam 



T he 19th ccnturv began in Spain under a threatening omen: the ideas 
ot the French revolution had come into the peninsula and the overseas prov- 
inces in America, although the Philippine Islands were the least aftected then by 
this ideology. 

A movement against the uneien reginn\ the absolute monarchy, was joined in 
1 8()<S by Napoleons invasion, which, in turn, united the Spaniards against the en- 
emy and strengthened their patriotism and their loyalty to the king. But the en- 
lightened class had adopted the new ideas and there was a contradiction between 
the definite military victory, which expelled the invaders from the Peninsula, and 
the triumph ot the revolutionary ideas which eventually brought about the hill ot 
the ancien regime. 

In May 1 808, when the people ot Madrid rose against the French, Don Mari- 
ano Fernandez de Folgueras governed the Philippines, having temporarily suc- 
ceeded Don Ratael Maria de Aguilar, who died on 8 August 180 . News about 
Spanish events reached Manila in the middle ot February 1809, when the Aetivo 
arrived at the port trom Nueva Ksparia with an otficial note trom the Junta Cen- 
tral, which was then in Sevilla. 1 he immediate reaction ot the government and 
High Court in the Philippines was to proclaim Fernando VII king. 

The French frigate Mouehe suddenly attacked Batangas, but the people led 
by their parish priest captured it and sent it to Manila. Another French boat, the 
Entrepreneur carried a message trom the highest authority of the Isle de France, 
informing the government ot Philippines about the events in Spain, trying to con- 



I HI 1*1 III Il'I’INI HI V< >1 1 NON \Nl > hi H >‘.i » 

vincc them that only the Knglish were the enemies <>t Spain atul that tlu*\ should 
recognize Napoleon I as "the man chosen In mights < ,od t<> u ;;nin ate Spain" as 
their sovereign. 

lolgueras’ answer is dated 2X August I SO'). | le mlui med tin 1 rein h that the 
Philippines had sworn loyalty to King I ernando \ II atul had de. lured ssar on the 
cm peror of the I tench . I he ship that da red enter \ 1 a n 1 1 a Pas ss a s gt ee t e. 1 s\ it h two 
gun shots and the boat the french sent to shore svas seized and the .less taken to 
Port Santiago. Later, however, the governor sent the prisoners back and the h'ntrr- 
preneur sailed away. 

Shortly before these events, the Junta ( entral had issued an oltk i.d note stat- 
ing: hiking into account that the large atul precious dominions that Spain pos- 

sesses m the Indies are not proper colonies or factories, as it is the case of' other 
countries, but an essential and integral part of the Spanish Mon. m. In... | || S Maj- 
esty has seen fit to declare the kingdoms, the provinces and islands foiming the 
said dominions must have a national representation before I I is Koval Person and 
so be part of the Junta Central Cubernativa del Remo through their deputies." 1 

Hy this official note, the government of the Philippines was ordered to name 
representatives, and before it could do so, on 1 May 1 X09. an e\t r aorditiurv parlia- 
ment meeting was summoned for August 1X10. 1 , K h prim i pa 1 tow n would send a 
representative to I .eon Island. Due to the lack of time, the Philippine government 
was forced to choose "substitute representation" from natives of the overseas prov- 
inces residing in peninsular Spain. Representatives of the Philippines were Pedro 
ere/, de I agle and Jose Manuel de ( .onto. I he latter was on dut v a very short t imc\ 
as he was given permission to leave for Veracruz on 2l January 1X11 f or health 
reasons, and on 22July of* the same year, Perez de Taglc got permission t( , <, 0 [-> ac k 
to the Philippines when Omto returned. 

On 6 December 1X11, the parliament approved the authority given to 
entura de los Reyes bv the d own Council of Manila; he took his oath as an official 
representative of the Philippines on 9 I )ecember, the same day Perez Iagle was al- 
owed to return to the Philippines. 

Ventura de los Reyes played an important part in the discussion on whether 
to stop the galleon trade or not, a subject proposed on 7 July 1X10 by Philippine 
jovernor-General Don Manuel ( ion/ale/ Aguilar. 

I here was a long debate about this matter at the ordinary Cortes in 1813 
More it was finally agreed that the trade be stopped. At the session on 20 March 
the representative of the Philippines asked that Manila private companies be al- 
owed to equip ships at their own expense and to continue the trade with Nueva 
Lspana. I he decree of 1 4 September 1X13, which stopped the galleon to Acapulco, 
permitted boats coming from the Philippines to call at Acapulco, San Bias, or 
ansonate in accordance with the conditions proposed by Deputy Ventura de los 
eyes. I he boletas disappeared though "those ones that could be rightly justified" 
were replaced, paid in the meantime by the Royal Treasury of Manila.' 



142 



PI \/ I Kh ill t h> /W;/;* ' .:tul the Philippine* :n the Phh ( >//mn 

In a session on S t Vtober 1813. Peputv Pc los Reyes also presented several 
propositions conccrnim; .u;rivuliurc. industry, commerce and navigation, which 
went to the propel commission 1 1 > r study. 

I he lack of coimminkaiion between the Peninsula and the Philippines kept 
the residents in the islands completelv unaware of what was going on in Spain, lo 
fill the gap the first periodical was born on S August 181 1. although it could not 
be properly called a periodical as it did not have a fixed date of issue at first. I he 
first issue tells us that its source of information was the bnglish Cui^rrc' coming 
from Bcngala and translated into Spanish. I hus the inhabitants of the Philippines 
learned about the war .u^ainst the french and the opening of the C. onstituent 
Cortes that on 12 March 1812 promulgated the first Spanish Constitution. 
Ventura de los Reves was among those w ho signed it. 

I he constitution was proclaimed m Manila on 1 April the following year 
and it was sworn in the C athedral the day after and throughout the whole archi- 
pelago in the follow ing da\ s. Phe proclamation was taken by the natives as abolish- 
ing taxes and private service, and the governor had to issue an official note making 
it clear that everv state could rightfully continue to demand that its subjects con- 
tribute to public expenses. I his explanation did not stop people from rising in 
some places, specially in I locos Norte. 

In 1813, the ordinary Cortes was called. As the new representatives of the 
Philippines could not be there on time, the Philippine deputy proposed to name 
only two deputies instead of 20, which was the legal number according to the 
population.' I he election would be done by indirect voting; each town would 
name an elector who would meet at each principal town and name two representa- 
tives, all of whom would meet at the main town of the bishopric. Among them 
three would be chosen to travel to Manila t o elect the deputies, who would then 
represent the Philippine Islands at the C cu tes. 1 he Philippine deputy also proposed 
that the number of deputies be left to the decision of the electors, but with a mini- 
mum of two. I he proposal was accepted and a decree on 23 March 1812 provided 
for the election of representatives to the C ones the following year, in America and 
the Philippines. 

The Return of Fernando VII 

Once the Spaniards expelled the French from the Peninsula, Fernando \ II re- 
turned, and on 4 Mav 1 8 1 4, a decree was issued in \ alencia abolishing the Consti- 
tution and declaring all previous Cortes proceedings null. Shortly after, the 
Ministerio Universal de Indias w as restored to its previous condition and the con- 
stitutional town and countv councils disappeared. 

I he absolutist regime did not last long. On 2 January 1820, the troops that 
were ready to sail for America to fight a rebellion revolted and established the Con- 
stitution of 1 8 1 2. I he weakness of the government gave several Spanish cities time 



143 



(HI milHMMNf HI- von I l< >N • I > (0 i * : 

to join the rebellion and the* absolutist king was forced In ire uihm.uk cs to publish 
the manifesto which ends with the famous sentence: I et us g* > fi.mkb. I first, 

along the constitutional path. 

I he government organization established In the liberal regime v.as restored 
and on 22 March 1 820 the ordinary ( airtes was called. Substitute representatives 
from overseas attended, including I )on jose Maria \rned<> ami I )on Manuel helix 
Camus y Herrera for the Philippines. 

I he Cortes abolished .ill the privileges of the Koval < ompam <>l the Philip- 
pines, which was created by Carlos III in I 85. Altera lev. debates on PM October 
1 820, the decree put the company in a difficult sit uat ion until (* Sept ember 1 S8*h 
when a royal decree abolished it. 

I he Cortes of 1820 also declared freedom of speech leu the Philippine Is- 
lands and on the last day, 0 November 1820, passed a lav. allocs mg am Spaniard to 
conduct trade with the Philippines. 

In May 1821, t he Const it ut ion of 1812 was sworn a sec oiul time m the Phil- 
ippines and elections were held to choose members lot the ( ones, which opened 
on 20 February 1821. On this occasion four representatives ware sent, although 
the I hilippines could have sent 25. ( )ne was \ icente Posadas, an e\ magistrate of 
the Manila Audiencia. lie had resigned his post a less months before he was 
elected, and this circumstance started a long debate over Ins legal capability to be a 
member of the Cortes. In the end he was not admitted. 

In an extraordinary meeting of the Cortes m 1821 1828, be presented his 
credentials once again and now he was admitted, along w ith brancisco Bringas y 
aranco, cx-mayor of Ilocos, elected for Nueva Segovia, and Manuel Saenz dc 
- lanos for Nueva Caceres. According to Montero v \ idal none of the Philip- 
pme eputies did anything worth mentioning, on this occasion. 

I he substitute member, Jose Maria Arnedo, requested to establish a regular 
maritime service directly to the islands; the proposal was approved bv the Cortes 

on 2) June 1820. It should be noted that by then Nueva Lsparia was in fact inde- 
pendent. 

On 30 October 1820, Held Marshal Juan Antonio Martinez, assumed his 
position as governor-general. With him came mam* peninsular officers to 
strengt en discipline and efficiency in the army ranks, which was dominated by 
Spanish Americans who treated their army companions verv bacllv, rudely calling 
them cachuchas, because of the cap they wore. I here were even conspiracies to 
send a group of officers to Spain. Among them was Luis Rodriguez. Varela, the fa- 
mous Philippine count . 10 But this did not solve the problem, and there were clan- 
destine meetings to plan new rebellions. Among the rebels ( aiptain Andres Novales 
was outstanding, he was posted in Mindanao, but a heavy storm stopped the boat 
from sailing. 1 he rebel leader went back to Manila in disguise 11 and organized a 
mutiny carried on by American and Philippine sergeants. I bey killed Lieutenant 
Mariano Fernandez de Folgueras and for about one hour it looked as if they were 



144 



DIA/ I K i 1 III I I O S ;/v />/ f/v / ‘>f/» ( >«fwn 

going to triumph. I he peninsular troops at last prevailed and caught Novales; he 
was executed along with a tew others who took part in the plot. 

The Spanish Situation 

At the beginning ot 1X2 a. the political situation in Spain was critical: trom 1820 
the 1 iberal Partv wasdnided between extremists and moderates, among these were 
docciiii ishis* now considered reactionaries. On 1 March, the ordinary C ortes was 
opened, shortlv afterward the “Cien Mil l bjos de San l uis, a brench army, en- 
tered Spain, and in the name ot the Santa Alian/a reestablished absolute power in 
Fernando \ 1 1 . 

Chi 1 October, the king declared null all the acts carried out by the constitu- 
tional government during the three wear period trom ~~ March 1820 until 1 Octo- 
ber 1823. Bv a roval decree ot 28 December. the overseas provinces were informed 
that the absolute regime was reestablished. It had little cttcct on the American con- 
tinent but it fullv attested the Philippines: the organization and the officials named 
by the liberal regime were no more: political positions, of Vices, and constitutional 
councils ceased to exist. I he submissive attitude ot the islands earned tor Manila a 
new honor; the roval crow was placed over the main battlement ot the castle in its 
heraldic arms as a reward for the “promptness w ith which the ceasing ot the abol- 
ished constitutional svsiem and the reestablishment ot the legal government had 
taken effect. ' Fernando VII also presented his portrait to the city: it was an oil 
painting by Vicente 1 ope/ and it was brought over bv the new governor-general, 
Don Mariano Ricafort, who arrived in Manila in 1828. 

The reception of the roval cftlgv was the cause tor splendid feasts, ot which 
there are manv evewitness reports. One, little known but remarkable, was written 
bv a Russian sailor, Otto von Kotzebue. Pin ing his second voyage ot circumnavi- 
gation made from 1 823 to 1820, he stopped in Manila to repair his boat; thus he 
was able to watch the reception of the king's portrait and described his amazement 
at what the saw. 

During the absolutist decade, life in the islands went on peacefully, except 
for endemic problems: assaults by the Moms, storms, and more or less disastrous 
earthquakes. 

Luis Lope/ Ballesteros, 1 ‘ Minister ot the treasury, tried to improve the eco- 
nomic development of the country by encouraging the planting ot diderent crops, 
especially cotton, but his cflort was fruitless. 

Pascual Knrilc v Alcedo, one of the best rulers the islands ever had in the 1 0th 
century, took Ricafort s place at the end of 1830. Fnriles decisions, the commer- 
cial code (proclaimed in the Peninsula on 30 May 1828), and the commercial law 
ot 24 July 1830 all contributed to the islands economic development. But 
Fernando VII died on 20 September 1833 and a period ot uncertainty began for 
Spain and Philippines. There was no male heir to the throne and the kings brother. 



I Ml I'M 1 1 IPPINI K! V< )M I I< > 



\N I > HI n >N I ) 



Infante Don Carlos, claimed his right to succ ccd him. I he n.it ion \\.h d is ided and 
a civil war started, lasting, with short intervals of pc.it e until 28 Icbruary 1876 , 
when Alfonso XII started to rule the coumrv. 

I he liberals gathered around the child i|ueen. Isabel, and her mother. Maria 
Cristina de Borbon; they were called tsahclnw <• <>r i //,/////> I he absolutists and 
those who tried at all cost to keep the Spanish tradition followed ( atlos and were 
called carlistas. 

I he first government of the Regency wanted to institute teloi ms from above, 
which did not please most liberals. Irancisco Martinez de la Rosa, a fbnr.wist.i" 
was the author of t he Royal Stat u te of I 83* t , wh ic h was a ( h.u t et pros idmg for t 
Cortes consisting of two chambers, the I ort Is and the ( ominous I hev could only 
advise for they had no legislative power. 

On 2 february 1835, the ship S,nit<i Ana arriv ed at Manila, bringing orders 
regarding the restoration of the constitutional regime, the proclamation of' the 
Royal Statute, and the convening of the ( antes. I lections thus took place on 1 
March. I he Philippines could name two ftroamtelnr^. but this tune it had none, 
not even substitutes as it had on previous occasions. I he elected prtu nr,u/or,s were 
Don Juan I rancisco I.ecaros, a Philippine lawyer who was m Madrid then, named 
by the city council of Manila, and Brigadier I )on Andres ( ,.ucia C amba. w ho ar- 
rived in Cadi/, in August when the session was alrcadv closed. 

Both were present at the opening of the Cortes on 16 November 1835, but 
the Assembly did not live long and there were no Philippine representatives at the 
general meeting of the Cortes on 22 March 1838. In the following meetings the 
number of representatives of the islands increased to four, and ( iarcia ( amba and 
I.ecaros were reelected. I he Cortes never assembled, because one week before the 
opening date, on 13 August, the “Cranja mutiny,” carried on In a group of ser- 
geants, forced the Regent, Reina Cobernadora, to reestablish the 1812 Constitu- 
tion and to convoke a Constituent Assembly on 2d ( )ctober 1 836. 

Article 24 of the convocation decree ordered that elections in the Philippines, 
Cuba, and Puerto Rico were to take place according to what the Royal Statute es- 
tablishcd for the previous C^ortes. 

It soon became clear how ignorant the Spanish authorities were about the 
1 ippines. For example, the provisional governor, Pedro Antonio Salazar Castillo, 

had signed a commercial treaty with the Sultan of Jolo, intending to stop the ex- 
cesses of the pirates off the island. He received effusive congratulations on that 
account from Don Juan Alvarez Mendizabal, who was then the minister of over- 
seas, commerce, and government. 1 '’ At the opening of the C lories, the crown speech 
emphasized the importance of this treaty for the mistaken reason that nearly all the 
ships going to the Philippines “called at Jolo.” The treaty was approved after the 
speech of Deputy Martin de los Hems, who repeated: “All the ships navigating in 
those islands had to pass by Jolo island.” 1 

I he Cranja mutiny had repercussions in the Philippines: some wanted to 
proclaim the 1812 Constitution here hut it was rumored in Manila that Governor 



146 



I'M A/ I K 1 i Ml lli' V’.; r ;; • r/V Philippines it: the l K )th ( entun 

Salazar did not want to do so because he was a i\irlisr»L A group plotted a con- 
spiracy, hut thev were discovered and a number of field officers and officials sup- 
ported the governor, believing the proclamation was not opportune. 1 he first or- 
ders from Spain were that the authorities were not to make anv changes in the 
political regime until the new l ones decided what was most convenient. ' 

In a secret meeting of the l 'ones on 1 h lanuary 183”, Vicente Sancho, a 
member from Valencia, proposed that the overseas provinces be ruled bv special 
laws and cease to be represented in the (fortes, lhe basic argument regarding the 
Philippines was the time and com of representation due to the islands distance 
from the peninsula and the large number of deputies. He recalled that for the 
1 820 C 'ones the Philippines should ha\ e had 32 to 3* deputies but sent only four 
because the expenditure w as considered excessiv e. I le also mentioned the problems 
relating to the heterogeneity and dispersion of the islands inhabitants. 1 he propo- 
sition was approved in the Assembly on 10 April 1S3~V V but the previous month 
the Philippine elections had taken place, with the result that Garcia Camba was 
reelected; the other deputy was Don 1 uis Prudencio Alvarez v l'cjero, who had 
been living in Manila for 1 3 years, before thev both arrived in Spain the new con- 
stitution of the Spanish monarch) was proclaimed on IS June 183”, stating that 
“the overseas provinces would be governed bv special laws. 

Phis was a serious mistake and it opened a deep abvss between Spain and 
Philippines. 

The Philippines and Carlism 

The archipelago became a home for exiled cnrlistits and this contributed to the 
transplanting of Peninsular div isions to the Philippines, l he queen received a note 
signed by “Id cristino por cscncia," describing the situation of the country and 
urgently asking for a governor who would be devoted to the queen, as Salazar was 
overly tolerant of the numerous enrhstus in the Philippines. 1 he same anonymous 
note said that the Audiencia of Manila as a whole, with the only exception of the 
oidor Larrumbide, was made Ilf'' of furious loyalists, who should be relieved. 1 he 
members of religious orders who had declared the queen the enemy were also ac- 
cused of being carlista .v, a great number of supporters of Hon Carlos in the army 
ranks were denounced. “So we the cristinos are afraid," it continues, “and the 
carlistas curse and swear at anything that has to do with a cristino 3 

Next, the note denounced the presence of Ceneral Don Pedro Grimarest, the 
Attorney General Don Ramon Pedrosa, the Canon Don Matias Jara, and the 
Intendente Don Manuel Telleria; thev were exiled to the Marianas Islands but 
stayed in Manila where thev were welcomed and honored, l he note requested the 
queen not to send any more cnrlistns to the Philippines because they would only 
increase the number of the Infante supporters." 

On 27 August 1837, the former deputy Don Andres Garcia Camba took 
over the government of the islands. He belonged to a group called the “ ayncnchos 

14" 7 






mi mu imsi rivoii i ion \ndiu iomi 

because he had taken part in the decisive battle tor the independence of Peru 
and all of South America. Shortlv after this defeat he- sailed from I i ( allao on 
hoard a ship of the Spanish fleet go ini; to the Philippines, but when the\ called at 
the Marianas, the crew mutinied, left the officers <m land, and went back to 
America with the ships. Carcin ( amba and his felloes officers managed to reach 
Manila on board F.nglish whale boats which often called at the ports of the 
Marianas. ( )n 4 April 1925, he arrived in Manila where he was welc orned In l Gov- 
ernor Don Mariano Ricafort, and named major general of the Anns. I le got on 
so well with Manila society that he became direc tor of i he Soc icdad I «, o no mica de 
Amigos del Pais and was elected depute for the < ones in IS v*. renewed in 1 S 
and 1837. 

While in Spain on 1 5 August 1 830, he temporarilv t< >< >k < >\ er t he \ 1 inistrv of 
War, while Don Jose Ramon Rodil, the official minister, campaigned against the 
carlistas. When Rodil was dismissed, ( »arcia ( amba resigned. 

His appointment as governor was greatly welcomed In the liberals m Ma- 
nila. He soon realized the division existing in the Philippines, espec i a 1 1 \ in the capi- 
tal* between the supporters of political parties in the Peninsula. There were ca rlist 

meetings at San Juan de I )ios convent where I )on Ramon Pedrosa li\ ed and also at 
Santo lb mas College. ’ I he dean of the (Cathedral and archbishops vicar, Don 
Pedro Reales, used to take Pedrosa for a ride in his carriage. Another exile, C anon 
Jara, instigated an uprising of the sergeants in the garrison. 

According to Carcia (.amba, there were daily meetings at the archbishops 
residence, where they commented and celebrated the carlist successes. The exiles 

were completely free and were visited and honored by the- wealthv and even bv the 
authorities. 

I he governor tried a conciliatory policy but he never succeeded w ith the 
clergy, f 1 is relationship with the members of the Audicncia was not very good ei- 
ther, more than once they disobeyed his orders. Some in Spain considered the tol- 
erant Carcia (.amba a traitor to the queens cause and at his demand he was re- 
lieved. However, shortly after he was named senator for Valencia, thus continuing 
his political career. ^ 



Plan to Iransfer the Philippine Islands to France 

I he Regency government was going through a critical economic situation mainly 
due to the cailist war and was desperately looking for financial resources. ' s When 
Fernando VII died, the Spanish external debt amounted to over 4 million reales, 
which made it difficult to obtain new loans. That explains whv the ambassador in 
Paris, Conde de Miraflores, conceived the idea of offering the usufruct of the Phil- 
ippine Islands for 50 years to the French government in exchange for the sum of 
400 million reales. About this matter, some curious documents exist in the Archivo 
Historico Nacional in Madrid, which have been discovered and studied by 
Fsperanza Yllan Calderon. ' (t 



148 



I >1 \/ I Ki i HI IIO s ,'\; /* »/;/;*•* ;/v Philippines :n lh? /9//> C W;/wn 

At that time, the French president was Marshal Soult. who was greatly inter- 
ested in the suggestion of the Spanish diplomat, who. ignorant ot the real value of 
the Philippines, considered that the\ are verv unproductive tor Spain. He went 
on to sav: “It we would obtain lor the cession ot the Philippines such a sum that 
will satei;uard vour Maiestvs cause and our tuture. the sacrifice ot 0 or S million 
reales thev produce... could he superabundantly compensated, lo this letter, 
dated in Paris, 20 September 1S3T a proposal. ‘Projet d line C ompagnie des Isles 
Philippines, was enclosed. 1 he hist state secretary, hvansto Perez de C. astro, the 
letter addressee, rejected such a wild [dan as entirely contrary to Spanish interests. 
Alter expressing a number ot arguments, he ended bv saying: "1 l.M. decision is by 
no means to accede to the proposal ot the Philippines' cession, neither alienating 
them at anv price, nor leasing them as u is proposed.... 

Shortly after, Sinibaldo de Mas w rote his well-know n Infvrme sabre el estddo 
de his Is Ids lilipnuis eu I Sid. In the third part, which was dedicated to domestic 
policy, he also considered as a possibility “to cede the Islands to a strong foreign 
country” as this would produce an immediate rebellion because the Philippine 
Spaniards would choose to be independent rather than submit to another country. 



The Queen s Majority 

On 12 October lSiO, the Reina Gobernadora was to reed by circumstances to re- 
sign the Regency. I ler position was taken oyer bv General Don Baldomero 
Hspurtero, named by the Clones on S May ISul. but his government was short- 
lived; at the end of |ulv 18u3 a new provisional government was formed, which 
convened the C 'ones. 1 his Assembly declared the queen's majority; she was only 1 3 
years old. 

Her swearing in and proclamation took [dace on 1 l December 18-43. and a 
period of political instability began. One ministry followed another in quick suc- 
cession; they were called “lightning or “forty-hour” ministry, alluding to their 
short life. In such circumstances it is not strange that the Philippine Islands were 
not well governed from Madrid: everything depended on the qualities ot the gov- 
ernors, and thev were soldiers, not politicians. 

It was not really surprising that the islands became a refuge tor dissenters. In 
1848, the European revolutions, w hich in Prance dethroned Luis Felipe de Orleans 
and in Italy forced the pope to flee from Rome, had repercussions in Spain. 1 here 
were disturbances in Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, and Sevilla, which were put 
down by General Narvaez, who was at that time was president of the government 
and leader of the moderate party. As a consequence, Casimiro de Grau v Figueras, 
Agustin Algara, Agustin Reverter, and others were deported to Manila. In a letter 
Reverter reported the journey s troubles and how thev were welcomed bv the gov- 
ernor of Philippines, Don Narciso Claveria, who told them: “There are only Span- 
iards here. From the moment you step ashore, vou will be treated by me and by 
everyone as unfortunate fellow countrymen and Spanish gentlemen. 



I HI I’HII ll’I’IN'l Kl V< )! I I l< >N \NI > HI >'.i 



Gasimiro dc Ciran y Pigueras, lawyer of the llustre t olcgm de Barcelona, 
stayed six months in Philippines; lie took advantage <>t his st.n to studs its moral, 
economic and administrative state. His conclusions were stated m a memoran- 
dum addressed “to the Cortes ( ionstituyentes and the C losernment <>t the Spanish 
Nation. 1 In it he praises the country's wealth and he points at the reasons which 
in his opinion, stop economic development : 1) had adnunisttation: 2 1 rule bv 
military governors; 3) tobacco and wine state monopolies: and i > the impediments 
to the establishment of foreigners on the islands. It these obstacles were removed, 
he said, the islands would surelv become prosperous. 

With respect to the quality of Spanish civil servants in the Philippines, the 
communication sent to the Presidcnte del ( ’onsejo de Mmistros In t .osernor I 'Jon 
Manuel Pavia y Lacy, dated 9 November IKS.L is illustrative: It is not unknown 

to you that the carelessness, to say the least, in appraising the sh.uacter of those 
chosen to serve in the Antillas was due to the special circumstances in our coun- 
try... Jo those faraway countries, most times, not the best informed or more con- 
scientious of their reputation and representation base gone... lo tlu Philippines, 
specially to the most important posts, employees known in the- Peninsula for their 
honesty and learning must go, rather than persons who mas onlv wish to make a 
fortune.” 

I he political instability in Spain during the grcatei part of the |‘)th centurv 
was the principal cause for mistakes committed in the Philippines, and was ex- 
ploited by those interested in fostering nationalist feelings in the Philippines. 

General Ramon Maria Narvaez was the strong man in the reign of Isabel 11. 
He began his military career in the carlista war. I lis political career began w hen he 
took part in putting an end to Lspartero’s regency, after which he was promoted to 
temente general. He held the presidency of the government as well as the war min- 
istry from 2 May 1844 until 1 2 February 184b. I lis authoritarian government was 
well received by the people, who were weary of disorder and anxious for peace. 
Narvaezs moderate party which Intel an absolute majoritv in the 18t5 Clones, ap- 
proved a new constitution, the fourth one, if we take into account the Royal Stat- 
ute. It ruled Spanish political life until 1869. 

Prom 1 844 to 1 854, the moderates governed, but they were divided into fac- 
tions: the puritanos, polacos, reaccionarios, and neoeatolicos. Thirteen ministries suc- 
ceeded one another, some lasting only a few hours. The queen's future marriage, 
because of its effect on international politics, was a burning issue for several vears. 
It was arranged that she would wed her cousin, Don Francisco cle Asis. 

I he moderate decade ended with ( ) Donnell’s rebellion. P.spartero reap- 
peared on the political stage for two years, during which he implemented a pro- 
gressive but unsteady and mistaken policy. Several achievements of the previous 
stage were destroyed, and there were social disturbances in Barcelona, Zaragoza, 
and several towns in Castilla. I he queen summoned O’Donnell and shortly after 
she slighted him at a ball at the Royal Palace. Once more she turned to Narvaez. It 
was a brief moderate period — from 1 2 ( )ctober I 85b to 1 5 C )ctober 1 857 — which 



150 



I )1 \/ 1 K I i Mi l l i ' S /'V !'fal:pptns> *vV ( Wm<n 

served .is .1 bridge lot ilu* 1 iber.il l mon ^ou'iimumu. but in stub a short time, 
Narvaez undid wh.it ii.ul been done uiuler the previous two-year progiessi\c gos- 
ernment and amended the IS o C onstuution. 

The 1 iberal l mon started as .i moderate let t coalition and ended up forming 
a political partv joining moderates and progressives. Such a heterogeneous part) 
gave stabilit v to the nation toi 1 1 \ e \ ears, during which u had to face the tust out- 
break of ( uban rebellion I he I’nitcd States was pleased with the party and even 
supported it. 

During this period. Spain plaved an important role in international atVairs. 
In Mexico, along with I ranee and I ngland, it opposed Benito Juarez s government. 
It fought a brief' wa i w it h Man tux os from C October 1 SS V ) to 20 April l SoO - 
which was ended b\ the W ad Ras pe.Ke. I lalt the island of Santo Pomingo, the 
old La I spanola, whu h was ceded to 1 i.mcc m 1 volumaiil) lomed Spam. 
Finally, Spain's diplomat ended in a war in the Pacific: Spain fought its old do- 
minions, Peru and C hile, in a useless conflict which caused deep wounds. 

In Spain, a carlist wai broke out again; now the pretender was the C onde de 
Montemolin, son of the Infante Pon Carlos. 

I )uring the last five \ ears of Isabel 1 1 S reign there w as a continuous change of 
governments, most of them moderate. On 10 \pril 1 SoT Narvaez fell, toppled by 
students of the Central l ’niversitv who supported C astelar, who had been dis- 
missed from his chair at the universitv in punishment for his famous article hi 
Rasgo. M1 Narvaez was replaced bv O Ponnell; w hile he governed, there were con- 
tinuous conspiracies and insurrections, making any efficient government action 
impossible. Narvaez came back to power for less than two \ ears; he died on — o April 
1 858. Isabel IPs throne was tumbling and the man in charge of supporting it was 
the authoritarian Pon I uis Cion/ale/ Bravo. Linallv, in Pcccmbcr ISOS, the revolt 
of the navv in ( 'adi/ and the defeat of the troops loyal to the government at Alcolea 
bridge'" forced the queen to lease Spain. 

The news about Isabel 1 1 leaving the throne reached the Philippines through 
Fnglish newspapers. C )nlv those of peninsular origin and the more cultivated C re- 
ole and native elite were conscious of the importance of the event, which cntiicly 
escaped the common people. C ivil servants were afraid of losing their jobs as the 
Organic Regulations for the Administrative C areer of 3 June 1 S0(> were abolished 
and the civil servants put at the mercy of the ruling government. 

Public opinion was now divided between the supporters of the overthrown 
queen and those in favor of the new regime. Some extremist Spaniards in the Phil- 
ippines thought that the situation in Spain would help them fulfill their aspira- 
tions, but nothing happened and life in Philippines went on peacefully. 

From Revolution to Restoration 

For the next six vears, Spain had a provisional government, which convened the 
Cortes Constituyentes that gave its approval to the 1 Sb l ) Constitution. General 



1 S 1 



THE PHILIPPINE RI-.V< Mill* »N V.l . HI >'.l 



Serrano was named regent of the kingdom, while tlu gosernmem looked fora 
person to occupy the throne. The Duke of Acosta. \m.id<«. d<. s.,l„,va. accepted 
the crown. He entered Madrid on 2 January IK - '!, .uni found tlu man who would 
have been his main support, ( leneral Prim. mystcriousls murdered I )on Amadeo 
reigned briefly, abdicating on II February IK C tired «.r ruling a strange country 
which he did not understand. 

The Cortes proclaimed a republic on the same das hut it lasted onlv 10 
months — the most chaotic period in I Oth-cetmir \ Spam I he republicans were 
divided: Castelar wanted a conservative republic; S.ilmenm desued it to be Unitar- 
ian and radical; and Pi y Margall was in favor of federalism 

The brief presidencies of Figucras and i’i y Margall were full of disorder. 
During Pi y Margalls presidency, which lasted a little ,n n ,,, u mon ,h. cantons 
modeled after the Swiss government units were formed m \.i| ( tu , , Malaga C ' ulir 
Sevilla, Granada, and Cartagena. Pi v Margall was replaced In Don Xicolis 
Salmcron, whose government energetically acted against the , and man- 

age to control the situation; he resigned to avoid signing death sentences. I l c w ,< 
succeeded by Don Emilio Castelar who reestablished nnln .,,id ritual out a con- 
servative policy which was opposed by the ot her repul >lu .m <.m < >ups \ dele u j n 1 

Cortes, where he did not have a rnajori tv. hastened lus lesiimuion m.l t' i 
avia intervened in dissolving the C 'ones. The arms, at hint . >f i | lc S11 nation p , s i 
the government over to General Serrano, who assumed the nresidem \ s <ii 
it from the Prime Ministry of the ( iounc.l. ‘ >U,ng 

Gradually, more and more people favored the rest „ ,,, of ,he IVnirhnn 
ynastym the person of Don Alfonso, Isabel lls onlv son. While in Pans she in- 
trigued and still hoped to regain the throne. 

In the preliminary arrangements for the rest or at i< >n , I )< )n a nfnM ; n < ' 
del Castillo played a most important part; he became the strong man in 
XII s reign. Alfonso was proclaimed by ( icncral Marline/ ( ampos, who was join'd 
by other members of the army, and a provisional government was formed^n 
Madrid called the Regency Ministry. Canovas presided over ,, unti | ,| K . 
the new king, who was received with the greatest enthusiasm |,v 
for peace. 

Spain, wracked by so many passions, divided into powerful groups, and o , 
erned by weak and short-lived governments, was unable to face the serious prob 
lems besetting the overseas provinces. Cuba had been fighting an armed struoo| c 
for its independence with arms since the ( irito de Yara ( I <S(TS). The IMiilippf,^ 
followed suit a few decades later. 



1 " ival of 
people hoping 



The provisional government of Spain, under ( icneral Serrano had appointed 
Adelardo Lopez de Ayala as overseas minister, who encouraged the execution of 
useful public works, extending the power of the governor of the Philippines to con- 
tract them. An important decree of the new government established the peseta as 
the currency unit in all Spanish territories, doing away with the peso of 8 reales 
that had been the currency in the islands for three centuries. 



152 



I > I \/ I K I i Ml 1 I O Spanish Politics >ind the Philippines in the 1 9th ( entury 

I he fears of the civil servants were confirmed when a decree from the Over- 
seas Ministry dismissed and replaced all of them with inexperienced people whose 
ignorance about administration caused great trouble. 1 his was the beginning of 
“nonstop shifting of employees which made thousands of Spaniards pass through 
the Philippines like trains through a tunnel. The effects of this were harmful to 
the progress of the count rv. 

But not everything was negative: commerce was liberalized bv a decree on 29 
December 1868, which declared free from export dutv all the products of the is- 
lands, and another decree on the same date which opened even* port to ships of 
anv country paving entry dutv. 

In the Overseas Ministry a special board was created, the president of which 
was Don Patricio dc la I scosura, w ho knew the Philippines well as he had been a 
royal commissioner there. Phe purpose of this board was to make a plan to intro- 
duce changes in the administration and the government, but it had no time to do it. 

Icniente Oeneral Carlos Maria dc la lor re became governor of the Philip- 
pines on the 23 June 1869, and was well received bv separatists and revolutionar- 
ies, who expected him to proclaim individual rights and to impose upon the “small 
monopolizing circle who were in anv case enemies of Philippine freedom, as 
Rafael Maria dc 1 abra wrote. Not knowing the country, he honestly believed that 
it would be a good idea to create the same kind of government policy as in Spain; 
misled by influential people who flattered him, he made many mistakes. Presum- 
ing that the Philippines was a democracy, he abolished the halberdier Palace Ouard, 
which dated back to 1 89 1 ; he went out without an escort, poorly dressed and wear- 
ing a straw hat, thus appearing ridiculous and eroding his authority. 

In his honor, a serenade was organized, sponsored by Manila C ivil Ciovernor 
Jose Cabeza dc I lerrera; it was considered bv manv to be a farce and a slap against 
the integrity of the Spanish nation. Nears later, Augustine friar Casimiro Herrero 
qualified this serenade as “the first ostensible act, and common to all the rebellions 
of that time. M<> 1 le added that the manifestation was made by some sons of the 
country, meaning Spanish Philippines, and an insignificant number of nidi os and 
half-breeds, but no peninsulars, who “expressed wrong ideas against the institu- 
tions" — the religious orders and the armv — “which conserved the archipelago for 
Spain." 

I he demonstrators were well received and entertained by the governor and 
on 13 July 1869 were praised effusively bv /:/ Diario dc Mandd. 1 he organizers of 
this act were since then regular visitors to Malacariang, which brought about a 
break between the highest authority and the principal peninsulars, who now 
stopped going to the palace. 

On the occasion of the declaration of the Constitution of 1869, De la lorre 
gave a reception which was attended bv persons who later on were distinguished 
for being enemies of Spain, from the balcony the governor cheered Vivan las 
Cortes Constituyentes! — a erv that the greater part of the republic did not under- 
stand. 



1 S3 



i m f * f iii imM 



I lie vc.irs between the Kill <>f Isabel II uM the r f «*i ***’ 'be ilv nasty in 

the person of her son Alfonso |Hf>h I S * .m I .tr.i * f e<! nuuh icgi'iattOQ 
concerning the Philippines, bur before t be*, ouikl be cite* t in c t he sv. ift ^ hanges in 
peninsular policy canceled .m<l repLueci * * m •'.:** <»*: r .r.*. s 

On 23 Julv I I )on \I.mueI P»' crt.i «»*. i : ‘ ' :u provisional 

government headed bv Serrano informed t b c *«». rnor «»f the I hihppmcs of ni> 
intention to implement a number of admmi u.ium *nd ,,n «* mu reforms in the 
islands, which would bring the Philippines up t * » the es el » >f the s\ stem established 
i n Spain by the September revolt 1 1 u in . A on su 1 1 1 tu; * ommission ss as thus ^ reated 
in Madrid on 30 January I SO made up <■* 30 meinb r ••• ho bad to report to the 
government within six months. Hut before tin » < « » 1 1 i i i ‘ »• luvcrta bail left the 
Overseas Ministry. 

Mis successor was Don Scgi sm u ik l<> \ h »i el a i 1 a r n ed man %s i , i i a lea t politt- 
cal vision , who came with the I >est intention I I c v. a tic let inuusi to nupro\c the 
communications within the Philippine islands and t lie- Peninsula I le thought of 
creating an administrative corps to revitalize tin and to impiose public 

finance. 

In the preamble of the plan to i irate tlu* .ulmims! i at in c c or ps the excellent 
possibilities that the islands offered wen- mentioned. \n ignotant and vicious 
bureaucracy stoodm the way of development and s 1 ( > i c t w . i s 1 1 p h t t o s,i \ t hat the 
backwardness of the country could be solved otih b\ an inielbgt nt and capable 
staff. 

But the corps was not created and dining Mont s ad m in ist i at ion the civil 
servants were not better chosen; and under A made < > de Saboya s t eign previous laws 
were reestablished. 

Mo ret a I so thought of cst a bl i sh mg a p rogr.i m at the l n i \ e t s 1 1 \ m \ 1 acl i id for 
those who wanted to enter the proposed ad m i n i xt r a 1 1 ve o)tgs of Philippines. 
Among the subjects to study were the Taga log language, the h ist ory of the I \nglish 
and Dutch possessions in Asia and of the Philippines Islands, the atitoe lit ho nous 
pre-Hispanit inhabitants, their customs, religions, inst it m ions, and the Spanish in- 
stitutions established there. 

Mo ret wanted to introduce free commerce* in the islands. I le i cestablished 
the Iribunal de C menus, wliicli had been suppressed in I K(>~\ and he organized die' 
administration of justice, f fc attempted to reform eifuc.it ion as well, adding to the 
University of Santo Tomas faculties of law, medieine, and pharmacology. Profes- 
sors would be named after a competitive examination in Madrid. I he reetor would 
be named by the government and theoneholdingth.it position at the time would 
remain as dean of the faculty of theology, who would continue to be in charge of 
the Dominicans. I he Dominicans protested. I rom the middle of the 1 Mb century, 
the University of Santo Ibmas was a cultural beacon in the Philippines and the' 
Dominicans naturally took exception to these and other measures relating to sec- 
ondary education measures, which also harmed the Jesuits. Motet s successor, Don 
Adelardo Lopez de Ayala, suspended these reforms and informed the Philippine 

I 54 



1) I A / IKlC Hill O Spanish Politics and the Philippines in the 1 9th Century 



governor, who then confronted the religious orders and the archbishop. 
The protest and all the documents related to the affair were gathered in a 
volume, which was prepared bv the general commissary of the Dominicans in 
Madrid.” 

After Morels relief, Ciovernor De la lorre was replaced by Rafael Isquierdo 
on 4 April 1 S"^ 1 . 1 1 is policies were completely opposed to those of his predecessor 
and geared above all t o reestablishing the prestige of the governor's authority in the 
archipelago. 1 le proclaimed Don Amadeo de Saboya as king of Spain, an act that 
did not meet with popular enthusiasm. 1 le also repressed the Cavite uprising in 
1872. 

Alfonso XI Ts Reign 

Alfonso XI 1 was received triumphantly in Madrid; his succession to the throne 
gave Spaniards hope for the future. During the next six years, Canovas del Castillo 
conducted the national poliev; in the Cortes there was a dynastic opposition led by 
Sagasta and other anti-dvnastic oppositions formed by carl is t as led by Candido 
Nocedal, the progressives of Castelar, the revolutionary republicans of Salmeron and 
Ruiz Zorrilla, and the federalistas of Pi y Margall. 

The first years of the reign were promising: on 28 February 18 6 the carlista 
pretender crossed the French border, and in Cuba, the Zanjon Peace was signed on 
12 February 1878, ending a 10-vear war, although the struggle for independence 
continued. 

In 1878, the Cortes gave Spain a new constitution, which for the first time 
guaranteed freedom of belief in the Spanish territories while affirming Catholicism 
as the state religion (art. 3). 1 he individual rights of the inviolability of home and 
correspondence and freedom of professional, residence, expression, association, 
and freedom to petition the government were also approved and could be sus- 
pended only under exceptional circumstances. 

During the Canovist government, Spain endeavored to keep peaceful and 
harmonious relations with all the countries and to open new markets, but in 1SS1, 
Sagasta took over the government and involved Spain more deeply in international 
politics. A question was raised that closely concerned the Philippine Islands. From 
the 1 870s the archipelago authorities had pointed out the convenience of making 
effective Spanish dominion over the Caroline Islands, because Spains discover) 
and possession of the territory were not valid if not accompanied by actual occupa- 
tion.* 0 Many history books used to sav Spain hastened to occupy 3ap Island when 
it learned that Cermanv was going to declare a protectorate over the Carolines. 
This is not true. The declaration was made on 13 August 1883, but on 19 January 
of same year, a Royal Orden accepted a proposal made by the Philippine governor 
to found a Spanish establishment in Yap and ordered him to submit a plan and 
budget of the operation, lb carry out the operation, the cruiser Velasco was sent to 
Yap; she called at that port on 3 March 1883 and later visited Korror in Palaos is- 



THf PI1II UTINi HI V( >1 t M< )N AM > hi 1 1 >NI > 



lands. The commander returned to Manila bringing with him a document signed 
by the native kings of these islands in winch dies acknowledged Spanish sover- 
eignty over the Caroline and Palace islands. Hue (he relief <»f ( »eneral lovellar by 
Don Emilio I erreros delayed the final occupation until the ness governor became 
familiar with the subject. At last in June 1 885 a dec ree was signed ^ r eating a politi- 
cal military government for the islands; its seat would be in Yap. 

Although things were going slowlv. on 8 and 10 August, the ships Manila 
and San C^utntinstzi sail from the Philippines to carr\ out the occupation. On 11 
August the state minister received in .Madrid a comniimu at ion from the ( tcrman 
government, which announced that it would establish a protectorate over die 
Carolina* and Palaos islands. I he ( icrmans could not have* known then that Spain 
had sent its ships. In Manila the ( icr mans intentions were known onlv on 1 •* Au- 
gust, four days after the San Quinttn had sailed. It arrived m Nap on 2 1 August; the 
ManiUi arrived the next day. Ignorant of these developments, tlu* Spaniards did not 
hasten to formally occupy the islands. When the ( »erman schooner lifts doc ked at 
the port on 25 August, they were welc omed like friends. I hat night , when the Ger- 
mans learned that the Spaniards had not ye t taken possession, the* Cermans de- 
clared their protectorate over the Central ( .arolinas and Palaos. 

I he Spanish ships sailed hack to Manila and the governor of the Philippines 
informed Madrid about what had happened. I his affair was solved through diplo- 
matic channels, by arbitration of Pope Leon XIII, and on I I )ecember 1885 the 
parties came to an agreement by which (icrmany acknowledged “the priority of 
Spanish occupation (art. \) and Spain guaranteed “entire and plain freedom of 
commerce, navigation and fishing rights’ in the Carolina* and Palaos to Cerman 
subjects. The Germans were also allowed to build a naval station and coal deposit 
for the imperial navy (art. 5). 

I his problem solved, Spain explored the islands and on 19 April 1887, it 
proclaimed its sovereignty over them. I he new government was installed in Yap 
where it remained until 1899. 

Regent Maria Cristina de Habsburgo 

Alfonso XII died on 25 November 1885. Another difficult time began for Spain. 
Because the king did not have a son, the throne would be occupied by Dona Maria 
Cristina de Elabsburgo as regent. She was an intelligent woman with great charac- 
ter, who faithfully performed her duty. She faced serious problems. 

I he kings illness had brought political life to a boiling point. C la r list as and 
republicans rekindled their hopes for power and began to conspire. Patriotism 
brought Canovas and Sagasta to an agreement to support the throne through the 
Pact of El Pardo, and shortly after the king died, the leader of the conservative party 
passed the power to his opponent. 

The years between the death of Alfonso XII and that of Canovas were diffi- 
cult. On 17 May 1886, Spain had a new king — Alfonso XIII, posthumous son ol 



156 



PI A/ I RR Mi l I O Spanish Politics .uni the Philippines in the 1 9th Century ' 



the dead king; he was declared of age in 1 C H)2. By then Spain had lost the last of its 
overseas empire. Myopic politicians had excluded the Gran Antilla from enjoying 
the liberal reforms implemented in the peninsula from 1881 on, which upset the 
Cubans. After the last rebellion, reforms brought the possibility of lasting peace. 
But the separatist minority, supported bv the United States, frustrated everything. 
The Cry of Baire was the beginning of the last Cuban war and it cost Spain blood, 
sweat, tears, and money. 

I he uprising in the Philippines developed along almost parallel lines. 

Conclusions 

We may come to the following conclusions: 

1. The extraordinary instability of the governments since liberalism was in- 
troduced into Spain made it impossible to have a consistent policy with respect to 
the Philippines. With ministries lasting only months, weeks, days, or even hours, 
the person in charge of overseas allairs had little time to be acquainted with the 
problems he had to solve. 

2. The distance and lack of communication prevented the Madrid govern- 
ment from making correct and opportune decisions. As in previous centuries, the 
royal orders often arrived in Manila after circumstances had changed so much that 
they had no application. 

3. As a consequence of the political fluctuations in Spain, main* men who 
did not want to come here ended up in the Philippines, some as deportees, others 
as refugees. Civil servants were not carefully chosen; sometimes positions were 
given as a reward, at other times as a punishment. Phe result was that many inept 
people were appointed to offices in the archipelago. 

4. In the islands, by a normal process of maturity and growth, a cultured 
minority had developed. Familiar with the political ideas of the moment, they be- 
gan to dream of a better future for their country. At the beginning they did not 
think of separating from Spain, but when their hopes were dashed, they began to 
turn to the idea of independence favored by other powers, especially the United 
States of America, which played a decisive role in Philippine history. 

Notes 

1. In Sevilla, 22 January ISO 1 ). 

2. Officer in the Cuerpo de Reales Cuardias Espariolas. 

3. I his decree was signed bv President Miguel Gordoa v Barrios and secretaries Juan 

Manuel Subrie and Miguel Riesco v Puente. 

4. One for every 60, ()()() inhabitants. 

5. Occurred on 17 June 1787. 

6. On 18 July 1820, the Cortes agreed to send the dossier about the privileges of the 

Compania to be studied by the Comisiones de Hacienda and Comercio. 1 his report 



157 



TUI mil.IPPINK: R I . V( )| l d I( )N AM ) HI Y( )NI > 



7. 

8. 
9. 

10. 

1 1. 

12 . 

13. 



14. 

13. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20 . 

21 . 



22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 



27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 



was discussed on 17and 1 8 October. The debates c. in be read in the I >sarso de Srsiona 
de Lis (fortes LegisLitivas de 1R20 .Madrid. 1 8'* E S vols 

I he text is reproduced by Jose Montcro v \ idal in I hstoria ( tctirral dr Pilipinas, vol. 
II, Madrid, 1894, pp. 448-449. 

Ibid., pp. 451-452. 

Ibid., p. 462. 

Vid. W.E. Retana, Filipinos. P.l precursor dr Li politico redentomta Hreies comenUtTWS 
a tin libro. Madrid, 1894. 

Paul de la fiironicre in his delightful small book, I unity )cars m thr Philippines, dedi- 
cates several pages to the Novalca adventures. I ondon. IKS \ , pp 2S 2S. 

I his is what is said in the royal document of 2 S April 1 82 E signed bv I ernando VII. 
Vid. Ixjurdes Diaz- Irechuelo, 44 1 -a segunda cxpalumn Kot/ebue en el pacific." Acts 
of the Congreso Internacional Present ta EspanoLi en cl Pat if'n te ( ordoba. 8 1 0 Novem- 
ber 1995. Ib be published in the English version of Kot/ebue, A Xcu \byage Round 
the World in the Years 1H23-1R2P). Edition of Biblmt he*, a Australian.!. N. Israel, 
Amsterdam, 1967, vols. 20-21. 

He occupied the ministry between 1 824 to I 832. A man of great prestige, he success- 
fully developed Spanish mining. 

Real decreto of 20 May 1 834. 

Real Ordcn of 24 April 1837. 

Diario de Sesiones de ( iortes, 1 2 C )ctober 1 837. 

Real orden of 16 August 1836. 

One for every 50,000 inhabitants, which was the rate in force then. 

I he leyes es pec tales' regimen was approved by 161 votes in favor and two against. 

I he abolition of the representation in the ( lories had 9S votes in favor and 03 against. 
Alvarez y Icjcro is the author of the memoirs, I )e Lis isLis Pilipinas , Valenc ia 1 842, in 
which he explains his ideas about the reforms to be implemented in the management 
and administration of the archipelago. 

An extract from the manuscript on Montcro y Vidal, op. cit. Vol. Ill, pp. 10-12. 
Appointment confirmed by a Real orden, 22 May 1 826. 

Los dieciseis meses de mando superior en Pilipinas , ( ladiz, 1 830. 

Vid. 1 he book of J. Sarda, La politica monetaria y las jluctuacioncs de la Economia 
Espanola en el siglo XIX. Madrid, s.a. pp. 25S-2S6. 

Un proyecto de cesion a hrancia de las Islas Eilipinas (1830)," in El siglo XIX en 
Espafia. Doce Estudios. Conjunto dirigido por Jose Maria (over Zamora. Barcelona, 
1974. 

Madrid, 1843, 2 vols. 

Carta cjue ha dirigido a sus amigos y enemigos el ciudadano Agustin Reverter en la que 
refiere en bosquejo los padecimientos de su deportat ion a Pilipinas. Tarragona. 

Memona sobre la poblacion y riqueza de las Islas Pilipinas y reformas para Li pros peri dad 
de aquellas posesiones y del Estado. Barcelona, 1 8SS. 

Quoted byj. Montero y Vidal, Historia General de Pilipinas , vol. Ill, Madrid, 1895> 
p. 227. 



158 



PI A/ I RI c HtTl O Spanish Politics on A the Philippines in the 1 9th Century 



31 . This article appeared in lut Dcrnocrucia, and considered that the grant of 73 percent 
of the sale of hi cries del real patrirnonio was not worth praising, because to keep the 
remaining 23 percent was undue appropriation. 

32. On the 20 October I860 he took over the command. 

33. 19 October 1 SOS. 

34. Montero v Vidal, op. cit., vol. Ill, p. *190. 

33. The color int l question. 

36. Resend tjue demucstra cl fundamento v causa dc la insurrenccion del 20 dc cncro dc l 8 72 
cn Pilipinas. . . Madrid, 1S”~2. 

37. Mcmoria presentada a las ( ortes ( onstitu rentes por cl Ministcrio dc L Utiamar . . . cn cl l 
dc Non cm hre dc l S ~Y ). Madrid, 1ST. 

38. Decrees of November and December 1ST. 

39. Manv documents referring to the subject are mentioned in the work prepared by the 
Comisario general dc los Dominicos in Madrid, published in 1871 under the title 
Documentos ijuc jusnfican la irnproccdcncia c ilcgalidad dc la refonna que ha hecho cn 
clla (cn la Univcrsidad dc Santo lomas) cl Ministro dc Ultramar don Scgismundo 
Morct. Madrid, 1ST. 

40. About this theme vid. the work of M. Dolores Elizaldc Perez-Cirueso, Espafia cn cl 
Pacifico , 1885-1899. Madrid, 1992. 



139 



L. 



Mater idles Li gems vs. Mater idles I'uertes 

The Conflict Between Nipa Huts and Stone Buildings 
in 19th-century Manila 



X.WII r Mi I I / I >1 I I MI’S 

Unr/eryty of Mi'e Sophia Aritipolrv Ot e 



T he urban sprawl of Manila in the last cenmrv of Spanish domination 
underwent great transformation. I he end of the* galleon trade and the open- 
ing of the Philippines to world trade transformed the* economic role of Manila 
while reinforcing its political role. Its demographic growth was significant: the 
citys population was between 72,000 and 8 5,000 m 1 <S 1 ’ and between 2*0, 000 
and 275,000 in 1802. I he period after 18 0 marked the* biggest population 
growth. I he citys socio-ethnic composition bee. line more complex due to social 
mobility brought about by economic changes .is well as the* increasing number of 
immigrant Chinese, Spanish, and other f oreign businessmen. 

I hese changes left deep marks in the urban space whic h was becoming more 
complex and extensive.' I he distribution of land along the lines of land use and 
ethnic or social segregation represented a major crux in the history of Manila in the 
19th century. Unfortunately, the bulk of the spatial changes is difficult to deter- 
mine, these being the result of a multitude of individual initiatives, which are not 
supported by archival sources. Nevertheless, the division of the ‘urban pie” was 
sometimes controlled by the central authority or by the municipality of Manila. 
I he complex machinery of the Spanish administration gave rise to a mass of docu- 
ments* available to the historian. One of the major issues of the urbanization of 
Manila is the issue of peaceful coexistence within the urban space of two types of 
dwellings present in the city: stone buildings and nipa houses. The transfer of the 
latter toward the periphery was not the result of a “natural process but of a strong 
political will of the colonial authorities. The exercise of this political will gave rise 
to significant economic, social, cultural, and political repercussions. 



160 



I IMPS Matcrialcs l igcros rs. Matcrialcs Fucrtcs 



Ihere is an abundant bibliography about the two types of dwellings/ What 
is important to bear in mind is that the Ctistis de matcrialcs fitertei' which tradition- 
ally utilized stone, wood, and tile became modified in the 19th century by the 
dominant use ot wood, brick, iron frames, and zinc roots and later by roots made 
of ealvanized-iron sheets. Dwellings usimi strong materials were common, at least 
at the beginning ot the 19th century, tor the individual homes or the Hats ot the 
rich Europeans, natives, or C hinese as well as tor public buildings, warehouses, 
workshops, factories, and commercial buildings. On the other hand, the architec- 
ture of the ctistis (Ic Ciiriii v nipit dates back before the coming ot the Spaniards. This 
type of construction utilized almost exclusively plant materials like bamboo and 
nipa shingles. This kind of dwelling was generally reserved tor the ordinary native 
population (/W/Wor mestizos dc sanglcyS. In 19th-century Manila, it also served as 
temporary factory or even temporary office especially after an earthquake or a ty- 
phoon. 

The origin of the conflict between the two types ot dwelling is simple: the 
plant materials, especially the nipa shingles, were very combustible, lhe risk ot fire 
leveling a congested city was great — which, together with typhoons and earth- 
quakes, had brought destruction to Manila since the 16th century. Io minimize 
the destruction from earthquakes, the Spanish colonial authorities imposed build- 
ing regulations which slowly yet perceptibly modified the appearance ot stone 
buildings without modifying zoning considerations, l he prevention of fires and 
their spread required more radical measures: the clear and neat separation ot build- 
ings made of plant materials and buildings made ot stone so that fire from one zone 
could not spread to another zone, thus allow ing effective containment of fire. 1 his 
problem and the solutions adopted in Manila were not original. The European 
cities during the modern period as well as many colonial cities in the 19th century 
were likewise confronted with the constant threats ot fire brought about by 
thatched roots and straw roots. I h is required strong measures to eliminate com- 
bustible building materials and to separate houses made of combustible materials 
from stone edifices. 1 ’ In Manila, many injustices were committed bv the colonial 
government, specifically by the municipal government (Ayuntamiento) on the 
question of segregation. 

This paper has three parts: the first deals with the first half of the century; the 
second, the mass relocations of the second half of the century and the situation on 
the eve of the 1 896 Revolution; the last, the reactions of the natives to the colonial 
policy. 

At the beginning of the 1 9th century, the distribution of the two types of ar- 
chitecture was rather simple. The Walled City (Intramuros) was exclusively re- 
served for houses of stone. Beyond the military fortification was open space on the 
left bank. The three suburbs of the left bank (Ermita, Malate, Paco) were occupied 
by houses made of plant materials. The situation on the right bank was more com- 
plex, particularly on two suburbs facing Intramuros: the suburbs of Binondo and 
Santa Cruz. Here stone houses were found side by side nipa houses. 10 Houses of 

161 






I Ml mil IITINI HI V< >1 I '! l< )N AM > HI i < INI > 



strong materials were numerous between the c him h of Bmoiulo .uni the river with- 
out specifically dominating file area. l or example, the street of I woha which be- 
came a principal commercial area in the I ‘Mi centtirv still had mam nipa houses 
especially in the area bordering Santa ( r u/. I r 1 tin* suburb of ( )tii.tpo where nipa 
houses, predominated stone houses were an exception 

I here was a preponderance of strong materials <>n the right bank with the 
overall evolution of Manila at the end of the 18th ccnturs and at the beginning of 
the 19th century. I hese two suburbs f panic ularlv Bm<>nd<> were to become the 
commercial centers of the capital as the port of Manila became open to interna- 
tional trade. Warehouses, tobacco factories, and other f.u lories could not be con- 
structed within the Walled C ary since the re* was a lac k ( >f spac e as well as it being an 
enclosed space. ( I he gates were closed from I 1 p.m until a a m. I his regulation 
prevailed until 1852). I he right bank, however, vielded wide open spac es as well as 
many tributaries of the Pasig (esteros) which enabled the* to pl\ their waters. 

I he role of Hi non do and, to a lesser degree, of Santa ( r 1 1 / w .is not limited to being 
economic centers. At the end of the 18th cent urv, a number of Spaniards as well as 
foreign traders initially established their secondary homes then later their primary 
residences in these areas. Indeed people disliked living in the Walled ( ity more 
and more, it being an enclosed space. I he walls brought a feeling of suffocation. 

I he city s unhealthy conditions were often mentioned, hurt her mo re, the fear of an 
uprising declined with the limitation on the* entrv of ( hmese migrants and the 
British occupation of Manila in 1762 proved that the fortifications were ineffec- 
tive. 

Io sum up, the huropeans began at the start of the 19th centurv a slow pro- 
cess of building stone houses in the suburbs of the right bank. I he stone houses 
were no longer the monopoly of Spaniards or I mope. ins and the* rich C hinese 
mestizos', the rich inclios and the rich Cdnnesc* also became owners of stone houses. 

I he ethnic segregation practiced fat least in theory) by t he Spaniards in earlier cen- 
turies of colonial domination fa P.uropean Walled C.itv and Asian suburbs) no 
longer existed at the beginning of the 19th century. 

Of course, the decline in importance of Intramuros and the gradual impor- 
tance of the right bank highlighted the problem of the* coexistence of the two types 
of architecture, forcing the municipal government to issue a polic v which remained 
in force until 1898: the stone edifices should at .ill cost be protected against the 
dangers posed by the nipa houses. 

for the Ayuntamicnto and the colonial administration, the stone buildings 
signified the growing prosperity of the* city, hatch stone edifice was considered an 
important investment by the owner and an important source of taxes which filled 
the coffers of the municipal government or the colonial revenue department. 1 ' On 
the other hand, and logically, the native houses were passed off as negligible as re- 
flected in the terms frequently used to refer to them (casuchos, chozuis , cobachos ). M 
Factors such as the limited resources of the owners of the nipa houses, the cultural 
attachment of the natives to such type of dwelling, and its adaptation to the cli- 



162 



I l Ml's M.iccri.ilcs l igcros r>. N1.ucri.ilcs l ucrtcs 



mate or to earthquakes were rarelv taken into account. 1 he nipa house was consid- 
ered as a temporaiA dwelling, easily assembled and conveniently moved from one 
place to another. The “passivity” of the natives during times ot fire was tor the 
Spaniards and the western visitors the best proof ot the low investment value ot 
this ivpc of d w cllini;. 

Of course, such an attitude rested on a lack of cultural appreciation on the 
part of the Avuniamicnto. which was composed ot C rcoles and Spaniards from the 
Peninsula. 1 or them, the citv should be made up of stone houses: the nipa house 
was appropriate in the count rvsidc but not in the city. 1 his denigration was a fa- 
vorite theme in the colonial discourse: stone was synonymous with wealth, respect- 
ability, and civil i/at ion, while houses of nipa and bamboo gave shelter to savages 
and “nomads. I luis, the development ot stone houses illustrated not only indi- 
vidual and collective success but the progress ot '‘civilization which the colonizers 
were supposed to personify: 

[the development ot stone construe non ] . . . takes the form ot a march towards 
the civili/ation of societ\ and the retreat from savagery. . . a city made ot stone 
marks social progress and gives refuge to the wealthy and the respectful, while 
the nipa houses represent savagerv. repulsive to civilization, and attract unde- 
sirable and maleficent persons. 

According to the Avuntnmicnio, the continued presence ot the prc-1 lispanic 
houses was an insult to the capital of the archipelago, which was the show window 
of Spanish colonization (foreign visitors were increasing in number and judged the 
Spaniards on the basis ot a single visit to Manila) and the model tor other cities in 
the colonv. Such a discourse had a logical conclusion: the nipa houses which could 
not be totally eradicated must disappear from the city center and from strategic 
points. Of course, the municipal councilors, the merchants, industrialists, or prop- 
erty owners were directlv affected bv this operation: the value of a land ot a stone 
house which w as not surrounded bv nipa houses would have a higher market value. 

During the first half of the l l )th centurv, the two target areas of the Ayun- 
tamiento were logically the pueblos of Binondo and Santa Can/. 5et the plans of the 
municipality conflicted with the military, who also had jurisdiction over the city 
and underlined the importance of defending the Walled Caty. brom the end of the 
18th century onward, the Armv had jurisdiction over all the edifices within the 
radius of 1 ,250 m ( 1 ,500 z vz/v/M around the wall. 1 hey prohibited the construction 
of stone edifices on the right bank to prevent external or internal enemies from 
using them as bastions as the bnglish in 1^62 did the bell towers of churches and 
other stone constructions built too close to the walls of Intranutros. On the other 
hand, the military preferred the structures made of nipa since it was easy to set 
them on fire to create open territory in the event of a threat. 1 he military also 
worried about the growing migration of Spaniards to the suburbs. I hese Spaniards 
were viewed as reserved forces in the event of an insurrection or a war. But the pres- 



i m mu iitiM hi v< m i h i 



encc of natives inside the Walled ( nv jeopardized ns smini’, Bv icMricting the 
construction of stone houses on the right hank, the arms hopeil to c luouragc the 
Spaniards to stay within the Walled < itv 

I he clash of opinions between the munu ipalitv and the \mi\ resulted in a 
policy which lacked coherence till the late 1 V o | hr :<>. -roots -eneral assigned 
to the Philippines arbitrarily favored one group against the othe r NV\ ertheless, 
the idea of making Bmondo a c|uarter of stone* house s gr.idunllv took shape From 
the 1830s onward a number of mpa houses were transferred to San lose 1'ro/o) 
and a demarcation line 05 m wide between Binmulo and londo was set a kilome- 
ter from the she) re. But. even in Bmondo. the strn t separatum be tween these two 
types e)f construction was far from being reah/ed 

I he great fires of the years 1 860 w it nessed a mu e hanir in the c < domal pro- 
gram. Between 1863 and 1869, the* areas where the mpa houses dominated were 
razed to the ground by big fires whic h threatened the stone edifues oi the center 
and rendered available the land desired by the influential membets of the munici- 
pality. I he opportunity for new distribution of land arose \t the same time, mili- 
tary resistance began to crumble. I he transfer of n one mi u ae r i \ mes as w ell as the 
relocation of the Spaniards outside the Walled ( it\ hael pu ><Mcsscd in the fust h lit' 
of the century thus creating a serious lae k of stone buildings m she lte r pe>rt t icili- 
ties or to house the rich and the westerners. 

In describing the whole process of relocation of mpa houses each time there 
were fires, one can focus on two significant example s: San Nicolas and Divisoria 
J he quarter of San Nicolas which was part of Bmondo w as to bee nine the model 
of flow nipa houses could he rc/oncd. I mil the* fire* of I 863, San Nicolas was i 
place inhabited by fishermen, sailors, and who had paticnth reel limed 

land from the sea. I he total absenc e of urban plan n i ng was due to the* spontaneous 
development of the place. I he mass of nipa houses had Been c*vcd for a lom» time 
by businessmen and owners of stone edifice's, cspecialh to extend the* port f icili- 
tics. After the fire, the Spanish authorities prohibited the* natives from reconstruct- 
ing their nipa houses in San Nicolas. I he natives would have to relocate, without 
any financial compensation, toward the periphery (San Jose*, north of londo or 
north of Santa C ,ru/J where space was reserved for them. At the' caul of a long pro- 
cess of urban planning, San Nicolas was set up as a quarter reserved for stone edi- 
fices, traces of which can still he seen. ’ I he year I860 also marked the setting up 
of Divisoria. As its name indicates, it was not a road which eased circulation. 
Divisoria ran from east to west while the usual direction of communication was 
north-south. In fact, I )ivisoria was a wide firebreak line (50 m) set up to separate 
the quarters reserved for stone houses, at least in theory, and the quarters domi- 
nated by nipa houses in the periphery. 

( )n the eve of the 1896 Revolution, one can appreciate the extent of reloca- 
tion taking place from the start of the 1860s and the “natural grow th of built-up 
areas. I here was sharp opposition between a center rounded off bv Divisoria, 
which was dominated by stone houses, and the peripheries dominated by nipa 

164 



I I MI'S M.ucri.ilcs I igcros r\. M.ucrialcs l ucrccs 



houses. And yet the urban space was onlv at first blush simplified by a policy of 
expulsion and segregation. 

Despite the tact that the Spanish policy did not have as its objective ethnic 
segregation, the relocation ot nipa houses had a strong effect of creating areas along 
ethnic lines. Iwen it some C hinese, some Spanish mestizos* and even poor Span- 
iards lived in the suburbs, the majoritv o f the population was composed of natives 
and C hinese nu'stizvs. 1 lie different sizes of nipa houses reflected the sharp social 
differences among the inhabitants of the suburbs, but on the whole those who lived 
in nipa houses represented the poor. Spanish sources suggest that the rejection of 
the nipa houses was associated with the stigma of being a social outcast. Owners of 
nipa houses were often described as dirtv, sick, immoral, and rebels, fhe nipa 
house was looked down upon bv Spaniards and bv some natives, although some 
supported it. s 

If the peri p her v acquired a socio-ethnic unity, the center itself did not present 
any homogeneitv. The ethnic and social mix was very marked, even in lntramuros. 

I he tvpe of dwelling gives us a good indication of this complexity. Nipa houses 
were verv much present in the center even it they were degraded and damaged (in 
theorv the ow ners did not have the right to repair their houses). Moreover, slums 
appeared here and there. In the slums, the small dwellings though mainly made of 
plant materials also utilized other materials like stone, wood, wooden planks, tin, 
galvanized iron sheets, cardboard, etc. At the start ot the American rule, these types 
of dwellings were called “interiors. 

A new category of buildings also appeared at the end of the 19th century: the 
houses of mixed materials (casits de vuitermles ??uxtos). 1 hese included those with a 
frame of bamboo (rarclv of wood), a root of zinc, brick or tin, or a roof of nipa 
covered with tin.' 0 I lowever, most of the native population of Manila could not 
afford roofs made of metal. 

Even the stone houses were far from being comfortable. In the 19th century, 
two types of dwellings appeared in the city center including lntramuros: the 
accessories and the poscsioncs. They were one-story structures with an interior court 
where a few facilities were centralized. I hev were divided into tiny living compart- 
ments. Usually the structure was badly constructed and ill maintained. ' 1 I he poor 
who did not like or could not want to in the periphery would rather stay here un- 
der congested and unhygienic conditions which were often worse than those in the 
nipa houses. 

I he slums or t he poscsioncs were not specific to a quarter. 1 hey were found in 
dead spaces, vacant lots which were areas of speculation, on beaches and banks of 
esteros , ruins of buildings destroyed bv earthquakes and transformed into accesonas 
or occupied overnight, swampy areas, backyards of lots where the front yard had a 
“respectable facade. I bus, no suburb had an ethnic line or dominant social class; 
a street with the reputation of being affluent could hide a slum colony. 

This kind of mixed neighborhood was without doubt one of the reasons for 
witnessing at the end of the century a movement of the rich toward specific areas. 



1 65 



mi mu iittM 



( >i t 



I he remote peripherv was first .in .ittr.i 1 i< »n ! » um « >t t h .« >w pruc nt l.uul where 
tlie rich could afford to construct Antillian h< »u si i r t on t ulcil h\ gardens or 
parks. Sampaloc witnessed tins kind of development, the tesnlenis looked for green 
surroundings and fresh .nr hit S.mt.i Me a for ‘imp v. ’u rr e.i dilation is not 
that significant in comparison with the < enter I he sou t h shore * >f \ I.mil.i Bay also 
attracted the rich who discovered the «|ii.irtei <»f 1 nnit.i nni Ma.aic borne of the 
working class rill then and praised the beautiful :u r . «>r the fresh air. 

In tile 1890 s, this move which v,.is | list lur.inmn;: the urbanization of Er- 

mita and Malate reached its apex under American rul< rise to an important 

problem: the beautiful houses constructed in S.unp.ilot . 1 nnit.i. Malate were 
located outside the zone reserved for stone si rm tines atul in t lieor \ rlu* home own- 
ers took full responsibility of protecting then homes aiMinst tires \s before, the 
municipality attempted to put them under then pnueitnmbs extending the /one 
for stone structures and demolishing mpa houses I he \\imiamienio supported 
this move for Sampaloc on the one hand and I rmita ami Malate. on the other, 
where a subtle division let the whole seaside to tin stone buildings.... But the 
central government did not wish to give wa\ t <> the pressure o! the munn ipal gov- 
ern men t, apparently for pol i t ic al reasc ms: t he gr ea t number of e\ u t ions during the 
years 1860-1870 had given rise to .i number of nu ulenis and bad left profound 
memories on those whose homes had been demolished. It was thus proper to he 
prudent. ’ 

I he problem a r ic cocx istcnc e of t hese tun ryprs of stnuunes i esul ted in con- 
flicts between the owner of a stone house situated amidst mpa houses and the in- 
habitants of the latter. I he archives abound m cases <>f puairels and letters of 
complaints. Asa whole, t he clem ol i t ions were of ten ma r ked b\ (disc emotions, ex- 
pressions of anger, and petitions. I he* owners of mpa houses tric’d to resist pas- 
sively, with the weapons of the weak, the* demolition orders. I he - authorities in 
charge of implementing the orders complained of tlu- "stubbornness of the na- 
tives who insisted on rebuilding their mpa house’s at the- same place: the military 
engineer Luis Angel Ciarcia admitted having demolished more than M) times the 
same nipa houses during his whole stay in the- Philippines and reported that nipa 
houses reappeared like mushrooms on the forbidden spots. I he owners of nipa 
houses who were found in the areas reserved for stone houses in theory did not 
have the right to repair their houses but they did so c kindest i tick by disguising the 
materials to give them a patina. 

Sometimes, the natives used more organi/cd forms of resistance and wrote 
petitions to the cent ral govern men t . I he few pet 1 1 i< >ns written by i n habitants who 
were evicted showed that they felt they were victims of injustice. I he fact that they 
were illiterate (few being able to affix their signatures) revealed their coming from 
the poor sector of society. Among those exacted were not only nir/tos but also C hi- 
nesc mestizos who did not always belong to the middle class of Manila as is often 
mentioned in historical sources. I he signatories were perfectly conscious that the 
rich benefited from their eviction and that speculators bought the abandoned land 



1 66 



1 1 MI >s n M.itcrulcs 1 it;cros M.ucri.dcs lucrtes 

at a low price and pocketed the profits from a change in classification o f the land 
without giving even a tew pesos to the previous nipa-house owners. 

file victims ot eviction tell that the division o t the urban /one was unfair: 
thev had to vacate the land near the ^ itv center tor land in the periphery which was 
far from their place of work and more often than not swampv.* 0 l he petitions 
reflected also the cultural and traumatizing repercussions of the relocations.*’ Ac- 
cording to the petitions, the e\ u tions broke the svmbolic tie between the land and 
the familv and deprived the latter ot its identitv. 

The petitions reveal likewise that the natives had a different concept ot land- 
ownership and propertv: for them, the sole basis ot ownership was the notion ot 
primaev in occupving the land and tor this reason those who had stone houses ot 
recent construction did not have prioritv over the nipa houses which had been 
there since time immemorial even it thev were destroved bv fires or even it the 
owners could not produce a legal title. 

Lastlv, the texts coming from the victims bet raved the lack ot concern by the 
colonial authorities for the interests ot the poor and the natives.*' 

This critique leads us to a last point which is rather complex: Did the colo- 
nial poliev of demolition of nipa houses have political repercussions? Did this situ- 
ation lead to the development ot nationalist ideas during the last quarter of the 
19th centurv? Did the inhumanity ot the policy give wav to a feeling ot injustice 
with regard to the colonial situation? Was the feeling of being rejected the symbol 
of marginalization of ethnic groups and social groups in colonial societv? Since the 
natives and the C hinese mestizos were distinctlv victims of eviction, did this give 
way to the solidarity of the two groups? 

A positive reply may be quite an attractive answer, but it seems best to remain 
prudent for lack of sources and new research on the matter. Ot course, the geo- 
graphical spread of the Katipunan reveals its origins in the suburbs where the nipa 
houses dominated. “ Of course, the insurgents of 1896-189” appeared to be from 
these quarters, 0 but it is difficult to establish a direct connection between eviction 
and revolution. One can only advance two factors which seem to have played an 
important role, hirst, exaction as colonial as well as municipal poliev became un- 
tenable by the end of the 1 9th centurv: eviction was an injustice or a misdirection 
of the colonial power. 1 he rejection ot Spanish domination bv a sector of the popu- 
lation in the capital must be seen in a general context and not as an isolated phe- 
nomenon. 

Secondly, the policy imposed by the colonial authorities created a physical 
situation favorable to an outbreak of an insurrection. The areas in the periphery 
(even for those in some quarters in the center) tended to be free from the control of 
authorities because of the problems of distance and the anarchic nature of zoning. 
The institutions charged w ith organizing the native population witnessed during 
the 19th century H ‘ a serious crisis which we have no time to analvze here. The 
population growth did not lead to the creation of new political subdivisions* and 
it was the same case for the parishes which had the same classification at the end of 



16 



nn muii'PiM kivi >n u<> % . \m»i^ m»m> 

the century .is .it the beginning. I bus the Sp.im.iuls .<»st .m important means of 
surveillance of population: was not the Katipun.in tlisv • *s ereil tarciiU b\ an Angus- 
tinian friar.' 

Notes 

1. I would like ro thank Dr Maria ! m i ( . ■* * • »t < < he Philippines 

and my friend ( .cede Per t / N>r r r . * r ; ..miii' flu pa; 

2. I his estimation is based on \KA< *< >N ‘ IUic!« »i 
con alguna notuuis turtoui de 

otras nueiunmutf (U (jutruLi erit't: .i .it ’•! i N / > /V it ie : < \guer\n . ... 

Manila 2 1 de linern fit IHl '/ \ \ < a\itr Irnpu « » I el m« » de l.t Pla/a. v Puerto 

de Davite, por I oren/o del K<» i r m » 1M mb. a • • p and. *<>t ! N v >2. on the 

padrones de alma of the >1 th<- \uhdu» t Manila I Ik degree ot rdi* 

ability of i hese figures and r he drmoer aph *. < »t t h< r . »f Manii.i k a rule are ana I wed 
in HUhIZ de I.I.MPS Xavier \},inille utt \/\t trite ro: .Hue r( .1 nirtLi^rmcnt 
cl line I’ll Ic - (Annul Ic I X J > / XXIX I lir.c d h<\: *1 ( ms ei site Michel de 

Montaigne Pjordeau \ III 1 ( ) { ) a * iom< !OS2 pp pp i 2 1 20 1 

3. Numerous authors rnistak omer a non < : lu* W a 1 led C it v which was 

f or a long 1 1 me solel v k nown a s ( 1 1 n lad dt Manila. a iu i t i u pi » 1 1 k e o t \ lamia cre- 
ated in 1 8 34 . I Inis i r is necessa r \ i o < l< f i n< the 1 1 1 ba n i e . i 1 i i ies \\ I i u h t he \\ ord “ \ ia- 
n i 1 a real I v ref ers t o i n t he I0rhientur\. P>\ i unsuiinu; a i n a p o t t he ea 1 1 v L>t h 
tury, one realizes that things are <]iiitr ample atn i ill. Manila Dcaib appears as a 
built-up area made up of the Walled ( it\ Iniiainuios) and of Milnnhs (, /;•;;/ lhjlt$)s 
three on the left hank (P.rmita, \lalaie, and San I em.mdo de I hlao) and m\ on the 
riglit ( Binondo, londo, Sant.i ( .ru/. ( v )mapo, San Miguel. Sampaloc >. \s tar hack as 
the early 1 ( 2t h eenturv, t he corn i nu 1 1 v of the urban tabi k \s as u iu|uest io nable, vet its 
juridical and cultural recognition took place oniv in ibe second half of the centurv. 

I Respite its extension in the- 1 9t h centurv, the aggie u ne t a t ion ( > t .Manila had not in- 
corporated new dist ricts on the eve of the- t rv< >1 1 i 1 1 < >i i : ( alooc an (to the north), Pineda 
bo the south), Santa Ana and Pandacan (tot he east > were pueblo s i nc reasinglv linked 
to the capi tal but from a get >graph ic a I and a juridical p< > i n t of view, t hev still made up 
small independent towns. 

4. 1 he Philippine National Archives (PNA) of Manila contain the most abundant 
records on this subject. The following headings are part ic ularly important: Avun- 
tamiento, ( mnstruccibn de (Lisas, Policia urban. i, Spanish Manila et Varias Pro- 
vinces. I he files from the Archivo Histonco Nacional (AI IN, especially in the 
gobierno heading) or from the Scrvicio I Iistbrico Militar (SI l\l) of Madrid are an 
essential complement. ( )nly the most significant records are mentioned in this paper. 
Por further details on facts and the* sources mentioned above, refer to chapters V, VI 
et VI I of I I Uh I Z de I T,M PS op. c 1 1 . pp. 350-559. 

5. DACANAY (Julian P.. Jr.) “(irand ( )lcl Staircase, hilipnio I lentrige, vol. VI, pp. 
1598-1603; DIAZ- I RPX’IIULIX) (Maria Lourdes) Anjuiteetimi espunobi eti bilb 



168 



I I MPs Materials l ii^cros is Mate*riale\s Pucrtcs 



tunas. /S6S JSOO Seville: Pscucla de l studios Hispanoamericanos. 1986, S3 
planches ^ 8o3 pp.; 1 1 ART 1 )onn V.) The ( ebuono THipino Dwelling in C lancugon: 
//s ( 'onstrui tion anti ( ultural Aspects. Vale l niversitv: Southeast \sia Studies Cultural 
Report Series, 1980, \ 1 1 + 1*8 pp.: Kl ASSl N (WinaiuD Architecture in the Philip- 
pine^. Filipino Huil/hn g m a ( ross-( ultural ( 'on text . Cebu City: University of San 
Carlos. 1986. XIV * -t38 pp.: MO| ARi ; S (Resil B.) ( Corordo in Cebu . Crbar: 
Residence in a Philippine Province. Cebu: Ramon Ahoiti/ foundation, 1983, 3 HI + 
1 ■ * S pp.; PI RA1 1 S iPraiKisco) Intlueneia de la arquitectura espanola en Pilipinas. 
llispanidad. vol . II. no 13. CMl; ITRAl PS (Prancisco) “Arquitectura hispana en 
Manila.' llispanidad . vol. 11. no l ", CMC pp. 21-38; ITRLZ (Rodrigo 111). 
LNCARNACION (Rosario S. and DACANAY (Julian P. Jr.) Folk Architecture. 
(Quezon C itv: t .1. Books. 1 9S9, 36-t pp.: Z1A1 CPPA (Fernando) et PINK") (Martin) 
Philippine Ancestral House IS 10 CCO. Quezon City: C.C.P. Books, 080, 363 pp. 

0. I )ilJerent names are also used: c*ts*i de fobrnw (te monpostcrio . tie c*tl y atnto. (it pnaia. 

7. On these transformations see 1 11 1 1 / de 1 IMPS op. eit. pp. 3 2-39*4. 

8. ( )r eosa tie tnatcriah's hgeros. 1 he phrase casa de pit jo is very rare, ho hoy bubo is ne\er 
used in the texts of that time. 

9. Por l uropean cities: 1 1AROIT I (Jean-1 ouis) / embelhssement des nlles. l.'urbontsme 

franyaisau W IHe. slide . Pans: Pieard. eolk Villeset Soeietes, 1963, 33 8 pp., pp. 3 la- 
31 1 ) and PINT M ( lean l ue) / e monde ties nlles ou \l\e. siecle. Pans: 1 Bichette. 0)1, 
330 pp., pp. 109-1 10. Por other colonial cities: C i.B. PNDlC CM l A History of Hong 
Ron g. 1 long Kong, Oxford, New \ork: Oxford l niversitv Press, 1988 (1 Oc. sdd, 
XIII + 33" pp., pp. 88-86; Cl ’Ll 1CK (J.M.) The Story of Forty Kuolo Lumpur Sin- 
gapore; Donald Moore, 1986, 100 pp., pp. 08-66, M-~3; James C JACKSON 
“Kuala Lumpur in the 1880s: The contribution of Bloomfield Douglas, Journal of 
Southeast Asian History . vol. 1\, no. 3, 1963, pp. P > 1 1 1-4+1-S, Charles 

GOLDBLUM Metropo/es de TAsie du Sud-Fst. Strategies urboines et pohtujues du 
logernent. Paris: L I larmattan, Villes et Paureprises, 3 6 pp., pp. - * ^ * LlK ^ uc * cn 

LAMANT “La creation dTme capitale par le pouvoir colonial Phnom Penh m P.M. 
LAP'ONT Peninsule nidochtonoise. F.tudes urboines. Paris: LHaimattan, Kecherches 
Asiatiques, 1 99 1 , 233 + 1 0 pp., pp. 68 et 80; Roger PASQU1KR “Villes du Senegal an 
XlXe. siecle." Revue Frangaise d'Histoire d Outre- Mer. t. XL\ 11, no 168+16), 1 )(T), 
pp. 387-436, p. 393. 

1 0. The use of different colors for stone Buildings and nipa houses allows us to spot their 
implantation with precision. Por the early 19th century, two maps can be consulted. 
Alberto ele Cordobas map of 1 803 (Servicio Ceograafico del hjcrcito, Islas 1 ilipinas 
no 88, in Puertos y Fort ifteactones en America y Filipinos: Actos de! Seminm to. Maehiei. 
Biblioteca CP I lOPU, 198-6 36-t pp., map no 134); and the one in the Depostto 
iopografico de Manila de 1 S PL (SUM, Madrid, Cartoteca no 13964). 1 he Razo n del 
numero de vans tjue hti producido la medicibn con objeto a la tontubtnibn di i 
a turn bra do, 18/08/1819 (PNA Ayuntamiento no ) isalsovei\ useful. 

11. In 1 8 1 7, 40 percent of the Spanish community (Creoles and Spaniards horn the pen- 
insula) already lived outside the W alled C atv (Fstados de !a poblacion di las islas I dipt 



1 69 



I III mil IITINI R I .<>M I l! >'. 



12 . 

13 . 



14 . 

15 . 



16. 



17 . 

18 . 



19. 



20 . 

21 . 



22 



23. 

24. 



ruts correspondirntcs ul ttno fir '•II >< < < '. • 1 1 i • ... ... ; . u ; rr 

delaM.N. >•/.. ( turbid de SUmtLi rn l '/ rir Abrti dr isl'i M.millr \l \lcmi|c. ISIS). 

I*or the whole p.ir.if'r.iph. see 111 1 1/ <i< i i \II‘ s «>j ;>;> <•»'• tl<> 

I he stone houses p.ml the tiiunuip.il t-i*. <•( tlu i.i. •, :r.-.;'>. .» t.»\ «.rc4tcxl 

in 1 8 I 7 for t he ele.inmji ol t he st rer t s .imi pul >! : . . (itin- uui (torn the ISSOs. the 

contribution urbuthl levied (>•. the <<>i<*m.il puhii i : . .lep.utment 

( .aliins, huts or sheds 

See, for instance, the A Jemomi obrr b> at tit dr mant/t in : \nn N r . u . fu*in de Lam* 
como ( tobemador Superior ( n il dr I ihfnmi .tit . Ir \br u . v- > ai 1 2 de Juli b 

de IHGC), At IN no S20 ^ f 20 .nui ' 

On t he cornposi r ion of the ii\unt*nnirntt> HI I IX I I M I’ ^ «*p v it pp. 2""t>- 
299 and appendices 8 and 9 pp ‘>80 JO SO 

AI IN no 2 1 42 ~22. 18 V)ct ,\l IN no 1 Ho r < p« » r r from the < nmnar :o Rr^io Patricio 
de Iti hscosura on t he adrn mist ra t ion of t li< Ph i 1 i ppi nc n . 3 t 11 1 8< » s 
( i( )VAN I KS O'clipe Maria de I V < imttl til pt> ;< unit i [ul»t r rutfita 
provincia. Madrid: Imp. I )e Alfonso Rodeo, 188 8 pp . art Will ( tovantes \\1S 

a town councilor in 18 ’5 18 0. 

Mariano de ( ,( )K .( )l .( HI .A \1ettintni \tdtrr wttnia .■(<> /rafit f -» lati: * /; 4 a*. topo\rrj- 

fuus de las Islas de tjae r ttnnptme la ( apiiatna < trnrta. fie l iltpnia* (22 \ 1 1 S*iO) 

OHM c .O I lee cion ( leneral de I )oc umentos. In it alter < (»0. no 10(0; hi forme del 
( .oronel tie Inyenieros l) l ui Anyel ( ran la at en a fit L> </ > rabalt ' de Manila eon un 
proyecto tie una nuera nndtid. 2 VOu 18 i i <S| PM. ( ( .1 ), no .MS); ( omiMon de 
deslinde de juriduciones y tie uuero tnia t ido fit h> tirrahtilc' fit \lamla 18(0-1867 
PSHM, ( X d ), no ~ 7 2 / iH). por furtliei information, see 1 11 1 I / tie I IMPS op. cit. 

PP- 423-427. 

1 1 UIH X de PIMPS op. c n . pp. 42 i iO. 

’V the late 1 890s, about 2,000 fam i I ies st i 1 1 1 1 ved in n i pa bouses in Pi non do, particu- 
Pa r 1 y in the area between the esteroiA Pinondo and the sea ( PNA ireeeion tie Pueblos , 
Manila no 127, 1849, a plan for the creation of font positions of ecLidorcs de policia 
ln ul)ul P See also the PLino topografiett tie! pueblo fie londo pan/ n/ani/t’.aar la portion 
(juernada en el truendio tie! A l de Moran tie 1 Hi ■> dt • hnna > ( or/e\ (0S/0*/ 1 8-i3, PNA 
Varias Proviiiaas, londo no 2). In t lie in id 1 8 30s, Pinondo s housing stock was made 
11 P ( >f 1 ,483 stone buildings versus 2,000 m pa houses ( ( ( ) \ 1 PS I ( ) N ( 1 \ 1 RAP HP 
KVIADISTICA I )!-. MPIPINAS Prnncro y sc^undo iiitielemos. Manille: Imp. Pel 
Po let in ( )ficial , 1 855, 2 volumes, 40 + 1 28 pp., pp. 12 IS). 1 n t be late 1 S3 0s, an area 
reserved for stone buildings was set up in 1 1 1 c* district of San Miguel ( bv the rive r). At 
die same time nipa houses were relocated further north. lor the situation of* other 
districts, see I IUPTX de PI MPS op. cit. p. m3. 

San Nicolas and I ro/.o were burnt down in 1803; Prmita, londo, Santa C m/, and 
Qiiiapo in 1803; I ro/.o and Mevsig in I 800; San Miguel in 1 N09 (III! IX de 
I-PMPS op. eit. pp. 335 and 450-458). 

^ hi i fiis, see 1 1 1 p 1 X de PPM PS ( >p. e i t . pp. M 3 1 5 ) . 

I ^ IH X de I 1 ,\1 PS op. cit. pp. 458 40‘». 

170 



1 1 Mi's M.ucrulcs 1 igcros r> M.ucrialcs bucrtes 



28. 1 lie works stance! m lS(o. the section between the sea and Santa Anas square was 

set up as earl\ as 1S(>S. 1 he last part . between Santa Ana and Makicariang, w as set up 
later on and was less w ule C alle San Rataelh 

20. 1 veil though tlieie ate good examples ot sueh distriets ot nipa houses in londo 

( Iuiuban. I echerosi. tile atea ot Pulumbavan (north ot the pueblo ot Santa ( rti/, 
between the l h \ isoi ta and San 1 .rain i lospual ‘ is the best example ot a suburb where 
i'iistiy de Milter:. ih ' huddled in a total mess, w ithout any eolleetive taeilities. 

2”*. 1 he\ still leathered m Binondo but were present in all the distriets ot the agglomera- 

tion it onl\ tot the network ot s*tr: s.in stotes. 

28. See in particular the anotn mous art ule "I a /ona de piedra in / </ llustraeum h:!:pifui 

r. 1 1; no ui. (rv* /,sm. 

20. Annual Reports ot the War Pepartment tor the biseal \ear b tided lime 30. l c H)3. 
Washington: Cio\ernment Printing Office. vol. \ 1 : Report ot the Philippine C om- 
mission Part II and III, lOOs. WII + 88(>, pp. SS, 0(). See also the remarkable pho- 
tograph, p. 1 00. 

30. 1 he nipa was maintained because it acted as a temperature regulator. 

31. Ill 1 I / de 1 l \ IPS op. eit. pp. n 1 P(\ See, tor instance, the descriptions ot Ratael 

I MAX AR1 N AS ( Mornor/ns histone.is y estiidistiens de bilipituis y piirtieuhmnetite de Li 
<r vtinde ishi de l neon. eserihis per Pon jefe de ILieiendd eesante . (juien his dedie a al 
I'ese/eiit isi mo e llustnsiMo Sum. Areobispo. Manille: Imp. Pel Piario de Manila, 188(), 
non imagine, 2”3 pp., 1 1 euadernos) and ot Antonio C OPORNIO 8 Nil I O 
1 irpo^nifiti rnedieii de his ishis Iilipithis. Manille: Imp. Pe P. Alejandro Pome/ 

1 uentenebm, ISSN 3~M pp., pp. 12a, 12” 128. 

32. I IU1 I X de 1 IMPS op. eit . pp. S.p)-S81. 

33. /:'/ Resunien, t. 1, no 1 18, 10/1 1/1800; PNA map no 3-t-A, Ihi^ido de hi dirisorm de 
Mtiteritiles fuertes y h^eros en hi ori/hi i^i/nenhi del Manille, 23/02/ 1 800; 1 11 RAS 
Y C ’Rb.SPO (C 'arloscle la ) Ante-projeeto de Siineiimiento de Mamhi. Manille: 1 ip. Pit. 
de C 'hot re v C ia., 1 800, 0 1 p. + 3 maps, map ot 30/00/1800; PNA (.onstnieeioties de 
( hisds, no 2, 180 S PNA Ayuntnmiento no 18M, a plan tor the incorporation ot 
londo in the Mdterniles fuertes /one. 

34. I 1PKTZ cle l IMPS op. eit. pp. 88A-S01. 

38. In San Nicolas, the natives tore ott the poles used tor the new lines and used them to 
reinforce the nipa house’s built illegallv in this district (Al IN no 822, c. 2, -3.M). 

W hen C lovcrnor- ( leneral Nate iso C laveria ordered the roots eit the nipa houses from 

Santa C air/ district torn off... I os reenios ... Siiliiin por milhires ii piirar el eoehe del (ren- 
ew/ (doreriii, pidiendo hi reroetieion de sit deereto Miiruhwdo dernbiir hi nipa... 

( ( .onusion de deshnde . . . 1 808: SI INI. C C i P no 2 tS, t. 8S). 

30. I uis Angel C iarcia In tor me (...) 1 8 l l ; SI I M , C C I P no ”288, t. ! . 

37. 1 III I X de I IMPS op. eit. pp. *R)(i-8() 1 . 

38. A petition of nine women from the district ot the Mural Ion (by the Pasig, in the’ area 
ot San Nicolas), 1820 (PNA Miron Pronneeis no 1 ): a petition ot t he pnueipii!es ot 
londo, 1 8*3 (PNA l nr on Prormeiiis no 2); a conflict between Bernardo Baro, the 
owner ot a stone house and Ins neighbors hong in nipa house's, 1801 (PN \ Aynu 



i m fiiii i 



Y). 

40. 



41. 

42. 

43 . 



44. 



45. 



46. 

47. 



turn ten to no * p'-rumr. * ' 

1 872 1 VS A l*nlt* t*l t 'rh.m.i r 

cncc 1 by the* building of a * r 
S tin 1*1 ( ru. no I 
I hcv also resented bring far v 
I he layout i hosen for I )i . : * >• ? 

San Jose f peisett fir A.u tirru'/u t « ! 

stone houses in the South o? i * 
bending in order u> lease n> be *. 
swampy island of futuban I' 
turn icntn to rlie go.' r nor - - i 

Incidentally, these text' i< »rl. 
carelessness of natives f.n ' d with f i r ^ 

When neighbors dashed •>■.> : prop* r r . 
testimonies of older inhabit. mr ?:•>::» th* r 
Lnlikc the first half of the ' nr . (lit o.srur 
1860s or 18 Os were irnrrr dian i . •. • . < ! 

th e interdiction of repairin'/ and hutldin/ n* 
times in the past and the |jf( of mpa hou .* b- it 



< ) i 



’ i u * 
r hat 



lllcilff: 



Ilf f 1 < 



and could 



not c la i r n a n v t orn p< n .a 1 1 < > n a t f i r 1 1 1 



1866 in PNA ( .oustrm ( tone fie ( ,j ,/ ( Ju:*tpn\ 



bayan), in Paco or in the popular 1 
ilia Revolt of the Musses. I he S t(. 



: s *| and 22 JObJ 

VunpaI«K threat- 



'ton between the sea and 

* * . oration to protect the 
?. next \Ck tion wa% JcJflv 

,s d»! c \ tension of the \tn* 

'* ‘ * f‘- J*»rt from the dyiOh 

du pasM\ its. and ocn the 

fir st fi flex ss as to record the 

h« »uses bur ru dow n in the 
ss It h a simple argument; 
lias mg been cn.K ted many 
u: tlu latter were all illegal 

o 1 of 22 01/1866 



1 ( 


( or; t 


’< > tie \d nit tils 


tr.u ton. 10/01/ 


lo 


• lido 


i sjus lulls m 


i lu' district of 


i r i 


I r ( i/< 


». m Santa C m/ (in I )ulum* 


d 


K lull 


\c ,( >N( III 


l td 1 eodoro A. 


/ ,nut th 


< l\./ 1 1 pit //,/ /; 


Quezon C'itv: 


la 


V |>|>. 


SO. | v,). 




1 1 


I.< 1, 1 


>els managed 


to get into the 


h > 


in. i in 


losse s b\ going through the 



agglomeration. 

Sec HUI.'l / de I.I.MPS op. eit. p. YU) hl l. 

bxccpt for the pueblo of San Jose ( Iro/o) created in the middle of the centurv hilt 
joined to Binondo again as soon as I 80 i. 



The State of International Politics 
and Relations in the 19th Century 



lost D.win 1 API v 
Umw:sit\ of Santo Tomos, Manila, Philippines 



N ineteenth-century religion and philosophy were characterized by a growing 
interest in linking social theory to biological evolutionism, . S*yng , 
increasinglv sophisticated sociological and anthropological studies in ti p|^ crr 
speaking world. 1 drawing on the experience ol colonialism, NMitets sue c 
Spencer and James Frazer developed the notion ot a natutal P l °^ Ie 
"primitive'' to "advanced societies. Meanwhile, in \ ienria, Signuint ^ \ 

to formulate his intlueiuial ideas on the subconscious and human 1 • i 

losophv, the absolute idealism of 1 legel found its first supporter in bug anc \\\ 
Francis I lerbert Bradley, while in the United States pragmatic thinkers such as \ i - 
liam lames argued that the truth of an idea depends on its sosia uik 
ideologv of anti-Semitism grew up in the wake of heightened nationalist sentiment 
while an evolutionary type of socialism grew more popular than its mo utionar> 

counterpart. ... , • , r 

Nineteenth-century literature was influenced by the pessimistic 1 
evolution as found in Fmilc Zolas naturalistic novels, \\ hieh sties/ee 
rions on man's actions stemming from his inherited ehaiactctistics at c 
ronment and portraveef the most sordid aspects of Fiench l°wet s ass t c. 
same period, F.nglish literature entered a more reflective, conamp ati\e . ta^e, : 
ing the exuberance and effervescence of C harles Oickens. Nationalism 
vital cultural stimulus, creating a school of regeneration in Spain in leaetion u 
political weakness highlighted bv the war with C.uha, and in lnih eelebtatin^ um 
fication. In both, writers turned to their national classics tot models. 1 he fust se t 




conscious I .irin \n r r 
tradition .. 

As rhe* rt . 1 1 1 sf m » . ; * : . 

Haubcrr s Mj/Lnn* li> • 

Baudelaire s .if rcr.n ; *r ; 

rnrnr. ro v/hn Ij r *. >* . 
sm. I Josroevsk ■. .in-: ; . * 

cal issues riles < y ; a >r r j r 
from I )ic kef i ■ m ( i •>: 
c* fry of Walt YMfnr rr .m 
styles jnd rhe rro; * ; -o ■ • • j 
Kofruntu l r : ; . > ■ 

pressionism Ik- m , ■ 
ropca n pr ipul.ir run f 
ciation of rljr rh , * 
fenr j.ii of rhr r kv. , ; , 

In sc k/ic c i r . < i ' < 

in rhe scienc r ba m mb. 
m cc 1 1 1 c ;i r i o r i and , j u , j i f : i 

flourishing lira •, n.dn r r 
<ind led rhe field in rnedi in . . 
discovery of annbodx .me i 

l ^ c niosr imporr.inr . i( j i: , f . • 

wirh tlic- widespread hinldni'- ,,t ho ; » 1 1 .< 
western hi trope. ( )du i t • < f . i , . ,1, j . ,i I in : 

t,)c invcn,i '"is of the teh phot. .md tie i-C ■: 1 , 

c-.plain discoveries in. tdt m , .idio.e t : . 1 1 . r ■ ; ■ : 

woultl only he resolved h- I -I. , ,, 

I fit- ! Pth cetitut the n nt m \ of . In..i ; •<. 

turmoil. 



I uropcan 

ds « »? i iiisiavc 
! ' C ?K ll |XKtrV. 
* n«»!iNt nunr* 
nit In Rus- 
a and politi- 
n an nosciists 
n h the |xv 
•* *u \ f uropcan 

a nm .uul im* 
e m .uul I u- 
iMng appre- 
" » »: the [xv 



i he the lead 
n et u\ h nolog)’ 
' . r mans w ith a 
h '■ < lopmcnt. 
- :u e. w ith the 
a u : c ulosis was 

< ’ : n s. v. omhined 

:mh d t lirougliout 
n mer souet\ w ere 
;di\ su s failed to 
’ 'iiu s i taints that 

J of ter mem and 



K period her v. ee; i rhe ( ( > n * * n 
•'ll ways rein. tin time j T1< ,f not I, . . o ■ : 
■he time of Ri/.tl d< mhle <| .,nd t |,.n . .1 I i : ■ ■; 
system of tec htioloy •■.),:< j, h.id pt< . .nle. i 
was completely re . olu I ;om/r( ! . I h, old un, ,.t 
du like of which had ne ( t hern !•. nov. 1 1 . I h * ‘ >■ t . 

lies of the Mew in hnoloyv and the nrv. - a c iik >li i : 

■'ll 'lie states of the western world. A new o, ; a -• 
c Aid of mac hme mdir ;r\ mi! tin- f.e nu 
Matice of its masters. ( .ommert and n,dn : • 

' n r/)e wak< of w h .i t a \ >[ km iv< ; , , i die r : ' . 

[ m ogress. ■ i i roj )i m n ( j \ 1 1 »/a i ior > ’ . is . . 1 1 1 d . ! ; 1 < . * 

v \ e : , se, i s t h ro i m 1 1 a r h » ; i ; and . ; i a 1 1 n ( ! < > I f ; i • i 



^a • \ « > will probable 

a a . >1 id popuiat ion .it 
s ' '' to AM a. hhe 
s ' n main millennia 
> n i a. ■ s v \i h\ a new one. 

• ■ in. i - a s and hetietivia- 

■ f I n- i i ; 1 1 mm lass m almost 
; ! n- i net ust 1 1 a l [Proletariat* 
n • : : .<>111 l si i he domi- 

i 4 ■ a.'; . . -»Mindmg ra[piditv 

1 1 a ! : ; n m ■ . i i 1 1 pi cal maivll ot 
'a ’in nt iik nts and the 

Men n.it i ails w ere horn 




i 



i \ri / 



s Relations it: the 1 9th C entun 



in tlu* Nc.u 1 asp in \m.i. in \iiu.i. and in the Americas. In Kurope, two new great 
powers appealed 1 1 a 1 \ and t iermam. \ooss the Atlantic, the Idnitcd States grew 
troin a teehle inlant to a \oung giant, w ith vast resources and an enormous popu- 
lation. In eastern \m.i. anothei gieat power emerged: japan. I he European state 
system lu\ ame a woild state astern. Ihe entire globe was carved up, partitioned, 
and subjected to the control ot the powers. w hose citizens were tired with a new 
patriotism and whose goxemments struggled with one another tor territory, mar- 
kets, and a ‘place n the sun. until their r i\ al ties culminated in the greatest and 
most destiiutixe ol all waiv \ 1 i ot these developments were without parallel or 
antecedent m tlu past. Out ot them has evolved the international society ot the 
2( )i h c ent m v. 

/rjt( no less man .wind / s m//7<\ was the battle cry ot the bourgeois 

revolut ion. \nd as pat lonahsm is alw a\ s bred ot w ar. the impact of the great Napo- 
leonic conflicts intensified nat ion a I c on sc ions ness at the verv time when the bour- 
geoisie- was rising to p i . op pow e’ t tom kings and aristocrats. 1 he revolutions of the 
mid ccimirx weu led and supported bv middle-class patriots for whom the 

achievements of national units and ot democratic constitutionalism were hut two 

facets of the same- bbcial progiam. The tide ot nationalism in almost ever}* state 
rose in proportion to tin economic and political ascendance of 'the bourgeoisie. 
Nationalism and democi.icx w ei c e\ ervw ’here corollaries, tor true and genuine na- 
tional unitv is i m possible* w u hout the common participation in public life w hich 
[Political demoe i .u \ implies. and democracx is unworkable on a national scale m a 
population whose members are not imbued w ith a sense of national consciousness 
and solidarnv. In the- era ot the- triumphant bourgeoisie, nationalism became 
creed, a catechism, and a wa\ of life*, shaping the’ attitudes and actions of million- 
th people and scores of governments throughout the western world. 

I he' progressne dissolution ot the* Ottoman e'mpire presented an oppod 
nity to the Sla\ ie C hristians of southeastern Kurope to achieve liberation and state 
hood. I he Serbs acquired autonoim in ISIS. The revolt of the Cuveks began m 
1 <82 1 and culminated a decade- later in the achievement of Cuvek indepcndciK 
through tlu- intcivention of Orcat bntain, f iance, and Russia against the in 

Belgium rose up against Pinch control in 1830 and nine vears later hei inele pe 1 

i i , ; • j u v r he mother 

deuce as a pe-rpet ual l\ neutral and uniolate state was revognizeu m 111 

count iv and b\ tlu- powers. In the ISpOs. Russia sought to establish a piotectoi -i 

over lurkev but was frusiraied b\ British and l : rench opposition. 1 he appd y‘ 

si on of tlu- west c rn states o\ er t he extension ot Russian power at the expense oi y 

sick man ot i -uropc as burkev came to be c’alled, led to the C.rimean Aai di S 

1 <SS(Yj m which ( iirat Britain and i r.mcc, with the aid of Sardinia fought l\u ss . > 
over control ot ;hc black Vm. Russian domination of C onstantmoplc and die 
Straits was prexciu J b\ admitting tlu Sublime Porte to the advantages of t ^ 
public law and >\sn:u >i I mope Ireatvof Pans, 30 March i8S(d,andb\ p’ Ll * 
anteemg the - iuiei viuv u < and iniegni\ ot lurkev. In iS , Russia w aged w m 
lurkev again. row using dm skn u nationalities still under Itirkish inic as [M a 



in her j»;imc of imf>cri t! c ■«. ; 
once more, fins r i r r >•. if : < >u* 

created Bulgaria .is an .< ;**•: . : ' 

Rumania were all u *> ■* / : - * ; ' 

I urkey s expense If. PP/ * : J • 
extended their frontier or . * , • * 

garia, which wa rr upoi r 1 *5 * 

Second Balkan War I j : : ; 

alism thus created -a >. nev. * e 
and made tlie Balkan an u r » * *' 

I he interaction het wren Bt ■ .*• * * «*n 

immediate oct asion of tie * u * r **• 

Nationalism flu . t'rrai n!- o|o * .*. e * . 



- ami Kuvmj vickial 
' . «»? Berlin of' l$~8 
s ' Montenegro. and 
: a*!.::tit»nal territory at 
• I nkes and further 
v!et r iment of Bui* 
•o d Rumania in the 
k s!n Balkan nation- 
: : >•. ' ?n powers in 1913) 

* • * • 'he great fxnstrse 

er p« kitn s furnished the 



: i< »n :<» the nation into prin- 



ciples or programs Brought about . : <» ’ m: v .Mat > s in the political 

organization of central I uroj t PH c ' r e divided into 

seven states and those of (,rrmm. into o V. * r t i!<>min.ifed Both spheres. In 
hoth, the Napoleonic war. had ;t. ( ii :: < *■ " * or ; sentiment under the 

influence of wh ic h middle t la pa r r \* » t * : o . : o attain p« 1 • t n a I m> Belarus and 

nationhood. S i n < c Austria r < ■ f * ; . <* d r < > . i < . • ! p • * i f n i t » » tins disad\ant a goo us 
modification of the status <jiio. v. ,ir * a r 1 1 < < I the on I s ro.nl ic umfk.uioii, particu- 
larly after 1 848, when the Hr run. m I iB' i ah. failed r : i i er aBI\ in their ef tor ts to create 
a ( j errnan nation By peac ef ul mean and w Ik m < 1 1 I 1 - »i n a t n ef hu is io av h icvc Italian 
unil y proved of no avail. In Both region tin r w nation w as forged in the heat of 
Battle, with the Kingdom of Sardinia 'Piedmont under < a sour pl.i\ mg the same 
rnlc in Italy as the K i ngdorn of Prussia i m < I < a P> i s n i .m k was in pi a\ in C • erman y. In 
^ ^ ^ ’ *Bc new Bona p,i rr e I . n i pet o r m Pari., u . i p< * I e< > n III. t o i n in I a n a 1 1 1 a nee with 
Sardinia against Austria on t ondit ion of the return to liaiueol N n e and Savoy, 
conquered By the first Napoleon Inn lost m ISh. War followed in 1 SSO aiu j Sar- 
dinia annexed I .orn hardy. Nat ion a I isi rrvoh i non s m central Italy iik teased the ter- 
ritory of the new state while ( ,ar iBaldi s filibusters adde d Naples and Nieilv jn die 
south. In 1861, King Victor Immanuel of Saulima took the title* of King of Italy, 

I hrec years later, Prussia under the Iron < hatuelloi joined .Austria in war 
against I Denmark and prom pt ly pi oc ecu led t < > c| u.i r re I with her a 1 1 \ ovet the spoils — 
Schleswig- 1 loltcin. In the Seven Weeks’ War of I SOO, I Yussia defeated Austria and 
assumed the presidency of the new North ( leriuati C ( m f edera t ion , while Italy at- 
tempted to wrest Vcnetia from the* control of \ lenn.i. I Ins enhancement of Prus- 
sian power was viewed with alarm Bv Napoleon III who placed into Bismarck's 
hands by precipitating the Branco- Prussian War of PS 0. With t he w it lulrawal of 
I rench troops from the Papal states, Italy oc i upied Kninc aiul i he new Italian na- 
tion was complete, except for Italia I rreciei 1 1 a ( 1 1 a I \ l n redeemed ) , that is, the prov- 
ince of the lyrol and the Trent ino, still under \ustn.m rule. I Ik* Pivnch armies 
were meanwhile crushed By the Prussian unlit. u\ machine*. Napoleon III lost his 
throne and the Hurd french R epuBI u was c om [k*I led 1 i > return A I save I .orraine to 



i \ri 



I r ( - s :,iu >' lKtfrna::o*uii Politics c*iul Relations it: the 1 9th Century 



German control. Since the south German states had joined Prussia in the war, the 
German I mpire w as proc laimed at \ ersailles during the siege of Paris, on IS Janu- 
ary IS 1 . I wo new great powers were thus created at the cost of the defeat and 
humiliation ol 1 ranee and the exclusion of Austria from German and Italian af- 
fairs. Austria and 1 Itmgarx had already joined together in the Dual Monarchy in 
18(G, hut this political edifice, composed as it was of incongruous congeries of 
German. Magyar. 1 atm, and Slavic peoples, was not a national state, but a com- 
posite structure w hich the rising tides of nationalism threatened to engulf. 

The mid-century decades of national emancipation and unification, which 
completely upset the arrangements established by the Congress of \ ienna. were 
followed bv a new era of colonial expansion in which almost all of the non-Luro- 
pcan world was seized and partitioned by the powers in 30 years. 1 he great states 
of the west, old and new alike, took to the path of empire once more and gained 
larger territories and more imposing dominions in a single generation than their 
ancestors had won during the three centuries following the circumna\ igation of 
Africa and the discovery of America. 1 he impact of luiropean culture upon 
older civil i/at ions ol the l ast and upon the peoples of the tropics almost a 
resulted in the loss of political independence and in social and economic e isc r^ 
ni/ation. One exception stood out in brilliant contrast. I he island empiie of a f 
was ope*neef to w estern influences bv an American naval expedition under . 

Perry in ISM, but instead of falling prey to the western powers as did me ^ 

states of Asia, Japan aelopteel western technology, western economics, aiu N ^ 

nationalism, and emerged t0 years later as a great nation state in het ow n r 
latest addition to the western state system and the only non-lairopean ^re ^ ^ 

The course of empire-buileling and imperialism between ISM anc 
marked bv numerous minor wars between the European states and nan ^ , j^ uss0 . 
and Asian communities and bv one open conflict between great power. • ' ^ \ 

Japanese War of 1 c )()*4- 1 C )0S, in which Japan ousted 



;t oeiw ee n t — 

isted Russia from south Manchuria 



and the Liaotung peninsula. I he minor wars are too 



numerous to 



list here, but 



mention mav be made of the French war against China of ISM ^ V i % \ 

inconclusive; of the Sino-Japancsc War of 18 c )4, in which Japan « 

ful bid for empire; the unsuccessful Italian war against Abyssinia of ' 

War of 1 8 C )8- 1 000 in which Cheat Britain finally conquered thc SUl U ^ . 

settlers of South Africa in the face of their heroic resistance, anc me 
against Turkey of 1 0 1 1 , which resulted in the Italian annexation of J- 
and innumerable other conflicts were waged by the powers against me ee 
of Africa and Asia. I he rival claims of the powers were usualh a jus tec 1 

macy, mediation, good offices, and conference. 

It is useful and profitable to view' international politics in the centun of xi/a 
against its immediate background: the expansion of the western imperia ist power, 
and the congeries and complex of attitudes, behavior, patterns, institutions, pioce 
du res — in short, the psvchological milieu — which the\ e\ol\cd. Since interna 
tional politics revolves around the competitive struggle tor power and prestige be- 



M;tjor inU rn.ilKiii.il rwuls in llir I'Mli i ciilun 



I 804 
1812 



ulnmatciv 



18141816 


< , ,t "f , 




ate f uropcan 


I 8.2 4 


r i f < J f f 

i r 


J • I *: 


-ires the west* 


1 846 


M 


’ ,i, , * | • . 1 r . i • ! N * i * 


S ! annexe^ New 




' \ 


, : i( ♦ ( , •* *r : i ; t 


! : » * ..o . * s * s 


1 848 


( nf nit Hi 


t / . , > 


f • S \ am: 1 ncvlrich 




1 n }: 4 

1 lungar 


*. and * i u 1 1 a i i a f • ‘ ’ 


i am e. \uNtru- 


1842 


.X» ,| pc »| ( t 


>n III ■ r.ddidu -i. 


• » *:d I n 1 mpirc. lapan 




openc < j 


• , ■ • r 0 • \ i j » i r i a r ( < * 


\ iai t new 1 err v. 


1846 


( r i nic.i : 
R ussia 


h \X .if 1 Mm < uul i u 1 t . 


tu: a. m iu:ke\ against 


1 847- 1 868 


Se poy n 
India. 


1 x Hum Indian * • 1 d u i 


ft’. . *lt i amst Im utsh rule in 



185'; 

1861 

1 864 

1 864- 1 870 



Sin / < .ni.il .in«l is * • nupiv tv 4 m 1 S(>‘). 

Kinudom of | f .,l v < si.il.Ii -In 4 -itu-i P'.k • " umliution led by 



.oiisf r i K linn begi n * >i ' 



Sardinia I mam ipatum ( • 1,1 ^ vlIssM 

I ns. Intr -rn.iiMXi.il 4 l«. M u m I •union. 



s t i \ 1 1 War. 



ope*/ v. a r. :\ f gc n i id 



p, r i/il ami l i upu. i\ \ n m.ilK de 



strov 



tween the units of the system, it )s c nm pi ehrn -able and i < diet ent <>nl\ in terms of' 
the general nature of the system and the spec itu habits and panel ns of aetion which 
have grown out of the interrelationships between its units. In Ins essa\. I he Phil- 
ippines a C x-ntury I lenee, Ri/al pen ei\ ed and t ec < >g,n i/ed the habits and patterns 
of his century and dealt with them h i st < >t k a 1 1 \ and i ea 1 1 s t u a 1 1 \ . Mew .is steeped in 
the history of his t inic and c on vet sat 1 1 wi t h w < >t Id p< >1 1 1 u s, w !m h he t er tiled politico 
intercontinental. Indeed, it is my judgment that the perspicacious uul diseerning 
Ri/.<il adumbrated, by a good number of \eais, the teahst paunligm nr theory in 
international polities. 

I lis essay, first published as Hlipimo dent to dr c ten aims in / ./ Soinlnridad* 
(Madrid, .“$0 September 1 SSO I I ( bi nary l<S 00 ), Ri/al provided basis for interpre- 
tation and evaluation the next 100 veais. I le examined the \atious actors, organi- 
xa t ion s, and other st >e i a I cn 1 1 1 1 es t h a t pi a ved 1 1 n [ ">< > i uni 1 c > I es in global po 1 1 1 ics. I le' 
tlien dealt with the impact on foreign policies and international lelaiion.sol the 
various powers of the- I 0 th eenturv. I le also anal\ /ed the relat lonsh ips among vari- 
ous categories and groupings of powers, the eon flu t ot east versus west, and the' 



1 



1 API / I be St.ite of huerti.ition.il Polities .mil ReLuions in the / 9th Country 



1 8 (r 



1 8 ~ 0- 1 8 ~ 1 



1871 



1 8~8 



1 882 



1 894- 1 89 S 



1 898 



1 899 



1900 



Paraguay. 

British North America Acts creates Canada as a confederation. 
Marx publishes Capital United States purchases Alaska from 
Russia. 

Franco-Prussian War. German states, led by Prussia, invade 
and defeat Prance, completing a process of German unifica- 
tion that included the 1864 Second Schleswig-Holstein War 
against Pcnmark and the 1 866 Seven W eeks' War against Aus- 
tria. 

German empire established under the leadership of Prussia. 
Wilhelm l becomes Kaiser. 

C ongress of Berlin. European powers meet to thwart Russia 
and carve up Ottoman Empire. 

1 ri pie Alliance is formed bv German\; Austria-Hungary, and 
Italy. 

Sino- Japanese W ar. Japan defeats China and becomes an im- 
perial power with acquisition of laiwan. 

Spanish-Amcrican War. The United States defeats Spain, ac- 
quires the Philippines, and becomes a great power. 

“Open Poor policy toward China bv the western powers. 
Boer War ( 1 899- 1 902) between British and Dutch settlers be- 
gins in South Africa. 

Boxer rebellion. Forces of the European powers, Japan, and 
the United States sent to China to put down revolt against for- 
eign penetration. 



interaction of states in organizations, such as political coalitions, economic com- 
munities, and so on. Finally, he took a comprehensive and extensive look at the 
international system as a whole, and made predictions which were inferences from 
historical facts and marked by scientific accuracy. 

Thromih Basilio, a character in his novel, HI Filibusterismo , Rizal said: 

W ithin a few centuries, when humanity has become redeemed and en- 
lightened, when there are no races, when all peoples are free, when there are 
neither tyrants nor slaves, colonies nor mother countries, when justice rules 
and man is a citizen of the world, the pursuit of science alone will remain, the 
word patriotism will be equivalent to fanaticism, and he who prides himself on 
patriotic ideas will doubtless be isolated as (one suffering from) a dangerous 
disease as a menace to the world social order. 



lb which Nimoun answers in this wav: 



IMF 



\cs VC \r T * ' i 


' " .4 * 




! . a ‘ 


' * h* n« » c\ * 


r, innK.il .irul no n . ? 








.* ?reclv chat 


he know hov. r«» r 








. 4 * . aiui tor 


fins there j . * ri. , * 


t ?> : : 






1 ’ 4 1 v 1 


Ki/.ii nruierstooci 


* r ; > r * * : 




.4 r \ % ! 


' • »uruli\ that his 
■" uthtenmem of 


1 1 1 1 v. i ic t 1 1 i«i i i,n >or t ( <; w 
the l ilipinos. 









1 HO 



Capitalism and Welfare 
in 19th-century Philippines 



Norman C, . Ow i n' 

Deportment ot History, University of Hong Kong. Hong Kong 



U nder Spanish rule most Filipinos unquestionably felt the burden of 
economic exploitation. We do not know, however, whether during the 
course ol the 1 l )th century the general state ot the Philippine economy improwd 
or deteriorated. Setting aside tor the moment the changes in social and pohtica 
consciousness that accompanied the transformation of the economy, can wt aau 
ally demonstrate that lile for ordinary Filipinos on the eve ot the t e\ olution was 
worse or better than it had been a generation or a century befote. 

During the century, capitalist exchange — though not, in most cases, capita - 
1st modes of production — came to dominate the Philippine economy. 1 
mous expansion o! exports, primarily ot agricultural products such as abaca, xu^ar, 
and tobacco, is well documented; this was accompanied bv a great expansion of 
imports. In terms of commerce, it would appear that the 1 1th centun was a | em c 
of rising prosperity tor the Philippines as a whole, an interpretation seemingly cor- 
roborated by the visible vvei lit h of much of the Filipino elite. 

There is a consensus among most historians that the lise ot a Filipino n ^' 
class” was what Teodoro Agoncillo ( 1 990: 1 16-19) calls an accelerator of Fi ipino 
nationalism, but no such consensus as to whether general welfare rose as well. A^o 
ncillo himself refers to a “great transformation from the preceding centimes of eco 
nomic stagnation” and to “seemingly [sic] economic prospeiity in the 1 )th een 
tury, despite the devaluation of the peso. O.O. Corpuz (1989: -.42) mentions the 
rise to prosperity of the new Filipinos but implies (2:68-83) that \illage life was 
essentially unchanged/’ 



181 



I Hf Vi i i 



I he view that life got v,nrvr f«>r «»rdm.if i •;> n»> ..is rK-cn put forward bv 

th osc who stress the rvils of Spar mna?r v ontr.uiut ions of capi- 
talism, and die growing gap between the i ; - : wnhm I ihptno sodctl, 

Renato C.onstantmo ' lo ‘ I < f (til masses e\|K*ncnccd 

’greater deprivation both # ■ <-> - *' '•*:*■ me uul Jaumthit 

an economic depression of ISO) . *hu :« »nar \ Mippirt. as 

cry and desperation rallied rh antr*. *»f I u/«»nt«»th v aww * »f the Katipunan.^ 

Amado ( Marrero ' 1 *) *0 ! ' .V * : - ‘ ■ * ' ; v * * ; e \ p.oi tat ion during 

the 1 9th cent ur *, j oppn n>:. w a T p;* * -p ’ s *. ati«> “ s>k s 

In considering this ; ; * i: • . * ' 1 ' mm the ha*. k of our 

minds rhe real i Ait ion that r he Philippi nr r r*. • »!w r i« »n a me at t he end of t hi\ venture 
of change. Often if va at- : »* • • « . * '<* • ** ’ * ev » »lut ion affects 

t lie way we look at or f a : i * < > >< » • at -hr • « » . * : : : c f « »r t he v ent ur\ that 

preceded it. NX ere I ihpino e mall. dim a t»> * < - t > ;nmj; welfare, or \vq$ 

endemic poverty si m pis tie pr- or.* 1 odium t r utgered b\ other social 

( ,r pol j 1 ica I c auscs' 

In fact, as Ken I )r IV. oi • I on * h.» n«md t he instoi u al dimensions 

o> Philippine poverty arc almo.t w } i « » ! I *. nr. - p i " r d I his paper docs not offer d 

simple answer to these tomple*. ijiieaion Iri ae.nl. it attempts to isscss the kinds 
of historical evident e that might 1 >e u <d t » > ..(train t he el f ta t s ol 1 o t h v enturv 
capital ism on f 1 1 1 pi no we I fare: desi n p 1 1 v c .h » nimis, trade s t a 1 1 s t n s . price and tax 
data, and dcmogr.iphic ukIk.iku I In .um i. i>> ■ ug.gcst h<>\\ u. might arrive at a 
more objective assessment ol cuninniH t 1 1 . 1 1 1 j • . m tin late Spanish period. and, 
(laving done that , how we might un< lerst.mil the o i >m >mu . < > lit ext ol the revolu- 
tion. 



Descriptive Accounts 

I here are t (lousands of elese n | >t i s'e si Mire i's tli.it I >e.i i < >n t lie <. | ucst ton o| economic 
welfare in 1 9t li-ccm u ry Philippines: t rave lei s tales (main rep n 11 1 cd h v the I’ll ipini- 
ana Book (mild, Historical Conservation Society, ami National Historical Insti- 
tute), government reports, essays By I’ropagaiulisis, ami imutmci.ihle petitions 
a >id investigations Buried in the Imre . iik rat is art hives. Some of these accounts 
patnt vivid pictures of hardship and oppression: peasants losing their lands to 
speculators, families on the verge of starvation, taxes unpaid heeau.se of ahjeet pov- 
and more*. R r/.al s novels tell v i vid I v the same* kind ( ) I stones that can he found 
in these non fictional sources. 

At the same time, however, most of these sources are anecdotal, rather than 
systematic; they refer only to one place ami more sign if leant ly to one time. We 
know from them that the •re was poverty in the- Philippines, hut we cannot tell how 
widespread it was, or whether it increased over time. In a few instances explicit 
comparisons are made with the “old days, when things were allegedly better (or 
worse), but we must always he cant ions about the- natural human tendency to over- 



1 HI 






ROPRKiLTZ land and the Philippine Revolution 



integrity of (heir subsistence base and access to life-sustaining resources. Practices 
that threaten the intetmtv of ecosystems and remove human communities from 
their means of livelihood can lead to impoverishment and social conflict. 

Spanish colonial policy made an impact on society-environment relations bv 
imposing the luiropean concept of land ownership and land use. Land, which was 
generally considered a "communal resource' ' in pre-Hispanic times, became pri- 
vate property that could be sold and purchased. Colonial policy introduced a sys- 
tem of land use whereby land was used mainly not tor the subsistence of the com- 
munity, but as a means to produce food crops which could be exchanged in the 
market. Land, then, emerged as a means to realize profit. Moreover, Spanish colo- 
nial policy promoted an ethical system opposed to an indigenous environmental 
ethic based on the belief in the oneness of human beings with nature. A colonial 
ethos asserting the domination and exploitation of nature replaced an animist ethic 
formed bv a deep respect for the natural world. 

The transition to land as private property and a source of profit transformed 
the traditional concept of land tenure. Although a high degree of diversity charac 
terized pre-Hispanic culture, Filipinos, for the most part, were shifting culma 
tors. 10 In lowland regions, they lived mostly in coastal areas and maintained swid- 
den plots in the interior where root crops were grown to complement a main diet 
of seafood. Arable land, woodland, and water sources were considered commun 
resources. 1 1 The forests provided important products such as bamboo, wood. 



fruits, nuts, honey, beeswax, and game. . 

Shifting cultivation involved a complex system of site selection, p antin^, 
schedule, crop-mixing, and soil conservation. he availability of land an asi 
population size, then, permitted cultivators to clear a piece of land, cu ti\ate 
a relatively short period of time, and allow it become forest again. A fa o\\ per o 
could range from five to 10 years, allowing enough time for the soil to reco\er 
fertility. 1 ' The process was repeated as crop cultivation moved to another bcauon. 

Swidden rights were generally uniform throughout the archipe a^o. e 
first to clear and cultivate a piece of land owned the crops gio\\ n on t ie ant , ut 
not the land itself. It was a typical practice to return to former swi t en p ots ^ er 
the fallow period, making it necessary to remember theii location. If a sense o pri 
vate ownership existed, it was based on the long history of use b\ a fami \ oi a 
barangay. Rarangay chiefs were known to gain profit from untilled land \ impos 
ing a charge on fishing rights or forest products. 1 Land that had long been he t in 

usufruct could pass to the chief 's heirs. 

Spanish conquest transformed Philippine lands into the propertv of the 
Spanish crown. The change in ownership deprived natives of theii ancestral tights 
to land. Ul The Spanish colonial government recognized the rights of the natives to 
keep their land with the understanding that they were royal grants. Land came 
into private ownership through grants made by the crown to Spanish soldiers as a 
reward for service and to monastic orders in order to support themselves. Land 



199 



I Ml 1*1 III IITINI HI V< >1 



grants were made to native pritu ifuilta m P.mi;un a n*i thru help m suppressing 
I agalog resistance. Koval lands also he* am prr. ate proprrt*. through public auc- 
tions. ' 

With the transit ion from communal « »v. n< r dup a me a shit t in the system of 
land use. The natives shifted to t he c ult is at ion <»! rue m «»rdcr to satisfv the pay- 
ment of tributes and to provide food for the resident 'Spanish population. Thus* 
the practice of single-crop cultivation emerged Settlements mosed from riverine 
or coastal areas to insular towns whuli ssere under the supersision of a parish 
priest. The need to pay tributes and the shift < >f resident e n » tow ns compelled Fill- 
pinos to practice a more sedentary agm ulture. 

file lagalog region, because of its proximo > to \ lamia. e\ pc' rienccd the early 
consequences of the change in land ownership and land use I he first land grants 
were made to encourage farming and cattle raising m ordet to meet the demands of 
Spanish colonists, f rom 1 5 '2 to I bl 8, at least 5 \ land grants were made to Span- 
ish soldiers, bureaucrats, and religious corporations m the iiuisdu t ion of lbndo.* 1 
I he land grants consisted of I 0 cuanuas /utm '/anadn ( for horned cattle), 

nine estancias para gcinadn metinr (for sheep), and S a < *if>*il/rrs t i\ (each measuring 
about 1 25 acresj for farming and gra/ing land. between 1 8U() and 1 V)S % Spanish 
governors awarded land grants for the same purpose m Imus. h.uoor, Binakavan, 
and Parahaquc. ( battle raising and large sc ale agr u ulture were well established in 
most of the I agalog region by the end of the 1 (Sth ccniurv. 

By the middle of the I 8th century, most of t he original land grants came into 
the possession of friar corporations through donation and pun base. ‘ The expan- 
sion and consolidation of friar lands became a source of misers* for the Tagalog 
population many of whom lost their tenuri.il rights in the process. Although land 
sale and transfer, especially of baraugay lands, we re- governed In strict legal proce- 
dures to protect the natives, the rules were easily circumvented."' 'Title deeds of 
early transactions identified sellers as priucipales. ' With the conversion of land to 
private property and the rise of friar estates in the I agalog region, landless natives 
became tenants, sharecroppers, unsalaried or salaried farm labor, and homeless 
drifters known as vagamundos: 

1 he friar estates created land enclosures that deprived the natives of their live- 
lihood and severely cut their access to communal resources. In 1745, a revolt 
erupted in the Augustinian estate of Meysapan in Tondo, and spread to Cavite, La- 
guna, and Bulacan. 28 Peasants complained that the friars of St. Dominic and St. 
Augustine enlarged their property “without leaving them the freedom of the rivers 
for their fishing, or allowing them to cut wood for their necessary use, or even to 
collect the wild fruits; nor did they allow the natives to pasture on the hills near 
their villages the carabaos which they used for agriculture. Peasants further com- 
plained that they could not even pay the tribute because they did not have land to 
cultivate. 

Occurring 1 80 years after the Spaniards settled in 1 565, the Meysapan revolt 
illustrates the link between ecology and social conflict. It shows how Spanish colo- 



200 



RODRKJUKZ. luind and the Philippine Revolution 



nial policy transformed the relationship between land and society and, by doing 
so, undermined the livelihood of native communities, and incited them to revolt. 



Ecological Change and the Revolution 
Environmental Change in the 19th Century 

The incorporation ot the Philippines into an emerging world economy during the 
19th century stimulated the settlement ot the hinterlands. 1 Land became an im- 
portant commodity as the Philippines supplied foreign markets with sugar, indigo, 
tobacco, cof fee, abaca and copra. With the emergence ot an export crop economy, 
landowners sought to increase production through the expansion ot existing es- 
tates and the clearing ot forested lands. 

The demand for labor in agriculture and the settlement of new areas contrib- 
uted to the growth and the redistribution of population. As a whole, the popula- 
tion of the Philippines grew from 1,561,251 in 1800 to 3.85/, *424 in 1850, an 
6, 1 0 1 ,682 in 1 89 1 . " Some provinces showed remarkable population increases, 
around 1800, Cavite had a population of 99,982 which grew to 126,86- > 

1872.' : 'The expansion of sugar haciendas and subsequent demand for a 
brought migrants from Cebu to Negros Oriental and from 1 ana\ island to V 
Occidental. Negros Oriental grew from 40,000 in 1845 to 122,000 in 188/ . e 
population of Negros Occidental grew from 18,805 to 308,272 in halfa centuty^ 

In Mindoro, population grew from 10,114 in 1860 to 20,564 in 18 N 
number of towns increasing from 1 1 in 1870 to 29 in 20 years. 1 awu an n 
pasture land and timber attracted migrants to Abra, which was create as a sC P dr 
province- in 1854.“ In char year, it had a population of: 25.000 whtch grew to 
44,629 in 1903.' Pampangans moved up toTarlac m search of new air- 
moved to Pangasinan and parrs of Nueva Ecija in search of land to • 

gasman grew from 199,279 in 1849 to 303,912 in 188 / while Nueva I 1 I 
lation increased from 66,721 to I 54,831 in the same time pertodo 

Population growth and the requirements ol an export er 1 . 

reused pressure on land. Although fertility of agricultural land in the aga el 
-cs of Laguna. Cavite, and Bttbcan had begun to erode due to a long h, story of 
cultivation! values increased because of population growth, land improven.cn , 
L, proximity to Manila. ' " Thus. agricultural estates developed m areas wher retd 
estate was relatively cheaper. Landowners in Pampanga acqutred land m southern 
la, lac for sugar cultivation while entrepreneurs fro,., Iloilo developed haciendas m 

Negros Occidental.* 0 ,-r 

While landowners were preoccupied with expansion, land became more di - 

ficult to acquire for the less privileged. I he process of claiming anc ownership 
required a registration and titling system which favored those wit i wea 1 1 anc e u 
cation. 41 Although strict rules regulated land acquisition, the expansion of acien 
das became fraught with many unfair practices. In central Luzon, peasants cleared 



Cl 

inces 
cu 



201 



I f If mu lltIM Pi ‘." I ' V'.. * ] 

land onlv to lose ir because a sugar ' »w d proof ownership. In 

Negros, farmers who hail maintained viiltr- at d p.«*t\ * * -iu ir ns eh hood because 

of land-grabbing. ‘ I hus, rural fariulu • found • : t ling in marginal areas 

where shifting cultivation could assure them «»! sub.isnru 

I he Spanish colonial government made- itnrnp:^ t«» regulate latul conver- 
sion. From the late 18th century, colonial ; * had recognized the ecological 

degradation brought about In umimcru.il r«»p production In Mauritius, the 
French colonial government implemented forest ami soil coiisersation which the 
English also did in India. In the Philippine- . r he ;*o\ eminent v reated the C icncral 
Inspection of Forests in 185S and the Bureau <>f I *»reai\ m I So v I he bureau 
determined which land should he used f<>r agm ulture aiul which should remain 
forested for the purpose of mamtammg i Innate and in gu ru ami protecting water 
resources.’ Because policies were never enforced, the bureau tailed to regulate land 
use. * I he laws further enabled the wealths t< » expand and ac i|inrc more property 
The second half of the 19th centurv vs as, tluretoie. a time* of tremendous 
environmental change. I he expansion <>f sugar land m Negros stripped most of its 
coastal rainforests.* Bv 18 9, ( .ebu had been scverelv deforested and eroded due 
to rice, corn, sugarcane cultivation, and timber e lining, I he use ot wood to fuel 
steam mills led to deforestation in central I u/on. Meanwhile, la ml clearings and 
the practice of mono-cropping created adve rse c onse<|iienc es. In Batangas during 
the early 1890s, insect pests and disease dest roved e of fee plantations while rinder- 
pest killed large numbers of carabaos, hoc list at tac ks oc c urreil periodically in the 
sugarcane fields of Negros Occidental. I lie environmental change accompany* 
ing the growth of an export crop economy took its toll on the population as well. 
One study observed unusually high death rates in the* ISNOs. * Environmental fac- 
tors and the economic exploitation of the peasant rv, among other factors, may have 
contributed to this mortality crisis. 

Response to Ecological Change: The Revolution 

I hilippine history can be viewed in terms of native responses to colonial policies 
that altered their relationship with land, undermined their resource base, and, 
therefore, threatened their survival. Why the revolution should gain momentum 
in the lagalog region can be explained, in part, by the regional variation in the eco- 
logical impact ofcolonial policy. Compared to the rest of the country, the Tagalog 
provinces had a longer history of transformation in land ownership and land 
use because of its advantageous location. Being an older agricultural area, the so- 
cial problems arising from this transformation bad produced a history of tension 
between Spanish Manila and the surrounding provinces, between friar corpora- 
tions and leaseholders, between leaseholde rs and cultivators, and, on the whole, be- 
tween the Spanish colonial government and the native population. Compounding 
these tensions was the social dislocation which led to a growing number of 
vagamundos and so-called lawless elements who were labeled ladrones and 



202 



RODRIGUEZ Lxiiid and the Philippine Revolution 



tiilisanes . s<> In response to the worsening social condition, the government created 
the Guardia Civil, a policy that contributed to the increasing militarization in the 
1 9th century. s 

The shift to an export crop economy further aggravated the social problems 
in the Iagalog region. Through a gradual process ot consolidation and expansion, 
the friar corporations came to own the best and most expensive agricultural land in 
Cavite, Bulacan, and Laguna, including urban land in Manila and the suburbs. 
Emerging as the biggest landlords, their imposition of rent increases and taxes 
made an already-deteriorating tenancy situation intolerable. In Cavite, friar estates 
were known to charge fees for irrigation and taxes for bamboo and mango trees 
grown on their property. V) Land rent increases worsened economic hardships due 
to crop failures, and the decline of abaca and coftee prices. 

The Calamba affair illustrates the dissatisfaction among leaseholders tow ar 
friar corporations. 1 he Dominican owners of the Calamba estate were collecting 
rents without issuing receipt and had continued to raise land rent in spite c 
fall of sugar prices in 1880. hl In a petition written by Jose Rizal, the tenants com- 
plained that rent increases, being arbitrary and unjust, had placed them n 

cult economic situation. I he Dominicans threatened to expel the tenants 

sponded by withholding rent payment and by demanding a forma t - onrr j K 
result of the final judgment in favor of the estate, tenants were evicted while ot 

were exiled, including members of the Rizal family. . . i „ : n 

The land problem created different expectations for Filipino socia ‘ 
the face of mounting ecological and economic problems. In tie ec ? r har the 

the native elite, who were mostly leaseholders of friar lane e ‘- sr ^ s ’ 1 ; n _ 

expulsion of friars could bring about the chance of owning anc . ie p am - 

creasing rent, and, therefore, the possibility of largei wea 11 P‘ ^ snoau r h e 
panga and Negros Occidental, which had the more ptoe utm< \ ' them, a divi- 
de did not share the same hope because they owned the land For ffem, ^ 

sion of the friar lands would set a precedent in lan ret ‘f* 1 most likely de- 
harm their interest. However, cultivators and peasants, in 1 reea in their land 

scendants of earlier generations of dispossessed natives, iop & commo difi- 

in order to restore self-sufficiency which had been undermined by 

cation of land and its products. , t j ie revo lution. 

Such tension would be manifested in tie events Ca i am b a case to 

When he founded the La Liga Filipina, Rizal, "'ho had t. ^ injusticCt 

the highest conn in Spain, acknowledged the ^ togethet with 

hut also favored the encouragement of ag be fruit f u |, must come front 

education,^ Later on, he would write that te ^ , f and insecure, For 

above tor those that come from below are shaky - J of revolution was more 

Bonifacio, on the other hand, no less than the s. 

worthy of a struggle in order to end "the nameless oppress, ons Filip.no had sut 
fered under colonial rule/" After Bon.facios execution, Agu.na do would assume 
the leadership of the revolution which started in the environs ot Manila in 1 8 >6. 



203 



THK milJPI'INI- RI V( >1 l 'I !< )N ANI > HI YC >N! > 



While Aguinaldo found support in the Iagalog provinces, the P.impangans re- 
mained loyal to the Spanish government in Manila. I’hcy did not support Agu- 
inaldo until they knew he was winning/' 

Land usurpation by the friar corporations had been recogm/ed as one of the 
reasons for the revolution. I lowevcr, it did not become a legitimate problem until 
Aguinaldo, in a proclamation issued from Biak na Bam in IS 1 )"*, demanded the 
“restitution to the townships of the lands which the friars have appropriated."* 
Upon his return in 1898 and after establishing a dictatorial government, Agu- 
inaldo ordered the arrest of the friars, me hiding their c ollaborators. and the confis- 
cation of monastic property/ " Because land had been a long standing problem, 
Mabini proposed the return of friar estates to the people as “parcels of private and 
communal property/ v// However, the need to raise* income and to build support 
for his government became important concerns for Aguinaldo. Subsequently, the 
Malolos Constitution provided for the restoration of friar properties to the “Fili- 
pino state. ; In order to generate revenue, Aguinaldo signed a law that would put 
friar properties under the administration of “men of means” who would receive, as 
their payment, a percentage of rent from the property. I he Malolos Republic es- 
tablished a forestry bureau in order to continue the Spanish police of collecting 
fees for timber cutting . ?l 

Consolidating nationwide support for the revolutionary government became 
difficult for Aguinaldo. I lie hacenderos of Negros ( )ccidental opposed his govern- 
ment, believing that the United States could offer them greater economic security. 
After organizing a provisional government, they issued a message to C Captain Glass, 
who was in Iloilo, requesting American protection. They proposed that, consider- 
ing the gains they had made from the “fertile and rich soil of Negros," only the 
American government could give them the protection against possible destruction 
of lives and property. ' I he Negros haccndcros were not alone in feeling the anxiety 
of landowners. Analyzing his experience during the Malolos Republic, Mabini 
would later write that: 



...some very frightened ilustrados told us that the cry for liberties had begun to 
germinate socialistic or communistic ideas in the minds of the people who got 
a bad deal in some properties of questionable origin, without understanding 
that the discontented ones precisely belonged to the class of those unfortunates 
who were dispossessed by hacenderos and big landowners. * 

The transformation of the Philippines into a producer of export crops in the 
global economy of the 19th century had been most devastating for landless peas- 
ants. It led to aggressive land acquisition that contributed to the spatial and social 
marginalization of self-sufficient peasant communities. An episode during the 
I hilippine-American War shows a radical response to ecological change. Up until 
the early years of American rule, the babaylanes under the leadership of Papa Isio 
had continued to raid towns and haciendas in Negros Occidental. s The babaybines 



204 



RODRIGUEZ Land and the Philippine Revolution 



upheld an animist belief in the sanctity of nature. Filipinos, before the Spanish 
conquest, regarded and to a certain extent continue to regard nature as the source 
of life and the dwelling place of ancestral spirits. Thus, it was necessary to protect 
and respect nature since its destruction would upset the spirits who could bring 
retribution upon the living. This attitude remains strong today among indigenous 
groups that have resisted colonization. The Higaonon of Mindanao regard land as 
a gift from Magbayaya and as a place where spirits ‘continue to live and keep watch 
so that land could be for eternal use for generations and generations and their de- 
scendants.'' 

In their rituals, the babaylanes invoked the spirits through a medium and 
offered animal sacrifices to placate them. In the mountains of Negros Occidental, 
where they built a holy place, they zealously protected a well because of its super- 
natural powers; they also respected the moon. Christian, western, and scientific 
attitudes tended to simply dismiss b a bay bin practices as "baseless. 8 According to 
another source, the ba bay lanes aimed to convert others to live in a "communistic 
paradise. ’After the surrender of General Malvar in 1902, the Americans consid- 
ered them bandits and ladrones . so 

1 he babaylanes continued their fight against American troops until 1 HF 
when Papa Isio was captured. 81 According to the testimony of General Smith be- 
fore the Taft Commission, Papa Isio wanted to convert the haciendas of Negros 
Occidental into a "state of nature" and to expel all foreigners from the I hilip- 
pines. 82 Given their belief in the organic unity between human beings and nature, 
it is easy to understand why ecological destruction aroused such a militant reaction 
from the babaylanes. The clearing of coastal rain forests for sugarcane fields was a 
clear violat ion of the spirits dwelling in the natural w'orld. lo the babaylanes , locust 
epidemics and economic hardships were the consequences of disrespecting nature. 

A return of the haciendas to a “state of nature" could be the only means to restore 
the sanctity of nature and to prevent further disasters in Negros Occident 

I he desire to restore communal ownership of land and self-sufficienc) m ^ 
vated peasant resistance during the revolution. In several towns, the people seiz 
church properties, including those of Filipino landowners. 83 Farm animals, inc u 
ing equipment, were distributed among townspeople in the Recollect estate o a ^ 
Jala in Morong (Rizal province). 84 In Pangasinan, small tracts of land, a h^ r c %> 
declared as "property of the people," were turned into communal land or d 
ing. 8S In Laguna, rebels distributed land among the local people. In an < ^ 
the Pansacula brothers advocated the restoration of land to communa P r(4 l 1 < ^ 

They believed that the revolution was "the time for the rich to be P°° r anc . ^ 

poor to be rich" and that the "uneducated should govern the towns w 

ligent should be subordinated to them." 88 , 

Shortly after gaining possession of the Philippines, the Unitec - tates . 
primarily concerned with the settlement of the friar estates. Subsequent i § 
tions on the friar estates revealed problems that made it difficult to esta is 
size, value, and legal ownership. Land markers were removed during the revolu- 






205 



THI mil 1 1 * 1*1 N I HI VC Mt'IK )N \NI > lU’H *Nl » 



tion. 89 Rebels destroyed sugar mills in ( lalamba. ‘ A fire in Manila on Septem- 
her 1897 destroyed documents in the Bureau <>f Forestry \lihough the American 
government recognized the seriousness of the icnaiuv problem, no genuine at- 
tempts were made at land reform. I lie Americans purchased the friar estates 
which were then leased and sold to wealths Filipinos and American corporations 
who reaped the benefits from the protection of sugar export to the l tilted States 
market. I he American government , in ef fee t . distributed the friar lands among the 
wealthy who were considered essential m administering the country. Apart from 
resolving the land problem, the l mted States conducted a sweeping inventory of 
Philippine natural resources.' Realizing the economic value of the vast resources 
in its new possession, the United States promoted the export of forest and mineral 
resources. At the turn of the century, virgin fore sts covered approximately "'A per- 
cent of the Philippines. Today the figure has dropped to 7. A percent. It the pat- 
tern of deforestation continues, original old grow th forests will disappear before 
the end of this century. 



Conclusion 



Spanish colonial policy altered not only the concept of land ownership and the 
system of land use. In a broader context, it transformed the relationship between 
human beings and their resource base, thus undermining their survival. The social 
responses to the land probie m reveal that, apart from the political tension between 
e colonizer and the colonized, the revolution involved a clash between opposing 
attitudes and interests emerging from the broader transformation in the relation- 
s e tween native society and nature. The c lass of landowners and leaseholders, 

w o had been educated in the western tradition of the 1 9th century, espoused the 
° modern, urban progress, which was essentially removed from land, yet de- 
j Cnt on lts exploitation, for them, land was an economic resource and, in or- 
7 to progress, it should be developed or exploited to create more wealth. Being 
ucated, they believed that human beings should dominate nature, which was 
pposed to serve the economic needs of society, for the so-called unlettered culti- 
at ° rS an< ^ Peasants, who either resisted, defied, or did not bother to assimilate 
-pi Crn va ^ ues > land essentially formed the roots of their existence and livelihood, 
tion^ p C . )nS1<aerc< ^ human community as inseparable from nature. The separa- 
ein 8 from nature as a result of the commodification of land and its prod- 
tS W pK t ^ ere ^ ore » equivalent to the destruction of life itself, 
clash h C CCntCnnia * c ^ c Philippine revolution comes at a moment when this 
ruli T* ^ rOWn morc intense owing to contemporary developments. Firstly, the 
, C ItCS ° r ^ C sout h have become more aggressive in achieving high economic 
a wid 31 a tlme When economic progress itself is being questioned. There is 

tion Jp^ rCa< ^ aware ness that the fulfillment of material wants through the domina- 
k j. . nature has been responsible for ecological destruction. And secondly, glo- 
zation, as promoted by transnational corporations, has overrun the culture and 



206 



RODRIGUEZ Land and the Philippine Revolution 



economy of many countries at a time when less privileged groups in poor countries 
are trying to reverse the centuries of resource exploitation. The need to fulfill the 
demands of external markets competes with the struggle of local communities to 
maintain the integrity of their subsistence base. Given these local and global ten- 
sions, how to resolve the moral issue of what is good for the country will certainly 
involve difficult choices. In 1896, it sparked a revolution. In the next millennium, 
we can only hope that interest in this question remains alive as ever. 



Notes 

1 . Without having to categorize each, the following is a list of works dealing with the 
social, economic, and political background of the revolution: Teodoro A. Agoncillo, 
l he Revolt of the Masses: The Story of Bonifacio and the Katiptinan (Quezon City: Uni- 
versity of the Philippines, 1956); Cesar Adib Majul, “Social Background of Revolu- 
tion, Asian Studies , 9 (1971): 1-23; Jonathan Fast and Jim Richardson, Roots of De- 
pendency: Political and Economic Revolution in 1 9th Century Philippines (Quezon 
City; Foundation for Nationalist Studies, 1979); John N. Schumacher, S.J., Eco- 
nomic Factors in the Revolution, The Making of a Nation: Essays on Nineteenth Cen- 
tury Filipino Nationalism (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, n.d.), 
pp. 126-133; and John N. Schumacher, S.J., Tire Propaganda Movement: 1880-1895 
(Manila: Solidaridad Publishing House, 1973). The following works deal with the 
religious background of the revolution: John N. Schumacher, S.J., 11 1 he Religious 
Character of the Revolution in Cavite, 1896-1897,” Philippine Studies, 30 (1976): 
445-492; John N. Schumacher, S.J., Revolutionary Clergy: The Filipino Clergy and the 
Nationalist Movement (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1981); and 
Reynaldo C. Ileto, Pasyon and Revolution: Popular Movements in the Philippines 1840- 
1910 (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1979). The need to de\elop 
new perspectives in the understanding of the revolution is discussed in John N. Schu 
macher, S.J., “Recent Perspectives on the Revolution,” Philippine Studies 30 (1982). 
445-492. 

2. Nicholas P. Cushner, Landed Estates in the Colonial Philippines (New Haven. Yale 
University Southeast Asian Studies, 1976). 

3. Milagros C. Guerrero, “Luzon at War: Contradictions in Philippine Society, 1898 
1902,” (Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 1977), pp. 164-229. Guerrero presents 
an excellent discussion of peasant response to the revolution in central Luzon during 
the Aguinaldo government and the early period of American administration. 

4. 1 his is based on the testimony of General Smith before the Taft Commission. He 
claimed that immediately after the American occupation of Negros in 1899, Papa 
Isio, the leader of the babaylanes , “commenced missionary work among the employ 
ees of various haciendas, exciting them to the idea of destroying the property and re 
ducing the haciendas to their original conditions, that is to say, to a state of nature 
(underscoring mine). He didn’t wish any more sugar planted, neither did he wish any 
but pure-blooded Filipinos to live in the island. As a result of his propaganda the la- 



207 



mi* mu iitint v \ v< m \ '\ i< >n \ni> hi v > 



borers on hacicnebu destroyed the hae tetuLu \ irsr. and then went «»ut to iom Papa Scios 
fsic) Baibailanet (si< /. taken frotn I-nuts t Irlil for I'n Icsustkal Purposes in the 
Philippines," laft Philippine ( onuntutnn Reports l*H)i). 5(>ch t jjngrcss, second scs- 
sion, vol. 1 2, no. 1 90. p. 2 U 

Hvelyn T. C jjlLim.Tr, Bahaylantstn tn Seym !X*S(> J'H) (,)ur/i>n l ns New Pay I\ib* 
lislicrs, 1 986), p. 4 1 ( ullamar quotes ( ornclio R I urntrs. Apuntei Hocunientadas 

de La Revalue ion en toeLi Is Li de \'e?roi ‘Iloilo I 1 ( cntincl.i. Itu . I t, l t, ». Primer.! Parte, 
pp. 128-129. Five days after the founding of the Nqjros provisional government* its 
leaders sent a letter to ( aptain I i lass of r hr Amcru an * ruisn ( h.trlnton in I loilo. I he 
letter contained the following passage t nnsidrrmj: that in assuming the internal 
order of the territory we should also have the preparedness against the attac k of Spain 
or other powerful strangers othersvisc it w«»uld be tantamount to the destruction of 
all that we have gamed in tins fertile tin ft rtt h uni i 1 j ruler sc or i ng mine), and Isecausc we 
are determined to repel vigorously anv urualled tor aggression. the Provisional Revo- 
lutionary C jovernrnent of this independent territory has agreed to place itself under 
the protectorate of the North American Republic so that it can immediately protect 
the lives and properties and all that c oust it me t he* c ollec t is it \ of Negros Occidental 
which has been reconquered hv force of our arms from Spanish domination, provided 
that it recognizes our independence and with the limitations to the said protectorate 
to be agreed upon eventually between ourselves and the said protec torate nation. 
Vandana Shiva, Monocultures of the Mind Perspet tires on Btodtvcrot > and Biotechnol - 
°gy ( Penang, Malaysia: Third World Network, 199*). pp. 1 6*i. \ anda Shiva dis- 
cusses the disappearance of knowledge systems as a result of colonization and the 
domination of i ndigenous soc let les by so-c a I led modern . west c*i n . sc len 1 1 f ic cultures. 

I he following work.s touch upon the consequenc es of l .uropean intervention in na- 
tive societies: (Jive Ponting, A ( ' treat History of the World: l he hurironment and the 
Collapse of (treat Civilizations (New York: Penguin Books, 199 1); and Alfred W. 
Crosby, Ideological Imperialism: The Biological l\xpan$ion of hurope, < )()0 1 1 )()() (Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University I Yess, 1986). A disc u scion of genocide, et hnocidc, and 
ecocide a.s a result of Spanish colonization of South America can be found in Brunetco 
Chiarclli, Colombo e la Riscoperta dellAmerira: ( tenocido, Ttnocido , Tcocido (Firenze: 
Angelo Pomccorboli Kditore, 1992). 

Karl Polanyi, “Market and Nature,” 7 he ( treat Transformation: The Political and Eco- 
nomic Origins of Our limes (Boston: Beacon press, 1957), p. 178. lo quote: “What 
we call land is an element of nature inextricably interwoven with mans institutions. 
!o isolate it and form a market out of it was perhaps the weirdest of all undertakings 
of our ancestors.” 

Nicholas P. Cushncr, S.J., “Mcysapan: I he Formation and Social hffects of a Landed 
Kstate in the Philippines,” Asian Studies, 7 ( I 973): 30. 

I rederick L. Wcrnstedt and J.li. Spencer, The Philippine Island World: A Physical 
C ulturaf and Regional Ceography (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), p. 
187. 



RODRIGUEZ Land and the Philippine Revolution 



11 . 



12 . 



13. 

14. 

15. 

16 . 



17. 

18 . 

19 . 

20 . 



21 . 

22 . 

23. 

24. 



25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 



29. 

30. 



See discussion on land and property among the Tagalog in William Henrv Scott, 
Barangay: Sixteenth Century Philippine Culture and Society (Ateneo de Manila Uni- 
versity Press, 1994). pp. 229-230. 

Discussion of shifting cultivation can be found in Lucien M. Hanks, Rice and Man: 
Agricultural he o logy in Southeast Asia (Honolulu, University of Hawaii Press. 1972), 
pp. 28-32; and Stuart A. Schlegel, Children o f lu l us: Essays on the Timmy People (Qu- 
ezon City; Giraffe Books, 1994), pp. 56-58. 

Hanks, Rice and Alan. p. 32. 

Scott, Bamngay, p. 229. 

Ibid., p. 230. 

Gesar Adib Majul, “So Far from God, so Near the Monastery,” Filipinas (November 
1 694), pp. 1 8- 1 9. This article d iscusses the process of how communal lands became 
private land holdings. 

Ibid., 18. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

See the Fifth Annual Report of the Philippine Commission 1904 (Washington: Gov- 
ernment Printing Office, 1905), part 1, p. 792. To quote: “By public auction, held 
November 9, 1678, Field Marshall Don Tomas de Endaya acquired certain govern- 
ment lands in Calamba for the sum of 1,400 pesos ” 

Cushner, Landed Estates in the Colonial Philippines , p. 24. 

Ibid. 

See the history of the Imus estate in the Fifth Annual Report of the Philippine Commis- 
sion 1904 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1905), part 1 , p. 780. 

For a history of friar landed estates sec Cushner, Landed Estates in the Colonial Phil- 
ippines; Dennis M. Roth, The Friar Estates of the Philippines (Albuquerque, NM: Uni- 
versity of New Mexico Press, 1977). A good historical summary for each of the Do- 
minican, Augustinian, and Recollect estates is found in Fifth Annual Report of the 
Philippine Commission 1904 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1905), part 
1, pp. 752-816. 

Cushner, Landed Estates , p. 26, 64-66. 

Scott, Barangay ; p. 230. 

Cushner, Landed Estates , p. 68. 

1 he following works provide details of the Meysapan Revolt of 1745: Cushner, 
Meysapan: I he Formation. Journal of Asian History, 7 (1973): 30-53; Cushner, 
Landed Estates in the Colonial Philippines , pp. 58-64; Roth, The Friar Estates of the 
Philippines , pp. 100-1 16; and “Usurpation of Indian Lands by Friars” in The Philip- 
pine Islands 1493-1898 , eds. Emma H. Blair and James A. Robertson (Cleveland: 
The Arthur H. Clark, Co., 1907), 48: 27-36. 

See Usurpation of Indian Lands by Friars” in The Philippine Islands 1493-1898 , 48: 
28. 

John A. Larkin, “Philippine History Reconsidered: A Socioeconomic Perspective,” 



209 



31. 

32. 

33. 



34. 



35. 



36. 



37. 

38. 



39. 



40. 



41 . 



\ Iff mil HTIM Rl V( || n H >N > HI V >ni » 

American Historical Rritru '87 ( 1 982) S*)S f>2K I firkin dtv* ussrs the role of tin' ex- 
port -crop economy in population redistribution and the opening of frontier land in 
pp. 612-617. 

Robert R. Reed, Hnpanic f rhannm m the Philippine \ V ml} >' :*'e Impact of ( f'urvh 
and State ( Manila: 1 lie I mversity ot Manila. I' 1 ** p ,,n 

Isagani R. Medina, ( .*nitc before the Revolution 1 > / IS'H% Oiic/nii C ny: ( SSP 

Publications. 1994). p 1*1 

Pllcn S. Hoffman. I he 1 oresi frontier in the Iropus Pioneer Settlement and Agri- 
cultural Intensification in Negros ( biental. Philippines, in l {nine* Puslt on Scattered 
Poles: Prehistory and Urology in .\eyrn: ( )r:entai. Pt'i.ippi'ie <*ds Karl 1 1 bitterer and 

William K. Macdonald (Cx*bu ( it’* I mvrrsitv «*f San < trios. 19K.N. p Mi. 

Alfred W. Mcf oy, 4 A ( <>uccn I ),rs Slowls I hr Rise and 1 VJmc ot Iloilo C ity." in 
Philippine Social Htitory ( tlnhal trade and Huai hantormatiof:. rds \ltrcd W Mc- 
C Aiy and fxi ( . . I )r Jesus (( ^ur/o n ( it*. A t eneo de \ 1 a n i la l m vet m t \ I less. I 9S 2). p. 
31 1 . McC x>y s f igu res arc* d i f leren t from t hose < >t I ope/ t ion/aga w ho wrote that the 
population of Negros ( kcidenral grew from 59.7 V to *OS.7'V in the second ballot 
the 1 9th century. See Violeta Pope/ ( »on/aga. I ami of l lope. I .nut of W.tnt: .1 SoCMh 
Pconomic History of Ncgrm (l 5" / / OHS ) ( ( ,)ue/on ( it\ Philippine National Histori- 
cal Society, 1991 ), p. 45. 

Volker Schult, Mindoro: A Social History of a Philippine bland m the 20th ( entury 
(Manila: Divine Word Publications, 199 1 ). p. *(). figures relet to C 'hristian popula- 
tion only. 

I his is based on the report ol the* provmc lal g< >vci m >r < >1 t he Abra which is found in 
the Pourth Annual Report of the Philippine ( imimcaon 1002 (Washington: Ciovern- 
ment Printing Office, 1904), part 1, pp. 751 32. 

Ibid., pp. 731-732. figures include both ( Christian and non C hristian population. 
Marshall S. Mcl .ennan, “Peasant and I lacctulcro in N ucv.i I *.e i j a : 1 he .Socio-eco- 
nomic Origins of a Philippine (.ornt7ierci.il Rice-growing Region (Ph.D. disserta- 
tion, University of ( California, Berkeley, 1973), pp. 5*i ’ 5 \S. Mcl ennan presents 
population figures for central I.tr/.on provinces and mini ic ipal 1 1 ics lor selected years, 

1 837 to I960. 

See testimony of Sr. Juan Villegas, comparing land values and productivity in the 
fagalog region, Negros, and Pampanga, before the Pali Commission in the Pourth 
Annual Report of the Philippine (Commission I 002 (Washington: ( lovernment Print- 
■ng Office-, 1904), p. 169. Also see Schumacher, "lxonnmic factors in the Revolu- 
tion,” p. 131 . 

1 or Pampanga, sec John A. Parkin, The Pampanga ns: C.olontal Society in a Philippine 
I rovince (Berkeley: University of (California Press, 1972), p. 74. for Negros Occiden- 
t-d, see Ma. fe Id. Romero, Negros Occidental between Two horeign Pincers ( 1888 - 
120V) (Manila: hnterprise Publications, Inc., 1974), pp. 31-42; and Violeta Lopez- 
(jonzaga, Land of Hope, p. 72. 

Peslic K. Bau /.on, Philippine Agrarian Reform l RR0- 1 VOS (Singapore: I he Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies, 1975), p. 10. I his monograph includes a discussion on 



210 



ROPRKilT/ La rid and the Philippine Revolution 



the methods ot Lind acquisition that led to the dispossession of many Filipinos. Also 
see discussion ot land acquisition in Negros Occidental in Lopez-Gonzaga, Land of 
Hope. [^p. "'3-80. 

See Guerrero, l.uzon at War. pp. 144-145. Residents of Anao, Tarlac, claimed that 
they had cl eared ‘ extensive virgin land tor rice farming and had lived in that town 
since 1859. A Spaniard by the name of Gonzalez presented papers claiming he was 
the legal owner ot the land in question. Having lost their case against Gonzalez, the 
residents were reduced to being tenants in his hacienda. Gonzalez also claimed land 
in Barrio Guiling, Rosales, Pangasinan. Having cleared the land and, therefore, 
thinking it was theirs, the people were surprised by Gonzalez's claim of ownership. 

1 he people brought a suit to court but lost. They eventually became tenants in 
C ion/ale/ s hacienda. 

See Lopez-C ionzaga. Land of Hope . p. 3-80. 1 he author includes a quite disturbing 
a case ol land-grabbing by Hon leodoro Benedicto: “With a gang of armed men, 
Don leodoro burned down peasant villages, bribed local officials and amassed an 
enormous property of 1 1 ,200 hectares, by far the largest in Negros. In August 1876, 
some Spanish planters complained to the Governor-General in Manila that 
Benedicto had acquired ,000 hectares on the slopes of Kanlaon volcano by expul- 
sion from their properties of poor indios (Filipinos) who from time immemorial cul- 
tivated small plots of coflee and cocoa sufficient to cover the costs of their basic ne- 
cessities. 1 he Spaniards claimed further that Benedicto had grabbed another 4,600 
hectares by driving the villagers to the mountains with their families where they are 
relegated to a miserable life." The quote was taken by Lopez-Gonzaga from Alfred W. 
McCoy, “VI o-ilo: Factional Conflict in a Colonial Economy, Iloilo Province, Philip- 
pines, 1937-1955 (Ph.D. diss., Yale University, 1977), p. 8. 

Richard I I. Grove, Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens and 
the Origins of Environmentalism , 1600-1860 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995). 

Information on the General Inspection of Forests was taken from Gonzaga, Land of 
Hope , p. 121 ; and information on the Bureau of Forestry was taken from Dennis M. 
Roth, "Philippine Forests and Forestry" in Global Deforestation and the Nineteenth- 
Century World Economy ; eds. Richard P. Tucker and J.E Richards (Durham, NC: 
Duke Press Policy Studies, 1983), pp. 31-49. 

Gonzaga, Land of Hope, p. 121. 

Ibid., p. 121 . 

Roth, Philippine Forests and forestry," p. 41. 

Gonzaga, Land of Hope, pp. 101-102, 121. 

Roth, Philippine Forests and Forestry," p. 41. 

Marshall S. McLennan, “Peasant and Hacendero in Nueva Ecija: The Socio-eco- 
nomic Origins of a Philippine Commercial Rice-growing Region," p. 341. Also see 
Marshall S. McLennan, “Changing Human Ecology on the Central Luzon Plan: 
Nueva Ecija, 1705-1939" in Philippine Social History: Global Trade and Local Trans- 
formation, pp. 57-90. 



211 



52 . 

53 . 

54 . 

55 . 

56 . 



57 . 



58 . 



59 . 

60 . 



61 . 

62 . 

63 . 



64 . 

65 . 

66 . 



nil mil iri-r.i mi >M i :- ••• v : ■ ■ • *'.i • 

( ilcnn Anrhonv M.iv I 50.000 Mi m : • • 1 •*;>!>.!> ( riM, in 

gas, 1887-1903." A Putt Re,mered^)xu /<m < it. • I».- Publishers. I9«S~). p. 67. 
Robust iano Ich.m/ . S l-rt.hc ot the I / * • <-. ' •> •• - ,lu i annotatcJ by 

Do n V. Mart (Athens. < >1 { < >hi«. I nr. rut. < n- • • u ln rn.ition.tl Studies. 

1978). pp. 104-105. 

Peter ( .. Smith. I )rmngr.iphi- Mr. tot-. \n ’\p;-t • • i.ls ot the I ilipino 

I'a.St III PcrspeetWf J on Philippine II: torn. ■ v <”-' si h'hn I -IfklH 

(New ( laven : Vale I inversus Southea ' \ ■ > Sm.ii< ;•;> . • << 

Ibid., p. 43. 

bor information regarding ruyumundo ( u hm-t. /..’. .v<; : >t.tte< in me ( oloiujl 

Philippines, p. 52; on htdrones and tult tine ml. Medina. * .miff. pp. 59* 

105. 

Medina, f.urite, p. 96 l p until the revolution tb : w ,r * mam taxes imposed on 

ordinary citizens and rules preventing 0< mow nu nt ot population See discussion 
by William Menrv Scot r, Mistotv ol the Inattu ulan < ’•/. e the I'.tr. hntent (,'ur- 
liiin ((Quezon I ,ny: New I )av Publishers. I OS ’ pp I ^ • 

See tables showing location and values ol tn.it estates in tin ioursh \nnuul Report of 
th c Philippines ( commission , part I , pp I 99 /ns \ \ >< > o < .msui is ot I i\. Mercado co 
the quest ion na ire ol the I .if r ( .om mission in I .mils I I eld toi I «. c lesi.istu.il Purposes 
in the Philippines/ Lift Philippine ( onnnvion Report l *)()(). Mull ( mil* revs, second 
session, vol. 1 2, no. 190, p. 24V. According to Merc .ulo. f r i.u c or por.it ions possessed 
“numerous urban lands in Manila and suburbs. Ml the e state s were essentially ag- 
ricultural , except i ng jVI augdrin^, which i s ded k a t ed t < » the pasttueof c a 1 1 lc, and Jala- 
Jala to the feeling of trees and hauling of firewood 
Medina, ( Invite , p. 200. 

Agoncillo, The Revolt of the Musses, p. 1 S2. Agoncillo includes a long list of com- 
plaints taken from Isabelo de los Reyes, Sennit nnnil Memo) /,/ Sober Li Revolution hit - 
ipina( Madrid, 1 899). ( )ther complaints inc hided t he tendeiu \ ol friar estates to grab 
land in adjacent areas by simply including it in their map. 

See Roth’s discussion of the Calamba controversy in The heme /whites, pp. 1 S-23. 

See the constitution of La Riga bihpina m Agoncillo, l he Revolt of the A hisses, pp. 

376 - 382 . 

Quoted in hast and Richardson, Roots, p. OS. This was taken from Jose Rizal, “Mani- 
festo a A Igu nos Filipinos,” dated 1890 in VCAnsccsIao 1.. Rct.ma, l u/ay hserito del Dr. 
Jose Rizuzl (Madrid: I.ibrcria Ccncral de Victoriano Snare/, 1907), p. 374. 

See Agoncillo, The Revolt of the Musses, p. 1 SO and see footnote 37 on p. 349. 

Larkin, The Pampangans , p. 114. 

Milagros C. Guerrero, “'The Provincial and Municipal F.litcs of Luzon during the 
Revolution, 1898-1902” in Philippine Social History: (dohal 'Trade and Local Trans- 
formation, p. ISO. To quote: “The Kapampangan elite, as J. Larkin cogently points 
out, joined the Revolution only in late May and June of 1898 when the Filipino 
rebels in most of Central Luzon had defeated the Spanish forces. Also see Larkin, 
The Pampangans , pp. 111-119. 



212 



RO DRK it T'X land and the Philippine Revolution 



67. Jose N. 1 ndriga, " Lhe Friar Lands Settlement; Promise and Performance/' Journal of 

Public Administration. 1 a ( 1 397-4 1 3: quote was taken from Teodoro A. Agon- 

cillo, Malolos: /he ( risis of the Republic (Quezon Gin*. Uni vers in - of the Philippines, 

1 060), p. 1 3. 

68. Agoncillo, Ala/o/os. p. 230 . 

60. Majul, “So Lar l rom God p. 10. 

0. Agoncillo, Malolos . p. ^8S. I he Nlalolos Constitution, promulgated on 20 January 
1800, contained an additional article which provided that: “All lands, buildings and 
other properties belonging to the religious corporations in these Islands shall be un- 
derstood to have been restored to the Filipino estate on the 24th of Mav last, the day 
in which the dictatorial government of Cavite was constituted. ' 

1. John I ay lor. Report on the Organization for the Administration of Civil Government 
Instituted by hnulio Agumaldo and His FoHoivers in the Philippine Archipelago (Wash- 
ington: Government Printing Press), p. 73. One of the many laws promulgated bv 
Aguinaldo on 10 February 1 809 included Article 1 1 stating that: “The property of 
the religious corporations restored to the state in accordance with the additional arti- 
cle ol the constitution will be administered by men of means who will be designated 
by the secretary of the treasury, local chiefs, (presidentes) preferred, who will furnish 
such security, in cash or by bond, as the secretary of the treasury may deem neces- 
sary." 

72. Iavlor, Report on the Organization , p. 18. To quote; “Steps were taken to restore the 
Spanish system ol forestry control, licenses were issued to cut wood, and officials of 
the forestry department appointed. 

73. See note 5. 

74. Apolinaro Mabini, “Cuestiones en Relacion con las Corporaciones Religiosas,” La 
Revolut ion Filipina (Manila; Bureau of Printing, 1931), vol. 2, p. 148. The English 
translation is from Majul, “Social Background of Revolution," p. 23. 

75. See Light/) Annual Report of the Philippine Commission to the Secretary of War 1907 
(Washington: Government Printing Office, 1908), part 2, pp. 310-312. More de- 
tails on the life of Papa Isio or Dionisio Siguela Papa can be found in Cullamar, 
Babaylanism; and Romero, Negros Occidental pp. 168-187. 

76. Quoted in Marites D. Vitug, Power from the Forest: I he Politics of Logging (Quezon 
City: 1 he Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism, 1993), p. 143. 

77. See Fxhauz, Sketches of the Island of Negros, pp. 98-103. 

78. Ibid., p. 101. Echauzs description, although rich, reflects the colonizers unfavorable 
view of indigenous culture. 

79. James A. Le Roy, The Americans in the Philippines: A History of the Conquest and First 
Years of Occupation with an Intivductory Account of the Spanish Rule (Boston and New 
York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1914), vol. 2, p. 107. 

80. Cullamar, Babaylanism , p. 55. 

81. Romero, Negros Occidental p. 186. 

82. See note 4. 

83. Guerrero, Luzon at Way ; p. 127. 



213 



mi mmitiM Kivuinn v'.i » in > v .i » 



84. Ibid. 

85. Ibid. 

86. Ibid. 

87. Ibid., p. I 72- 1 73. 

88. Ibid., p. 1 72. 

89. Fifth Annual Report of the Philippine ( *ttntnt n>n l'>0), p.»M 1 

90. Ibid., p. 792. 

91. Ibid., p. 785. 

92. hndriga, “The briar Hinds Sciilcmnif. pp *12 * ^ 

93. See, for example, the Report nf the Philippine ( tttnmt nr the 

ington: C jovernmenr Printing ( Mfitc. 1**0 1 *- « *1 * I hs . report 

ers, chapters on mineral resources and gr«»l«»g\. b«»t.m\. timbe: 
/.oography. 

94. Michael C Howard, ed., Amis l nrtmtttnrnt.il ( m Hotil 

1993), p. 2. 



p p. "56. 



/Wmient /Wf)(\Vash- 
i ont.iins. among oth- 
r and tine woods, and 

der. \\ esc view Press, 



214 



Landed Estates 

in Colonial Philippines and Mexico 



Nicholas P. Cushner 

State University of New York, Buffalo, New York, U.S.A. 



T he Spanish conquerors brought to their overseas empire European 
concepts, cultural patterns, and institutions. Some of these patterns and in- 
stitutions were absorbed in the process called Hispanicization, some were rejected. 
One Hispanic institution, the large landed estate, appeared almost everywhere. Not 
that it filled the need of the indigenous population, but because of imposition from 
the colonial ruler. Iopography and pre-Hispanic economic systems influenced its 
appearance in different regions of the empire. A case in point is the landed estate in 
the center of the empire, Mexico, and on the periphery, the Philippines. The simi- 
larities and differences in the formation and social effects of the large estate pattern 
are striking. 

1 he landed estate took root in Mexico for several reasons. 1 1 he white popu- 
lation was unable or unwilling to live exclusively on Indian foods. 2 European 
staples such as wheat and cattle products were desired. In addition, the sharp re- 
duction of the Indian population created a land vacuum which was quickly filled 
by herds of sheep and cattle. Neither of these reasons was operative in the Philip' 
pines. The Spaniards who settled in Manila in 1571 readily accustomed themselves 
to the many available varieties of Filipino rice whose cultivation was not unknown 
in Spain and Mexico. Orchards provided mangoes, papayas, bananas, cacao, and 
lanzones , all of which were readily accepted by the Spaniards. Nor was there a dras- 
tic reduction of the native population to open vast areas for cultivation and graz- 
ing/ Perhaps the most cogent explanation for the rise of the landed estate in the 
Philippines (and the same factor operated in Mexico) was that it fulfilled the ideals 
of Spanish society. A principal determinant of social status in 16th-century Spain 



215 



mi rmuitiM kivoii n< >n \ni » mi a »ni> 



wa.s the ownership of a large estate I his ideal w .is i .tr r ini t< » Mexuoaiul the Philip- 
pines. I hus, within weeks after founding .Manila. ( mvernor Miguel l ope/ dc 
Legazpi began distributing land grants. I mm IS *1 to mughh the area east 

and southeast of Spanish .Manila was transformed into a complex of large landed 
estates owned for the most part In individual Spaniards and religious corporations. 
Communally owned village lands were divided up in I ilipim » prmctpMn and sold 
to individuals who often immediately resold to large landholders with the result 
that ancient community lands disappeared into large private holdings. I he social 
consequences that sue h a t ransforrnat ion implies were emu mous \\ the large pri- 
vate holding arose the number of landless peasants uu teased who either worked as 
landless peons or were set adrift, becoming the of I u/on. 4 So manv 

were the vagamiuidos in the* .Manila area that then required a special category in 
royal tribute lists of the I mb century. 

Although the first royal land grants were made In I cga/pi m I S " 17 a [K'ti- 
tion from the City of Manila to King Philip II indicated that In OSS there was 
neither sowing of luiropean c rops nor raising of c at t lr. Ihccitv asked that hilipino 
farmers he relieved of paying tribute* m view <>f their contribution to the colony's 
well-being and the need to enc outage* more far mmg. I bus m 1 SNS there were few 
working estates and large farms. Within 0 scats this situation changed dramati- 
cally. hrancisco Colin, a Jesuit of long residenc e m the* Philippines, wrote in 1663 
that along both banks of the Pasig River all tlu* was down to I aguna de Has* there 
are many orchards, rice fields and large* Spanish estates with more* than 2,000 Chi- 
nese gardeners and farmers. Taken altogether the area forms a vast and numerous 
farming population. But the absolute number of landed estates svas far fewer in 
the I hilippincs than in Mexico. And understandably so. I he* Spanish population 
was less and the principal source of wealth for Spaniards in t lie archipelago was not 
based on agriculture or cattle, hut upon the* t ranssh ipment of ( .hinc.se luxury items 
to Acapulco. 

By the end of the 1 6th century the large landed estate m both Mexico and the 
I hilippincs was desirable as a financial investment. In 1 S~"2, the Jesuits who were 
ooking for means of supporting their college in Mexico C 'ity were advised to in- 
vest in land. Jn the late 16th- and early 17th-century Philippines the large landed 
estates surrounding the capital city expanded in order to supply rice, fruits, and 
meat for the growing city population/' 

I he techniques used in the formation and expansion of the large landed es- 
tate were roughly the same in Mexico and the Philippines. Royal grant, purchase, 
and donation (in the case of religious orders) were the principal means of acquiring 
estates. In general the types of prc-I lispanic Mexican landholdings are known, so it 
is possible to assess the legality of land sales between Indians and Spaniards. 10 The 
same cannot be said for the Philippines. Our present knowledge of landholding 
arrangements in pre-Hispanic Philippine society is imprecise and spotty. In gen- 
eral land was considered a communal resource, but data or chiefs granted lands to 
their nobility; whether in fee simple or in usufruct is difficult to say. Other lands 



216 



C'USHNKR landed Estates in Colonial Philippines and Mexico 



were tilled by maharlika and slaves tor the sole benefit of the datu, and some lands 
were worked in common, the produce of which was shared by the community. 11 
We are certain of the existence of these communal lands, but thus tar we do not 
know what classes or individuals in pre-Hispanic society possessed alienable lands. 
Until this is known, one will not be able to assess accurately the legality and legiti- 
macy of the many land sales between Filipinos, Chinese, and Spaniards which oc- 
curred in the first decades of colonial rule. 

Royal land grants were one of several means available to Spaniards for acquir- 
ing agricultural and grazing lands in the Philippines. Purchase from and outright 
usurpation of Filipino-owned land were perhaps the most common form of ac- 
quiring estates. 1 he price paid for land varied, depending on size, quality, and the 
availability of water. On 25 January 1624, Alferez Antonio Mendez sold a piece of 
land to the Jesuit procurator' 1 Alonso Roman, for P2,500. Fhe lands were called 
collectively Olioli and located rio arriba , i.e., along the upper banks of the Pasig 
River. 1 ' Mendez had purchased the land from Filipinos of Pandacan and Sapa, so 
the area was probably just west of the town of Pasig. Five years later the Augustin- 
ian con ven to of San Pablo paid General Juan de Alcarrasa P9,400 for riceland near 
Pasay. In 1591, the Augustinians of Tondo purchased half a cab alien a of farmland 
near Morong from Juan Garcia de Olivares for P900. u The highest price for a piece 
of land of which 1 have a record was PI 6,500, paid bv the convento of San Agustin 
to Don Joseph de Herrera y Figueroa on 10 October 1689. ,s The land was south of 
Manila, near present-day Pasay City, and the reason it was so expensive was be- 
cause it included an old-style wooden sugar mill and all the attached apparatus. 
The land s were used tor growing sugar cane. 

In the recorded land sales between Filipinos and Spaniards, the Filipinos are 
described as either naturalcs , natives, or princi pales. 1 he sales documents often note 
that the pnncipales were acting on behalf of consortes , who could have been either 
relatives or village folk, or on behalf of entire towns. For example, on 26 Septem- 
ber 1624, Dona Maria Palaman, Francisco Luijon, Juan Gogol, Juan Alaguiag, 
Geronimo Dimagapi, and Diego Manas, all naturalcs of Binan, sold to Santo 
Tomas College a piece of land (pedazo de tierraf 6 called Tanag on the west shore of 
Laguna de Bay for P575. The sellers claimed that they were representing the entire 
town of Binan. Apparently, these pnncipales were selling communal lands of which 
they assumed control either through coercion, collusion, or unilaterally. Two years 
later, on 16 March, Bartolome Balot, Baltazar Boncal, and Agustin Saguisag do- 
nated to the Jesuit College of Manila an extensive tract of land near Maybunga. 
The three princi pales claimed that they were acting for the townsfolk of Maybunga. 
The question in this type of donation (and there were many to the religious orders) 
is the possibility of collusion between the religious procurator and the village prin- 
cipals. Donations from individuals are perhaps explicable in terms of passive re- 
ceipt in return for spiritual gain (masses, prayers, etc.) but no possible advantage 
accruing to entire villages is mentioned in the documents of donations made in the 
name of entire towns. 



mi mil IITIN! Kl \ < >1 1 1 l< >N ANI > hM< >NI > 



( )nc of the largest landowners 1 r i <. olom.il Philippines v..t\ the Society of Jesus 
(Jesuits). Each of its colleges and institutions had at least one estate which provided 
a yearly source of revenue. I liese estates were either donated b\ a founder 
( fun clado r) or purchased with an endowment fund In return the founder or donor 
shared in certain spiritual benefits agreed upon In the recipient institution, 
(prayers, burial in the chapel, masses, eu I wo of the largest lesuit estates were 
attached to St. Ignatius C ollegc of Manila. San Isidro tie Marujtiina. and 
Mayhaligue, both in the jurisdiction of Ion do Mam puna nu I m led the land called 
Calumpan, Angono, ( arovan. and Maponso. but tbe\ were not easib acquired. 1 * 
When the Jesuits attempted to pure base t liese flat . mb m elands, about 50 q uni ones 
in extension (179 qunlones in I '^68). the people of la\ta\. ( amta. P.tsig, and 
lagtiig objected that the land was theirs. I he I ilipmos lost their tourt fight hut the 
townsfolk of Cainra and San Mateo received fisc* <fuinoncs to gross tobacco in ex- 
change for water rights. Mavhaligne. on the other hand. \s as a sprawling conglom- 
eration of farmlands near ( Jmapn sold to the lesuits b\ the print of Quiapo 

a.s heirs of Rajah Soliman. further purchases seen made from the natives and 
principals of londo in 16.37. I3v 1768, the enure estate ssas sallied at 1 U M)65 and 
the farmland at 1*3,954. " 

following tlie initial acquisition of an estate-, wIkiIki In grant or purchase, 
came a second step, its extension. I his ssas often done- at the* expense* of adjacent 
native holdings, further purchase* or usurpation ssas the* ordinary pattern of exten- 
sion and consolidation of an estate. I he* most detailed example of extension which 
I have seen occurred on the Augwstinian estate of Maysapan. Within a hundred 
years this estate tripled its si/e bv occupation of the adjacent estates, San Juan de 
Buenavista, San Pedrillo, San Isidro, and Mamancat Butin, all of svhich svere south 
and southwest of the original land grant made by (lovernor Miguel Lopez de 
Legazpi in ] 572. 

A.s long as the legal requirements were fulfilled, the colonial government did 
not interfere in the transfer of land f rom f ilipino to Spanish ownership. Theoreti- 
cally, the filipinos were protected by several layers of colonial law which made the 
purchase of native lands extremely complicated. 1 But the laws were easily circum- 
vented and in the end ineffective in preventing indigenous communal holdings 
from being replaced by concentrated and consolidated private Spanish holdings. A 
royal land commissioner reported in 1723 that most of the towns around Manila 
no longer possessed communal holdings and many villagers had neither land of 
their own nor even house plots (solares). This was especially true of Santa Cruz, San 
Sebastian, and Bagumbayan. 22 Native protest in the face of this usurpation was 
weak and sporadic. 1 he people of Santa Cruz, led by Alfcrez Nicolas Diaz, did 
bring a suit against St. Ignatius College, claiming that the estate of Mayhaligue had 
usurped their common lands. The oidor , Pedro Calderon Henriquez, ordered the 
Jesuits to appear in court but Martin Irrisari, S.J., the Jesuit representative, claimed 
ecclesiastical immunity and countered by having an ecclesiastical court order 
Calderon to withdraw his order within 24 hours or be excommunicated. The Jesu- 



218 



C USHN1 R I a ruled Estates in Colonial Philippines and Mexico 



its won the long drawn-out court case and the people of Santa Cruz were advised 
to appeal to the Council of the Indies, if they so wished. 2 ' They made no appeal. 

1 he people around the Dominican estate of San Isidro de Birian were con- 
tinually protesting encroachments made on their lands but the colonial courts just 
as regularly ruled in favor of the Spanish defendants. 29 The very legal complica- 
tions involved in a suit discouraged ordinary folk from securing justice through 
established legal channels, even though a number of highly placed Spanish officials 
in Manila were aware that irregularities had been committed in land sales. Julian 
Ignacio de Velasco, the land commissioner, even went so tar as to sav in 1723 that 
the land grants made by former governors in the Philippines were all given at the 
expense of hilipino communal holdings. 2 * 1 his was one reason why he suspended 
a land inspection in 1 21 . Velasco realized that a composition tee was in realitv an- 
other form of purchase, and he refused to be a party to illegal sales. 21 ' And he said so 
to the king. But officials like Velasco were few and tar between. Most did nothing 
because the strife was in a sense below the surface, on the village level, which did 
not effect the placid administration of the colony. But the effects were tar reaching. 

1 he response of the native Mexican and Filipino to the encroachments of the 
large landed estates provides interesting parallels and contrasts. Both native popu- 
lations acquiesced in the imposition of an estate structure, but deep resentment 
remained. As tracts of land gradually passed to the ownership of Spaniards, the 
feelings of the original tillers of the soil must have been mixed with resentment and 
confusion. It can be argued that the position of the native farmer (whether landless 
laborer or plot cultivator) did not change. He did not own the land in pre-Spanish 
times and he did not own the land under the Spaniards. But he at least had land to 
till. Other segments of Philippine society, e.g., the vagamundos and reserves, 1 nu- 
merically the largest in the area, had neither land nor the use of any. Their existence 
was due directly to the newly introduced concept of the private ownership of land, 
insofar as common lands were no longer available. Those working plots of land on 
the perimeter of estates were dissatisfied because the estate was encroaching on the 
little they possessed. But dissatisfaction was mixed with confusion. The estate was 
largely formed from what had previously been communal land, worked as such by 
neighboring communities. Litigation was of little effect in protecting native and 
communal holdings from usurpation. 28 In 18th-century Philippines these Filipi- 
nos, on and off the estates, argued that the land was theirs, notwithstanding 150 
years of titles, sales, and legal transferals. To the mind of the peasant farmer the 
problem was simple. I he lands that once were theirs through common ownership 
had been taken from them. They had a right to take them back. They attempted to 
do so in 1 745. 

In 1 745, the estates surrounding Manila were involved in a full-scale armed 
revolt which included all of the working segments of the hacienda. 29 The revolt is 
significant for several reasons. It was widespread, involving over 6,000 armed men 
from the four provinces of Cavite, Laguna de Bay, Tondo, and Bulacan. That such 
a large number of men could be organized in secret and put into the field prepared 



219 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.UTK )N ANI > HI- Yc >Nl ) 



to battle the Spanish army indicates that the motives for the revolt were compel- 
ling, the leaders were persuasive, and the common Filipinos who took up arms 
were convinced that their grievances could only be resolved by force of arms. Dis- 
content with land distribution and allied grievances must have been smoldering 
for many years because the stated motives for the revolt existed for decades. Per- 
haps most important of all is the fact that the l ilipinos who revolted considered 
the estates as their ancestral lands, stolen from them by the Spaniards. 

The oidor sent to quell the revolt, Pedro ( alderon I lenrique/, wrote that: 
The principal motive of this revolt is land. Ib repossess their old lands the towns 
ofSilang, Hagonoy, Cavite, Bacoor and Paranacpie formed a confederation swear- 
ing in writing to defend their ancestral lands to the death. I he csta rnitis. they claim, 
have usurped these lands... ” 30 The clash between two differing concepts, of land 
use and land ownership, becomes clear as the Spaniard continued: 



In so far as you say that your lands have been usurped by the estancias 
which you claim is the principal cause of your revolt, you must recall that in 
1739 I began to ask for titles of the estancias and that irregularities were re- 
ported to the government in Spain; the estancias will he realigned according to 
their legal boundaries... You believe that the haciendas around your towns 
have usurped your land, but your fathers and grandfathers sold this land. Jus- 
tice demands that those with legal titles cannot be dispossessed of their land. ' 1 



Although Calderon held a firm line against the rebels, he expressed a far more 
lenient attitude in the reports and suggestions he made to the governor in Manila. 
He would allow the rebels to remain on occupied estates “until we find out who 
really owns the land.” 32 

Within a year the revolt was over. Calderon declared the contested land 
realengos and sold them to Filipino farmers, a solution bitterly opposed by the es- 
tate owners. 



fhe social consequences of Spanish conquest were immediate for the ruling 

asses of pre-Hispanic Mexican and Filipino society. As Ciibson points out, for the 
tec aristocracy the change was absolute, from a position of dominance to one of 
su jugation. 33 I n both Mexico and the Philippines the principalia class, formed 
mam y rom the pre-Hispanic nobility, exhibited an openly opportunistic attitude 
t( fT r J C nCW Conc l uerors - In the Philippines, for example, Lakandula, the rajah 
o on o, supplied military aid and personnel in the Spanish conquest of greater 
ani aand central Luzon. And there are other examples of direct Filipino-Spanish 
co a oration in conquest. Rewards in the form of land grants were the immediate 
result. Both in Mexico and the Philippines the principalia class became intermedi- 
aries between conquerors and the masses of society, performing a variety of mu- 
nicipal duties. The principals of the Philippines became gobernadorcillos (elected 
magistrates with jurisdiction over a number of towns) and alcaldes of villages, 
w ose principal functions were tax collecting and organizing forced-labor gangs. 34 



220 



c I'M IN HR I a tided Estates in Colonial Philippines and Mexico 



I he social consequences ot the imposition of the landed estate pattern were 
profound. In Mexico the mining booms of the 16th and 18th centuries were major 
factors in the proliferation ot estates. Mining centers required regular food sup- 
plies. In the Philippines the estate was geographically confined in the early post- 
conquest decades. 1 he further one got from Manila the fewer were the estates and 
less evident were its effects. 

In Mexico land was a principal source ot wealth, control of which deter- 
mined income, wealth, and power. But income could not be realized without la- 
bor. 1 herefore, there developed a distribution ot property rights necessarily accom- 
panied by a series of interpersonal and intergroup relationships. Probably the single 
most important result of the landed estate structure in Mexico was the gradual rise 
in the 17th century of the farm-working segment which was kept on estates by 
contracted debts, one of several mechanisms used to assure a labor supply. At the 
same time Indians from villages on the periphery of estates lost their communal 
lands and became landless peasants or occasional labor. Silvio Zavala has demon- 
strated the relationship between these landless laborers and the peones of 19th-cen- 
tury Mexico. ' s Unfortunatelv, the different categories of peons that existed on 
Mexican estates have not been examined. As Chevalier says, “we catch only 
glimpses of them."'*’ Kven less well documented is the role played by groups exist- 
ing on the fringes of estates. 

A parallel rise of peons and fringe groups occurred in the Philippines in the 
areas effected by the estate structure. Many of the parcels and larger tracts of land 
were sold to Spaniards by native principales who assumed, quite contran to i t 
pino customary law, absolute ownership of village lands. The newly introduced 
concept of private ownership (as opposed to the pre-Hispanic practice of land use) 
and the precipitate appearance of a monetary economy provided attractive eiieiim- 
stances for financial gain. Other principtiles, in the social chaos of the post-conquest 
years, assumed a moral control over communal lands and when land sales elid ta e 
place they were done in the name of principales anel common folk of a given village. 
Thus, from their former and actual positions of authority the principolio class too 
quick advantage of the new economic and political reality to sell lands which \\<-ic 
not theirs to sell. 

1 he Filipinos caught in this transition front communal land to pritate es 
did not abandon their relationship to the soil. There emerged three distinct sou 
etal strata all of which involved a man-land relationship: the inquilino, th e. resen a, 
and for want of a better term, the group farmer. / n quilin os were those v\ho be 
the estate in their own houses and cultivated a small field, in return fot farming t e 
large estate. Inquilinos were born on the estate, worked on it and passed their status 
on to their own children. The Augustinian estate of Maysapan, one of the largest in 
17th-century Philippines, had at least 91 inquilino families. ’ 1 hus fai the data on 
these families is spotty. But we do know that some inquilinos had been former 
owners of farmland which they sold to estate owners and then were allowed to ic- 
main on the land. The inquilinos of the estate were considered socially superior to 



22 1 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTK )N ANI > PI Y< >NI > 



the daily laborers (reservas) and to the folk whose small farms bordered the edges of 
the estate. By association the inquilino was identified with the estate owner and he 
sometimes exercised an arbitrary control over the use of certain grazing and wood- 
cutting privileges which the village folk enjoyed. Thereby nujuilhios often pro- 
voked a good deal of friction between the estate and the surrounding native popu- 
lation. 

One of the most curious and significant of the farm-working segments was 
called the reservas. These were individuals, usually classified as rescript r/e tribute* or 
casa cle reserva , who were freed from the obligations of forced labor service and 
paying tribute in return for fulfilling some specific function in the colonial 
economy, e.g., farm work on large estates. The reservas were a floating population 
uprooted from their own lands, ready to attach themselves to .1 monastery or large 
estate in order to avoid the work gangs organized to cut timber for construction of 
the Manila galleons. 38 "The reservas played a key role in the rapid development of 
most of the estates east of Manila, for they provided a labor force which otherwise 
was nonexistent. Each of these estates and some orchards enjoyed the use of reservas 
and it is probable that without this labor supply the estates could not have devel- 
oped as rapidly and successfully as they did. 

The use of reservas as farm laborers developed from a changing attitude to- 
ward the concept of tribute collection. After the bitter tribute controversy between 
Archbishop Domingo de Salazar and Governor ( lomez Perez I )asmarinas in 1 589 
to 1590, tribute was levied on all native Filipinos with very few exceptions. Old 
age, poor health, and non-subjection to Spanish rule were the only reasons ac- 
cepted for not paying tribute. However, the practice grew in the 17th century of 
exempting natives from tribute and personal service in exchange for their perform- 
ing domestic services for religious houses. 39 The government thought that it would 
s essen its financial burden of supporting monasteries, convert tos , and mission- 
aries, as it was obliged to do according to the agreements of the Patronato Real. But 
w at appened was that such large numbers sought to work in cotiventos and mon- 
asteries in order to escape the dreaded labor gangs that the government was actu- 
a y losing money through reduction of its tribute lists. E ven further reductions oc- 
^ Urre y outright requests and permission to waive tribute obligations. After the 
inese revolt of 1639'° the Chinese gardeners and truck farmers on the Jesuit 
an s o Quiapo (numbering 250 in 1603) were hesitant about returning to work. 
As an inducement the Jesuits procured a tribute exemption for them from Gover- 
nor Sebastian de Corcuera. 41 

By the early 1700s all the estates along the Pasig River had the use of reservas. 
Only the Augustinian hacienda of Mandaluyong was without th em and the pro- 
vincial , Casimiro Diaz, sought to remedy that. The permanent Filipino popula- 
tion on the estate, he wrote, was repeatedly called away to cut timber for the galle- 
ons, row the royal galleys, and work in the royal foundry. As a result the fields of 
the hacienda were left untended, preventing the natives from raising enough crops 



222 



i t MINI R / mini i>:Mc$ iri ( 'olotii.il Philippines and Mexico 



to pay the rent.' Oiaz thought that a reserva of SO easas de Indios Yagamundos 
would he able to tend the fields on a more regular and permanent basis. It is to be 
noted that the distinction is here made between simple reservas and reservas de In- 
di° s Yagamundos. 1 he vagamundowws one who was not enrolled on the tribute lists 
of any of the four provinces surrounding Manila: Tondo, l aguna de Bay, Bulacan, 
and Pampanga. 1 le had no fixed residence. Ot'a/ wanted the ragaw undos for the 
cultivation of the hacienda in order to occupy the natural laziness of the Indian in 
a place where the harvest from hard work is abundant. 1 he request was granted. 
But the fiscal, 1 er natulez loribio, m his capacity as protector of the Indians, 
warn eel Oiaz that he must avoid the abuses practiced on other estancias of forcing 
the reservas to pay the estate administrator P6 or P~' and demanding work on Satur- 
days without pa\. her natulez also warncel Oiaz that the estate had to allow* gov- 
ernment officials to collect tribute and levy work gangs from the vagamundos and 
other natives on the estate w ho were not included in the stipulated ^0 casas 1 his 
was the common government complaint against missionaries and rural parishes, 
that tribute returns were diminishing because monasteries and parish priests pre- 
vented collections from Filipinos attached to the religious house, whether the Fili- 
pinos were reservados or not. ‘ s 

A faint echo of pre-I fispanic communal use of land was present in the rela- 
tionship which involved estates and whole towns. The lands of Lambacnang Sagad 
which fell between the villages of Mavbunga and Sagad were leased by the estate of 
Maysapan to the principals of Mavbung;u»' The principals of the village, repre- 
senting all the village folk, agreed to cultivate the lands for nine years at an annual 
rent of P30. The agreement between the Augustinian province of Santfsimo 
No mb re de Jesus and the prnicipalcs of Maybunga was in force by the 16/ 0-> ’ 
newed on 6 July 1688, and continued well into" the 18th century. The rich nee 
lands running along the shore of the Mariquina River totaled 14 quifwnes. Since 
one qninon of rice land produced between 30 to 80 cavanf (a cavan equals - 
bushels) of unluisked rice and the price of unhusked rice in Laguna de Bay at t w 
time was one ton, in for seven and half gantas, it follows that the P30 rental cou 
purchase about 3,588 gantas ,** or about" 20 percent of the total harvest of unhus je 
rice. Thus the town was entitled to approximately 13,912 gantas. What does tus 
figure mean in terms of individual returns? If the population of Maybunga in 
were 565, w each persons share was approximately 24 gantas rice, or enoug or 
240 meals. This means that supplementary farming or hunting and fishing was a - 
solutely necessary to keep body and soul together. It also means that the vi age o 
of Maybunga were probably living on the border of alimentary insufficiency. e 
number of substantial loans made by the Augustinian provincial, Caspar e an 
Agustin, to the principals and townsfolk of Maybunga, also indicates that t eir 
work on Lambacnang Sagad may not have provided a sufficient income. Loans of 
P5 and sometime P80 were drawn by the principles of Maybunga during the 
1670s and 1 680s on the annual rent paid to the Augustinians. At least two of these 



223 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND M Y( )NI > 



loans amounting to P80 were drawn to pay for a lawsuit brought by the town 
against the owners of the lands called Lambacnang Calompang. But other were 
drawn under the general rubric of effectos particulars , personal needs. 

The social structure developed in estate areas provides an insight into rural 
relationships in early colonial Philippines. I he social classes determined by eco- 
nomic function were varied. The absentee proprietor was the absolute owner of the 
land. An administrator who lived in the large house on the estate took care of the 
farms in place of the owner. He generally received a salary for doing so. 1 he renter 
worked in place of the owner to whom rent was paid in cash or kind. I lie nujutlmo 
lived on the estate and in return for farming estate land was allowed to work a small 
plot of his own. Hired workers, reservas , and vagaynundos were in theory entitled to 
a small wage. Thus at the top of the social pyramid was the wealthy owner, fol- 
lowed by a small class of renters. Inquilinos were a larger group who were above a 
large mass of unstable and poor farm laborers. During a relatively short time the 
countryside had been transformed. The transplantation of the concept of private 
ownership of land, superimposed on the native population, had created landhold- 
ln g patterns under which the Filipino peasantry is still struggling. 

The formation and development of the landed estate in early colonial Mexico 
and the Philippines were similar. But although the institutional structure was the 
same, the evolutionary development in the two distinct settings was dissimilar. 1 he 
landed estate area in the Philippines evolved under pressure of revolution in 1 896 
and succeeding occupations by America and Japan into a conglomeration of farms 
for the most part worked under a system of tenancy or proprietor farming. In 
Mexico the estate developed into the 18th-century self-sufficient hacienda. 1 hus 

t e peons of Mexico had to wait until 1910 for the beginnings of a land reform 
program. 

Notes 

1 TL 

e major work on the development of the landed estate in Mexico is Francois 
Chevalier, La formation des grands domaines au Mexique. Terre et societe attx XVI e- 
XVIIe siecles (Paris, 1952). The same authors Instrucciones a los her?yio?jes jesuitas 
administradores de haciendas (Mexico, 1950), provides an insight to the operations of 
Jesuit estates. Charles Gibson, The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule. A Hist my of the hidians 
of the Valley of Mexico, 1519-1810 (Stanford, 1964), Ch. 10, focuses attention on 
transfer of land from Indian to Spanish ownership. 

2. This idea is developed in James Lockhart, “Encomienda and Hacienda: I he Evolu- 
tion of the Great Estate in the Spanish Indies,” HAHR, 49:3 (August 1969), 424. 

3. Principales'NQ.xz originally the chiefs or sons of chiefs who were ruling when the Span- 
iards arrived in the Philippines. These leading citizens became the barangay heads, 
cabezas de barangay. , from whose number the gobernadorcillos , or town magistrates, 
were elected. As the barangay ceased to be a kinship unit and was transformed into a 
political entity, the principalia class was extended to include anyone of means. 



224 



CtMINKR Landed Estates in Colonial Philippines and Mexico 



4. A vagamundo was a person or family having no fixed residence. 

5. A complete list of the land grants made bv governors of the Philippines to individuals 
and religious orders between 1 571 and 1626 is in “Tttulos y recaudos de la Estancia 
de MandaloyaA l illy 1 ibrary. Indiana Universitv (cited hereinafter as Lilly), Philip- 
pine Ms. 1585-1721, to Is. 152-169. 

6. The petition ol the city of Manila was incorporated into a general memorial sent to 
Philip II. 1 he king replied bv authorizing the sending of 100 farmer settlers and their 
families to the Philippines at roval expense. They were to give bond that they would 
actually engage in farming after arriving in the colony. Public land was to be assigned 
to them. I he breeding of farm animals was to be started with the 12 mares, two stal- 
lions, 24 cows, and two bulls, all to be sent from Mexico at royal expense. Cattle and 
horses were to be imported from China or Japan and the native buffalo domesticated. 

1 he city's memorials and the king's reply are printed in Francisco Colin, Labor 
evangclica . Pablo Pastells, ed., (Barcelona, 1899), 1, 415-420. 

7. Labor evangelic a (Madrid, 1663), p. 21. The Chinese in 16th-century Philippines 
were not adverse to engaging in agriculture. Antonio de Morga grew alarmed at the 
growing number of Chinese buving estates, orchards, and country property. Antonio 
dc Morga, Report ot Conditions in the Philippines, i n Emma Blair and James A. 
Robertson, The Philippine Islands, 1498-1898 ( cited hereinafter as BR) (Cleveland, 
1904), X, 88. 

8. Juan Sanchez Baquero, Fundacion de la Compahia de Jestis en Nueva Espafia, 1571- 
1 580 (Mexico, 1 94 S) , p. l 1 (). Sanchez Baquero wrote his account in the late 16th 
century. Felix Zubillaga, S.J., “La provincia jesuttica de Nueva Espana. Su 
fundamento economico: Siglo XVI,” Archivum Historictwi Soeietatisjesu . 38 (1969), 
1-169, relates the episode on p. 40. In this lengthy study Zubillaga utilizes the mam 
unpublished and hitherto unconsulted documents on Jesuit estates in Mexico now 
on deposit in the Jesuit Archives. A considerable number of documents on Jesuit es- 
tates in 16th-century Mexico have recently been edited by Felix Zubillaga, 
Monument a Mexicana, IV (1590-1592) (Rome, 1971), esp. 595-748. 

9. John l.. Phelan, Free versus Compulsory Labor: Mexico and the Philippines, 1540 
to 1648, Comparative Studies in Society and Flistory 1:2 (1958-1959), 189 20 
maintains that the estate remained static. 

10. Gibson, The Aztecs, pp. 257-270. 

1 1 . Table accompanying Frank Lynch, “Tempo and Mode in Social Mobility, (unpu 
lished paper given at Second Biennial Conference of the International Association o 
Historians of Asia, Taipei, 6-9 October 1 962). See also the discussion of pre-Hispantc 

society in John A. Larkin, The Pampangans. Colonial Society in a Philippine Province 

(Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1972), pp. 17-22. 

12. A procurador, used in the above context, was the business manager or treasurer of a 
province. Procurador , in another sense, was used to describe a representative of a prov- 
ince sent to the court at Madrid or Rome on urgent business. 

13. Registro de Escrituras,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1701. 



225 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI Y( )NI> 



14. The ordinary land grant in the Philippines and Mexico was an estayictti para ganado 
mayor (for horned cattle), an estancia para gayiado menor( for sheep), or a caballeria of 
farmland. The size of the estancia and caballeria varied in Mexico and the Philippines. 
See Francois Chevalier, La forryiation de grands doyyiames tin Afexujue. Terre et soeiete 
an XVIe et XVIIe siecles (Paris, 1952), pp. 126-127, and Ward Barren. I hr Sugar 
Hacienda of the Marqueses del Valle (Minneapolis, 1970), pp. 1 13 - 1 1*. In the Philip- 
pines th e sitio de estayicia para gayiado yyiayor was fixed at about 1 S square miles, a sitio 
de estancia para gayiado yyieyiorai about 7 square miles. 1 he caballeria was a rectangu- 
lar shaped tract about 4,4 1 6 feet long and 2,108 feet wide. I hese area measurements 
were used in the 18th century but were based on an earlier set of land regulations 
titled Ordenayizas para la yyiedicioyi de tierras eyi los Reyyios de las Ind ms. 1 he above Phil- 
ippine measures were in force in 1 746 and are taken from “hxplicacion de la mapa de 
la medida fecha en la hacienda de San Isidro de Bihan, 1 746,'’ Archivo C ieneral de 
Indias (Seville) (cited hereinafter as AGI), Pilipinas, leg. 244. I he tjuifioti realeyigo 
with its subdivisions of balitas, brazas, and locnies was used .is a land measure up to 
1861. The size of the quinon was never definitely fixed but it was approximately 7 
acres. 

15. “Registro de Escrituras,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1701 . 

16. Filipino-owned land was referred to as a pedazo de tierra or geyieres. Literally trans- 
lated it means “piece of land,” but the plot could be fairly extensive. In the 1 7th cen- 
tury good farmland around Manila sold for P 1 00 a quifioyi. I here! ore, a pedazo worth 
P575 was a sizeable 6 quihones. 

17. Zubillaga, “La provincia jesuitica,” 4-6, discusses the ecclesiastical implications of 
Jesuit landholdings. 

18. A detailed account of the acquisition of Mariquina and Mayhaliguc, written around 
1699, is in Archivo Historico Nacional (Madrid) (cited hereinafter an AI 1 N), Jesintas, 
leg. 235/2. 

19. In 1603, Archbishop Miguel de Benavides accused the Jesuits of usurping this land 
from the natives ofQuiapo. Governor Pedro Bravo de Acuna came to their defense. 
See the pertinent documents in Colfn-Pastells, Labor Tvayigelica , II, 486-489. How- 
ever, the dispute was between Spaniards squabbling over native spoils. Benavides 
wanted the natives of Quiapo to work on constructing and maintaining his cathe- 
dral. 

20. If we use the value of Pi 00 per quindn , the size of Mayhaligues farmland should be 
about 40 quinones. The farmland of the Meysilo estate measures 282 quifioties , seven 
times larger than Mayhaliguc, yet it was assessed at only P 1 2,266. Apparently quality 
of the land, not merely size, was taken into account. 

21. The regulations concerning sales of Indian lands are in RecopiLicion de Leyes de los 
Reynos de las Indias (Madrid, 1791), Book IV, Title XII, I .aw 16. In addition I have 
here used a handbook written by an Augustinian for those of his fellow-religious en- 
gaged in administration of the order and in land purchases and sales, “Tierras de 
Yndios,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1747, fols. 178-180. 



226 



I'l'SHNER landed Estates in Colonial Philippines and Mexico 



22 . 

23. 

24. 



25. 

26. 



27. 

28. 
29. 



30. 

31. 

32. 



33. 



34. 



35. 



Report ot luli.in Ignacio de Velasco, Manila, 16 March 1723. AG1, Pilipinas, leg. 
244. 

I he case is detailed in "C'onnin del pueblo de Santa Cruz... sobre las tierras de 
Pizo... 1739," AHN, Jesuitas, leg. 235/8. 

See, lor example. Pray Prancisco Ximenez to (?), Manila, 18 May 1704. AG1, Filipi- 
nas. leg. 258, no. 3; Pray Antonio Varela to Rector ofSto. Tomas, Binan, October 1 8, 
1 24, ibid.; and "Autos que sigue el abogado fiscal como protector de los naturales, 
[1741], ibid. No. 1, fols. 1-30. 



Phe exact wording is en pcrjuicio de los pueblos de Indios. Pueblos of course held com- 
munal land, \elascos report is in AG1, Pilipinas, leg. 244. 

A composietbn was a tee paid to the government in order to legitimize defective titles. 
1 he practice began in late I6th-centurv Mexico to help fill the empty coffers of Philip 
II. It continued. See Gibson, The Aztecs, p. 285. Velasco's upright attitude in the 
Philippines was matched by Prancisco de Alfaro in Peru. Alfaro wrote bitter denun- 
ciations of Peruvian landowners and even proposed that the king revoke all land 
grants given in his name in Peru. Prancisco de Alfaro to Philip HI. Lima, 28 April 
1623, AGP Indifcrentc, leg. 2690. 1 am grateful to Dr. Fred Bronner of Jerusalem 
University for bringing this reference to mv attention. 

See explanation of these terms below. 

See the three detailed examples in Gibson. The Aztecs, pp. 293-298. 

The printed sources on the revolt are few. See Jose Montero y Vidal. Historic! general 
de Pilipinas (Madrid, 1887), 1, 478-479; Juan de la Concepcion, Historic! general de 
Pilipinas (Manila, 1791), XI, 280-285; C.H. Cunningham, The Audiencia in the 
Spanish Colonies as Illustrated by the Audiencia of Manila, 1583-1800 (Berkeley, 

1 9 1 9), p. 1 04. In the following account of the revolt I have used the original commu- 
nications between the Filipinos and the Spanish commander as well as the dispatches 
sent to Manila from the field. They are all collected in "Traslado autenttco de las 
diligcncias evaquadas para la pacificacion de algunos pueblos sublevados... Lilly, 
Philippine Ms. 1745. Juan de la Concepcion, has the revolt take place on the Jesuit 
estates of Plan and Nasugbu in Batangas province. *1 he author writing a half cei 



after the event obviously confused his estates. 

Report of Calderon to Acting Governor Juan de Arechederra, 30 May 1 745 , Tras a o 
autentico, I.illy, Philippine Ms. 1745, fol. 11. 

Ibid., fol. 17. 

Ibid., fol. 32. 

Charles Gibson, " Phe Aztec Aristocracy in Colonial Mexico,” Comparative Studies in 
Society and History 2:2 (1959-1960), 170. 

John P. Phelan, The Hispanization of the Philippines. Spanish Aims and Filipino Re 
spouses (Madison, 1959), pp. 124-129. The general theme of Larkin, The Pampan- 
gans, is the retention by the elite class of a dominant role in one province of the Phil- 
ippines. 

La encomienda indiana, (Madrid, 1935). 



227 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 
43. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 



La formation, p. 407. 

This figure, probably an underestimate, is derived from the average number of ///- 
quilino families (seven) living on 3 quihones of land. 

The Dominican estate of Bifian, south of Muntinlupa, had 5,000 resertuis in 1745. 
“Traslado autentico,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1745, fol. 72. for the plight of the rescripts 
see Nicholas P. Cushner, Spain in the Philippines. Prom (Conquest to Revolution (Ma- 
nila, Tokyo, Rutland, 1971), pp. 1 17-126. 

See ibid., pp. 101-126. 

Ihrough the 17th and 18th centuries the Filipinos and Spaniards joined forces in a 
periodic massacre of the Chinese. In each case the Chinese were accused of foment- 
ing an armed uprising. For an account of the 1639 “revolt, see I I. de la C .osta, The 
Jesuits in the Philippines, 1581-1768 (Cambridge, Mass., 1961), pp. 3H9-392. 

The reserva grant was made on 1 September 1640. “LibrodcC lobierno del senordon 
Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, 1641-1642,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1640-1642, fol. 
39. 

Fray Casimiro Diaz to Governor Fernando Manuel de Bustillo Bustamante, 29 July 

1720, Titulosy recaudos de la Estancia de Mandaloya,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1585- 

1721, fol. 266. 

A practice developed of being able to buy one’s way out of personal service by paying 
the government P5, called the tugpa. The estate owners illegally assumed the right to 
collect this sum from their reservas. 

Fernandez Toribios remarks arc in the margin of Diaz’ letter. See above, note 42. 

A long list of abuses perpetrated against reservas on estates in the provinces of Ilocos 
and Pampanga is in Joseph Ignacio Arzadun, Ordenenzas , 1745, Newberry Library 
(Chicago), Philippine Ms., Shelf 1301. 

Contract between the town and the Province of San Agustin, 20 July 1 689, “ I ltulos 

y recaudos de la Estancia de Mandaloya,” Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1 585-1721 , fols. 3-4, 
7-10. 

rhe amount of palay obtained from 1 quinon depends on the quality of the land. The 
estimate I use is 50 cavans per quindn. Sec Manuel Buzeta and Felipe Bravo, 
Diccionario geogr dfico, estadistico , historico de las Islas Pilipinas (Madrid, 1 850), 1 , 1 80. 
Rice prices varied according to provinces. The price of rice in Laguna at this time is 
taken from Iributos de encomiendas de particulars, ” AGI, Pilipinas, leg. 1 1 . 

In 1700, the town of Pasig had 424 tributes. Maybunga was a barrio of Pasig and 
approximately one-third its size. “Relacion de los tributos, 1699-1700,” AGI, 
Contadurfa, leg. 1253. 

Loan agreements and contracts in “Tftulos y recaudos de la Estancia de Mandaloya,” 
Lilly, Philippine Ms. 1585-1721, fols. 11-13. 



228 



In Search of the Masses 

Non-confrontational Forms of Dissent 
in Late 19th-century Philippines 

Grkc;orv E.A. Bankoff 

University of Auckland, New Zealand 



T he role of the masses during the Philippine revolution has been the 
subject of much debate among historians. While none deny the widespread 
participation of peasants and workers among the rank and file of the revolutionary 
army, their influence on the course of events is a much more contentious issue. A 
certain ambiguity in terminology provides grounds for some dispute: there are real 
difficulties in reaching agreement over what determines elite, middle-, or lower- 
class membership and who should be included among ihistrado or intellectual 
circles. But there are also much more fundamental disputes over the nature of the 
revolutionary movement and the part played by the masses in it. Rather than uew 
ing the revolution as the “conscious work” of intellectuals, Teodoro Agoncillo 
(1956 and 1960) depicts a movement inspired by proletarian ideals but betrayed 
by those same middle-class fence-sitters and saboteurs (1960:ix). 1 1 he masses loom 
even larger in Renato Constantino's analysis of the rey'olution as a peoples yyar 
under elite leadership (1975: 166). Class struggle was the logical result of a groy\ 
ing revolutionary consciousness among the people, spawned by centuries of op- 
pression that finally culminated in a national revolution. 

On a personal level, however, the support exhibited by thousands of indi- 
vidual peasants and workers for the revolution is less easily explained. To some, 
their participation was simply the unswerving faith and blind obedience of the ig- 
norant masses” in their leaders or the clientalist ties of loyalty betyveen tenant and 
patron (Majul 1967:17). lo others, their involvement had no obvious tangible 
incentive” and was largely an involuntary act of self-preservation in the face of es- 
calating aggression (Fast and Richardson 1983:93). For Reynaldo lleto (1979) and 



229 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< )NI ) 



John Schumacher (1981), the wider religious tradition provides another dimen- 
sion of analysis: the multiple meanings generated by the pasyon pilaptl in folk con- 
sciousness and the role of the Filipino clergy in sanctioning support for the revo- 
lution. 

Apart from Ileto’s work on the pasyon , however, historians have sought to 
explain mass participation in the revolution in terms of external forces; not to treat 
the people as actors in their own right but as acted upon by tlustrndos , principalis , 
hacenderos , patrons, and priests. As Milagros Guerrero points out, despite profes- 
sions of concern for the peoples role and due recognition accorded to the impor- 
tance of periodic revolts, the historiography of the revolution has largely been writ- 
ten from the point of view of the elite rather than the masses, from above rather 
than below (Guerrero 1 977:24-28). 2 Despite the monopoly on the production of 
source materials enjoyed by the colonial government and on the dissemination of 
revolutionary tracts by the ilustrados, William Scott reminds us that there are 
cracks in the “parchment curtain” through which “fleeting glimpses of Filipinos 
and their reactions to Spanish domination may be seen ( 1 982: 1 ). An examination 
of the judicial records of the colonial state — court transcripts, police dossiers, 
prison registers, and the like — hint at the depth of popular resentment during the 
latter half of the 19th century and help explain the apparent responsiveness of the 
masses when the call to revolution came. 

Much has already been written about the history of resistance in other parts 
of Asia, most notably in South Asia where Ranajit Guha’s Subaltern Studies has 
been responsible for spawning a new genre in historiography.' But there have also 
been studies of a similar nature within Southeast Asia, most notably the work of 
James Scott on Malaysia. Scott is interested in the commonplace forms of resis- 
tance that class struggle takes when it does not seek to openly confront the forces 
that dominate: what he calls “hidden transcripts” ( 1 990) and “weapons of the 
weak (1985). Hidden transcripts refer to the dissonant political culture that exists 
among subordinates out of earshot of their masters — the words of anger, revenge, 
and self-assertion or the alternative meanings given to public texts. Ileto has re- 
vealed the significance of popular interpretations of the Gospel story of Jesus as 
rendered by the pasyon but no attempt has so far been made to examine the every- 
day forms of resistance in terms of non-confrontational actions. 

Weapons of the Weak 

Regardless of whether the Revolution of 1896 was a revolt of the masses or a 
peoples war, Philippine historiography has tended to neglect detailed studies of the 
role played by peasants and workers except when they posed a threat to the state. 
The same onerous conditions that incite revolt or revolution have also provoked 
people to defend their interests in ways that tend to avoid direct confrontation with 
authority. These are what Scott calls the ordinary weapons of relatively powerless 
groups: foot dragging, dissimulation, false compliance, pilfering, feigned igno- 



230 



IvWKOI I hi Search of the Masses 

ranee, slander, arson, sabotage, and the like (1985:29). While such modes of resis- 
tance do little to modify the various forms of exploitation that peasants and work- 
ers endure, the cumulative effect of these activities can be far from trivial. Imperial 
aspirations have undoubtedlv been thwarted bv desertion and labor evasion, the 
ambition of rulers has been curbed bv flight and tax evasion, and the financial sol- 
vency of states has been jeopardized bv smuggling and counterfeiting. Often these 
forms of defiance are the onlv option available to subordinates resisting those who 
seek to extract labor, food, taxes, and rent from them. 

In the case of the Philippines, a record of such mass resistance exists in the 
judicial transcripts of the colonial state that detail these everyday forms of non- 
confrontational dissent, especiallv for the second half of the 19th century. I he 
record shows a people far from acquiescent to the forms of domination and exploi- 
tation imposed by Spain, and expressing their anger and frustration in actions that 
range from passive noncompliance to evasion to outright acts of violence commit- 
ted anonymously. Vagrancv, flight, arson, and other acts of insubordination may 
be deeds of little individual significance but their collective impact can be consid- 
erable. Equally as important, according to Scott, they represent an implicit dis- 
avowal of public and symbolic goals" (1985:33). 

Prior to 1745, a vagrant was a precise legal classification for anybody not 
included on a town's tribute list (Roth 1977:74-75). By the 19th century, however, 
the term vagamundo had been extended to any person whose manner or life-snle 
was suspect to either the ordinances of the state or the precepts of religion. Accord 
ing to a decree of Governor-General Fernando de Norzagaray in 1857, vagrants 
included not only the unemploved, tax-evaders, and those without propel identi 
fication papers, but also gamblers, idlers, beggars, drunkards, lechers, the home 
less, and "those who have been admonished three times tor being detained in ta\ 
erns, gaming-houses or brothels after ten o’clock at night (Bandos \ Circulares 
1857)! Even swidden agriculturalists did not escape society's censure: the slash-an 
burn agriculture of "vagrant" kaingincros was held responsible tor destroy in D tie 
archipelago's immense forest reserves and for wreaking havoc upon Burias, 
Romblon, Bohol, the Calamaines, and especially Cebu with its growing lane 
rility and loss of topsoil. "These individuals," reports the Eco de Panciy , ...disrupt 
the climate, lay bare the land and diminish the rainfall, they are criminals in some 
cases, provide harbour and shelter on other occasions, are suspect at all times, eas 
ily eluding the reach of Justice by their nomadic life-style, and not contributing 
anything to the maintenance of the State or the development of agriculture (-7 
June 1889). 

Simply being detained without identification papers, ones cedilla peisonal, 
was grounds for suspicion and subsequent investigation. Guillermo Villanueva of 
Alfonso in Cavite was said to be "of a lazy disposition [and] without employment. 
Worse, he was known to frequent cockpits and gaming houses without it being 
certain where the money came from to support his vices (Cavite Alfonso 1887). 
Provincial governors were or dered to compile indexes of people with suspect life- 



231 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOEUTK )N AND HI VON D 



Principal activities associated with vagrancy in Cavite 1870 



Activities 


Numbers 


No known occupation or abode 


42 


Rustling 


26 


Theft and swindling 


17 


Bandit association 


16 


Prison record 


6 


Gambling 


6 


Illegal hunting 


5 


Sources: (Cavite 1870, Cavite Alfonso 1870, Cavite Bacoor 


1870, Cavite Cavite El 


Viejo 1870, Cavite Indan 1870, Cavite Naic 1870, Cavite San 
1870, Cavite San Roque 1870.) 


Francisco de Malabon 



styles in each municipality. Analysis of the town by town index tor the province of 
Cavite in 1870 reveals the activities and associations of those considered as va- 
grants, which range from lacking occupation and fixed abode, to gambling and 
poaching, to overtly criminal operations such as rustling, theft, and banditry. 

Spanish perceptions were divided, the press classifying vagrants according to 
their perceived degree of public menace (HI hco de l\niny \ 27 June 1 889). 1 be less 
offensive class included persons who had no known occupation blit made a living 
from scrounging off public charity, begging, and gambling. I hey were not consid- 
ered dangerous as such but their activities and style of living was thought to have a 
pernicious influence on others and set a poor example to those engaged in full-time 
work. I hus Joaquin de Castro was arrested for allegedly breaking a municipal or- 
dinance by sweeping the front of his house in June 1838. In reality, however, he 
was known to have no gainful employment, to be supported by bis mother, to be 
of suspicious habits, and to have a reputation for cheating and deceit. Rumor also 
had it that he had swindled an army captain out of PI 2.50 the previous year! He 
was charged with vagrancy and sentenced to serve in the military for eight years. 
Similarly, the seven others sentenced along with Castro were all young, on average 
being slightly over 25 years of age, single, and accused of nothing more serious than 
having been without work for some time (Cavite Cavite 1 838). 

Much more threatening were the vagrants reputed to have close links with 
criminals. Many were considered to be petty thieves and swindlers, or to act as spies 
for local bandits, advising on likely targets, peoples whereabouts, and police move- 
ments. As such, they were regarded as undesirable elements that society could well 
do without. Nor were these persons only to be found among the colonized, as the 
career of Miguel Godoy, a peninsula Spaniard, illustrates. Granted provisional resi- 
dency in 1857, he was imprisoned in 1862 for attempted homicide. On his release 
in January 1865, he sought permission to engage in commerce in Ilocos Norte but 
was arrested for vagrancy four years later in Camarines Sur. The complaints of par- 



232 



IVWKOl 1 In Search of the Masses 



ish priests and municipal officials indicate that he supported himself through beg- 
ging and extorting money from local communities, that he was often drunk, and 
that he was rumored to be forming a bandit gang. In ordering his deportation, the 
judge observed that during his 13 vears in the Islands, Morales “has found no 
steady occupation to support himself, there is nobodv to vouch for his person, he 
has crisscrossed nearly all the provinces of Luzon with and without permission, and 
is now to be found in Hi 1 ibid Prison (Denuncias Por Abusos Camarines Stir 
1870). 

1 he policy toward vagranev changed from one that attempted to curtail mi- 
gration to the capital to one that stressed controlling banditry in rural areas. From 
the late 18th to the mid- 10th century, colonial officials were concerned with the 
number of people “abandoning their families and their labour in the fields to find 
work in Manila and with the health hazard this represented (Spanish Manila 1 38). 
The state also seized on the charge of vagranev to meet its manpower requirements 
for the military. Royal decrees of 18 Mav 1773 and 7 February 1798 ordered va- 
grants to be placed at the disposal of the armv, the navy, and even the merchant 
marine. Moreover, local authorities were urged to seek this type of person among 
those people who regularlv frequent gambling houses (Spanish Manila 1 3). A 

century later, however, vagrants were more likelv to be deported to agricultural 
prison colonies in the south. 

Jose Montero v Vidal notes the deportation of hundreds of people accused of 
vagrancy to Balabac and Mindanao in 1870 (1887-1893:3, 316) with as many as 
20 persons being sent south from a single municipality (Bankofi 1991:448). De 
portees were often forced to remain for long periods in remote locations. Hilario 
Zalasar was sent to Davao in 188 7 on the testimony of his local parish priest an 
gobernaclorcillo who accused him of being idle and a known gambler with crimina 
confederates. Fight years later, he was still languishing in a place called Malti in re 
fourth district of Mindanao (Cavite 1887 and Cavite 1894). 1 he preoccupation 
with vagrancy during the second half of the century reflects the states concern w it 
a growing level of rural lawlessness (Bankoff 1996: chapter 3). , , 

Yet vagrancy was often a local response to the harsh economic realities face 
by many peasants during the 1 9th century. The parish priest of Oas in Alba\ com 
plains in 1 826 that the whole coastline is “inundated with Vagabonds and ma 
tors, who having fled their homes... do not pay tribute, and spend their i\es in 
state of savagery." The priest blames the policy of relocating fishermen in .an to 
evade the depredation of pirates along the coast as depriving people of their i\e i 
hood and condemning them to misery and hunger (Memorias Camarines ur 
1826)7 Similarly reports of vagrancy in Camarines Sur during the 18/ Os an 
1880s can be related to fluctuations in the price of abaca, the chief export crop o 
the region. Prosecutions for vagrancy in the province rose from 3 percent of a 
cases in 1871, to 6 percent in 1873, to 13 percent by 1880 before falling back to 3 
percent in 1 8837 1 he price of abaca over the same period declined horn 1 ).33 per 
picul in 1871 to P6.13 in 1873, to P6.30 by 1880 before recovering to P8.03 in 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOl.l I K )N AND hi \ ( >NI ) 



1885. At the same time, however, the volume of abaca exports continued to rise 
from 465,800 piculs in 1871 to 834,200 piculs in 1885 (Owen 1 l )8^:258-60). In 
other words, while demand for labor increased over this period, the 35-percent 
decline in abaca prices made sharecropping agreements less remunerative and en- 
couraged people to defy the ordinances of the colonial government and abandon a 
settled life-style. 

A marked rise in mendicancy during the late 1880 s and 1800 s can be ex- 
plained in similar terms as a popular response to economic depression and natural 
calamity. Groups of beggars roamed the streets of Manila and other urban centres, 
causing authorities to issue licences certifying that certain individuals were legiti- 
mately in need of public charity. While not a cause of sufficient alarm to worry the 
colonial administration, El Comercio surmises, the number of vagrants especially 
in rural towns constituted “a social ulcer whose remedy needs to be attended to 
with care” (11 June 1887). 

Flight too was a form of resistance that indigenous men and women resorted 
to in order to evade both the Financial and labor requirements of the state and the 
moral strictures of the church. I hough flight might lead to related activities such 
as vagrancy and even banditry, the Spanish charge of fug*/ included anv person who 
had abandoned the settlement in which they were included on the list of tribute 
payers. 6 Governor Orozco of Cavite observes in 1 83 1 how “registered taxpayers in 
the towns of this province frequently absent themselves from their communities 
without the knowledge of their Parish Priest or Gobernadorcillo” (Cavite Imus 1 
September 1831). But unlike the remontado , who chose to reject Hispanic culture 
by living in areas beyond the pale of Spanish authorities, the fngaz^ or person 
charged with flight, had no desire to remove himself or herself completely from the 

sound of the bells but, rather, sought merely to evade both official and personal 
obligations. 

The nature of these obligations is described in a missive written by Hr. Nicho- 
las Becerra, a parish priest of Cavite, in September 1831. I )ebt was an important 
consideration in determining flight: he notes how those with tribute arrears of be- 
tween Pi 5 to P20 or more would disappear, taking their families and work ani- 
mals and move to another district or province. There the fugaz often sought work 
and security by settling next to the property of a principal or landowner. “He has 
only to say to him, remarks the somewhat acerbic Hr. Becerra, “that he wishes to 
plough, and that is sufficient to obtain remission for all his past offenses, although 
he might have been a thief, and known for it.” The priest accuses the municipal 
officials in his vicinity of not only tolerating flight but of actively encouraging such 
people to settle in their communities (Cavite Imus 1 September 1 83 1 ). This prac- 
tice was confhmed by the provincial governor of Cavite who observes how even if 
the Gobernadorcillos and Parish Priests know the whereabouts of the absentee, 
and request his return from the town where he has taken refuge, they still do not 
obtain his return, nor the remittance of his tribute” (Cavite Cavite 2 September 



234 



B AN KOI I In Search of the Masses 



1 83 1 ). Others sought to evade prosecution bv a timelv re-enrolment on the tax list 
before any charges were preferred (Cavite lmus 1 September 1831). 

lax evasion, however, was not the onlv reason tor abandoning ones home. 
Hr. Becerra describes how some ol his parishioners chose flight rather than perform 
the state s onerous corvee labor requirements. Adult hu/ios on the tribute lists were 
required to render •*() days' service to the state or pav P3 in lieu: men might be 
employed in public works, woodcutting, or in the shipyards. 1 he system was noto- 
rious for its abuses and conditions were hard (Cushner 19 1:1 12-26). Still others 
saw flight as a means ot escaping from unhappv marriages and the moral strictures 
of the church. W omen especially but also some men ran away to live with their 
lovers, leaving the abandoned partner behind "burdened with the sole care of the 
children, crying over the whims of their women, and if women of those of their 
husbands. 1 he priest maintains that these women should be returned to their 
parishes but complains that his demands are always refused. Many women claimed 
to be the legitimate wives of their new partners, but their deathbed confessions 
often revealed that their relationship was purely a de facto one (Cavite lmus l 8ep 
tember 1831). 

Arson is perhaps less obviously a weapon ot the weak than flight and \a 
grancy, whose practitioners simply evade those who seek to control their actions. 
But the anonymity ot the arsonist attests that it, too, should be counted amon^ 
non-confrontational forms of dissent. Hire was an ever present danger in sat e 
ments: the common building materials used in house construction- bairnoo, 
nip ft* and cogon grass — proved highly inflammable, especially during tu^ 
months preceding the rains in June. The lack ot urban planning, deplorec 
authorities, ensured that once lit a fire spread easily from house to house as ^ ^ 
ings were “without doubt to be found pressed too close together (Camar 
Nabua 1876). . 

The ever-present danger of fire influenced the design ot houses w it i ' lt( ~ 
being situated in separate structures at the rear of main buildings. 1 his v>a; 
sible precaution as many fires began there: a fire in the kitchen was r ^ s P°^j sl ^ 
the loss of 38 houses in Menalabag in February 1839 (Ereccion de reS p e c- 

and 14 houses in Camalig and 38 houses in Ligao in April and June tQ 

tively (Ereccion de Pueblo 1846). Once lit, however, it was often im P ' ^ 

arrest the progress ot a fire fuelled by the wind" (ibid.). 1 he e ^ ectC ° U , • 

. when a lire burn, down 73 dwellings in the anabn! ofSan M.guel in 



devastating as wnen a tire burnt down / J dwellings m - '~7 A , pncon provides 
Manila (El Comercio 18 June 1891). An account by the Uuc e 
a graphic description of one such fire in Binondo: 

They blaze like torches while the crackling bamboo parts th 
embers, spreading calamity in all directions. As it is impossible to keep 
from spreading, an Indian whose house is threatened flees with everything he 
can carry; it something proves too heavy, he throws it in the esteio 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI ITION AND W Y< >NI > 



where he can find it again the next day and calmly contemplates the descrue- 
tion of his house. On a fine June evening, I have seen a thousand of these hm s 
burn down: over an area of one kilometer square, not one house uas spared 
(1986:21). 

While many fires were the result of accident or carelessness, others were the 
work of arsonists. El Comercio deplores how hardly a dav passed when there %sas 
not a report of a fire somewhere in the capital or the provinces “almost all of whioh 
are intentional” (30 April 1891). Fire was frequently used as a diversionary tactic 
by robbers and bandits to cloak their activities: a dwelling deliberately set alight at 
one end of town might cloak the sacking of another somewhere else. Nor were of- 
facials entirely unaware of such practices: a 1792 letter to the king on the frequenc) 
of arson in the capital blames many of the recent fires on “the inhuman hands of 
the many vagabonds, idlers, and had intentioned people as are contained in Z ^ IS 
city, and its suburbs who find no other means of supporting their vices and g‘ irn ~ 
bling habits than robbery which is facilitated by this cruel means" (Spanish Manila 
1792). Similarly, the fires lit in Silan (Cavite) on the night of 2? March 1 833 ' vcrC 
blamed by the town’s gobernaclorcillo on bandits intent upon “entering and piling' 
ing” (Cavite 1833). 

But there was another form of arson, too, that did not employ fire as a means 
to an end but as an end in itself. Accounts relate fires being deliberately lit for no 
other purpose than to destroy property. Two pieces of pitched-soaked timber were 
found alight on the balcony of Don Francisco Davids house in Binondo in 1*79-2* 
the same year more than 8,000 people lost their homes to arsonists in a single blaze 
(Spanish Manila 1792). Similarly Senor Onamayor discovered a lighted wick 
smoldering on a Venetian blind on the mezzanine floor of his Manila home as he 
2m his household were about to sit down to dinner on the night of 1 7 May 1 89 1 • 
nother wick soaked in petroleum was found on the roof of a house in the barrio 
of Sulucan in the early morning of 1 7 June 1 89 1 (FI Comercio 1 8 June 1 89 1 )• 
ere the identity of these victims can be established, many proved to be mem- 
ers < of the principalia, officials, or shopkeepers. Thus one of three houses set alight 
y andits in the settlement ofMabatibato (Camarincs Sur) on the morning of 2 
pri 1839 belonged to the gobernaclorcillo, whose charred body was found among 
the ashes riddled with arrows (Ereccion de Pueblo 1839a). The house of the 
teniente prtmet o of Nueva Caceres was also intentionally set ablaze in August 1 886 
Come} cio 3 September 1886), while a shop owned by a Chinese in the barrio of 
Bilibid was set alight on two consecutive days in May 1891, but put out on both 
occasions using water from the nearby estuary (El Comercio 1 8 June 1891). 

If those with wealth or position in society were more often the victims of 
arson, certain other sectors, such as vagrants, were more frequently suspected of 
committing such offenses. After two fires had been deliberately lit in the early 
morning of 3 March 1792 in the suburbs of Manila, th c appropriate officials were 
ordered to proceed with urgency “against those who have no known means of sup- 



236 



IVWKOl 1 In Search of the Masses 

porting themselves nor are registered tax payers, and on whom should hill the first 
suspicion tor that crime (Spanish Manila 1~92). The perception of the poor as 
inherently dangerous has been noted in other societies (Chevalier 19~3) and acts 
of arson were one ot the few available wavs for the dispossessed and homeless to 
express their anger at an increasingly inequitable social system. Certainly munici- 
pal authorities were often faced with a conspiracy of silence when it came to find- 
ing the culprits responsible. 

1 he case ol the mysterious arsonist of Silan is of interest in this respect: roofs 
in the town were deliberately set ablaze on succeeding nights during April 1833. A 
suspect was seen and chased on several occasions but always managed to evade his 
pursuers (Cavite Silan 1 1 April 1833), the gobernadon'illo claiming it was impos- 
sible to follow the man in the dark (Cavite Silan 22 April 1833). In his turn, the 
provincial governor reports that the matter has received his urgent attention and 
that strict orders have been given for the culprit's immediate arrest. In the margin 
of this document, Governor-General Enrile observes how “very strange it is that 
such a person can remain unapprehended and unknown in a town the size of Silan. 
Enrile orders that the gobernadorcillo be investigated to establish whether he is ne- 
glecting his duty and failing in zeal" (Cavite Cavite 14 April 1833). Many people, 
perhaps, found a form of redress in a lighted taper tossed anonymously on a dark 
night. 

Vagrancy and flight were attempts to evade a dominion that sought to sup- 
press traditional values and control the wav nidi os lived and acted, while aison was 
a means to redress grievances deeply felt but impossible to articulate without the 
threat of reprisal. But there were other wavs, too, by which dissent was manifeste 
in non-confrontational forms that appear only infrequently or not at all in tie 
criminal statistics of the period that are based solely on cases referred for con 
firmation bv a lower court to the high court {real audiencia). Compilation } 
this method has the effect of either excluding from the official record tie 
charges on which most indios were chiefly arrested, namely drunk and disorc ei } 
behavior, indocumentation, and gambling, or, at the very least, under-representn 
the extent of their frequency as in the case of counterfeiting and tax and tri ute 

evasion. s , 

As yet no data on arrest records have been located in any of the aic mes an 
the only source on such matters remains the official pronouncements pu is iec 
the Gaceta de Manila and other newspapers. But even these figures give some in 
cation of the extent of offenses not included among the official statistics. ius l 
the area of the first regiment of the Guardia Civil, 0 roughly equating with t le pio\ 
inces of Luzon south of Manila, total arrests for the month of May 1881 amounte 
to 300 cases of which 1 79 or 36 percent were for gambling-related offenses, 1 5^- or 
30 percent were for tax evasion, and 104 or 21 percent were for indocumentation 
( Gaceta de Manila May 1 88 1 :78). H) Similarly, figures for the second regiment cov- 
ering the provinces of northern Luzon show that there were 216 arrests for drunken 
and disorderly behavior during April 1881 alone, which accounted for 45 percent 



2 37 



THE PHILIPPINE RKVOl i; I ION AND HI Y< »\D 



of all arrestees [Gaceta de Manila April 1881:56). I hesc ,nu 1 similar figures hint at 
the real nature and extent of these activities among nidws. 

By all accounts, counterfeiting, paring, and other tampering with currency 
were so commonplace during the 1 9th century that one foreign < >bscrvcr notes how 
“one after the other of your callers bites the silver or drops it on the floor to detect 
lead” adding that “to listen to the resulting sound is not to feel complemented by 
their opinion of your integrity’ (Stevens 1898:191 ). I he prevalence of these 
monecleros falsoswas partly the result of the chronic monetary haos reigning in the 
colony, especially the shortage of small change.” Ignacio Victor, Isidore) de C astro, 
and Eduardo de los Santos were all prosecuted in 1 834 for being in possession of 
cuartos (32 cuartos = 1 peso) recently minted blit without the appropriate stamp 
or mark (Cavite Cavite 1 December 1834). Fakes of larger denomination were also 
in circulation, Julian Ruiz being arrested in the marketplace of San Pablo, Laguna, 
for passing counterfeit P5 pieces to two blind beggars (/:/ ( .omcrcto 1*1 November 
1888). More common, however, were the silver peso or dollar coins bearing the 
marks of private Chinese merchants and known as Chop I )ollars. Such pieces were 
of particular concern to colonial authorities as the stamp generallv defaced the 
royal bust or the arms of Spain and had implications of Icse-tnajcste. 

Tax evasion was yet another way in which popular discontent could be mani- 
fested without directly confronting the state. Indios , as noted by br. Becerra, might 
simply take to the hills” or “run away” to avoid tribute and labor requirements but 
the situation was altogether more difficult for the Chinese. Denied many of the 
alternatives open to indigenous people, the Chinese were also forced to pav a per- 
sonal levy four times higher than others. M Montero v Vidal observes how Chinese 
who failed to meet their contributions in the 1820s were sent to work on landed 
estates until the amount had been settled (1887-1895:2, 5 16). Prison, however, 
was the fate of many others (Cavite Cavite 1 8 and 30 September 1 833). 



Growing Popular Resentment 

1 hese and related activities such as desertion, infraction of municipal regulations, 
perjury, and contempt of court provide evidence of the extent of non-confronta- 
tional forms of dissent among peasants and workers during the 1 9th century. But 
in just a few cases, the historical record is more complete and it is possible to com- 
pare the frequency of such offenses over time. 

The annual collation of criminal statistics in the Philippines dates from a 
royal decree of 28 March 1850 (Montero y Vidal 1895:3, 148) but some of the 
eailier material is no longer possible to locate. However, detailed statistical break- 
downs of crimes prosecuted in the courts exist for 1 863 to 1 885 and for some other 
years. Despite the reservations with which all such figures must be treated, the sta- 
tistics indicate a iise in the level of popular resentment during the century. In par- 
ticular, there was a threefold increase in the proportion of criminal prosecutions 
between 1856 and 1885 to do with vagrancy, flight, and arson. 



238 



BANKc M l hi Search of :he Masses 



Percentage of cases involving “weapons of the weak” 1856-1885 



Crime 


1856' 


1865" 


1871° 


1875" 


1880° 


1885 ! 


Vagrancy 


4 


152 


186 


191 


208 


164 


Flight 


— 


133 


176 


146 


260 


264 


Arson 


41 


90 


96 


154 


114 


317 


Total 


47 


375 


458 


491 


582 


745 


% 


3% 


12% 


11% 


11% 


14% 


14% 


All Cases 


1.421 


3.200 


4.034 


4,314 


4.260 


5170 



Note: flight includes escaped prisoners. 

Sources: •’ (Canovas 1859:79), (Estadistica General 1866), 04 
(Estadistica de las Causas Criminales 1872, 1876, 1881 and 1886) 



these and other such activities were perceived as threatening the established 
colonial order: vagranev was considered a form of economic sabotage, while flight 
was interpreted as a type of civil resistance. The life-styles of the vagrant and the 
fugitive or runaway ran contrarv to the Spanish conception of urbanism that was 
so central to their ideal of civilized and orderly life. 1 he vagrant, because economic 
pressures forced him or her to choose a nomadic rather than a settled existence, 
and the runaway, because he or she chose flight rather than fulfil their marital or 
socioeconomic obligations, could onlv be regarded with suspicion by the authori- 
ties. 1 he Spanish believed that an urban existence was essential to a rational and 
cultured life and anyone choosing to live away from the pobhicion was considered 
as uncivilized, possible dangerous, and potentially a threat. Arson, on the other 
hand, was simply a direct attack upon private property and the institutions that 
upheld it. In any event, colonial authorities made a concerted effort to stamp out 
this type of offense in the last part of the century. 1 he establishment of a more ef 
fective police force, the Guardia Civil, after 1868 provided authorities with the first 
real opportunity to exert their writ over rural areas bv attempting to stem popu a 
tion movement, control banditry, and minimize the evasion of government mo 
nopolies. I he result was a substantial increase in the number of piosecutions 
vagrancy, flight, and arson during the 1870s and early 1880s. 



Conclusion 

Scott argues that the mechanisms mainly resorted to by peasants in defense of 
interests are those commonplace forms of resistance that he calls the weapo 
the weak.” Revolt and revolution are too dependent upon outside ea eisup a 
provoke a more rapid and furious response than an insubordination t at ma\ ^e 
as pervasive but never ventures to contest the formal definitions of hierarc y an 
power” (1985:33). An examination of the judicial records of the colonial state in 
the Philippines supports such a contention. Vagrancy, flight, arson, drunken and 



239 



THE PHILIPPINE RE. VO I II I< )N \NI > HI Y< >NI ) 



disorderly behavior, gambling, indocumcntation, counterfeiting, tax evasion, and 
the like indicate the widespread nature of popular dissent during the 19ih century. 
More importantly, the number of criminal prosecutions suggests that the incidence 
of such activities was rising during the 1870s and early 1880s. As yet, the annual 
statistical data by offense for the 1890s have not been located. ' so it is not possible 
to document whether these trends continued to rise. I lowever, a decade after the 
last of these detailed breakdowns, thousands of Filipino peasants and workers re- 
sponded enthusiastically to the call of revolution. 

Applying Scott’s concept of non-confrontational forms < >f dissent to the Phil- 
ippine context suggests that mass participation in 1896 was the culmination of a 
rising tide of popular anger and frustration with a colonial system that had mani- 
festly failed to win their allegiance or buy their acquiescence. Rat her than being the 
involuntary act of blind obedience to patron or priest, the revolution gave sub- 
stance to the sense of grievance long felt and expressed in other wavs by Filipino 
peasants and workers during the 1 9th century. 

Notes 

1. Agoncillos revisionist interpretation was immediately branded by some as a purely 
Marxist interpretation of the Philippine Revolution” (Hernandez and Rosario 

1956:80). 

2. Schumacher provides a comprehensive critical review of the various perspectives on 
the revolution taken by historians (1991:178-209). 

3. The contributors to Subaltern Studies Writings on South Asian History and Society are 
primarily concerned with creating a non-western historiographical tradition that re- 
jects neocolonialist, neonationalist, and economistic approaches and methodology 
and that restores the “suppressed” histories of women, nonwhites, and minorities. 
Numerous volumes edited by Ranajit Guha and published by Oxf ord University 
Press in New Delhi have been published since 1 982. 

4. On Muslim raiding along the Bicol coast, see Francisco Mallari ( 1 986:462-492 and 
1986a:257-286). 

5. Vagrancy prosecutions amounted to 2 out of 68 cases in 1 87 1 , 9 out of 1 6 1 in 1 875, 
12 out of 96 in 1880, and 6 out of 124 in 1 885 (Estadistica de las causas criminales 
1872, 1876, 1881 and 1886). 

6. The term also referred to persons who escaped from custody. 

7. Many indigenous people were exempt from labor requirements, including members 
of the prtncipalia (present and former gobernadorcillos and cabezas de barangay and 
their eldest sons), soldiers and militiamen, and those who assisted missionaries or 
who performed personal service to the Church. The number of days service was re- 
duced to 1 5 in 1882. 

8. Fax and tribute evaders were generally charged with being debtors to the Real Haci- 
enda (Royal Treasury). 



240 



H AN KOI l hi Search of the Masses 



9. The C iuardia C 'ivil was an elite police force of some 3,500 men progressively deployed 
in the northern and central Philippines between 1868 and 1880 (Bankoff 1996: 
chapter 5). 

10. On the extent and type of gambling related offenses, see Bankoff (1991a). 

1 1 . The currency situation during the 19th century was chaotic with coins of the early 

18th centurv “Dos Mundos variety, the bust-portraits of the later Bourbon kings, 
those ot the newlv independent Latin American states (especially the Mexican peso) 
as well as those ol Spain all in circulation at one time. In addition, decimalization was 
carried through in 1858, adding still further to the complexity of working out the 
value of coins in dailv use. The first coins minted in the Philippines were copper to- 
kens known as barrillas, struck on behalf of Chinese merchants in 1 66 to overcome 
the acute shortage of small change in the colony. A royal mint was only established in 
Manila in 1 86 1 and the gold and silver pesos struck in that year were the first e\er to 
bear the legend “Pilipinas on the coinage (Legarda 19 6:1 -*6). 

12. In a vain attempt to standardize the currency, colonial authorities prohibited the im- 
portation of Mexican peso coins struck after 18 and of Chinese Chop Dollars in a 
series ol measures taken between 1881 and 1886. 

13. Tribute was levied at the rate of 12 reales per adult indio or 48 reales (6 pesos) P er 
adult Chinese. Tribute levies were replaced in 1884 by the yearly purchase of identity 
papers ( cedillas personates) whose cost depended on racial and civil status (Cushner 
1971:111-112). 

14. Figures do exist for various provinces for some years: Nueva Ecija for 188 (Kajal 
Tar re 1890:59) and Batangas for 1895 (Sastron nd:65). 

References 

Agoncillo, Ieodoro, 1 960. AJa/o/os. The Crisis of the Republic , University of the Philip \ 

Press, Quezon City. 

Agoncillo, I eodoro, 1 956. The Revolt of the Musses. The Stoiy ofBonifac io und tin kutip 
University of the Philippines Press, Quezon City. 

Alcncon, Due d\ 1986. Luzon and Mindanao , National Historical Institute, Mani . 

Bando y Circulates, 1857. “Bando de Fernando de Norzagaray” Philippine National 
Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Bankoff, Greg, 1996. Crime, Society and the State in the Nineteenth Centwy PC ipp 

Ateneo de Manila University Press, Quezon City. w 

Bankoff, Greg, 1991. “Deportation and the Prison Colony of San Ramon, 1870 
Philippine Studies, 39, 443-457. 

Bankoff, Greg, 1991a. “Redefining Criminality: Gambling and Financial Expediency in the 
Colonial Philippines, 1 764- 1 898,” journal of Southeast Asian Studies , Cl, 2, ^-6 ^8 1 . 

Camarines Sur, Nabua 1876. “Incendio,” Philippine National Archive, 1 872-1 879. 

Canovas, Maximo, 1 859. Notieias de las Is/as Pilipinas, Imprenta Litografia Militar de Atlas, 
Madrid. 



241 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI ^ < )NI ) 



Cavite, 1894. “Antonio Trujillo to Governor-General Davao 2^ Maw Philippine National 
Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, 1887. “San Castillo y Suarez to Governor-C General. Manila 2~ 1 December, Philip- 
pine National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Alfonso 1887. “Expediente contra Guillermo Villanueva por mala conduct.!. Phil- 
ippine National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, 1870. “Relacion nominal de los individuos que se hallan en la ( arc el ptiblica de 
esta plaza por mala conducta, segun informe de los principales v ( ura P.irroeodesus 
respectivos pueblos,” 15 March, Philippine National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Alfonso 1870. “Gobernadorcillo of All onso to ( iovernor of ( .avite, 2 ( ) bebruarv, 
Philippine National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Bacoor 1870. “Victor Mionay to Governor of Cavite, 1 March, Philippine Na- 
tional Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Cavite 1870. “Mariano Riponga to Governor of Cavite," 21 bebruarv, Philippine 
National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Indan 1870. “Catalino San Jose to Governor of Cavite," 22 bebruarv, Philippine 
National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Naic 1870. “Catalino Rociente to Governor of Cavite" 19 bebruarv, Philippine 
National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, San Francisco de Malabon 1870. “Julian Lionga to C iovernor of ( .avite 21 bebru- 
ary, Philippine National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, San Roque 1870. “Gregorio Jose to Governor of Cavite” 16 bebruarv, Philippine 
National Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, Cavite 1838. Gutierrez-Magdalcna, solicita se exima a mi hi jo Joaquin de Castro 
del servicio de las armas,” Philippine National Archive, 1 80 1 - 1 898. 

Cavite, Cavite 1 December 1834. “Gregorio Jose to unknown,” Philippine National 
Archive, unreferenced bundle. 

Cavite, 1833. Oficios del Governador de Cavite: sobre los incendios ocurridos en el Pueblo 
de Silan de aquella Provinicia y de la considerable porcion de Palay que se quemo," 
Philippine National Archive, 1801-1 898. 

Cavite, Cavite 30 September 1833. “Rafael Ripoll to Captain-General,” Philippine Na- 
tional Archive, 1801-1898. 

Cavite, Cavite 18 September 1833. “Bernardo Fernandez to Captain-General,” Philippine 
National Archive, 1801-1898. 

Cavite, Cavite 14 April 1833. “Rafael Ripoll to Governor-General Enrile,” Philippine Na- 
tional Archive, 1801-1898. 

Cavite, Silan 22 April 1833. “ Theodoro de Leon to Rafael Ripoll,” Philippine National 
Archive, 1801-1898. 

Cavite, Silan 11 April 1833. “ I heodoro de Leon to Rafael Ripoll,” Philippine National 
Archive, 1801-1898. 

Cavite, Cavite 2 September 1831. “Francisco Orozco to Governor-General Enrile,” Philip- 
pine National Archive, 1801-1898. 



242 



B AN KOI 1 In Search of the Masses 



Cavite, Imus 1 September 1831. “Fr. Nicolas Becerra to Governor-General Enrile," Philip- 
pine National Archive. 1801-1898. 

Chevalier, Louis, 19 An Labouring Classes ami Dangerous Classes in Paris During the hint 
Half of the I 9th ( entury. Rout ledge and Regan Paul, London. 

Constantino, Renato, 19^5. /he Philippines: A Past Revisited, Tala Publishing Services, 
Quezon C a tv. 

Cushner, Nicholas, 1 9~1 . Spain in the Philippines. From Conquest to Revolution , Ateneo de 
Manila University Press, Quezon Citv. 

Denucias Por Abusos, ( amarines Sur 18"A). “Contra Don Miguel Morales Godov sobre 
excesos cometidos, Philippine National Archive, unreferenced. 

Fd Comereio, 18 June 1891, “Incendios/' 
hi C.omereto, l a November 1888, “Aprehensiones. 

El Comereio. 1 1 June 188"', “Mendicidad." 

El Comereio , 3 September 1886, “Incendios." 

El heo de Panay ; 2 |une 1 889. “Colonia Penitenciaria Agricola de Mindoro X\. 

c* > . 

Ereccion de Pueblo, 1 8a6. “I os incendios ocuridos en los pueblos de Carnal ig) Ligao en a 
provincia de Camarines Sur, Philippine National Archive, Camarines Sur IS.*) 
1850 . 

Ereccion de Pueblo, 1839. “Diligencias practicadas sobre el incendio del pueblo de 
Menalabag el dia 8 de Febrero, Philippine National Archive, Camarines Sur 18. 
1850. 

Ereccion de Pueblo, 1839a. “Juan Carlos to Governor-General Nueva Caceres 11 ApriL 
Philippine National Archive, camarines Sur 1 837-1 850, 

Estadistica de las Causas Criminales, 1886, 1881 and 18/6. Estadistica dt las Cat 
Criminates , Negoeios Ci riles y Espedientes de Gobierno , Despachados pot la 
Audiencia de Pilipinas Durante el Atlo 1885 , 1880 and 18 5, Estableci 
Tipografico de Ramirez y Giraudier, Manila. 

Estadistica de las Causas Criminales, 1872. Estadistica de las Causas Ct im inales, Neg ^ 
Ci idles y Espedientes de Gobierno , Despachados Por la Real Audiencia dt Filipia ^ 
rante el Alio 18 /, Establecimiento Tipografico <<Ciudad Condal» de 1 L 
Manila. ^ 

Estadistica General, 1866. Estadistica Genera! de los Negoeios Terminados y Pen \ it 

Despacho en la Rea! Audiencia de Pilipinas en Fin del Ano de 1865 > Establecimiento 

Tipografico de Amigos del Pais, Manila. . R _ 

Fast, Jonathan and Jim Richardson, 1983. Roots of Dependency. Political and Econo ^ 

lution in 1 9th Century Philippines , Foundation for Nationalist Studies, Que 0 

Guerrero, Milagros, 1977. “Luzon at War: Contradictions in Philippine Society, 

1902, Ph.D dissertation, University of Michigan. w 

Hernandez, Jose and Simeon del Rosario, 1956. “The Revolt of the Masses. ic .to > 
Behind Agoncillos Story of Andres Bonifacio, n.p., Manila. 

Ileto, Reynaldo, 1979. Pasyon and Revolution: Popular Movements in the Philippine 18 

1910 , Ateneo de Manila Press, Quezon City. 



243 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLT' I K >N AM > Bi Y< >NI ) 



Legarda, Angelita de, 1976. Piloncitos to Pesos. A Brief History of ( outage in the Philippines , 
Bancom Development Corporation, Manila. 

Majul, Cesar, 1967. The Political and Constitutional Ideas of the Philippine Revolution, Ori- 
ole Editions, New York. 

Mallari, Francisco, 1986. “The Maritime Response, 1793-1818, Philippine Studies , 34, 
462-492. 

Mallari, Francisco, 1986a. “Muslim Raids in Bicol, 1580-1^92, Philippine Studies , 34, 
257-286. 

Memorias, Camarincs Sur 1826. “Mcmoria sobre la provineia dc ( amarines para la 
Sociedad Economica de estas Yslas Pilipinas presentado por el C tira Regular del 
pueblo de Oas,” Philippine National Archive, Mcmoria de ( amarines Stir. 

Montero y Vidal, Jose, 1 887- 1 895. Historia General de Pilipinas l )esde el l )eseuhrnniento de 
Dichas Islas Pfasta Nuestros Dias, Imprenta y Pundacibn de \lanuel lello, Madrid, 3 
volumes. 

Owen, Norman, 1984. Prosperity Without Progress. Manila Hemp and Material l ife in the 
Colonial Philippines , Atcneo de Manila University Press, Quezon C ity. 

Rajal y Larre, Joaquin, 1890. Memoria Acerca de la Provineia de Nueva-l ct/ii en Pilipinas , 
Establecimiento I ipografico de Fortanet, Madrid. 

Roth, Dennis, 1977. The Friar Estates of the Philippines, University of New Mexico Press, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico. 

Sastron, Manuel, nd. Pequenos Estudios : Batangas y su Provineia , Establecimiento Tipo- 
Litografico del Asilo de Huerfanos, Malabong. 

Schumacher, John, 1991. “Perspectives on the Revolution” in The Making of a Nation. Pis- 
ton Nineteenth-Century Filipino Nationalism, Atcneo de Manila University Press, 
Quezon City. 

Schumacher, John, 1981. Revolutionary Clergy. I'he Filipino Clergy and the Nationalist 
Movement , Ateneo dc Manila University Press, Quezon C aty. 

Scott, James, 1990. Domination and the Arts of Resistance. Hidden Transcripts , Yale Univer- 
sity Press, New Haven and London. 

Scott, James, 1985. Weapons of the Weak. Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance , Yale Univer- 
sity Press, New Haven. 

Scott, William, 1982. Cracks in the Parchment Curtain and Other Essays in Philippine His- 
tory, New Day Publishers, Quezon City. 

Spanish Manila, 1792. Suarez to Carlos IV” Manila, Philippine National Archive, Reel 7. 

Spanish Manila, 1775. Real cedula de 18 de mayo,” Philippine National Archive, Reel 7. 

Spanish Manila, 1758. Bando de 10 de febrero,” Philippine National Archive, Reel 3. 

Stevens, Joseph, 1898. Yesterday in the Philippines, Charles Scribners and Sons, New York. 



244 



The Native Clergy From the Late 19th Century 
to the Early 20th Century 

m * 



An roi in V. Uv, S.V.D. 

Divine Word Seminary, lagaytay, Philippines 



W Ticn we talk ol the native clergy in the Philippines we necessarih 
talk about the Spanish church in the Philippines, the Spanish friars, the 
colonial administration, the Madrid government, the Propaganda Fide and the 
Nunciature in Madrid (Vatican), and to a degree, the Filipinos themselves. 1 he 
Americans had a role in the development ol the native clergy. 

The lot of native Filipino priests in the second halt ol the 19th century was a 
continuation ol their plight in the previous century except that it had become 
worse. The native clergy were in a state ol nondevelopment or arrested growth. 
When Rizal dedicated his novel /:/ Fill b listens mo t o the martyrs Frs. Gomez, bur- 
gos, and Zamora, he was not only proclaiming their innocence but also condemn- 
ing the injustices — “evils ol which you were victims" — perpetrated not just in IS ~ 
but generations before. 



The Early Years 

As early as 1 585, King Philip II approved a petition ol Bishop Salazar ol Manila to 
establish a seminary for the natives. 1 he petition was sent in 1583 when the Dio- 
cese of Manila was barely lour years old but the project was not implemented be- 
cause of lack ol funds. In 1 604, it was argued that if a seminary were to be built it 
should be for Spaniards. In 1641, Governor-General Corcuera made a further 
qualification that the candidates be pure Spanish ( limpiezn de sangi'e). 

Partly because ol the pressure and encouragement of Monsignor Francois 
Pallu of the Propaganda Fide, a founder of the Paris Foreign Mission Society and 

245 






THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION \ND Ml VOND 



ardent advocate For the native clergy, there was a revival of interest in the native 
clergy. He was in Manila in 1674 and, unable to show his credentials, a nested and 
brought to Spain. In Madrid, his identity' established, he was able to win royal of- 
ficials to his cause. The result was that in 1677 King ( diaries II issued a Royal 
Cedula enjoining the ecclesiastical authorities “to endeavor by every possible means 
to provide the Indians with the opportunity of studving for the sac red university. 
The civil governor and Archbishop of Manila Pardo recommended calling in more 
religious from Spain. Pardo preferred Spaniards to natives for the following rea- 
sons: the inclioswerc not inclined to theological and moral studies; their customs 
and vices were evil; and they were slothful due to the climate. A layman, the 
colony s attorney-general, Diego deViga, took exception to the churchman s views. 
There are natives, said De Viga, “who show themselves apt to be ordained. He 
argued this way: all things considered, a native speaking his peoples language was 
more likely to get permanent results in the conversion of infidels than a foreigner; 
the number of priests simply would not suffice to meet the needs of the growing 
population. Moreover, bringing Spanish missionaries to the Philippi ncs was expen- 
sive. As for the natives’ shortcomings and vices, De Viga answ^Eed: Surely if they 
are taken in hand from an early age and trained as they ought to be trained these 
vices could be overcome. Paradoxically, the Madrid government and a Catholic 
layman seemed to be more insightful and sympathetic to the development of the 
native clergy than the religious prelates in the country. 

As late as 1697, King Charles II was still inquiring whether there was a col- 
lege-seminary in Manila and, if none, how much it would cost to erect one. hven 
Rome kept out of ecclesiastical affairs by the Patronato Real — entered the scene 
via the Propaganda Fide and the Papal Nuncio in Madrid. Apostolic Legate to the 
har East missions Archbishop dcTournon and his companion, Abbe Sidotti, per- 
suaded the Manila authorities in the early 1 700s to make the city the seat of a semi- 
PItT ^° r ^ S ian’ not: just Filipino, candidates to the priesthood. Unfortunately, the 
Philippines did not lie under the Propaganda Fide but under the Spanish 
Patronato, and because Philip V, the First Bourbon king, was not properly in- 
ormed, the seminary of 72 students — eight of them native Filipinos — was closed, 
us seminarians dispersed, and Archbishop of Manila Camacho transferred to 
Guadalajara, Mexico. 

The first native Filipino was ordained to the priesthood in 1698, during the 
time of the unfortunate Archbishop of Manila Camacho (1695-1704), who or- 
dained 10 native Filipinos. From the time of Archbishop Salazar ro that of Arch- 
bishop Camacho the native clergy traveled an uneven course due mainly to the lack 
of fitness of the natives but no less to other historical factors. For example, the pre- 
mature experiments of the Spanish missionaries in Mexico of admitting natives to 
the clerical state had a negative effect on ecclesiastical policy in the Spanish Asian 
colony. The church later relaxed its legislation against the native clergy in South 
America; in the Philippines it did not. 



246 



t'Y The Xiitivc Clergy Trow the Lite 19th Century to the Early 20th Century 



The Bourbons, rulers of Spain from 1700 on, were notoriously anticlerical 
and, above all, antireligious and anti-friar and, therefore, pro-native clergy. In the 
90 years from the time of Archbishop Camacho, who was of the secular clergy, to 
Archbishop Sancho de Santa Justa y Rufina (1767-1787), none of the seven arch- 
bishops of Manila came from the traditional regular orders (OP, OSA, ORSA, 
OHM). At least six were Bourbon appointees. Sancho de Santa Justa y Rufina him- 
self was an Kscolapio or a Piarist. Archbishop de la Cuesta, Camachos successor, 
was a Jeronvmite; he ordained at least IS indios . Although modest, the number of 
indigenous priests was enough to merit comments from both an Augustinian and 
a Jesuit. Caspar de San Agustin warned the flourishing Christian communities of 
the islands that it would be a divine chastisement to place “them in the hands of 
natives ordained to the priesthood. ' What was the Augustinian friar driving at? 



I heir pride will he aggravated with their elevation to so sublime a state, 
their avarice with the increased opportunitv of preying on others; their sloth 
with their no longer having to work for a living; and their vanity with the adu- 
lation that they must needs seek, desiring to he served by those whom in an- 
other state of life they would have had to respect and obey.' 1 

The Jesuit Murillo Velarde was quite of another persuasion: 



There are in the Philippines, as in other parts of the world, man) Mio 
are stupid and ignorant; but thev are not wanting some who have wit and abil 
iry, sufficient for the studv of grammar, philosophy and theology, in which c1k\ 
have made some progress, though not much/ 

Either convinced that the natives were sufficiently able to cope with ecc ^ 
astical studies or forced by the sheer need for more laborers in the vineyaid oi ot > 
the enlightened regalist and anti-friar Archbishop Basilio Sancho de Santa Justa } 
Rufina initiated a crash program of ordaining as many priests in the shortest pos 
sible time, so many that a contemporary observer in Manila quipped. I cre J ere 
no oarsmen to be found for the coasting vessels, because the archbishop ia or 
dained them all." It was Archbishop Sancho who established the first tru ) u 
tioning seminary for the secular clergy known as the Conciliar Seminar) o an 
Carlos, named after his patron the Bourbon King Charles III. Cleary, t e 
archbishops laudable ends could not be justified by unsound means, and tie re 
suits were disastrous. Before long complaints came in that many native priests e 
unedifying lives. Fray Caspar de San Agustin was right after all. Govemor-Gener 
Anda, a supporter of the pro-native clergy policy of the archbishop, relented and 
advised the king that "after a long hard soul-searching, I do not find it proper to 
entrust Christianity in these Islands completely to the native clergy. The in- 
formed zeal and precipitous actions of the archbishop created more pnests but 



247 



THE PHILIPPINE RKVOl l I K )N AND HIM >NI > 



undermined their quality. The losers were ultimately the native clergy. Iwen the 
king was now having second thoughts. The spirit of the hrench Revolution of 1 89 
followed by the Napoleonic Wars in the Iberian Peninsula ushered in seculariza- 
tion measures and caused a drastic drop in friar vocations in Spain. In the next a() 
years, Spain would witness a number of her South American colonies gaining in- 
dependence, with native priests among the leading figures in the revolutions. After 
the fall of Napoleon, religious orders in the Peninsula were restored. And even 
when in 1836 the anticlerical government dissolved all the religious houses in 
Spain, the Recollect, Augustinian, and Dominican (.olegios cle Misioneros were 
allowed to exist. lo these three were added two more by virtue of the Ro\al C edula 
of 1852: the Franciscan and the Jesuit Colegios. 1 he Spanish orders were re\ ived 
and membership increased although, as planned by the government, the\ were for 
the overseas Spanish colonies. For the Philippines the benefits were double-edged. 
As more Spanish regulars entered the colony, more parishes had to be made a\ ail- 
able to them and therefore fewer parishes were left for the native clergy, although 
there was a gradual increase in personnel of both the regular and secular clergy. In 
the archdioceses of Manila the parishes served by the regulars jumped from 143 in 
I860 to 177 in 1873 while those of the secular clergy went down from 44 to 33. 
There were also 168 coadjutors in 1860; in 1873, there were 208. The reports of 
1830 and of 1860 reveal astonishing inverses: while the regular parish priests more 
than doubled from 56 to 143, the number of secular parish priests was more than 
halved from 96 to 44. 7 We do not find a friar designated as coadjutor; the Spanish 
curas helper was called a companero or vicario. 

Liberal, progressive ideas trickled into the lone Spanish colony in Asia where, 
unlike in the Peninsula, friars and bishops accepted the necessity and political ex- 
p e iency of working together and being allied with government. Id them to de- 
n the colonial administration was to save the church and, since they were not 
particularly welcome in anticlerical Spain, to preserve themselves. 

A pnest, no matter how indio he was, or how poor in theology, must have 
noticed something wrong with the system. Nineteenth-century Philippines wit- 
nessed the presence of native priests who were trained at the best ecclesiastical 
? C ,?°|, r ^ e R °y al University of Santo Tomas. A group of them during the second 
a ° t ^ le cen tury raised complaints loud enough for civil and church authorities 
to ear; not only because they were legitimate complaints but also because the 
group knew the nature of the priesthood and the mind of the universal church. 

hey were Pedro Pelaez, Jose Burgos, Mariano Gomez, and Jacinto Zamora, all 
occupying respectable positions in the archdiocese. From the point of view of their 
ecclesiastical state they were asking for nothing more than fairness and justice as 
enunciated and taught by the church. 

Clearly the controversy did not center only on the Fitness of candidates to the 
priesthood but also on the accessibility of parishes to ordained native priests, who 
were being deprived of offices due them. Since 1826, there was cle facto 
desecularization of parishes as they were turned over to regulars. In 1849, seven 



248 






I Y Ihe A \itire ( 'ler X y brow :be faite 1 9th Century to the fairly 20th Century 



more Cavite parishes were handed over to the Recollects and Dominicans, and in 
1861 still more parishes were given to the Recollects. The open discrimination 
against the secular priests could have been rooted in racism or it could have been a 
political maneuver. 

It appeared that I I is C atholic Majesty was, at least in principle, tor the pro- 
motion ol native clergy. \\ lule the ecclesiastical authorities in Manila could not 
disobev outright royal orders, there were grounds not to comply. 1 he religious or- 
ders often had reservations about the native candidates and priests, and with good 
reason since they knew the nidios better than anyone. 

What was the position of the church, particularly in Rome? Although Span- 
ish sources do not give suf f icient attention to the role of the Vatican in the develop- 
ment of the native clergy, its interest in the question was more than just passing. 
The i -e was a good amount id correspondence between Rome and certain offices 
and personalities touching on the following: 1) 1 he Propaganda hide. Monsignor 
Pallu, and Archbishop deTournon and their visits and activities in the Philippines, 
2) Nuncio Barili's letters to the Spanish bishops in the Philippines and K aez, ; 
the coming of non-C 'atholic America and the exit of Spain; and 4) the ef ott; 
Pope Leon XI 11 to reorganize the church in the islands. 



The Propaganda Fide: The Pursuit of a Native Clergy 

The Sacred Congregation lor the Propagation ot the haith (Propaganda Fide, 
SCPF) was formally established by Pope Gregory X\ by the ni mu tt t 
Divmac of (22 June 1622) for the "preservation, strengthening and sprea o 
Catholic faith. ” s In a letter to the nuncio in Madrid onJ> Apri \ , .. he 

specifically mentions the increase ot the Catholic religion in hot i nt u- ^ 
conversion of non-believers.’"’ In another letter (15 January 162- to tu n ^ 
Francesco Ingoli, the first secretary of SCPF, warned them against ^ 

temporal affairs and involvement in politics. Ingoli had in mini _g e P aR 

verse reaction from the Patronato Real ot Spain and Portuga . 1 m j x _ 

congregation for the mission was in actuality “a protest against tie ^tor 
up of the worldly end .he occl«i aS ,ic,l."'» A ,nodm m*«J, w.dyhe Ibenen mon 
archs had to be found, and this was concocted at the Propaganda o it 
would not name residential but titular bishops exercising ^ 

partibns infideliunu who would be directly under Rome. UIS ' w 2 , 

Portugal had dominion over a territory, she could exercise her patron a g y 
privileges; where not, Rome would have a direct sav, such as in tie 1101 ^^ n( ^ 
bishops. The Propaganda bishops bore the title of vicars aposto ic. n y 
such vicars apostolic were appointed by Pope Alexander VII for the missions in 
China and Indochina. One of them was Francis Pallu, bishop of He iopo is, c ne 
the founders of the Paris Foreign Mission Society (MEP). hi A\ut a - lt * n 
1665 was the first seminary for Asian clergy. He went to Rome in 166 ) to e e enc. 
the vicars apostolic against Portuguese Patronato claims. Seeking to 



249 



THE PHILIPPINE KEV< >1 U EI( >N AND KI Y( >NI > 



Tonking in 1674, his ship was driven by strong winds to Manila where he was de- 
tained by Spanish authorities and sent to Spain via Acapulco. < ardinal Altieri, pre- 
fect of SCPF, and Nuncio Millini of Madrid sought Pullus release. Because he was 
“mistaken for the Bishop ofBerito” he was freed and received in Rome by Monsi- 
gnor Urbano Cerri, the secretary of SCPF, toward the end of 1 (C6. NX ell received 
in Spain, his stay in Madrid must have won for the bishop of I leliopolis useful 
acquaintances and friendships among influential persons at t lie* royal court, spe- 
cifically the surprised and embarrassed count of Medellin, president of the Coun- 
cil of the Indies, who went out of his wav to make up for the indignity suffered by 
the papal prelate. “The bishop,” relates an Augustinian chronicler, 'filled him with 
strange notions” supplied by information from “corrupt tilctildcs-nitiyor. I fence 
the Royal Decree, from which “originated the ordination of Indians as priests — an 
unfortunate move; and as the inclios usually do not enter through the gate of voca- 
tion and only strive to attain it for the sake of advantage to themselves and their 
relatives, the danger is evident that the result will seldom be satisfactory.' ^ 

The Royal Decree referred to was that of 1677, which bore the explicit pro- 
vision: 



I have seen fit to enjoin by letters of even date on the Archbishop of 
Manila and bishops — of these Islands to endeavor by every possible means to 
provide the Indians with the opportunity of studying for the sacred ministry, 
admitting boys (even though they be few in number) to such studies in the 
existing seminaries; and, if such seminaries do not as yet exist, to put forth ev- 
ery effort to establish them in accordance with the provisions of the sacred 
Council of Trent . 16 



The royal command did not enjoy the desired compliance. Rome, however, 
. 1 not f° r g et the case. Urbano Cerri, secretary of the Propaganda Fide, who had 
in the meantime written a comprehensive account of the Propaganda's missionary 
activities in the last 50 years, includes the Philippines in this report to Pope Inno- 
cent XI with the following auspicious words: 

Were it possible to obtain the consent of the Spaniards, it would be easy 
to found a spiritual storehouse (arsenale spirituale) for all those neighboring 
kingdoms and provinces of China . 17 

Cerri is referring to future missionaries trained by the orders in the Philip- 
pines for work in China and Japan. Here he speaks of the possibility of ordaining 
native candidates. Despite the number of religious and the progress of the church 
( almost two million souls” converted) he finds fault in their not caring enough for 
the sick, besides, they do not offer the advantage (commodita) of study for, nor do 

they confei sacred orders to the natives ( nationali ), although they possess sufficient 
ability ( babilita J.” 18 



250 



L'Y The Witivt ' C'lergy From the Lite 19th Centun' to the Early 20th Century 

The information could only have come from Palin. Cerri, like Ingoli, was 
strongly endorsing the formation of native clergv in preference to the foreign reli- 
gious. Cerri adds: " The true method of securing the faith is the ordination of na- 
tive priests and the nomination of native bishops/ 10 

In fact, the formation ot the native clergv ought to be started in the soonest 
possible time as “it is the only right wav of proclaiming the faith." This is the fore- 
most task of the bishops in the missions, and their own successors will have to be 
native bishops. 0 l T ndoubtcdlv the Propaganda Fide at the very start showed a 1 cer- 
tain predilection for the missionaries of the secular clergy/ 21 particularly for bish- 
oprics. Commenting in 1638 on the affairs of the Recollects in the Philippines, 
Ingoli anticipated a principal point of Vatican I Ys Ad Gentes : “If the Spanish regu- 
lars do not ordain natives, the Church in both lands [Spain and the Philippines] 
will always remain a small child and never will sain inner strength. 

Propagandas policy and ideas of focusing on the spiritual part of mission 
work, of weaning the church's missionary activities from the politico-temporal 
concerns of the Patronato Real of the Iberian Catholic powers, and of developing 
a functional native clergy were not lost a quarter of a century after Monsignor 
Pal lu's death. The congregation had grown with experience and its direction was 
better defined. 



Propaganda Fide: The Story of Charles Thomas Maillad de Tounion 

Archbishop Tournon, patriarch of Antioch, was appointed apostolic visitator on 5 
December 1701, by Clement XI. Bearing also the title of legatus a latere, he en- 
joyed extra legatine powers conferred upon him on 21 April 1702. These pow 
gave him wide, almost unlimited jurisdiction over China and other adjoiniru. . ^ 
ritories and regions, over high and low ecclesiastics, Jesuits included {etinm 
tis Jesus ). 23 . 

Unlike Monsignor Pallu, who was lower in rank and dignin, Tournon 
travels was preceded by letters of commendations sent to nuncios, bis tops i 
ing that of Manila), kings, even the emperor of China. While in Spain 
received an d given due recognition. He left Seville on 9 Februar) 170. , ^ u 
companions, passed through Mexico and Peru, and reached Pondic in 
1704. 2/ ‘ On his way to China he stopped at and stayed foi half a \ cai in 25 

from 22 September 1704 until 13 March 1705, the date he e t or 
Tournons travels were marked by problems and conflicts, in particu ar Q^ nese 
ship with the Portuguese patronato on the questions of the Ma a tU ^ ^ 

rites. He felt the ire of the emperor because of his stand against tie i ^ 
and the Jesuits. Arrested and detained, lie died on 10 June 1710. 1ICC ) . 

fore, 1 August 1707, he had been created a cardinal. His piolongec sojoiii 
Philippines (he attempted a trip to China on 22 Novembei but w as oicec 
back because of bad weather) became significant particularly because o c ^ 
volvement of Abbe Sidotti, his companion, in the Seminary ot San C emente. u 



251 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.in K )N AM ) HI Y( )NI > 



seminary was closed by the Royal Decree of 3 March 1 10. I he story of the Semi- 

nary ofSan Clemente is an unfortunate incident hut, more important, it shows the 
assertion of the church’s constant and persevering advocacy in the promotion of 
native clergy. 

Abbot Sidotti remained in Manila from September ni l until 20 August 
1708, waiting for an opportunity to go to Japan. Archbishop ( amacho, already 
in his new see in Guadalajara, praised the abbot for his time and effort in const ruct- 
ing San Clemente. Camacho continued his correspondence with Rome, raising the 
great interest in seminary. In turn, Cardinal Paulucci, papal secretary of state, drew 
the attention of Philip V and the Council of the Indies to the future seminary. In a 
letter to Nuncio Zondadari, he exhorts him to do his best to support one of the 
most important undertakings, most desirable for the spread of the I loly faith in 
China and adjoining kingdoms... which is the establishment of a good seminary 
in the Philippines.” 2 The nuncio should forward pertinent letters (for example, 
from Archbishop Camacho and Council of the Indies) to the Propaganda hide. 
Every care should be used in favor of “so fruitful a work. ’ * I -*ven the nuncio him- 
self received a word of appreciation for his zeal and devotion in “promoting the 
work of the seminary in the Philippines. ” 2<> In a much later communication 
Paulucci informed Zondadari of two letters received from Archbishop C "amacho 
from Guadalajara where the former Manila archbishop “speaks of a new seminary 
established there by that good prelate,” Gianbattista Sidotti, with all his zeal and 
power. Such a great undertaking needed continuous support. Letters were sent to 
is Catholic majesty and to the count of Montezuma, president of the Council of 
^ Hr! ^^ es> ex P ress ing the pope’s pleasure in what they had done so far. Paulucci 
a c that a few days ago six ecclesiastics had left to see Cardinal Tournon; could 
one or the other be of help for the Manila seminary?' 1 On the same day, 1 5 Octo- 
er 1707, Pope Clement XI wrote the Spanish king, praising him for the planned 
an d exhorting him to promote and help such great project.' 2 I he count 
o ontezuma also got a letter from the pope. Six months before the count re- 
ceive a letter from the pope thanking him for his contribution to the construction 

° 1 e „ S ^ minary an< ^ f° r “ample subsidy in the maintenance and support of the 
same. 33 



As per instruction of Cardinal Paul ucci, Nuncio Zondadari informed the 
ing a out the planned seminary, and the king seemed to have been satisfied. On 
sen ing further foreign missionaries to the archipelago? No need, as the orders 
provided enough personnel. On the students? They had to be subjects of the 
crown. The Patronato Real could not allow the Camacho-Sidotti-Propaganda 
Seminary ofSan Clemente to exist, so all plans came to a standstill. 



Barili, Nuncio in Madrid (1857-1868), and Father Pedro Pelaez (d. 1863) 

By the latter part of the 19th century, Spain was hardly a power and the king’s pa- 
ternal rights and privileges were no longer those of the Patronato Real of the 17th 



252 



t V The \\u hr C'/ergy From the luite / 9th Century to the fairly 20th Century' 



and 1 8th centurv. Rome had more room to maneuver in as it asserted more aggres- 
sively her ecclesiastico-spiritual domain, determined partly by its sheer persistence, 
partly by events like the independence movements in the Americas. In Spain, Nun- 
cio Bari 1 i spoke tor the traditional position of the church on native clergy; in the 
Philippines, hr. Pedro Pelaez represented the teachings and practice of the univer- 
sal church as well as the legitimate aspirations of his fellow Filipino priests. 

Lorenzo Barili had his first diplomatic stint in South America, (lor eight 
years, 1848-185” 7 , in Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Peru) and therefore 
was not unfamiliar with the doings and the mind of the Spanish patronato. 
Toward the end of 1859, he wrote Bishop Jimeno of Cebu in order to acquire 
“more ample and reliable information on the religious state of both your own 
diocese and of the others which have been established in the Philippines. 
The information was for the holy father who knew little or nothing about the 



Philippines. „ . 

Next, Barili turned to the other Dominican bishop, Cainza of Nueva 

Caccres, a knowledgeable prelate, whose eagerness to inform was equaled only 
by the nuncio’s hunger for news. Although he tried, he could not get information 
from the late Archbishop Aranguren of Manila' 1 ’ so that corresponding win 
his successor. Archbishop Martinez, was “one special favor. Barili was able to es- 
tablish contact with Bishop Aragones of Nueva Segovia in January 186?, a few 
months before bis episcopal ordination. « The four bishops cooperated splendidly 
with Nuncio Barili despite this being an unprecedented initiative of Rome to cor- 
spond directly (albeit via the Nunciature in Madrid) with Ultramar bishops. 



res 



IV Via 

More than just looking for information, Barili wanted to end Spain's Asian colony s 
isolation from Rome and to check the patronato system. 1 hus he explained to 



Gainza: 



Now, if vour Paternity will use your influence prudently, and with all the 
means at your disposal, so that the isolation from Rome of that part of the 
Catholic family may cease, you will perform a very meritorious work. 1 will use 
with discretion whatever is communicated to me. If it will not be directh of 
help to me with the government, which holds on to the old and mistaken sys- 
tem, I will take advantage of passing it on to the Holy Father, who will then 
decide on what he deems convenient."’ 



Despite the disapproval of Spains government of the nuncios interference in 
colonial affairs/ 0 the exchange of letters between Barili and the bishops in the Phil- 
ippines in the last nine years of his office fulfilled the hope of Rome. The day be- 
fore he relinquished his post, Barili wrote Martinez he did not consider his work 
useless as the holy see is as a result now “aware of ecclesiastical affairs of those is- 
lands.” 41 Indeed he felt convinced that the “occasion may have arrived for discuss- 
ing ecclesiastical affairs of the colonies between the holy see and her majestys gov- 
ernment.” 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLt I K >N AND HI Y( >NI ) 



As always and everywhere the church’s concern was reform. Ihc Philippines, 
from the viewpoint of the nuncio, was particularly vulnerable on the question of 
the native clergy. The bishops in the Philippines had provided him ample material. 
Fray Antonio Orge, comisario apostolico of the Dominicans, admitted that the 
missions in the islands were falling apart. The conduc t of the regulars was far from 
ideal. The attraction and attachment to established rich parishes was a big con- 
tributory factor . 43 

Archbishop Martinez, who came from the diocesan clergy was not against 
the regulars, but his leaning toward and defense of his diocesan (native) priests did 
not endear him to his fellow Spaniards i n the orders. On the question of the native 
priests, the other bishops could not agree with the archbishop. Martinez thought 
that there was some injustice being done in the successive losses of parishes to the 
regulars. Firstly, parishes around Manila held by diocesan priests for years had to 
be handed back to the friars ; 44 secondly, the Recollects lost Antipolo, “pearl of the 
parishes ; and thirdly, Gainza planned to expand the Golegios de Misioncs do 
Ultramar to accommodate more Spanish religious missionaries in order that they 
would effect the gradual and progressive substitution of the indigenous parish 
priest by the Spanish regular clergy.” 43 That meant, according to Martinez, “the na- 
tive clergy can be useful only as coadjutors and under the direct dependence of the 
Spaniard . 5 ,r> The nuncio observed: 



Whose fault is it if the indigenous [clergy] cannot render greater services 
to the Churchr What has been done in three centuries to form among the na- 
tives a clergy educated, edifying, worthy of its mission? ' 

The nuncio wondered why, during all the years of Christianity the natives were 
eit er prepared nor given the chance to develop. Was it not some kind of preju- 
ice t at those responsible held against the natives? They were deemed 

incapable, as of a nature inferior to the Europeans, of becoming ministers of 
religion. But was a serious and sincere try ever made? Were not rather obstacles 
placed for them to rise from their lowly condition? For this they are re- 
proached, because of this they are perpetually condemned to a kind of helo- 
tism (ad una specie di ilotismo)™ 

To Martinez and the nuncio such as attitude was equivalent to depriving potential 
seminarians of an incentive to embrace the ecclesiastical state. It was in this at- 
mosphere that Fr. Jose Burgos’ Manifiesto appeared as a response to the friars’ 
mean epithets. The nuncio seems to have not heard of it, and 

I ublishing here the Manifesto, especially if it is strong and hard against 
the regulars, will cause the secular clergy to lose still further before public opin- 
ion which is already unfavorably disposed towards it by ancient tradition. S() 



254 



UY / he Wit nr ( /ergy From the lore 1 9th Century to the Early 20th Century 



Fr. Pedro Pelacz and the Question of Parishes 

Pedro Pablo Pelacz was chancellor of the archdiocese of Manila when on the death 
of Recollect Archbishop Aranguren he was elected, apparently unanimously, vicar 
capitular in April 1 86 1 . As vicar capitular, he was in effect acting archbishop until 
the arrival of the new archbishop, Martinez, in May the following year. In his one 
year of administration of Manila Hr. Pelaez must have acquitted himself creditably 
well. 

Pelaez was a contemporarv of l : r. Burgos. His views were expressed in a sys- 
tematic exposition, a 34-page essav of text and documents called Breves Apuntes 
sobre la Cuestion de C 'unit os de Pilipinas, where he raised his voice because of the 
“unfortunate affair of the deprivation of almost all the parishes of the (secular) 
clergy in the archdiocese in favor of the Recollect Father." 51 For Pelaez, it was po- 
litical expediency, racial considerations, and greed which had been made to prevail 
over church norms and justice. 

Now, ecclesiastical practice in the Philippines did not hold it wrong that 
there were parishes held by the religious foreign priests. Pelaez would not, in prin- 
ciple, object to that. He was, however, quick to observe that church laws and tradi- 
tion supported the view that established parishes were held by the diocesan priests. 
In Manila, that seemingly was not the case. Thirty parishes in the whole archdio- 
cese administered by the diocesan clergy were in danger of being taken over by the 
regular priests or friars. Pelaez observed and asked: 

1. Fhere are many places elsewhere, say, the Visayas, which are in greater 
need of the services of the friars. Why don’t they instead man the lhe mis 
sions? Why do the Recollect Fathers, for example, prefer Manila parishes 
to the hush missions in Mindoro? 

2. 1 he possession of well-established parishes militates against religious dis 
cipline; in particular, against the observance of the vows. Why do the 
regulars go after opulent parishes like Antipolo? 

3. A good crop of the present native clergy are better trained and educate 
Why are brighter opportunities barred from them, why ha\e the) 
chances of becoming parish priests? 

Pelacz concluded: 

1 he best proof of virtue a religious can show to the public is not to a 

cept (a parish) and to remain in the monastery, or come back immediately a 

ter he has served there. s: 

Even as Pelaez accused the government of being biased by depiiving the seculars of 
the parishes in favor of the friars “apparently with no other consideration than ^t at 
the said religious are Spaniards and that the greater clergy consists of natives, he 



25S 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLLH I( )N AND BI Y< )M) 



was quite certain that the governmental action was clue to the intrigues and 
maneuverings of the friars in Spain. Government or triars, right or not, the nuncio 
must see “that in this question there are matters involving canon law which ought 
not to be scorned by the government, much less bv the above-mentioned reli- 
gious.” 54 

The 19th-century Native Clergy and its Credibility 

We must look at the question from another angle. Justified or not, the friars had 
their own reasons for objecting to the native priests. The sad fact was that the na- 
tive priests suffered from a lack of credibility. Almost to a man, the five bishops in 
the Philippines in the 1860s comment on 

the humiliating anomaly, with a native priest of such qualities placed at the 
head of a vast diocese, served by Spanish curates coming from different orders, 
men of greater talent, of superior career, education, and managerial skill. 

The Spanish Manilans abhorred the native priests’ low education and sub- 
standard performance 

to a point that they do not want to confess to them, nor assist at their mass 
because they hold them incapable of administering worthily the exalted re- 
sponsibilities of the priesthood. 56 



This attitude of the Spanish Manilans was hardly defensible, yet the objec- 
tive basis of their social bias could not be challenged. There were too many in- 
stances of misbehavior on the part of the native clergy. The bishop of Cebu thought 
t at the native clergy, put at a disadvantage, armed only with a limited education, 
and weak of character, had to be constantly watched, opportunely reprimanded, 

and punished by the bishops 

in such a way that if they are not chaste they should at least be cautious (si no 
son castos almenos sean cantos). Moreover, as their character is weak, one cannot 
place in them trust of major importance, I do not think it is necessary for me to 
say that this general rule does have exceptions. 5 ^ 

Most would admit that Fr. Pelaez was such an exception. But the point was 
that the native clergy s deficiencies and shortcomings, as even Archbishop Martinez 
of Manila confessed, should not be attributed to lack of aptitude what in great 
part proceeds from want of preparation.” 58 Convinced that it was not natural inca- 
pacity blocking the native clergy’s chances of becoming parish priests, Pelaez called 
for the improvement, expansion and increase of the seminaries for the native 
clergy. The resistance of the Spanish regulars and Spanish officialdom to the de- 



256 



IV The A., 



< /f'j’t / row the / .ire 1 Oth ( rimin' to the T.irly 20th Century 



velopment ol the native clergy should theretore he seen principally in the light of 
racial prejudice and the tear that their work of centuries would be lost. 

In summary, hr. Pedro Pablo Pelaez was a respected leader in Manila ecclesi- 
astical circles and the undisputed spokesman of an otherwise silent and unheard 
secular clergy. 1 its observations and claims were legitimate and constructive. He 
did not ask tor preferential treatment tor the native clersv. It was enough that the 
native secular priests he treated tairlv, offered opportunities, and trained suitably 
for the ministry. 1 le issued an all-embracing plea for the native priest: 

1 hat he he not harassed, despised, discouraged, or treated as a slave and 
mere servant ot another. Assign him sufficient parishes to reward his efforts and 
stimulate his industry, perfect his education. If necessarv, watch over him and 
punish him in what is just. But let him not he stripped without hearing, with- 
out regard, without taking into account the claims and services that are at- 
tended to and rewarded m the least ot men. 

Not many years later. Archbishop Martinez warned, and some of his priests 
quickly confirmed, that if the treatment of the secular clergy by their colonial mas- 
ters did not improve, they would not mind serving under another power. A third 
of a century later, when the Spanish church was 333 vears old, Protestant America 
came to occupy the Philippines. 

Rome and the Philippines at the Turn of the Century 

The instruction of the Vatican to Archbishop P. L. Chapelle, the newly designated 
extraordinary apostolic delegate to the Philippines (since May lk98 an Americ 
colony) was “to protect effectivelv, in the actual circumstances ot the country, t e 
interests of the Catholic Church."'’" This was later spelled out in Pope Leo . s 
allocution to the cardinals p re pa r i n g t h e a p os t o 1 i c co ns t i t u t io n Qiutc nuv i Sin 
“a general plan to he established towards the reorganization and restoration o 
Catholic Church in the Islands.”" 1 . 

Although the Spanish religious were limited in number and m 
activities, the fact that they were permanently installed was an irritant an 1 
solve the problem of personnel as intended by Rome. The continuing staj ° ^ 

friars in the country indicated a patent, intentional deprivation of what tie * 
diocesan priests had fought for and failed to obtain in the preceding centuries, 
was from Delegate Chapelle s series of meetings with the bishops, Spanisi le you., 
and diocesan priests held in January and May 1900 that we gain a fail \ 
albeit gloomy picture of the Filipino native clergy at the turn of the century n 
the question of friars returning to parishes, Chapelle and the religious superiors 
agreed they could again occupy parishes. What to do then with the native priests 
their role in the ministry, their aspirations of finally becoming parish priests, tieu 
political stance, and, most importantly, their fitness and ability? In 1 8 98, the \ ear 



THE PHILIPPINE RLVOI U U >N A N I ) B! Y< >Nl > 



the Spanish-American War broke out, there were 967 parishes and missions in the 
country. Caring for their spiritual needs as pastors were 809 religious (83 percent 
of 967). There were in the Diocese of Vigan 164 friars parish priests ( ( 95, C )SA 

68, OFM 1) and seven (around 4 percent) secular parish priests; there were in all 
131 secular priests in the diocese. Manila, which had the best seminaries and the 
most qualified diocesan priests, counted 198 secular priests hut onlv 35 of them 
parish priests. The friars counted //>9 parish priests. I he- native priests held only a 
surprisingly disproportionate 4 percent of the parishes in Niicva Segovia (\ igan), 
or about 9 percent in Manila. One marvels not so much at the fact that there were 
so few priests for so many souls (2,000 for a population of 6.5 million) hut that 
there were so many Spanish priests and so few native parish priests. 

Another question was how to explain and accommodate the express will of 
our Most Holy Father the Pope” 64 that the Spanish religious should remain in the 
islands. The consensus of the religious superiors was that the religious would rcoc- 
cupy some parishes; the rest of the parishes would go to the diocesan clergy'. I he 
native clergy protested and strongly urged that the four religious orders should not 
go back to the parishes Tor the good of the Church and public tranquillity. ”66 
Father Mariano Sevilla, the spokesman of the group, cited as a reason the dislike or 
sometimes even hatred of the parishioners for the friars. They would prefer to turn 
protestants and schismatics than to he under them again. 



Totally Incapable, as by Nature 

. the native priests were claiming that reason and right were on their side, the 
P ishops and priests focused on the natives’ qualifications. 1 he perennial 

whT fK he eXclusion of thc indios from the Catholic priesthood during the 
, ° r c Spanish period was their moral unfitness/’ 1 he indigenous priests, 

p nis religious said, were “by nature inept’’ (natura ineptuin). M 1 hey suffered 
.. . natura l limitations (naturalis purvitis animurum ). As for their moral 

quames, much is to be desired.” 69 One Dominican, 37 years in the Philippines 
“ ” I ° P ° f Nueva Se S ov ia (Vigan), reflected a “general belief of impartial per- 

, 8 enera b he said, there are traits which militate against the natives enter- 
mg t e c erica! state: their peculiar character and fickleness, childish vanity, frailty, 
cowardice; their pride when occupying high positions; their spirit of 
U 5 ? their lack of practical sense. Therefore, they are not for the priest- 
hood much less for the episcopate.”™ 

At the beginning of his administration as bishop of Nueva Segovia, 
amp°ma nes asked for more Dominicans and Augustinians “so as not to see my- 
se orced to confer sacred orders to indigenous Filipinos.” 71 Because of lack of 

personnel he had to ordain natives; “I always did it with repugnance, at least for 
my part.” 72 

hker 14 or more years in the seminary, the ordained clerics could serve only 
as coa jutores under the watchful eye of the friars parish priests.” 5 1 he predeces- 



258 



L 'Y Fhe Satire C lergy From the Late / 9th Century to the Early 20th Century 



sor of Archbishop Nozaleda, Monsignor Pedro Pava, went further and sealed the 
lot of the native clergy bv prohibiting in his seminaries the teaching of Dogmatic 
Theology to the Filipino clerics, holding the subject not necessary and indeed su- 
perfluous for them who had been condemned perpetually to the humble office of 
auxiliaries of the parish priests. '* 

For Archbishop Nozaleda, last friar archbishop of Manila, the native priests 
were “totallv incapable (omnitw impotens) of carrying out the sacred ministry as 
they should " because of their fickleness, their uncontrolled inclination to vices of 
the flesh, their incapacitv to learn the minimum expected of a mediocre priest. 
How could thev defend the church from, saw the Protestant Americans? 1 hey were 
not free from avaritia clcricalis and thev would sacrifice the sacred dignity of the 
priesthood itself to the material prosperin' of their own family. AVe are very much 
afraid,'' said Nozaleda, “that because of the ignorance and ineptitude of the Fili- 
pino priests the faith of the people will be ruined. (1 

Chapel le asked if it would be expedient for the Filipino clergy to continue to 
exist. Cebu Bishop Alcocer volunteered this interesting observation: I am con- 
vinced the Filipino clerics will disappear bv themselves. I he logic is not unlike 
Nozaledas: because the life of a priest is premised on sacrifice and work, both of 
which are un-Filipino, and because donations and income from parishes have con- 
siderably diminished, the native elergv is due for self-destruction. 

After hearing bishops and superiors complain that the Filipino priests were 
the cause of the misfortunes of the Spanish religious, the author of impious and 
detestable propaganda," the spirit behind the antireligious campaign. Apostolic 
Delegate Chapelle came to his own conclusion. He extolled the Spanish bishops 
and religious orders as, after all, the most sincere and powerful friends which tie 
Americans could have 0 while branding the native priests “without doubt the most 
astute and constant supporters of the insurrection s0 in the country. As the re e s 
were incompetent in governing the nation so too were the native clerg} m s P irl 
tual administration." They were, Nozaleda observed, “our w r orst enemy and wit 
few exceptions, only after their own benefit. 81 When Chapelle asked the religious 
superiors point-blank why their congregations did not accept indio candidates, tie 
Dominican superior Santiago Pava spoke for the group: 

Experience has taught us that congregations do not have much more 
from admitting natives because they are held incapable of observing the rule 
and constitutions and still more of committing themselves as religious to the 
Lord. 8 ’ 



The Gravest Mistake of the Past: No Remedial Measures Undertaken 

Apostolic Delegate Giovanni Battista Guidi (1902-1904), Chapelle s successor, 
was much different from his predecessor. A non-Spaniard, he sincerely had the 
good of the church at heart and the promotion of the native clergy as well. He 



259 



THE PHILIPPINE*. REVOLUTION AND BI-VOND 



wrote to Rampolla toward the end of the 1 902 and confirmed that the last Spanish 
bishops in the Philippines sought 

on purpos <z(di proposito, underlined once by ( »uidi). to impede the formation. 

I will not say elevated but even of a practicable and adequate kind, of the poor 
Filipino clergy; they wanted on purpose ( di propostto, underlined twice by 
GuidiJ to hold it in ignorance and humiliation. 

I his was the “gravest mistake of the past regime ; this was the principal 
motive, continued Guidi, 

of the profound resentment and of the irremediable aversion which the Fili- 
pino priests, good or bad, without distinction and without exception, harbor 
against the Spanish bishops, priests, and religious/' 

Not all superiors were in full agreement. Two in particular, Fr. Pi and Hr. 
Lobo, thought along the same line as Guidi. hr. I’i. the Jesuit superior, reasoned 
that in dealing with the people the native priest had an edge over a European in 
situations involving kinship and political sensibilities. The people obviously had 
to be taken into account. 1 he Augustinian Provincial hr. I. oho entertained the 
hope of improving the lot of the native clergy; for example, why did not each 
bishop send 10 or 12 students from his diocese for ecclesiastical studies in Rome? 8 ' 
Lobo and Pi did not deny that the native candidate continued to suffer from short- 
comings; but the native candidate was not, as Paya and No/.alcda said, nutum inep- 
t-urn esse ox omnino impotents. A native could change and improve with better for- 
mation. Church teaching and tradition constantly maintained that the priesthood 
was a vocation, that one was not born a priest; he was called hv god and formed. 

In a letter to Civil Governor Taft, Papal Secretary of State Rampolla pre- 
sented the holy see’s intention of calling in religious of other nationalities and “as 
far as possible of the United States.” 86 The papal secretary of state promised more- 
over that the holy see 

will not neglect to promote at the same time the further education and better 
ecclesiastical formation of the native clergy to prepare it according to its fitness 
to gradually take the place of the regular orders in the pastoral ministry. 8 

Rome seconded the suggestion of the Augustinian Provincial Lobo to send 
native candidates to the Eternal City. One of the instructions given to the incom- 
ing Apostolic Delegate to the Philippines, Guidi, was to encourage rhe bishops 

to send young clerical students to study in Rome, with due attention given in 
the choice of the same, with preference for those of proven ecclesiastical voca- 
tion, greatest piety and talent. 88 



260 



I Y The .Win re ( /rr^y From the Late 1 9th Century to the Turly 20th Century 



Less than a year later, in the spring ot 1903, two telegrams sent by Rampolla to 
Guidi indicated that the holv father had decided that these ecclesiastical students 
chosen tor their “talent, piety, and genuine vocation should come to Rome lor 
the “coming scholastic year. Lhev were 12 in all: tour trom Manila and two 
from each ot the other dioceses, l hev were to stay at the Colegio Pio Latino 
Americano and not, as initially planned, at the Dominican House at Via Condotti 
in Rome. v ’ 

While these words and measures merely restated thechurchs position on the 
internationality of Clod s gilt ot the priesthood and on the required quality educa- 
tion ot the candidates, the holy see further stressed the importance ot having good 
seminaries and schools in the Islands. It this was a must tor all countries, how 
much more, declared Rome, tor “the Philippines where the clergy and people are 
in direct need of the best formation." This was, continued the instruction, the 
urgent need ot the Lilipino clergy. °° 



The Coming of America: More of the Vatican 

With the coming ot America and its constitutional provision ot separation ot 
church and state the Vatican ironically could interfere directly and enjo\ full tree 
dom in the ecclesiastical affairs of the Philippines. Because ot the dire need tor 
personnel, Guidi suggested to Rome that the Philippine church invite non-Span 
ish friars, “in particular, American or Irish: or still better to invite religious ot ot 
congregations with simple vows, even Spanish ot missionary and educationa on 
entation.’ 1 1 his had been suggested before bv a group ot diocesan priests in a n 
moria submitted to Apostolic Delegate Chapelle in 1900. * What it signihe v a 
that Catholic missionaries trom other countries were welcome to work in tie ^ 
ippincs. The response to the personnel crisis found echo even in the Unite t< 
thanks to the efforts ot Apostolic Delegate Agius (1904-191 1), the Eng an e ^ 
cated Benedictine from Malta. The same thought was verbalized in 1 503 } 
dent Theodore Roosevelt who not only wanted the Spanish regulars out 
Philippines but proposed the idea of having “a certain number ot 1 i ip in ° Lt 
dates educated here in the United States." 1 ’ 1 /of 

In a letter to Apostolic Delegate Falconio in Washington, Pap^ ecr j" ' 
State Cardinal Merry del Val communicated the popes great pleasure at 

of “some American archbishops, bishops, and abbots to sponsor gratis t ie e 

r . . . . , r . . os Fourteen such prelates 

tion of Filipino seminarians in their respective seminaries. 1UU1 

volunteered to take in 4cS seminarians. At the same time Merry del Va su t?t> 
that it would be “more advantageous that the young Filipinos woul e e 
in Rome under the watchful eye of the Holy See" and that the amount to e s P ent 
in America be sent instead to Rome. % On this proposal Falconio volunteered his 
personal opinion why the bishops would prefer “their respective seminaries to 
Rome: 1) it was “generally cheaper in America than in Rome and 2) future m 
pino priests should learn English and become familiar with American customs. 



261 



THE PHILIPPINE RE VO EL" I K )N AM ) HI Y< )M > 



Asked by Falconio about Cardinal Merry del Vais proposal the American 
bishops supported the apostolic delegates view. Archbishop \X illiams of Boston 
was willing to pay for two in Rome; as for C Cardinal ( libbons of Baltimore, he said 
it would be “a great pleasure for me to educate a student .it the North American 
College in Rome, but unfortunately all the burses of this diocese are already 
filled:’ 98 

The Apostolic Constitution Quae mari Sin ico issued by Leo XIII (1 Sep- 
tember 1902) to reorganize the church in the islands, explicitly states that Filipino 
secular priests found most worthy “be gradually promoted to higher dignities. 
The stand of the Spanish bishops and religious superiors in the Philippines could 
not possibly be favorable as seen in the meeting between Apostolic Delegate 
Chapelle and the Spanish prelates in early 1900. But an unexpected source from an 
unlikely person surfaced. Felipe Agoncillo, President Aguinaldos representative in 
Paris and who filed an official protest (12 December 1 898) to the Spanish-Ameri- 
can Peace Commission for excluding the Philippines from the deliberation ot the 
peace treaty, succeeded in contacting the papal nuncio in Paris even if only indi- 
rectly. Io hear Nuncio Lorenzelli tell it, Agoncillo had communicated to him, 
through a prominent Catholic individual, that 



Aguinaldo was most disposed to negotiate with the I lolv See for the re- 
lease of the Spanish prisoners of religious (monad) and priests including the 
bishop ofVigan, should the same Holy See consent to name, as bishops of the 
four dioceses which remain under the power of the Philippine government, 
native ecclesiastics, or Filipino nationals . 100 



i lpino diplomat Agoncillo was ready to come to Rome and talk to Rampolla. 
orenzelli realized the delicatezzsiof the situation and of the proposal” as the nam- 
ing o bishops would imply, at least outwardly, a certain recognition of his gov- 
ernment on the part of the Holy See.” 101 Talks were aborted as the Vatican had al- 
ready sent an apostolic delegate to Manila and the prisoners had in the meanti 
been released. 102 



me 



In the archives of the Council for the Public Affairs of the church there are at 
ast t ree telegrams, dated July, November, and December 1900, urging the holy 
at er to nominate Filipino bishops. 103 The secular priest Fr. Mariano Sevilla and 
is companions at the meeting with Chapelle urged the papal representative to 
name Filipino auxiliary bishops cum jure successions}"' This was followed by a 
memorial of the Jaro clergy demanding Filipino bishops for Philippine dioceses. 105 
Fr. Mariano Sevillas friend, Fr. Manuel Roxas, submitted another mernoria to 
Chapelle recommending among other things the erection of dioceses and arch- 
dioceses under the indigenous clergy, and “the elevation to the cardinalate of 
two or three prelates of the Philippine Church.” 100 A surprise solution came from 

a previously unheard group, the laymen De los Reyes, De Leon, Arejola, and seven 
others: 



262 



UY The Nil tnr Clergy From the Fite / 9th Century to the Early 20th Century 



I he only effective remedy would he to grant to the virtuous, intelligent 
and from every aspect, most fit Filipino clergy its rights to occupy exclusively all 
archbishoprics, bishoprics, ecclesiastical courts, vicarships, chapters, parishes, 
the administration of seminaries. 10 



Chapelles successor, the Italian Guidi, rejected all Spanish candidates and 
turned down an all-American hierarchy. Instead he proposed a mixture of three 
Americans and two Filipinos. I0S Fearing his two candidates would be eased out by 
incoming American bishops, Guidi quickly wired Rampolla to implore the Holy 
Father to name two Filipino priests as bishops, otherwise government, clergy, and 
the natives would he greatly disgusted." He added: "1 take responsibility for them 
and act as guarantor before God and the Holy See that they will give honor to the 
Church. Rampolla immediately asked the three Spanish ex-Philippine bishops 
for their comments on a list of native candidates for "one or two episcopal sees. 

Bishop Arsenio ot Nueva Caceres 111 and Archbishop Nozaleda of Manila, 
who appeared to have toned down their judgment of the native clergy, dutifully 
gave their evaluation although without enthusiasm. 11 * 1 Bishop Campomanes, ex- 
prisoner of President Aguinaldos troops, the ordinary of the schismatic priest Gre- 
gorio Aglipay, and for 37 years a missionary in the Philippines, sent an 1 1 PA? e 
handwritten report which was both an apologia for the Spanish religious and a 
damning testimony against the native clergy: 



They arc not for the priesthood, much less for the episcopacy. All aspire 
and all believe themselves fit to become bishops, cardinals, even popes... h Ls 
necessary to consider the native priests always as neofitos in the faith, and it is 
not prudent to make them bishops, ne in super biam elath in judicium incidant 
diaboli. They are good only as assistants under certain conditions. 



For all the private initiatives of the Aguinaldo government in early 1 9 ^ 

the flurry of correspondence among Manila, Madrid, and the Vatican r ° m ^ 
to 1903 it was only in June 1906 when the first Filipino bishop, Jorge a* ^ 
Nueva Caceres, was ordained; then in 1909, Bishop Gorordo of Ce u, t 
after, Bishop Singzon of Calbayog. The explanation for the delay was ne^ 
intense search for American ecclesiastics ready and willing to presi c p||jq n0 
pine dioceses, a search that took place simultaneously with the seaic i 
bishops. 114 



Conclusion 

Four factors converged to set off the gradual process toward the Filipinization o 
the Philippine church. The first was the coming of Protestant America, t e secon , 
the American principle of separation of church and state; the third, t e entrance o 
the Vatican into the Philippine church; the fourth, the efforts of two aposto ic e 



263 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND Hi Y< )NI ) 



egates, Guidi and Agius, to obtain the appointment of Filipino bishops. The 
United States effectively terminated government intrusions into ecclesiastical af- 
fairs guaranteed in the Spanish Patronato Real. With the separation of church and 
state the Vatican could freely and directly interfere in church matters in an Ameri- 
can colony without going through Madrid or through Washington. It can truly be 
said that President Roosevelt and Governor-General Taft aided the Roman Catho- 
lic church in the archipelago to become less Spanish and more ( Catholic. I he Vati- 
can availed itself of the religious liberty enjoyed by American C Catholics by seeking 
its extension to the Catholics in the Philippines. Rampolla and the American 
Catholic prelates, like Gibbons and Ireland, strove to accommodate American de- 
sires by, for example, appointing American bishops. But it was clear in the mind of 
Rome that its plan of reorganizing the Philippine church meant, above all, pro- 
moting native clergy and appointing Filipino bishops. Guidi, who modified and 
changed some instructions of his predecessor Chapelle, and Agius, who continued 
Guidi s initiative in encouraging the appointment of Filipinos as bishops, both ex- 
erted enormous energy in implementing the provisions of Quae yuan Snuco. It was 
widely known in Manila that, unlike during Chapelles time, opposition was being 
waged by religious groups led by the Spanish friars against Guidi and Agius, which 
plainly shows where the sympathies of the two apostolic delegates lay. The role of 
Divine Providence appears when one observes that the different and varied ele- 
ments which could have, humanly speaking, jeopardized the Philippine church did 
in reality contribute to fostering its auspicious growth. 

Notes 



1 . 



2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 



Collection Paste lls cle Madrid, Philippine Section, XIV, 1 03v, quoted in Horacio de la 
Costa, I he Development of Native Clergy in the Philippines” in Horacio de la 
Costa and John N. Schumacher, The Filipino Clergy: Historical Studies and Future 
Perspectives { Manila: Loyola Papers, 1980), p. 34. 

See Summary of a letter by Archbishop Pardo” in Blair-Robertson, The Philippine 
Islands (henceforth BRPI), XLV, pp. 182-83. 

Diego de Viga to the King, 26 June 1680, as quoted in John N. Schumacher, Read- 
ings in I hilippine Church History (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University, 1 987) 
pp. 196-97. 



In Sinibaldo de Mas, Informe so bre el estado de las islas Filipinas en 1842 III, p. 33, as 
quoted in John N. Schumacher, Readings, p. 1 98. Tr. H. de la Costa and J.N. Schu- 
macher. Spanish and English texts may be found in Sinibaldo de Mas (Manila: His- 
torical Conservation Society, 1963) pp. 39-40, 145. 

Geographia historica,VIII (Madrid, 1752) 37, as quoted by De la Costa in “The De- 
velopment of the Native Clergy in the Philippines” in The Filipino Clergy: Historical 
Studies and Future Perspectives (Manila: Loyola Papers, 1980) p. 40. 

Quoted in John N. Schumacher, Readings, p. 205. 



264 



UY The Wit nr Clergy Trow the late 1 9th Century to the fairly 20th Century 



7. Sec Antol in V. U\\ The Stiite of the Church in the Philippines (Tagaytay City, 1 984) pp. 
34-36. 

8. Josef Metzler, “f oundation of the Congregation dc Propaganda Fide by Gregory XV 
in Sacra e Congregation is dc Propaganda Fide Memoria Rerum (henceforth, SCPF Me- 
moria Rerum) (Rome-l : reihurg-\\ ien: Herder, 1972) 1/2, p. 80. 

9. Ibid., p. 8 1 . 

10. Karl Mueller, “Propaganda-Kongregation und einheimischer Klerus in SCPF Me- 
moria Rerun/, 1/1, p. 55T 

1 1. Ignacio I ing Pong l ee, “l a Actitud de la Sagrada Congregacion frente al Regio 
Patronato" in SCPF Memoria Rerun/, 1/1, pp. 382, 387. 

12. “Pallu, Francois, in Lexihon der Mission, ed. Horst Rzepkowski (Graz-Wien-Koeln: 
Verlag Styria, 1992), p. 338. 

13. Archivio Segreto Vaticano, Archivio della Nunziatura di Madrid (henceforth ASX, 
Arch. Nun/. Madrid) 20, pp. 123-126. 

14. Casimiro Diaz, “ 1 he Augustinians in the Philippines 1670-94 in BRPh XLII, pp. 
136-37. 

15- Ibid., p. 139. 

16. The Royal Decree is dated Madrid, 22 August 1677. Cited in Horacio de la Costa, 
Readings in Philippine History (Manila: Bookmark, 1965), p. 87. 

1 7 . Urbano Cerri, “Compendiola e generale relatione dello stato delle missioni fatta all- 
San tita di Nro Sig., Panno 1677" in Miscellanee Varic, XI I la. Archivio Propaganda 
Fide (henceforth APF). 

18. Ibid. 

1 9. Cf. Josef Metzler, “Die Kongregation in der 2. Haelfte des 1 . Jh. in SCPF Ah 
Rerun/ , 1/ 1 , p. 271. 

20. Ibid., pp. 263-64. ^ pMno- 

21. Josef Metzler, “Verso un lnstituto Missionario di sacerdoti secolari in S 

ria Rerun/, 1/1, pp. 506-07. M 

22. Cf. Karl Mueller, “Propaganda-Kongregation und einheimischer Kleius 
Memoria Rerun/, 1/1, p. 556. 

23. APF, SC, Ind. Or., Cina, del 1705-1706, vol. 230, p. 193. 

24. Ibid., p. 554. 

25. Ibid., vol. 9, p. 13. Nunz 

26. Archbishop Camacho to Nuncio Zondadari, 3 April 1708, AS V, Arc . 
Madrid, 69, pp. 1 1-14. The letter encloses other pieces of correspondenc 
Camacho and other persons, such as Tournon and Pope Clement XI. 

27. Cardinal Paulucci to Nuncio Zondadari, Roma, 12 April 1707, ASV, Arc 
Madrid, 60, p. 1779. 

28. Cardinal Paulucci to Nuncio Zondadari, Roma, 26 April 1707, ASV, Arc . u 
Madrid, 60, p. 1 779. 

29. Cardinal Paulucci to Nuncio Zondadari, Roma, 23 July 1707, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 60, p. 1951. 



265 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTK )N AND BEYOM ) 



30. Cardinal Paulucci to Nuncio Zondadari, Roma, 1 3 ( )ctobcr I ''O' 7 . ASV. Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 61 , p. 152. 

31. Ibid., p. 1 53. 

32. Pope Clement XI to King Philip V. Roma, 15 October 1707, ASV. Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 69, pp. 162-3. 

33. Pope Clement XI to Count of Montezuma, 7 May 1707, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 
60, p. 1831. 

34. Carlos Alonso, “I^a Sagrada Congregacion y Pilipinas; rclacioncs solo cn la primera 
parte del siglo XVIII” in SCPF Memoria Rerum , II, p. 1 043. 

35. Nuncio Barili to Jimeno, 1 November 1859, letter unnumbered, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

36. Nuncio Barili to Gainza, 5 May 186)2, no. 1 147, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 447. 

37. Nuncio Barili to Martinez, 5 January 1863, no. 38, ASV, Arch. Nun/, Madrid, 447. 

38. Aragones to Nuncio Barili, 13 January 186)5, No. 1326, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 
449. Also, Nuncio Barili to Aragones, 21 May 186>5, no. 1425, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 49. 

39. Nuncio Barili to Gainza, 22 June 186)1, letter unnumbered, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

40. Nuncio Barili to Cardinal Antonelli, 4 October 186)0, no. 6>6)8, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

41. Nuncio Barili to Martinez, 5 May 1868, letter unnumbered, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

42. Nuncio Barili to Gainza, 21 May 1868, letter unnumbered, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

43. Nuncio Barili: Interview with Antonio Orge, OP, 22 August 1 858, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

44. Royal Decree of 8 June 1826. By another decree of 9 March 1849, the secular 
clergy lost seven parishes in the nearby province of Cavite to the friars, three of them 
to the Recollects. The Recollects, in compensation for the parishes in Mindanao 
which were turned over to the newly arrived Jesuits, claimed Antipolo, “Li perla tie los 
curatos, by the Royal Decree of 10 September 1861 (Martinez to Regent of Spain, 

31 December 1870, Archivo Historico Nacional, Ultramar, leg. 2255, exp. 2. Hence- 
forth, AHN). 

45. Visita Diocesana, Nueva Caceres, 25 October 1863, AHN, Ultramar, leg. 2204, exp. 
63. 

46. Martinez to Nuncio Barili, 21 June 1864, no. 1 545 bis, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 
447. 

47. Nuncio Barili to Martinez, 20 August 1864, no. 1 572, ASV, Arch. Nunz, Madrid, 
447. 

48. Ibid. 

49. Martinez to Nuncio Barili, 21 June 1 864, no. 1 545 bis, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 
447. 



266 



UY / he Native Clergy From the Fite 1 9th Century to the Eiirly 20th Century 



50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 



Nuncio Barili to Martinez, 5 November 1864, no. 21 18, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 
447. 

Pelaez to Nuncio Barili, 22 April 1863, no. 1278, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 44/. 
Pelaez, Breves Ap mites. 

Ibid. 

Pelaez to Nuncio Barili, 22 May 1863, no. 1623, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 447. 
This was the letter accompanying Breves Apuntes. 

55. Ciainza: Memorandum to Archbishop Martinez, 24 June 1862, in Gainza to Nuncio 
Barili, 5 Julv 1862, no. 2083, ASV, Arch. Nunz. Madrid, 447. 

56. Ibid. 

57. Jimeno to Nuncio Barili, 24 February 1860, letter unnumbered, ASV, Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 447. 

58. Martinez to Ultramar, 20 July 1864; copy sent to Nuncio Barili, ASV Arch. Nunz. 
Madrid, 448. 

59. Pelaez, Breves Apuntes. 

60. Chapel le was Archbishop of New Orleans, U.S.A., when he was appointed Apostolic 
Delegate Lxtraordinarv to Cuba and Puerto Rico, which appointment nn as extended 
to include the Philippines on 28 September 1899. See the letter ot Secretary ol State 
Mariano C Cardinal Rampolla to Placidus Luduvicus Chapelle, 2 September IS ) ^ n0 * 
51877, Sacra Congregazione degli A Bair Ecclesiastici Straordinari (SCAAEESS0, 
Spagna, Posizone 903-903, Fascicolo 316, paina 67. 1 his and similar other citations 
will henceforth appear as, e.g., Rampolla to Chapelle, 2 September IS )), no. 318 
SC:AAEESS, Sp., Posiz, 903-903, Ease. 316, p. 67. Rampolla was Secretary of- State 
of Leo XII from 1887 to 1903. 

61 . On the general plan ol the Pope, see SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz, 9 3, Facs. 3 0, p* 2 
Quae wank Sinieo, dated Rome, 1 7 September 1 902, was promulgated in Manila on 
8 December 1902. See letter ol Apostolic Delegate Giovanni Battista GuiC 
Rampolla, 9 December 1902, (no. 6) no. 75917, SCAAEESS, Sp., Psiz. ^6, Fas 
384, p. 60. Ci.B. Guidi was born on 26 April 1852 in Collepard, Dioce.e^ 
Alatri, Italy. A doctor ol philosophy, theology, and canon law, he was sent in 
Ecuador where he stayed lor a lew months as acting eha rge-d ajfaif s ol the Hob S * 
Quito. Cardinal Rampolla ordained him bishop in Rome on 21 September 

On 25 September 1902, he was appointed Apostolic Delegate Extraordinary t ) 
Philippines and Titular Archbishop ol Stauropoli. He died in Manila, — Jtib 
See Chapelles reports to Rome on his series ol meetings in January and Ma\ 
with the bishops, religious, and diocesan priests, in Chapelle to Rampolla, Mani a, 
27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 330; Chapelle to 
Rampolla, Manila, 20 September 1900, no. 59601, Fasc. 335. The reports were com 
piled under the title: “Acta Collationum, quas Episcopi Philippinarum Habuerunt in 
Civitate de Manila. Praeside Rdmo. Ap. Del. PL. Chapelle. 

Our facts are taken Irom reports to Rome ol 1896-97, 1898, and 1 )00. Sec 
SCAAFTSS, Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 331, pp. 28-30. 



62. 



63 . 



267 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTIC )N AND HI Y< )M ) 



64. Chapelle to Rampolla, Manila, 27 April 1900, no. 5 _ '2-*5, S( AAF.FSN, Sp., Posiz. 
934, Fasc. 330, p. 71 Chapellc met the Spanish religious .it least three times: 9, 13, 
17 January 1900, ibid., Fasc. 330, p. 1 10. 

65. Meeting between Chapellc* and religious superiors, 9 January 1900, in C .hapclle to 
Rampolla, 27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posi/. 93*. base. 330, p. 101. 

66. Meeting between Chapellc and secular clergy, 25 January 1900, in Chapellc to 
Rampolla, 27 April 1900, no. 57245, ibid., Fasc. 33 1 , p. 3. I be position paper of the 
clergy consisting of eight petitions was read by Fr. Jose C lhanco, member of the Ca- 
thedral Chapter of Manila. 

67. Bishop Francisco Gainza of Nueva Caccrcs said this of the native priests in 1862: 
“Generally speaking, they lack the strength of character, the drive and initiative in 
their work; their upbringing is very different from ours, and their habits and customs 
are not those of Europe. Caeteris paribus they are inferior in aptitude a nd talent. To 
wish them then to be on the same level as the Spanish priests is to ignore the immense 
gap which separates the two races, to wish an absurd thing, to demand the impos- 
sible (quoted in Antolin V. Uy, SV1), The State of the Church in the Philippines 
(Tagaytay City, 1984), p. 186). 

68. rhis is the observation of Santiago Paya, OP, Rector of the University of Santo Ibmas, 
during the meeting between Chapellc and religious superiors, 9 January 1900, in 
Chapellc to Rampolla, 27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 
330, p. 97. 

69. Ibid. 

70. Jose Hevia Campones, Bishop of Nueva Segovi a, to Rampolla, 14 May 1903, no. 

77849, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 998. Fasc. 396, p. 48. 

71. Ibid., p. 49. 

72. Ibid., p. 48. 

73. The same opinion (as that of Campomanes) on the native clergy is had with another 
Dominican Bishop Gainza of Nueva Caccrcs a contemporary of Fr. Pclaez and Fr. 
Burgos. I he native indio priests,” Gainza remarked, “under the guidance of the zeal- 
ous, charitable, and proven [Spanish] curacnn work with profit in the vineyard of the 
Lord. See Antolin V. Uy, SVD, The State of the Church in the Philippines (Tagaytay 
City, 1984), p. 89. 

74. Guidi to Rampolla, Manila, 23 December 1 902, no. 75917, SCAAEESS, So., Posiz. 
986, Fasc. 384, p. 86. 

75. Meeting between Chapelle and bishops, 8 January 1900, in Chapellc to Rampolla, 

27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 330, p. 70. 

76. Ibid. 

77. Ibid., p. 71. 

78. Meeting between Chapelle and bishops, 8 January 1900, in Chapelle to Rampolla, 
27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Fasc. 330, p. 72. 

79. Chapelle to President McKinley, Manila, 10 February 1900, in Chapelle to 
Rampolla, 27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 330, p. 50. 



268 



80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86 . 

87. 

88 . 

89. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 
100 . 



I Y l he Satire Clergy From the Late 1 9th Century to the Fitly 20th Century 



C'hapellc to President McKinley, Manila, 31 March 1900, in Chapelle to Rampolla, 
27 Apri I 1900. ibid., p. 51. 

Meeting ol C diapelle with bishops and religious superiors, 23 May 1900, in Chapelle 
to Rampolla, September 1 900, no. 5960 1 , SCAAEESS, Sp.. Posiz. 934, Fasc. 335, p. 
60. 

Meeting between Chapelle and religious superiors, 9 January 1990, in Chapelle to 
Rampolla, 2~ April 1 900. no. 5 _r 245, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 330, p. 100. 
Ciuidi to Rampolla, Manila. 23 December 1902, no. 75917, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz, 
986, base. 384, p. 80. 

Ibid. 

Meeting between C'hapellc and religious superiors, 9 January l l !00, in Chapelle to 
Rampolla, 2^ April 1900. no. 5~245. SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz, 934, Fasc. 330, p. 98. 
Rampolla to Taft. 2 1 June 1 002, no. 70963, SCAAEESS, Sp„ Posiz. 975, Fasc. 3 71, 

pp. 8, 1 0. 

Ibid., p. 9. 

Instructions to Ciuidi, September 1902, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 986, Fasc. 384, p. 
18. 

Telegram, Rampolla to Ciuidi, 6 April 1 903, no. 6433, SCAAEESS, Sp., 1 osiz. c 
Fasc. 387, p. 34. Also, telegram, Rampolla to Quidi, 7 April 1903* no. 64/ 1, ibi 
Fasc. 387, p. 33. 

Instructions to Ciuidi, September 1902, SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 986, Fasc. 384, p. 

39. - • 

Ciuidi to Rampolla, 22 April 1903, no. 77861, Sacra Congregazione deglt Aftari 
Ecclcsiastici Straordinari, Spagna. Posizione 996, Fascicolo 393* p* 83. Hence 
SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz., Fasc. 

The Mem or in is found in Chapelle to Rampolla, 2 April 1)00, no. 
SCAAEESS, Sp., Posiz. 934, base. 332, pp. 86-92. 

Monsignor Mr. Quaid of Rochester to Falconio, 6 June 1907, U.S.A. Apostol 
egation, sezione VII, scatola 103, p. 13. Henceforth USAAD, sez., sc. Two Fi ip 
students were in his seminary since October 1906. Archbishop Diomedes Fc 
was Apostolic Delegate to Washington (1902-191 1). 

Falconio to Rampolla, 1 0 January 1 903, no. 1 066(?), USAAD, sez. VII, sc. 3a, p 
Merry del Val to Falconio, 3 May 1907, no. 23376, USAAD, sez. VII, sc. 103, pp 



bid., p. 3. 

^alconio to Marry del Val, 1 6 May 1 907, no. 1 4690. USAAD, sez. Vll, sc. 10. , p 
Cardinal Gibbons to Falconio, 3 June 1907, no. 148623, USAAD, sez. VII, sc. 10. , 
3 . 10 . 

Fext in Achutegui-Bernad. Religious Revolution in the Philippines ( Manila. Ateneo 
Vlanila University Press, 1972) IV, 283-90. 

\Juncio Eorenzelli to Rampolla, Paris, 8 January 1900, No. 174, no. 34079, confi 
iential, ASV, Segretario di Stato, anno 1 901 , Rubrica 249, Fascicolo 3, p. 30. Hence 
orth ASV, SSt., a., Ruhr., base. 



269 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



101. Ibid., p. 50. 

102. Rampolla to Nuncio Lorenzelli, 1 1 January 1900, no. 54079, ASV, SSt., a. 1901, 
Rubr. 249, Fasc. 5, p. 52. 

103. Telegrams to Pope Leo XIII: July 1900, November 1900, December 1900, 
SCAAEESS, Sp., a. 1900, Posiz. 933, Fasc. 329, pp. 87-89. 

104. Cf. Chapelles report to Cardinal Rampolla, 27 April 1900, no. 57245, SCAAEESS, 
Sp., Posiz. 934, Fasc. 332. 

105. Memoria que la Comision del CIcro de la Diocesis de Jaro presence) a Monsenor 
La(!) Chapelle” in Chapelle to Rampolla, 22 May 1 900, no. 573 1 2, S( 1AAEESS, Sp., 
Posiz. 934, Fasc. 332, p. 91. 

106. Manuel E. Roxas y Manio to the Holy Father, 1 April 1900, SC 'AAEESN, Sp., Posiz. 
934, Fasc. 332, p. 99. 

107. Isabelo de los Reyes, Presidente de la Comision Secular europeo-americana por el 
clero filipino; Felix de Leon, Vice- Presidente de la Misma; Fomas Arejola, Presidente 
del Comite Republicano Filipino de Madrid and seven other individuals to Leo XIII, 
Madrid, 29 June 1901, letter unnumbered, SCAAEILSS, Sp., a. 1901, Posiz. 954, 
Fasc. 348, p. 64. 

108. Guidi to Rampolla, Manila, 31 December 1902, no. 10, no. 75917, SCAAEESS, 
Sp., a. 1902-1903, Posiz. 988, Fasc. 385, pp. 37-38. 

109. Guidi to Rampolla, 20 April 1903, cable, SCAAEESS, Sp., a. 1 903, Posiz. 998, Fasc. 
396, p. 25. 

110. Rampolla to Nozaleda of Manila, Arsenio del Campo of Nueva Caccres, and 
Campomanes of Nueva Segovia, 28 April 1903, no. 76870, SCAAEESS, Sp., a. 
1903. Posiz. 998, Fasc. 396, p. 40. 

HE Bishop Arsenio to Rampolla, Valladolid, 14 May 1903, no. 7785 1 , SCAAEILSS, Sp., 
a * 1903, Posiz. 998, Fasc. 396, pp. 56-59. The bishop’s candidates were Barlin, 
Singzon, and Gorordo. 

112. Archbishop Nozaleda to Rampolla, Ocana, 27 May 1903, no. 77583, SCAAEESS, 

Sp., a. 1903, Posiz. 998, Fasc. 396, p. 70. Nozalcdas choice were Barlin, Pacis, and 
Singzon. 

113. Bishop Campomanes to Rampolla, Oviedo, 14 May 1903, no. 77849, SCAAEESS, 
Sp., a. 1903, Posiz. 998, Fasc. 396, pp. 48, 51. The Latin scriptural passage is from 

Paul. 1 Tim 3:6. 

1 14. See Antolin V. Uy, “ 1 he Making of the First Four American Bishops in the Philip- 
pines,” DIWA 18 (1993), 73-85. 



270 



Faustino Villafranca 
and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



Perfecto M. Terra Jr. 

The Filipino, London, United Kingdom 



Who was Faustino Villafnuica? 

F austino Villafranca was a major 19th-century Filipino figure v>ho 
seems to have escaped the attention of historians. Although he was not, like is 
contemporary, Jose Burgos, an obviously influential political figure, the fact t at 
he wrote the first book about Europe and Asia en route, in effect providing us a 
glimpse of the world, should be enough to place him among the more important 

figures of the second half of the 19th century. 

Wenceslao Retana describes Faustino Villafranca by quoting D. Pons, aeon 
temporary who reviewed Villafrancas book: “El primer indio y el primer orient 
que ha viajado por Europa, describiendo de paso en espanol sus viajes. This quo 
tation alone should have aroused Retanas interest in Villafranca. But it seems e 
missed its significance. Thanks to him others are left the task of trying to recon 
struct a picture of Villafranca from the shards of information he stiewed a out 
himself as he progressed through Europe. Until his records are retrieved from the 
archives of the University of Santo Tomas and the Manila Cathedral, we shall know 
nothing about him apart from what he tells us in the book. 



The Book 

Faustino Villafranca wrote Desde Pilipinas a Europa. He was a prebend of the Ma- 
nila Cathedral. The complete title of the book is: Correspondencias de un Viaje 
Desde Filipinas a Europa por Na poles, Sicilia , Roma , Italia , Paris , Londres y Espana 



271 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND hi VON D 



(comprenden la description de varias poblaciones del transito . nicluso ( anton en China 
con los sucesos del viaje en la ide y vuelta). 

The book was published in Manila in 1870 by the Imprema Rcvista 
Mercantil dej.de Loyzaga y Cia. It takes the epistolary form, made up of letters 
addressed to imaginary ecclesiastical brothers dated from 5 February I860 to 25 
November 1869. It is 283 pages long. 

Desde Manila a Europa is not cited by I lelen R. Tu Bangui in her bibliography 
of Filipiniana at Villadolid in Spain. Neither is it listed in the catalogue of the Brit- 
ish Library nor in the bibliography of Philippine books in the l.N. Library of 
Congress. Perhaps the only one who cites the book is Wenceslao Retana in his 
Aparato Bibliograpficor. 

Cronica epistolar de un largo viaje vcrificado por el autor, I again, quo 
revela dotes de observador y acredita ser un cscritor faeil, amujue tanto 
adocenado. Segun D. Pons, F. Villafranca ‘file el primer Filipino y el primer 
oriental que ha viajado por Europa dcscribiendo de paso en espanol sus viajes’ 
Visitoen Roma a Pio IX, en Paris a Dona Isabel II. Recien destronada. . . Obra 
muy agotada. 

If it is true as claimed by Pons that Villafranca was the first native Filipino 
and the first Oriental to have written about his travels to Europe, then his book 
Desde Filip inas a Europa is uniq ue in the travel literature of the 19th century, and 

or t is reason alone it deserves a place among the better-known travel books of its 
period. 

The significance of its being written by a native of one of the European colo- 
nies (for the first time, contemporary Europe is viewed and interpreted by a non- 
ropeanj cannot be overstressed. Since the onset of European expansion in the 
I t century until the middle of the 19th century, the only picture one saw of 
urope and indeed the world was that presented by Europeans. 

This is hardly surprising because as late as the second half of the 1 9th century 
urope s colonizing energy was as strong as ever, fuelled by its need for raw mate- 
ria s for its expanding industries, pushing it to enlarge its colonies in Africa and 
Asia. 

Travel writers came in train, the majority of whom were interested in collect- 
ln g and supplying data to the great commercial establishments that were quick to 
seize any opportunity to establish b ranches in the colonies. I heir accounts were 
more or less factual and imbued with the spirit of honest inquiry; hence they are 
still of value to scholars and researchers who wish to study the history of the colo- 
nies during that period. 

There were not a few, however, whose accounts were so distorted by preju- 
dices rampant among colonizers that they are now interesting only as curiosities of 
a bygone age, for they tell less about the colonies than the ignorance that reigned in 
some quarters of European society. 



272 



IT'RRA Fa ns ti no \ ilLifnmca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



A Europe seen through the eyes of a native of one of the European colonies is 
indeed something rare, especially if this view is interpreted through the complex 
prisms of his thoughts, experiences, origins, and society. This could provide an 
indication of how the educated natives of the colony generally viewed the world. 
Villafrancas account contains descriptions of landmarks that have long since van- 
ished: the Crvstal Palace in London; the Palais des Tuilleries, which was destroyed 



a few months later in the conflagration ot the 1870 revolution; a dilapidated Rome 
strewn with ancient ruins and new ones resulting from the battles tor Italian unifi- 
cation. The underground railways, tunnels under mountains ;hid railways that 
girded their slopes, and iron bridges spanning wide rivers were landmarks of a 
Europe well bevond the memories of millions of Europeans today, breathtaking 
during their time but now taken tor granted. Moreover, he describes events and 
political currents shaping Europe during that period so that his picture is not a 
mere outline but richly detailed. 

Viewed within the context of 19th-century Philippine literature, Desde Ma- 
nila a Euro pa is also unique. With a tew exceptions literary production during that 
time was confined mainly to churning out religious books and mediocre imitations 
of mediocre Spanish writers. Villafrancas book goes beyond this mold as it is in 
formed by the liberal scientific spirit that was struggling to survive in the Phi ip- 

One might expect Villafrancas view of Europe and the world to be blurred 
by religious obscurantism, he being a cleric, and that it would also be tinged wit 
colonial servility. But it displays none ot these. In his account, Villafranca shows an 
astonishing clarity of mind and self assurance, as though he had been schoo ec a 
along in the liberal-scientific tradition of Europe, praising what needed praise, 
admiring the great scientific inventions and the progress they brought about, 

also criticizing their shortcomings. ^ 

His being an inciio makes his book doubly significant. It woulc e two c e 
cades before the generation of 1896 produced Filipino writers imbued with the 



same spirit. . , 

Apart from his descriptions of Europe, Villafranca also presents us wit ac 

counts of the different cities in the Orient he passed through, en loute to an com 
ing back from Europe. He visited Singapore, Hong Kong, and Canton an o 
serves with more than a tinge of envy the rapid economic development in mese 
cities that had even then already outstripped Manila and made it backward in com 

parison. r . 

The fact that Desde Manila a Europa was published by D.J. Loyzaga y ia, 
the publisher of Revista Mercantil&nd El Cornercio , speaks well for the book. Revista 
Mercan ti l and El Cornercio were the two leading journals that traced the movement 
of trade, listed goods and ships and their movement from port to port, and pub- 
lished business and general news from Europe; they were the local equivalents of 
the Wall Street Journal and therefore indispensable to traders in the country. 



273 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEY< )ND 



That Villafranca’s book contained data and information of use to local busi- 
nessmen is beyond doubt. But perhaps the main reason the publisher of commer- 
cial journals published an account of an individual’s travels in a fast-developing 
continent is that there was an audience, however small, for that sort of literature, 
and that the book could contribute to the spirit of reformism that was already in 
the air. 

It is surprising then that Desde Manila a Huropa has escaped the attention of 
Philippine historians and scholars. Perhaps because during the time of Wenceslao 
Retana, 30 years after its publication, the book was already out of print and diffi- 
cult to procure. 

Travel in the 19th Century 7 

Villafranca provides us with a complete picture of world travel in the 1 9th century. 

Although the main international sea routes had been charted by the middle 
of the 19th century and ships were plying them at regular intervals, foreign travel 
was still an inconvenient enterprise at best and oftentimes hazardous. While there 
was an extraordinary movement of people between Asia and Europe, the majority 
of these travelers were soldiers sent to pacify newly occupied lands or to consoli- 
date territorial gains, clerics in vast numbers raring to plant the various seeds of 
Christianity in the colonies, 1 businessmen and employees of European companies 
in Asia, and government officials assuming their posts in the colonies.*’ 

There were a few who traveled for adventure and research and who subse- 
quently put their discoveries in the service of science. 1 he introduction of new 
p ants and animals from the Orient gave impetus to the growth of nurseries and 
zoos, directly encouraging the biological, zoological, and botanical sciences in the 
west. The jungles and wilds of the Orient were scoured for exotic plants and trees 
or botanical gardens and the extensive gardens of the great houses. I he availability 
o nental fruits, vegetables, and spices irrevocably changed the eating and drink- 
ing habits of Europeans so much so that one cannot imagine an Englishman with- 
out his cup of tea. Many of the scientific travels were subsidized or assisted by 
wealthy patrons or companies needing more information about the colonies be- 
fore setting up business there. 

Those who traveled for pleasure were few and consisted mainly of wealthy 
people and some who, like Villafranca, were lucky enough to have some private 
means to do it. 3 Those who had the courage to travel soon discovered the pleasure 
of traveling by ship; they were frequently buffeted by myriad inconveniences to 
which they had to adapt if only to ward off misery, and if they did not have this 
ability they soon developed it. 

To start with one did not travel on one ship throughout. On his way to Eu- 
rope Villafranca had to change ships five times: 



274 



T1 RRA Fa us ti no \ ULifranca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



Manila to Hongkong: 5.2.69/7.2.69: Marques de la Victoria 

I longkong to Pont <ic Gal: 1 1.2.69/24.2.69: Orissa (P&O) 

Pont do Gal to Suez: 28.2.69/12.3.69: Mooltan 

Alexandria to Malta: 13.3.69/19.3.69: Poona!) 

Malta to Naples: 2 1 .3.69/23.3.69: Marsala (Italian). 

The names of ships indicate the countries of ownership. The openness of 
modern ports was still unknown then. Some ports were open only to certain flag- 
ships, thus one had to change ships in order to enter them. 1 he discomforts of trav- 
eling by ship were many and varied. If one did not have enough means one traveled 
second or third class and this meant cramped quarters: 

We were 1 80 passengers altogether. . . there was some kind of confusion 
as there were not enough cabins for all. The officers had to abandon and cede 
their own rooms to the passengers. . . I took one of those on the deck which 
had the advantage of having a temple-roof-like covering and free from the heat 
that those below suffer.... 

The meagerness of food is notable in the second class and the passengers 
had only one waiter. Their cabins, moreover, were uncomfortable because their 
beds were placed close side by side and as a consequence very little air circu- 
lated within. 

Such being the situation, passengers of the second class and the lower deck 
soon learned ingenious ways of survival as Villafranca here observes: 

The calmness of the sea and an agreeable temperature have returned and 
aroused fresh hopes among the passengers of the second class. They abandoned 
their caves, as they themselves called their berths, and surfaced to the top deck 
to pass the night, as is their custom. This needed some ingenuity: they have to 
find commodious armchairs with blankets to sleep on until the break of day. 

One evening, it happened that the armchair on which my companion nor- 
mally slept was occupied by an Englishman from the first class who came here 
to have some fresh air and fell asleep. My companion, already drowsy, got im- 
patient waiting for the Englishman to wake up. He walked toward the arm- 
chair, gave it a kick and pretended he tripped over it. The Englishman woke up 
with a jolt and shortly afterward left for his cabin to finish his interrupted sleep, 
leaving our astute friend in possession of the armchair. He could not stop sing- 
ing paeans to his own victory as a warning to others who would try to covet his 
armchair. 

Food was another problem. Coming from a country where food is naturally 
varied, Villafranca had occasion to complain about the food served on English 
ships: 



275 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



The English fare is frugal. The greater portions of food served .ire veg- 
etables and greens and very little meat and fish. Dishes are nearly always 
cooked with strong spices. Beer and brandy are also served. 1 he desserts con- 
sist mainly of pastries. After bread and cheese, fruits follow accompanied with 
a portion of sweetmeats of raisins and hazelnuts. Dinner is served with so much 
ceremony, etiquette and care, as though it were a grand occasion. In truth. 
Spanish food is so much more tasty and preferable in all senses. 

As the ships were not as big and stable as the modern ships we know, they 
were more susceptible to big waves and ocean storms, making the passengers sea- 
sick: “On the 8th day fresh wind came with the East creating huge waves. Everyone 
felt seasick, especially the ladies.” 

On his way back to the Philippines, Villafrancas ship encountered a storm 
over the China sea: 

On the first day, I had hardly lifted my head and I was about to reach a 
cup of chocolate on the table of my cabin, when the chair rocked to and for, 
rolled over and was thrown over the table, swiping my cup of chocolate and a 
glass of water — all three finally landing on my bed. I was drenched in choco- 
late and water. My companion who was suffering from seasickness was trying 
to sleep on the bed in front of mine. He was thrown off the bed and he landed 
on the floor under the table. It was the third or fourth time he had fallen off the 
bed, but there was no damage done, and he picked himself up and duly went 
back to bed... Of my former companions four of us now occupied the 
Captains room which was quite capacious. Four chairs from the corridors were 
converted into beds arranged in a semicircle. It seemed to me at times that we 
were in a hospital instead of a ship, thrown hither and thither, with spittoons 
in our hands, as was our animated captain who ordered the sails folded and 
laid on the floor. Our stomachs could hardly accept soup let alone food even if 
we had nothing to eat. Besides, cups and plates could not remain still. From 
the kitchen, frying pans and stews flew out to have some fresh air on the 
deck.... 

Apart from typhoons there was the inevitable sickness among the passengers: 
One day the youngest of the three Spanish sailors on the Marques had a fever — ” 
Villafranca himself fell ill: “The doctor on board the ship noticed my cough one 
evening and gave me some medicaments which seemed to work.’ 

On his return to the Philippines Villafranca mentions a death on the ship: 

One day we received the disturbing news that we had a cadaver on 
board. It was that of a French machinist who they say was bound for Cairo and 
who arrived on the ship already ill. Add to that he was always drunk. The night 
before the fatal hour he had convulsions upon which the doctor asked for help 



276 



IT RRA Faustino 1 7 llafninca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



so that he could be brought up to the top deck to have some fresh air, not sus- 
pecting that he was near death. He was brought upstairs lying down on his bed 
and well covered. T he Dutch missionaries watched over him should he have 
anymore attacks not knowing that he was already dead. 

One of the main curses of a long journey by ship was boredom. As an anti- 
dote to this the ship provided games: 

There were different games on this ship including various types of card 
games such as tuno, tablet del burro, jit egos de naipes as well as chess. There is 
also a swing where for two days the girls sat. It so happened that one of these 
girls fell on the floor and felled with the tips of her feet two Dutchmen who 
were passing below just when a descending undulation occurred. The girl 
turned pale and fled because the Dutchmen shouted at her. On the third day 
an American wanted to put his daughter on the swing, but one of the Dutch- 
men objected, not wanting to have a repeat of the other days incident. In his 
ire, the American pulled out a flick knife and cut the swing off. 

The passengers also devised their own entertainment. Aboard the Cambodge 
on the Red Sea, the passengers held a ball: 

Since the 1 1 th night one felt a mounting heat that was almost suffocat- 
ing. It was precisely on one of these nights that the officers of the ship orga- 
nized a dance. The French character is quick to act on such diversions. They 
immediately arranged chairs and seats here and there, hung buntings, lights 
and lanterns on the awnings, converting the poop of the ship into a salon for 
dancing. Fortunately for the occasion there was on board a company of young 
poor Italians who, with their harps, violins and a beautiful accordion, were 
making their way to India to seek their fortune. They brought their instru- 
ments to the dance and with the sound of these the dancing commenced. But 
to dance on this sea one had to do a delicate balancing act. One of the sons of 
Terpsichore fell on the floor with his partner, followed by another pair. Poor 
creatures suffering the consequences of taking Terpsichore to this mobile floor 
of the domains of Neptune! The dance, however, continued to the satisfaction 
of the undaunted dancers and music filled the air until eleven o clock. 

Outside such group activities, there was plenty of scope to amuse oneself. In 
the case of our indio traveler, he sometimes found diversion by merely watching 
with his wry sense of humor the foibles of people. He also amused himself by ob- 
serving the various costumes of the people on the ship: 

The reunions of the prow continued to be animated and diverting. It is 
curious to see here in the afternoons a collection of diverse costumes. The chil- 



277 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI V( > N I > 



dren of the Indian rajah, although dark brown skinned often appeared dressed 
in a species of large jacket of white or violet cloth, trousers made of scarlet silk 
embroidered with gold and silver-threads. They were clad in shoes made of 
embroidered cloth, and a hat a la Scottish also embroidered with gold — all 
rather in poor taste. The Protestant bishop is dressed in a long jacket, a closed 
waistcoat and tight-fitting trousers, all in black. The English men all wore dif- 
ferent hats, some of which were extravagantly decorated; their ladies had waist- 
bands and vertical ribbons, and small hats perched lightly upon their forehead 
which they bear with no certain amount of grace. 1 he Moslems are distin- 
guished by their ubiquitous turbans and shirts tightly held around the body 
with a belt.... 

And of course there was always nature: 

In the afternoons... the position of the sun often gave us sublime im- 
pressions. One could see Phoebus as he threw over a magnificent and wide bed 
of glittering gold. I he enchantment that such moments offer — the sight of its 
rays could serve as a model for making beautiful paintings. 

Moonlit nights in their turn offer an enchanting chapter. If the moon is 
new and you catch it at the moment of its rising and one of its horns is hidden 
by a coast or an island, the other side is a phenomenon of a brilliantly lumi- 
nous hook. And if the moon is full and you see it rising at the edge of the seas, 
you could easily confuse it with a great lamp, solid and red or an enormous 
aerostatic globe of artificial light thrown into space and floating there. How 
many times have we fallen prey to the enchantment of the beauty of Venus. . . 

The tracks that the ship leaves on the skin of the sea become phosphorescent: 
schools of fishes playing and jumping on the surface become incandescent, 
their luminosity corresponding to their length and density. Such are the scenes 
that make this long and arduous journey pleasant. 

There were also bonuses such as: 

...birds perched on the mast of the ship while it is anchored, because afterward 
they would no longer see land as the ship would have moved far out to sea. 

One morning I had for company a swallow which was locked in my cabin. It 
was one of the many that flies from Europe to Africa at the onset of winter and 
having entered my cabin yesterday afternoon through my open door, stayed to 
rest and spend the night with me. 

An Irish priest asked him to deliver a letter to a nun in a Catholic convent in 
Aden: 



278 



TI- RRA Faustino l ' ilLifranca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



We hired a calesa tor 3 rupees or a peso and told the driver to take us to 
the convent of the French religious. We started our journey on tortuous roads 
at the foot of sharply inclined rocks. There were not a few merchants including 
Arabs, Persians, and negroes coming and going with their camels and mules 
loaded with merchandise, mounted by negro assistants or guided by them. An 
electric telegraph line followed the direction of the street and after a number of 
zig zags that went up and down we arrived at the gate of a castle erected on top 
of the rock. We entered a wide gate cut into the same rock with a bridge above 
and arrived at the town which was not big. All the houses were made of stone 
and nearlv all were low and could be said to be no more than halls divided into 

rooms At last our calesa stopped. And what a surprise it was for us. We were 

delivered into a brothel full of black prostitutes who, upon seeing us, broke 
into pandemonium. But their rejoicing was short-lived as we ran as fast as we 
could ordering our rogue of a driver to hurry away and take us to the sacred 
convent — 

However, after a long and arduous voyage at sea with all its inconveniences 
and discomforts one was no longer jolted quite so rudely by such incidents and, 
having reached land, one felt almost like a veteran. The destination of ones trip, 
which got ever nearer, beckoned one to proceed without delay. 

The ultimate reward of traveling, however, is finally given only to those who 
can go beyond the actual physical act of traveling and cull from this experience 
knowledge thev may share with others and even pass on to future generations. 

Europe During the Second Half of the 19th Century 

The second half of the 19th century saw Europe reaping the rewards of the scien 
tific and technological discoveries of the preceding century, the industrial ie\o u 
tion that resulted from these, and the social transformation that ensued. 

Advancement was to be seen everywhere: the bridges that spanned rivers, rat 
ways that crisscrossed the plains of the continent and girded its mountains, us\ 
ports, factories blowing smoke nonstick, magnificent new buildings, new towns, 

and the growth of cities. ^ . 

It was one of the most brilliant epochs of Europe. It suffices to mention on } 
a few names to show that it led the world in intellectual fields: Charles Darwin an 
Karl Marx in philosophy; Louis Pasteur in medicine; Victor Hugo, Leo Tolstoi, 
and Goethe in literature; Verdi and Wagner in music; Courbet, Millet, Cezanne, 
and Manet in painting. 

Charm, gentility, and prosperity seemed to reign everywhere. Countries 
competed in showing off their gains by holding international fairs, the most fa- 
mous of which were the London Exhibition of 185L for which the Crystal Palace 
was erected, and the Paris Exhibition of 1867, whose remains Villafranca saw two 
years later. 



279 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



It is extraordinary how the course of human history is sometimes directed by 
a key idea, discovery, or invention. A case in point is the simplification and perfec- 
tion of the steam engine by the English engineer Robert Trevithick ( 1773-1833). 
The steam engine of Boulton and Watts the century before was huge, ponderous, 
and slow. Trevithicks was light, agile, swift, and portable, using high-pressure 
steam. His patent in 1802 for “the construction of steam engines; application 
thereof for driving carriages and other purposes” ushered in the age of railways. 

It started with the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 
1830. By 1854, Britain had 900 miles of railway. Other countries in Europe fol- 
lowed suit. The development of railways changed their economies as well as their 
physiognomies. As the pace of transport of coal from the mines to the factories, 
and of raw materials from their sources to the ports, and from the ports to the fac- 
tories quickened, so did the emergence of more factories and manufacturing in- 
dustries transform the rural, sleepy countryside into areas of intense activity. 

From 1815 to 1851 the production of coal and pig iron in Britain increased 
fivefold and tenfold respectively. It can be said that the second half of the 1 9th cen- 
tury was the age of steam, railways, coal, and iron. Monuments made of iron rose 
to attest to the greatness of the age, the most important of which were the railways. 
By 1870, railways be-ribboned the world and were technologically improved. 

Let us quote Villafranca on his train trip to Susa in the Italian Alps (the fa- 
mous Mont Cenis tunnel was completed the year after his visit): 

We notice that the rails are not two as they normally are but three, the 
central one being higher than the two outside ones and having a distinct form. 

It is this rail that holds the train so that it does not get derailed. I his system, 
they say, is American. We start then to cl imb the slopes, each distance going in 
curves around the mountains so that the ascent is not rapid and jolting but 
smooth. 1 he force of the steam is very evident. 

We stop every now and then to renew the water supply for the engine. 

At this point we are assured and fixed beforehand by clamps to prevent the 
train from sliding down. I hen we continue, passing small tunnels, then some 
larger ones like galleries made of wood and iron to protect the railway from 
snow that usually obstructs the passage. As some tunnels are narrow, we close 
our doors and windows so that we do not asphyxiate. We are plunged in total 
darkness — The railway seems like a belt that girds the slopes of the moun- 
tains in several directions, opening up breathtaking vistas of peaks and snow 

here, precipices there, zigzags and sharp turns and also valleys down below 

At last we reach the top of the Alps. 

With the railways and the rapid transformation of the economy came the 
rapid modification of cities. One of the greatest urban developments of the age was 
the expansion of Paris by Hausmann under Napoleon III. From the small medi- 
eval town around the St. Michel/St. Germain area, Paris blossomed into a beauti- 



280 



TERRA Faustino \ ilhifranca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



ful cirv of long, wide, and elegant avenues and grand boulevards bordered by trees 
and handsome edifices, no matter that these avenues were primarily laid out for 
military purposes. 

One wonder which we now take for granted was the water distribution sys- 
tem by means of the tap or faucet connected to a central reservoir. How it helped 
improve the general health and upgrade the level of life of people is inestimable. 
Villafranca was quick to note this: 

The famous artesian wells are columns that give honour to the age. 1 hey 
are called wells because the columns are constructed on top of wells of great 
depth to extract the water from under the ground for distribution throughout 
the city. As the force of the water gushing up is so great, the columns are made 
of iron in whose centre are tubes or pipes, also of iron, through which water 
climbs up until its force is spent, and where it gets deposited in a receptacle. It 
comes down from here through the other tube and in its descent is distributed 
by means of iron pipes with special mechanisms. 

1 saw the artesian well of the district of St. Germain, the column of 
which could have been 200 feet high. One climbed up by means of steps gird 
ing the column. On the wav up there are bollards on which one could sit and 
rest. I climbed to the top which had a window through which I saw the top 
ends of the tubes. The force of the water coming up was still strong even here. 

At its base there are pipes through which you could get this ferrugenous and 
nourishing water to drink. 

It is with great difficulty we got water from the tap because the \\aur 
escapes with such violence, shooting out into spumes. We had four Lr\sta 
glasses which, having been subjected to the action of the water, retained a 
golden color for two days. Of these artesian wells, there are already two stand 
ing in Paris. There are others being erected but are as yet unfinished. 

One of the marvels of the industrial age, apart from the Crystal Palace, 
the Thames tunnel in London: 

One day... we went to the famous 1 hames tunnel which passes ui 
the river Thames. We arrived at a circular edifice entirely roofed over w ith 
Inside are two wide staircases, one for going down, one for coming up. 
went down into the tunnel by means of a lift or elevator. We entered it an 
walked under the perilous river. The ceiling of the tunnel is curved like a tube 
but the sides narrow down toward the floor. The tunnel is divided into corii 
dors, both spacious and lit with gas lamps. One corridor is designated for pc 
destrians; the other has a moving platform that goes forward and backward. 

There are small shops in the center of the tunnel selling various objects and 
hardware. It is advisable to have a raincoat with you when you go into the tun 
nel as the air is damp and humid. 



281 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



A Europe adorned with the prodigies of industrialization is only half of the 
picture. The other half, which Villafranca did not see fully because he stayed in 
what is now the tourist belt of the cities he visited, practically negated the picture 
of progress. Although it would have been asking too much of Villafranca to stray 
too much from the tourist center, he saw indications that made him suspect there 
was an opposite to what he admired, as in London: 

The noise and disorder of kids dressed in tatters whom one sees in cer- 
tain streets call one’s attention. One also encounters men with wooden legs 
quite frequently (casualties, perhaps of the Crimean war).... There are whole 
streets that look forlorn and sad, with houses that have no decoration at all, 
looking more like walls with slits for windows. 

Alexis de Tocqueville describes the city of Manchester, one of the main cen- 
tres of industry: 

It is a Styx of the New Hades. Look up and all around this place you will 
see huge palaces of industry. You will hear the noise of the furnaces, the whistle 
of steam. These vast structures keep the air and light out of human habitations 
which they dominate. They envelope them in perpetual fog. Here is the slave, 
there the master; there is wealth for some, poverty for the most; there the orga- 
nized efforts of thousands produce for the profit of one man. 

A sort of black smoke covers the city. The sun through it is like a disk 

without rays. Under the half light, 300,000 human beings ceaselessly work 

From this foul drain the greatest stream of human industry flows to fertilize 
the whole world. Here humanity attains its most complete development and 
its most brutish. Here civilization makes its miracles and civilized man is 
turned almost into savage. 

The Filipino painter Juan Luna saw this side of Europe 27 years after 

Villafrancas trip. In a letter to Jose Rizal, he describes a visit to an iron foundry 
near Bilbao: 

I spent five hours there — There was a shop where sand and coal are 
being milled. As they get converted into the finest powder, they rise into huge 
clouds and the whole place is enveloped in smoke. The ten or twelve workers 
engaged in refilling the mill with their shovels looked like corpses. I was by that 
mill only three or four minutes but it seemed to me I swallowed sand and dust 
my whole life. It is a crime to abandon such people. 

I his visit made such a deep impression on Luna that he made many draw- 
ings of the interior of the foundry and a number of oil paintings on the same sub- 
ject. 



282 



IT RRA Faustina l dLifranCii nrui the Roots of the Reform Movement 



The complete transformation of European economies brought about by ad- 
vances in technology and the means of communication freed vast numbers of 
people from work on the land so that thev were now available to work in factories. 

A new class of people emerged as dominant: the capitalists who owned the 
means of production, the factories. Alongside them a class of people who had noth- 
ing but their labor to sell also developed. They were the ex-peasants, newly emerged 
as workers. ’They became the grist for what the poet \\ illiam Blake called dark, 
satanic mills. 1 hev were easilv exploited initially, but they soon learned how ro 
organize themselves for their own protection. 

The first trade unions were legalized in England in 1825. Progress created its 
opposite: crisis. In 1815 - 1851 , there occurred four major economic crises in En- 
gland. Thev gave birth to various political movements of workers such as 
Chartism. In continental Europe the socialist ideology developed and spread. It 
was elaborated into a complete all-encompassing system of thought by Kail Marx 
and Frederick Engels. Dtis KiipitiiL the bible of scientific socialism and magnum 
opus of Marx saw publication in 186~\ The first Internationale was launched in 
1864 and its congress was held two vears later in 1866. 

Beneath the skin ol prosperin' and tranquility, old sores festered. Spain was 
rent by the Carlist wars, the struggles between the church and republicanism an , 
the regional, separatist wars. Germanv was still divided into petty' states, and In } 
was still disunited, with some of its regions under Austrian hegemony, d he Italian 
movement for unification gave birth to Garibaldi, Mazzini, and Cavour, gnat men 
of thought and action, but unification could only be gained through wars mat 
engulfed the whole country. France and the newly powerful Prussia would come tc 
blows in 1870 partly due to the question of Spanish succession. 1 In Baris com 
munes that rose during the Franco-Prussian war would be brutally suppresse 

In 1 869, while Villatranca was still in Europe, revolution started breaking o 
in France. From London he heard news of it: “ I here had been quite consi era ^ 
uprisings in two or three parts of France. In Paris the troops intervened causi^ g 
casualties among the people as well as soldiers and many prisoners were ta 'en. ^ 
Europe, which was united within one continental system under tie ^ 
Napoleon, started breaking up. Nationalism became the dominant ideo °8T J* 
territorial boundaries more or less based on ethnic, linguistic, and culture 
ences reemerged. The map of what was to become the modern Europe unti 
War II was sorted out during the second half of the 19th century. 



The Philippines During the Latter Half of the 19th Century 

To better understand Villafrancas enthusiasm for the material progress he wit 
nessed in Europe, we must situate him in his country of origin. 

In the more than three centuries of rule Spain did little to develop the I hilip 
pines. She was hardly interested in the country, leaving its affairs to the nuic\ of 
fate and the various religious orders which became wealthy and very powerful as a 



283 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEY( )ND 



result of this indifference. She had no direct dealings with the country but coursed 
everything through Mexico, from governing to trading. 

When Mexico proclaimed its independence in 1820, Spain was forced to 
deal and trade directly with the Philippines. She removed restrictions on the entry 
of colonial produce, stimulating in no little way agriculture in the country. The 
port of Manila was opened to foreign trade in 1834, followed bv Iloilo in 1833, 
then Cebu in 1861. Foreign merchants were allowed to reside in the country. The 
British who already controlled trading in the Asian mainland lost no time in estab- 
lishing their houses. Before the end of the century there were more than a dozen 
British firms, a dozen Swiss and German firms, a number of American firms, the 
most famous of which was Russell and Sturgis, and a handful of companies owned 
by foreign nationals operating in the country. 

The entry of foreign capital stimulated the production of export crops like 
sugar, abaca, coconut, tobacco, coffee, etc., setting the pattern for export-oriented 
agriculture in modern Philippines. According to the figures supplied by Sir John 
Bowring, the three top export crops for the year 1858 were: sugar, 34,821 tons; 
hemp, 25,781 tons; and sapan wood, 4,201 tons. 1 he same crops maintained their 
top position until 1889. John Foreman, another English h istorian, supplies the fig- 
ures for 1889: sugar, 218,925 tons; hemp 71,071 tons; and sapan wood, 4,018 
tons, showing more than a 100 percent increase for the top two crops. 

As there was hardly any wide-scale manufacturing industry in the country, 
goods from abroad flowed in without any competition. According to Robert 
McMicking, who was in the Philippines in 1848, the import trade was controlled 
y t e British. Some of the goods they sold in the country were: various types of 
c ot including cotton, velvet, twill, cambric drills, lace, etc.; iron, lead, spelter, and 
stee , cut ery, ironmongery, glassware; and India beer. 1 he increase in foreign trade 
a so stimulated domestic trade, and it is in this area that the native mercantile class 

PbT C< ^ ^ tSC ^* P attern °f trade that would characterize the economy of the 
i ippines as a whole was now firmly set; raw materials would be exported from 
t e country to the industrial west, mainly Europe, while the west would supply 
manufactured goods, and later on, capital. 

With the historic opening of the Suez Canal (Villafranca saw the last stage of 
wor eing done on the canal in 1869), the route from Asia to Europe was short- 
ene , quic en i n g the tempo of trade between the two continents. 

T e change in the economic life of the country necessitated improvement in 
t e means of communication. In the geographical and statistical survey of the 
I ustracion Filipinaof 1859, mention is made of the quickened pace of road build- 
ing connecting the different provinces, towns with other towns, and hamlets with 
other hamlets. According to American writers at the turn of the century, the major- 
ity of these roads were no more than dirt roads, trails in some cases, and mud traps 
during the rainy season. Stone bridges were built over rivers and gorges. For this 
enterprise, thousands of natives were recruited. The plan to build a railway run- 
ning north from Manila to Pangasinan (a distance of a 120 miles), and another 



284 



TERRA Fatistino \ ilia franca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



running south to Albay was first conceived in 1875. It was not until 1891 that the 
first section of the northern line was opened, 28 miles, all told, owing to bureau- 
cratic problems. 

The first telegraph service linking Manila with the rest of the world opened 
in 1880 when the British-owned Eastern Extension Australasia and China Tele- 
graph Company laid down its submarine cable. Interisland steamer shipping was 
controlled bv the British, using Spanish dummies, while trade in sailing craft was 
left to the half-castes and natives. The mail steamer was British-monopolized. 

The political and social structures within the country had to be adjusted to 
conform with the development in the economy. In 1863, Spain introduced a gen- 
eral reform of government and education. 1 he friars were alarmed as the reforms 
would affect their power and authority in the country. They did everything to re- 
sist the reforms, none more bitterly than the secularization of education and the 
parishes. Three native priests Frs. Gomez, Burgos, and Zamora became martyrs to 
the cause of secularization. 

The number of natives attending various schools, especially the Ro\a an 
Pontifical University of Santo Tomas, increased. They came mainly from the mer 
cantile families who did well due to the increasing liberalization of the economy 
In 1871, the College of Pharmacy and Medicine of Santo Tomas was opene . ts 
graduates included some of the most notable figures of the late 19th century, sue 
as Leon Ma. Guerrero, Antonio Luna, Jose Rizal, Anacleto del Rosario, Trini a 
Pardo de Tavera, Ariston Bautista y Lim, Manuel Zamora, etc. Some of them sur 
vived the revolution of 1 896 to serve as functionaries under the American go\ un 

ment at the beginning of the 20th century. 

Reforms in the area of public health were more successful. It is we to re 
member that the first hospitals and the skeleton of a health service were esta is 
by the friar orders, most notably the Franciscans, a few years after the) sprea 
through the islands in the 16th century. The first office of public health, owe\e , 
was formally organized only in 1870, and reorganized in 1883, with two pro e 
sors from the Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy of Santo Tomas formin D 
governing core which liaised with the diverse organizations responsible toi pu 

health down to the town level. , 

Vaccination was first introduced into the country as early as 1805 } t e p 
vate physician of King Charles IV, one Dr. Francisco Xavier de Balmis, w 10 came 
to the country and laid the foundation of the Institute of Vaccination. Ot lei means 
of maintaining public health were introduced, such as the regular col ection o 
refuse, the segregation of those with infectious diseases, building of pub ic mar 
kets, and, of great importance in checking the spread of epidemics, the construe 
tion of a system of providing and distributing potable water. 

Water for general use as well as for drinking was, from time immemori , 
obtained from rivers, wells, or from rain water stored in big jars or cisterns. In 
1690, a Dominican priest/engineer, Fr. Juan Peguero, constructed a system for 
conveying treated water through pipes that were open in some parts for easy acces- 



285 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI V( >Nl> 



sibility. This system fulfilled the needs of the city of Manila for a good while. In 
1732, a Spanish philanthropist named Don Faustino Carriedo donated P10,000 
for the creation of a modern potable water system. I he money was invested in the 
Acapulco trade until there was enough to fund construction of the svstem. 

I he work on the water system was not started until 1 8~8, a century later, and 
was finished only after four years from that date. The site chosen for the reservoir 
was at San Juan del Monte. According to Dr. Jose Bantug in his Bosquejo Historico 
de la Medicina Hispa n ico - Fi lip i na, the reservoir had a capacitv of approximately 
52,000 cu m, completely surrounded bv stone walls to restrict public access and 
thus prevent contamination. At Santolan, some 5 km from the reservoir, pumps 
were installed to extract water from the Marikina river, a tributary of the Pasig. 
From the reservoir, pipes of three feet in diameter carried the water to the city of 
Manila, following the undulations of the terrain. Where the pipes crossed the road, 
they were supported by stone bridges. At the Rotonda in Santa Mesa, a huge iron 
fountain was erected in honor of Carriedo. Water was then conducted by smaller 
pipes to the different arrabales or districts of Manila and the Walled C'itv. One ex- 
tracted water by means of a special button, similar to the system which Villafranca 
so admired in Paris in 1869. Of these faucets Dr. Bantug writes: “ These faucets 
(& r tf os ) that multiplied in number were veritable works of art in cast iron. You 
turned the button and the water surged from the mouth of a lion. 

I he advances made in various areas of life in the Philippines from 1 820, al- 
though at a snails pace compared to the giant strides being made in Europe in the 
same period, accomplished in a few decades more than anything Spain had done 
in the country in the preceding three centuries. The material and intellectual de- 
velopment led to the demand for reform and genuine change so that the country 
could catch up with the more advanced countries in Europe. Although backward 
compared to the countries in Europe, the Philippines had tasted and seen enough 
of the products of progress to make it yearn for more. 



Conclusion 

Villafranca is better understood within the background of the Philippines. His let- 
teis aid us in making his profiles and getting an insight into his character and po- 
litical beliefs, prejudices, and general ideas on various subjects to enable us to make 
a tentative conclusion about him. In doing so, we may get an insight into the de- 
velopment of the ideas of the rising ilustrado class during his time. 

We know from the title page of his book that he was a prebend or sinecure of 
the Manila Cathedral and that he was, at one time, a student at the University of 
Santo Tomas from his account of his visit to the Dominican college at Ocana in 
Spain: 



The porter led me to the rectoral cell and you could imagine the tender 
emotions I felt when I embraced Dr. Ceferino after two years of absence 



286 



I’FRRA Einstino l ilLifranCii and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



Shortly after this I saw hr. Rivas, former Rector of the University of Manila, 
and also the old hr. huixa. Ex-Rector of the same university. 1 hen I saw the 
celebrated hr. Moran, and hr. Mateo, a student at the University of Santo 
Tomas and our friend who is now a professed Dominican — I occupied the 
room where Sr. Cuartero was billeted when he was consecrated Bishop orjaro, 
and this led me to gentle remembrances of our old professor (XLVIII, par 1). 



Whenever he could, he staved at Dominican missions, schools, or seminar- 
ies, such as that of Rosary Hill in Hong Kong. In Rome, he stayed at the famous 
Dominican seminary at Santa Maria sopra Minerva where the Pope annually cel- 
ebrated mass during the Holv Week. He was accompanied by the Fr. Prior of the 
seminary around Rome, visiting churches and museums, piazzas, and ruins. 

From his casual mention here and there of names of friends and acquaintan- 
ces, we mav assume he came from a comfortably well-off family, enough to pre 
cipitate him into the company of colonial bureaucrats and their relations in Spain. 
It was quite rare for an huiio of his time, considering that even the educated an 
wealthy natives were spurned bv Spaniards in the Philippines as beasts laden vdt i 

wealth," to quote Ieodoro Agoncillo. 

In Valencia, Spain, he was escorted bv a certain Comandante Felix, hermano 
de que fue magistrado de Manila v muy conocido en esa capital, and a Don Juan 
Cano, “hermano de uno de los avudantes de Capitan General de Pilipinas an 
provincial deputy of Valencia. At Tolosa near San Sebastian, he was met b\ a cer 
tain Sr. Miramon, “magistrado que fue de Manila. He also knew a certain 
Quevedo, “Ministro Plenipotenciario en Manila. His passage across Europe \ 
made easy by a host of ecclesiastical connections and relations of bureaucrats ^ 
ex-bureaucrats of the colonial government in Manila and he moved amongst 

with ease. , f act 

His close connection with the Dominicans is further bolstere > ^ 
that it is through these connections that he was granted an audience > r ^ 
of Madrid, Don Carlos VII, and the ex-Queen Isabel II, who were boti l 

exile in Paris. . 

Being a cleric we may assume that he must have had a groun in t> 
tian learning and the Greek and Latin classics. What is surprising, owe 
ease with which he alludes to them at the right moment. 

For instance, after he visited the London underground, one o tie e D 
ing marvels of the time, he wrote: 



There are steel railways underneath the city inside subterranean tunn 
We went on a train through one of these railways and it was indeed aweson 
to see these caverns that resemble the mansions of Vulcan. Here you dont see 
the trains running — you perceive them only through their obscure rumble, the 
sparks that fly off the burning coals in their engines and the light fiom their 
lamps. 



287 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



He refers to the dancers on the French ship Cambodge as “hijos do lerpsicore 
en el suelo movedizo de los dominios de Neptuno. He recalls the migration of the 
Israelites upon seeing the coast of Aden. Objects, places, and events often coaxed 
out the most apt allusions from the classics or Christian knowledge. 

Villafranca was also armed with knowledge of both ancient and contempo- 
rary history of Europe so that what he observed became alive and accessible and 
memorable. At Biaritz, on the Spanish-French border, he casually wrote: “Biaritz, 
memorable tambien por la entrevistade Napoleon III. He was, of course, referring 
to the welcome extended by Napoleon III to the disgraced and dethroned Isabel II 
on her way to exile in Paris. He explained the origin and history of various land- 
marks in Rome: “The Forum of Nerva is now the monastery and church of St. 
Catherine of Sienna... in its convent can be found the tower of Nero, named thus 
because it is claimed rather dubiously that it is where Nero played his lyre while 
enjoying the sight of Rome burning.” 

Here is another example: “The Roman Forum was the First piazza for popu- 
lar gatherings in ancient pagan Rome. It was also named Campo Vacchino because 
prior to its being a piazza it was a cattle market.” 

About the parish church of the Dominicans in Monte Mario, Villafranca 
added a bit of contemporary history: “Its parish priest was assassinated and robbed 
by the Garibaldinos in their invasion two years ago ” 

Other places are viewed in the light of contemporary events: “At the piazza of 
St. Pauls one sees the barracks destroyed by a mine installed by the revolutionaries, 
killing more than twenty pontifical guards. The Castel Sant’Angelo and another 
ward were also mined and robbed ” 

It is in fact in his casual references to contemporary events that Villafranca 
gives away, albeit indirectly, his political leanings. 

In his visits to the many new as well as old landmarks of Europe, Villafranca 
s ows an almost encyclopedic memory or a talent for remembering details, objects, 
incidents, coupled with a vividly descriptive eye, much to the distaste of W. Retana 
who remarks, Tan to adocenado.” 

His account of an afternoon in a Roman piazza is a classic. All the characters 
eloved of Fellini are there come to life — dwarfs, jugglers, clerics, cripples, rustics, 
pon erous Romans, magicians, etc. In him, we have a traveler who not only pos- 

sesse an observant but also an informed eye that beheld everything through dif- 
ferent prisms. 

What is extraordinary is that although he came from a relatively backward 
colony of a moribund colonial power, Villafranca was not completely overawed by 
all the material progress and wealth he saw in Europe as to make him blind to the 
more retrograde side of its life. Even if he was confined — perhaps not by choice — 
mainly to the tourist areas of the countries he visited, hence to their more pictur- 
esque and presentable places adorned with the products of the industrial revolu- 
tion he never lost his keenly critical eye. 



288 



TFRRA Faustino l 7 ILifranca and the Roots of the' Reform Movement 



So far \vc have established the broad contours of - the portrait of Villafranca. 
What about his political beliefs? His overall world view if he had any? As men- 
tioned earlier, there is no systematic expression in the book of any ideology or clear 
political viewpoint. But one may gather enough from his casual remarks on events 
to find at least his political leanings. 

Being a Catholic cleric, he was of course convinced of the truth and superior- 
ity of his own religion. Ecumenism was a word that did not exist in the 19th-cen- 
tury vocabularv, especiallv as religion was still very much a partner in the colonial 
consolidation effected by the contending Protestant and Catholic powers. He had 
a long and acrimonious argument with some Protestant missionaries who were on 
their way to India when he shared a train compartment with them: 

When I least expected it, I found myself in the company of three Protes- 
tant ministers, all German, and one of them was the chief of the mission to 
Madras in India. I le spoke to me in some passable Latin and he seemed to be 
quite informed. He spoke of his evangelical principles and tried to comince 
me that they were the same as ours. He told me of the propagation of the Bible 
as the only efficacious way of spreading the word of God and his love. His 
litany of errors opened up a discussion. I spoke to him of the necessity for a 
visible head of the church, the supremacy of the Pope, the sacrament of peni- 
tence, and various other points of dogma which he could not accept, and which 
are not found in the Bible in the Holy Scriptures. 

The discussion became more abrasive with neither side giving way, prompt 
ing Villafranca to remark: 

They took notes during our discussion as they must inform their socien 
of their pseudo-apostolic work. And since they are mercenaries, their salaries 
are augmented in proportion to the number of their conversions, or at least, 
for each polemic they engage themselves in. 

We gather that he was an admirer of monarchy. In Paris he sought audien 
with Don Carlos VII, Duke of Madrid, and the ex-Queen Isabel II. 

1 made my way one afternoon to the palace at Avenue de Roi de Rome. 
General Calonje and his son invited me to enter the reception room where I 
was received by the unfortunate lady ( desgraciada senord) — She told me 
among other things she never expected me to be presented to her in Paris and 
that she was happy over the loyalty of the Philippines and that she approved of 
my visit to the unfortunate mother country. 

In Valencia, he witnessed: 



289 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI VC )ND 



... an awesome republican demonstration in which SO armed men took 
part in taking over the government ministry; the popularly elec ted mayor and 
president of congress, Sr. Rivero, arrived with troops and confronted the re- 
publicans. The risk of violence was high, but they finally ended the conflict 
without a shot being fired and dislodged the republicans from the building. 

He was nearly marooned in Barcelona: 

Today, bills were posted all over the city notifying the public that under 
the orders of General Gazminde, the municipal body ( ayuntamiento ) was dis- 
solved and a new one has been formed to replace it, one that is favorable to the 
revolution. Another news widespread in the city is that the railways between 
Tarragona and Zaragoza have been closed, the electric cables having been cut 
by the insurgents who are now rejoicing in the countryside, and who intend to 
isolate Barcelona. Right now they only have to close the railway to Clerona 
before we are completely isolated and sequestered. I must therefore leave be- 
fore this situation and its attendant miseries happen. 

Spain was not only rent by internal struggles between various political fac- 
tions but was also being torn apart by uprisings in her last remaining colonies. In 
Seville, Villafranca saw the dispatch of troops to Cuba: 

I was on the street when troops of soldiers dressed in their travel uni- 
forms passed by. 1 hey were on their way to Cuba to suppress the uprising t here. 

They seemed to be quite happy and joyful. An old lady in the crowd exclaimed 
for all to hear in a voice filled with compassion, “How young they are and how 
happy they go, the poor creatures, to the slaughter houses!” How much reason 
there is in her outburst, but no one at this moment would listen to her omen. 

Villafranca was in Spain during one of her many convulsions. The sight of 
the struggles made him reflect on the destiny of the country: 

In this capital (Madrid), people do not live in peace. Political agitations 
are becoming worse and frightening. The Isabeli nos and Alfonsistas do not 
stop in advancing their own candidates to the throne. These elements that are 
varied and in opposition cannot but produce a labyrinth whose end all desire 
but could not see. Meanwhile, commerce and industry are paralyzed and the 
emigration of wealthy families continues. Those who have invested money in 
enterprise pull out all their investment, increasing the misery that is already 
there. God has not yet extended his hand to help poor Spain whose future 
seems to be getting more and more obscure. 

At the cry of liberty, Havana or Cuba in h er turn stretches her might and 
at the risk of her own ruin, proclaims independence. So much blood and 



290 



TKRRA Faustino 1 1 1 Li franca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



money it has cost Spain and will continue to do so. And if at last Cuba escapes 
her as she tears, it will he without doubt the depths of her disgrace. And with 
Havana she will lose a rich jewel in her crown. 



The situation in Spain was a complex web of political lines. The Republicans 
were supporters of Isabelinos, and hence of the monarchy; the Carlistas, on the 
other hand, had the backing of the Church. The rise of Catalan and Basque na- 
tionalism which was neither republican nor monarchist added another dimension 
to the situation. Villafranca expresses deep sympathy for the plight of- Spain as a 
whole but not for a single political group. He shows a certain opposition to the 
revolution in Cuba and seems to view political struggles as futile. When he said of 
Cuba, “At the risk of her own ruin she proclaims independence, he could have 
easily been thinking of the Philippines. This is the lvnchpin to his political beliefs 
which links him directly with the next generation of ilustrados (the educated, mer- 
cantile class), to those of the Indios Bravos and La Solidaridad The kernel of the 
main political aim of one wing of the ilustrados was integration with Mother 
Spain” through representation in the Spanish Cortes or parliament. 



Precursor of the Reformists 

How then should we view Villafranca? How do we place him in relation to the 
writers and thinkers, the propagandists, and revolutionary activists of the secon 
half of the 19 th century Philippines? Quite simply in this way: he prefigures tie 
next generation that would become prominent for its reformist agitation. It is rom 
him and not from Jose Burgos, who was his contemporary (and could have een a 
classmate) and a radical, that the Rizals, the Jaenas, and Del Pilars descend. Burgos^ 
proper heirs were Mabini, Antonio Luna, Isabelo de los Reyes, an o 
independentistas. 

Villafranca possessed a knowledge about the world outside the 
well beyond what he could have derived from his colonial education. e a 
keenly critical faculty that enabled him to winnow what was progressive rom 
was backward amongst the things he saw in Europe. He was acutely inquisim ear 
enthusiastically appreciative of the m aterial and social advances being ma e t ere. 
He desired the same things for the Philippines, reflecting the goal o t e 
native mercantile class which was beginning to flex its muscles. He expresse t 
succinctly in his summary: 

How much would Manila gain if she were part of the vital lines of com 
munication linking China with India, Egypt with Europe, Europe with 
America, America with the islands of the Pacific, Japan and China, or at least 
have the rapid means of communication with all points in the Pacific. There is 
much she would gain in material as well as social advancement in that she 
would be able to observe with her own eyes, compare herself with, emulate and 



291 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



even aim to reach the same level or at least the closest possible level of the most 
advanced countries in the world. 

This is a noble aim indeed, but unfortunate in that it was viewed within the 
context of a Philippines that was a colony of Spain and not an independent coun- 
try. 

And herein lies the contradiction, the very same one that bedeviled the re- 
form movement of the 1890s: genuine material and social advance would be 
achieved only by removing the main obstacle to it, that is, by overthrowing Span- 
ish colonial rule. Villafranca and the ilustrados of the reform movement could not 
see this link. They could not look beyond the goal of integration with “Mother 
Spain, and therefore failed to see the path to a progressive future they desired for 
the country. 

As a Filipino, Villafranca embodied the best qualities of the reformist 
ilustrados of the 1890s: he was sophisticated, well educated, sharply critical, for- 
ward-looking; but he was also riddled with contradictions. He appreciated the 
progress being made in the most advanced countries in the world, but lacked the 
vision to see the Philippines as a sovereign nation — learning, trading, and com- 
peting as an equal with other sovereign nations. 

Although he was the quintessential 19th-century reformist i lustra do, he is 
also very much a modern figure. Substitute the U.S. or Japan for Spain, and the 
advocates of special relations” for the 19th-century reformists, and you get a 
Villafranca in modern dress. The fact is that the Revolution of 1 896 and the direct 
American rule during the early decades of the 20th century put the reformist 
ilustrados and their descendants Firmly in power. To be fair, in response to the chal- 
lenges of a more complex world, they have also evolved a more complex charac- 

ter ^ ess forward-looking now, perhaps, but still desirous of development that 
keeps eluding the country. 

While the ilustrados and their vision dominate the country, Villafranca will 
remain centrally relevant. However, even when they pass into history, Villafranca 
will still be interesting to read not only for his account of the vigorous develop- 
ment he witnessed in many countries in Europe and Asia during the latter half of 
the 19th century, but because he will have become a cipher to how a dominant 
class in the Philippines, and in a broader sense, the Filipinos, thought and viewed 
the world at one point in their intellectual development as a people. 

Notes 

1. At the port of Aden, Villafranca observed: “This very afternoon, a lovely ship of the 
Mensagerias Imperiales arrived and among those who disembarked were 1 3 mission- 
aries who were bound for our own Filipinas” (XII, part 3). Aboard the Mooltan , 
among Villafrancas companions en route to Europe were “the protestant Bishop of 
Colombo with his wife and daughter. He was going back to England. There was also 



292 



THRRA Faustino \ ULifranca and the Roots of the Reform Movement 



an Irish Catholic priest from the English colonies in Australia who said he was going 
to visit Rome" (X. par 7). On board the Poornib, at Alexandria, Villafranca met “the 
Archbishop of Goa with his secretary and a German prince who was traveling incog- 
nito. I he Archbishop who is Catholic is returning to Lisbon due to illness, having 
been worn out with the immense task of governing all the Portuguese and Catholic 
dioceses of India single-handed, because seats were left vacant as the Portuguese gov- 
ernment could not provide prelates for them" (XV, par 1 5). On his return east at Suez, 
Villafranca met three Protestant ministers, all German, who were on their way to 
Madras in India (LXIII, par 2). “On the Bay at Bab el Mandeb everyone's attention 
was called by the English transport ship similar to the one we encountered on the 
Red Sea. It has colossal dimensions with three layers of windows and could easily 
contain 2,000 men on each floor. These ships are bound for transporting troops to 
the English possessions overseas." 

2. Aboard the Marques dc la Victoria enroute to Hong Kong: “Amongst those who came 
aboard with me were the Plenipotentiary of Spain to China, the ex-fiscal, Senor 
Marques de Campo Santo and a nephew of the present Minister of State in France, 
all of them quite well known and friendly, especially the first one (L par 10). On the 
Orissa , Villafranca met a “Portuguese Postal Officer in charge of the mail between 
Hong Kong and Singapore and who spoke good Spanish (V, par 11). 

3. Aboard the Mooltan , \ illafranca saw “ The senor Rajah or King of the interior of 
Hindustan, with numerous servants. He came from Calcutta to bring his two sons to 
England to be educated there. One of the sons was barely 14 years of age. He is one 
of those rajahs who have ceded their territories in India to the English; in return the\ 
are receiving a more or less considerable amount of compensation which will gradu 
ally diminish in time" (X, par 4). 



293 



Marcelo H. del Pilar: 
His Religious Conversions 



Fidel Vilearroel, O.P. 

University of Santo Tomas, Manila, Philippines 



O f two death centennials this year — that of Jose Rizal (30 December) 
and of Marcelo del Pilar (4 July) — Rizal’s is likely to attract the most atten- 
tion. This is not surprising. I he memory of Rizal has been exalted in a hundred 
ways. Every aspect of his life and death has been studied in detail, his main works 
have been translated into English, and his biographies continue to multiply. 

Del Pilar, on the other hand, remains obscure in the popular mind. His life 
acks the poetry and romanticism of Rizal s. He is associated with a legal frame of 
udnd and the monotony of his work behind his desk as editor of La So li da ri dad. 
His formative years have been completely ignored and the circumstances of his 
eath remain a mystery. And while the retraction of Rizal on the eve of his death 
as ept his memory aflame through decades of heated discussions, few have won- 
Cre et ^ Cr ^ ar > a higher-ranking Mason than Rizal by many degrees, re- 
, . C ^ e * s re ^§i°us convictions and returned to the bosom of the church before 
is eath. Perhaps the centennial of his death is the most Fitting occasion to study 
this aspect of his life. 

Del Pilar’s photographs reveal a well-rounded, bull-shouldered, square-faced 
Filipino with thick hair and mustache. More revealing, however, are three psycho- 
logical pictures of him drawn by different writers. The German graphologist, Herr 
Langerbruch, described Del Pilar based on his autographs of Marcelo: 1 He has the 
character of a warrior; foxy; he has much energy and a great talent for satire; good- 
ness, intrepid, ambitious; he puts considerations away when he deals with some 
serious matter. For General Ramon Blanco, governor of the Philippines (1893- 
1896), Del Pilar was ‘the most intelligent of all, the true voice of the separatists, 



294 



VILLARROEL Marc tlo H. dd Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



very much superior to Rizal. Moreover, “he had no rival as a journalist, polemi- 
cist or publicist, one hundred cubits above Rizal as a Tagalog writer.'’ 3 Fernando 
Ma. Guerrero is still more penetrating: Del Pilar was “hard-headed, mordant, sa- 
gacious, hounded into exile, ferociously lonely tor his wife and daughters, Rizal s 
greatest ally and rival. 

I will not discuss Del Pilar the journalist and political writer, who tirelessly 
worked for reforms in the Philippines that would eventually lead to the countrys 
independence. I will deal only with his religious attitudes, particularly the reasons 
for his two conversions from Catholic to Freemason, and his reconversion to 
Catholic at the end of his life. 

For three centuries of Spanish administration, religion was intimately inter- 
woven with political and social structures; church and state were so united down 
through the centuries that a frontal or veiled attack on one was likely to have 
prompt repercussions on the other. Del Pilar must have experienced this reality in 
his soul, in his personal and family life, in his social relations, and in his thinking 
as a lawyer and a journalist. As a Catholic on the one hand and, on the other, as a 
cultured Filipino for whom the signs of the time pointed to his countrys immi- 
nent political adulthood, Del Pilar had to face the problem of reconciling a greater 
or lesser measure of respect for the church, its teachings and its institutions, with 
his political aspirations. What to him seemed reasonable objectives for the Philip- 
pines, the men of the church considered detrimental to the state, to the church, 
and to the people of the Philippines. 

Del Pilar, like Rizal, went through three religious stages. The first lasted tor 
30 years, in the atmosphere of a Catholic family and his schools especially the Pon 
tifical University of Santo Tomas. In the second stage he was disenchanted w ith t le 
friars; he broke away from the church and joined the Freemasons. The final sta^e 
saw his return to the Catholic church in the last days of his life. The first two stages 
will be dealt with here only in relation to the last, which is the main purpose of t e 
study. To what extent did Del Pilar stray from the Catholic church? How antic en 
cal, anti-friar, and anti-Catholic did he become once he started on the road of P° 
litical activity? Was a final return to, and reconciliation with, the church possn e. 
Was it actually a fact? 

A Laborantist Against the Philippine Frailocracia 

Even though our knowledge of Del Pilar’s family and his early years is extremely 
limited, it cannot be doubted that he was born to a Catholic family, of Christian 
parents, Julian H. del Pilar and Blasa Gatmaitan. They had him baptized in tie 
church of Bulacan, Bulacan. His eldest brother, Toribio, was ordained a priest o 
the Archdiocese of Manila. 

He was imbued with the principles of the Catholic religion and the Domini 
can schools of the Colegio de San Juan de Letran and the University of Santo 
Tomas. 5 His study of law included two courses of canon law. Many of Del Pilar s 



295 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



writings, such as La Soberania Monacal , attest to his broad knowledge of ecclesias- 
tical legislation. In fact, he often used ecclesiastical provisions to make a point in 
his tirades against abuses of the church/’ 

It is certain that the first shocking experience of the young Del Pilar with the 
church was the trial and execution of the secular priests Burgos, Gomez, and 
Zamora in the wake of the Cavite Mutiny of 1872. His brother, Toribio, was ac- 
cused of complicity and deported to the Marianas Islands with other priests. Del 
Pilar, then 21 years old, about to graduate as bachelor of philosophy, could not 
forget that painful experience. While it was not the church that sentenced the three 
priests to death, the execution widened the gap between the native Filipino clergy 
and the friar-parish priests/ It also ignited the Propaganda Movement. 

The second unpleasant experience of Del Pilar with the church was more 
personal. He wrote in La Soberania Monacal that “a young student of Law went to 
a parish of a certain suburb of Manila to be padrino at a baptism” and that “there 
followed a dispute between him and the [friar) parish priest over fees, the whole 
trouble resulting in the student being jailed for thirty days.” M 

In 1881, Del Pilar, a graduate of civil law from the University of Santo 
Tomas, returned to Bulacan and soon engaged in activities that the provincial gov- 
ernment and the Augustinian friars there looked upon him with suspicion. Del 
Pilar’s experiences were certainly not unique. In the 1880s it was not uncommon 
to see university graduates {bachilleres, licenciados , ftlosofos , a bogados) , conversant 
in Spanish, looking down on the gobernadorcillos and the principals , and even chal- 
lenging the parish priests on matters of the graduates’ specialization, thus gaining 
prestige among the people. In the opinion of J. Schumacher, “the failure of the fri- 
ars to recognize and come to terms with this changing situation lies at the heart of 
the Filipino nationalists’ opposition to them.” 9 

If they found the petulance of the graduates unpleasant, the parish priests 
must have been more disturbed by the liberal ideas they brought home. Del Pilar, 
perhaps more extroverted than most and better acquainted with the world of juris- 
prudence than the liberal arts students, was surely influenced by the libertarian 
trends of the Spanish September Revolution of 1 868, which in the Philippines led 
to student unrest in the university the following year, to the Cavite Mutiny of 
1872, and to the execution of Gom-Bur-Za. 

The 1880s saw the birth of the Propaganda Movement, which targeted the 
riars as the main obstacle to reform. When the young nationalists maintained that 
tec urch had invaded many areas of the state and that the religious institutes 
constituted the main pillar of the church in the Philippines, they were saying noth- 
ing new. In fact that was also the conviction of the men of the church. In 1887, 
Archbishop of Manila Monsignor Pedro Payo, in a bid to defend the beleaguered 
religious orders, reminded the government that the religious (friars and Jesuits) 
were the great auxiliaries of the [political] Administration for all kinds of official 
affairs in the towns of the Archipelago”; that “they would do their best to extin- 
guish in their parishes the least intent of movement against the constituted authori- 



296 



VII1.ARROEL Marcelo H. del PtLir: His Religious Conversions 



ties”; and that “thanks to them, the Nation, with scanty military force, keeps these 
provinces in utmost peace and submission. And he prophetically added that were 
the church and religious institutes to lose their prestige, “the beginning of a violent 
period of the struggle tor the conservation of those provinces tor the Metropolis.” 
The archbishop concluded that “the regular clergv is already victim of a crusade 
clearly unjust”; they are the object of “a campaign of discredit to make them lose 
the power and authority in the towns of the Philippines.” 10 

Del Pilar was among the first to attack the friars openly. In Bulacan and 
Malolos he organized his relatives and associates to oppose any intervention of the 
parish priests in municipal affairs. In 1885> all the 24 parishes of the province were 
run by the friars, 17 of them controlled by Augustinians, seven bv Franciscans. 

In 1884 in Bulacan, Del Pilar and his associates staged a showdown with the 
parish priest, Fr. Felipe Garcia, over the rights of the gobernadorcillo to govern the 
town without the priest's intervention. 11 At the same time, he linked up with 
groups in Manila which were organizing against the friars. The protesters raised 
the issue of the precedence of the gremio de nntundes (guild of natives) over the^c- 
mio de sangleyes (Chinese or mestizo guild) in the parish of Binondo. The parish 
priest, Fr. Jose Hevia Campomanes, O.P., was denounced before the acting gover- 
nor of Manila, lose Centeno, a high-ranking Mason. The demonstrators prevailed 
for the moment, the parish priest was removed, and there was even a clamor against 
the Dominican archbishop himself, Pedro Payo. Eventually, it was Centeno who 
was removed from his post and Fr. Hevia restored to his parish. i: 

In 1887, the new civil governor ol Manila, Benigno Quiroga, a member o 
the Liberal Party and notoriously anticlerical, issued a decree forbidding the tradi- 
tional practice of bringing corpses into the churches for the final funeral rites, a 
decree proclaimed with special fanfare and pomp in Malolos as an embarrassing 
challenge to provoke the friars. " 

But more alarming and provocative still was a rally organized on 1 March 
1888, by a group of Filipinos led by their principales from several districts o 
Manila. They marched from the town hall of Santa Cruz to the office of the civd 
governor of Manila, where they presented a petition asking for the expulsion o 
Manila Archbishop Pedro Payo and of all the friars. Never before had Manila seen 
such a bold demonstration against the religious orders and their archbishop. e 
archbishop was accused of being disobedient to civil authority, while the riars 
were accused of being hostile to all authority, ambitious, despotic, wealthy, an 
gerous to the government. The manifesto was interspersed with quotations rom 
Canon Law and from the Laws of the Indies. Understandably the Spaniards of t ie 
city were alarmed by the demonstration. An investigation followed and it was 
found that the whole affair had been engineered by a few. Was Del Pilar among 
them? 

That he was involved behind the scenes cannot be doubted. The manifesto 
shows unmistakable similarities of style and content with his future, well-known 
anti-friar writings, like La Frailocracia. He certainly influenced the leader, Doroteo 



297 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



Cortes. But he was not totally in accord with the demonstrators, for we know that 
he was against attacking Archbishop Payo. 14 

The Friars and Del Pilar’s Deportation 

Del Pilar became famous in Bulacan, “thanks to his career and to a no mean intel- 
ligence,” as the commissioner of the legal case against him would later say. When 
his clandestine activities became notorious, the authorities in the province as well 
as the parish priests began to worry and to brand him a filibustero and anti-Span- 
ish. In October 1888, following denunciations against him before the superior 
provincial of the Augustinians, the civil governor of Bulacan ordered the opening 
of an expediente or legal action against “the abogado Don Marcelo H. del Pilar” in 
order to establish the facts regarding some meetings he organized with “elements 
allegedly propagating ideas contrary to the representatives of religion and against 
the Spaniards.” 

The most damaging testimonies were by 1 2 parish priests of Bulacan (of the 
towns of Paombong, Marilao, Bulacan, Malolos, Santa Isabel, Calumpit, Pulilan, 
Hagonoy, Bigaa, Mecauayan, and Guiguinto), all Augustinians. The charges were 
several: he was the president of the meetings, distributed antigovernment leaflets, 
called himself anti-Spanish, declared “war to death against the friars,” collected sig- 
natures demanding the expulsion of the religious, and so on. The most cogent tes- 
timony was that of Fr. Felipe Garcia, parish priest of Malolos. 

If Del Pilar s activity did not yet endanger the security of the Spanish admin- 
istration, the antagonism between him and religious orders had reached a point of 
no return. The commissioner judge of the legal case did not Find Del Pilar guilty of 
all the charges, but in fact a decree of estrangement — of change of residence or 
deportation was signed on 30 October 1888. However, on 28 October, Del Pi- 
ar, warned by friends, managed to embark for Hong Kong and Spain, “with the 
purpose, as he put it, “of lending effective service to our unhappy country.” 

His pending deportation was to be a nightmare for him during eight years of 
exi e until his death. He carried in his heart a deep-seated animosity against the 
riars, whom he continued to consider the main obstacle to his plans and to the 
aims o the Propaganda Movement, with which he was to identify himself in Spain. 

He would never again have a personal encounter with the friars, except for 
two tentative moves at reconciliation which some Dominicans offered him in 
Madrid, but which did not produce the desired result. However, he attacked the 
friars constantly in pamphlets, booklets, and in the fortnightly organ of the Propa- 
ganda Movement, La Solidaridad 

Anti-friar Writings: From the Irreverent to the Serious 

Del Pilar fired the first serious salvos of his pen before departing for Spain. Epifanio 
de los Santos related that on the eve of Del Pilar’s embarkation, Del Pilar met with 



298 



VII I.ARROEL Marcelo H. del PiLir: His Religious Conversions 



anti- 



Pedro Serrano and town mate Rafael Enriques to create a series of Tagalog a 

friar writings. 16 Among them were a mock catechism and a prayer book titled 
Dasalan at To k so h an, a “crude burlesque of the friars and their religion," using the 
Lord’s Prayer, the Ave Maria, the Salve, the Commandments of God and some 
Christian virtues, depicting the friars as ridiculous, grotesque, and odious. 

The Lord's Prayer, for example, reads in part: “Our stepfather, who art in the 
Convento, cursed by thy name, thy greed be far from us, thy throat be cut on earth 
as it is in heaven." The Ten Commandments are turned into a set of friars com- 
mandments, beginning with “Worship the friar above all things and ending with 
“Thou shalt not refuse him thy wife; thou shalt not refuse him thy goods. An- 
other tract was the Pasiongdapat pagabib nang puso nangtaong babasa, a bitter and 
inflammatory attack on the friar, which begins: 'Oh, Friar, full of cruelty, whose 
only thought is to vanquish and to overcome; oh. Friar, without pity on the blood 
of innocent ones...." 1 

During his voyage to Spain he composed another Tagalog pamphlet, Sagot 
nang Espana sa hibik nang Pilipinas (Reply of Spain to the lament of Filipinas), 
which called for the expulsion of the friars, source of all misery, pitiless robber of 
the widow and the orphan, disturber of the peace of families, etc. This is consid 
ered “the most inflammatory of all Del Pilar's writings and the more striking for its 

contrast with the Spanish pamphlets. " IS 

Of the Spanish anti-friar writings, the most famous is undoubted \ a 
Soberania Monacal en Pilipinas , also written during his voyage to Spain, and pub 
lished in Barcelona in 1889. Entirely different in style and tone from theTigalog 
pamphlets and meant for distribution in Spain, Del Pilar was careful not to an 
tagonize Spanish readers. His language was moderate, his sentiments even patrioti 
cally Hispanic. He favored assimilation and union of the Philippines with Spain. 
But the main obstacle was the friars. It was a book a liberal-minded, antic eric 
Spaniard of the 19th century could read with pleasure. 1 } . 

The meaning of the title is explained in the introductory paragraph P ain 
has already abdicated her sovereignty (in the Islands) in favor of the Philippine on 
archism The friars had power over everything — politics, the economy, an re 1 



In the field of politics, Del Pilar wrote, the friars had a free hand. The) ma 
nipulated the elections of gobernadorcillos , controlled municipal elections, super 
vised the census, acted as polizontes , had decisive powers of deportation against 
suspected filibusteros , and thought of themselves as the only protectors o t e 
integridad de la patria. For Del Pilar, however, “the consolidation of the fraternity 
between Spain and the Philippines is the best defense of national integrity, an 
it would not be prudent to leave the safety of that integrity in the hands of the 
friars.” 

The friars lived in opulence, Del Pilar continued, owned large estates, and 
used the people’s money on fiestas, novenas , religious objects; they took commis- 
sions on the cednla taxes. 



299 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



Del Pilar accused the friars of practicing simony by raising the prices of reli- 
gious objects by reason of their blessing. They had always exempted themselves 
from Episcopal visitation and jurisdiction, against the provisions of the Council of 
Trent. Why not replace the friars with secular diocesan priests, of whom there was 
“superabundance” in the Peninsula, and w'ho were “no less worthy, no less lovers of 
Spain” than the friars? 

La Soberania Monacal ends with a call to Hispanic patriotism: “For our part, 
we only wish that the sentiments of fraternity between Spain and the Philippines 
be consolidated,... that the Philippines may breathe the atmosphere of the Moth- 
erland (Spain), and that only one faith, only one ideal, and only one hope vivify 
the aspirations of both peoples But is this possible under the monastic sover- 

eignty?” 

As J. Schumacher, S.J. wrote: “Though certain half-truths, oversimplifica- 
tions and gross exaggerations were included in this indictment, the moderate tone 
of the pamphlet, together with its basic argument, pleading the interests of Spain 
in binding the Filipinos more closely to her, ably presented Del Pilars case to Span- 
ish politicians.” 20 

a Frailocracia Filipinavras a denial of everything good the friars claimed to 
have done in the Philippines. But of far greater importance are Del Pilar’s articles 
in La Solidaridad ’ which he edited for six years (from November 1 889 to Novem- 
ber 1885). 

To a great extent Del Pilar’s writings in La Solidaridad were motivated by 
other articles that appeared in the newspaper’s rival, the pro-friar La Politica 
Espanola en Filipinas , published by Wenceslao Retana and Pablo Feced 
( Quioquiap ). This explains why a considerable number of Del Pilar’s articles dealt 
critically with the friars in general 21 and with the Augustinians in particular. 22 

It is not easy to draw the line between the Propaganda Movement’s legitimate 
and improper criticism of the friars. Its political aims and aspirations — assimila- 
tion with the mother country, development of a national identity, and indepen- 
dence which no other Asian colony was demanding at the time, were as legiti- 
mate and reasonable as those of any nationalist movement of the 20th century. But 
in 19th-century Philippines, the big question, the vexata quaestio , was “What to 
do with the friars? of some years later — of making the friars the villains in the 

story. As far as Del Pilar and his fellow laborantists were concerned, the friars had 
to go. 

It was against the interests and objectives of the Propaganda Movement to 
extol the outstanding contribution of the friars to the educational, social, and 
material advancement and progress of the Philippines. Missionary dedication was 
not lacking in the last quarter of the 19th century, such as that of the Dominicans 
in the mountain areas of northern Luzon or the Jesuits in Mindanao. 

While there were wayward friars, laborantist allegations of “the abominable 
moral corruption, the lasciviousness, the sacrilegious breach of the vow of chas- 



300 



VIl.LARROliL M a redo H. del PiLir: His Religion Conversions 



tiry” of the regular clergy were exaggerated. Corruption was rare. Jesus Ma. 
Cavanna notes that "the archives of the religious orders give only 2 percent for these 
cases of wicked friars/' a statement sustained by most 19th-century foreign travel- 
ers who keenlv observed the way of life of the parish priests they met throughout 
the islands, including the anti-Spanish Jagor, the Spanish Sinibaldo de Mas, and 
other French, Italian, and English travelers. 

For the Propaganda Movement, it was the friars great influence in govern- 
ment that was so oppressive. Significantly, Del Pilar tried to explain in La 
Solidaridad that he was not against the friars, but against frailocracia and fiailismo: 
“It is not true that we have attacked the friar; frailocracy, yes; but the friar, we do 
not remember having done it. Have we ever attacked the friars right to live in en- 
closure, or the renunciation he has made to his family, to his country and ro the 
world? Have we ever contested his vows of obedience, poverty and chastity . . But 
Del Pilar seemed to have forgotten that in some ot his writings, especially in the 
Tagalog tracts, he had parodied not only the friars, but even the most sacred Cat 10 



lie truths, rites, and the virtues. 

However, while his denunciation of the friars, and even his irreverent treat 
ment of religion, may have made him a sinner, it did not place him outside the fo 
of the church. It was only when he joined the Freemasons, who were condemne 
and excommunicated by the church, that Del Pilar broke with the church. 



Del Pilar Becomes a Mason and Leaves the Church 



An Active Mason 

One of the most notable things about the men ot the Propaganda Mo\eme 
that almost all the young Filipinos who went to Spain in the last two ecae * ~ 

the 19th century became, at one time or another, Freemasons. Del Pi ar was p 
ably the most prominent of them and the highest in rank. , r 

Del Pilar and the others were not initiated into the Masonic o ^es 
departing from Spain for the simple reason that natives could not join nnu 
In Spain, it was only in 1 887 that the lodge Solidaridad was founde in a 
for a few Filipino, Cuban, and Puerto Rican members, with the help, e ^ in S’ 
sympathy of the most outstanding Spanish Mason of that generation, G u 
Morayta, who would become Del Pilar's guiding star in 1889, in Barce ona, so 

after Del Pilar’s arrival. . 

In 1889, the member lodges of the Gran Oriente de Espana agree to orn s 
new grand lodge — Gran Oriente Espanol — under the leadership of Morayta.. 
was founded on 9 January, just eight days after Del Pilar s arrival in Barce ona 
Hong Kong. 26 Almost simultaneously, the first lodge exclusively foi Fi ipinos was 
also founded in Barcelona. Called Revolucion, its original members were e so 
Mir Deas, Lopez Jaena, Del Pilar, Mariano Ponce, Jose Ma. Panganiban, an some 



301 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



others. Lopez Jaena was elected Worshipful Master, and Del Pilar, Orator. The 
1889 records of the lodge show that most Filipinos in Barcelona joined the lodge. 2 

The Revolucion petitioned Morayta to have the Filipino lodge affiliated to 
the Gran Oriente Espanol. On 16 April that year, Morayta made a trip to 
Barcelona, where he was honored by the Filipino colony with a banquet. Morayta 
and Del Pilar for the first time established a close friendship that would last almost 
until the death of Del Pilar. Earlier, in January, some Filipinos and Spaniards had 
founded the Asociacion Hispano-Filipina for the purpose of working lor political 
and economic reforms in the Philippines; Miguel Morayta was elected President. 
The Asociacion launched La Solidaridad y on 1 5 February; Del Pilar was to be its 
most illustrious editor. 

With the supreme head of Spanish masonry his friend and a newspaper at his 
disposal, Del Pilar promoted both Filipino nationalism and Masonry, in Spain and 
in the Philippines. I he Propaganda Movement became more efficient when it 
transferred its editorial offices from Barcelona to Madrid and the Filipino colony 
migrated to the Spanish capital. Th e move caused the death ol the lodge 
Revolucion. But on 10 December 1889, the Soliclariclad lodge was founded in 
Madrid, adopting the name of its predecessor in Barcelona. Julio Llorente was 
elected Worshipful Master, and Del Pilar, Senior Warden. Recognition by and af- 
filiation to the Gran Oriente Espanol were easily obtained through the good of- 
fices of Morayta. At the end of the year, Llorente left for the Philippines and Del 
Pilar succeeded him; Mariano Ponce was Secretary. Del Pilar and Ponce held their 
posts until the dissolution of the lodge just before the collapse of the Propaganda 
Movement in 1895. I hey became members of the Supreme Council of the Gran 
Oriente Espanol, in which they held the highest degrees. 28 

Del Pilar, more than anyone else, was instrumental in the promotion of Ma- 
sonry in the Philippines. The entry of Filipinos in the Masonic lodges dealt a big 
blow to the church, while enhancing the interests of the nationalistic cause. In 
1890, Del Pilar asked Morayta for authorization to organize lodges in Manila and 
the provinces; the first lodge appeared in 1891. One year later, on 10 March 1892, 
the Gran Oriente Espanol accorded filiation to the Nilad, from which other lodges 
sprang with amazing speed. By the end of the following year, always through the 
initiative of Del Pilar, there were no less than 85 lodges all over the islands, and by 
1896, there were 200. In Malolos, Bulacan, the Kupang lodg e was founded, named 
after the barrio where Del Pilar was born. 29 

Soon Philippine Masonic lodges, now wracked by internal dissension, asked 
for Del Pilar s help. Resenting the autocratic policies of the Nilad, a group of lodges 
decided in 1893 to form a Grand Regional Council and asked Del Pilar to secure 
the necessary authorization from the Gran Oriente Espanol, which Del Pilar did 
in December 1893. 

Three questions may now be asked: How high did he ascend in the ranks of 
the sect? Was he motivated by authentic Masonic ideals? Was he a convinced deist? 



302 



Vll l-ARROFl. Marcelo H. del PiLir: His Religious Conversions 



His Masonic Degrees 

Initiation into Masonry is done by degrees, the number of which varies from one 
Masonic rite to another. All rites have traditionally had three basic degrees: Ap- 
prentice (first). Fellow Graft (second), and Master Mason (third). Rites differed in 
the way they promoted Masons to the highest degrees. The Masonic rite prevailing 
in Spain was the so-called Old and Accepted Scottish Rite, which could confer 33 
degrees “but ordinarily it gave only the first three, the 18th, and the 30th to the 
33rd inclusive."' 0 

According to J. Schumacher, Del Pilar “already appears in the records [of the 
lodge ‘Revolucion] of April 2 [1889] as holding a third degree, which is surpris- 
ing considering that he had arrived in Spain only three months earlier. By August 
30 [of the same year]," adds Schumacher, “Del Pilar and Mariano Ponce had 
reached the eighteenth degree," and it seems very likely that Del Pilar and Po n ^ 
had reached the 30th degree by September 1889. By 1890, both men ahead) e 
the 30th degree in the Solidaridad lodge, although there is no record among t 
documents of that lodge of their formation, indicating that their promotion must 
have taken place while they were still affiliated with Revolucion, in Barcelona. 

But whatever the number of degrees Del Pilar was promoted to, one is per 
fectly documented by the diploma granting the ninth degree of Master Elect o 
Nine by the Supremo Consejo del Grado 33 del Gran Oriente Espanol, on 1 J > 
1889. The diploma, signed by the Grand Master Miguel Morayta, is preserve i 1 
the Archives of the University of Santo Tomas in Manila. But did Del Pilar rc. 
reach the highest degree? As far as we know, only Teodoro M. K aw an 
Schumacher have affirmed it, the former without citing any source of in ormati ^ 
and the latter adducing a secondary source. Be that as it may, Del Pilar ascen 
the ladder of Masonic rankings with fantastic speed. 3 ' . , 

Furthermore, Del Pilar occupied honorable positions in various o D es 
which he was related. In April 1881, he was elected Orator in the Revo ucion, vv 
Graciano Lopez Jaena as Worshipful Master.' 3 In December, the ° 1 
elected him Senior Warden, with Julio Llorente as Worshipful Master. 1 v 
Llorente returned to the Philippines the following month, Del Pi ar sue 
him. Kalaw attests that Del Pilar also occupied the positions of Gran ° U 
of the Order, President of the Grand Commission of Justice an o ice tiat \ 
granted only to eminent lawyers — and Assistant Gran Orator. He was so a mem 
ber of the Commission of Awards of Masonic Perfection. 

Motivations 

The speed with which Del Pilar was promoted is surprising. He probably got a 
helping hand from Morayta. The signs of friendship between the two were several. 
Del Pilar tells us that soon after his arrival in Madrid in 1890, he was visited at 



303 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



home by Morayta. Recalling that occasion, he fondly refers to Morayta as 44 papa . ” 35 
A year later, Del Pilar wonders why Morayta, whenever they met, would dissuade 
him from returning to the Philippines, insisting that Del Pilar’s mission was better 
accomplished in Spain. 36 And in 1895, when Moravta’s wife died, he invited Del 
Pilar to preside over the funeral rites. 37 

But were Morayta and Marcelo motivated by the same reasons in joining 
Freemasonry' Morayta was certainly zealously devoted to the objectives of the Free- 
masonry, bent on conspiring against the Catholic church. But, like most liberal- 
minded Spaniards of the end of the century, he probably did not favor the separa- 
tion of the Philippines from Spain although he would later be branded as a traitor 
for conspiring against the integrity of the national territory, preparing for the in- 
surrection through the Masonic lodges. 38 

But Del Pilar and other Filipino laborantists seem to have become Masons 
only for practical reasons. They saw in the Masonic network a powerful ally. Ma- 
sonry and the Propaganda Movement gained from their alliance. Morayta pro- 
vided the Filipinos access to Spanish newspapers and politicians, not to help them, 
but to harm the religious orders and eventually Catholicism in the Philippines. Del 
Pilar saw in Masonry a means to influence the highest circles of the Spanish gov- 
ernment and the deputies of the Spanish Cortes. “Masonry in the Peninsula,” 
wrote Del Pilar, £ ‘is for us a means of propaganda. If the Masons of the Philippines 
try to make Masonry an organ of action, they would make a serious mistake. A 
special organism, dedicated specially to the Filipino cause, is needed.” 39 



The Deism of Del Pilar 

Was Del Pilar a convinced and dedicated Mason? Did he abdicate the Catholic 
faith of his early years? Was he an agnostic, an atheist, a deist? Did he change from 
merely anticlerical or anti-friar to non-Catholic and then to anti-Catholic? 

Unlike Rizal, Del Pilar wrote relatively little on religious questions. Fie was 
less exposed to the rationalist and enlightened philosophers of Europe than Rizal, 
who visited France, England, Germany, and Austria. Rizal once urged Del Pilar to 
take lessons in French so that he could read the complete works of Voltaire and 
taste his beautiful, simple and correct style” and know his “way of thinking.” 40 

Rizal found pleasure in debating at length with his former Jesuit professor, 
Fr. Pablo Pastells, about religious matters, Christianity, and natural religion. He 
would express similar ideas through the characters of his novels. And he would 
have a lively discussion about the same with Fr. Balaguer in Fort Santiago on the 
eve of his death. Del Pilar s thoughts on religious doctrines, however are reduced to 
four or five articles in La Solidaridad, buried under his numerous writings on po- 
litical, social, and nationalistic issues. 41 If Rizal was a “free-believer,” as Unamuno 
called him, who wrote much about natural religion, Del Pilar was occupied by 
more practical questions such as of political reforms. However, he did write some 
articles on the relationship between Masonry and religion. 



304 



VILLARROEL Marc do H. dd Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



Masonry, he wrote, is not a religion. But it upholds some general principles 
of religiosity' which the Englishman Lord Herbert of Cherbury considered basic 
for the only acceptable religion: Deism. “Masonry,” he continued, “does not in- 
vade the Infinite; it does not determine the attributes of- the divinity, it does not 
limit in heaven or on earth the sphere of- action of the Great Architect of the Uni- 
verse. All Christians of the world, except the Papists, accept masonry.” Masonry is 
tolerant of all faiths; the church, however, is an oppressive institution. 

His writings show Del Pilar to be a deist who still heard echoes ot his Catho- 
lic past. Once, at least, he openly expressed antipapal sentiments, when he v rote 
Rizal: “I understand clearly that what is needed among us is a weakening of the 
power of the Pope.” 42 It is in his more than one hundred letters to his wife Chanav 
and his daughters that we discover his internal struggle. He avoids direct reference 
to Catholic beliefs and practices to which his family certainly still clung; there are 
no references to the Mass, the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Saints, the sign of the 
Cross, the Christian virtues. He constantly enjoins his wife to give their daughters 
a good education — not the “Catholic” education for girls, but the naturalistic edu- 
cation in virtue and honest}' envisioned in Rousseaus Emile. 

Yet, the same letters betray his Catholic past. About 50 contain phrases li e 
“by the grace of God” and “by the grace and help of the Almighty.” In a Christmas 
letter he wrote: “By this hour you must have finished hearing the Aguinaldo Mass. 
He asks his daughter Sofia “to pray even' night the Our Father, asking for our re 
union as early as possible." To her and her baby sister, Anita, he writes that e opes 
“to obtain the grace of God Our Lord so that your parents be able to guide you 
along the right path.” This was not the language of a Freemason, especi y er 
the repeated condemnation of Masonry by the Roman pontiffs, whic provo 'e 
many lodges in Europe to eliminate even the name of God in their constitutions. 

Del Pilar knew that by becoming a Mason, he was placing himse outsi e o 
the fold of the Catholic church. He, a student of Canon Law, was farni iarvut 
explicit condemnations of Masonry and other secret societies by at least six popes 
ever since the foundation of Masonry in 1717. The most explicit an resoim in ° 
condemnation of all was pronounced by Leo XIII in his E n <T c 1C ‘ ett ^ r 
Humanum genus in 1884. “The ultimate purpose of Freemasonry, te wrote e 
pope, “is the utter overthrow of that whole religious and politica or er o tie 
world, which the Christian teaching has produced, and the substitution o a new 
state of things in accordance with their ideas, of which the foun ations 
and laws shall be drawn from mere naturalism.” 43 A consequence of this an ot ^ er 
condemnatory encyclicals was that no Catholic might join a Masonic lodge wit l 
out incurring excommunication reserved sirnpheiter to the Holy See. 

Excommunication for Masonry did not condemn Masons to eternal perdi 
tion. Del Pilar knew that he incurred certain ecclesiastical penalties before the vis 
ible church: he was deprived of the reception of the sacraments, the spiritual trea- 
sures of the church, Christian burial, and such rights as acting as godfather in bap- 
tism. 



305 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



Did he ever come to a point when he reflected, as the prodigal son of the 
parable did, on the Gospel of Christ? Would he retract like some contemporary 
and future Filipino Masons (Rizal, Antonio Luna, Isabelo de los Reyes, Manuel 
Luis Quezon, etc.) who, facing death, retracted their religious errors and returned 
to the fold of the Catholic church? 



Toward the End of His Life 



The Death of a Lonely Man 



Del Pilar’s death passed almost unnoticed in official circles and the mass media, 
among fellow Masons, and even most of his closest friends. Historians and biogra- 
phers of Del Pilar relate his death in one paragraph, in which they mention his sick- 
ness and poverty. 

Now, his last days and final moments can be summarized as follows. 

Once the Propaganda Movement ceased to be active in Madrid and after the 
closure of the fortnightly newspaper La Solidariclad on 15 November 1895, Del 
Pilar and Mariano Ponce started making arrangements to return to the Far East, 
possibly to the Philippines. About the beginning of January, they arrived in 
Barcelona. How they managed to survive there for several months is something of 
a mystery, for they had no money except for the fare. They did have a common 
friend there, Fernando Canon Faustino, a Filipino engineer, whose Spanish wife, 

Teresa Casas de Batlle, lived in the arrabal (now district) of San Gervasio de 
Cassolas. 



De Pilar would never board the ship. Soon after arriving in Barcelona he fell 
seriously ill from tuberculosis. By 20 June, he was placed in the Surgical Section of 
t e Hospital de la Santa Cruz, and then transferred to the Medical Section. On 4 
J u y 1896, he died of 'tuberculosis generalizda.” With him at his bedside was 
Fernando Canon and possibly Ponce. The following day he was buried in the 
ementerio del Sud-Oeste of Barcelona, on the slopes of the Motjuich hill, over- 
oo *ng the Mediterranean Sea. He was 45 years old. Twenty-four years later, on 3 
ecember 1920, through the efforts of Don Norberto Romualdez, his remains 
were transferred to the Philippines. 

Almost incredibly, Del Pilar’s death was unknown to the Madrid and Manila 
governments for as long as one month. On 20 July, Philippine Governor-General 
mon Blanco communicated to the overseas minister the alarming news that a 
Tagalog clandestine newspaper, Kalayaan (Freedom), was circulating in Manila, 
calling for national emancipation and hailing the bloody insurrection in Cuba. The 
newspaper, the governor explained, was being published in Yokohama, Japan, by 
Del Pilar, former editor of La Solidaridad ' who had taken refuge in that country. 
Actually, it had been printed in Manila in March, edited by Emilio Jacinto, who 
ably misled the government by using the name of Del Pilar and giving a foreign 
place of printing. Blanco wrote to the Spanish ambassador in Tokyo asking him to 



306 



VILLARROEL Marcelo H. del PiLir: His Religions Conversions 



watch over Del Pilar and recommended that the overseas minister in Madrid ask 
the Japanese government to extradite Del Pilar. 

The deception of the Spanish authorities continued. On 29 August, in the 
wake of the Cry of Balintawak, which started on 23 August, Blanco received a 
coded telegram from the overseas minister: “It being convenient to foil the work of 
Marcelo H. del Pilar in Japan, you should find the means to summon him, within 
the legal process for conspiracy now in course there (in Manila), and cable us for 
future instructions.” ' ,s The governor did reply the next day, but with the embar- 
rassing news that, according to newspaper reports from Barcelona, Marcelo had 
died in that city on 4 July.* 5 

Was it only the government that was ignorant of Del Pilars death. W ere there 
others just as shamefully ignorant or, worse, merely silent? Where were the politi- 
cians Marcelo had courted for years— Sagasta, Becerra, Pi y Margall, and others. 
Where were the journalists of the Spanish liberal press, sympathizers of La 
SolidaridacP What about his colleagues in the Propaganda Movement now in 
Spain, Hong Kong, and Manila? Little was said by Mariano Ponce and Fernando 
Canon. It was surprising that the Masonic lodges did not seem to have cared about 
the dying 33rd-degree Mason? There was not a word written by Don i igue 'O 
raytafwho had found in Del Pilar a convenient instrument for his plans and wo 
only recently had invited Del Pilar to preside over the funeral rites of his wife. Wa 
this apparent unconcern due perhaps to the fact that Del Pilar 1 not ie in 
way many would have wanted him to? 

Del Pilar’s Troubles and State of Mind 

Judging from his extant correspondence and other writings, . S 
years show a marked decline in activity. In Epistolario de Marcelo . e 1 r ’ 
fast letter is dated 4 December 1 894, one year and eight months before his dea . 
His last letter to his wife Chanay was sent on 22 May 1893, one year and one 
month before his demise; and his last article in La Solidartdad was written in No- 
vember 1895, eight months before his death. How could Marce o not a\ e writte 
a single letter to Chanay and daughters in one year, when he had written to t em 

almost twice a month for seven years? 4 . , 

With the passing of the years, Del Pilar seems to have become isappointe 

and disgruntled, physically disabled, miserable, and emotionally broken. 

He had quarreled with Jose Rizal over the leadership of the Filipino co on) in 
Madrid and over the manner of managing La Solidaridad. Even though De i ar, 
the better politician of the two, won the elections, it was a pyrrhic victory, w ie 
generated animosity between the two in spite of the conciliatory remarks o t eir 
correspondence. 

As the Propaganda Movement lost momentum, its members, inc u ing 
Rizal, started leaving Spain for the Philippines. Del Pilar resigned himself to the 
dwindling ranks: “After you left, he wrote to Rizal in 1892, I saw the continuous 



307 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



surging of quarrels, now with some now with other, individuals of the colony. And 
I had to swallow up in silence all the bitterness falling on me, only to maintain 
unity among all.” 48 Two years later, the situation was worse: "As our campaign 
moves on, our forces dwindle instead of increasing. The retreat of some, the indif- 
ference of others (mostly from the wealthy class) is creating a vacuum around our 
cause.” 49 

Worse, La Solidaridad, fruit of his countless labors and dreams, the main 
weapon of his struggle, had to fold up. In August 1 895, Del Pilar was instructed by 
a letter from Apolinario Mabini that La Solidaridad would cease publication as the 
people had lost faith in the papers function in the Propaganda Movement. He was 
further told to proceed to Japan. "Abject disappointment was Del Pilar’s reaction 
to the event, and he bewailed the fact that the gains of the Propaganda would be 
lost and that the cessation of the Propaganda journal was an indictment of the Fili- 
pinos capacity for social preservation.” 50 

Some friends died. On 20 January 1896, Graciano Lopez Jaena, the founder 
of La Solidaridad, fellow laborantist, and brother Freemason, now reduced to mis- 
er y, penniless, forced to perform menial jobs, died of tuberculosis in a ward in 
Barcelona run by the Sisters of Charity. 51 Six years earlier and also in Barcelona, 
Jose Maria Panganiban, Del Pilar associate in the founding of the Revolucion lodge 
and a strong pillar of the Propaganda Movement, died under similar circum- 
stances, sick and despondent, assisted by a Vincentian priest. 52 

Del Pilar himself had not enjoyed good health for the past few years, however 
much he tried to conceal his maladies from his family. His letters to Chanay re- 
ported his good health "thanks to God.” Sometimes he mentioned a "pain in a vein 
or membrane, or a brief fever,” “a midnight chill that caused me to vomit,” "a 
, ea -cold and cough,” "an abscess in the neck.” From 1894 to 1895, he reported 
a spell of rheumatism, ’ "weakness caused by dengue, a fever that I did not take 
seriously, only a case of influenza.” In his last extant letter, written in May 1 895, 
is r eumatism was not yet cured, but he was able to attend the festival of San 
Isidro, the patron saint of Madrid. 



His poor health was caused mainly by poverty. Some of his letters to his wife 
mention that Everyone had abandoned me,” or “All my food comes from my own 
WOr * an ^ ^ have come to the extreme of gathering cigarette-buts to be able to 
smo e. There is no way of finding employment here except as a house-boy. Tell 
e ° a ^ 3 [Arellano, Chanay s brother] and the others, to save me from this ship- 
wrec . ^ In 1892, he reported that the pesos sent to him which were spent to pay 
C tS * tC> recover pawned jewels of Naning [Ponce] and Raimundo 

Andres , the clothes of Naning and mine are still in the pawnshop.” In another 
etter he says that he owed money to Ponce and that he (Del Pilar) had just paid his 
debts for paper, printing, etc. In 1893, he wrote: "Formerly I had some clothes to 
deposit in a pawnshop; now that they had been auctioned, I do not know how to 
go about. By the time of the last mail, I had no money even for a postage stamp. 

The misery I am going through is very painful.” 55 



308 



V1L I-ARRO EL Marcelo H. del Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



Tlie Call of the Family 

There was something worse than disillusionment and division, sickness and pov- 
erty: the separation from his family. Leon Ma. Guerrero wrote that Del Pilar was 
“ferociously lonely for his wife and daughters.” Del Pilar, the man “with a charac- 
ter of a warrior,” as Herr Langerbruch describes him, kept within him a tender, 
ardent, passionate love lor his wife Chanav and his daughters, Sofia (9 years old 
when he left) and Anita (one year and lour months). 

For eight years, returning to his family was Del Pilar’s permanent obsession. 
Of all his sufferings, this was the only one that made the warrior shed tears like a 

boy, and put his soul in a trance ol madness. 

As soon as he arrived in Barcelona in May 1889, he wrote to his wife: It will 
not be Ion- before we see each other again.” “My return” is the topic of every letter 
Then why he did not return? Two things stood in the way: money for the fare, and 
the hope of seeing a bill passed in the Spanish Cortes suppressing summary depor- 
tations, like the one hanging over Del Pilar's head. But “we are now working on 
that bill.” “Wait for me,” lie wrote in another letter, I am going, soon will em- 
brace my little daughters, 1 dream with the return. 

Yet Del Pilar never wavered in his loyalty to the political aims of the Propa- 
ganda Movement. He wrote to his friend Jose Reyes Tolentino at the end of 1894: 
“The important thing is to have faith, great faith in the cause of our redemption 
of the native country/' If he could not see those aims accomplished others wo . 
But as he saw death approaching, he must have realized that neither Inends nor 

family nor country would help him. 



The Call of God 

The question seldom asked about Del Pilar is whether, at the approach of death, he 
reflected and returned the Church and to God. I believe he did. 

There is no testimony from Del Pilar about his final conversion or about his 
willingness to die as Catholic, no last will, no letter, no statement of retraction from 

MaS °But reasons for upholding his final conversion to the Church are two: first, 
the signs of a Christian death; and second, the signs of a Christian burial. 



Christian Death: 4 July 1896 

Mariano Ponce, Del Pilar’s companion, tells us that since the spring ol 1895 Del 
Pilar began to feel sick.... When in February of 1896 we transferred to Barcelona 
to embark, his malady worsened very much, so much that we had to suspend the 
voyage. On July 4. . . he died. . . very far from his motherland. . . in the arms ol his 
friends.” 59 



309 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



The Catholic Hospital de la Santa Cruz was situated on Calle del Hospital, 
between Cervello and Egipciacas Streets, the names they still bear today. Founded 
in the 13th century, the hospitals had departments of medicine and surgery, and 
could accommodate 600 patients. 60 The hospital records registered the death of 
Del Pilar, and we must examine them carefully. First, however, we will do well to 
transcribe the registration of his death in the municipal record books. 

The Civil Registry of the Distrito del Hospital made the following registra- 
tion attested by the Municipal Judge: 

In the city of Barcelona, at 9:45 a.m. of July 4, 1 896. Before me, D. Jose 
Ricardo Ventosa, Municipal Judge of the Distrito del Hospital, and D. Juan 
Bautista Sauras, Secretary, there appeared D. Jose Rubio, born in Vilosell, 
province of Lerida, of legal age, married, employee, resident in the Calle del 
Hospital, n. 56, first floor, manifesting that D. Marcelo FI. del Pilar 
Gatmaitan, native of Bulacan, province of (Ultramar) [sic], aged 45, with resi- 
dence in Calle de San Pablo, n. 30, first floor, died at 1.15, in the night of this 
day in the residence [?] of the deponent, as a consequence of generalized tuber- 
culosis, of which he gives due information, as the person in charge. 

(Other circumstances) — That the deceased was married to Marciana del 
Pilar, origin unknown; that he was son of Julian del Pilar and Dona Blasa 
Gatmaitan, origins unknown. There is no record that he left testament. 

The body will be interred in the Southwest Cemetery/’ 1 

The deposition was witnessed by D. Jose Arevalo, from Sitges, and D. 
Mariano Rion, from Las Fargas, both residents of Barcelona. The proceedings are 
signed by the deponent, the judge, the secretary, and the two witnesses. The civil 
registration is not concerned with the religious or spiritual dispositions of the de- 
ceased. 

The records of the Hospital de la Santa Cruz attest to the death of Del Pilar 
in two different registry books: The Libro de Defunciones and the Registro de 
Entradas de Enfermos. 

The entry in the Libro de Defunciones, corresponding to the year 1 896, reads 
in Spanish: 



[Margin] [n.] 9. Del Pilar Gatmaitan, Marcelo 

[Text] A los cuatro de julio de mil ochocientos noventa y seis, a la una y 
cuarto de la madrugada, en este Hospital de la Santa Cruz de Barcelona, 
fallecio de muerte natural Marcelo del Pilar y Gatmaitan, natural de Bulakan 
(Ulramar), vecino de Barcelona, de cuarenta y cinco anos de edad, periodista, 
casado con Marciana del Pilar, hijo de Julian y Blasa. Recibio los Santos 
Sacramentos. Fue sepultado en el Cementerio del Sud-Oeste. — Esteban 
Teixido, Presbitero, Prior. 62 



310 



V1LLARROEL Marc do H. dd Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



Certificates of this entry have been served to two Filipinos on separate dates: 
in 1910 to Dr. Jose Bantug, who specified that the doctor attending Del Pilar was 
Dr. Bellini; 63 and in 1920 to Justice Norberto Romualdez, at the time he was ar- 
ranging for the transfer of Del Pilar's remains to the Philippines. 64 In 1995, a diird 
certificate was given to by the Archdiocesan Archivist of Barcelona. 

The most significant detail in the above document comes at the end when it 
says that Marcelo del Pilar red bid /os So n t os Sacramentos, received Last Sacra- 
ments. The registration was done by the priest in charge of the chaplaincy of the 
hospital, D. Esteban Teixido, “Prcsbitero, Prior" (Priest and Prior), the title of 
“Prior” probably being a reference to a medieval title of the chaplains of the Mili- 
tary Orders, some of them devoted to the care of hospitals. One such order was 
founded in Barcelona in the 1 4th century, the Order of Montesa. 



The entry of the Registro de Entradas de Enfermos of the same hospital is more 
detailed. The page that begins with 20 June 1896 shows Del Pilar’s name heading 



the list. 



[CHECK-IN] 



Year 

Month 

Day 

Entry number 

Name and surname 

Place of origin 

Province 

Residence 

Street 

Number 

Floor 



Age 

Profession 

[Status] 

Fathers name 
Mother’s name 
Ward 



1896 

June 

[ 20 ] 

2041 

Marcelo del Pilar 
Bulakan 

Ultramar (Overseas) 

Barcelona 

San Pablo 

30 

First 

45 



Journalist 

Married 

Julian 

Blasa 

C. (Cirugia, Surgery] 



[DISCHARGES] 



Month 

Day 



July 



Particular Ward 



Bed numberd 
Death or exit 
Death’s time 



4 

T [Santo Tomas] 

11 



+ [death] 

1.1/4 am (one and 
quarter, morning) 



311 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



Sacraments 

Observations 



V. (Viatico) 

E. (Extreme Unction) 
Filipino 65 



Del Pilar thus received the last sacraments, those normally administered to 
dying Christian s. They are the Viaticum or Holy Communion, and the Extreme 
Unction, today called the Unction of the Sick. Of the 40 patients admitted on 20 
June, seven died in the hospital. Two received only the Extreme Unction, while 
five, including Del Pilar, received both the Viaticum (Eloly Eucharist) and the 
Extreme Unction. 

The reception of these sacraments presupposes that the recipient is willing 
and well prepared, and therefore worthy of them. The Unction of the Sick is 
sometimes administered to a person already unconscious, on the presumption 
that he or she has not expressed objection and therefore is presumed to be well dis- 
posed. In those cases, it is given conditionally. But the Viaticum or Holy Com- 
munion is administered only to those who are conscious and, therefore, willing, 
worthy and well disposed to receive it. I he sick person has to ask for it, either per- 
sonally or through a messenger. If offered by the priest, the patient is free to accept 
or reject it. 



Another consideration is that the Church does not administer the last rites or 
sacraments to persons who are clearly and publicly known to be spiritually ill-dis- 
posed, such as those who have been excommunicated. The canonical dispositions 
are clear about this. Extreme Unction or the Unction of the Sick “may not be ad- 
ministered to those who remain obstinately impenitent in manifest mortal sin” and 
if there is doubt about this, it should be administered conditionally,” 66 For its part, 
the Eucharist (called Viaticum when administered to the dying) is denied to “those 
who are publicly unworthy, such as the excommunicated. . . unless they are known 
to have repented, amended and have repaired first the public scandal.” 67 

We may conclude, with moral certainty, that Del Pilar was offered the last 
sacraments, at least the Holy Communion, that he was conscious to receive it, and 
that, being aware of it, he willingly accepted it. In other words, he must have made 
a retraction of masonry before receiving Holy Communion or Viaticum. The re- 
ception of the sacraments means that Marcelo died reconciled with the church. 

The hospital records find confirmation in the testimony of an eyewitness, 
Fernando Canon Faustino, whose testimony, however, must be qualified. From 
Ponce, we know that he witnessed Del Pilar’s burial on 5 July, in the Montjuich 
cemetery, because he referred to it using the verb in the first person: “ Depositarnos 
los restos, we deposited his remains. But he does not give us particular details 
about his death and the manner of it, 68 which could indicate that either he had not 
witnessed it or that he preferred to pass it over in silence on account of his conver- 
sion. 



But Fernando Canon seems to have witnessed Del Pilar’s death, to have spo- 
ken to him, and to have received a final message from him. Unfortunately Canon 



312 



VILLARROEL Marcelo H. del Pilar : His Religious Conversions 



is little remembered in history. We know that he was cultured, scholarly, and inge- 
nious. 69 He hailed from Laguna, like Rizai, whose classmate he was at the Ateneo 
Municipal, before he left for Spain to become a successful engineer. Rizai dedicated 
to him one of the first copies of El Fi lib usterism o. ° Canon married a Spaniard, 
Teresa Casas de Batlle, and they lived in San Gervasio de Cassolas, Barcelona. 
Ponce fondly recalled the great hospitality of the Canons. 1 Canon was in 
Barcelona when Del Pilar died in 1 896, and there he remained until 1898 when he 
returned to the Philippines to join the revolutionary army. Returning to Spain, he 
stayed there until 1 908 when he finally left for the Philippines. He died in Manila 
on 18 July 1938. 

Canon made a short remark on the death of Del Pilar. Unfortunately t e 
document containing that remark is rather late and was not written by Canon 
himself. The information is found in the newspaper, El Debate , which, on the oc- 
casion of the 1 12th birth anniversary of Marcelo, 30 August 1962, asserted in its 

editorial: 



In his last moments, as testified by Fernando Canon, in whose arms Del 
Pilar breathed his last, this hero was thinking of his country and of his family 
to the point of entrusting Canon to tell his daughter (Marcelos) that he had 
confessed and received Holy Communion. : 

To be sure, El Debate is not a primary source, and it does not give its source 
of information. But most likely the editorialist knew Canon and obtained the in- 
formation personally from him. If the words of Fernando Canon cannot e oc 
mented more directly, at least they do not contradict the data gi\en ) t ie ) 

authentic hospital records. 



Christian Burial: 5 July 1896 

Ponce, who attended the funeral rites for Del Pilar, wrote: In the Southwest Cen 
etery of Barcelona, on a hill dominating the Mediterranean Sea... we eposite 
the remains of Marcelo del Pilar in a private pantheon of a friendly am D* 

The Southwest Cemetery (Cementerio del Oeste or Cementerio uex ° 
Barcelona, inaugurated in 1883, was divided into four sections. Cat o ie, 

Protestant, and “de abortos' (for abortions)/ 4 

In the Register of the Funeral Services of Barcelona there is an entr) s owing 
that Del Pilar “was interred on July 5, 1896, in a vaulted Hypogeum, No. 2 , via 
de San Jose, Group 2, of the Cemetery of Montjuich of this City, whose tit e is 
registered in favor of Teresa Casas de Batlle.’ 1 This statement comes from tie ie 
of the Cemetery Services of Barcelona, Jose Capsir Utrillas, who added this o ser 
vation: “The aforementioned tomb is situated in the cemetery traditionally known 
as Catholic Cemetery.” s This is in perfect accord with the testimony ma e y 
Ponce in 1907, namely that Teresa, the wife of Canon, “keeps in her residence in 



313 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



the district of San Gervasio de Cassolas the title of the crypt of her property, where 
the remains of the illustrious Plaridel rest.” 76 

Other than the date and place of the burial, (5 July), we do not possess any 
details about the funeral services. 

The Exhumination of Del Pilar's Remains: November 1920 

The remains of Del Pilar rested in the cemetery of Barcelona for 34 years, until 
1920, when they were brought to the Philippines upon request of the Philippine 
government. Paradoxically, the man who arranged the exhumation of the body of 
the highest-ranking Mason of the Propaganda Movement was Justice Daniel 
Romualdez, sometimes called the “Consummate Christian,” “Catholic Actionist 
No. 1,” and ‘ ‘one of the strongest pillars of the Catholic Faith in the Philippines.” 

After having represented the Philippines in the Seventh Universal Postal 
Congress held in Madrid in the spring of 1920, Romualdez received a message 
from Sergio Osmena, then Speaker of the House of Representatives, instructing 
him to proceed to Barcelona and try to “locate the remains of the hero Marcelo H. 
del Pilar and to bring them home to the Philippines.” In Barcelona, Romualdez 
contacted the proper Spanish authorities through the good offices of Joaquin 
Pellicena y Camacho, a Spanish journalist and chief of the Philippine section of La 
Casa de America . 

In the Ayuntamiento or town hall, they obtained definite information on the 
location of Del Pilars grave. Arrangements were made with the funeral parlor un- 
der the Sociedad Union de Empresarios de Pompas Ftinebres. 

Romualdez recorded these facts in his diary, some of which is transcribed in 
Romualdez s biography, Master of Souls. But he forgot to publicize a significant 
step in his dealings with the Barcelona authorities. For on 25 October 1920, he 
addressed a courteous letter to the Most Reverend Bishop of Barcelona asking him 
to authorize the exhumation of the remains of Del Pilar: 

Your Excellency: 



Commissioned by the Philippine Government to collect the mortal re- 
mains of my unforgettable compatriot, the lawyer and journalist Don Marcelo 
H. del Pilar y Gatmaitan, may I ask Your Excellency to have the kindness of 
authorizing the exhumation and collection of said remains, interred in the 
Cementerio del Sud-Oeste. 

It is a favor I expect from Your Excellency. May God keep your life for 
many years. — Barcelona, 25 October, 1920. 



Norberto Romualdez 



His Excellency the Bishop of Barcelona 78 



314 



VII 1 ARROI I Marcelo H. del PiLir : His Religions Conversions 



Together with the letter, Romualdez provided the bishop a certificate of the 
death of Del Pilar issued by l 'r. Jose Rosell, head of the Comisaria de Entradas del 
Hospital de la Santa Cruz. The Bishop, Most Rev. Ramon Guillamet y Coma, who 
governed the Diocese from 1920 to 1926, ° complied with the request: 

Barcelona. October 2S, 1920 



1 laving received the above request with the accompanying certification, 
as far as we are concerned, let it be done as requested. Permission to be granted 
according to norms. 1 lis Excellency granted it and signs it. to which 1 attest 
(Signed] Ramon, Bishop of Barcelona — By order ol the Bishop my Lord 
(Signed] Juna Boada [Secretary] 

Action taken. Permission granted on the same day of the decree, to 
which 1 attest. Boada. 

Havin'’ obtained the authorization of the bishop and after completing the 
arrangements with the funeral parlor, “the body of Del Pilar was exhumed and 
placed in an urn. in the presence of Joaquin Pellicena, of Angel Varekt, representa- 
tive of the American Consulate in Barcelona and of officials of the htneral parlor, 
and the urn closed and sealed. Then, the Father Chaplain ol the Cemetery said a 

Mass for the deceased . . r 

The ceremonies of the exhumation were covered by the mass media 

Alicante arrived in Manila on 3 December 1920. bearing the remains of 
Del Pilar. Del Pilar's wife Marciana, his two daughters, and his sister-m-law, car- 
ried by a coast-guard cutter, were the first to go aboard to receive them. Then a 
funeral procession, joined by the Masonic lodges, carried the body to the Funerana 
Nacional. On 1 1 December, a program was held at the Grand Opera ouse, a 
on 1 2 December, state necrological services were organized in the Salon de iVLumo 
of the Ayuntamiento. The remains were later laid in a mausoleum prepared lor the 

national hero in the Manila North Cemetery. 8 -' , . . . . 

In summary, there are two points that must be emphasized: the authoriza- 
tion of the Bishop of Barcelona required to initiate the proceedings and the Holy 
Mass celebrated in the cemetery for Del Pilar. 1 he first is a clear proof t lat ie was 
interred in a Catholic cemetery, and the second means that he was considere rec- 
onciled with the church, worthy of sharing her spiritual graces. 



The Mystery of Del Pilar’s Masonic Diploma 

One of the least known items kept in the Archives ol the University ol Santo Tomas 
of Manila is Del Pilar’s original Masonic Diploma. Measuring 36 by 32 centime- 
ters, the diploma is printed in black and red letters with designs in red. It is folded 
twice and bound in hard cover measuring 17 by 10.5 centimeters. It looks like a 



315 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< >ND 



modern passport, with the following diagonal title: Y IR:. ( )R:. ESPANOL. It was 
issued in Madrid in 1889 in Spanish and French. I he text is printed inside a deco- 
rative frame, the top part adorned with a radiant triangle encircled by stars, and 
under it a twin-headed eagle with sword in its claws, and, under the sword, the 
motto “ Deus Meumque Jus." The text reads in Spanish: 

Supremo Cotisejo del Gr:. 33 del ( Iran ( )riente I '<punol 
A todos los M Mas:, dc todos los ( )ri rates 
S:. E:. P:. 

SABED:. Qiie nuestro muy querido her:: Marc el o II. del Pilar 

simb:. Kupang 

natural de 

de . . . . . anos de edad t ha si do e lev ado, por an tori dad 
Masonica legal , 

al gr:. De Maest:. Eligido de los nueve gr:. 9 

Y para que conste y se le reconozcan las prerogativas a su 
gerarquia correspondiente , expedimos este titulo 

Madrid ’ 1° de julio de 1 BH9 

(Sello del Gran Oriente) (Sello de la Eesoreria) 

El Gr:. Com:. 

(Fdo.) Miguel Morayta 
(hirmas del Tesorero y del Secretario) 

TUTULO de Maestro eligido de los nueve gr:. 9o expedido a favor del 
her:. Marcelo El. del Pilar 



Iomada razon en el a. 20, folio 4 

Inside the folded diploma, there is a note written in the 1 930s by Fr. Alberto 
Santamaria, Archivist of the University of Santo Fomas, which reads: 

This Title of Mason of M.H. del Pilar was found in La Pas ion, Madrid, 
among the personal things of Archbishop Nozaleda. From there, it was brought 
by Fr. Francisco Marin. Is this a sign that he [Del Pilar] retracted Masonry? 

In the 1930s the original text of Jose Rizal’s retraction was found in the 
Archives of the Archdiocese of Manila. In the controversy that was unleashed im- 
mediately, the Dominican Fr. Serapio Tamayo, three times Rector of the Univer- 



316 



VI l I ARROl-'l Mil redo H. del Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



siry of Santo Tomas (1926-1936), about to end his last term of office, intervened 
with an article published in El Debate (18 June 1935), which ended with these 
remarks: 



W hen the Most Reverend Bernardino Nozaleda died in Madrid, there 
was found in his room the Masonic Diploma of Marcelo H. del Pilar, who died 
in Spain, and who, according to that evidence, also retracted Masonry. 1 he 
Diploma can be seen now in the Archives of the University of Santo lomas. 



It would seem logical to keep the diploma either in some Masonic lodge, ei- 
ther in Spain or here, as an important memento of such an outstanding Mason. In 
fact, it would make sense to keep it in any place other than an institution run by 
friars, whom Del Pilar castigated in the Soberania Monacal. 

If we cannot explain this, we can, to a certain extent, explain the iter ot the 

d ' Pl ° We start with a word about the Dominicans and Del Pilar. In his campaign 
against the frai/ocracia. 1 VI Pilar attacked all the friars of the Philippines and all the 
religious institutv, including the Jesuits. It seems that he did not treat the Domini- 
,,, badly as the Olliers. I Is knew them well, having studied under them lor 
It, a. the University of Santo lomas. which granted him two academic degree. 
This notwithstanding, 1 VI Pilar was behind the popular rallies in Manila in IS, 
in favor of the (itoi» de n.mmiles of the parish ot Bmondo against the Dominican 
Fr „ e Hevia Campomanes. However, as he later pointed out m Spam, e nev r 
intended to attack the Dominican Archbishop Pedro Pavo. also a target ot the tal- 
lies of that year. During Del Pilar’s eight-year stay in Spam, the Dominicans of 
Madrid sent him feelers^ offering their hand of friendship, telling him. as Del Pilar 
p ut it rha, ”, hey were no, opposed ro what we (the laborantists) desired ; other 

fri-irs perhaps, were; but “not they’ (the Dominicans). 

Del Pilar’s relations with Archbishop Nozaleda, although never perhaps di- 
rect were noticeable and peculiar. When Fr. Bernardino Nozaleda, professor ot the 
university, was nominated by the Holy See as Archbishop ol Manila on -7 May 
1889 to succeed his confrere Archbishop Pedro Payo, La Solidandad received the 
news with mixed teelmgs. For Del Pilar and his colleagues m the newspaper, 
Nozaleda was a man of remarkable qualities. “We opposed his 
cause he is unworthy, hut because be is a friar™ So when the leaders ot P P 
ganda Movement organized in 1890 a banquet for distinguished personalities, 
among them politicians, they sent an invitation to Bishop-Elect Nozaleda, rea y 
in Spain for his Episcopal ordination, subtly laying a trap for him. For it he ac- 
cepted he had to speak clearly about Philippine issues in front ot the pro-retorm 
liberals' and other anticlericals. If he did not accept. La Solidaridad would know 
how to criticize his lack of etiquette. s 

After the Episcopal ordination of Monsignor Nozaleda in Oviedo, on 13 
April 1893, Del Pilar wrongly suspected that the new bishop was reluctant to re- 



317 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTIC )N ANI ) HI Y< >NI ) 



turn to his see of Manila and that he was lobbying to be assigned to another Kpis- 
copal see in some other part of the church. 

When the time came for Nozaleda to return to the Philippines and be in- 
stalled as archbishop, Del Pilar, playing the counselor, wrote extensively in La 
SolicUiridadW\s\\\n^h\r\\ good luck in his most difficult task ahead, which was, in 
Del Pilar’s opinion how to bring the friars under his control, in accordance with 
the spirit and the letter of the decrees of the Council of Trent. ( )ne year later, Del 
Pilar took the trouble of following up the matter of archbishop-friars relations. 89 
Whatever Nozaleda did in this respect, what he certainly did some years later was 
to denounce in strong terms the de-Christianizing activities of some people of 
Malolos through “heterodox printed pamphlets and leaflets in which the mysteries 
of our religion are insolently attacked,’ 90 possibly referring to, among others, the 
Tagalog tracts written by Del Pilar in 1888. In sum, the relations between Del Pilar 
and Nozaleda were not cordial, at least in the last years of I )el Pilar s life. 

We now turn our attention again to I )el Pilar’s place of death, Barcelona. The 
Dominicans of the Rosary Province of the Philippines were conspicuously present 
in that city, at least periodically, in the second part of the 1 9th century, ever since 
their new missionaries made the voyage to the Philippines by way of the Suez Ca- 
nal. Initially, the port of embarkation was the French city of Marseilles. But since 
1878, the port of departure was Barcelona, and it continued to be so until World 
War II. Twelve friars embarked in 1 896, sailing on 4 January, aboard the Mindanao . 

By the end of the century, the Dominicans had begun to think of establish- 
ing a residence in Barcelona for departing missionaries and in order to more easily 
make arrangements for embarkation. In 1903, they opened a house there, inaugu- 
rating it on 29 December and placing it under the tutelage of Saint Joseph. I hat 
house was in the arrabal or suburb (now district) of San Cervasio de Cassolas 
(Zaragoza Street, 51, near Mount Tibidado). 91 

I hus, the Dominicans of the Philippines were present in Barcelona before, 
during, and after Del Pilar’s death, more visibly after the establishment of their 
house in 1903. But when does Nozaleda, Archbishop Manila, come into the story 
of Del Pilar s diploma? Once his resignation was accepted by the Holy See, 
Nozaleda settled for good in Spain, arriving in Barcelona in 1902. He lived until 
1928, and although he did not settle in Barcelona, he occasionally visited the city, 
undoubtedly staying in the house of his confreres in the district of San Gervasio. It 
is not farfetched to assume that he was given there the Masonic diploma of Del 
Pilar. Who had it? I he Dominicans of the House of San Jose? Fernando Canon? 
And how did they or perhaps others (bishop, priest, layman) come to get it, di- 
rectly or indirectly, from Del Pilar? We do not know. 

In any case, Archbishop Nozaleda possessed Marcelo’s Masonic diploma and 
kept it until the end of his life. For many years he resided in the Dominican Con- 
vent of Avila where he taught theology, and he spent the last years of his life in the 
Convent of Nuestra Senora de la Pasion, Procure House of the Phili ppine Domini- 
cans in Madrid, Calle de Zeferino Gonzalez, 5. In that house he died on 7 October 



318 



VII l ARROl l Mu redo H. del Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



1927, at the age of 83 vears. It was then that the confreres going over his personal 
belongings and papers, found Del Pilar’s Masonic diploma.’’’ 

Nozaleda’s bodv was transferred to the Convent of Ocana (Toledo) and bur- 
ied in the church. In that convent there stayed then a famous Dominican theolo- 
gian, hr. Francisco Marin Sola, once Professor of Theology in the University of 
Santo I omas. After several years as professor in the University of Fribourg, Swit- 
zerland ( 1922-1926), hr. Marin was assigned to the Convent of Ocana in 1927, 
where he devoted one year to his theological works."'' But by the end of 1928, he 
was assigned bv his superiors to teach again at the University ofSanto Tomas. Upon 
his departure, he was entrusted with Del Pilar's Masonic diploma and on arriving 
in Manila on 6 February 1 629. he handed it over to either the university rector, Fr. 
Serapio Tamavo, or directly to the university archivist, Fr. Alberto Santamaria. Fr. 
Marin did not live long. 1 le was nominated dean of the Faculty of 1 heology and, 
at the Provincial Chapter of the Dominicans in 1 93 1 , he was elected Diffmttor. Fie 

died in 1932. „ , , 

Let us underline that neither Fr. Santamaria nor Fr. I amavo referred to the 

diploma as a proof of Del Pilar's conversion to the church and his retraction of 
Mason rv. They spoke of it only as a possibility. But we can now be more assertive, 
since we possess stronger proofs— the records of the Barcelona hospital where he 

died 0 f his having died receiving the last sacraments of the church. 

Is the evidence convincing? Perhaps not so for those who do not accept even 
the more cogent proof of the retraction and conversion of Rizal (eyewitnesses ac- 
counts, text of retraction, sacraments received, canonical marriage, religious ex- 
pressions and messages, etc.). We acknowledge that the documentary evidence in 
the case of Del Pilar is not overwhelming, we lack his testament, a retraction text, 
his own. We have only the hospital records and the testimony of Fernando Canon 

Faustino, his friend and companion by his deathbed. 

The evidence is not much but it is certainly valid, undeniable, and therefore 
strong. Anyone who might want to deny its validity can do so only by presenting 

primary documentary evidence to the contrary. . ,. 

A Catholic may be pleased at the thought of Del Pilar’s death as a Catholic 
just as a Freemason may be displeased by it. But let us not forget that, in the past, 
the contrary happened in the cases of Tertullian and of Martin Luther. But t at is 
not the issue. What is important is to establish the historical facts and arrive at t te 
truth, whether it pleases or not. 



Notes 

1. Epifanio de los Santos, “Marcelo H. del Pilar,” in Revista Filipina , III (1918), 775. 

2. Ibid. Governor Ramon Blanco never met Del Pilar, at least not in the Philippines. To 
call Del Pilar “separatist” is not entirely correct. Many critics think of him more as an 
“assimilationist.” 

3. Ibid., 974. 



319 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.UTK )N AND HI Y< >Nl ) 



4. Leon Ma. Guerrero, The hirst Filipino, Manila 1 979, p. 133. 

5. “When we were studying in Manila under the ferule of (he I )ominicans, to wear a 
rosary around the neck wa.s an academic asset, not to wear it was a liability that pro- 
duced its effects at the final examinations’ (Del Pilar, I. a Soheranta MotuiciiL edited 
in Magno Gatmaitan, The life and writings of Marcelo l L del Pilar / I.a Soberania 
monacal , Historical Conservation Society, vol. XLVI, Manila 1 98“\ p. I * 1 )). 

6. On Del Pilar’s academic training, see F. Villarroel, ( ).P . Marcelo I 1. del Pilar in 
Santo Tomas,” in Unitas. 

7. Del Pilar was studying at the university when one dav a number of anonymous leaf- 
lets against some members of the teaching faculty, including the friars, were unex- 
pectedly distributed in several classrooms. On that unrest, see my article in Unitas , 
quoted in the previous note. 

8. Del Pilar, La Soberania Monacal, in M. Gatmaitan, op. cit.. p. l t~\ 

9. John Schumacher, S.J., The Propaganda Movement, 1R00-1R 1 ) 5, Manila 1873, p. 
275. 

10. Exposicion del Arzobispo de Manila , Mons. Pedro Payo, ( ).P. ill Ministro de Ultramar, 
26 de noviembre de 1887. Ms. of the Archives of the University of Santo I omas (here- 
under quoted as AUST), Libros 115, vols. 233-34 1 . 

1 1. On this showdown, see J. Schumacher, op. cit., p. 96. I )el Pilar would write on this 
encounter years later in La Solidaridad. 

12. For more details on this, see J. Schumacher, op. cit., pp. 97-99. 

13. Much of the correspondence exchanged between Archbishop Payo and the governor 
regarding this anti-ecclesiastical decree can be seen in their original texts in AUST, 
Libros 115; particularly, a comprehensive report of the Archbishop to the Govern- 
ment, vols. 233-24 1 . A summary of it appears in J. Schumacher, op. cit., pp. 99-102. 

14. Sabes que you estaba opuesto a que sc atacase al P. Payo [i.e. Archbishop Pavo] (Let- 
ter of Marcelo del Pilar to P. Icazama, March 7, 1 889, in Epistolario de Marcelo hi. de! 
Pilar, Manila 1955, 1, p. 5.) Fora documented overview of this rally, see Schumacher, 
op. cit., pp. 102-107. 

15. Expediente interior seguido contra Don Marcelo H. del Pilar (a) Plaridel, por 
coaccion y antecedentes sospechosos. Malolos (Bulacan). Empieza el 14 de octubre 
de 1888 . 1 his “ expediente" is kept in a folder of the Philippine National Library, 
which actually contains little about the legal proceedings. The biggest part of it has 
been lost. However, Epifanio de los Santos transcribed almost all of it in his “Marcelo 
H. del Pilar,” in Revista Pilipinas, III, 778-789. 

16. Ibid., p. 789. 

17. I hese and other short lagalog works, written by Del Pilar before his departure for 
Spain via Hong Kong, have been published, with a Spanish version of the laureate 
poet Manuel Bernabe in Escritos de Marcelo H. del Pilar, Manila 1970, II, pp. 317- 
356. For an evaluation of these writings, see J. Schumacher, op. cit., pp. 111-1 134. 

18. 7 he full poem is in Escritos, II, pp. 347-356. The quoted comments in our text are in 
J. Schumacher, op. cit., p. 138. 



320 



VII I.ARROI'I Miircelo H. del Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



19. TIk 



20 . 

21 . 



22 . 

23. 

24. 

25. 



I here .ire two modern editions of Li Soberania Monacal: one in Escritos de Marcelo 
H. del Pilar. Manila 1970, vol. II; and the other in M. Gatmaitan, The Life and Writ- 
ings of Marcelo H. del Pilar. I iistorical Conservation Society, Manila 1987, pp. 131- 
171. In this study I have used the edition of Magno Gatmaitan. 

J. Schumacher, op. cit., p. 136. 

The first anti-lriar articles ot Del Pilar in Li holidaridadvtete Revista de Quincena 
(31 October 1889) and "Cam flic to clerical en Pilipinas,” (15 November 18S9), “A 
los gove. names y govern ados" (3 1 August 1 S95). Between them, he wrote at least 20 
other similar articles in Escritos: “Lo que cuesta la frailocracia (n. 108); Regimen 
tutelar” (n. 1 04); “Supresion del regimen tutelar en Filipinas’ (n. 105); Abusodela 

frailocracia contra los frailes de Pilipinas” (n. 121) etc. 

Only the August inians were exclusive topics for some articles in La Sohdandad, tor 
example- P I P Pont” (n. 109. in Escritos): “Los Agustinos filipinos” (n. 117); ”Los 
Agustinot ( Jo — Mcmoria del 1’. Font* („. 118): ‘M-o.b del P. 

o” , ‘l.is ’i|u'smm. MS- Jetm, Nlaalav:, mu. C.M..Ml!/»/^r/o- »/«»■»« »/te 

M'dc’i'a!!,' 'SpXw in U SMM 1 1 March ,892 

0 „ the affilhition of Pel Pilar ... Masonry, see among others: J; Sdm.mchcr, "Phd- 
ippinc Masonry ,o 1 890. Asi.tn SVw/r.s (August 1966, 2), 328 - 34 1 . who says he had 
access primary sources regarding Philippine Masonry eststmg the Archives o 
the Delegation National de Servieios Documentales in Sa amanca, .pain S' e ' 

see j Schumacher. The Tn,p„g,,U, Mmrmm. PP- 154 - 163 : Teodoro M. Kala , 
Philippi,,' Mwr,, Manila 1956: Lea S. Zapanta. The political idea, of Marcelo H. 

del Pilar, Quezon City 1967, pp. 125 and It. 

26 The author of “Masonry" in ESPASA, Enciclopedia Universal Ilustrada vol , p. 

' 720) places the meeting of the lodges on 14-17 May 1889, but Schumacher, lollow- 

Lgt source friendly to Morayta.” puts the formation of the <*»» Onente Espanol on 
9 January 1889 (Schumacher, “Philippine Masonry, p. 334). 

27. J. Schumacher, “Philippine Masonry, pp. 333-334. 

28. J. Schumacher, The Propaganda Movement, p. 158. 

29. Lea S. Zapanta, op. d,.. PP- 1 26- 1 27. Zapanta goes a list o to memhers o, Mr* 
family who were members of this lodge and were among the nine individu. . c 

by Governor-General Blanco for subversive activities. It may be asked whether these 
events were known to Fr. Toribio del Pilar, Marcelo’s eldest brother and, at that time, 

coadjutor parish priest. 

30. Art. “Masonry,” in ESPASA, Enciclopedia Universal Ilustrada. vol. 33. p. ~1. 

31 Regarding these promotions see J. Schumacher, Philippine Masonry, pp. 334 335. 

Schumacher seems to be absolutely sure that Del Pilar obtained the 3rd degree since 
it is registered in the records of the lodge Sohdaridad. He is also sure that Del Pilar 
reached the 18th and the 30th degree (ibid.). 



321 






THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AM > HI Y< >M ) 



32. T.M. Kalaw, op. cit., p. 22, says: “Del Pilar, notwithstanding Ins Filipino nationality, 

held honorable positions in the Gran oriente Espafiol. I Ic had the thirty-third de- 
gree ” Schumacher ( The Propaganda Movement, p. 1 59), says that I )el Pilar and 

Ponce “were likewise to become members of the Supreme C Council ol the Gran 
Oriente Espafiol, holding the highest degree,” citing the work of Mauri/io, La gran 
traicion , Barcelona 1 899, p. 92. 

33. J. Schumacher, “Philippine Masonry,” p. 334. 

34. T.M. Kalaw, op. cit., p. 222. 

35. “To persons who arc not yet close to me, I make them understand that my residence 
is not yet ready for receiving visitors. However, Don Miguel Morayta, whom we con- 
sider like another papa, has already come to see me (Letter to C hanay, Madrid, 4 
February 1890, in Epistolario de Marce/o H. del Pilar, II, p. 47). 

36. I cannot understand why in these months, whenever Don Miguel Moravta and I 
meet, this gentleman keeps repeating that I should not be in a hurry to return there 
(the Philippines). I ask him why, and he keeps silence for a long while, and then tells 
me that what you can do here for the good of your people is more than what you can 
do there (Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 22 July 1 89 1 , in Epistolario, II, p. 105). 

37. I caught this influenza the day I went to the burial rites for Moravia's wife. Since I 
was the one presiding the mourning rites, we had the duty to be the last to leave the 
cemetery, and while the participants were still taking leave, we had to be bareheaded, 
and it was very cold.” (Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 14 February 1 895, Epistolario , II, 
p. 197). 

38. In 1899, the majority of the members of the Spanish Clones were opposed to admit- 
ting Miguel Morayta as member of the Assembly, “for having— in the words of 
Ugarte by means of the Masonic lodges, prepared the insurrection of the Philip- 
pines (Art. Mesoneria”, in ESPASA , Enciclopedia Universal Ilustrada , vol. 33, p. 
747). 

39. Letter of Del Pilar to Juan Zulucta, Madrid, 1 June 1893 ( Epistolario , I, p. 265). 

40. Letter of Jose Rizal to Del Pilar, London, January 1 889 (Epistolario Rizalnio , vol. II, 
p. 97). 

41. He wrote two articles on Masonry in La Solidaridad. “La Masoneria Filipina” (15 
September 1893) and “Masoneria y Monaquismo en Pilipinas” (30 November 
1893). I he only articles in La Solidaridad in which he treats rather superficially Ma- 
sonry and religion are the following: “La Masoneria en Pilipinas” (15 September 
1893); “Masoneria y Monaquismo en Pilipinas” (30 November 1893); “El 
alarmismo frailuno y la Masoneria Pilipinas” (15 December 1893); “Bichara” (15 
January 1894); “Tampoco” (31 January 1894). In all of them, criticism of the friars 
abounds more than theological discussion. 

42. Epistolaro de M.H. del Pilar, I, pp. 72-73. 

43. Leo XIII, Encyclical Letter Humanum Genus, 20 April 1884 (ed. in The Great Encyc- 
licals of Pope Leo XII, Chicago 1 903, p. 89). 

44. Code of Canon Law (1917), can. 2335. 



322 



VILLARROEL Marc flo H. del Pilar: His Religions Conversions 



45. Letter of Governor Ramon Blanco to the Overseas Minister, Manila, 20 July 1896 
(original draft in the Philippine National Archives, “Marcelo H. del Pilar, ’ RARE, 
B-5). 

46. Original, “Reservado. Ministro de Ultramar a Manila”, 29 Agosto 1896. Philippine 
National Archives, “Marcelo H. del Pilar,’ RARE, B-5; cf. Antonio Molina, The 
Philippines through the centuries , Madrid 1961, vol. II, p. 66 , based on original sources 
in the Archivo Historico Nacional, Madrid. 

47. My statements are based only on the existing published correspondence. Del Pilar 
may have written other letters. 

48. Letter of to Rizal, Madrid, 20 July 1 892, EpistoLirio de Marcelo H. del Pilar, I. p. 264. 

49. Letter to Jose Reyes Tolentino, Madrid, 3 November 1894, Episto/ario, I. p. 267. 

50. Cf. letter of Apolinario Mabini to Del Pilar, 9 August 1895 (The letters of Apolinaro 
Mabini, Manila 1965, p. 34); cf. Lea Zapanta, op. cit., p. 174. 

5 \ Cf. Gregorio Zaide, Great Eilipinos in History, Manila 19/0, p. 262. 

52 Jose Ma. Panganiban, deprived of the ordinary financial aid coming from the Philip 
pines, died in a dingy boarding house in Barcelona on 19 August 1890, at age -7, 
with the Vincentian Father Jose Recoder, his former professor in the Seminary of 
Nueva Gaceres, giving him spiritual comfort as he breathed his last (G. Zaide, op. 
cit., pp. 375-376). 

53 Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 17 August 1892 ( Episto/ario , II, p. 138). 

54 Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 18 March 1893 (ibid., II. p. 183). 

55 Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 3 August 1893 (ibid., II. p. 161). 

56. The quotations are taken from the letters indicated in the text, taken from the 

EpistoLirio de Marcelo H. del Pilar. 

57 . Letter of Del Pilar to Jose Reyes Tolentino, Madrid, 3 November 1 894 EpistoLirio, I, 
p. 276. 

58. Leon Ma. Guerrero, The First hilipino , p. 598. 

59 Quoted by Epifanio de los Santos, op. cit., pp. 971-972. 

60. The Hospital de la Santa Cruz does not exist today. Since 1914, the building 
has housed the Biblioteca de Catalunya. A historical marker placed at the entrance of 
the compound in Calle del Hospital reads in Catalan: “Antiguo Hospital de Santa 
Cruz.” For some historical background, see ESPASA Enciclopedia Universal, vol. XII, 
p. 744. 

61. Transcription from an authenticated copy made by Jose Capsir Utrillas, Je e e 
Servicios de Cementerios, Institut Municipal dels Serveis Funeraris de Barcelona, and 
sent to me on 4 November 1995. 

62. From a photocopy of the document sent to me by Reis Fontanals, Archivist of the 
Manuscript Section of the Biblioteca de Catalunya, Barcelona, with letter dated to 6 
October 1995. The original documentation is in the Archivo Historico del Hospital 
de Sant Pau, which keeps a great part of the records of the old Hospital de la Santa 
Cruz. 



323 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



63. Published in E. de los Santos, “Marcelo H. del Pilar,” in Revista Fill pitta. 111 (1981), 
972. According to Dr. Bantug, Del Pilar was first placed in the Sala de Cirugia (Sur- 
gery Section), but since operation would have been useless, he was transferred to the 
Santo Tomas Ward, bed n. 1 1 (ibid.). 

64. Photocopy provided to me by the Archivist of the Archdiocese of Barcelona on 30 
May 1995. 

65. Photocopy made and sent to me by Reis Fontanals, Archivist, Bibliotcca de 
Catalunya, with letter of 6 October 1 995. 

66. Code of Canion Law, 1917, can. 942. 

67. Ibid., can. 855. 

68. Quoted by E. de los Santos, op. cit., p. 972. 

69. Born in Binan, Laguna, Fernando Canon left for Spain at the age of 1 7 and settled in 
Barcelona, where he studied at the Royal School of Electric Engineering, obtaining 
the title of Engineer. In 1888, he visited the Philippines bringing copies of Rizal s 
Noli Me Tangere. He married Teresa Casas de Batlle and they lived in the district of 
San Gervasio de Cassolas. He returned to the Philippines at the outbreak of the Revo- 
lution, was a member of the Malolos Congress, representing Bon toe. President 
Aguinaldo appointed him Brigadier of the Engineering Corps and Politico-Military 
Commander of Nueva Vizcaya. He was cofounder of the now-defunct Liceo de Ma- 
nila, where he taught. He returned to Spain again, and finally settled in the Philip- 
pines and resumed teaching at the Liceo. He died in Sampaloc, Manila, on 18 July 
1938 (G. Zaide, Great Filipinos in History, pp. 1 37- 1 4 1 ). 

70. That copy of El Filibusterismo preserved in the library of the University of Santo 
Tomas, Filipiniana Section, and has the following dedication autographed by Rizal: 

A mi antiguo companero D. Fernando Canon Faustino. Tu amigo, J. Rizal. Grand, 
17 Sept. 1891.” 

71. In 1907, Mariano Ponce wrote this about Canon: “His wife Teresina, as we called her 
with familiarity, whose hospitality was shown in San Gervasio de Cassolas, Barcelona, 
in days troublesome for Filipinos, keeps the title of the crypt of her own, where the 
remains of the illustrious Plaridel are resting” (M. Ponce, “Fernando Canon,” in El 
Renacimiento, 26 November 1907). 

72. El Debate, XLIII, 14 (30 August 1962). Editorial. Unfortunately, it is not signed, as 
editorial articles usually are not, and the author does not give his source of informa- 
tion. In 1962, El Debate was published by Rafael Ripoll as director and Antonio L. 
Serrano as associate director. 

73. Quoted by E. de los Santos, op. cit., p. 972. 

74. ESPASA Enciclopedia Universal, vol. VII, art. “Barcelona-Cementerios,” p. 714. 

75. Letter of Jose Capsir Utrillas to Fidel Villarroel, O.P., Inst. Mun lop. Dels Seveis 
Funeraris de Barcelona, 6 November 1995. 

76. Cf. Supra, note 71. 

77. Norberto Romualdez, Mi primer viaje... 7’his book, which I have not been able to 
locate, is the source for the description of the events narrated in Romualdez s biogra- 



324 



V1LLARROEL Man: do H. del Pilar: His Religious Conversions 



78. 



79. 

80. 
81. 
82. 



83. 

84. 
83. 



86 . 

87. 

88 . 
89. 



90. 



91. 



92. 



93. 



phy entitled Master of Souls: The Life ofNorberto Romualdez (1875-1941), prepared 
by Norberto Romualdez Centennial Committee, Manila 1975, pp. 164-170. 
Autographed letter kept in the Archivo Diocesano, Arzobispado de Barcelona, Serie 
“Translado de Restos del ano 1 920.” An authenticated copy was handed to me by the 
Diocesan Archivist Fr. Leandro Niqui in May 1995. 

Cf. Lamberto Echevarria, Episcopologio Espanol Contemporaneo ( 1868-1985 )» 
Salamanca 1986, p. 71. 

Document quoted supra , note 78. 

Cf. “Mi primer viaje,” in Master of Souls, p. 165. 

At least one report was published in a Barcelona newspaper. See Les despuilles d un 
patriota,” La Veu de Catalunya (“The remains of a patriot,” in The Voice ofCatalund). 
The report ends: “La fait a de tiempo ha impedido que las autoridades catalanas y la 
ciudad de Barcelona hayan tributado un homenaje publico a la memoria del ilustre 
patriota y de simpatia hacia el Gobierno y el pueblo de Filipinas (Trans. L. Galmes). 
Master of Souls, pp. 167-1 68. 

El Debate, n. 269 (18 June 1935). 

“I received a message from a highly placed Dominican, to tell me not to consider the 
Dominicans as my enemies. I answered him that we consider nobody as enemy, we 
were asking only what was ours by right. He sent to tell me a second time that he was 
not opposed to what we were desiring, meaning perhaps that our antagonists were 
the Augustinians, the Franciscans and the Recollects, not they (Dominicans), (letter 
to Chanay, Madrid, 3 March 1891, Epistolaro, II, p. 93). 

“Las Mitras Filipinas,” La Solidaridad, I, 4 (31 March 1889). The unsigned artic e 
was actually written by Graciano Lopez Jaena. 

Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 15 October 1890, Epistolario, II, p* 76. 

Letter to Chanay, Madrid, 26 November 1889, Epistolario, II, p. 34. 

On the return of Nozaleda and his task, Del Pilar wrote one article in La Solidari a 
“Pasce agnos meos” (30 June 1 890), Escritos de M.H. del Pilar, I, pp* 60-610, and on 
the difficulties he encountered in the first year, he wrote two: Revista de Quincena 
(31 October, I, pp. 1 10-11, 1 1 1-118). 

Letter of Archbishop Nozaleda to Governor Ramon Blanco, Manila, 13 March 1895, 
in Nozaleda’s Defensa obligada contra acusaciones gratuitas , Madrid 004, pp. 56 6 
The Dominican Provincial Chapter held in Ocana (Toledo) in 1906 formally ac 
cepted the house founded in Barcelona in 1903, and assigned there five religious 
( Acta Capituli Provincialis Provinciae Sanctissimi Rosarii Philippitiamm , Madrid 
1906, p. 71). 

For a comprehensive biography of Archbishop Nozaleda, see Acta Cap. Provincialis, 
Provinciae Smi. Roasarii , Manial 1931, pp. 58-61. 

About Fr. Francisco Marin Sola, see Victoriano Vicente, O.P De la prision a las aulas 
universitarias,” Philippiniana Sacra, 1,2 (May-August, 1966 ), 320-346. 



325 



Ferdinand Blumentritt 
and the Philippine Revolution 



Harry Sichrovsky 

Boltzmann-lnstitute for China and Southeast Asian Research, Vienna, Austria 



I n the rich and colorful history of the Philippine revolution, the story of 
Ferdinand Blumentritt is a chapter apart and rightly so. It does not Fit into any 
category and yet it is perhaps the most fascinating episode in which the incongru- 
ous, the illogical, the improbable, and the unbelievable converge. For it is without 
parallel that a foreigner, a white Central European to boot, should of his own free 
will play a leading part in the freedom struggle of the Philippines and wholeheart- 
edly support its national revolution notwithstanding the inevitable dangers and 
difficulties to his family, his career, and his personal safety. And the fact that all this 
took place without his ever setting foot on Philippine soil puts the seal on this 
more-than-strange mystery. What were Blumentritfs motives? What drove him to 
change his life by devoting it to a country not his own, a race not his own, a lan- 
guage not his own? 

In the course of research, which is but in its initial stages, more questions arise 
than can be answered. But in this treatise 1 would undertake the attempt to explain 
the veritable metamorphosis of an Austrian small-town schoolmaster, a devout 
Catholic, and loyal imperial civil servant into a politician, an agitator, orator, pam- 
phleteer, tactician, and analyst in support of the liberation struggle of a people not 
his own but very much by his own choice. Supposing he did feel the urge to open 
the window of his small home town into the wide world by study, reading, and 
research, why would he, from all the mysterious and beautiful countries of the 
world, choose an almost-unknown archipelago of 7,000 islands? 

To find the answers let us take a close look at the principal actor. Ferdinand 
Blumentritt was born on 1 0 September 1 853 in the city of Prague, then the capital 



326 



SICHROVSKY Ferdinand Blurnentritt and the Philippine Revolution 



of the so-called “Crownland” Bohemia of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, today the 
capital of the Czech Republic. His father, of the same Christian name, also a native 
of Prague, concluded his life there as a retired civil servant of the Public Finance 
Department. Ferdinand’s mother, Amalia, was the daughter of Andreas Schneider, 
an imperial accountant from Vienna. Their son passed secondary school, went on 
to receive his master's decree in geography and history at the famous Karls Univer- 
sity in Prague. Taking up his post at the College in Leitmeritz in 1877 at 24, he 
must have been one of the youngest professors in the country. Blurnentritt stayed 
at the school more than 30 years, crowning his career by being elected headmaster, 

a post he held lor the last 1 1 years ol his hie. 

There are few portents of his luture adventurous life. To illuminate his ances- 
try we must turn to the distant past. In a personal biographical note Blurnentritt 
reveals that his great-grandmother was related to Alcazar, a former governor of the 
Philippines. Subsequent research establishes that there actually was an auditor at 
the military court in Manila named Andres Alcazar who succeeded Governor-Gen- 
eral Juan de Silva from February to September 1616. Moreover there was another 
female descendant, who married a Peruvian Creole who fell in the battle o 
Avacucho on 9 December 1 824, a battle which sealed the late of the Spanish Em- 
pire in South America when Bolivar defeated the Viceregal army. This great-aunt 
later moved to Prague where Ferdinand, as he relates it, in her home received 
those impressions, which later should prove decisive tor my hie: the love ol the 
Spanish Colonial world. But of all regions and peoples my greatest interest wen 

rhe land and people of the Philippines." . 

‘ Blurnentritt continues to relate how he devoured all books and pictures on 
the subject. As soon as he was able to read he learned Spanish from books because 
there was no teacher available. As soon as he started school his classmates dubbed 
him the “Spaniard.” But soon he was curious to know what the explorers and his- 
torians of other nations had to tell. And he proceeded to learn English French 
Portuguese, Italian, and Dutch to which he later added Tagalog and several region- 

lan§U ^vo years after mking up his post in Leitmeritz, Blurnentritt published his 
first treatise, on the “Chinese in the Philippines,” one ol 284 titles in the cata ogue 
of his works. In modern terms, Blurnentritt must have been something o a 
workaholic. Apart from his heavy responsibilities as protessor and, later headmas- 
ter, he spent every minute of his spare time on the study of his beloved Philippines. 
Visitors relate that his home looked like a Philippine museum. His favorite daugh- 
ter was named Loleng and he even had plans to find a Filipino husband lor her— 
a century ago, when the mixing of races was still a daring thought. His wife, Rosa, 
surprised visitors and guests with Filipino cuisine. His study overflowed with clip- 
pings and manuscripts concerning the Philippines. 

Hardly a decade had passed and Blurnentritt was an internationally recog- 
nized authority on the Philippines. Miguel Morayta, a well-known professor of 
history at the Central University of Madrid, remarked that it seemed impossible 



327 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



that a foreigner, a stranger to the archipelago, should achieve so much insight into 
the secrets of the history and people of the Philippines. Another Madrid professor 
of ethnology, Manuel Anton, wrote in the magazine El Globo in 1887: “Blumen- 
tritt stands unique in the world. His absolute knowledge of the islands which he 
studies without ever visiting them has produced a wealth ol data, notes and re- 
marks without parallel.” When an international congress of Philippinologists was 
planned in Paris (it never materialized), Blumentritt was the obvious choice for 
chairman, being a member of royal societies of geography, anthropology, and eth- 
nology of Vienna, Berlin, Paris, Madrid, Amsterdam, Lima, Manila and others. 

Blumentritt might well have been satisfied with his life. He was a respected 
citizen with a happy family, a good job and, even with his small-town horizon and 
ivory-tower perspective, he always had his beloved Philippines to turn to, at least 
in spirit if not physically. 

But all this was suddenly changed by a letter such as Blumentritt was wont to 
receive almost everyday from Filipinos abroad or from other foreign contacts. This 
one had come from the German university town of Heidelberg and was signed by 
a certain J. Rizal, a man unknown to Blumentritt. Neither writer nor recipient 
could surmise that life would never be the same again for either of them. Much less 
would they have believed that their venture would open a new and important chap- 
ter in the history of the Philippines. 

To this day we cannot completely analyze the mystery of the development of 
a lifelong friendship, a brotherhood, a fighting comradeship between the two men. 
But the fact remains that when Rizal and Blumentritt met in their one and only 
encounter in Leitmeritz in May 1 887, they fell into a tearful embrace although only 
nine and a half months and 29 letters had passed between them since Rizals first 
communication. 

Veteran statesman Carlos P. Romulo wrote in his foreword to my Blumentritt 
biography: Dr. Blumentritt lent his distinguished scholarship in support of the 
noble efforts of those patriots whose aspirations were in complete accord with his 
liberal spirit... both men had a natural chemistry for each other, brought about by 
their mutual respect for each others intellect.” And the British Rizal biographer 
Austin Coates has this to say about the Leitmeritz meeting: “What they sensed of 
each other in correspondence proved to be true: they were two spirits closer than 
kin. At Leitmeritz was sealed their friendship that was to be the closest in Rizals 
life aside from that of his brother Paciano. And for Blumentritt it was the same. 
The two, in fact, looked upon each other as brothers.” 

This remarkable companionship lasted over 10 years and is documented in 
some 300 letters of which more than 200 have been preserved, providing a valu- 
able background for one of the most dramatic periods of modern Philippine his- 
tory. And yet there was hardly a more unlikely pair of close friends imaginable, for 
they were completely different not merely in race, color, nationality, and language, 
but also in mentality, psychology, temperament, and life-style. Blumentritt was a 
loyal imperial civil servant, a devout Catholic, a patriot, and a patriarch, a symbol 



328 



SICHROVSKY Ferdinand Blumentritt and the Philippine Revolution 



of conservatism and stability. But Blumentritt was also a scientific mind, an ana- 
lyst, a careful thinker, exact to the last detail. 

Rizal, on the other hand, was an opponent, a challenger of the established 
order, a true patriot, and therefore a fighter against injustice, oppression, and per- 
secution. But he was also the restless wanderer, at home nowhere, a rebel and con- 
spirator given to the emotional moods of his race, from melancholy and despera- 
tion to boundless enthusiasm and willingness to sacrifice and to take risks. Here 
was a man who never had time to have a family but was entangled in the occasional 
love affair during his travels all over the world. And finally Rizal was an enemy of 
the church, at least as it manifested itself in th efrayles as the extended arm of the 
colonial power. 

This verv question— Catholicism, the church, and the religious orders— was 
the bone of contention between the new friends. For the professor, the monk and 
the missionarv had always been the torch bearers of culture and enlightenment, 
bringing at least education and health to the native. That is why Blumentritt was at 
first shocked by Rizal s violent opposition to the holy orders, which was not anti- 
Christian but against the worldly power which the monks w, elded over the Hi- 
pino in the name of God: a form of clerical colonialism. It was inevitable . 
Blumentritt would sooner or later be torn between his conviction as a devou 
Catholic and his engagement in the Filipino cause. Rizal himself writes in a fore- 
word of a volume of their correspondence that “Blumentritt was a good Catholic 
and submissive to the Roman church, he does not confuse, however, dogma with 



fanaticism, man with God.... . 

There are more objective testimonies from reliable witnesses sue as veter 

Rizalista and Jesuit priest John N. Schumacher, who writes in h J s essa > ’ ™ 

Blumentritt” in Philippine Studies-. “About the Cathohcism of Blumentr tt, there 
can be no doubt. . . Blumentritt was a Catholic, a sincere Catho ic, wo e ie\e 
the teachings of the church....” Even the superior of the Jesuits at the time, Father 
Pablo Pastells, admits that “although his (Blumentritts) ideals ^ were : separatist h 
always made a profession of the Catholic faith and never could it be said of him 



blumentritt, with his quick-witted intelligence, learned to differentiate 
between religion and the harsh methods and abuses of many priests, e r ^ 
more and more that the friars were not only opposed to progress but were t e en 
emies of even the most modest reforms. His final resolve to fight the inass ^carne 
when he heard that Eilipinos who secretly studied Spanish were whippe } t e 
friars, who were afraid to lose their exclusive power as mediator between t e 1 1- 
pinos and their colonial rulers. Blumentritt was shocked to realize that the o v 
orders had degenerated to such a degree as to use the enforced ignorance of their 
flock as a weapon to uphold their rule over them. Blumentritt knew that le cou 
no longer stand aloof; he had to take sides. From then on he had no mercy. De in 
ing the rule of the monks as a bureaucratic military regime subservient to the piiest 
hood, Blumentritt wrote in an article on the subject that his essay would please the 



329 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



friars even less (compared to a previous one), because: “There 1 also tear the mask 
off their faces.” 

Step by step Blumentritt was drawn into the net of the Filipino freedom 
fighters abroad. But he was not swept away by emotion. As befitted his mentality 
and character he consciously constructed the fundament upon which he built his 
engagement in the Philippine cause and aided by another miracle in this story of 
wondrous events. For what at first glance had forecast incompatibility of the two 
characters would now prove to be the ideal complementation. Blumentritfs public 
support lent tremendous prestige to the Filipino cause. For here was a well- 
respected scientist of international fame who had nothing to gain in either purse or 
position but acted solely on his convictions. The second line of support for Rizal 
were the valuable contacts Blumentritt arranged for his traveling friend. In time 
Blumentritt was able to gather the leading intelligentsia of Europe as friends and 
sympathizers if not active supporters of the Filipino cause. In almost all capitals of 
Europe visited by Rizal, the lonely traveler found a haven of understanding and 
warm reception organized by Blumentritt. In the Austrian Rizal soon found a for- 
tress of steadfastness and reliability, but above all a valuable adviser. 

For Blumentritt his new friend Rizal was not only a welcome object of study 
that would allow him to grasp and understand the emotions, the mentality, and 
problems of the Filipinos, but also a test case for the validity of Blumentritt s stud- 
ies, the ultimate proof of the value of his lifelong research. 

Having solved the problem of the attitude toward the church and particu- 
larly the friars, Blumentritt was now faced with the question of how far to support 
his friends struggle. Would he merely watch it from a distance with sympathy and 
benevolence or would he take an active part, even throw himself heart and soul 
into the struggled We do not know if Blumentritt realized at the time what pro- 
found changes would come into his life. He would no longer merely be the aca- 
demic Philippinologist interested only in ethnology, history, language, and tribal 
rites and customs. He would more likely be thrown into a battle with the powers in 
Spain, in the Philippines, and perhaps even in his native Austria, where his prestige 
and position as the emperors most loyal civil servant might be at stake. 

In a way the decision was taken out of Blumentritt s hand with the publica- 
tion of Rizal s novel Noli Me Tangere. The book was a landmark in the freedom 
stm ggle Filipinos and the extent of its influence has often been compared 

with that Uncle Tom's Cabin in the fight to abolish slavery in North America. 
Blumentritt not only encouraged Rizal to write the book, he also found him a 
printer and helped to publish it. After publication it was Blumentritt who spread 
the gospel of the Noli , defended the book against a world of enemies, and turned 
the review of the book into a brilliant analysis of the Philippine problem under 
Spanish colonial rule. With the opening of the Suez Canal, traveling time between 
Europe and the Philippines was cut in half. The gates to world trade were opened 
and the replacement of the sailing ship by the steamer turned the once-remote 
Philippines into a busy junction of trade routes in the Pacific and the Far East. This 



330 



SICHROVSKY Ferdinand Blumentritt and the Philippine Revolution 



breach of isolation forced Spain to introduce certain timid reforms, such as the 
abolition of the tobacco monopoly and the introduction of the Penal Code, mea- 
sures that were welcomed by the peninsulares. But powerful Spanish financial in- 
terests were afraid to lose their privileges on account of Rizal’s realistic description 
of the plight of the indios. 

Economic progress and the opening up of the country resulted in another 
significant change which would have important repercussions. Talented young 
men from middle-class and wealthy families who could afford it went to Europe. 
Their destinations were the universities of Spain but also of other European coun- 
tries. There they felt as if they had suddenly landed in a political dreamland. They 
found the liberty and liberalism for which they had hoped and fought. Suddenly 
they were citizens free and equal, writes Blumentritt, while in their homeland they 
were subdued and subordinated, living under tyranny. Naturally, when these sons 
of the islands returned home their stories spread like wildfire. And the full-fledged 
academics they had now become expected to receive the same treatment they en- 
joyed in Spain and the same right to participate in public life. The forces of monas- 
tic colonialism made it clear that they' had no intention to grant t e eman 
the returnees, leading to further tension and a radicalization of the nationalist 

movement. . i \ytUoi- hp 

Blumentritt had again proved his worth as a pioneering analyst. ‘ 

discovered in the Philippines would be repeated in most colonial countries— the 
academic youth educated in the motherland in the spirit of democracy, equality, 
and liberalism were thus involuntarily trained to provide the leadership of the 
country. They would be the future presidents and prune ministers of t e new y 1 
erated countries. This had, of course, not been the intention of the colonial power. 
Their tragedy was based on the misconception that the natives educated in the 
mother country would return home as grateful, loyal, and obedient civil servants 

well-trained to keep the colonial administration running. 

The basis of the colonial misconception was its profound racialism. 1 he ru - 
ers simply did not believe that the native had sufficient intelligence to draw his own 
conclusions instead of accepting the one prescribed by their lords and masters _ t 
a time when the principles of apartheid were the accepted rule in all colonies, B u- 
mentritt was a rare, passionate defender of the absolute equality o a mei1 ' 
castigated the Spaniard for looking down on his colonial subjects w ic in , C . U f 
not only the indio, but also the mestizo and even the Spaniards born an ie m t le 
islands. Blumentritt had unlimited trust in the intelligence, the ability, and the 
character of the Filipino and all other colored people and he abhorred discrimina- 
tion of any kind on account of color, race, or creed. Consequently, Blumentiitt was 
convinced that the hateful persecution of the Noli was not so much on account o 
its contents but for the fact that it was an indio , a brute, a half-man who had dare 
to write a masterpiece of a novel and attack the “holy foundations ot the Spanis 
colonial empire. Blumentritt thus considered the Noli not only the best novel evei 
written by a Malay, but created with the blood of the heart ( Herzblut ), as the Gei 



331 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



man saying goes. He wrote, “If you continue thus, you will be one ol the great men 
of your nation who shall have a decisive influence on the development of its spiri- 
tual life.” 

It would not be Blumentritt not to go to the root of a problem. He pointed 
to exaggerated national pride and intellectual isolation as the basis of Spain's rabid 
racism. Even after the loss of most of her colonial empire Spain continued to con- 
sider herself to be the center of the civilized world. Such conceit Blumentritt con- 
sidered a national weakness which nolens volens was bound to lead to xenophobia 
and racism. 

It is important to underline that Rizal and Blumentritt were both deeply 
rooted in the Spanish cultural heritage. Their liberal outlook, democratic spirit, 
and profound humanism did not permit them to condemn a nation tor the mis- 
deeds of its rulers. They both valued not the color ot a person's skin or the language 
he spoke, but his character. 

With his defense of the Noli Blumentritt passed his final test as a comrade- 
in-arms of Rizal. It was the Austrian’s first public engagement for the Filipino 
cause. He was no longer the sympathetic observer of his friend's activities, but took 
his place in the frontline. This time Blumentritts activities drew international at- 
tention. Never before had he fortified his position with so much passion and power 
of conviction. 

But Blumentritt did not rest on his laurels even though Rizal was worried for 
his safety and career as an imperial public servant. Blumentritt had already chosen 
his next battleground — the Soli. Founded by Filipino exiles, the periodical La 
Solidaridadat first advocated modest reforms, later developing a more radical out- 
look as Spain stubbornly refused to loosen the chains of colonialism. The contribu- 
tors of the Soli were mainly scientists, artists, students, and the occasional liberal 
Spaniard who professed sympathy for the Filipino cause, such as the historian and 
minister Miguel Morayta. 

When Blumentritt started to contribute his essays and articles to the maga- 
zine, it attracted attention out of proportion to its importance. In Madrid the 
clergy, government circles, and even the Royal Court were somewhat perplexed. 
They failed to understand how and why an internationally renowned and respected 
scholar and scientist who had no personal stake in either Spain or the Philippines 
should make common cause with a bunch of exiles, rebels, subversive elements, 
and conspirators against country, king, and cardinal. After all, Blumentritt was also 
a personal supporter of the Queen Regent Maria Christina of Austria, her husband 
King Alfons XII and their son, later King Alfons XIII. 

Much as they would have liked to, the authorities could not afford to dismiss 
Blumentritt as an eccentric. On the contrary, they soon realized that Blumentritt s 
contributions challenged the colonial power seriously enough to force it to start a 
special publication La Politica de Espana en Filipina — to counteract Blumentritt 
and the Soli. It was difficult to refute Blumentritts arguments for he was not a 
Filipino and could not be accused of having ulterior motives. What remained was 



332 



SIO iROVSKY Ferdinand Blumentritt and the Philippine Revolution 



to slander the professor and accuse him of being a German agent, a confidant 
of Reichschancellor Bismarck, a spy fed by a “reptile hind,” notwithstanding the 
fact that Blumentritt had supported Spain in her dispute with Germany over the 
Carolinas. 

Then Rizal completed a second novel, El Filibusterismo or the Fill a conti- 
nuation of Noli Me Tangere. Blumentritt again took great interest in the publica- 
tion and propagation of the book. According to some sources he even suggested 
the title. But the importance for the biography of Blumentritt lies in the introduc- 
tion, which to this day adorns all reprints of the Fill “One is tempted to imagine 
that an agitator has secretly bewitched the friar-lovers and the reactionaries into 
favoring and promoting all unwittingly a policy which can have only one aim: to 
spread subversive ideas" throughout the entire country and to convince each and 
every Filipino that there is no solution except independence from the Mother 

Country.” ... .n 

The few lines contain Blumentritfs development of conviction in a nutshell. 

At first trying in good faith to convince the colonial power of the Philippines need 
for reforms and autonomy, Blumentritt realized more and more that Spain, y 
clinging desperately to its filtering empire, was herself creating a situation where 
violence produced counter-violence, burying all hope of a negotiated solution 
and leaving independence as the only way open. Still, Blumentritt remained an 
enemy of violence until the end. There is no doubt that neither of the two 
friends was revolutionary in the violent sense of the word. It was the increasingly 
uncompromising attitude of the colonial power which drove them toward radi- 
calism^^ of ^ topica , pro blems motivated Blumentritt to closely 

study the fundamental preconditions for national liberation by armed uprising. 
The result was one of the most remarkable documents of the Rizal-Blumentntt cor- 

Blumentritt departed from the thesis that a colony would nevei achieve free 
dom entirely on its own. This thesis was supported by a number of examples: tie 
American Union was conceived with the aid of France, Spain, and Ho land, the 
Romanians, Serbs, and Bulgarians were supported by Russia; Italy was helpe >' 
France and Prussia; Belgium was born with the help of France and bnglanc . 

The list may be continued until the recent past, with the two superpowers, 
the United States and the Soviet Union, supporting liberation movements accord- 
ing to their own foreign policy. But Blumentritt came to his conclusion a century 
ago, when anticolonial liberation movements were just beginning to show on tie 
political horizon. 

Finally, Blumentritt quoted four fundamental and indispensable con ltions 
for a successful anticolonial revolution: 

1 . at least part of the army and navy should join the insurgents, 

2. the motherland should be bogged down in a war which would weaken 
its political and military bargaining power; 



333 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



3. the revolutionaries should have a sufficient and continuous supply of 
money; 

4. a foreign power should support the rising, openly or clandestinely. 

These were not the ideas of an astute politician of long standing nor of a 

military officer with years of battle experience nor of a seasoned revolutionary 
steeped in political bargaining and guerrilla warfare. Here was merely a scientist 
and headmaster in a small Bohemian town predicting events which had nowhere 
yet taken place. Some 10 years later the scenario of the Philippine revolution would 
unfold exactly as Blumentritt said — with one exception, which not even a Blumen- 
tritt was able to foresee — that the United States would go back on her pledge to 
recognize the independence of the Philippines and turn traitor on her former ally. 

The situation moved relentlessly toward a climax and with it the slander and 
harassment against Blumentritt. Influential circles in Madrid went so far as to de- 
mand Blumentritfs expulsion from the venerable Sociedad dc amigos del pafs 
(Royal Society of the Friends of the Country). But Blumentritt beat them to it by 
resigning, publicly stating that he would not barter his personal honor. It was a 
grave loss for him as Blumentritt was one of only three honorary members of the 
society, the other two being Prince Oskar of Sweden and Ferdinand von Lesseps, 
the builder of the Suez Canal. 

Meanwhile history advanced in its inexorable course, forcing Rizal into a 
deadly race with a revolution not of his making, but spreading like wildfire in his 
name and inspiration. 

Much against the advice of Blumentritt, Rizal returned to the Philippines 
only to be deported to Dapitan and finally arrested on the high seas. Mobilizing 
his influence and contacts, Blumentritt tried in vain to secure Rizals release in 
Singapore. Spain was resolved to set an example. Not satisfied with the frame-up 
against Rizal, Spanish colonial justice demanded the extradition of Blumentritt 
and his trial as an accomplice in the alleged conspiracy. The Emperor Franz Joseph 
intervened and the Austrian authorities treated Blumentritt with amazing leniency 
that amounted to gross interference in the internal affairs of a country with diplo- 
matic and friendly relations with Austria. But there is no evidence that the Aus- 
trian court or government impeded Blumentritfs fight for the Filipino cause. It is 
not impossible that Austria, being the only major power of the time without colo- 
nies, observed somewhat critically the events in the Philippines. This may be sur- 
mised from diplomatic dispatches. 

Subsequent events are well known. The attachment of the two friends was 
such that Rizal dispatched four letters on his last night: to his father, his mother, 
his favorite brother Paciano, and Ferdinand Blumentritt. It was addressed to “My 
dear Brother and when Blumentritt received the news he shed tears and collapsed. 
Once recovered he had the vision to realize the historic significance of the tragic 
event when he said, “So strong is the impression of the execution of our friend Rizal 
that we may say without hesitation that from this day onwards a new era of Philip- 
pine history has begun.” It was a prophecy fulfilled exactly 1 8 months and thirteen 



334 



SICHROVSKY Ferdinand Blumentritt and the Philippine Revolution 



days later when the Spanish flag was lowered in Fort Santiago after almost 400 years 
of Spanish rule. 

For Blumentritt the most important chapter of his life had ended. Although 
surrounded by his family he hiced a lonely life, perchance withdrawing into his 
ivory tower. Then he realized that there was only one way to fulfil the legacy of his 
fraternal friend — to continue the fight for freedom and independence with the 
Filipino people. He threw himself heart and soul into the battle assisted by Filipino 
leaders who vied with each other to take Rizals place beside Blumentritt: Marcelo 
H. del Pilar, Graciano Lopez Jaena, Jose M. Panganiban, the brothers Juan and 
Antonio Luna, and many others. Blumentritfs little study in Leitmeritz became a 
beehive of activity, an unofficial embassy when the Malolos Republic was pro- 
claimed, with Blumentritt issuing travel papers and trade permits. 

Austrian diplomacy took great interest in the situation in the Philippines 
from the beginning. In a dispatch of the Austro-Hungarian consulate in Manila 
dated 5 October 1 896 we read: “. . .there has been open rebellion in the vicinity o 
Manila since August 20. . . we have learned that the rebellion has been planned or 
a long time. The revolutionary party is finding support not only in Manila but so 

in the more distant provinces of Luzon.... 

In another dispatch of historic significance, as it was sent on 29 December 
1896, one day before Rizals execution, we read: “...the situation has deteriorated 
beyond doubt. . . the Spaniards had started to attack the rebel insurgents in a% ite, 
but have met total defeat with the loss of 600 men. This defeat was o sue mo 
significance that several provinces like Bulacan, Zambales and Bataan w ere eNer > 
thing was calm have come out in open rebellion. From all parts oi tie country 
ports are coming in suggesting that should there be another like y e eat ^ e re 
lion would develop into a general upheaval with unforeseeable resu K-— 

We do not know if Blumentritt had knowledge of these reports, ut is pu 
lished dispatches would suggest that his sources of information were ^ SU P 
to those of the diplomatic channels. His prestigious position ena e mi o 
the pages of the Amman Monthly Review for the Orient (Otterretchtscbe 
Monatsschrift fur den Orient), published by the Ministry of Commerce to tig t 
with his pen for the defense of the republic and against the slander sprea } p 

ish propaganda in Europe. . . . 

In “The Filipinos Masters in their Own House” Blumentritt expresses his joy 

over the fact that the constitution of the new republic granted equality to cm 
zens irrespective of race, color, or creed. A principle he had fought or 
had now become a reality. 

Another dispatch is imbued with Blumentritt s spirit of sympat y an un 
derstanding for the new republic: “There is no anti-Catholic policy in the liberate 
areas. . . when Aguinaldo was the ruler of Cavite province it seemed to be a kin o 
Catholic model state, good clerical government, judging even from the reports o 
the Spanish papers surely not friendly towards Aguinaldo. We may conclude t at 
the insurgent province of- Cavite had at least no worse government than under 



335 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



Spanish rule. Nay, more if we believe foreign reports we had more peace and justice 
when Aguinaldo was ruler of Cavite than ever before.... 

When it became clear that the United States appeared as a new threat of co- 
lonialism Blumentritt spared no effort to try and convince the Americans that they 
would have all the political and commercial advantages without bloodshed and 
hatred by recognizing Philippine independence and winning the Filipino people 
over as their ally. In a testimony for Boston University, Blumentritt rose in passion- 
ate defense of Philippine independence, stating that there were more educated 
people in the Philippines than in Serbia, Bulgaria, or Montenegro. They had a 
better educational system than Spain or the Balkans and more trained administra- 
tors than many European countries. 

Blumentritt was held in such esteem that he was actually nominated as a 
mediator in the conflict and Leitmeritz was mentioned as a possible venue for a 
peace treaty. But the emperor hesitated to have Austria involved in an international 
conflict and refused permission. 

Ferdinand Blumentritt died on 20 September 1913. He had dedicated 34 
years, more than half his life, to the Filipino struggle for freedom, justice, and in- 
dependence. When the news reached Manila, emotions assumed the scale of na- 
tional mourning with the entire press publishing obituaries and photographs, some 
of them on the front page. 

At a memorial meeting leading personalities from all walks of life took part, 
among them two future presidents. Sergio Osmena said, “ 1 he history of his cam- 
paign of selfless engagement is at the same time a history of our emancipation and 
liberation. He may have been a foreigner by birth, but his ideas of justice were our 
ideas. He was an upright friend and brother of the Filipinos. In the memory of 
Rizal and his compatriots Blumentritt takes his magnificent and everlasting 
place....” 

The second speaker, Manuel L. Quezon, had this to say: “He understood the 
aspirations and needs of our people. It may be surprising and amazing how a man 
who never set foot on our soil was able to penetrate the Filipino mind, the inner- 
most crevice of the Filipino soul. With this conviction he was openly and honestly 
able to put forward his ideas and become a torchbearer of a just cause 

When almost a hundred years later the Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky 
visited the Philippines, he expressed his satisfaction that the memory of Ferdinand 
Blumentritt was very much alive among the Filipino people, adding: “Blumentritt 
has obviously contributed to the historic national consciousness of the Filipino 
nation and I would like to express my pride as an Austrian that one of our country- 
men still enjoys such esteem in your country ” 

Allow me to conclude with the wish that the memory of Ferdinand 
Blumentritt will continue to provide the firm fundament of Austro-Philippine 
friendship and cooperation. 



336 



Masonry and the Philippine Revolution 



Reynaldo S. Fajardo 

Department of Justice, Manila, Philippines 



F rom the very start of the Masonic organization, its internal laws ha\e 
invariably enjoined its members not to involve the fraternity in political con 
troversies. In every nation where Masonry is established loyalty to government an^ 
country are constantly stressed. But notwithstanding the repetition ad 
the nonpolitical injunction in Masonic regulations, countless political U P 
have been laid at its doorstep. For a century and a half, a large segment of t e 
ligentsia of Europe believed that many of the events that transpired in tie. wo 



happened because Freemasons planned them so. Masons were 



considered ipso facto 



subversives and were blamed for the French revolution and subsequent upris g 
in Spain, Portugal, Italy, Austria, and Latin America. In 1852, Prime Minister 
jamin Disraeli of England warned that secret societies, in the guise of Freemas^ T 
were “ever prepared to ravage Europe/' A decade later Pope Pius IX attri ^ ^ 
Masons the “great wars and movements of revolt by which all Europe as 
ablaze.” 



Origins of Masonry 

It is difficult to say when Masonry actually began. According to the mythology of 
the ancient lodges, its origins may be traced back to the times of Solomon, o , 
or even Adam. Some writers, on the other hand, believe it arose from amon § t 
ancient Egyptians, Chaldees, or Greeks. Other writers adopt the more realistic view 
that it sprang from a medieval secret order. But whether it began from A am, an 
ancient civilization, or a medieval order, the fact is that at the start of the 18th cen- 



337 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



tury there already existed in Great Britain and Ireland numerous Masonic lodges. 
In 1717, four of them organized the first Grand Lodge. 

The establishment of a Grand Lodge proved to be the spark that ignited a 
worldwide acceptance of Masonry. Within a few decades lodges were organized 
throughout continental Europe and the Americas. Masonry gained great popular- 
ity because of the harmony between its ideals and the new current of religious and 
political thought. It enjoyed a universal appeal and was embraced bv aristocrat and 
democrat, conservative and liberal, devout Catholic and free thinker, rationalist 
and lover of magic and esoteric rites. Masonry preached religious toleration based 
on an irreducible minimum of belief in God and the immortality of the soul, per- 
sonal and civic morality, liberty, equality, and peace. It emphasized the ideal of 
brotherhood, freedom of conscience, toleration, as well as the absence of class, 
caste, or race requirement in its standards of admission. All these gave it an appeal 
not only to devout Christians, but to followers of many other faiths in an age of 
universal intellectual awakening. 

Masonry in Spain 

In countries which were not under the domination of an absolutist church, Ma- 
sonry coexisted in perfect harmony with the civil authorities. Often it was spon- 
sored by the ruling houses with kings and noblemen occupying high positions in 
the fraternity. But in nations like Spain, which came under the sway of the Catho- 
lic church, the Masons were the objects of relentless persecution. The first lodge in 
Spain was barely 10 years old when Pope Clement XII issued a Bull in 1738 ex- 
communicating Masons. From then on the agents of the Holy Inquisition continu- 
ally harassed the members of the fraternity. King Philip V, Ferdinand VI, Charles 
IV, and Ferdinand VII assiduously implemented the Papal Bull. Persecuted for de- 
cades by church and state, Spanish Masonry developed along lines radically differ- 
ent from those in the English-speaking world. It gradually became anticlerical and 
acquired the character of a subversive secret society and active champion of mod- 
ernism, secularism, and democracy in opposition to all forces seeking a renewal of 
medieval theocracy. 

In time the clash of Masonic and clerical ideals in Spain and her Latin Ameri- 
can possessions expressed itself in the field of politics. In the second decade of the 
19th century, Masons in Latin America — Simon Bolivar, Francisco de Paula 
Santander, Antonio Jose de Sucre, Jose de San Martin, Bernardo O’Higgins, 
Augustin de Iturbide, etc. — led their compatriots in a successful struggle to obtain 
the liberation of the entire Latin America from Spanish dominion. The only colo- 
nies left of its once vast empire were the island territories of Cuba, Puerto Rico, 
and the Philippines. Then in 1868, in Spain itself, the Masons under Juan Prim 
spearheaded a revolution which overthrew Queen Isabela II and resulted in the 
crowning of Amadeo of Savoy, a Mason, as king of Spain. 



338 



FAJARDO Masonry and the Philippine Revolution 



A Legacy of Hate 

The decades of hostility between the Masons in Spain and the church left a legacy 
of hate. After a long period of persecution the Masons learned to despise their 
tormentors and instituted anticlerical measures wherever and whenever they came 
to power. On the other hand, the friars hated the liberal ideology which, once 
victorious, effected their despoliation in the mother country and her American 
colonies. In every country where Masonry triumphed the church lost its pelf 
and power. The separation of church and state, freedom of religious worship, es- 
tablishment of public schools and freedom of expression — all standard Masonic 
ideals and all abominated by an absolutist Catholic church — were translated into 
law. 

Masonry Reaches the Philippines 

The Philippines in the 1 8th and 19th centuries was a distant Spanish colony. The 
Masonry which was first introduced into the country was, therefore, the Masonry 
of Spain which had an envenomed relationship with the Catholic church. 

Historians tell us that the first Masonic lodge in the Philippines was esta - 
lished in 1856. It was followed shortly by lodges organized in Manila. All, how- 
ever, were composed of Spaniards and foreigners. Only a handful of Filipinos \vere 
admitted into membership. It was not until 1892 that the first lodges compose 
Filipinos were set up in the country. But while the doors of the earl) o ges \\ere 
closed to the Filipinos, the Spaniards and foreigners who comprised their mem 
ship gave the Filipinos a foretaste of the libertarian ideals of the raternity 
aroused in them a craving for the “new liberties. This was especial y tru e unng 
the terms of Governors-General Carlos Maria de la Torre and Emi io errero ) 

Perinat. 

De la Torre’s Term 

After the triumph of liberalism in Spain in 1868, the Masons who headed the ne^ 
administration in Madrid appointed hundreds of their fraternity Trot lers to 
ernment positions in the Philippines as replacements of the officeho eis ° 
deposed regime. The genial liberalism and humanism of the new arrivals aw ene 
at first curiosity and later a feeling of goodwill toward the fraternity. The asons 
spread among their newfound Filipino friends such dangerous ideas as li erty, 

“equality,” “fraternity,” and “independence.” 

The Masonic regime in Madrid also sent to the Philippines Carlos Maria e 
la Torre as the new governor-general. A liberal to the core, he became populai 
among the Filipinos. He encouraged freedom of speech, abolished censorship of 
the press, and fostered free discussion of political problems. Encouraged by his lib- 



339 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



eralism, Filipinos, both priests and laymen, waged a campaign for the Filipiniza- 
tion of the parishes and the ouster therefrom of the friars and pressed for greater 
political rights. For the First time Manila witnessed the staging of public demon- 
strations and the emergence of a crop of agitators for reforms. 

The liberal regime in Spain also caused an Assembly of Reformers to be 
established in Manila. The Assembly had the power to vote reforms in the colony, 
but monastic supremacy prevailed. The friars in the Philippines were in those 
days the true rulers of the country, with sufficient clout to frustrate all attempts at 
change. Thus the reforms voted were never carried into effect. Nonetheless, the 
first sparks of liberty had been struck which no amount of persecution could to- 
tally extinguish. The Filipinos had been taught to hope for equal laws. They 
agitated for their promulgation and became a thorn on the side of the Monastic 
Orders. 

The friars viewed La Torre’s liberalism with alarm and utter distaste. They 
started a campaign in Madrid to bring about his removal and simultaneously plot- 
ted their moves against the Filipino intellectuals who in the liberal atmosphere of 
his administration expressed their views too freely. In 1870, La Torre’s patron, 
General Prim, was assassinated, and the following year La Torre was recalled to 
Spain. His replacement, Rafael de Izquierdo, was a Mason, but he was above all a 
Spanish patriot who took to heart his mandate to reassert Spanish authority. Be- 
sides, he was convinced the friars were indispensable for the preservation of Span- 
ish rule in the Philippines. He reversed the liberal policies of La Torre and reverted 
the governorship to its classic form. 

The Cavite Mutiny 

In 1872, the friars got their chance at revenge. The Filipino workers at the Navy 
Yard in Cavite mutinied. It was a minor uprising which was easily suppressed, but 
the friars saw in it a chance to silence the local intelligentsia and nip in the bud the 
growing agitation for reforms, so they blew it up all out of proportion. The mo- 
ment the mutiny started authorities began rounding up prominent Filipinos, 
priests, lawyers, and wealthy traders who were at the vanguard of the reform move- 
ment. Historian O.D. Corpuz tells us that “some or most of the lawyers and busi- 
nessmen were Freemasons.” After hasty trials, those arrested were meted severe pen- 
alties. The Masons Enrique Paraiso, Crisanto de los Reyes, and Maximo Inocencio 
were also implicated, but Izquierdo extended protection to them and saw to it they 
received only light sentences. Nonetheless, Masons were persecuted in the after- 
math of the Cavite Mutiny and the lodges were forced to close. 

The harsh measures taken by the regime wiped out the leadership of the re- 
form group, but it was a costly triumph. Instead of fear a hatred of the friars took 
hold of the people. Peace prevailed, but it was a peace which had to be enforced by 
the sword. 



340 



FAJARDO Masonry and the Philippine Revolution 



The Term of Terrero 

In 1885, there was a resurgence of Masonic influence in the country. In that year, 
the prime minister of Spain was Praxedes Mateo Sagasta, the Sovereign Grand 
Commander and Grand Master of the Gran Oriente de Espana. Sagasta sent to 
the Philippines a 33° Mason as governor-general of the country, Emilio Terrero y 
Perinat. The new governor started out as a conservative Carlist, but after seeing 
firsthand the abuses and avarice of the friars and their blatant disregard for the laws 
of the land, he gradually abandoned his absolutist and apostolic Carlist convictions 
and w'as transformed into a liberal, reform-minded, and anticlerical governor- 
general. Terreros two principal assistants w^ere also 33° Masons. Jose Centeno, the 
acting civil governor of Manila w r as the local head of the Oriente Nacional de 
Espana, while Benigno Quiroga Lopez Ballesteros, the director general for civil 
administration, was a protege of the Mason Segismundo Moret. The three formed 
what historian Manuel Artigas y Cuerva called theTriangulo de 33°. For the first 
and only time during the Spanish regime the Philippines was governed by the 

Square. , . 

The Triangulo de 33° brought the power and prestige of the friars to their 

lowest ebb. It struck the first blow in 1887. Before the fiesta of Binondo, ree 
auilds — native, Chinese, and mestizo — vied for the right to manage the air. e 
parish priest, Father Hevia Campomanes, ruled in favor of the Chinese gui , ut 
when the matter reached the desk of Terrero he sided with the natives. In protest, 
Campomanes refused to go on with the fiesta and when Terrero maintaine t at it 
be held, he kept aw^ay from the celebration. Incensed, Terrero removed him as par 
ish priest over the objection of the archbishop. He also discharged the go erna or 

cillos of the mestizos and the Chinese. 

The affair was a signal success for the Filipino nationalists. e y ^ P re 
vailed over the parish priest and the archbishop. Moreover, when they c ^ on 
Terrero in Malacanang to thank him, he declared that Filipino natives were } aw 
Spaniards. His statement gave the Filipinos hope that they would win equa rig ts 
with Spaniards despite the uncompromising opposition of the friars. 

A greater blow to ecclesiastical prestige followed when Quiroga issue an 
executive order directing the provincial governors to prohibit the exposure in 
churches of corpses of those who had died of infectious diseases. Some claim t e 
order was in retaliation for the refusal of a parish priest to grant a Christian buria 
to a Mason. Be that as it may, the decree hit the friars where it hurt most, the poc 
etbook. The friars tried to defy the order, but Centeno and the other provinci 
governors called in the troops. 

A third decree which exacerbated the dispute called for the establishment o 
schools in Malolos “with such assistance as the resources of the Treasury would al- 
low,” but with the specific injunction that they should be managed by lay persons 
and not by the religious. It was an audacious move. Only a few years before Pope 



341 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



Leo XIII issued a Bull, Humanum Genus , castigating Masons because they advo- 
cated the education of children by laymen. The decree was in direct defiance of the 
Papal Bull. 

The bold measures taken by theTriangulo de 33' brought them close to the 
hearts of the Filipino patriots. The Filipinos led by Marcclo H. del Pilar, with the 
assistance of his group in Malolos, Bulacan, and the gobernadorcillos and princi - 
pales of Manila gave them their full and unqualified backing. In Malolos, Del Pi- 
lars group published the degree on burials “with music and flags’ and paraded in 
the streets. The Filipinos were also emboldened to report to the civil authorities the 
abuses of the friars and their infractions of the law. 

Rizal’s Return 

In August 1887, Jose Rizal returned to the country. He was a member ol Acasia 
Lodge No. 9 of the Gran Oriente de Espana and was the leader of the Propaganda 
Movement of the Filipinos in Spain. Before returning to the country he wrote a 
socio-historical novel, Noli Me Tangere, an incisive, full-scale indictment ol the 
Philippine political and religious regime. Understandably, the friars wanted to get 
their hands on him and his book, but Terrero extended him protection and even 
gave him a bodyguard. Needless to say, Terrero’s coddling of Rizal did not endear 
to the friars. The friars, however, were persistent. Daily they demanded that Ter- 
rero ban the Noli and order the arrest of Rizal. When the pressure became too 
strong Terrero himself advised Rizal to quit the country. 



The Manifestation of 1888 

On 1 March 1888, emotions rose to their highest pitch. The Filipino patriots, 
encouraged by the support they were getting from the Triangulo de 33°, marched 
through the streets of Manila to the office of Centeno to whom they handed a 
petition addressed to the Queen Regent, which asked for the expulsion of the fri- 
ars. The demonstration was organized by Doroteo Cortez, Marcelo H. del Pilar, 
and Jose A. Ramos. 

The march of the Filipinos was astounding for its daring. It was the first and 
only time in the history of the country that a demonstration against the Spanish 
friarchy took place. The manifestation which the marchers presented to Centeno 
was dynamite. It went too far even for Terrero and the other senior Spanish offi- 
cials who held anticlerical views. Compelling the friars to obey the laws and curb- 
ing their abuses was extremely difficult to accomplish; asking for their expulsion 
was too much. It was declaration of war, something which even the governor- 
general could not dare support. Rizal also doubted the prudence of the petition. 



342 



I A JAR no Masonry and the Philippine Revolution 



The Fall 

Three davs after the demonstration, the Junta de Autoridades met and placed re- 
sponsibility for the manifestation on the shoulders of Centeno. Within a week he 
was forced to resign and depart for Spain. In April, the three-year term of Terrero 
expired and was not renewed. A few months later Quiroga also had to leave. The 
Filipinos had lost their protectors. 

' Terrero was succeeded by \ aleriano Weyler, a pliant tool of the friars. Imme- 
di uelv the friars took their revenge. Strong measures were adopted to undo the 
reforms instituted by the Triangulo de 33°. Quirogas decree on burials was re- 
imied The Noli was included on the censor's list and Filipinos caught possessing 

SL incarcerated. Father Hevia Campomanes, whom Terrero removed, was re- 

U i , his p u ish in Binondo and given a bishops miter. The gobernadorcillos 
, () sll pported the Triangulo de 33" were hooted out of office, arrested, and 
W . p lans WC re also made to arrest Del Pilar, but he was given timely notice by 
hiT friends in the administration and was able to sail for Spain before the police 
could get their hands on him. 



Filipino Masonn in Spain 

, i i «S() S improved economic conditions in the Philippines enabled Filipinos 
” 1 if | Sp un to pursue a higher education or, like Del Pilar, flee from the dan- 
tOSa , IS environment of their homeland. At first only a trickle left, but when the 
Suez Canal was opened, reducing travel time to Spain from four to only one 

month, the exodus became a stead)' How. 

The Filipinos found the political atmosphere in Spain conducive to a cam- 
for reforms. Thev had come from a country of oppression and arrived in a 
P f nrrv n T freedom. There, unlike in the Philippines, the citizens enjoyed ^ all the 
“° l f M-n liberties.” The “carta fundamental " or constitution guaranteed to Spams i 
- hizens freedom of speech, press, association, and religion. They could criticize, 
orMy or in writing, tin- policies of else govemmem. and evenathews and agnosnes 
uld express their views freely. All this was unheard of in their homeland. If one 
criticized the authorities in the Philippines he was branded a filibustero, a sobriquet 
which was enough to cause his detention and deportation. The Filipinos also found 
that in Spain the vast wealth, power, and influence of the friars, so pervasive in the 
Philippines, was absent, and in fact there existed a large residue of anticlerical feel- 
• Above all they learned that in Spain Filipinos were in legal contemplation 
Spaniards and enjoyed all the rights and privileges given to Spanish citizens, unlike 
in their home country where they were sneered at as indtos , members of an infeiioi 



race. _ . . . 

The Filipinos observed that the Spanish officials and politicians who took 

great interest in their welfare, defending their rights in the parliamentary tribunals 
and issuing decrees in their favor, were Masons. Among them may be counted 



THE PHILIPPINE RHVOU I K >N \M)M. <>Nl> 



ministers Segismundo Moret and Manuel Bacerra, lorinci presidents 1 rancisco Pi 
y Margall and Emilio Castelar, and, above all, Miguel Moravia. Nik c i he lodges in 
Spain were open to all nationalities regardless of race or color, the Filipinos soon 
became initiates of the Masonic lodges. Those who joined included lose kizal, 
Marcelo H. del Pilar, Mariano Ponce, Rafael del Pan. (uaciano I ope/.-Jaena* 
Moises Salvador, Pedro Serrano Laktaw, Cialicano \pacible, Ieodoro Sandico, 
Tomas Arejola, Jose Panganiban, Antonio I ima. Arision Bautista, lomas del 
Rosario, Pedro de Govantes, Jose Alejandrino, Julio I lorente, and Santiago 
Barcelona. In 1886, some of these Filipinos participated in the organization of 
Lodge Solidaridad in Barcelona. A few years later, they established I odge Revolu- 
tion in Barcelona and in 1890, they started another lodge in Madrid also named 
Solidaridad, which was composed exclusively of Filipinos. 

The Filipinos attended lodge meetings with great enthusiasm and in these 
meetings they were indoctrinated through lectures with the immutable teachings 
and lofty ideals of Masonry. “The meetings of the Lodge, said Ieodoro M. Kalaw, 
“were of utmost interest. They were feasts of patriotism and Masonic apostleship; 
a marvelous communion of ideas and action, spirit and matter. Never did lips utter 
such eloquent appeals in the name of a universal brotherhood of all men as were 
heard at these gatherings. Never could Masonry have a more noble or a more chiv- 
alrous objective.” 

A Plan to Establish Filipino Lodges in the Philippines 

The Filipino Masons in Spain soon realized that the fraternity could be a potent 
instrument in the promotion of Philippine nationalism. With this objective in 
mind Del Pilar and Rizal initiated a project in 1890 to establish, lodges in Manila 
and the provinces exclusively for Filipinos. Specifically, there were two sound rea- 
sons behind the plan. 

Firstly, it was perceived that Masonry could help unify the Filipinos and im- 
bue them with a sense of nationhood. In spite of the strides already made at that 
time in arousing among the Filipinos a feel ing of oneness and a national conscious- 
ness, the Filipino Masons in Spain were sadly aware that the Philippines was essen- 
tially still a mere cluster of hopelessly divided tribes. The inhabitants did not have 
a true sense of nationhood; they did not look upon themselves as Filipinos, but 
merely as lagalogs, Pampangos, Ilocanos, Visayans, etc. They belonged to the same 
racial stock and shared a common grievance against their colonizer, but did not 
embrace each other as brothers. Tribal and regional differences predominated. 
They all yearned for freedom and had, in fact, staged a hundred revolts against 
Spain, but all their uprisings were local in scope, waged bv a divided people and, 
therefore, easily suppressed. Thus, when the lagalogs rose in arms, the Spaniards 
enlisted the Pampangos to put down their uprising, and when the Pampangos re- 
volted, the Spaniards called upon those from other regions to quell it. The Filipino 



344 



1 MAR no Mtisonry und the Philippine Revolution 



Masons saw the unifying value of Masonry. They had come from different regions 
and provinces ot the country — Rizal was from Laguna, Lopez-Jaena from Iloilo, 
Del Pilar from Bulacan, Apacihle from Batangas, Arejola from Camarines Sur, 
Panganihan from C amarines Norte, Alejandrino from Pampanga, Bautista from 
Manila, 1 lorcmc f rom C Thu, and Luna from llocos. But inside the lodge all their 
regional differences w ere f orgotten: they mingled together as brothers, as Filipinos. 

As Del Pilar expressed it: “Masonrv has consecrated its efforts to the task ot uniting 

all men in brotherhood, erasing the differences ot country, race and color, of ban- 
ishing war. replacing the din of arms and clanking of chains with the sound of work 

and industry." Mariano Ponce in later years stated it in the following terms: Ma- 
sonry was established to give our people a school which would provide it with 
models for cooperative action ( normas de sociabilidad) and accustom it to live as a 
collectivity. In the bosom of Masonry we have learned to live a life of association; 
in the midst of that brotherhood we have communicated to one another our im- 
pressions, our thoughts, our aspirations, and we have made ourselves apt to unite 
our desires and our acts." Masonrv did not always succeed in erasing all ruffled 
feelings, hut it was the best catalyst ot unity available. 

Second Iv, the Filipino Masons perceived Masonry as the “universal protest 
against the ambition of tyrants," as the “supreme manifestation of democracy, as 
the organization which could redeem and transform the Philippines from a down- 
trodden Spanish colon v. poor and sickly, without rights and liberties, into a digni- 
fied free and prosperous nation." They believed that the lodges established in the 
Philippines could later constitute, together with those in Spain and other coun- 
ts a strong, consolidated league against oppression. One by one the members 
spoke on the need of bringing Masonry to the Philippines. Tomas Arejola, in one 
of his speeches in his lodge, said: 



If Masonrv is then the supreme manifestation of democracy, for in de- 
mocracy are found Masonry's principles, teachings and tenets combined, there 
can be nothing more profitable and logical tor us— children ot a forgotten 
country on the other side of the world— than to adopt those principles for our 
own and to become st rong advocates of reform if we truly wish to see t e ant 
of our ancestors redeemed and transformed from a neglected and downtrod- 
den Spanish colony, poor and sickly, without rights or liberties, into a digni- 
fied, free and prosperous nation on the horizon of which the sun ot justic 

civilization will rise in Kill splendor. 

There is no place for doubt. A Fraternity that, like Masonry has existed 
and will always exist through the centuries, paying unremitting homage to the 
eternal verities, consecrating its efforts to the redemption ot humanity, as the 
destined liberator to bring freedom and right to the Philippines. 



345 



Del Pilar, for his part, declared: 



THK \nu\.iw\s\ RI V< )I l I K )N AM > hi A < >Nt > 



The failure of the present ( Jovernment, my dear brethren. proclaims the 
necessity of trying other civilizing means. II the despotic regime now in force 
in the Philippines oppresses without doing any construe rise or progressive 
work, then it is our duty to carry beyond the seas the light <>t Masonrv. I et us 
strive, therefore, to extend to the remotest corners of the Philippines the prin- 
ciples of our august order, teaching the people by precept and example, it not 
by legislation, the love of liberty, equality and fraternity. 

Rizal put it quite differently. To him Masons should not rest so long as the 
world nurtures a tyrant, so long as the night gathers in its echoes the moans of the 
oppressed, so long as there are slaves, so long as there are < >pprcsxors. And this work 
is perhaps the greatest that Masonry has imposed upon itself and the only one 
worthy of its universal name.” 

Del Pilar lost no time in requesting the ( iiaiul ( a nine il of t he C nan Oriente 
nspanol for the necessary authority to establish lodges in the Philippines. The Gran 
Oriente Espanol, under its constitution, was committed to spread Masonic light 
in the Philippines and, in fact, had already chartered five lodges in the country 
composed of Spaniards. Approval of the petition was, therefore, anticipated. Ac- 
cording to leodoro Kalaw, the consent was immediately given. A different version, 
however, pointed out that the establishment of lodges in the Philippines, com- 
posed exclusively of Filipinos, was a ticklish and sensitiv e matter for it raised the 
possibility that the role Masonry played in the liberation of the Spanish colonies in 
the Americas would be replicated in the Philippines. Because of this, it is asserted, 
the petition was approved only after “conference, ( Irand Lodge sessions and finally 
compromises of some magnitude.” 



Nilad Lodge 

Once the authority was secured, Pedro Serrano Laktaw was commissioned to es- 
tablish Filipino lodges in the Philippines. Af ter receiving his certificate of Maestro 
Superior from the university where he was studying he sailed for home and arrived 
in Manila sometime in December 1891. He got in touch with Anacleto Ramos, 
Timoteo Paez, and Moises Salvador who were all Masons. Ramos was initiated into 
Masonry in England, Paez was made a M ason “under the celestial canopy” by 
Lopez-Jaena during the latter’s visit to the country in 1 890, while Salvador joined 
Solidaridad Lodge during his stay in Madrid. The four initiated three new mem- 
bers and with the participation of the initiates founded the Nilad Lodge on 6 Janu- 
ary 1892. They at once applied for affiliation with the Gran Oriente Espanol in 
Madrid. In March a charter was issued and Nilad became Lodge No. 144. 

In the following months the Nilad Lodge was kept busy initiating new mem- 
bers. Filipinos flocked to Masonry with great enthusiasm, “beyond what had been 
expected, as Rizal put it. I he most eager joiners were those who were indoctri- 



346 



I \l \ K l K > .\ftisonry ^nei the Philippine Revolution 



nated with liberal ideas by the Spanish Masons during the progressive regime of 
Governor-C ieneral Ierrero. Among the first initiates were the gobemadorcillos and 
principals who figured in the Manifestation of 1888, those who supported 
Quirogas decree on burials, the partisans of Del Pilar in Malolos, and the officers 
and members of the C omite de Propaganda which was organized just before Del 
Pilar departed tor Spain in 1888. 

New Masonic Centers 

The Nilad 1 odge was barelv two months old when its members founded new 
Masonic centers in Manila. In March they set up Iriangulo Balagtas in Sampaloc 
and in April thev founded Iriangulo Bathala in Ermita. Soon Masonic Triangles 
were sprouting up all over Manila. 1 he members of the Nilad Lodge then waged a 
vigorous drive t o proselvtize in other parts of the country. 1 he new adepts fanned 
out to the provinces to spread the tenets of the fraternity and bring in new con 
verts. Spanish provincial officials who were Masons helped their brothers propa- 
gate the craft. In the Visavas and Mindanao, maritime officials of the steamship 
vessels functioned as efficient purveyors of the Masonic movement. According to 
the bishop of Nueva C'aceres, Masonry was spread through public meetings, re 
unions, dances, and other social events. The campaign w>as so successful that in 
barely 14 months. Masonic circles were established in Batangas, Bicol, Bulacan, 
Capiz, Cavite, Cebu, Davao, Iloilo, Laguna, La Union, Mindoro, Negros, Nueva 
Ecija, Pampanga, Morong (now Ri/al), larlac, layabas (now Quezon), Zam 
boanga, and elsewhere. 



The First Filipino National Organization 

In barely 14 months the Masons were able to establish a truly national organiza 
tion which stretched from the Ilocos in the north to Zamboanga in the sout 
bringing together under one umbrella people who belonged to different regions, 
had dissimilar customs, and spoke diverse dialects. What is more, these people 
Tagalogs, Pampangos, llocanos, Bicolanos, Visayans, etc. learned to embrace 
each other as brothers. It was the first time in the history of the country that sue 
a feat was achieved. Never before had a nationwide organization composed of Fi i 
pinos been set up. 1 he Masons proved that national unity was within teach. But it 
was not only the spirit of brotherhood that the Masons propagated. Masonn was 
nothing less at that time than a campaign for liberty. In every community where 
Masonry was introduced, the people were indoctrinated in the new libeities. It 
was graphically demonstrated to them that their country was a land where justice 
is mocked, legal rule is ignored, any semblance of equality contemptuously le- 
fused.” The campaign had a telling effect. In March 1893, Jesuit Superior Father 
Juan Ricart complained: “The religious orders have lost much of their prestige. 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< >1 t l l< )N AN I > Hh< >Nl > 



And as religion loses, so does Spain and filibnsterisnw grows together with impiety. 
The lodges are being organized. May Ciod help us and have meiw on these people 
once so simple.” 

Masonry as an institution did not advocate the violent overthrow of the es- 
tablished order, but its teachings of religious tolerance, of mans right to freedom of 
speech, of the press, etc., fanned the flames of discontent and engendered a craving 
for change, a desire for liberty. Because Masonry was fast spreading throughout the 
country the yearning for the “modern liberties soon became a universal clamor of 
a united people. It was ominous. In one of his essays Ki/al had spelled out elo- 
quently what universal discontent could lead to: 

All the little insurrections that have hitherto occ urred in tin* Philippines 
have been the work of a few fanatics or mutinous office rs ho have had to 
deceive or cajole or exploit their followers to achieve their ends. And so thev 
failed; all of them. Not one of these insurrec t ions had the pe< >ple hell incl it ; not 
one sprang from a whole races need; not one was fought for the rights of man 
or the claims of justice. This being so, thev left no lasting impression on the 
memory of the people. On the contrary; once the peoples wounds had healed 
and it recognized itself to have been t he vie t i m of dec ei t , it applauded t he fall of 
those who had perturbed its peaceful existence. But suppose a movement were 
to arise from the people itself, with the miseries of the people as its motive 
power? What then? 

Program of Action 

I he propagation of Masonry in the Philippines was no doubt hastened by a well- 
planned program of action which the Nilad Lodge observed. F.very candidate was 
required to read and subscribe to the Masonic Program and Code. It was a clear and 
explicit document demonstrating that Masonry was not what its enemies depicted 
it to be. It showed that Masonry is a fraternity which considers all men as equals, 
all men as brothers, children of one God, a fraternity which erases all differences of 
race, nationality, or color; protects and defends freedom of thought and religion; 
fosters charity; condemns selfishness and the exploitation of people oppressed by 
obscurantism. 1 he Hlipinos saw in the Masonic Program and Code an eloquent 
expression of all their libertarian aspirations for their country. 

La Liga Filipina 

Masonry was growing by leaps and bounds when Rizal arrived in Manila on 26 
June 1892. He brought with him the constitution and bylaws of La Liga Filipina, 
a society which he intended to establish and which he hoped would unify the Fili- 
pinos and eventually lead to their emancipation from Spanish rule. At the time 
Rizal drafted the rules of the Liga in Hong Kong, he knew that Masonry was suc- 



348 



I \ 1 A RHO A fasonvy and the Philippine Revolution 



ceedinti exceptionally well in bonding the Filipinos, but then he was also aware the 
fraternitv had its limitations. Under the ancient landmarks of the Order, Masons 
are prohibited from using the fraternity as a political organization to bring down 
an existin'; government. He felt that a new and different organization was needed 
to supplement the work of Masonry. 

In f ramin'; the structure of the Liga, Rizal followed the example set by the 
secret conspiratorial societies that mushroomed in Europe in the 18th and the early 
19th centuries. These societies owed much of their success to their adoption of 
Masonic structures, rituals, procedures, and rules of secrecy. He had many models 
to choose from, among which were the Carbonari, Illuminati, Sublimes Mai t res 
Parfaits or Sublime Perfect Masters. Raggi, Lega Nera, Centri, and Guelfi. Indeed 
the Masonic initiatory rituals, the use of secret recognition signs and passwords, 
the oaths of secrecy, the binding pledges of mutual assistance, and the adoption by 
the members of symbolic or secret names fit nicely into the needs of secret societ- 
ies Alotm these lines, therefore, Rizal molded the framework of the Liga. 

The local Masons got in touch with Rizal the moment he arrived. Timoteo 
Paez and Pedro Serrano' 1 aktaw accompanied him on his trip to the provinces 
where he met the local Masonic leaders. Back in Manila they arranged several ban- 
qu „s tendered bv the lodges in Ins honor. On 3 July, upon jus request they orga- 
nized a meeting of Masons and non-Masons during which he founded the Liga. 



The Katipunan 

Rizal enjoyed only a tew days of freedom. On 7 July, the local papers published an 
order of the governor-general deporting him to Oapiran in Mindanao. Shock and 
b „i derment spread through the ranks of the fraternity. Upon reading the news- 
pipe 7 ix Masons who were present at the founding of the Liga met ,n Binondo 
and agreed i, was time to found a new and more radical organization, one with 
separatist aims. They called „ the Katipunan. These Masons were Deodato 
Arellano of the 1 .usong I odget lose Dizon, the Master of the Tnangido Tal.Uu and 
four members of the Triangulo Taliba— Valentin Diaz. Teodoro Plata Andres 
Bonifacio, and Ladislao Diwa. Profiting from the example of the Liga, t it 
of the Katipunan also carried over into their new organization the sym o s, cer 
emonies, and organizational structures ol Masonry, but made a few mnos ations to 
suit their needs. For example, they devised three degrees for the Katipunan just^ 1 'e 
in symbolic Masonry, but instead of calling them Aprendiz Mason, Companero 
Mason, and Maestro Mason, they named them Katipon, Kawal, and Bayani. Simi- 
larly, in Masonry the degrees were distinguished through the aprons worn v t e 
members; in the Katipunan the distinction was through the hoods worn over t e 
heads of the members. In Masonry the candidate was brought to the lodge blinc- 
folded and conducted to the Chamber of Reflections where he was obliged to an- 
swer questions concerning his concept of man’s duty to God, to himself, and to his 
fellowmen, and thereafter he was conducted through the ceremonies of initiation 



IHh PH 1 1 IPPINi K I \ ( )Il I !< )N \M 



by a brother called the Terrible. In the Katipun.m the , .mdul.n w.is also brought 
to the ritual room blindfolded, but the questionv isked «>t him before initiation 
were about the conditions of the country in the past, the piesent. .md the future. 
I he candidate was also guided through the c erenu )tnes 1 > ■. .i b rot 1 h i who was called 
the Mabalasik, which is but thcTagalng translation of the Spanish word Terrible. 
I he most important innovation in the ritual was the ini rod tu t ion of the so-called 
Pacto de Sangre where neophytes were required to make iih imoiis on t heir arms 
and sign their names in their own blood. I his was n< >t a \ I.im >n u pi .u t k e; it was a 
ritual copied from the Carbonari. 

Despite the changes adopted by the Katipuneros tlu. mil. nines m the ini- 
tiatory rituals of Masonry and the Kat i pu nan were so grea t that \lasons w ho joined 
the Katipunan were often confused. Santiago Abate/ tells us that when Tmilio 
Aguinaldo was initiated into the Katipun.m he ke pt responding u> questions in “the 
Masonic manner, because of which ’his cross-examination was prolonged." 

In subsequent years the resultant structural similarities among the I iga, the 

Katipunan, and Masonry, plus the subsequent discovcrv that all these organizations 

were led by the same group of people, would fort if v t he e< >n\ ie t ion of the authori- 
ties that they were in fact essentially united and make the government feel perfectly 
justified in considering Masons ipso facto subversives. 

A Crackdown on Masonry 

Unknown to most Masons, the authorities were closelv monitoring every move of 
Rizal from the time of his arrival. ( )n 5 July, they stnu k. Simultaneous raids and 
thorough searches of the houses visited by Rizal in Bulaean, Pampanga, and Tarlac 
were conducted. In Manila, the houses of leading Masons were also searched. 
Many were arrested and deported. Some officeholders were fired. The severe mea- 
sures taken by the authorities forced the closure of some lodges and brought Ma- 
sonic activities to a halt. On ] 4 November, Moises Salvador w rote to I VI Pilar: “As 

regards Masonry, no lodge is working at present, because we are so closelv 
watched.” 

Masonic Labors Resumed 

I he surveillance of Masons continued up to the end of the vear. In 1 893, however, 
the authorities relaxed their watch, believing that the danger had passed after the 
deportations. Moreover, around the middle of 1893, Ramon Blanco took over as 
the new governor-general. He was a 32" Mason and not inclined to make life hard 
for his brothers. I he Masons, therefore, were able to resume their labors. More 
initiations took place and new lodges were founded. In April, the Masons orga- 
nized a grand body, the Gran Goncejo Regional, which assumed supervision over 
the lodges and took over the direction of Masonic affairs. Much Masonic progress 
was recorded. 



3S0 



! \|ARl >0 .Masonry und the Philippine Revolution 



The Li ga Revived 

In the same month, Andres Bonifacio, Apolinario Mabini, Domingo Franco, and 
other Masons took advantage of the relaxed atmosphere and reactivated the Liga, 
which had withered awav after the rustication of Rizal in Dapitan. As reorganized, 
the 1 iea was governed by a Supreme Council and had under it Popular Councils 
whiclVwcre established in each of the different districts of Manila. The Supreme 
Council and all its subordinate Popular Councils were headed by Masons. The 
council in Binondo was headed bv Estanislao Legaspi of the Lusong Lodge, that in 
Ouiapo had Francisco Nakpil of the Balagtas Lodge as its president, the one in 
Tondo was led bv Timoteo Paez of the Lusong Lodge, that in Ernnta and Malate 
was under the presidency of l hand Master Ambrocio Flores, the one on Santa Cruz 
was under Isias I oribio of t he Nilad l odge, and finally the one in Trozo was headed 

by Andres Bonifacio of the Taliha Lodge. 

The most active of the popular councils was the one in Itozo heads 
Bonifacio It was so successful in recruiting members from the masses it was te t 
that if an election were held. Bonifacio could have easily wrested control of the 

JSS ° U ThTreon mnized 1 .iga lasted for only six months. Two factions emerged one 
which still nurtured the conviction that political reforms could be wrested from 
SoL through peaceful means, and the other, led by Bonifacio, whtch argued that 
Z time foM'evolutionarv radicalism had come. In October 1893 the two groups 
, wavs and the I ,a was dissolved. The moderates organized the Cuerpo de 

franco. 

A Ramos. Moisei. Salvador, bausiino Villaruel, and Ambrocio ktanzares Eaimsta 
dl Masons, Tlicsc men pledged co raise funds for the support of the propaganda 
m ean U Solid, md„d. and for the reform crusade, the radicals, on the other hand 
who were convinced chat an armed uprising was the only solution to the politics 
ills of the country grouped themselves under the banner of che kanpiman fed b) 
Taliha Lodge members Bonifacio. Teodoro Plata. lose Dizon, Alvaro Nep 
muceno, Jose Turiano Santiago, lose Reyes lolenttno, Eustaquio Javier, an 

Valentin Diaz. 



Persecutions Resumed 

In March 1 894, the persecution of Masons was resumed, but this time with greater 
severity. As the days passed the repressive measures grew in harshness. The conduct 
of Masonic affairs became a cat-and-mouse game. The Guardia Civil m the prov- 
inces and the Veterana in Manila were ever on the lookout tor Masonic gatherings. 
The Masons had to adopt ingenious schemes to masquerade then meetings. The 
same house was seldom used more than once as a meeting place and while a Ma- 
sonic meeting was taking place, a purely social affair was usually held in anothei 
part of the house to divert attention and lull suspicion. 



3M 



THK miUPPINI RI-VOIl I ION \M)hhn\|) 



In 1895, a real reign of terror lor Philippine Masonry began. I he abuses of 
the authorities grew in magnitude. Arrests and deportations of Masons were a daily 
occurrence. By the end of the year the lodges had to suspend their labors. But the 
losses of Masonry were translated into gains for the Katipunan. I he ranks of the 
Katipunan began to swell dramatically, Even Masons shifted their attention to it. 
Antonio Salazar declared that in 1896 the laliba I odge was dormant because its 
Worshipful Master Jose Di/on and Andres Bonifacio were engaged together with 
Pio Valenzuela in the affairs of the Katipunan 

The spectacular growth of the Katipunan made it vulnerable to discovery and 
eventually the authorities found it out. Bonifacio was forced to take to the battle- 
field prematurely. The revolution had its ups and downs, but in the end the Fili- 
pino rebels were victorious. Independence was won. 

During the entire period of the revolution, the Masonic fraternity was mori- 
bund; the lodges were closed and all Masonic activities suspended. Nonetheless, 
the leaders of the revolution came from the ranks of t he bn >t herhood. Emilio Agu- 
inaldo, Baldomero Aguinaldo, Crispulo Aguinaldo, I icerio lopacio, Cavetano 
lopacio, Santiago Alvarez, Ambrocio Rianzares Bautista, Andres Bonifacio, Juan 
Castaneda, Edilberto Evangelista, Ambrocio 1 lores, Pantaloon Marcia, Mariano 
Llanera, Vicente Lukban, Antonio Luna, Apolinario Mabini, Julio Nakpil, 
Artemio Ricarte,Teodoro Sandiko, Trinidad Tccson, Manuel Tinio, Mariano Trias, 
and a host of others belonged to the craft. 



An Assessment 

Today, as we celebrate the centennial of that glorious struggle, we may do well to 
pose and ponder the question: What was the contribution of Masonry to the revo- 
lution? Emilio Aguinaldo, the leader of that heroic campaign, provides the answer: 

I he successful Revolution of 1896 was Mason ically inspired. Mason- 
ically led, and Masonically executed, and I venture to say that the first Philip- 
ptne Republic of which I was its humble president, was an achievement we 
owe, largely, to Masonry and the Masons. 



352 



How and Why was the Date 
of the Philippine Revolution 
Advanced to 21 August 1896? 

Ism 10 Rodriguez Rodriguez, O.S.A. 

Real Academia de la Historia, Madrid, Spain 



I would like to manifest my sincere and profound appreciation to Dr. Salva or 
H. Laurel for having invited me as an official resource person ot this congress. 
It is for me the highest honor in view of the fact that 1 am Spanish, a friar, an 

an Augustinian. 

Mv paper deals with the following: 

1. The Augustinians and the regular Philippine clergy on the question o 

parishes 
A. The facts 
B. The reasons 

II. Hr. Salvador Font, an Augustinian, and Dr. Jose Rizals Noli e angeu 
A. The condemnation 

B. The consequences . . 

III. The discovery of the Katipunan by Fr. Mariano Gil, an Augustinian 



I. The Augustinians and the Regular Philippine Clergy 
on the Question of Parishes 



A. The Facts 

From early on, the Augustinians of the islands fought lor the security of tenure of 
the regular clergy in their parishes as contained in a Cedula (Charter) from Cailos 
III to the Augustinian provincial on the curacies from 1 1 October 1776, negating 
in great part his recent order leaving the vacated parishes to the secular clergy. 



353 



THKminmNi ki von i k )n \Ni>nno\i> 

The king, however, wanted the archbishop ol Manila and other bishops in 
the islands to send him a list of all the secular priests in the Philippines. 

Restlessness quickly developed because of the- assignment of certain curacies 
to the secular clergy. On 10 July 1801, the ecclesiastical nibtl/lo uhapter) of Ma- 
nila, in representation of the secular clergy, appealed t<> I hs Majesty, complaining 
of the regulars in general and the Augustinians in panic ular. since the latter were 
above all laws in matters relative to the const rue tic >n of c hurc lies, parochial houses, 
schools, etc. With these complaints, the king demanded the necessary information 
from the governor of the islands, who immediately complied and also praised the 
generosity of the Augustinian religious in towns under their care. C.overnor Rafael 
Maria de Aguilar wrote: “If I were to itemize thegre.it efforts that the Augustinians 
undertook to make the towns under their administration happy, whether trying to 
advance the cultivation of lands the people possessed, or urging the people to un- 
dertake operations beneficial to themselves, I would base much to say. 

With the information given by the ecclesiastical chapter in Manila and with- 
out waiting for the reply of the Philippine governor, the king issued the royal char- 
ter of San Lorenzo de El Escorial (3 June 1803) ordering that the curacies of old 
Cavite, Las Pinas, and Santa Rosa which were involved in the litigation be given to 
the secular clergy. Having studied the charter and weighed the previous recourses 
of the Augustinians, Governor Rafael Maria de Aguilar did not feel it timely to 
implement the charter as he felt that I I is Majesty was not properly informed on 
the matter and that whatever he was told was greatly biased. ' 

Among the reasons that the ecclesiastical charter denounced the religious 
corporations, specifically the Augustinians, was their opposition to absorbing the 
expenses that the king had levied on them for the assistance of conciliar seminar- 
ies. Initially, the Augustinians won the battle because of nothing more than the 
pressure from the bishops on the king who, prior to the dictates of his fiscal and 
the opinion of the Consejo de las Inclias (Council of the Indies), decreed that all 
teligious orders except the Franciscans were to pay 3 percent of the monthly eccle- 
siastical remittance to their respective seminaries/’ 

The Manila ecclesiastical chapter also sought placements for the secular 
clergy, which kept increasing at a moderate pace. Some religious corporations — 
among them the Augustinians — did not have sufficient personnel, who were dis- 
tributed throughout the different provinces, of advanced age, and of little use. 
Some of these extreme cases were stated in the letter of IT. Provincial Manuel 
Apaiicio, OSA, to the governor-general, saying the order could not be carried out 
on the island of Cagayan (Panay) because of the lack of religious. 

I he problem became more acute during the first decades of the 1 9th century 
as evidenced by the few missions that arrived in the Philippines and the complaints 
about them from the provincials and the commissioner procurators of the religious 
ordeis in the Court of Madrid. In short, the secular clergy of the islands repre- 
sented in the ecclesial chapter of Manila wanted fuller participation in parochial 
life. They achieved it in part, albeit after long processes, requests, and subsequent 



354 



ROPRU i l T / The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



appeals which fill thousands of pages in the official archives of- the government and 
of the religious orders. The religious orders were opposed to this as they had a suf- 
ficient number of priests. The August inians won these battles, turning the convent 
of San Agustin of Manila into a think-tank. 

Years later, the same arguments cropped up again because it was proposed 
that the curacies of Quingua. Bulacan, be turned over to the secular clergy since 
the Auyustinian parish priest who served there had died. 1 he provincial, Fr. 
Hilarion I he/, immcdiatelv intervened. 1 ' He asked that the regulars not be dispos- 
sessed of the ministries and doctrines they had formed and organized through great 
sacrifice." To this effect, the provincial invoked all the royal charters that could 
work in favor of his wishes and against the secular clergy. 10 

The intervention of Fr. Hilarion Diez was momentarily successful. On 7 
January 1 823. the king ordered the issuance of the corresponding royal order di- 
rected to the governor-general of the Philippines prohibiting his intervention in 
the secularization of the curacies under the care ot the religious orders. 11 Later, Fr. 
Hilarion I )iez's arguments were invalidated in the provision ot San Jose de Bulacan 
in 1841. At the time, the religious orders were losing influence while the secu ai 
priests were progressively gaining strength due to the number ot the secular clergy 
led by one with strong leadership qualities. 1 ' From this moment on, the victory o 

the secular clergy seemed imminent. 

In 1 863," Dr. Pedro l’claez circulated "Documentos Importantes para la 

cucstion pendiente sobre la provision de curatos en Pilipinas” (Important Docu- 
ments on the Pending Question on the Provision of Curacies m the Philippines), 
Madrid, printed in El Clamor Publico (1863) under the management ot Diego 
Navarro. Pelaez reproduced the exposition directed to his Holiness by then Arch- 
bishop of Manila Basilio Sancho de Santas Justa v Rufina on 15 November 1/68; 
the representation by the same archbishop to the king, 10 May 1 68; and the 
Memorial of 1 0 Mav 1 768 with a long series of documents and letters directed to 
the El Clamor Publico — all of which were favorable to the Filipino secular clergy. 

The procurators of the Augustinians and the Recollect Augustinians, rs. 
Celestino Mayordoino and Cuillcrmo Agudo, respectively, replied to Pelaezs work, 
saying that this “very important question. . . could seriously affect the existence of 
the Philippine Islands.” In the same year a complement was added to tie ciy 
Important Question, printed in El Clamor PublicoC 

This move by Its. Mayordoino and Agudo was of- little importance since a 
they did was reproduce various documents previously printed by Fr. Francisco 
Villacorta, commissioner procurator of the province of- Filipino Augustinians in 
the courts of Madrid and Rome. 1S Of greater impact and merit was what Manila 
Archbishop Basilio Sancho said in his Exposition, Representation y Memorial, the 
objectives he had in writing the articles, and the regalist ideas that moved him to 
write so vehemently against the regulars. This is something he did not do after 3 
October 1 778, when the rules ot Royal Patronage and Diocesan Visits were alieady 
accepted by the definitors ot the Filipino Augustinian province. 11 ' 



355 






THE PH 1 1 IP PI NT R I V< >1 l I I< >N \NI > PI ^ >NI ) 



More important than the articles is knowing what motivated their authors. 
On 10 September 1861, a royal order was sent to the superior government of the 
islands ordering that the Recollect Augustinians be replaced by the Jesuits in the 
missions and ministries they administered in Mindanao. I he royal order also de- 
creed that the Recollect Augustinians numerous merits be recompensed and that 
the curacies and doctrines of Cavite or others served by the indigenous clergy be 
assigned to the Recollect Augustinians as they were being vacated. 

This measure most favored the Jesuits, followed by the Recollect Augustin- 
ians; the most prejudiced were the secular clergy since they quickly began losing 
their work and benefits. On 23 November 1 861 , the governor-general sent a copy 
of the royal order to the archbishop of Manila endorsing t he corresponding decree 
for compliance. 18 On 18 December 1861, the capitular vicar of t he archbishopric 
of Manila replied to the previous letters expounding on the serious consequences 
that would be derived from the strict application of said orders. 

In a relatively short time, decrees, official communications and replies, 
charges and countercharges were issued, which merely served to deepen the con- 
flicts 0 And if the problem of the curacies was already murky, it was aggravated even 
more from 23 February 1863. The metropolitan archbishop of Manila met with 
the bishops of Cebu and Nueva Segovia. I hey agreed to appeal to I hs Majesty with 
an exposition (treatise) asking for full authority for the ordinal*)' 1 diocesans over the 
parishes administered by the regulars. They further promised to protect the powers 
of the crown in the islands and at the same time initiate a series of ecclesial re- 
forms. 21 

I his tense atmosphere necessarily had repercussions in the Spanish press. 
The presence of the media in the arena did nothing more than to fan the flames of 
exacerbated emotion. Some Catholic newspapers defended with virulent editorials 
the position of the regular clergy against the ecclesial hierarchy. 

Objectively, we have nothing against what we have read about this defense in 
favor of the regular clergy. However, we must say that the ancestral (or historical) 
defense was no longer valid. Filipino customs had improved as the number of edu- 
cated and virtuous religious grew, contributing to a better way of life, progress, and 
well-being of the nation. However, what they defended so vehemently had a vio- 
lent outcome much later. It would have been better to seek positive results through 
debate. The Philippines was already mature and its people walked to the beat of 
this reality. To deny them at this juncture would be to turn ones back on the reality 
of life and on evangelical norms. 

B. The Reasons 

More than the events, what matter — at least for us — are the reasons for the tenac- 
ity of the Augustinians in keeping their parishes at all cost. We should remember 
that the Augustinians were the first to arrive in the Philippines with Miguel Lopez 
de Legazpi on 13 February 1565. 22 Authors well versed in the history of the Phil- 



356 



RO P R K 1* 1 / The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



ippincs know i hat it was Andres de Urdaneta, an Augustinian, who discovered the 
return trip via the Pacific from the Philippines to Mexico (8 October 1565) after 
the misfortunes of 1 lernando de Magallanes (1519-1522), Fray Jofre Garcia de 
Loaysa (1525-1536). Alvaro Saavedra Ceron (1526-1528), and Ruy Lopez de 
Villalobos ( 1 542- 1 54~), who followed the orders of the Royal Charters with the 
intention of strictlv obeying the mandates ol the Alexandrian (Papal) Bulls.-’ In 
333 years, the Augustinians established more than 300 towns, many of which were 
ceded for reasons of need and out ot the interest ol the secular clergy as well as the 
other religious orders who worked with them in the archipelago.-' They kept un- 
der their administration 234 towns and missions which were the most developed 

and the richest in the islands."' 

'flic Augustinians concentrated exclusively on the Philippines since their 
presence in Japan and C hina ' was hardly felt. The Augustinians realized, albeit 
I t h c consequences of this concentration within the islands, without any efforts 
outside It is a good thing that Pope Leon XIII on 8 June 1885 appointed Fr. Man- 
uel Die/ Gonzalez as the- apostolic comisario. With this important position tucked 
under his belt and aware of the problems of the order in the peninsula, Fr. Diez 
Gonzalez announced his visit to the Philippine Islands. 2 " 

Fr Die/ Gonzalez’s trip to the islands and his contacts wit t a o c ie re 1 
eioU s served as one of the factors that oriented the direction of the August, man 
province in the Philippines to adopt measures that years later would save the order 
from obscurity. The studies acquired a new impulse and splendor, unanimously 
agreeing to open schools of secondary education in the Philippines, specified .y in 
Vie an a ml Iloilo. Above all, it was decided to begin missions and work outside 
Philippines, especially in Australia. Frs. Gelestino Fernandez-V, liar and Mariano 
Isar Redo were sent to study the land and get a feel of the situation If nothing was 
later done, it cannot be blamed on a lack of interest on the part of the order and t e 
ipo colic comisario, but rather on the series of unacceptable conditions that he 
ecclesial hierarchy in Australia wanted to impose on the Augustinians from the 

Phil ‘ AlTttese events brought about the desire of the Philippine Augustinians to 
fierht for “their Philippines" so nobody would take from them what they la game 
irf large part by the sweat of their brow and their sacrifices. Frankly, they never 
understood that times had changed, that others were coming, demanding what in 
large part was theirs, and that their mission was completed. 



H. Fr. Salvador Font, Augustinian 
and the Noli Me Tange re of Jose Rizal 



A. The Condemnation 

For many Augustinians, Spain lost the Philippines in 1872 with the execution of 
the three Filipino clerics: Gomez, Burgos, and Zamora.'" This was the belief of 



357 



THK I'l-n I IIM’IM KIA()M I K >N \NI>Kn<>NI> 



Apostolic Commissioner Fr. Manuel Die/ Gon/ale/. who sought a place tor the 
Order of Saint Augustine and protection for his sons should the need arise, espe- 
cially since the air that began to waft was tar from healthy. 

What was worrisome was that the behavior of some of the religious from the 
Order of Saint Augustine contributed to the feelings of disgust, albeit slightly 
veiled at the outset, toward Spain, the friars, and the < acholic church. I his lack of 
foresight did not stop the flames that began to spread in a major conflagration. 

This then is the case of one Augustinian, hr. Salvador l ont. 

Fr. Font, a native of Igualada, province of Barcelona, was born on 23 July 
1844. He took his vows when he was barely 1 9 years old in the college seminary of 
Valladolid on 10 September 1864. I le was gifted and intelligent. I le finished his 
studies with enviable punctuality and was sent to the Philippines in 1868. He was 
tall, handsome, and spoke well, clearlv, and persuasively. I Hiring the cholera epi- 
demic of 1 882, as prior of San Agustin ( Convent in Manila, he /ealously helped the 
sick without fear of contamination and death. I le saved many children in Manila, 
especially those who ended up orphans, without food and lodging. 

In the provincial chapter of 1 885, he was appointed del initor or counselor of 
the province and concurrently prior of the ( Convent of Tondo. Perhaps his zeal 
and popularity did not allow him to see the rather unfavorable circumstances pre- 
venting the peaceful domination of the Philippine Islands; hence, his anxiety to 
delve into the matters we have just explained. 

In 1887, Jose Rizals novel Noli Me liuigerc" began circulating clandestinely 
in Manila, a fact immediately brought to the attention of the governor-general of 
the islands, Emilio Terrero. He immediately sought the opinion of the permanent 
commission on censorship, which verbally informed him of its position, which was 
correct and well thought out; to have published its decision, however, would have 
helped propagate the book rather than repress it. 

We suspect that Governor-General Terrero was not happy with the decision 
of the commission and, wanting to forge ahead with his wishes, used the friend- 
ship and somewhat triumphalist and patriotic soul of Fr. Pont. We say “suspect” 
because we will later see what the opinion of the aforesaid governor was about the 

number of copies of Fr. Font’s pamphl et that he wanted printed and for what rea- 
sons. 35 

Fr. Fonts pamphlet is dated 29 December 1887 in Manila. It has 24 num- 
bered pages and even if it does not bear the printer’s name, we know it was printed 
in Guadalupe at the Imprenta de Asilo dc Huerfanos de Nuestra Senora de la 
Consolacion, under the management of the Augustinian priests, most probably in 
1888. His style, in addition to being slightly aggressive, is curt and exaggerated, 
with a patriotic color that is not gratifying to read, even for readers sympathetic to 
his thesis. Nonetheless, we must forgive him as this was his style of writing: he 
enjoyed redundancy and sonorous phrases, relying on them to express the patriotic 
spirit deep within him. 37 



358 



RODRIC iUKZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



Fr. Font’s booklet was briefly circulated as decided by Governor Terrero, who 
did not want to give Rizal’s novel any publicity by way of Fr. Fonts condemna- 
tion.^ The governor erred once more when he allowed the publication of the 
Dictamen against Noli Me Tangere. Pamphlets and articles, all clandestine, began 
raining down against religious corporations in general and against Fr. Font in par- 
ticular. From the Manifiesto we quote: “Loyal Filipinos appeal to the noble Spanish 
nation in defense of their honor and fidelity which has been seriously maligned by 
the newspaper La Verdad in Madrid. 

Of the three articles in the Manifiesto , the second and third are of primary 
importance to us. Included on pages 25 to 41 of the Manifiesto , dated 17 January 
and 3 February respectively, are the second article, “Viva Espana, Viva el Rey, Viva 
el Ejercito, Fucra los Frailes,” and the third, “The Truth About Friars in the Philip- 
pines.”"’ Various documents presented to Governor Terrero are contained in the 
second article wherein the unbending position of certain religious was severely cen- 
sured. This was prepared in Hong Kong with the collaboration ol Filipino resi- 
dents there, leading us to conclude that the information ot the residents was up to 
date and accurate as far as events in the archipelago were concerned. 

In the third article, “The Truth About Friars in the Philippines,” 41 Fr. Fonts 
nresence was considered dangerous once the news of the condemnation ol Rizals 
novel was circulated in Manila. The superiors of the province realized that the con- 
tinuous attacks — veiled or express— were directed against Fr. Font. But Fr. Font 
was not reticent about counterattacking, something that proved more prejudici 
than beneficial to him. On 19 January 1889, the Ordinary Provincial Chapter was 
celebrated in the Convent of San Agustin in Manila. The provincial-elect, Fr. 
Tomas Gresa, who stood out because of his prudence and common sense, propose 
Fr. Font as a comisario procurator of the province in Madrid. This was one way o 
diverting attention away Irom Fr. Font’s tirade against Rizal. 

On this the Augustinian author, Gregorio de Santiago Vela, commented. 



Fr. Font left the archipelago under somewhat unfavorable circumstances 
for the peaceful domination of the islands because ol the anti-Spanish mani- 
festations of 1 888, whose consequences are common knowledge to those who 
have studied the last events in the Philippines under the Spanish government. 
The mission that our subject had to accomplish in the capital was something 
that required all his energy because it was necessary to change the opinion 
which kept growing in support of those who worked lor the emancipation of 
the islands. Fr. Font did not frustrate the hopes of those who trusted him to see 
normal relations between the peninsular and native elements. He made tre- 
mendous attempts in Madrid to establish these objectives. There is no need to 
narrate them because everyone knows of the events attesting to his untiring 
zeal. He used not only the pen but also his relationships with the ruling offi- 
cials Sagasta and Canovas to further Spains cause in that remote flower ot our 
Crown. 42 



359 



THE PHILIPPINE REV( >1 t"l'l< )N \M ) BMONI > 



Fr. Font left for Spain bringing specific orders to promote the establishment 
of a daily newspaper in Madrid to defend traditional policy, the interests ol the 
Spanish nation, and the prestige and the works realized in the Philippines by the 
religious bodies. 43 Fr. Font, from the moment he arrived in Madrid, moved with 
superhuman energy before all the comisarios procurators of other religious orders 
established in the Court. He was greatly helped by the apostolic commissioner of 
the order, Fr. Manuel Die/. Gonzalez, as seen his letter to hr. Provincial Fomas 
Gresa. 44 A day later, 45 Fr. Font sent another letter to Fr. loma.s Grcsa, informing 
him that he (Font) was arranging the establishment of the newspaper and was 
counting on the help of the religious orders as well as the most representative civil 
elements in Madrid. He requested approval for this project and insisted on receiv- 
ing important news from the Philippines. 

Meanwhile, Fr. Provincial Fomas Gresa, with characteristic prudence and 
tact, had changed his mind in reference to the establishment of a daily in Madrid. 
He wrote his comisario procurator in Madrid recommending caution and begging 
him to assess the implications of Fr. Font’s narratives, articles, and promises since 
the restlessness in the archipelago continued unabated, a fact which meant that the 
malaise had deeper roots. 48 

Events changed rapidly and very much against Fr. Font s wishes, perhaps due 
largely to the intervention of the apostolic nuncio in Madrid. ( ^n 20 March 1889, 
the capitular vicar of Manila wrote the nuncio, with an urgent note from the bish- 
ops, provincials, and religious superiors in the Philippines requesting the nuncios 
support. 49 

On 4 May of the same year, Fr. Tomas Gresa wrote Fr. Manuel Diez Gonzalez 
about measures he had taken for the smoother management of the religious in the 
islands. At the same time he took advantage of the moment to mention the news- 
paper but without openly declaring himself in favor of the project. Fr. Gresa later 
sent letters to the different religious in the province, resident in Spain, and to the 
apostolic comisario as well. 51 News arriving in Madrid convinced responsible 
people that the restiveness in the Philippines would not find relief in the simple 
publication of a Catholic newspaper, especially since it was destined to reach a very 
small number of readers. 

All these details convinced the nuncio, undoubtedly tied to certain special 
orders of the Holy See, that Fr. Fonts project was not timely. Thus, on 26 Septem- 
ber 1889, the matter of the newspaper was shelved, much against the wish of the 
Augustinian Comisario Procurator in Madrid. 52 Another comisario procurator 
thought the measure wise and had beforehand denied all kinds of f inancial and lit- 
erary assistance for Fr. Fonts ideas. Months later, Fr. Gresa understood the ulti- 
mate reach of the decision. The problems in the Philippines had very deep roots 
which could not be solved by a simple defensive campaign. On the other hand, the 
Madrid government was incapable of evaluating the malaise due to its ignorance of 
the political reality in the islands. 



360 



RODRIGUEZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



Since the efforts of the Catholic daily were mired, Fr. Font prepared, at great 
cost, the booklet F Hi pinas, problema fundamental por un espanol de larga residencia 
en aquellas is Lis.''' Perhaps, due to scarcity of material with which to accomplish 
his objective, Fr. Font reprinted the Censura [Censure] against Rizal’s Noli Me Tan- 
gereN In truth, the Spanish government did not display any interest in its content 
and did not reallv have anything specific against its author, simply because it had 
already assimilated the idea of freeing the islands as a result of some political errors. 
At this level, the fault lay in no one and in everyone. It was only with the realization 
that the Pearl of the Orient was lost that everything was blamed on the religious 
orders, which was totally unjust. 



B. The Consequences 

At this point, a small spark was capable of igniting a conflagration, and it did. On 
18 October 1887, Quiroga Ballesteros, director general of the Philippine Civil 
Administration, published a circular in La Gaceta de Manila emphasizing the ob- 
ligation of provincial chiefs to watch over the public health, which was constantly 
threatened by the way burials were performed. Taking into consideration the 
country’s hot climate and how quickly bodies decomposed, Ballesteros ordered the 

immediate closure of cemeteries in the towns. 

Among the different measures adopted by Ballesteros was one which stipu- 
lated the following: 



How many of these [people in charge of] public hygiene have prevented 
the bodies from being laid out in public temples since the royal order of 28 
August 1855™ which expressly states that “the decomposition subsequent to 
death produces noxious fumes which when breathed in by the faithful in at- 
tendance are at times hidden and unsuspected as being the origin of more seri- 
ous diseases”. Thus, in recognizing the exactitude of such observations, the fu- 
neral rites of lying in state were prohibited at all times. This important decision 
was often forgotten due to worries and pride which is carried far beyond the 
grave. If these dispositions are to be effective — and they should be in the pen 
insula— 1 leave ir to Your Holiness’ consideration especially in a country whose 
high temperature is a factor of decomposition." 



Ballesteros’ circular would not have stirred up controversy if there were not 
already an atmosphere of malaise and restlessness. We say this because there were 
numerous laws on burials, which were not complied with because of a series of un- 
controlled [vested] interests.™ However, once the circular was published, the reac- 
tion of the hierarchy among the religious orders was immediate and eneigetic. On 
28 October 1887, Fr. Pedro Payo, Dominican and archbishop of Manila, replied 
’ :h another circular in response to that of Ballesteros.™ It was the aichbishops 



361 



THK PH I LIPPI NT. RLV( )I t I K >N AM ) l*n« >M > 



intention to place things in perspective, explaining the reasons that motivated the 
circular of 18 October. All this naturally precipitated the break in relations between 
the civil and ecclesial authority, especially at a time when cooperation was most 
needed to bridge the chasm in Philippine society. 

The reasons for Archbishop Pedro Pay os circular were well known by the 
residents of Manila. In August 1886, the scandalous ball held in the residence of 
Governor Justo Martin Lunas was deemed as a prelude to other more shameless 
examples. Before such arrogance, Manila Archbishop Pavo felt it his duty to ener- 
getically protest by means of a pastoral letter condemning such public displays of 
obscenity, destructive of public morals. 

The governor felt himself, as well as many who attended the ball, alluded to. 
Among the Spaniards, some applauded the intervention of the archbishop while 
the majority were offended. The governor resigned .is a result of all this and was 
succeeded by Jose Centeno Garcia as interim governor, who was worse than his 
predecessor. Ballesteros took the side of the new governor, who issued the new cir- 
cular on funeral honors and cemeteries, perhaps moved by the singular attempt to 
irritate the opposition. 60 

At the outset of February 1888, Jose Rizal had to leave the Philippines bound 
for Hong Kong and other countries. Artigas y Cuevas wrote: 

Because of the events and even before the atmosphere of discontent had 
dissipated, the manifestation held on 1 March 1888 served to further aggra- 
vate the political situation. It must have been around 1 0 in the morning when 
a large group of Filipinos gathered before Plaza Santa Cruz, Manila, along 
Curtidor Street (today Soler) and walked through various streets of the capital 
until they reached the civil government where they submitted a petition dated 
20 hebruary 1888 to Mr. Centeno strongly protesting what had just hap- 
pened. 61 

1 he petition submitted to the governor demanded the immediate expulsion 
of all religious bodies, headed by Manila Archbishop Payo. It stated: 

We are forced to supplicate Your Excellency the temporal exile and im- 
mediate embarkation for the Peninsula of the aforementioned diocesans in 
accordance with Law 28, Title 14, Book 1 of the Recopil acion de las Indias, as 
well as the expulsion of friars in accordance with the laws mentioned and royal 
orders extant in this government which instructs the secularization of curacies 
and repossession of the properties of friars, bearing in mind the very sad and 
bloody memory of Filipinos who, filled with patriotism, made a loyal manifes- 
tation to His Excellency, Carlos Maria de la Iorre, governor of these islands. 

Said governor brought with him the royal order effecting the secularization of 
the University of Santo Tomas. This manifestation displeased the friars who at 
the time were struggling with the question of the curacies which the [secular] 



362 



RO P R I G U EZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



clergy tried to grab from them. This was the reason for the issuance of the two 
royal orders demanding the secularization of the curacies and the repossession 
of the friars properties. Because of this, they [the friars] manipulated matters 
against the secular clergy to the point that they surprised General Izquierdos 
government with their intrigues and managed to bring many innocents to the 
gallows, particularly the wise and virtuous Fr. Jose Burgos, at the time parish 
priest of Manila, who supported and headed the question of the curacies 
against the friars. Should this petition not be granted a favorable decree, and 
should the friars not be despoiled of their properties, we would suffer the same 
fate as those unfortunates. Therefore, we implore Your Excellency’s protection 
as loyal subjects of the Government and descendants of those who, in centu- 
ries past, fought and shed their blood for the integrity and defense of the fa- 
therland, in the war against the English and Chinese who invaded this terri- 
tory and continue sacrificing themselves against the rebellious Joloans and 
Carolinians, telegraphically advising His Majesty and the Council of Ministers 
about this petition due to its importance. 0 ' 



Another article of 20 February 1888 created such an uproar in Manila that 
Governor Terrero was forced to call a meeting of the authorities. After hearing 
everyone’s opinion, he agreed to endorse the petition to the Audiencia. The 
Fiscal of In tram uros, Mariano Izquierdo, also wanted to bring up the Manifesta- 
tion of the 1st of March to the Court, which decreed the proper hearing of the 

PetItl< The specially appointed judge asked the Augustinian provincial if he wanted 
to be part of the hearing as per the final decision of 3 April 1888: “A communique 
was read from the judge on the present proceedings against certain y* etna out os 
and residents of various towns of the province of Manila for having presented a 
petition against the archbishop and other religious communities full of errors and 
calumnies asking if the [Augustinian] province wanted to be part of the ltigation. 
The venerable Definitorio Provincial agreed that it was not prudent for him to be 
part of the above stated criminal proceedings and our father provincial should re- 
ply to the judge in this manner.” 63 

The special tribunal proceeded against the accused, but without the inter- 
vention of the archbishop of Manila nor the religious bodies in the proceedings. 
Nevertheless, the circumstances were more than critical. The Manila press gener 
ally sympathized with the ecclesial authorities while the peninsula press did not. El 
Globo , a Madrid daily, published two long articles, 64 u Los Frailes, Esbozo ciitico 
de los de Pilipinas” (The Friars, Critical Muzzles of the Philippines) by Jose Anto- 
nio Guillen, a friend and admirer of the religious, especially the Augustinians, but 
who changed his mind due to certain arguments with the Dominican priests, Frs. 
Bernardino Nozaleda and Pedro Payo, as well as to some resentments against the 
Augustinians because of monetary matters. “This (the problem with the Domini- 
cans) placed him in opposition to them but he abstained from showing personal 



363 



THE PHILIPPINE RhV< >1 \\U )N AND Bi Y< >Nl> 



resentment which, in effect, did not have a solid basis. A few months passed. 
Guillen had property in Bulacan that included a sulfur spring which, in time, could 
produce substantial gains. He proposed that the Augustinian fathers purchase his 
property. The Augustinians, perhaps sensing his resentment, could not or would 
not acquire Guillens property, although he offered them a good deal. 1 his was the 
last straw in his aversion for the friars. ' Neither was the ( atholic press idle in 
Spain. In “Manifestaciones tumultuosas en Pilipinas [ Tumultuous Manifestations 
in the Philippines], the Madrid newspaper La Unioti' dared call the attention of 
the Ministry of Colonies to the state of unrest which had begun to worry the Span- 
ish, especially after the Manifestation of the 1st of March. As La l niton stated, ex- 
treme measures [are needed] for extreme evils. I he author felt it meant little to 
accept Centeno Garcias rejection and the appointment of Weyler lor the position 
of governor-general if the appointment of the latter was not accompanied by a se- 
lect group of technocrats and collaborators of good judgment and upright con- 
science. To do the contrary, concluded the author, Spain would have begun play- 
ing its last card in the Philippines/' La Hpoca , another Madrid daily, had a similar 
opinion, but with sharper ideas insofar as the danger of the lack of a specific policy 
and secure action regarding events unfolding in the islands, which threatened the 
crown. A more ample commentary was given by the Madrid newspaper hi Siglo 
Futurcr. 



Let us now consider the press. Only a few newspapers have dealt with 
the gravity of the events in Manila, especially the behavior of the government 
and its supporters who have tried to erase events in what has been graphically 
called the conspiracy of silence. To cull the facts deliberately spread and strewn 
by many is precisely what we intend to do today in reference to the question of 
the very important and extreme events and of the fatal consequences for the 
future, in a place from which we are unfortunately far, should the government 
continue in its implacable and incomprehensible apathy/’* 

With the editorial “El peligro gravisimo en Pilipinas ( 1 he very grave danger 
in the Philippines), the Madrid newspaper La Fe once more took on the numerous 
extraordinary events in the islands on 8 May 1 888 while proposing the means nec- 
essary to stop the danger. Of the four dangers pointed out by the author, the last 
one deserves attention. He said: 

To animate the export of the products of such a fertile land by means of 
good treaties since it would be useless for it to have tobacco, sugar, coffee, co- 
coa, black coral, rattan, cotton, anil, wax, honey, rice, leather, sampan wood 
trees (sibucao), tree nurseries, etc., unless their exportation is facilitated. There 
is much in this area for the civil authorities to do; and pursuing the develop- 
ment of the natural wealth would do more in proving an interest for the father- 
land than in the persecution of the Religious. 69 



364 



RO n RIGU EZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



Of greater circulation and impact was the pamphlet titled Filipinos en su jugo 
[The Philippines in its Element], by Agustin Pastor, a pseudonym used by Antonio 
Fermentino, 0 an Augustinian. First published in El Porvenir de Visayas (The Fu- 
ture of the Visayas), it was reproduced in the Madrid newspapers and later torn 
apart. -1 There were readers, especially the Augustinians, who applauded the work 
of this anonymous author as a genial novelty. However, the supreme authority of 
the province did not i eel the same way. 

A balanced hearing on hr. Fermentinos pamphlet was due to then Fr. Provin- 
cial Tomas Gresa, one of the few Spanish religious who knew how to appreciate 
“the numerous errors bandied and written about in reference to the islands.’ - Fr. 
Fermentino, using a pseudonym, sent a copy of his work to Fr. Gresa through Fr. 
Mariano Isar Redo, an Augustinian. Fr. Gresa replied on 29 April to the author 
whom he did not know, giving him a summary of points that as a superior of the 

Augustinian Order he could not accept. 

According to Fr. Gresa, the pamphlet contained timely statements and ob- 
servations, especially in reference to agriculture and industry, precisely pointing 
out the reasons for their decay, along with the methods to be adopted lor their re- 
suscitation. Fr. Gresa also accepted what the anonymous author said vis-a-vis the 
deficiencies of Spanish legislation in the Philippines, confessing that the country 
would forge ahead if these deficiencies were to be remedied. Fr. Gresa further sai : 
“The pictures he paints of certain types in the archipelago, as well as the character, 
abuses and excesses of the natives are exaggerated. And it there were any trut i to 
them at all, and not what the pamphlet assumes, they are not as common and gen- 
eralized as the pamphlet paints them to be.” ' 

Fr. Gresa ends by saying: “The publication of the pamphlet, with its style and 
method of expressing matters, discounting the errors and gross mistakes it con- 
tains, is inconvenient” and prejudicial. It could even be a powerful weapon that evil 
doers could avail themselves of to continue the war.... 



Ill The Discovery of the Katipunan by Fr. Mariano Gil, Augustinian 

Mariano Gil y Guzman was born in Carrion de los Condes, province of Palencia, 
Spain, on 2 July 1849. His parents were Manuel Gil and Maria Guzman. Because 
his parents relocated, he spent his childhood in the town of Alanza, Leon. He too 
his higher studies and some of- his secondary studies at the Conciliar Seminary o 
Leon When his father died, perhaps due to financial difficulties, Mariano entere 
the Colegio de Agustinos de Valladolid and later on La Vid, Burgos. But without 
having professed his final vows and as yet not having received his priestly oidina 
tion, he went to the Philippines on the mission of 1873. It was in Manila that he 
was ordained a priest in 1874. s His superiors sent him to Baliuag, Bulacan, to 
learn Tagalog since it seemed he would have to minister in this language. Fr. Gil 
had Fr. Tomas Gresa as prior-minister until 1876, the year he took over as vicar 



365 



THE PH I LIPPI NT. REVOM I l< >N \NI>unoNl> 



prior-minister of Bigaa, also in Bulacan, Pulinan ( 1 S ’ > , Nor/agaray (1879), and 
Bigaa for the second time ( 1 884- 1 889). 

On 25 January 1889, the Provincial ( Tap ter was held at t he C .on vent of San 
Agustin where Fr. Gresa was elected father provincial, hr. ( » i 1 s Best biographer, Fr. 
Joaquin Duran, considers Fr. Gifs appointment by Fr. Gresa as parish priest of 
Tondo to have been the expression of a desire to recompense the zealous cam- 
paigns in faith and morals effected by the different l mac ies headed by Fr. Mariano 
Gil.” It was furthermore a guarantee of what Fr. Gil would continue doing as head 
of theTondo parish of more than 40,000 souls. A necessary factor required for its 
administration was a man with the qualities of the appointed parish priest. 

Fr. Gil had good intellectual qualities bordering on excellence, pastoral zeal, 
and philanthropic works. However, what does not seem too plausible was his pru- 
dence, above all, in the investigation of subversive activities against religion and 
the fatherland due to the dangers to which he exposed himself and others. 

Fondo was for Fr. Gil an apt platform to develop an activity in tune with his 
character. From the first moment of his stay as head of the Iondo parish, Fr. Gil 
was in contact with the governor-general of the islands, Valeriano Weyler, who 
spared nothing in order to discover, pursue, and extinguish all subversive activity. 
The Masons knew this, and with the desire to eliminate the problem, Spanish 
Masonry, headed by Miguel Morayta, prepared the terrain to discredit Weyler be- 
fore the Spanish government and have him replaced. 1 his was done using all 
means, with or without reason. These are the words of Morayta in a letter to 
Marcelo H. del Pilar (20 March 1890): “We have offered to proceed against 
Weyler. For this we only need information, founded or not, with or without proof, 
and we have not been sent a single word that I know of. 

It would be somewhat puerile to think that the civil authorities of the islands, 
the ecclesial authorities and a sufficient number of people were ignorant of the 
subversive movements of Masonry until Fr. Gil undertook his “great deed.” Fr. Gil 
had his collaborators, his connections and also (why not?) his precursors. In the 
Augustinian archives of Valladolid, there arc numerous letters and narratives of 
parish priests of different churches reporting abnormalities, movements, and con- 
versations of people supposedly Catholic. 

A certain Pedro Fe wrote to the Augustinian provincial in a letter dated June 

1895 : 



Very Reverend Father provincial of the Calzed Augustinians. Father of 
my soul: I have just been informed that Antonio Rianzares Bautista is terribly 
anti-Spanish; a mortal enemy of religious priests, an atheist, immoral, has nu- 
merous concubines, and a red filibuster. He goes from house to house asking 
for money for those who are members of the Hispano-Filipino Association in 
Spain to whom he frequently remits funds. He is one of the most ardent insti- 
gators of the Cavite Revolution and author of Ang Tanda ng Cara y Cruz. At 
present, he works with his friend, Marcelino del Rosario, who lives next door 



366 



RODRIGUEZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



to his relative Dororeo Jose and is known as a signatory of the article against 
the friars. Marcelino and Ambrosio are working on a long article seeking the 
expulsion of the friars from the Philippines whose article, with documentation, 
will be sent to Spain. They frequently go to Bulacan and Malolos to gather 
money and signatures. A son of Ambrosio Rianzares, named Pablo, will soon 
arrive from Spain. The son was recently appointed Titular [medical] Doctor of 
Lauuna. This Pablo is a close friend of Rizal, editor of La Solidandad and ac- 
tively participates in the Hispano-Filipino Association, headed by Morayta. To 
ascertain the truth, one only has to watch the movements of Rianzares, 
Bautista, and Del Rosario. Don Ambrosio was jailed for political crimes in the 
year 1 875, 1 874, and 1 873. He is Blumentritts political agent with whom he 
carries on correspondence. I took advantage of the present medium to notify 
vou because I fear the anti-friars and my conscience dictates I inform your rev- 
erence. [Signed] Your humble son. Pedro Fe. 



We do not know who this Pedro Fe could be and whether he was Spanish or 
Filipino What is certain is that he must have been a friend of Fr. Juan Zallo, pro- 
vincial in June 1 895. the date of the letter. In addition, the sender of the letter re- 
veals exact knowledge of Ambrosio Rianzares Bautistas movements, actions, and 
condition as well as his relationship with Marcelino del Rosario, whose son Pablo, 
had a close relationship with Jose Rizal. We suspect the letter was sent to Fr. Juan 
Zallo by a trusted messenger and not by himself to avoid all suspicion or to prevent 

its falling into the wrong hands. 

Months before the Katipunan was discovered by Fr. Gil, another Augustin- 

ian Fr Agustin Fernandez, prior of the convent of Nuestra Sehora de Guadalupe, 

visited Governor-General Ramon Blanco and reported on subversive and anti- 

Spanish movements in different provinces of the islands * \^°f % Zo d e 

paid no attention and everything ended there. News published m El Heraldo de 
Madrid and El Impartial state that it was common knowledge that the archbishop 
of Manila, Fr. Bernardino Nozaleda, OP, as a member of the governing board, ad- 
vised Blanco on three different occasions about what was being plotted against 
Spain and her government in the islands, asking him to take the necessary precau- 
tions. The governor-general did not reply to two of Archbishop Nozaledas letters, 
but answered the third as though belittling the information. 81 

On 6 July 1896, First Lieutenant Ramon Garcia Casero of the Civil Guard, 
assigned to the towns ofTaal and Lemery, Batangas, showed up at the home of Jose 
Agoncillo (nephew of Felipe Agoncillo) in Taal. He searched the house and 
grounds calmly and carefully. He found some weapons and a flag of the future Re- 
public of the Philippines. The lieutenant also found Mr. Agoncillo’s financial 
records and those of other people who had deposited their money in Hong Kong 
banks. On the same date, the lieutenant informed the governor-general of the de- 
tails of his discovery. Given his passivity, we may presume the governor-general did 
nothing. 82 



367 



THE PHII.IPPINh RPA'C >1 l \ K >N \NI ) HI Y< >M> 



There are other testimonies, such as those from the Franciscan provincial, a 
member of the Provincial Junta, but let us go to the subject of the discovery ’ of 
the Katipunan by Fr. Gil. 

In one of Fr. Gils visits to the school of orphaned children in Mandaluyong, 
under the management of the Tertiary Augustinian Sisters, the mother superior 
complained about the advances taken bv Masonry in the Philippines. As proof of 
this alarming fact, she told Fr. Gil of a typesetter, Ieodoro Patino, who told his 
sister, a student at the Asilo, that to continue printing /:/ Diario dc Manila where 
he worked was mandatory to being a member of the Katipunan, under pain of 
dismissal. 83 

I he information made Fr. Gil very happy. I le immediately thought this was 
the key to what he sought. Wanting to gain time, Fr. C »il told the mother superior 
that he wanted to talk to the typesetter of /:/ Diario tic Manila. 1 he meeting was 
arranged. In the afternoon of 19 August 1896, Ieodoro Patino told Fr. Mariano 
Gil everything he knew as an eyewitness in the parlor of the convent of Iondo. Fr. 
Gil already knew everything because of the narration by the mans sister and the 
mother superior. 84 

I hat evening, between 7 and 8, taking advantage of Governor Blancos ab- 
sence, Fr. Gil went alone to the workshop of hi Diario dc A tanila and found Ra- 
mon Montes, director-proprietor of the newspaper, commander of the Oth Infan- 
try Regiment, at the door together with Jose I rillo and Fui ritjue C itiidotti. Once Fr. 
Gil complied with the usual greetings, he explained what he knew from Ieodoro 
Patino and immediately began a search. After 30 to 45 minutes, important docu- 
ments were found. 85 I he papers contained the date set for the beheading of all the 
Spaniards and the proclamation of the Republic of the Philippines, and lastly, the 
lithographic typeset with which were being printed the receipts for the collection 
of funds to develop and maintain the Katipunan. 86 

Around 9 in the evening, Fr. Gil went home to Tondo feeling very satisfied. 
After examining what he found in El Diario cle Manila. , he went to the cuartel of 
the Civil Guard accompanied by Patino to show the value of his discovery. Patino 
certified before the Civil Guard the authenticity of the typeset. 8 

With the numerous proofs in the hands of the Civil Guard — papers, typeset, 
etc. the authorities had to intervene, beginning with arrests and deten- 
tions and initiating procedures with Tondo Judge Alberto Concello. The testimony 
of Jose Pique Castello, infantry commander and presiding judge of the present 
case, said: “Events began on 22 August 1 896 under the Judge of the Court of First 
Instance in Tondo, Alberto Consello, by order of the Fiscal of the Territorial 
Audiencia as part of Folio 6 which transfers that of the government on the previous 
day and refers the accusation made by said Fr. Mariano Gil about the existence of 
a Masonic and rebellious society against the institutions as well as that of individu- 
als belonging to the same who were imprisoned and whose houses were searched, 
turning up papers and books with some effects corroborating the existence of the 
said society.” 88 



368 



RODRIGUEZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



Pique Gastello continues “that the items for the process were 18, without the 
documents being numbered and hundreds of letters with different manifestos/’ 
which made it also impossible to place in order or make a summary of the events 
involving the accused. “As such, therefore, for better clarity, the names will be indi- 
vidually listed in alphabetical order with the participation of each man and the 
incidents involved in the case so as to better understand the proceedings. >S9 

The news of Hr. Gil’s discovery spread throughout the city of Manila. The 
gratitude to Fr. Gil for his “deed" was universal and unstoppable. 90 The same press 
came out in court but was well controlled by Governor Blanco. In view of the lists 
already found at early evening of the 21st and above all on the 22nd of August 
1896, the imprisonments began of those who were on hand and included in the 



Given this discovery, Filipinos tried to protect their lives. The Philippine 
Revolution began on 2 1 August 1 896, advanced from the initial date of 2 Septem- 
ber, because of the detentions and imprisonments initiated by the Spanish authori- 
ties. Below is a superficial and brief account of the revolutionaries who fell into 
the hands of justice on the evening of the 21st and morning of the 22n as per 
the “extracts” of the procedures spoken about by Pique Castello, in alphabetic 

° rdCr 1) Andres Santillan de los Santos. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 
1 896 The statements of folios 39, 5 1 , 1 80, and 205 “accuse him of membership in 
the ‘Patria’ Lodge, whose objective was to assassinate all the Spaauards and friars, 
[attack] the cuartel ofTondo, and proclaim the independence of the Philippines, 
as well as being one of those in the conspiracy. The accused denied all the charges. 
On 25 August all his belongings were confiscated and he was deported to < ]o o. 

2) Ansel mo de la Torre Ibarra. Imprisoned 21 August 1 9 . ccuse o 
sonry and filibusterism. The statements of folios 139, 179v, and 205 corroborate 
the charges despite his denial. His belongings were confiscated and he was also de- 
ported t ^ ^ , a Rosa imprisoned on 22 August 1896. Accused as a Mason 
and filibuster. Having found the documents in his home as enumerate y t e 
Civil Guard in folio 3v. He was acquitted of the charges on 27 March 1897 per 
statements in folios 35v and released on 17 May as having been pardoned on this 
A 93 

^ 4) Apolinario de la Cruz y Achoy. Imprisoned on 22 August 1896 by the 
Civil Guard. The following were found in his home: one knife with a diamon 
point, documents that compromised him, and statements with a marked rebellious 
bent that he admitted as his. He was appointed to assassinate Spaniards, receive 
quotas from members, and was one of the heads of the rebellion. 

5) Ariston Bautista Lim. Doctor. Was arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 
1896. From the statements of folio 4 and the accusation by the head of the Civi 
Guard, it turns out he was a member of the Supreme Council and contributed P25 
monthly. Aguedo de Rosario unequivocally confirmed in folio 921 that Ariston 



369 



THE PHILIPPINE RKV< )I t I K )N AND HI 't < >NI ) 



belonged to the Junta Magna (Supreme Council), a charge denied by the ac- 
cused. 95 

6) Baldomero de Jesus y Eduarda. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 
1896. From his statements, it turns out he was a Mason and a filibuster. He was 
one of those sworn in for the revolution by Eolicarpio larlac. He stated he did not 
know anything and denied ever belonging to the Tama 1 odge. I le was deported 
to Jolo. 96 

7) Braulio Rivera y Garcia. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 1896. 
From the statements of folio 51v, he was seen to be a member of the Katipunan. 
He belonged to the “Patna’ 1 Lodge under the orders of Alejandro Santiago. In folio 
194v, he was sentenced and his belongings confiscated. 

8) Catalino Sionco Terin. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 1896. De- 
clared a Mason and a filibuster, he belonged to the ‘Patria Lodge whose objective 
was to assassinate the captain general, the Fondo parish priest, all friars and Span- 
iards, and proclaim the independence of the Philippines. Lastly, he was one of 
those sworn in for the Conjuration. 98 

9) Faustino Villareal Zapanta. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 1896. 
With his numerous and voluminous statements, he was one of the great propagan- 
dists of Masonic and independentist ideas, having different responsibilities in 
Masonry, belonging to the propaganda section, and being among those sworn in, 
as well as belonging to the Grand Regional Council of the Philippines. In addition 
he was a member of different lodges, supporting ideas of independence. He was 
present at the meeting headed by Jose Rizal in the house of Doroteo Ong-junco in 
June of 1892. He was also known as a Venerable of the "Patria" Lodge with the 
symbol Ylaw. 1 he case was later transferred to another judge. 99 

10) Jose Calillo Nagual. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 1 896. In the 
statements, he was accused of being a Mason and a filibuster. He was present at a 
meeting of 107 members, belonging to the “Patria” Lodge whose objective has al- 
ready been given. He was deported to Jolo on 21 September 1896 and expelled 
from the case. 100 

1 1) Julian Basco Baltazar. Arrested and imprisoned on 22 August 1896. From 
the information, he was discovered to be a member of the “Patria” Lodge and a 
filibuster whose objective had already been given. 101 



Conclusion 

L On 28 May 1896, the Supreme Council of the Katipunan issued a secret 
manifesto giving detailed instructions on what the Katipunan should do on the 
day of the revolt, specifically to assassinate all Spanish residents in the islands. 

2. To remove all shadow of a doubt, on 1 2 June 1 896, the Supreme Council 
of the Katipunan divulged all the specific and palpable signs among which stand 
out those of the second , fourth , sixth and seventh. Second: Once the agreed signal of 
H. on 2 September is given, each brother must comply with his duty that this G.R. 



370 



RODRIGUEZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



Lodge has given him, assassinating all Spaniards, their wives and children, without 
consideration of any kind, whether parentage, friendship, gratitude, etc. Fourth: 
Once the blow is struck against the captain general and other Spanish authorities, 
the loyalists will attack the convents and decapitate the infamous residents therein, 
respecting the wealth contained thereat, which the commission in charge will take 
over, by this G.R. Lodge, without its being licit for any of our brothers to take since 
it rightfully belongs to the treasury of the G.N.F. Sixth: The next day, the appointed 
brothers will bury the bodies of the hated oppressors in Bagumbayan field as well 
as those of their wives and children, wherein which a commemorative monument 
will later be erected (honoring) the independence of the G.N.F. Seventh: The bod- 
ies of the friars will not be buried but rather burned in just payment for the felonies 
they committed against the noble Filipinos during the three centuries of their ne- 
farious domination. 10 ’ . 

3 When the news of the discovers' by Fr. Mariano Gil spread throughout 

Manila', and the names of the people involved and their movements were made 
known to the authorities, the people involved had no choice but to take to the 
streets against the Spaniards so that the others would have a chance to hide them- 

4. The names of the 1 1 imprisoned on the eve of the 21st and the 22nd are 
proof that some did not have time to flee, hide papers, weapons, instruments, etc. 

that would compromise them. , 

5 Therefore, it was Hr. Mariano Gil who advanced the date of the revolu- 
tion, „o, as planned by the Filipinos but as hastened by this Spaniard, friar, and 

A ugustnuan h^ ^ J<( delve im „ th e question of whether Fr. Mariano 

Gil violated the sacred seal of confession-a topic which we can freely touch on 
during the discussion of the paper. 



Notes 

1 A copy of the charter can he found in the Archives of the Augustiman Province of the 

Philippines, APAF leg. 140/1 A; 1 page, folio; printed in Archivo Agustimano, 22, 

1923, pp- 29-31. 

2. Archbishop of Manila Basilio Sancho immediately complied with the order: Arc ivo 
General de Indias, AG1, (General Archives of the Indies], Seville, Spain, Filipinas, 
1035. The archbishop was successful in administrative matters of the secular clergy 
which he was preparing but not so the other bishops of the islands. The dictates of 
His Majesty’s fiscal, Madrid, 9 October 1776, the Bishop of Cebu, Mateo Joaquin 
Rubio de Arevalo, gave his consent to the charter in a letter from Manila dated 12 
October 1775, but signifying that the “defects of the clergy in this area are so great 
that he cannot dissipate the doubts as stated in the report that deals with it... and 
that he only received from the Most Reverend Archbishop of Manila seven individu- 
als of tenuous capabilities," APAF, leg. 888/3-d, f. 4. 1 he bishop of Nueva Segovia, 



371 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< )I t r M( >N \M > HI \ < >M> 



Fr. Miguel Garcia, OP, also responded to the charter on 1 (a October 1 5, saying 

that he “did not have priests to substitute the religious in the charges they 
were serving and it was feared they would abandon their posts if they were pressed, 
forced or obliged to show their titles in reference to their future, APA1\ leg. 883/3- 
d. folio 4v. 

3. The statement of Rafael Maria de Aguilar, Manila, 2 3 November 1S()4, APAF, e.g. 
203/1-e, 2 pages folio; copy reproduced by hladio /aniora, C )SA, Las ( .orporacioncs 
Religiosas en Filip mas, Valladolid, 1901, pp. 333 336; ( n estndio sobre dicha expo- 
sition by Isacio Rodriguez, OSA, I fistoria de la Fromm la Agustiniana del San (is i mo 
Nombre de Jesus de Filipinas, III, Manila, 196 , pp. 366-360. 

4. For the Exposition of the Governor to 1 lis Majesty, ( fr. Note 3. 

3. APAF, Reales Cedillas, f. 547, II, Doc. No. 73; cfr. Manuel Artigas v C aierva, Historia 
de Filip inas, Manila, 1916, p. 283. 

6. The Royal Charter was dated 20 October 1806 in San Lorenzo. A copy of the same 
is found in APAF, leg. 203/1-e, Reales Cedilla, I )oc. No. 8. 

7. Father Aparicio’s letter in Manila is dated 1 September 1802, published in Archivo 
Agustiniano, II, 1919, pp. 120-122. 

8. Fr. Hilarion Diezs article is titled: Contestation cjue el provincial de Agtisttnos C.alzados 
en Filipinas en fecha 5 febrero 1822 , ha dado a la Fxerna. I )iputacion de Manila sobre 
misiones. 

9. Fr. Antonio Blanco, based on the authenticated signature of Fr. I lilarion Diez at the 
end of the article by the secretary of the province, Fr. Manuel I astor, writes that it was 
this one (Pastor) who wrote the Co n testae i on, cfr. Nota 8, and not 1 r. 1 lilarion Diez, 
cfr. Blanco Antonio, Blbioteca Bibliograjico-Agustiniana , Valladolid, 1 )0 ), p. 320. 
Fiowever, on p. 166, Fr. Blanco himself attributes the reply to Fr. Hilarion Diez. 
Retana feels the reply is printed in 1 823 and says he has seen a copy in the Augustin- 
ian library of La Vid (Burgos); cfr. Joaquin Martinez de Xainiga, OSA. Fstadismo de 
las Islas Filipinas. W.E. Retana, II, Madrid, 1 893, pp* 185-1 86. 

10. Fr. Hilarion made special reference to the “charter directed to the governor general of 
the Philippines informing him that it was decided to accept Fr. Manuel Riveras pre- 
sentation of the Province of the Calced Augustinians for the curacy of Quingua in 
Bulacan and rejecting the petition of the Archbishop of Manila on the secularization 
of said curacy, San Ildefonso, 1 7 September 1 788.” The original of the charter can be 
found in APAF, Reales Cedulas, Doc. No. 69: cfr. also Gregorio de Santiago Vela, 
Ensayo de una biblioteca ibero-americana , II, Madrid, 1915, p. 245. 

11. A copy of this royal order exists in APAF, leg. 203/3-d. 1 page folio. 

12. On the death of Dr. Pedro Pelaez, the parish priest Manuel Peralta took charge of 
replying to the letters of the priests Guillermo Agudo and Celestino Mayordomo with 
this brief treatise: Juicio sobre el folleto titulado “ Importantisima cuestion , ” Madrid, A. 
Santa Coloma press, 1864, 4th section of p. 20. Mr. Meralta did not merit the accep- 
tance that Dr. Pedro Pelaez received: Rodriguez, Historta de la provincia OSA , IV, 
Manila, 1968, pp. 70-71. 



372 



RODRIGUEZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



13. 



14. 

15 . 



16 . 



17. 

18. 

19. 

20 . 

21 . 



22 . 



23. 



24. 



Retana wrote of Pelaez’s work: “The question of the immovability of the curacies 
under the management of the regulars was very much alive at the time.” In this im- 
portant collection he tried to prove by means of the true copies of documents that the 
friars could not legallv manage the parishes as their properties. Emilio Wenceslao E. 
Retana, Aparato bibliografico de la H is toria general de Filipinos deducido de la colleccion 
que posee en Barcelona la Cia. gral. de Tabacos de dichas islas, II, Madrid, 1906, No. 
1030. However, one must take into consideration that this Retana defended a dia- 
metrically opposed thesis in his work Folletos Filipinos , Frailes y clerigos, Madrid 2, 



1 89 1 , p. 1 33. 

Cfr. Santiago Vela, Ensayo de una biblioteca y I, Madrid, 1913, p. 36. 

Francisco Villacorta, OSA, Papeles interesantes a los regttlares, que en las islas Filipinos 
adwinistran la era de almas, Madrid. 1 826. Eleven of the issues included in the Very 
Important Questions and the Complement were later reproduced in Documents 
Interesantes acerca de la secularizacioH y amovilizacion de los auras regttlares de Filipinos, 
Madrid. 1 897, collected and approved by the Augustinian Procurator, Fr. Tomas Fito: 
cfr Rodriguez, Historia de la Prorincia OSA. Ill, Manila, 1967, pp. 405-407. 

We are convinced that had Pelaez not died in the Manila Cathedral due to the earth- 
quake of 3 June 1 863, the events of 1 S72 could have been advanced. 1 he relation- 
ship between Pelaez and the Manila Augustinians were always cordial, so much so 
that thc provincial counsel, convinced of the authors worth, leh the original manu- 
script of Hr Martinez de Zunigas Estadismo, a book printed mostly in its entirety, 
inclusive of the prologue, in the newspaper El Catolico Filipino , publication un- 
known to Retana. It was precisely Pelaez who interrupted the publication because he 
was disgusted with the articles of Frs. Mayordomo and Agudo. 

APAF, leg. 839, 1 page, copy of the royal order. 

APAF, leg. 839, pp. 1-2. 

Doamicnt^on tl^X matter, front 1 4 January ,o 17 October 1862, are found in APAF, 

The^Ertposicion^of the Ordinary Diocesans svas signed in Manila in February 1863. 
APAF, leg. 839, pp. 55-58. Cfr. Other later documents related to said Exposicion, 

APAF, leg. 839, pp. 58-118. 

Cfr. “Relacion del viaje y la jornada que el armada de su majestad hizo en el 
descubrimiento de las islas del poniente, que partio del puerto de la navidad el ano 
mil y quinientos y sesenta y cuatro anos, de que fixe por general el muy Ilustre Senor 
Miguel Lopez de I.egazpi, 1 564- 1 565,” AG I, Filipinas, 29. Published in Rodriguezs 
Historia de la Provincia OSA, XIII, Manila, 1978, pp. 406-51 1 . 

Cfr. “Derrotero del piloto Rodrigo de espinosa de la buelta de las yslas del poniente, 
1565 ” AG I, Patronato 23, 16, Folios 45-54, published the Derrotero in Rodriguez’s, 



Historia de la Provincia OSA, XIII. Manila, 1978, pp. 511-537. 

Cfr. Elviro P. Jorde, OSA, Catalogo bio-bibliografico de los Religiosos Agustinos de la 
Provincia del Santisirno Nombre de Jesus de las Islas Filipinas desde su fundacion basta 
nuestros dias, Manila, 1901, pp. 834-835. 



373 



THK PHIUPPINT. RI-VOI.l I U >N WDlihOND 



25. Cfr. Elviro R Jorde, OSA, Estado General de lo Err..:" o ex is femes en los conrentos , 
colegios , casus y mi stones ijue la Provincia de Agu turns del Samsstmo N ombre de Jesus 
tiene en Pilipinas, China, Pspana con los ditto' ref creme > ,/ at dmimstracion espiritual 
en estas islas en el ano 1896-1897, Malabon, 189 . printed by i stablccimiento Tipo 
Litogr. of the A.silo de I luerfanos de Nstra. Sra. I )e la C onsolacion. I he articles in 
reference to the Philippines: Curas Parrocos y Mtstoneros, 2 ^2; ( ornpaneros Auxiliara 
y Coadjutores , 23; Provincias y distritos administrados, 2; Parrotjums y Slisiones and 
234; Almas administradas, 2,324, 681; Cedillas de Pago. 1,052.293. 1 he Estado is 
dated 30 April 1897 in San Agustin de Manila, signed by hr. I Kiro J. I erez. The 
Estado has the approval of hr. Provincial Manuel ( iiitierrez. 

26. The first two Augustinians who passed through Japan were I rs. I )iego dc Ciuevara 
and Estacio Ortiz. They left Manila on 25 June 1602 and reached Hirado on 12 
August. Cfr. Arnulf Hartmann, ( )SA, The Augustinians in Seventeenth Century Japan, 
Marylakc, 1965, pp. 40-41; Lino Pedot, OEM, la S.C. di Propaganda Fide e le 
Missioni del Giappone, 1622-1638. Studio storico-cntico su l documenti dell archvio 
della stessa S.C. ed altri roman i, Vicenza, 1946, 55; J. Jensens, ClCM, History of the 
Catholic Church in Japan, Tokyo, 1 969, p. 1 22. 

27. There were three periods of active missionary action by the Augustinians in China. 
The first was from 1680-171 1, the second from 1717-1818, and the third from 
1879-1952. Cfr. Isacio Rodriguez, OSA and Jesus Alvarez, OSA, Historia de la 
Provincia OSA, V. Valladolid, 1993, p. 1 22. 

28. Biographical note: Agapito Aparicio, OSA, A la huena memoria del Rmo. /? Manuel 
Diez Gonzalez, Madrid, 1897, 19 pages; Santiago Vela, hnsayo de unit hihlioteca, II, 
Madrid, 1915, pp. 254-259. 

29. APAF, leg. 45 bis, f. 490rv; leg. 853/2, 1 page, original. 

30. Cfr. Jose Montero y Vidal, Historia General de Pilipinas desde el descubrimiento de 
die has Islas hast a nuestros dias. III, Madrid, 1895, pp. 584-587. 

31. For Fr. Salvador Font’s biographical readings, sec* Rodriguez, Histoiia dt la I tovincia 
OSA, IV, Madrid, 1968, pp. 319-320. 

32. Santiago Vela, Ensayo de una biblioteca, II, Madrid, 1915, p. 643. 

33. The provincial chapter was held in the Convent of San Agustin in Manila on 17 
January 1885. During this chapter, Fr. Meliton Talegon was elected provincial and 
Frs. Jose Corugedo, Simon Barroso, Francisco Arriola, Antonio Manglano, Celestino 
Fernandez- Villar, and Salvador Font were all elected definitors, APAF, leg. 21/8, Cfr. 
Rodriguez, Capitulo Provincial de 1885 de la Provincia de Pilipinas. Estudios en 
eclesiasticos y tradition misionera, en Archivo Agustiniano, 75, 1991, p. 195. 

34. Jose Rizal, Noli Me Tangere, Berlin/Berliner Bruchdruckerei-Actien-Gesselshaft/ 
Stzerinuen-Schule des Lette-Vereins [at the base of the dedication], Europe, 1886, 8 
pages, s.n. + 354 Q f the text + 2 s.n., 220 x 150 mm. We reproduce copies of the 
bibliographer Retana precisely on the date of the novel: “First edition. It was regis- 
tered in 1886 considering the date on the dedication; however, the printing was not 
finished, nor was it circulated until 1887,” Retana, Aparato bibliogmfico , III, Madrid, 
1906, No. 2,414. 



374 



RODRIGUEZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



35. 

36. 

37. 



38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 



42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 



53. 



54. 



It. Font writes on page 1 of his liver; “In writing a report by order ofYour Excellency 
on this inflammatory libel, full of falsities and calumnies....” 

This is what Santiago Vela seems to feel in reference to the year it was printed. Cfr. 
Santiago Vela, Ensayo tie taut biblioteca, II, Madrid, 1915, p. 646. 

Chapters of the book: hitroduccion [Introduction], pp. 1-2; Ataques a la Religion del 
Estado, pp. 3-5; Ataques a la Administration, a los espafioles empleados del Gobiemo y 
Tribun, ties tie justitia. pp. 5-9; Ataque al ctterpo de la Guardia Civil, pp. 9-14; Ataques 
a la integridad tie Espafta, p. 14-23; Conclusion, pp. 23-24. Fr. Font ended by saying 
on p. 23: “With the writer basing himself. Most Excellent Sir, on the texts that were 
literally copied. 1 end by presenting to the judicious and patriotic consideration of 
Your Excellency that it seems [most likely... in the best interests] that your authority 
absolutely prohibit the importation, reproduction and circulation of this pernicious 



on 



>ook in the islands. 

'fr Rctana, Aparato Bibliografico, III, Madrid, 1906, No. 2,603. 

Published in Hong Kong, 1 888, in the 4th section of p. 41. 

Without identifying the printer, although we know it was in Hong Kong, 1888, 

he 8th section of a total of 40 pages. 

, begin, „ id, “Fr. Salvador Font. . . " and end, with “free the „a, ton Iron, the slavery 
,f ,|,e friars." printed it, Hong Kong. 1 SS9. even if nothing is stated about tts being 
,„e page in mo columns in a great folio. This article cam. from Filipinos resident tn 
vladrid. directly denouncing the machinations that the recently appointed Con„- 
atio Procurator of the Filipino Attgttstinian Province, Fr. Salvador Font, planned „ 

!an,i,go X ‘'Lm A ,m. UUi« H. Madrid. 1915. 643-644. 

n,’e L't?r is date.'. 4 March , 889. Madrid, APAF. leg. 945/2-ab, 2 pages, ortginal 



"idrid, 1 5 March 1 889, APAF. leg. 945/2-ab, 2 pages, original folio. 

AF, leg. 945/2-ab, 2 pages, original folio. 

e letter is dated 22 March 1889, Manila, APAF, leg. 42, folios 125-2 • 

,re data about these extremes, APAF, leg. 42, folios 125-130. 

AF, leg. 42, folios 270-272v. 

e letter was dated 22 May 1889, in Malinta, APAF, leg. 6/0 F.27v. 

AF, leg. 1 66/3-d, ff. 37-42. 

AF, leg. 373/3-b, ff. 325-327. . 

blished in Madrid, Don Luis Aguado Press, 1891, on the 8th section of 60 pages 

nando SumenTritt replied to Fr. Fonts pamphlet in 1892, Filipinos problema 
idamental, Madrid, Progreso Tipografico Press, 1892, 8th section of 0L ' r P a § eS ’ 
., one page s.n. of corrections and two in blank, dated in Lietmentz, 26 March 
52. The article makes up vol. Ill of the La SolidaridadUhvm’ and is a harsh reply 
Fr. Font, with the same title. Santiago Vela spoke of Blumentritts article saymg 
his must not have been to Blumentritts liking who is the defender of Fi lpino 



375 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< )I l I K )N \NI ) HI Y( >M> 



progressives and the mentor of anti-Spanish policy threat. 1 ic ( Santiago Vela) pub- 
lished in 1892, using the same title, another pamphlet which proposed to refute the 
previous one. Unfortunately, in his naivete, he was unable to do anything more than 
evidently expose how the emancipatory ideas had progressed in the last years among 
the professed redeemers of the Lilipino race. Santiago \ela. hnsayo de una biblioteca , 
II, Madrid, 1915, p. 646. 

55. Cfr. Artigas y Cucva, Historia de hi lip nun, p. 556. 

56. APAF, Reales Cedulas , III, doc. 64, 2 pages, folio copy. 

57. APAF, leg. 45, folios 288-289v. 

58. We quote among others the Royal orders of 30 June IS It. APAF, leg. 853/2, one 
page, copy of the folio. Also in reference to the same are the Royal Orders of 30 June 
1814, 23 February 1821, 13 November 1833, 13 February 1834, 2 June 1835, 12 
May 1 849, 28 August 1 867, 1 5 February 1 872, 2 1 May 1 884, APAF, Reales Cedulas, 
Doc. No. 17, 32,43,46, 49, 58, 64, 73, 81 , 91 , respectively. Copies were sent by the 
government of the Philippines to the Augustinian provincial. 

59. Cfr. Arc hi vo Eclesiastico de Filip in as, XII, No. 44, 188 , pp. 339-340. 

60. Cfr. Martinez, Apuntes Historicos, Filipinos, Madrid, 1 909, pp. 43 1 -432. I he gover- 
nor-general of the islands later intervened in the argument (Manila, 23 November 
1887), APAF, leg. 42, folios 67-69, copy. C )ther articles on the same subject are Copia 
de la Contestacion del obispo de Cebu a l go bier no general sobre la translacion de los 
cadaveres a la Iglesia y honras de cuerpo presente, C .ebu, 6 I )ecember 1 887, APAF, leg. 
42, folios 65-66; A copy may be found of the request elevated to the government b) 
the archbishop of Manila and religious superiors requesting the revocation of the la\\ 
prohibiting the transfer of bodies to the church and lying in state, Manila, 1887, 
APAF, leg. 42, folios 58-6 1 v. 

61. Artigas y Cuerva, Historia de Pilipinas, Manila, 1 9 1 6, p. 558. 

62. APAF, leg. 343-4, folios 309-3 10v, the article is incorporated on pp. 303-310, copy. 
B y 17 January 1888, the governor-general of the Philippines had already been sent 
the Recta representacion y justa proteccion cjue Don Candido ( lard a de Pandacan dirigio 
y solicito al imparcial governador civil de Manila, en 17 Enero de 1 888. A little later, he 
sent the same authority the Razonable reclamacion presentada por los governadorcillosy 
principales por el pueblo de Navotas al justiciero governador civil de Manila el 3 Febrero 
1888. Both articles are published in Manifiesto cjue a la noble nacion espanola derigeu 
[sic] los leales filipinos en defensa de su honra y fide li dad gravemente vulneradas por el 
periodico “La Verdad )} de Madrid, Hong Kong, 1888, on the 4th of p. 41. Both repre- 
sentations take up pp. 25-33 and 33-4 1 respectively, copy in APAF, leg. 839, pp. 292- 
297 for the First article and pp. 298-301 for the second. 

63. Taken from Martinez, Apuntes Histdricos. Filipinas, Madrid, 1909, 431. 

64. Published on 4 and 7 August 1 889. 

65. Cfr. Wenceslao E. Retana, Noticias para la historia del periodismo filipino, in La 
Politica de Espana en Filipinas, year IV, No. 87, 1 894, p. 159. The stated articles were 
signed by the pseudonym “Fernando del Valor.’ 5 It was Mr. Guillen who, in El 



376 



RO D R I G U EZ The Date of the Philippine Revolution 



Impartial , a Madrid newspaper, printed a series of articles against Governor Emilio 
Terrero with the pseudonym “Abenhumeya.” 

66. Published on 16 April 1888. 

67. APAF, leg. 839, clipping of the newspaper article in the stated newspaper. 

68. APAF, leg. 839, clipping of the newspaper article in stated newspaper of the same 
date. 

69. APAF, leg. 839, the copy of a clipping. Another one was written by El Diario de 
Barcelona in its 29 December 1888 issue: APAF, leg. 839, a copy. 

70. A native of Medina dc Pomar, province of Burgos. He was born in 1831 and took his 
vows in the Seminary College of Augustinians in Valladolid on 28 February 1851. 
He went to the Philippines in 1 855 and ministered in the island of Panay. He died in 
the Convent of San Agustin of Manila on 13 May 1890, Cfr. Santiago Vela, Ensayo 
de una biblioteca, II. Madrid, 1915, pp. 408-409. 

71 i t has no cover other than the one described, 4th of 60 pages. 

72. APAF, leg. 43, folio 22. 

73. APAF, leg. 43, folio 22. 

74 APAF, leg. 43, folio 22. Fr. Gresa ended by saying: “I do not know who the author is, 
although there are reasons to suspect he is a Religious. This is something you yourself 
corroborate in your letter. If this is so, and the religious belongs to our Corporation, 
he would be well advised to gather all the copies because, as I have said, I consider it 

inconvenient and prejudicial. 

75. Biographical literature on Fr. Mariano Gil can be found in Joaquin Duran, OSA 
Semblanza de tin patriota , en La Propaganda Catolica, weekly magazine, Palencia, 2 
December 1903, year XXXV, No. 1834, pp. 1028-1031; 2 January 1904, year 
XXXVI No 1 835, pp. 4-9, pp. 23-32. A copy of this article is found in APAF, leg. 
342/1 Elviro P. Jorde, OSA, Catalogo, Manila, 1901, pp. 582-583; Agustin Renedo 
OSA Escritores palentinos, I, Madrid, 1919, pp. 304-320; Santiago Vela, Ensayo de 
una biblioteca. III, Madrid, 1917, pp. 1 13-116. For the taking of vows by Fr. 
Mariano Gil, see APAF, leg. 583/1, No. 131. The book of vows professed is num- 
bered by oaths taken but is not paged. For the trip to Manila, see Rodriguez, Historia 

de la Provincia OSA, XII, Manila, 1980, pp. 406-409. 

76. Cfr. Jorde, Catalogo, Manila, 1 90 1 , p. 582; Santiago Vela, Ensayo de una biblioteca, 

III, Madrid, 1917, p. 1 13. 

Duran, Semblanzas de patriota, en La Propaganda Catolica, year XXXV, o. , p- 

1031. . . . , 

78. El Centro, Valencia, Friday, 27 January 1899. This is an interesting letter from 

Morayta to M.H. del Pilar telling him of the need to propagate ideas of the Philip- 
pine independence via the newspaper La Solidaridad. 

79. APAF, leg. 238/2-a, one page, cuartilla , the entire letter is handwritten. What Pedro 
Fe told Fr. Zallo was already known to him from other cases by letters and stories 
from the Augustinians in the provinces. Before the Philippine revolution exploded, 
said provincial knew that from 1887 to the exact moment ot the discover)' of the 



377 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< )I l IK >N \M > hi Y( >NI > 



Katipunan by Fr. Mariano ( >il, as told to Mariano Alcjandrino. a Malabon native but 
married in Arayat, who was totally denounced as an indepcndcnrista. professing a 
manifest hatred for Spain. It was the August iman parish priests ot Pampanga who 
secretly followed all the movements of Mr. Alcj.uuirim > and his connections with the 
government officials of said province, giving said officials whatever impression was 
convenient, enabled him to distract their attention and leave his hands free. APAF, 
leg. 341/9, folio 26r. 

80. Fr. Agustin Fernandez’s information came from, above all. the provinces of Ilocos 
Norte, Ilocos Sur, \j 3 l Union, and Batangas. ( .fr. Jorde. ( atalogo, Manila, 1901, p. 
586; Santiago Vela, Ensayo de una btbliotcca. II Madrid. 1 N pp* HD-410; other 
corroborative information can be found in Jose M. < astillo v limenez, hi Katipunan 
o el Filibusterismo en Pilipinas , Chronica con docufncntos. autografos y fotograb ados* 
Madrid, 1897, pp, 78-79. 

81. Isacio Rodriguez, OSA, Los Agustinos eti la rcvolucwn filiptna . /< S96- IK 99, eti Archivo 
Agustiniano, 79, 1 995, pp. 1411 42. 

82. Information personally given by Leiutenant ( »arcia ( asero to the correspondent of El 
Heraldo de Madrid, who in turn published the news in the corresponding issue of 
October 1 896. 

83. APAF, leg. 34/A, 1 page folio, handwritten, leodoro Patino, a native of Dao, Capiz, 
island of Panay. Cfr. also Rodriguez, Historia dc la prom ncia ( )S A. I\ , Manila, p. 388. 

84. Duran, Semblanza de un patriota, en La Propaganda ( .atolii a, I alencia, 2 January 
1904, year XXXVI, No. 1835, p. 7. 

85. Relacion nominal de masones con sus simbolos , APAF, leg. 238/2-cl. 

86. Cfr. M A copy of Act No. 36 which states various extreme actions relative to the Phil- 
ippine conspiracy against the integrity of the fatherland. A requirement of Fr. 
Mariano Gil, parish priest ofTondo in this capital. On 1 December 1896, before 
Agustin Malfaz Illera, lawyer by profession and a Notary Public by examination in 
the Illustrious College and District of Ivlamla, iMamla, 1 December 1 N )6, APAF, 
leg. 237/1. 

87. Once, Fr. Gil left the print shop of the stated newspaper, the owner and his two com- 
panions continued searching until they found proof of the manufacture of the knives. 
Montes called Fr. Gil with the wish that he (Fr. Gil) take charge of them. I his time 
Fr. Gil declined for fear that so many comings and goings would expose his move- 
ments and cause everything he had acquired to be lost. Cfr. Note 86. 

88. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios l-2r. 

89. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 2rv. 

90. Retana was one of the writers who filled the columns of La Politica de Espana en Fil - 
ipinas with praises for Fr. Mariano Gil considering him — as Spanish society did in 
1896 — as its savior. However, in 1905, Retana, influenced by a new charisma, ac- 
cused Fr. Gil of being the one who most contributed to the loss of the Philippines. 
Retana wrote, Also in 1904 without our being able to give the exact date, the Most 
Rev. Fr. Mariano Gil, parish priest ofTondo when the Katipunan exploded, ceased to 
exist in Pamplona. Through the revelation of one of the faithful, Fr. Gil discovered, 



378 



RO D RI G U EZ The Date of the Philippine Ret solution 



in the printing shop of El Diario de Manila, the receipts of the Katipunan and imme- 
diately informed the governor. He believed that through his discovery he had saved 
the life of the colony. However, his actions, in effect, were counterproductive because 
the [people] compromised thought themselves in imminent danger of losing their 
lives and wanted to sell them [their lives] dearly, thus launching themselves [into the 
fray]. Fr. Gil was so obsessed with his role as savior of the country that he practically 
competed with the authorities. He sent his photograph to various newspapers and 
became friends with the most conspicuous of writers; even going to the extent of 
having the fact that it was he, exclusively he, who discovered the Katipunan, be writ- 
ten in a notarial act. As such, he was the savior of Spain in Oceania. [In reality] Fr. Gil 
was one of those who most contributed to its loss.” W.E. Retana, Archivo del bibliofilo 
filipbw , Vol. V, Madrid, 1905, pp. 509-510. Santiago Vela replied to Retana, Ensayo 
de un a biblioteca , III, Madrid, 1917, p. 114, with these words: . there you have the 

history of the Philippine insurrection that praised him [Fr. Mariano Gil], dedicating 
one of its most brilliant pages to the narrative of that event, despite how badly it may 
suit the adulators of today and detractors of yesterday from among the Malay race 
who, in betraying their beliefs and the Spanish blood, presume to negate its impor 
tance.” 

91. APAF, leg. 237/2, folio 3rv. 

92. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 5v-6r. 

93. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 8v-94. 

94. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 8v-9v. 

95. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 10r-l lr. 

96. APAF, leg. 237/2. 

97. APAF, leg. 237/2, folio 18r. 

98. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 20v-21r. 

99. APAF, leg. 237/2, folios 36v-37v. 

100. APAF, leg. 237/2, folio 56rv. 

101. APAF, leg. 237/2, folio 64r. . . 

102. The Consignas above were all signed by the President of the Executhe Commission, 
Bolivar; the Grand Master Adjutant, Gradacio Bruno; the Secretary, Galileo. The 
Consignas were published in Jimenez y Castillo, El Katipunan o Filibusterismo, pp 
115-116. 



379 



V 









THE REVOLUTION UNDER 
WESTERN AND ASIAN EYES 



The Philippine Revolution in 
The Netherlands and the Indies Press, 1896/97 

A Study in “Localization” 



Otto van den Muijzenberg 

Centei for Asian Studies, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 



T he Philippine Revolution of 1896 is unknown to the Dutch public. 

Awareness of the Philippines is limited to events like the 1986 EDSA Revolu- 
tion the Pinatubo eruption, the fact of Spanish colonization, and perhaps some 
touristic notions of the “sun, sand and sex” variety. High school textbooks of his- 
tory refer to the country, if at all, only in connection with American imperialist 
expansion around the turn of the century. If this is the case in our time of go a - 
ization,” electronic communication, mass travel, and migration, we may suppose 
the information on Philippine events available to our ancestors around the turn o 

the century was next to zero. . . D , ... 

There seem indeed few reasons for interest in developments in the 1 hilip- 

pines among the Dutch in the late 19th century: Spain was far from Holland, 
Manila from Batavia in the Netherlands East Indies. The colonial economies were 
similar, producing rice, coconuts, sugar, and tobacco, and dependent on the west 
for most industrial products. Consequently, mutual trade was negligi e. 

Thus I was surprised to come across in a Dutch provincial newspaper a rather 
detailed account of the August 1 896 Philippine uprising. If such a report could be 
found in such an obscure newspaper, what might one find in the national newspa- 
pers? What was the Netherlands Indies press reaction to the revolutionary develop- 
ments in the Spanish colony? On the occasion of the centennial of the 1896 Phil- 
ippine Revolution these questions are pursued. The result is an admittedly Euro- 
centric” paper which hopefully can throw some light not only on the level of infor- 



383 



THE PHILIPPINE Ki V< )I l IK >\ \M > h! Yi >Nl > 



mation, but also on the attitudes and the interpretative framework of our grand 
parents’ generation insofar as the first Asian national resolution is concerned. 



The Dutch and Netherlands Indies Press 



Socioeconomic Development of the Netherlands After JS50: 
Emancipation and “Pillarization” 



Holland was a rather late “modernizer. An agricultural and commercial!) oriented 
country it lagged behind Britain, Belgium, Prance, and < icrmam in the industrial- 
ization process, which started only around 1HS0 (Brugmans 1 ) 6, De Jonge 
1968). The political system developed into a democracy in several stages from 
1 848 onward, but popular sovereignty was confirmed onlv in 1 SOS. w hen the king 
had to give up the last of his decision-making powers. A year laid the abolition of 
the press-seal led to a rapid increase in local and national newspapers. 

Democratization in the Netherlands took a peculiar form. I mancipation in 
the form of political participation of increasingly larger elec torates coincide wit 
the crystallization of ideologically oriented conglomerates of social organization, 
the so-called “pillars.” This “pillarization” process showed in all walks of life. Most 
people reckoned themselves to be members of the Protestant, the Roman Cat lolic, 
the Socialist, or the “Liberal” pillar, or even of a Protestant sub-pillar (Dutch Re- 
formed, Calvinist, Orthodox Reformed). Apart from attending church or meet- 
ings they congregated in their own parties; sent their children to special schools; 
joined ideologically tinted trade unions, soccer clubs, housing societies; married 
partners of their own orientation; and read a newspaper in their own ideological 
direction. 

Politically the system was held together mainly by deals among the leader- 
ship in what Lyphart has called a consensual democracy (I.yphart 1 968), while the 
rank-and-file were supposed to keep to themselves and as far away as possible from 
andersdenkenden (those with another ideology). 

In this process of democratization cum pillarization the emerging free press 
played an important role. Party-cum-pillar leaders had their own mouthpieces and 
used these newspapers to keep their followers informed as well as in line, parti) 
by attacking the opinions and activities of leaders of the other “pillars.” 



Localization” of Foreign News: 

Dutch Nationalism and the Ideological Struggle 

Considering the remoteness of the Philippines one might suppose that foreign 
news like the 1896 developments in Manila and Luzon would be reported in neu- 
tral terms. After all, what Dutch emotions could be touched by referring to the 
faraway Filipino-Spanish struggles? Or what Dutch interests could be influenced 
by the same? 



384 



NU’IIZI NBI- 1U The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



This paper will show that such a supposition is not wholly correct and that 
the developments in the Philippines were not only reported in considerable detail, 
but also “localized” to some extent in the Dutch and Dutch-language Indies press. 
Not only were the news items sometimes formulated in far-from-neutral language, 
but the whole uprising was also used in a barely disguised nationalist discourse as 
well as in the struggle between the ideological tendencies referred to as “pillars.” 
The nationalist discourse should he understood in the light of the Dutch 



colonial possessions. In the last quarter of the century Holland was expanding its 
sway over the territorv that is now Indonesia. For centuries Dutch colonial power 
had been limited to Java and part of the Moluccas and North Sulawesi, but the 
Napoleonic wars had shown the vulnerability of the Dutch position to competi- 
tion from other colonial powers, in particular the British. Starting with Sumatra 
the “Outer Islands” were successively brought under Dutch control during the 
19th century by “gentle persuasion” or force. W^seling has pointed out that the 
Dutch refused to regard this as a form of imperialism. Imperialism was what the 
great powers did “in their abject but inevitable game of power politics.’ The Dutch 
in their own view only extended their control over what was portrayed as a legiti- 
mate colonial heritage dating back to the early days of the Verenigde Oostindische 
Compagnie (VOC). In this self-righteous view the Dutch preferred to see them- 
selves as “a small but peaceful nation... cultivating a policy of neutrality, mutua 
respect and the promotion of trade and progress" (Wessehng, 1989: 65). 

Still, the bloody colonial wars in West Sumatra, Aceh, Lombok, and Bali, tor 
instance, did not fail to arouse rhetoric about the righteousness of Hollands po i- 
cies, the courage of its troops, and the abjectness of its adversaries, w ic s\as itt e 
different from that in the British or French press. Coupled with the we are a small, 
innocuous nation, just doing what is right” message came the self-conscious sug- 
gestion that Holland, because of its large colony in the Indies and its naval tradi- 
tion, belonged to the middle-sized powers of the world and should be respected as 
such. This also led to more or less extreme opinions on the other imperi ist po 
ers’ scramble for Africa (in particular against Britain in the Boer War), Jingoism in 
the U.S., claims of Oceanic and Chinese semi-colonial rights } tie erman 
Empire, and the emergence of Japan as a colonial power. 

How then did the journalists of 1896 and 1897 interpret the P 1 ippine re\o 
lution? Did they appreciate the rebellion against Spain as one of a series o rou 
tine” uprisings which would confront any colonial power sooner or ater. r 1 
they recognize it as the start of a national revolution, as a follow-up o tie wars o 
independence in Latin America earlier in the century? Did they allude to potenti 
consequences of a successful national revolution in the Philippines for the Dutci 
colonial system in what was to become Indonesia? Were the Philippine de\e op 
ments discussed in connection with potential shifts in the international geopoliti 

cal arena? w t . 

The “localization of Philippine news” in connection with the pillarize 
character of late 19th-century Dutch society may be hypothesized to relate to the 



385 



THE PHILIPPINE RLV( >1 l I K )N AND HI Y< >ND 



strong anticlerical overtones of the Philippine revolution. 1 low did the various 
ideological/religious tendencies in the Dutch press react to news, it any, on the at- 
tacks on priests, churches, and convents in the Philippine islands? 



The Special Character of the Indies Press 

Unlike the Netherlands press, the Dutch-language newspapers in the Netherlands 
Indies lacked sharp ideological divisions. 1 hey were all liberal, it this term is 
taken to mean having a strong aversion to government interference with private 
initiatives. The term should not be understood to stand tor progress or ethical no- 
tions” (Hoogerwerf 1990 : 59 ). Also, while the press at home was free to discuss 
whatever the editor deemed useful, the Netherlands Indies press was limited in its 
reporting or voicing of opinions on political issues. I mil 1906 printed matter had 
to be brought to the censor before it could be released, and even after that date the 
government interfered regularly by suing journalists tor inciting to mutual hatred 
between races” and subversion. 1 The tropical press tended to be more sensational- 
ist as well: u to be heard in a society without any other possibility to manifest one- 
self the press tended to shout loudly, Hoogerwerf writes about what is called the 
tropical press style” (Hoogerwerf 1990: 103). 



Sources of Information for the Dutch 
and Netherlands Indies Press 

What would be permitted in print, and what not, was never very clear to editors 
nor, for that matter, to censors in the Netherlands Indies. Apart from that, the 
Netherlands Indies reading public could freely import uncensored materials from 
the Netherlands. Journalists could evade censorship to some extent by using 
lengthy quotations from Dutch papers. The Indies newspapers also borrowed from 
the Straits and Hong Kong papers, which were controlled as well. 

Apart from the Indies press’ use of Dutch newspapers (not vice-versa!) there 
were no notable differences between the Dutch and Indies newspapers’ sources of 
information. Naturally, Spanish official statements and newspapers like the pro- 
government Heraldo and the oppositional Imparcial were important sources. Once 
in a while Philippine papers (El Comercio , El Diario de Manila) were mentioned. 
Press publications from elsewhere in East and Southeast Asia like the (Overland) 
China Times , the Hongkong Telegraphy and the Straits Times (Singapore) were occa- 
sionally cited. Few newspapers had their own correspondents in foreign capitals. 
The Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant (NRC) was an exception, having correspon- 
dents in London, Paris, and Berlin. Dutch newspapers mostly paraphrased the tele- 
grams from European news agencies and articles in papers mainly from Britain, 
France, and Germany: Havas , Wolff's Bureau (Berlin), the Times (London), the 
Manchester Guardian, Frankfurter Zeitung, Vossische Zeitung, Der Post, Journal des 
Debats , Independence Beige , New York Herald, etc.). 



386 



M l 1 1 / 1 N BF Rc The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and hidies Press 



In the reporting on the Philippine revolution, apart from one statement in 
September 1 896, official views of the Netherlands authorities are strikingly absent. 
Holland had a consulate in Manila since 1867, which became operational in the 
1880s, but apparently no newspaperman ever thought of requesting the consul to 
report directly about the situation. In fact, he wrote detailed annual reports about 
the state of the Philippines, which were officially published" in The Hague, al- 
though delayed b v at least halt a year. 

"in the last decade of the 19th century Holland had 62 daily newspapers, the 
Indies not more than eight (Schneider 1968, 164: FurnivaU 1939: 415). For the 
present research only a few dailies could be perused. Many of the cencurv-old pa- 
pers have partly or completely disappeared, but even then going through two years 
of all of the remaining would have been too great a task to be performed within the 

limited time available. , . 

I checked three Dutch newspapers. The NRC was liberal, national m scope, 

a “quail, v paper." Dr W™ » conservative Catholic daily, appearing m 
Amsterdam, national in scope. 1, was very vocal in the “pillatization struggle or 
nower between ideological streams. We may expect the paper to show particular 
attention to if not st mpatltv for the developments tit the only Christian country 

da,ly ^*et;:,'al ZtSAw was published daily in Batavia under 
the conditions indicated abovu 

11 • * r H foreign -affairs chronicles (like the Dutch 

lications, wee ^ > maga/i c, ^ y wor k I found very little evidence of 

WereUtkroniek), and cultural journals. In ea mat A few articles 

interest in the Philippines in such publications (Mui)zenberg 1992). A tew articles 

wem found, for insSicc. bv the orientalist Hendrik Kern and novelist Augusta de 
Wit in Tijdschrifi voor Nederbwdscb-buUe. Broader Dutch interest in the p 
pines emerged only after the Americans entered the scene. 

The Story of the Philippine Revolution in the Dutch/Indies Press 

Considering the dependence upon secondary sources one cannot expect any new 
facts” on the Philippine revolution to emerge from a perusal oi the Dutch or Indies 
press. But we need to know what (actual information was available to the newspa- 
per readers of 1896-1 897 (the news) before we can discuss the way in which this 
was reported (the views). 



387 



T HE PHILIPPINE REV< >1 l I K >N \NI > hi ^ < >M > 



The details of the Philippine revolution being familiar to the participants in 
this conference a brief summary of what was communicated in the Dutch papers 
will suffice here. A more detailed survey of items, which is not included here, shows 
that papers varied in what they reported, the NRC carrying most items, closely 
followed by the JB and the PDA, with the I >e ///r/ greatly lagging behind in the 
intensity of reporting. 

Spain , Cuba , and the Philippines 

The Dutch press had reported in some detail about the ( uban troubles in which 
the Spaniards had become entangled. I his was first of all reported as part of Span- 
ish domestic politics. Later the involvement of American adventurers and con- 
comitant diplomatic problems received more attention. 

The revolt in the Philippines was seen as a further complication of Spanish 
domestic troubles, which included, apart from colonial affairs, an unstable politi- 
cal climate, with conservatives and liberals changing places frequently. Violent 
Carlists and anarchists added to Spain’s distress. A floundering economy came 
under even heavier pressure from the colonial wars, which resulted in huge debts as 
well as withdrawal of manpower from agriculture and other economic pursuits at 
home. 

On 21 August 1 896, the Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant ' printed a telegram 
revealing the discovery of a separatist conspiracy in the Philippines on the 19th of 
that month. It reported house searches and the arrest of 2 1 suspects, Freemasons 
among them. The shock of the news was said to have caused a moment of national 
solidarity in Spain, where the opposition declared its support for any measure the 
government would take “to defend the integrity of the country." In the following 
days some issues demanded attention: the matter of foreign involvement in the 
‘conspiracy/’ and the mobilization of the few troops available in the Philippines, 
most of which happened to be campaigning in /Vlindanao. I he loyalty of the colo- 
nial army was in doubt; as a consequence a volunteer guard of civilians was orga- 
nized in Manila and troops concentrated in the capital and Cavite town. Jvlartial 
law was then proclaimed in Manila and seven provinces. 

The first large-scale armed conflict (in San Juan) is reported to have resulted 
in 60 rebel and 40 Spanish dead. In the early days of September the focus shifts to 
Cavite 4 province, although the brief occupation of San Isidro in Nueva Ecija is also 
mentioned (NRC 8/9, PDA 9/9) as well as a quickly suppressed mutiny in 
Magalang, Pampanga, reported in the PDA (1 1/9). 

Although the presence of about 7,000 armed rebels in Cavite and Manila is 
reported in the first week of September, in the following days the Spaniards seem 
to be regaining control. Victories over rebel troops in Bacoor, Silang, costing doz- 
ens of Filipino and several Spanish lives seem to support General Tarrados report 
to Governor-General Blanco that the rebellion has been suppressed (NRC 15/9). 
The next day, however, the news is different. Dutch editors start formulating the 



388 



Ml ' i I / IN Bl RC The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



news on Philippine developments in an increasingly guarded fashion as they are 
confronted bv a rapid succession of such contradictory reports. 

During September the Spaniards appear to gradually lose control of Cavite 
province. Armed incidents like the occupation of eight “villages” (towns), a three- 
day attack on the Rechazada (or Rechaede?) fortress, the “murdering by negroes” of 
the Spanish pastor of Santa Cruz, plundering of Spanish homes in Rosario illus- 
trate the violent character of the revolution. 



Violence is reported on both sides, and Dutch papers make mention of such 
Spanish abuses as the “black hole affair,” where 1 80 rebels were thrown into a dun- 
geon without windows, as a result of which 37 of them died in one night. Or the 
order given to a captain to transport rebels to Yap with the explicit message that he 
would not be held accountable for missing persons. Forms of symbolic violence 
such as public executions as a pastime for Spanish ladies and gentlemen or leaving 
corpses of rebels (some of them shot in the back) in the streets of Manila, are also 

mentioned. . , 

Notwithstanding soothing messages from Manila to Madrid, the Spanish 

government immediately started dispatching troops to the east. The Montserrat 
carried 2,000 troops (reported in Singapore on 24 September). Another vessel with 
2 800 men left Cadiz around that time, the cruiser Alfonso Kill following with 
1 500 troops in early November. By the end of that month the Spanish troops 
reached 16,000 (from an initial 3,000), and a further buildup to 30,000 Spanish 
soldiers by February 1 897 is announced in mid-December (JB 18/12; DT 19/12). 
This brought the armed forces under Spanish command, including 20,000 hi- 
pino soldiers, to 50,000; there were about the same number of rebels, the PDA 

Accounts contradict each other about the leadership and organization of the 
rebellion. Some suggest a thorough form of organization and preparation, some- 
times accompanied by references to foreign support or even leadership. Revolu- 
tionary leaders are variously said to come from all walks of life (JB _9 9 , rom t 
university in Manila (JB 28/12), or to be mainly mestizos. Theactive involvement 
of women was apparently so striking that observers report on it several times (3 
9; 1/10; 9/1 1). The leadership remained largely anonymous in these early days. 
Only a few rich among those taken to jail and executed are specifically mentione 
Valenzuela, Salmyento, Sylvestre, Peralta, and Rojas, a rich banker. 

It is only in the second half of November that the name of Andres Boni acio 
appears, when he is reported by the Diario de Manila to tour the country er 
having been proclaimed King by the rebels, going around with grotesque pomp 
(NRC 21/11, DT, and PDA 23/11). Emilio Aguinaldo’s name appears only in Feb- 
ruary 1897. Some attributes attesting to the striving for independence are revolu- 
tionary flags (NRC 20/9) and papers found with an official masthead; Republi- 
can Government of the Philippines” (NRC 30/9). 

There is little doubt about the goals of the revolutionaries: they want the fri- 
ars and the Spanish government out. Although background articles call the friars 



389 



THE PH 1 1 IP PI NT. HI V< )I l II() 



i > hi \i >n i > 



the Spanish colonial systems key figures, and consequently the rebels main en- 
emies, they receive relatively little attention in the news items. I heir expulsion and 
killing in Cavite province is subject to some exaggerated reporting, the Manila 
authorities tell the journalists early in ( Jctobcr: some Manila newspapers had sug- 
gested that 100 Spanish priests in Cavite had been tortured and killed, but the real 
number was only 14 (NRC 1/12). 

The archbishop of Manila blessed the banner of the Volunteers Guards and 
warned of an expansion of the rebellion (NRC Til 1 . Several months later he 
would be formally commanded by the government to return to Madrid after hav- 
ing refused twice to respond to a gentle invitation < |B 2S/ i). hr. Mariano Gil is 
cited in November 1896 as the savior of the Spaniards when he received a token 
of appreciation for his “patriotic behav ior in breaking the secret of the confes- 
sional in August. 

At the end of the conflict, friars are said to be hated s< > much that the Malolos 
church was violated and desecrated to the extent that it had to be cleaned and 
blessed anew (JB 24/1 1/97, citing /:'/ Comercio). But that is about all the Dutch 
readers are told about the friars and the church in this period. 

It is government upon which most attention is focused. Governor-General 
Blanco is variously regarded as a weak, cowardlv person, who hides in his palace 
(JB 5/10) or as a wise strategist who would have caused a massacre among Span- 
iards had he given in to pressure to immediately field his troops without waiting 
for reinforcements. I he governors predicament is marked several times: popular- 
ity of the rebels, lack of trained Spanish troops, doubts about the reliability of the 
indigenous troops, disappearance of those informal civil servants the Spanish 
parish priests — from rebellious areas, a sagging economy. Undoubtedly Blanco did 
not make himself popular with the Span ish hard-1 1 ners ei t her by stating that he de- 
plored cruelties committed by his forces, including the black hole affair referred 
to above (Java Bode 21/10 quoting the Overland (Jutm Alail). 

Early in October rumors about Blancos replacement appear amidst news 
about the confinement of the rebellion to Cavite province and Novaliches. Span- 
ish consolidation in Batangas, victory at Pansipit River (NRC 30/1 0) and Fanauan, 
and the beginning of a campaign in Batangas and Cavite by Blanco and General 
Echaluce, are said to have resulted in the re-occupation of Nasugbu in Batangas. 
The rebels lost 114, the Spaniards two, indicating the use of overwhelming fire 
power against a weak or largely unarmed rebel force/’ 

At the same time the papers in October and November are full of privately 
transmitted suggestions that the Spaniards are losing out in the Cavite-Batangas 
region. Furthermore, it appears that Fighting and ambushing, including the derail- 
ing of a train took place in other provinces like Nueva Ecija and Bulacan (JB 5/12; 
8/12), while uprisings, mutinies, desertions, and prison escapes. are mentioned in 
various papers in Sulu (29/10), Paragua (Palawan) (1 1/12), Lanao (18/12), and 
Cavite Viejo (11/12). 



390 



M 1' 1 1 /. I N* B l Rl The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



In October, hard-liner General Polavieja del Castillo is first announced as 
Blanco's vice governor-general, and then as his successor (NRC 23/10, resp. 8/12). 
By refusing to meet the press upon arrival in Manila, Polavieja immediately creates 
the impression that he means business and will cjuell the rebellion without much 
ado (or scruples) (DT 1 1/12). In December 1896 and January 1897 the newspa- 
pers report several setbacks for the Spanish forces (Noveleta 29/12; Pasig 6/1), as 
well as the capture of many rebels and the exiling of hundreds if not thousands. 
Dozens of executions by decapitation and shooting in Manila are reported: more 
than 20 in Cavite (NRC 20/12), four in Manila on the same date, 11 or 13 are 
reported on 4 and 6/ 1 /97, not counting the killing ot Dr. Jose P. Rizal. Rizal is in- 
variable (though incorrectlv, as the editors should have known) called one of the 
main leaders or heads of the rebellion. Closer to truth, he may have been “the soul 
of the rebellion" (NRC 30/12, 31/12, 1/1/97). The contemporary dailies hardly 
note the significance of Rizal for the independence movement, as they focus on the 
immediate fact of his execution. The NRC writes: 



Over Dr. Rizal s execution lies a highly romantic veil. First, one can 
imagine what torture it must have been when the Jesuit fathers were trying to 
wres t from him for twenty-four hours the secrets ot the conspiracy and tie 
uprising. And then Rizal, upon his explicit wish, was united in pardon in mat- 
rimonv with his mistress, a woman from Canada (NRC 1/1). 



To which the JB adds: 



(lie) married one and a half hours before his execution with an English girl 
from Hongkong, who had come to the doctor with her foster father, who was 
treated at length by the doctor for his eyes. After the death ot that tester father 
she had stayed on with the doctor (JB 16/1). 



The papers suggest that it was felt that too many official killings were carried 
out in Manila, so much so that the government resorted to “decentralization o 
the court-martialing of prisoners, resulting in 13 executions in Camarmes (on 4/ 1 ) 
and other unnamed places, where 100 prisoners were shot in tlig at. entton is 
made of (Pedro) Roxas and three priests, a notary-public, and another rich banker 



among those executed. . . . > 

Typically for the sensational Indies press, painter Juan LunaNovicio receive 

extra editorial attention in the JB (20/1) because of his fame as an artist who por- 
trayed bloody scenes in his paintings as well as because of his violent past (having 
killed his wife and mother-in-law in Paris). Luna is reported arrested and even 
shot in October (JB 21/10), but later appears to be alive. Then the paper predicts 
that he would receive the death sentence, but he is condemned to 20 years impris- 
onment “after renouncing freemasonry to which the rebellion is generally attrib- 
uted” (JB 1/2). 



391 



THK PMII iriMNI HI V< )|l IK )N \M ) HI Y< )NI ) 



“Glorious victories’ reported by the official press in these months are too 
often followed by announcements of the need of new troops or lists of Spanish 
casualties to be convincing either to the foreign press, or foreign governments. 

Britain, Japan, and Germany apparently read the situation in late 1896 as 
deteriorating to such an extent that they sent several men of war to be prepared for 
evacuation of their citizens from Manila (8/1 1; 28/ 1 1; 20 / 12 ; Britain); 9/1 1; 27/ 

1 1 ; 20/ 1 2 [Japan]; 28/ 11 [C iermanyj ) and to sh< >w their flag, as C icrman Admiral 
Tirpitz was openly proclaiming (NRC . 22/1 2). 

In mid-January the Nieuwe Rottcrrbnnsi he ( nin\mt guardedly quotes official 
communiques from the Spanish side that things go slightly better in the Philip- 
pines.” It says the Spaniards had 180 dead and *30 wounded since August 1896, 
the rebels, 7, 1 00 dead, 400 exiled, and 2, 1 00 arrested ( N R( . 16/1). Amnesty offers 
by Polavieja are said to yield results, and a massive campaign in ( Cavite against the 
rebel strongholds was being prepared, to be executed with increasing success in 
February and March. However, intermittent news about Spanish defeats and 
deadly ambuscades as well as general demoralization and refusal to fight by newly 
arrived Spanish recruits put these stories into perspective. 

Still, to the Dutch reader the news in February that Kmilio Aguinaldo, “the 
leader of the rebels in Gavite,” was offering the submission of his troops under 
condition of amnesty for all rebels and the refusal by Polavieja to react to this must 
have appeared a confirmation of a strongly improved Spanish position (NRC 2/2; 
DT 3/2; PDA 3/2). 

From mid-February onward a victorious, if bloody, campaign is reported 
under General Lachambre, in which the rebels successively lost control of positions 
in Santo Domingo, a fort near Imus, Silang, and Dasmarinas. Salitran, rebel-capi- 
tal Imus, Noveleta, Binacayan, Cavite- Viejo, and Rosario, which was destroyed 
completely by navy bombardment, were conquered in March. (San Francisco de) 
Malabon follows. 

Commander-in-Chief Polavieja, however, apparently did not feel very confi- 
dent about these victories. Several armed fights in other provinces, where his troops 
lost, and large-scale arson in Manila suggest that lasting suppression of the rebel- 
lion was still far off. He asked for 20 battalions of troops to consolidate Spanish 
power, which is considered tantamount to his having lost touch with reality (PDA 
6/3). He is said to be sick early in March. 

Palace politics somewhat delayed Polavieja’s succession by the more flexible 
General Primo de Rivera, but finally the Queen-Regent had to sign the replace- 
ment order (NRC 13/3; DT 16/3). Before leaving Manila, Polavieja granted am- 
nesty to 24,000 rebels and released several prisoners. The papers quote him as call- 
ing the Philippine Islands “quiet.” Apparently Polavieja was playing politics be- 
cause on the way home he reiterated to Singapore journalists that the rebellion 
could not be crushed with the troops available. 

I he Heraldo a few days later indeed reports 23,000 rebels still active in the 
mountains, while the fight for Naic, Cavite, in early May is said to have resulted in 



392 



Ml ' 1 1 / 1 NBI Rl . The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



the deaths of 20 Spaniards and 500 rebels. Private news accounts continue to paint 
a much less rosy picture than government and government-controlled sources. The 
economy is said to be in a slump, with poor rice and sugar harvests. 

After two months without Philippine news, the papers note bitter fights in 
July and August. Aguinaldo issued a proclamation of a less than revolutionary na- 
ture demanding representation rather than independence, but still insisting on the 
removal ol the friars (JB 19/8). 

From September onward the rebels (who still number about 10,000) are in- 
creasinglv referred to as brigands. Several violent encounters are reported, such as 
one in October when 287 rebels and 35 Spaniards were killed and the two-day 



battle of Arayat at the end of November (JB 25/10; JB 22/12). 

Uncertainty as to the veracity of Spanish victory claims, about the sincerity 
of reform proposals, as well as about rumors about negotiations reigns in the pa- 
pers in November and earlv December. This is related to bewilderment among 
Dutch editors about Spanish domestic politics after the assassination of conserva- 
tive prime minister Canovas in August. As late as 12 December 1897, strict mea- 
sures of confiscation, forced concentration of population, a pass system, and exile 
are reported to have been taken by Primo de Rivera (JB 22/12). Consequently, the 
news that Aguinaldo had ordered his followers to surrender arms by Christmas 
1897 (18/12) as well as his departure to Hong Kong (PDA 30/12) must have come 
as a surprise to attentive Dutch readers. The Philippines then disappears from the 

Dutch press until May 1898. 

One thing is clear: even if the revolutionary movement had not succeeded in 
establishing anlndepcndent Philippine republic, the Spanish colonial regime had 
been greatly undermined and was kept in place only at enormous cost in lives and 
money Madrid had to ship to the colony no less than 27,768 soldiers, 881 officers, 
nine generals, 43,100 guns, 24 cannon, 24,910 kg powder, 21,726,585 rounds of 
ammunition, and 30,604 grenades (up to September 1897, PDA 11/10). From the 
figures in the newspapers one cannot reliably calculate the number of Spanish and 
Filipino lives lost. Disregarding problems like double reporting and the indication 
of all colonial troops as "Spanish" while the majority of men were Filipinos, the 
figures would be at least 800 soldiers on the Spanish side killed in action and 718 
wounded. 8 Surely sickness laid low much greater numbers of Spanish military, 
some of whom are described by the JB on 25 October 1897: 



The Spanish steamship P. de Satrushegui arrived on the ninth of this 
month in Colombo from Manila, destination Barcelona. It was full of sick, 
invalid and heavily wounded. During the trip [Manila-Colombo] seven pas- 
sengers died and fifty were badly ill on arrival. 

Numbers of Filipino insurgents killed and wounded are probably even less 
reliable. Addition of figures mentioned in the Dutch papers until the end of 1897 
leads to 6,781 killed in action, and “many” wounded. But the NRC mentions 






393 



THE PMII 11 * 1*1 N I HI V< )I I I K >N AM > Bn< >M ) 



7,100 rebel dead as of 16 January 1 89” (against 1 80 on the Spanish side). What- 
ever the official figure, it excluded the thousands of civilians who died during bom- 
bardment or due to sickness. ' 

On the financial side, early on in the conflict Madrid proclaimed that the 
Philippines had to carry the whole burden of the war. It floated at least twice a loan 
of a total of 300 million pesetas, guaranteed by Philippine c ustoms duties (D 1 16/ 
4; DT 1/7), but no estimate of the total cost was found. 

Views: Translation of Philippine News in Dutch Categories 

Having outlined the story of the revolution as it could have been constructed by a 
diligent newspaper reader in the Netherlands we now come to the question ot how 
the news fit in with the political and mental “maps of such a reader. 

Some forms of appropriation or localization of the Philippine revolution may 
be indicated. By these terms 1 want to indicate the reformulation of foreign infor- 
mation into terms familiar to the readers and appealing to knowledge and emo- 
tions that may have less to dr) with the Philippines than with the Dutch or Indies 
political climate. 

The fact of the Philippine rebellion against Spain was, for instance, related to 
Dutch fears of shifting power relations in the Asia- Pacific region (5.1). The 
handling of the rebellion by the Spaniards also underscored Dutch feelings of 
rivalry and superiority vis-a-vis the Iberian colonizers if not the Spaniards as a 
people (5.2). What happened in the Netherlands Indies' northern neighbor was 
used as a weapon in an ongoing colonial debate about the wisdom of converting 
Indonesians to Christianity. This debate was waged also in the Netherlands among 
liberals, conservatives, and representatives of the various religious “pillars" (5.3). 

Preoccupation with Geopolitical Dangers 
for the Dutch Position in Asia 

The papers reviewed usually had one foreign news page, where events in European 
countries and their colonies were presented in the order of their perceived impor- 
tance: in general, west and central European countries received most of the space. 
This did not prevent the Boer War in South Africa, the Greek-Turkish Wtr, and 
closer to the Dutch interest, and on a different page, the Aceh war from receiving 
extensive treatment as well. 

Foreign Plotters? 

Immediately upon breaking the news of the rebellion in Manila the papers 
started speculating about the revolutionary movement’s supposed foreign connec- 
tions. For some time any wild guess seemed worthy of publication. Supposed 
plotters of foreign nationality are reported arrested by the Spanish government: a 
French national who was secretary to the Spanish-Filipino association in Madrid 



394 



M t ’ 1 1 / 1 X IU R( i The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



(PDA 26/8), an American who was supposedly president, secretariat, and financial 
manager all in one (PDA 2/9). Later on mention is made of deportation of for- 
eigners (Germans, Americans) to the Carolines. 



Japan? 

More remarkable were suggestions that the Japanese government was behind 
the uprising. 1 his fit in with a trend in the foreign-affairs debate in the Nether- 
lands. Only two years earlier a well-known professor of Japanese had addressed the 
Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences with a lecture outlining a long-term plan 
of the Japanese empire to expand southward. Professor G. Schlegel referred to a 
request as early as the 1 6th century from the Japanese emperor to the pope to allow 
him a free hand in Asia. Just before the Philippine uprising the Dutch paper 
Algemeen HandelsbLuic ntertained the fear of Japanese expansion in an article, sub- 
sequently copied by the Java Bode, which touched on a range of topics from Japa- 
nese tendencies to overseas expansion to Japanese maldistribution of population 
and xenophobia: 



Now that Japan has acquired Formosa it is casting its glance already on 
the Philippines and Farther India, including Siam. “And who can predict how 
far they will proceed if one lets them go?” th e Java Bode ominously added (JB 
8/8/96). Later on, the same Schlegel proposed an international action to wrest 
Formosa from the Japanese and offer it to the Dutch who were supposedly the 
most neutral trustees, and due to 1 7 th-century trading contacts well equipped 
to govern the island! Even the Java Bode which printed the story responded 
after a few days in an editorial: “ I he alarmists have not yet disappeared from 
the world” (JB 8/1 1). 



Still, the same paper makes much of a supposed offer of die Philippines to 
the mikado by the revolutionaries, who reportedly petitioned him with 20,000 sig- 
natures obtained under false pretext (NRC 5/9: JB 30/9). To reinforce the sugges- 
tion of a “Japanese connection” some rebel leaders who were apprehended by the 
Spaniards apparently revealed Japan as their destination when they tried to escape 
from the islands, and declared that the Japanese had promised to recognize the 
revolutionaries as a belligerent force once the rebellion spread to all provinces 
(PDA 4/12; 26/1/97). 

From the German press comes suggestions that Japan had financed the sepa- 
ratist Kalayaan publication that circulated in the country “on a large scale” (PDA 
10/9). According to the Vossische Zeitung, with regard to the Philippines Japan 
played the role of the U.S. in Cuba. One could, it says, expect freebooter expedi- 
tions to the Philippines anytime (PDA, 1 0/9). do add to the plausibility of a Japa- 
nese plot” Professor Ferdinand Blumentritt is quoted as having written that the 
Japanese were highly popular among the Filipinos: 



395 



THI*. PM 1 1 IPIMNT HI V< )I t !H \NDIUN<>M) 



...if the Filipinos should be successful in wrest i ni: themselves from Spain, they 
would undoubtedly place themselves under l.ip.ms hcgrmonv \nd in this cir- 
cumstance a significant hint lor I uropes colonial powers is contained. 1 hey 
have a vested interest in the status quo in 1 irther Asia, alter all ( NRC 3/9). 

In Batavia, the JB showed itself more anxious than the* motherland daily press 
and referred at length to Blumentritt s contribution to the ( itrni.ui periodical Crlol/us . 10 

...we cannot remain indifferent to this rebellion particularly because warlike 
Japan is pulling the strings here... I he latest military success ot the Japanese 
[in the Japancsc-Chinese war of 189*i/93j has resulted in a higher sense of self- 
consciousness among the population, for them the lapanese arc* brothers, an 
opinion cultivated bv the Spanish cthnolc >gists t hemsels es. \s ho proc laimed the 
Japanese to be Malays... (JB 19/12). 

More detailed information emerges: Japan, which quickh modernized its 
armaments, sold its secondhand arms 



...to European, Chinese and Japanese traders, who disposed of them in great 
quantities to any viceroy of China who wan t s them, to tlu Koreans, in brief to 
anybody who is not too scrupulous about his weapons. 1 he conspirators in the 
Philippines had hidden a cache of such arms bought in Japan for some time 
until they might become useful, they thought. But the Japanese government 
has nothing to do with this chaffering ( N R( - A • t / 1 / c ^ ). 

Rumors about Japan s designs and support were apparently so embarrassing 
for Spanish-Japanese diplomatic relations that the Madrid government felt it nec- 
essary to strongly deny any Japanese involvement in Philippine matters and to re- 
peatedly affirm that Japans attitude “left nothing to be desired" ( NRC 16/9; 24/1; 
JB 19/10). 

I his did not preclude rather intense interest on the side of official Japan, 
because when matters in Luzon seemed to turn dangerous for the Spaniards in 
November 1896, two men-of-war were sent, at about the same time that the Brit- 
ish reinforced their small squadron of three to five navy ships and the Germans 
appeared with the admitted purpose of showing the flag by no less than Admiral 
Tirpitz. 

Germany? 

The Germans crying wolf about the Japanese were suspected by the Span- 
iards of harboring intentions of interference as well. Early in the rebellion some 
German citizens were captured in the company of rebels. Later three Germans were 
reported by their own consul to have led the rebel troops (NRC. 1 7/ 1 /97). An anti- 



396 



M L ' I J / 1 N B I Rt , / he Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



Spanish book had been published in Germany, the Spanish press hinted. (The 
Dutch editors apparently did not realize that Rizals Noli Me Tangere was referred 
to). The Germans were also supposed to be active Masons. Ammunition had re- 
putedly been delivered to the rebels from Germany (JB 16/10). And German trad- 
ers pressed the Reich government to intervene in Nlamla on their behalf 



(Supposed rebels )... propertv had been confiscated. I he German firms 
who had done business with these persons now wanted the imperial govern- 
ment to intervene, because Spain refuses to honour these persons' business 
obligations (PDA 13/9). 



This was possibly linked with antagonism between Germany and the Span- 
ish conservative parliamentarians who had recently rejected a bilateral trade agree- 
ment (D’l 25/8). i \ • cr 

In reporting such information on the real or supposed relations of Germany 

with Spain and the Philippines, the Dutch press took care not to make partisan 
comments. This is understandable within a more general pattern of “neutrality 
(which sometimes bordered on a pro-German attitude and coolness toward Brit- 
ain). The policy of “neutrality" in the end was to keep the Netherlands out of 

World War I. 



Britain and the I S.? 

In August 1896, rather cryptic messages were sent out bv the Spanish gov- 
ernment “to a government in the neighborhood of the islands to collaborate in 
devoting attention to conspirators who might participate in the rebel movement. 
Rather naively and self-centeredly De Tijd immediately assumes that the reference 
is to the Netherlands (East Indies) (DT 25/8), but the calmer NRC suggests that it 
is to Hong Kong— the British government. “A committee in Hong Kong was re- 
puted to be in contact with the Philippine as well as the Cuban freebooters, >t 
clarified (NRC 25/8). News or rumors of arms being sent from Hong Kong to the 

Philippines are repeatedly reported during this period 

The U.S. was the major foreign power with which Spain had to contend in 
the Americas. We have mentioned the freebooters from Florida. Repeated diplo- 
matic frictions occurred between the two countries. As long as President Cleveland 
was in power, Madrid seemed confident that relations could stay reasonably work- 
able, but the fear that McKinley would ascend to the presidency turned out to be 
well-founded. However, during 1896-1897, apart from news of a few American 
prisoners taken, there were no signs of American interest in the Philippines in the 
Dutch newspapers. 

All in all, to Dutch editors Spain appeared to be isolated in her colonial 
troubles. Other colonial powers, in particular the British, looked down upon 
Spain’s backward colonial policy. As will be shown below, Dutch attitudes did not 



397 



THE PMII Il’I'IN! KIAolt 1 1< »N \M » IU It >M> 



differ much from those of the British. ( )nlv the hreiu.li press dc tended Spanish 
policy once in a while. 

In Spain the press called tor efforts by the government ot building "an en- 
tente of European powers to defend their colonial interests in the far hast and in 
America” (NRC 16/9), but if such initiatives were taken at all they tell upon deaf 
ears, and were reported with scepticism. No I uropean power wanted to risk con- 
flict with the U.S., although the European press is said to have objected to a rein- 
terpretation ofthe Monroe doctrine so as to sanction l S. expansion in the Ameri- 
cas (NRC 25/12). 

In the summer of 1897, when Europe had been alerted by the assassination 
of Spanish Prime Minister Canovas and several anarchist attacks elsewhere, DeTtjd 
seems to be sympathetic to a Spanish call to organize an international "antiterrorist 
league” which received support from Portugal and Italy. Spain even offered to con- 
vert Palawan or the Sulu islands into an international prison colony tor anarchist 
terrorists. The major powers asked for more specific plans and suggested a diplo- 
matic conference to be held as soon as everybody agreed in principle (DT 3/9/97). 



This Could Never Happen to Ls: Dutch Hidden Nationalism 

Spain had bad press in Europe at the end of the century. 1 hitch journalists joined 
in the general disdain for Spanish politicians, the military, colonial policy, the semi- 
controlled press, and even the monarchy: “Even this pearl in the crown ofthe little 
boy who is the king of Spain mav not be hist, the* Jiiiui Bode sneers when Aladrtd 
announces its intention to suppress the rebellion (JB 2 1 /9). 

Of all colonial powers Spain, next to Portugal, did the least to win over the 
indigenous population (PDA 27/8). More than three centuries provides the inhab- 
itants more than enough reason for discontent (PDA 3/9). 

Mention is made of an untidy political culture in Spain, where opposition 
members may be jailed so as to prevent them from campaigning for election (JB 
19/10), where a minister and a senator may come to blows in parliament (JB 28/ 
6), and where parties may resort to the use of military strong-men, involving, for 
instance, returning General Polavieja in a liberal effort to unseat the conservative 
Canovas government (JB 28/6). Such condescending remarks one finds less in the 
quality paper” NRC than in the others, in particular the “tropical” Java Bode. 

But all papers regularly show their irritation and disbelief at the Spanish brag- 
ging about the course of events in Cuba and the Philippines. A few quotes ranging 
from mild to blunt may illustrate this: 

Time will tell us whether the government chief has not told too beauti- 
ful a story to the journalist quoted (PDA 17/1 1 ). 

f he Spanish government still seems not to realize that she herself by the 
dearth of and unreliability of her official telegrams causes fantastic news items 
(NRC 1/10/97; PDA 2/10). 



398 



Mi l 1/1 NBl.Rli The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



[ Upon Canovas* promise to suppress the revolt in Cuba in March 1897, 
and in the Philippines before that] one need not be a Thomas not to believe this 
(JB 23/1 1 , emphasis added). 

More sarcastically: 

The Spaniards in the Philippines are as successful as they are in Cuba. 
I hey beat the cnemv in dozens of encounters (PDA 3/10/96) in one ofwhich 
1 1 2 rebels were killed, and on at the Spanish side — not a single man... (NRC 
12/12/96). 



so 



...it is odd that in the past few weeks we have not heard of any “gloriosa victo- 
ries” (DT 14/12/96; JB 1/7/97). 

Tongue in cheek: 

Governor-General Blanco is desperate and idle (PDA 6/1 1/96)." 

Or, much harsher, the Java Bode again: 

[The strong censorship in Manila results in:]... influenced newspapers 
that should convince the people that a rebellion only exists in their own minds, 
while at the same time military bureaus send out messages fe\erishl) and on 
another page telltale lists of sick and wounded soldiers are printed. At the san 
time on the front page in a boisterous proclamation, the bastards, the wild 
beasts, cannibals, cowards” etc. of a few months ago are invited to join the sa 
cred cause of Spain (JB 24/1 1/97). 

Apart from disdain for the Spanish officials, there is occasional commisera 
tion with the common Spaniards: “Spain, poor Spain, the NRC sighs las mo 
mentarily 368,980 men under arms” (31/10/96). 

Spanish troops in the Philippines are said to look sad, many have ne\ei 
touched a weapon before and they provoke laughter with their new kits (JB 
19/12/96). They are badly treated and clad. The officers on the other hand 
wear uniforms glittering with gold, many of them still young kids (JB -1/5). 

Once in a while comments are made about the effects of the colonial wars 
upon the Spanish economy and society, where agriculture and industry suffered 
from lack of manpower (e.g. NRC 15/4/97), and where every citizen had to 
shoulder an annual interest payment of Dfl. 30 for the colonial debt alone (DT 



399 



THK PHIIJPPINI* HI V< )I l I I< » v 



I ) HI \i >NI ) 



1/7/97). In the end “[t]he call tor volunteers has tailed completely. Twelve 
thousand volunteers were counted upon; one hundred men ottered themselves 
(PDA 27/3/97). 

In Catalonia. . . the weaving industry works v. ith only halt, sometimes 
one-third the needed personnel, and m.unlv halftime In many villages 
only old men remain with the women and children. ( ataloma is mainly de- 
pendent on the colonial market , and this has pr.u t u alls disappeared < N RC . 1 5/ 

4/97). 

Unlike its motherland colleagues the Jiiiui Hodc contains detailed and nega- 
tive stereotyping of Spanish character and ability: 

...remarkable points of similarity between Spaniards and ( Orientals in general, 
viz. a tendency to slowness and a distaste not only of physic al labour hilt also of 
mental effort. A distaste of focusing their mental facilities on one point. I hey 
love daydreaming too much, thinking and acting too little. ( >reat strategists, 
fierce fanatics, men of passion and enthusiasm have they produced, half the 
world they conquered, but nowhere they have been able to establish c\cn a me- 
diocre administration, not even in such a relatively small colons like the I hil- 
ippines (JB 9/10/97). 

T he Filipino rebels are inconsistent Iv labeled. ( hi the one hand they are por- 
trayed as “half savages” (PDA 17/1 l), 12 but most of the time some grudging admi- 
ration is reserved for those who persisted in fighting the Spaniards, who are com- 
monly regarded as oppressors who refused for too long to change their bad colo- 
nial ways. Brilliant military strategy is attributed a few times to the leaders in Cavite 
province. 

However, the Dutch Indies journalists could hardly imagine that the Filipi- 
nos might be victorious. The recurring reference to foreign assistance if not leader- 
ship attests to this. Whether or not because of the limited Spanish sources of infor- 
mation, the Dutch public was given hardly any insight into the cjucstions that are 
paramount in later historiography: the matter of the class base of the revolution, 
factional conflicts, the actual spread of revolutionary activity, the way Cavite prov- 
ince and contiguous revolutionary areas were organized during the liberated pe- 
riod, what warfare meant in the mountainous, the wet-rice, or forested portions of 
the contested region. In that sense the Philippine revolution was described from a 
Hispano- or at least a western-centric point of view. 1 

The presentation of Spanish-Philippine news was such that the Dutch read- 
ers could maintain the feeling that such blundering as done by the Spaniards could 
not happen here. Interestingly, the Dutch colonial army was at the time involved 
in a flare-up in the decades-old Aceh war. It is significant that there is not a single 
comparative remark made by any author on these two colonial wars. Professor 



400 



\ 1 1’ 1 1 / 1 N B } Rt ; The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



Kern, who protested against Spanish cruelties, but regarded them less abhorrent 
than what the British did in Maschonaland, does not refer to the Dutch actions in 
Sumatra. 



Sow the Wind. Reap the Whirlwind: 

Christianization and the Indies Colonial Project 

The Dutch Catholic press, represented by De Tijd , would show relatively more 
interest in the Philippines than it did, at least in matters pertaining to the friars and 

the role of the church and Freeniasonr\. 

Nothin- turned out to be less true. Of all the daily papers, the Catholic one 
shows least interest i n these topics. This is certainly not because it did not deal with 
such matters as the relation between state and church, the Dutch polity and Rome 
and what it perceived as the disastrous international role of Masonry. It did indeed 
devote much space and energy to such questions. Bu, not to the Plultppmes. It* 
possible that further research in other papers, for instance the less conservat.ve He, 

Centrum, might show a different result. 

Interest in religious aspects of the Philippine conflict came iron, a totally 

different direction and referred to Christianization in genera . 

I„ two lengthv articles in the JB under the revealing tide Lessons tor our 
colonies to be leaned from the rebellion in the Philippines, A H. Swaving a re- 
ared resident of the Minahasa (North Celebes), turns against the mission in the 
Netherlands Indies. Conversion to Christianity as it occurred in the Philippines, 
he maintains, fundamentally undermined not only the colonial pro,ect, but t e 

“spirit” of the people: 

Nowhere perhaps was the Christian doctrine forced upon the native and 
the Chinese with more zeal than in the Philippines. Also through education it 
was tried to make the native one with his master, to educate them to be Span- 
iards, at least members of the Spanish realm. And now Spaniards and their 
descendants, Chinese etcetera, mestizos in general, supported by Christian 
natives are resisting the legal authority set over them, developing an o stmac) 
that excludes any doubt about the resentment, the hatred at work OB 6/5D7). 

He uses the Philippine example to fulminate against the project of promot- 
ing Christianity (, christen-maken : “making Christians”) among the Indonesian 
peoples. The best Indonesian example where the project appears to turn awry is the 
Minahasa, well-known to him: 



The (Protestant) mission is said to have brought about a social revolu- 
tion, (it is said) that the people have become different, nay better, and that we 
would find loyal allies in the Minahasa even if the whole of the Indies would 
turn against us. 



401 



THE PH I LIPPI N I HI \ < )It I K )N \M)HhONI) 



The Minahasan people, however, it had also been remarked by others, show 
almost as strong a contempt for the I Hitch as the Ac mese. I low could it then be, 
Swaving asks his opponents, that C diristiani/at ion and education would have pro- 
vided support for the Dutch colonization in these parts.' I he increased sclt-con- 
sciou sness and insolence of the ( christianized populat i< >n undermined the political 
reason for conversion. Instead of becoming reliable allies, such groups became the 
most dangerous enemies of the (Christian colonial power. 

To the objection that if the political objective would not work, at least 
Christianization would have made the people morally better, he retorts: The 

Christian native, as soon as he is not under the sharp supervision of the pandita 
[minister] loses the fear of the Lord and is morally not better than the Muslim- 
native.” 14 

This, he says, is an unpleasant truth, but truth it is, and proven in the case of 
the Philippines. His witness is no less than the I Hitch orientalist I lendrik Kern, 
who wrote an appreciative article reviewing hr. Joaquin Martinez de Zunigas 
Estadismo de la Islas Filipinas. Zuniga, in Kerns version, as read b\ Swaving, gave 
a description of the Christians of the Philippines after one to two centuries of con- 
version that was no better than mine on the Christian society of the Minahasa (JB 



6/5/97). 

The following step in Swaving s argument is that the I Hitch, and particularly 
those in favor of the mission , are afraid of Islam (or Mohammedanism as he puts 
it) and conjure an image of terror and fanaticism, and he adds: “It is good to be 
alert and to supervise, but one need not shout loudly that one mistrusts a popu- 
lation which truly does not deserve to be mistrusted and accused as is being done 
time and again, considering what she endured and still endures" (JB 7/5/97). 

Instead of promoting a policy of “making (Christians" in the colony, one 
would be wise to accept the fact that “the Netherlands with its colonies is a Mus- 
lim, rather than a Christian state.” One should follow the example set by Britain 
after 1857 and promote the good elements in Islam, rather than try to destroy 
them, as is regularly done in a succession of panicky reactions among the colonials 
in the Indies. Islamic movements are routinely labeled “fanatical" and the “Chris- 
tian” Europeans immediately require death penalties of misdirected followers of 
religious movements, like that of Tjilegon ( 1 «««)• 

Swaving did not rest his case against “Christian-making” with these two ar- 
ticles. Later in the same year he published another series of lengthy articles attack- 
ing what he regarded as self-serving propaganda of the Dutch Protestant mission 
(JB 15, 16 and 17/9/97). Apart from undermining the success stories spread by 
some Protestant ministers, he returns to the example of the Philippines by focusing 
on the potentially revolutionary role of malcontent Christian Indo-Europeans. A 
discussion of popular education, which came as a consequence of the missionary 
activities, both in the Philippines and the Indies, particularly in the Minahasa, fol- 
lows: “It made the farmers less active, and in trade and entrepreneurship the 



402 



MUIJZKNBFRc; The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Tidies Press 



Minahassans do not excel either.” He quotes Brooshooff, an early representative of 
the “Ethical School": 1 ' 

I doubt whether the profusion of education, maximized in Manado to 
the extreme, makes the people more vigorous and industrious... The popu- 
lation is characterized bv laxity... Christianization has its good and bad sides, it 
makes the people more or less what one calls “decent” — even though a very 
sleepy kind of decency — but it also contributes to giving the half-baked 
Christian too high a fancy of himself, to considering himself above manual 
labour. 

Swaving then returns to Professor Kern, who may have admired the civiliz- 
ing work of Spain in the Philippines, while recognizing the disastrous aberrations 
ofthe friars and other Spanish exploiters in the past century. But Swaving consid- 
ers him too liberal and “soft.” Kern, an admirer of Jose P. Rizal, stresses that west- 
ern education might be the harbinger of a joint national development of Filipinos 
and Spaniards. But he deplores the combination of politics and the Spanish lan- 
guage in Rizal’s work, and in the Spanish colony in general. 

What the Filipino people needs in the first place is neither politics nor 
Spanish The last is useful and necessary for the upper classes only, the first 
brews more evil than good even in Europe (Kern 1897: 612, and Swaving in 

JB 17/9/97). 

While agreeing with the point against politics, Swaving would have liked a 
less idealistic position on Kern's part. He uses the “aberration” in the Philippines to 
flog once more his favorite whipping horse, the Christianized Minahasans. 

In summary, Swaving used the Philippine revolt in his crusade against the 
self-serving propaganda of Dutch Protestant mission societies as well as against 
the policy of increasingly admitting more Indonesians to western education. 
Whether his professed belief in the moral and intellectual abilities of the Muslim 
population ofthe Indies was more than a debater’s argument should be studied in 

more detail. ...... . 

In our context Swaving s use of the case of the Philippines is a glaring example 

of “appropriation” ofthe Philippine revolution for “local” Dutch Indies purposes. 
It is part of the intermittent debate on the use of Protestant and Catholic 
missionizing that raged in the Netherlands since the middle of the century, with, 
on one hand, the secular, liberal stream, and on the other, the religious “pillars” 
(which were sometimes divided against themselves). Further research should make 
out whether the Philippine revolution was “localized also in Protestant papers in 
the Netherlands. 



403 



THI-. mn.IPI’IN’l KfVoll IH>N V.I » HI u INI) 



Conclusion 

Considering the means of communication arul transport as well as the mutual iso- 
lation of Philippine and Netherlands Indies developments. I found remarkably 
detailed reporting of the evolving Philippine Resolution ol 1.390 even in the news- 
paper of one of the most isolated provinces ol the country. 

Due to their dependence on secondary information, I hitch reporting re- 
mained at the official and formal level, reporting on troop movements, battles, 
numbers of dead, and on Spanish politics. I ittle became known to l hitch Indies 
readers about the internal composition of the revolutionary movement or the way 
people in revolutionary areas lived and were motivated to iesist. I he emphasis 
upon suspected foreign leadership and the role ol ( hinese and mestizos shows that 
the journalists could not imagine Filipinos as able to take their fate in their own 
hands. No one thought of a parallel with the I -at in Americans ss ho lilx rated them- 
selves earlier in the century! 

Considering Holland’s position as a neighboring colonial power, the geopo- 
litical implications of an eventual withdrawal of Spam from the islands caused 
concern in the papers, especially' about the role of Japan and C icrmany. 

Influenced by prejudices going back to Spanish hegemony over the Low 
Countries, the Dutch press in varyung degrees showed a disdain for Spanish colo- 
nization and the way the rebellion was dealt with. 

Finally, a central aspect of the Spanish colonization, viz. the Christianization 
and western education of a sizable portion of the Filipino population, was “local- 
ized” for Netherlands Indies use. Formulating his opposition to Christian 
missionizing in political as well as moral terms, former resident Swaving also lashed 
out at the fundamental mistrust of Dutch colonizers for Islam and Muslims, a 
point which deserves further study even in the present world context. 

Notes 

1 . In this uncongenial press climate the major division within “the press” was racial, with 
the Dutch-language press being by far the most important, Chinese papers just 
emerging and Malay-language press still largely under control of Dutch editors 
(Hoogerwerf 1990: 28-37 and 137-139). 

2. Bootsma (1986: 25 sqq.) uses some of consul P.K.E. Meerkamp van Emden's mes- 
sages to The Hague. Dutch and Netherlands Indies trade with the Philippines re- 
mained below 1 percent of the total as late as 1915. Export to the Netherlands Indies 
was limited to tobacco and cigars, while imports consisted of textiles, glass and ce- 
ramics, candles, cheese and gin, all in small quantities. Many years passed when no 
Dutch vessel anchored at Manila. Bootsma’s criticism of Meerkamp that he did not 
do more than send only “fragmentary news” (p. 27) seems to negate the regular and 
detailed annual reports which were published in the official journal ConsuLiire 
Verslagen en Berichten (Consular Reports and News). 



404 



MUIJ/.I* '.N'Bl-'RCi 7 he Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



6 . 

7. 

8 . 



3. Dates mentioned in the following text refer to the date of appearance of the newspa- 
per. not of the occurrence of the event. The papers were uniformly vague about the 
“when” of events and often of the “where” as well. The dates are given in day-month 
form and. only if confusion might occur, year. 

4. The spelling of names is often rather primitive: Cavite is first named Cavito, Bulacan 
comes as Balancan etc. The telegraph lines with Manila were often reported dis- 
rupted. badlv functioning, or restored to normalcy in the Java Bode. 

5. A few weeks later the Hongkong Daily Press was quoted: “On hearing that prisoners 
had been tortured Governor- General Blanco had gotten so angry that he threw the 
adjutant on duty down the stairs and threatened the lieutenant-governor with arrest” 

(JB 12/1 1/96). 

Mav 1 99 1 . 48 refers to the Nasugbu action as "a major atrocity on the part of the 
Spanish troops ... where hundreds of noncombatants were killed." 

Cf Paredes (199 s* s72- T)S) tor a discussion of the Luna-Pardo de Tavera family 
traeedv. Here buna is called buna de San Pedro. 

This number of Spanish troops killed is considerably higher than that given by Tay- 
lor (based on Retanas work), viz. 484 officers and men killed as of 10 November 
1897 while the wounded seem under-counted compared to laylors 2,176 (lavlor 
j 97 , ’ , a 8 , . 282). It is lower, on the other hand, than Corpuz' figure of “at least 
, 149 casualties on the Spanish side" in the Cavite campaign alone! (Corpuz: 1989: 
„ 7 42 )' As far as the wounded are concerned, the PDA quotes an official figure for 
hospitals in Manila alone of 3. 145 sick and wounded in August, of 7.000 at the end 
of September (PDA 26/8/97: 22/9/9T 

As this paper does not intend to rewrite the revolutions history I lust refer to 
McAndiU remark (quu.ing Wilcox) that -|,|he toll of™, on the province may 
possibly be gauged he the sudden dru,. Cas hes population Iron, almost 1. 5.000 
1887 too'nlvV.OOO inearlv ISOS' (McAndrew, 1994: 30-31). Undoubtedly this 
was not all due mortality, as intensive population displacements took place during 

“Der Aufstand aufden Philippine.! von Ferdinand Blumentntt, Globus no. l4,Sep- 

This^may 8 have been a pun to be understood by any Dutch reader who finished el- 
ementary school. It alludes to the saying: de regering was mdeloos, her volk was redeloos 
en het land was reddeloos (government was idle, the people lost their minds and the 
country was past redemption), referring to the Dutch situation in “Disaster Year 

1 672 

1 2. The popular weekly De Wereldkrowek which published photographs, unlike the dai- 
lies, printed a small picture of two “native soldiers” next to a larger one entitled 
“Armed natives of the Philippines” to illustrate a brief article on the Philippine rebel- 
lion (6/2/97). The latter picture represents a group of shield- and spear-wielding loin- 
cloth-clad men in the jungle. As no reference whatsoever is made to such upland 
tribes in the article, however, the implied message must be that these men are part ot 
the rebel force. 



9. 



10 . 

11 . 



405 



THE Pmi.IPPINI El V( >1 t I I< > v 



I ) Hi 'i< >NI > 



13. Journalism, like historiography at the time, was oriented toward the official views. 

Participant views like those of ( icner.il Santiago \ Ah. are/ 3 4,t C) and the highlight- 

ing of the representations and motivations of the masses as studied by Ileto (1979) 
were still out of the question. 

1 4. In his later series on the mission he asks: Are t he- c < >1< >mal t roops from Mcnado and 

Amboina so useful because they are ( hnsti.msr SureK m>t. many of them allowed 
themselves to be recruited as Christians on an earnest money of Dfl 200, because 
they would have received only I )fl HO if pagan IB 1 ^ 0/0 ). 

15. Cf. Elsbeth Locher-Scholten M OH 1 : 11 5-1). I he 1 dm al Policy, a term coined by 

Brooshooft, stood for a variety of tendencies in colonial policy, which arc brought 
together in Locher-Scholtens new definition: policy aimed at acquiring dc facto 

political control of the entire Indonesian archipelago and the development of both 
country and people under I )utch leadership and after western example (Ibid.: 213). 



References 

Alvarez, Santiago V. 1992 (1927/8). Recalling the Revolution Memoirs of a Filipino General 
Madison/ Manila: University of Wisconsin, ( enter for Southeast Asian Studies/ 
Ateneo de Manila University Press. 

Bootsma, N.A. 1986. Buren in dc koloniale tijd. I )c Philtpptjnen ondcr Amerikaans bewind 
en de Nederlandse, Indischc cn Indonesische readies daarop, 1 898- 1 942. Verhande- 
lingen KITLV no. 1 19. Dord recht: Boris. 

Brugmans, I.J. 1976. Paardenkracht en Men senmacht: Sociaal-hconomiscbe Gescbiedenis van 
Nederland. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff. 

Corpuz, O.D. 1989. The Roots of the Filipino Nation. Qu e/on ( a t v: Aklahi Foundation. 2 
vols. 

Furnivall, J.S. 1939. Netherlands India: A Study of Plural Fcononiy. C aim bridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Hoogerwerf, Evert-Jan 1990. Persgeschiedenis van Indonesie: ( ieannoteerde bibliografie. 
Leiden: KI I LV Uitgeverij. 

Ileto, Reynaldo C. 1979. Pasyon and Revolution: Popular Movements in the Philippines , 
1840-1910. Manila: Ateneo dc Manila Press. 

Jonge, J.A. de 1968. De Industrialisatie in Nederland tussen 1850 en 1014. Nijmegen: SUN. 

Kern, H. 1897. “De onlusten op de Filippijnen.” I'ijdschrifi voor Nederlandsch-Indie. 2e 
Nieuwe Serie, lejaargang, pp. 591-612. 

Lijphart, Arend 1968. Verzuiling y pacificatie en kentering in de Nederlandse politick. 
Amsterdam: De Bussy. 

Locher-Scholten, Elsbeth 1981. “Mr. P. Brooshooft, een biografische schets in koloniaal- 
ethisch perspectief.” In idem, Ethiek in fragmenten: Vijf studies over koloniaal denken 
en doen van Nederlanders in de Indonesische Arch i pel 18 77-1942. Utrecht: HES Pub- 
lishers, pp. 1 1 -54. 

McAndrew, John P. 1994. Urban Usurpation: from Friar Estates to Industrial Estates in a 
Philippine Hinterland. Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press. 



406 



Ml ' 1 1/ i \’ Bi ke , The Philippine Revolution in The Netherlands and Indies Press 



May, Glenn Anthony 1 C B) 1 . Battle for Ba tangos: A Philippine Province at War. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 

Muijzenberg, Otto van den. D92. Dutch Filipiniana: An Annotated Bibliography of Dutch 
Publication s on the Philippines. Leiden: KI I LY Press. 

Paredes, Ruby R. I ‘B).L “Ilustrado Legacy: The Pardo deTaveras of Manila.” In Alfred \V. 
McC an (ed.) An Anarchy of Families: State and Family in the Philippines. Madison, 
\\'I: Univcrsitv of \\ isconsin. ('enter tor Southeast Asian Studies. 



Taylor John R.M. 1 1 ’ I. I he Philippine Insurrection against the United States, a Compilation 
of Documents with Notes and Introduction. Vol. 1. PasayCity: Eugenio Lopez Founda- 



tion. 



Wesseling, I LI . 1086 . “British and Dutch Imperialism: A Comparison.” Itinerario. XIII, 1, 
special issue “India and Indonesia: Oeneral Perspectives," pp. 61-74. 



407 



T HE PHILIPPINE REV< Mil K >N \NI > hi V( >Nl ) 



13. Journalism, like historiography at the time, was oriented toward the official views. 
Participant views like those of C icncral Santiago V Ak are/ l l h)2) and the highlight- 
ing of the representations and motivations of the masses as studied by Ilcto (1979) 
were still out of the question. 

14. In his later series on the mission he asks: Are the colonial troops from Mcnado and 
Amboina so useful because they are ( hristiansr Surely not. many of them allowed 
themselves to be recruited as C Christians on an earnest money of Dfl 200, because 
they would have received onlv I )fl 80 if pagan ( JB 1 5/ t )/o'"). 

15. Cf. Elsbeth Locher-Scholten (1981: 1 1-54). The I thical Policy," a term coined by 

Brooshooft, stood for a varietv of tendencies in colonial policy, which are brought 
together in Locher-Scholten s new definition: policy aimed at acquiring de facto 

political control of the entire Indonesian archipelago and the development of both 
country and people under Dutch leadership and after western example (Ibid.: 213). 

References 

Alvarez, Santiago V. 1 992 ( 1 927/8). Recalling the Revolution: Memoirs of a Filipino General 
Madison/ Manila: University of Wisconsin, ( Center for Southeast Asian Studies/ 
Ateneo de Manila University Press. 

Bootsma, N.A. 1986. Buren in de koloniale tijei. De Rhilippijnen onder Amenkaans bewind 
en de Nederlandse , Indische en Indonesische readies daarop . 1898-1942. Verhande- 
lingen KITLV no. 119. Dord recht: Foris. 

Brugmans, I.J. 1976. Paardenkracht en Mensenmacht: Sociaal-Fi onomische Geschiedenis van 
Nederland. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff. 

Corpuz, O.D. 1989. I he Roots of the Filipino Nation. (Quezon ( aty: Aklahi Foundation. 2 
vols. 

Furnivall, J.S. 1939. Netherlands India: A Study of Plural Fconomy. C Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Hoogerwerf, Evert-Jan 1990. Pe rsges ch ied en is van Indonesie: Cieannoteerde btbliografe. 
Leiden: KITLV Uitgeverij. 

Ileto, Reynaldo C. 1979. Pasyon and Revolution: Popular Movements in the Philippines , 
1840-1910. Manila: Ateneo de Manila Press. 

Jonge, J.A. de 1968. De Industrialisatie in Nederland tussen 1850 en 1 914. Nijmegen: SUN. 

Kern, H. 1897. “De onlusten op de Filippijnen.” Iijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-I ndi'e. 2e 
Nieuwe Serie, lejaargang, pp. 591-612. 

Lijphart, Arend 1968. Verzuiling, pacificatie en kentering in de Nederlandse politick . 
Amsterdam: De Bussy. 

Locher-Scholten, Elsbeth 1981. “Mr. P. Brooshooft, een biografische schets in koloniaal- 
ethisch perspectief.” In idem, Ethiek in Jragmenten: Vijf studies over kolomaal denken 
en doen van Nederlanders in de Indonesische Archipel 1877-1942. Utrecht: HES Pub- 
lishers, pp. 1 1-54. 

McAndrew, John P. 1994. Urban Usurpation: from Friar Estates to Industrial Estates in a 
Philippine Hinterland. Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press. 



406 



Ml 1 1 / 1 N H l Kc / he Philippine Revolution in The NetherLtnds and Indies Press 



May, Glenn Anthony 1 W 1. Battle for Batangas: A Philippine Province at War. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 

Muijzenberi*. Otto van den. 1 992. Dutch Fdipinuina: An Annotated Bibliography of Dutch 
Publications on the Philippines. Leiden: Kl 1 LV Press. 

Paredes, Rubv R. 1993. “I lust rado Legacy: The Pardo de Taverns of Manila.” In Alfred W. 
M c C : 0 \ (ed.) An Anarchy of Families: State and Family in the Philippines. Madison, 
\VI: Universitv of Wisconsin, Center for Southeast Asian Studies. 

Tavlor, John R.M. 19~1. 7 he Philippine Insurrection against the United States, a Compilation 
of Document* with .Votes urn/ Introduction. Vol. I. Pasay City: Eugenio Lopez Founda- 
tion. 

Wesseling, H.I . 1 '>8'). “ British and Dutch Imperialism: A Comparison. Itinerario. XIII, 1, 
special issue "India and Indonesia: General Perspectives, pp. 61-74. 



407 



The Philippine Revolution 
and Her Majesty ’s Consuls 
Plus Two British Army Officers 

Si rai in I ) . ( ,) i I \ si ) N 
Philippine Centennial Commr>sion/Umver>ity of the Philippines 



I 

T he story about the Philippine revolution and Her Majesty's Consul 
Edward Henry Rawson Walker, plus the two British Army officers, particu- 
larly Major George John Younghusband, is worth narrating for its own sake. It is 
also a case study of the various responses ( .onsul Walker made in the face of a tense 
revolutionary situation. The story begins with the reassignment of Consul Walker 
from Charlestone, South Carolina, U.S.A., on 14 March 1895, to Manila. How- 
ever, he did not report for duty until sometime in December 1895 because of his 
extended sick leave of absence. In early April of the same year, he wrote the Earl of 
Kimberly complaining about his “debilitated health,” and in October, he under- 
went “a serious operation” by Dr. Herbert Alolingham, P.R.C.S., of 25 Grosvenor 
St., London. Shortly thereafter, he set sail from London on hoard P&O S.S. Atis- 
tralia bound for Manila via Hong Kong. 

It was his fate to serve at several hardship posts — the first being at Tripoli as 
vice-consul way hack on 14 October 1862, the second posting at Massonna, 
Abyssinia, as acting consul, and then at Pernambuco where he spent three years 
and nine months. Perhaps his consular stint at Charleston gave him a good respite, 
climate-wise, but not his stint in Manila. He did not live long enough to see the 
“scripted capitulation” of Manila by the U.S. expeditionary forces under General 
Wesley Merritt. 

1 896 was a bad year or even a dark one, especially during its last few months, 
for the Spaniards in the Philippines. 



408 



QUIASON The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



In early January, the new British consul made his official courtesy calls on 
Governor-General Ramon Blanco, Marquis de Pena Plata at his official residence, 
Malacanang Palace, then on Admiral Don Carlos Roca and later, on Don Manuel 
Lucenca at the town hall in Intramuros. So well received was he that his excellent 
speaking knowledge of Spanish, coupled with his warm and tactful gestures, paid 
him good dividends. In late January, he received an invitation to attend a High 
Mass at the Manila Cathedral and then a sumptuous reception at Malacanang Pal- 
ace. In attendance were key Spanish colonial bureaucrats, high naval and military 
officers, members of the Foreign Consular Corps, and a sprinkling of select mem- 
bers of the Spanish local elite. 1 he cool, fresh air coming from the distant hills of 
Antipolo and the gorgeous, luxuriant scenery across the clear, blue Pasig Raver had 
whetted the appetites of the distinguished guests. 1 hey enjoyed for certain the 
many fine dishes together with a good wine from a list which included clarets, 
Spanish brandy, dry Madeira, and champagne. The lunch ended with an array of 
delicious desserts and indigenous fruits in season. This was Consul Walkers first 
experience with some moments of elaborate and impressive Catholic rites and his 
first taste of high-style living in Spanish-Philippines, which was already ripe for 
revolution. 

Again, Consul Walker fell “ill of rheumatic gout" on 2 April 1896. Dr. J. 
Doneland, physician of Her Majesty’s Consulate, and the principal British mer- 
chants advised him to go on vacation leave “due to excessive heat of 99 degrees in 
the shade temperature," which had a debilitating effect on his constitution. Upon 
the approval of his application of sick leave, he left for China and Japan where he 
“felt much better." But when he came back to Manila, his “old ailments" reoc- 
curred. A month before the outbreak of Le deluge, he reported foi duty at the 

British Consulate. . 

Five days after the tearing of cedillas by the Katipuneros of Andres Bom acio 
at Pugad Lawin and elsewhere in the Caloocan area, Consul Walker got wind of 
the initial shock waves of the revolutionary movement. His first coded message was 
dated 27 August 1896 and dispatched by telegraph to Lord Salisbury, the British 
Foreign Secretary in London. 1 he decoded text reads: 

Large numbers of natives in conspiracy discovered. Important arrests. 

Rebel forces attacked. There has been fighting in Manila. Adopted necessary 
precautions. Hope that tranquility will be restored. 

The next important piece of coded message Consul Walker transmitted 
quickly to the Foreign Office was dated 31 August 1896. 1 he decoded text reads. 

Very serious engagement between troops and insurgents yesterday 
morning. 50 insurgents killed in action, 12 troops, one officer killed. Procla- 
mation of Martial Law. 



409 



I F FF 1*1 ill II'IMSF KF \( >1 I I K >N \NI >Bh< 



We know now that the first sizeable attack <>l the- polvorm and /:/ Df post to in 
San Juan by the Katipuneros was launched in thee at l\ morning of 30 August but 
was repulsed by Spanish troops, causing heaw Katipunan losses. Consul Walker 
reported that the number of casualties sustained In the Katipuneros in the first 
encounter with the Spanish forces at Pinaglabanan in San loan was rather small. 
With his excellent spoken Spanish, he die! his best n it bin his lights and skills to 
ferret out reliable information from various sources: Ins colleagues in the foreign 
Consular Corps, the leading British bankers and merchants, his network of ac- 
quaintances among the Spanish local elite, and even prominent ( hinese shopkeep- 
ers in Binondo. His best informant, although quite biased and secretive at times, 
was the Governor-General Blanco himself, with whom he maintained close and 
friendly ties. There were many things Blanco kept to himself and did not disclose 
to Walker. Walker often deplored this fact, as in the case of Ins earlier dispatch re- 
lating to the military and naval expeditions led by Blanco to .Mindanao: 

It is most difficult to obtain reliable information on what is taking place 
in the Southern Archipelago of these Islands as the newspapers arc only altered 
to publish such news as may be agreeable to t he l< >c al aut horn ics. . . . 

Concerning censorship in the colonial newspapers, American Consul Oscar 
F. Williams also shared the same opinion. Thus, he remarked wryly: “...the rigid 
censorship of the press in general and the suppression of such publications as utter- 
ing the truth have made news gathering onerous. . .. 

Perplexing problems faced Walker on every side. There was the urgent need 
to extend protection to the lives and properties of the British subjects, numbering 
about 150. There were the business interests of more than a cloz.cn mercantile firms, 
banks, and other small establishments to look after. There was the Foreign Office 
instruction to extend “unofficial assistance" to the Chinese numbering around 
56,000 in the environs of Manila who besieged him with pleas for aid and protec- 
tion against ill-mannered and rapacious Spanish secret police and local officials. 
And lastly, there was the extra duty of taking good care of the American citizens 
and their economic interests during the most critical months of the Spanish- 
American war of 1898. 

Despite these mounting problems, Walker kept close watch on events. 

At the outset of the revolution. Walker was mainly preoccupied with the 
immediate and speedy evacuation of the British residents, their wives and children 
from their palatial houses in the suburbs of San Miguel and Santa Ana in case of 
emergency or imminent danger. Many English residents were being deserted by 
their indio domestic helpers, who ran away with their European-made guns. 

News of the first initial encounters at Santa Mesa and San Juan, combined 
with the rumors of the planned assassination of the Spaniards augured grim fore- 
bodings in Manila. To the danger that threatened them, the Spanish elite, British 
residents, and other foreigners reacted each variously. Many Spaniards living in the 



410 



QL’IASON The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



suburbs panicked, abandoned their houses, and sought refuge inside Intramuros. 

By then, Intramuros was surrounded by a moat and connected by means of draw- 
bridges to the nearbv outlying districts. Blanco and his staff moved out of 
Malacaiiang Palace. Many of the British residents were put in a great dilemma. 
Others living in the suburbs of San Miguel and Santa Ana made a hasty evacuation 
to commercial ships in the Manila bay. While waiting for the arrival of British 
warships, other British residents wanted to stay in the business center, but the 
“overcrowded and uncomfortable hotel” in Binondo simply turned them down. 
The English technicians employed in the Cavite naval yard and their wives and 
children took refuge on board a ship “lying on the slip” where they spent “several 
precious and anxious nights.” Since they found themselves within the angle of fire 
of the Katipuneros who were encamped in the villages of “La Caridad and 
Noveleta,” and also within the shelling range of the Spanish men of war Don Juan 
de Austria and I.e Reina Cristina , they were compelled to seek shelter elsewhere. 

As events turned from bad to worse, food shortages became endemic coupled 
with the spiraling prices of commodities. Food supply became more and more 
critical particularly during the months when Commodore George Deweys squad- 
ron was already inside Manila Bay and Manila and its environs were encircled by 
the forces of General Emilio Aguinaldo. Owing to the scarcity of food and other 
necessities of life, the cost of living in Manila and its environs rose by 50 percent 
since the revolution. During the state of “strict blockade" of the port of Manila 
since 1 May to mid-August 1898, the scarcity was keenly felt, especially by the 
Europeans Aguinaldos forces had cut off all lines of communication and supply 
routes with the neighboring areas. Water buffalos, horses and dogs had to be eaten; 
there were hardly an v vegetables, and those that were available caused diarrhea and 
even dysentery” and were expensive. The cost of beef was quite exorbitant from 
$ 1 00 per pound up to such “fancy rates” of $2.50, where it used to be less than -0 
cents per pound. Eggs costing 4 cents a piece were sold for 15 to 20 cents each. 

One of the first precautionary acts Walker undertook was to communicate 
directly with Vice-Admiral Alexander Buller, the commander-in-chief of the Chi- 
nese station. From time to time, he kept him abreast of the deteriorating state of 
affairs in Manila and its suburbs. He created a Committee of Public Safety com- 
posed of leading British residents with the consul as the presiding chairman. The 
committee hired a steam-powered kneha every night to patrol the major out ymg 
districts along Pasig River. In case of any emergency or “urgent necessity for armed 
assistance during the night” he had a telephone installed in the British Consulate 
to link with the British warship H.M.S. Daphne whose permission to lie in tie 
river” had been secured from the Spanish authorities. Since the commencement of 
the hostilities. Walker saw to it that he got in touch almost daily with Blanco and 
sometimes with other key Spanish officials. He told Lord Salisbury about the great 
difficulty” he encountered in securing the approval for the three lanchas to do the 
reconnoitering, but in spite of all these, he “acknowledged receiving much cour- 
tesy and assistance from the Spanish Governor General. 



411 



Till milll'IMNI K1 V< >1 t IK »\ 

Another precautionary measure \X alker undertook was the safety of the large 
floating population of about 1 ,000 British sailors manning a large fleet of British 
vessels” in the Manila Bay area. Accordingly, he issued strict orders to all British 
seamen in all the merchant ships ly ing in the has area not to go on shore leave. If 
they “got drunk and came into collision with 1 ilipino revolutionary soldiers or 
police, he should not he held responsible for the onscqueiKcs. 

When Walker first broached to Bl aiuo the Mih|cit of calling for a British 
warship to protect the British subjects, the reply of the Spanish governor-general 
was rather lukewarm and he seemed to resent anv outside assistance. In spite of 
Blancos nonchalant attitude, VC alker \< >st n< > t line e\ < >h ing a plan of action. Walker 
was very much worried that the cable lines linking Manila to the outside world 
through Hong Kong would he cut off. I Its grossing feeling of apprehension 
stemmed from a combination of factors: first, the telegraph lines in the nearby 
provinces had already been destroyed by the Kaiipuncros; second, there were only 
a handful of European troops (about 200) to defend Manila; and lastly, the sus- 
picion that the “native troops might fraterni/e svith the’ Kaiipuncros any r moment 
was a valid one. 

Immediately he telegraphed Bullet and informed him of the worsening con- 
ditions in the Manila area. Buller acted quickly by sending I I.Xl.S. Redpote, a gun- 
boat under Commander Grafton, to Manila Bay in the event that the I ilipino revo- 
lutionaries would gain control of the environs and the city’ of \tamla. A few days 
later, the H.M.S. l ) igpiy under (>ommandcr I )ormcr arrived to replace H.M.S. 
Redpole. As a matter of courtesy, I Jormer was introduced by Walker to the Spanish 
naval and military authorities and then to Blanco. ( hi this occasion. Consul 
Walker called the attention of the Spanish gov ernor-general to the uselessness of 
the presence of a small gun vessel lying in wait in the Manila Bay area. 

Blanco would grant Walkers request on condition that no Filipino rebel 
would be allowed to seek political asylum on board the British warship. The impo- 
sition of this “unprecedented condition” coupled with the refusal of the Spanish 
colonial authorities to permit H.M.S. Daphne to enter and to lay anchor some- 
where along the Pasig River in order to facilitate the rescue operations of the Brit- 
ish subjects living in the nearby districts became a thorny issue between Blanco and 
Walker. The case of H.M.S. Daphne became the subject of an interminable ex- 
change of letters and desultory conversations between Blanco and Walker. To this 
“unprecedented demand” Lord Salisbury reacted at once and made the best of the 
situation by instructing Sir H. Wolf- — the British Ambassador to Madrid — to re- 
quest the Spanish home government to persuade Blanco “to withdraw it [the con- 
dition]” without delay. Wolf should also stress that the British government “have 
no intentions of affording, encouraging, or sheltering the insurgents and the stand- 
ing instructions to Her Majesty’s ships are sufficient to prevent anything of that 
sort. 

Still reluctant to yield his ground, Blanco cited an existing colonial decree 
stating that foreign men-of-war were allowed to “go up the Pasig River under no 



412 



Ql I \SON The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



pretext. Onlv on one occasion did a foreign war vessel — a Portuguese warship — 
enter the Pasig River by mistake, and she was ordered to leave at once. Walker mar- 
shaled all the arguments, but always taking care not to further worsen the frayed 
nerves of Blanco. Always resorting to his old arguments Blanco took great caution 
so as not to be “censured” by the Spanish home government once he gave in and 
allowed the entrv of the H.M.S. Daphne into the Pasig River. What actually soft- 
ened Blanco’s attitude was the appearance of the Order-in-Council and the instruc- 
tions to the British Governors of Hong Kong and Singapore in the Official Ga- 
zettes of both colonies: “No arms [will] be allowed to be exported from the two 
colonies to the Philippines and no employment was to be given to the natives of 
the islands during the rebellion.” With these injunctions, Blanco expressed his ap- 
preciation as well as that of his Catholic majesty for “the mark sympathy on the 
part of Her Britannic Majesty s government. 

When the 1 I.M.S. Daphne arrived to take the place of H.M.S. Pigmy, Walker 
made the most of the occasion by introducing Commander A.C. Galloway to 
Blanco. As always, he was extra careful not to wound the sensitive feelings of the 
Spanish governor. Walker and Galloway, who worked in tandem, were taken aback 
when Blanco raised a question: “If permissions were granted tor H.M.S. Daphne 
to enter the River, would Commander A.C. Galloway give protection to any na- 
tive rebel chief or other insurgents who might take refuge on board Daphne ? Both 
Walker and Galloway were hard put as to what to say. Time seemed to be running 
out. There was too much risk involved on the part of Walker in looking after the 
welfare of 1 50 subjects, especially in view of the circulating rumor that a massive 
attack of Manila by “30,000” Katipuneros would take place sometime during the 
night of 1 0 November. According to Walker, Manila had been threatened on three 
different occasions by feigned attacks. Compounding his justified feeling of appre- 
hension, there was a brewing typhoon which would make it impossible foi the 
“ship boats” to ferry men, women, and children from the shore to the British war 
vessel in the Manila Bay. Both Walker and Galloway agreed to make a conditional 
promise pending the receipt of definitive instructions from Lord Salisbury and 
Vice-Admiral Buller. 

On 7 November, Lord Salisbury telegraphed Walker informing him of tie 
outcome of the representations conducted by British Ambassador Wolf. Thus, the 
coded message reads: “ There has been a communication gap. The sanction of the 
Madrid government was needed which is now granted. Blanco, also in a lettei to 
Walker dated 28 October 1896, reiterated his tacit approval: 

. . .tengo el gusto dc manifestar a usted que puede entrar y fondear en el Rio la 

golcta inglesa dc guerra que se cncuentra en bahia — 

Two days later, Blanco stressed that the British men-of-war would not allow 
any individual “rebel” to take refuge on the said vessels. And on 3 December, 
Walker dispatched a message to Lord Salisbury with more good news: ... that af- 



413 



THK PHI I Il'I'INI RI-V« >1 t I l< >N 

ter much fencing,” he obtained the cancell. ition <>f the conditions tor the addi- 
tional three steam -powered Lmcha to patrol the Pasig Kivet. 

In November, "the situation was. tr(>ni Walker s point of view, tar from 
satisfactory. Sensing that the rebellion was fast spreading to the other portions 
of the archipelago, he telegraphed a lengthy confidential and secret communi- 
cation to Lord Salisbury, the facts of which were extracted with some difficulty 
from a Spanish old-timer. It is worthwhile to mention here some interesting less- 
known facts about the Katipunan movement based on the piesailing Spanish 
opinion and also to note certain errors of facts sshic h Walker s Spanish informant 
had committed. 

According to Walkers informant, a secret societs ssas organized along the 
lines of the “Carbonar in Manila about I 1 .actualls on |uh IS)*.]. In the 
beginning, it had peaceful intentions and objec t ives. one of \s hie h was to \\ ork for 
the improvement of the social and political lot of the mdun. ( hie nlnious positise 
result behind the establishment of the Katipunan ssas the reduction of gambling 
and cockfighting in T’ondo. (rambling houses and cockfighting were under the 
protection of the Spanish authorities because, aside from bringing in handsome 
revenues for the colonial treasury, they became lucratise and illegal sources of 
wealth. I hese establishments were almost deserted and some closed because of 

the antigambling campaign launched by the Katipunems. About 1894, under the 
leadership of Supremo Andres Bonifacio, the society pursued a revolutionary path: 
the extermination of the Spaniards was its ultimate objectise. 1 he term 
“Katapunan” (sic) or association was concoc ted by Dr. Do Valenzuela, one of its 
founders. (Valenzuela joined the K.K.K. at a much later date thus becoming one of 
its founders. And it is doubtful whether he coined the term Katipunan.) Dr. Jose 
Rizal, who was exiled to Dapitan in Mindanao for political reasons, was consulted 
by the Secretary” of the Katipunan. Rizal professed a political solution instead of 
mass “murder.” “His opinion which would have acted powerfully on the Indians,” 
the Spanish informant continued, “was kept secret by Andres Bonifacio. 1 he tar- 
geted date for the “massacre of all the Spaniards in the Tagal [Tagalog] districts” 
was to coincide with the fiesta of Binondo and the expected visit of the first ty- 
phoon in late October. Fortunately, the plot was discovered toward the end of July 
or beginning of August. (It was Father Mariano ( lil of londo who denounced the 
Katipunan chapter and exposed it to a local daily newspaper). Forming the nucleus 
of the “army of extermination,” “about 1,500-2,000” Tagalogs — “all desperate 
characters” who bivouacked in the forested hills of San Mateo made a surprise 
and concerted multi-pronged attack towards Manila. Armed with choppers and a 
few firearms,” they were intercepted at San Juan Del Monte, and Santa Mesa by 
the Spanish and indigenous infantry soldiers and were nearly annihilated in the 
morning of 29 August. The leader, Sancho Valenzuela, a rope manufacturer, was 
captured and executed by firing squad. As part of the overall strategy of the 
Katipuneros, their projected advance toward Manila was to be synchronized with 
an assault on the Cavite arsenal. 



414 



Ql'IASON The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



Walker described the period between 29 August and 2 October as the “most 
critical one thev were passing through” for indeed if the indigenous troops had 
risen “en masse" and joined the rebels, Manila and its suburbs would have been 
taken and there was no saying what might have happened. 

All wars and revolutions have their share of man's inhumanity to man and 
the Philippine revolution was no exception. Both camps committed meaningless 
acts of brutality against both the innocent and the guilty. A case in point was the 
brut .,l nu i r ,lcr . .1 brum Mr. Morris ai.J Mr. Cliofre, a young rich Spaniard, who 
botlr went outside of Inuamuros to take photographs. According to Walker Me 
ris was the firs, linglish vie, in. in the early stage of the revolution. More and more 
acts of atrocities were perpetrated after the declaration of nramal law. One was 
reminiscent of the Black I Me of Calcutta: 169 revohmonanes were thrown utto a 
ma dun-eon located in the has, ion of San Sebasnan: by the follow, „g morntng 
M had died of asphyxiation and the remainder were shot to death batches on 

the ZwihZZl'tZZrrcd on the night of 25 March 1898 when a house 

A ' ' , , s , crci meeting was raided by the Spanish guardui civil. 

where 1 50 1 --- -U.ng a S ; mish colonial authorities. "These per- 
A priest supplied i k ^ ^ ^ may mn have been conspirators. Undoubtedly 
sons were un.umcc . • . • undoubtedly idle curiosity accounted 

some were dangerous pc. ^ ^ ^ as many as th ey con- 
fer the ( remainder were shot next morning. 

ven.emly could .m ^ much awaited reinforcements ot raw recruits 

During Out. x < ' Wcd bv lhc Spanish Creoles and penhmlares with 

from Spain arrived am we c soldiers came on board the S.S. 

bud jubilation. ^ ^pi^s” S. °AhHserntt landed a contingent force of 1 .900 men 
Cataluna on 3 C c o . - ,• ou nd 1,200 soldiers came on board S.S. 

on 13 October, he c urd " _ ^ Qn 17 October men on 

Ambrosia Lopez I he lot. th 1 J thc S . S . Colon brought in about 1,500 

hoard S.S. ,sU > “Irs. representing the' artillery, marutes, 

men. A total Annv arrived in Manila. “They were taken from the 

chans seta units o • 1 • ‘ hev j ia J to be "drilled into the proper use of 

plough” and short v l, P on * * j “thoroughly disciplined.” Greeted with great 

Mauser and i dle and need d to ' ^ Spaniards, the soldiers made a 

enthusiasm by the belcagueicd and f a \ c 

“triumphal entry into the old town" pacing under the pretty welcome archer tes- 
, Zed with “tropical flowers." l hc Antillan type ol house., ntramuros were 
bedecked with the Spanish royal colors and “pigeons were let loose to fly and 
welcome the tired, green conscripts. 

By 9 November, the Spanish colonial government had an aggregate force of 
10,000 soldiers to augment thc native Filipino troops of 1 5,000 whose loyalty was 
now doubtful: “two regiments" had already been shipped to Mindanao where they 
staged a mutiny, many of their members reportedly shot to death and otheis escap 
ing to the neighboring mountains. Walker reported that there were nine provinces 



415 



THI- PI HI IITINf Rl-Volt IK >N WhHltOMi 

placed under martial law. I he provinces of < aviic and B.u.mg.is were entirely in 
the hands of the Katipuneros. I he Spanish < k ner al lar annllo kept close watch of 
the Pansipit River, which separates ( .avite and B.u.mg.is. in order to prevent the 
25,000 Katipuneros from Gavitc and the 10,000 tr<»m B.u.mg.is from joining 
forces. Walker’s assessment was bleak: 1 p to ilns time <>t wilting, die rebels have 

so far held their own and the rebellion is inc rc.ismg. I n ( avite and Batangas the 
Katipuneros sequestered considerable quantities <>f food supplies in die granaries 
of several haciendas belonging to the Atigustiman ( )rdci. V cording to Walker a 
guerilla warfare” was waged in those two provinces. 

The main theater of conflict was ( avite. 

With a modicum of confidence restored. Blanco teh good tor waging a pre- 
liminary offensive bv ordering some 1,000 troops to advance toward Paranaque 
some 5 or 6 km from old Manila. ( )n *). 10 and 1 I November, Spanish rroops 
launched an assault against the well-entrenched Katipuncios at Novckta but were 
severely beaten “with a loss of 1 ,000 dead and wounded. It seems that the tide of 
the revolution was slowly turning in favor of the Katipuneros. But this fierce en- 
gagement resulted in a stalemate; each side decided not to counterattack. 

In the afternoon of 6 December, about I-K) K.itipuncro prisoners of war 
broke out of jail at the Cavite Naval Arsenal and in the process killed the alcalde — 
the governor of the prison and the Cavite Naval Vird and several guards. Many 
of the escaping Katipuneros were shot to death in the streets In the Spanish sol- 
diers and about 21 were recaptured and executed afterward In lning squad. 1 he 
wheel of reprisal was slowly turning full circle. A few clays later, on 14 December 
four rebels” were shot in the morning and several more rebels, rich proprietors, 
and merchants were thrown in jail to await their late". And soon tbc\ weie eon 
demned to death without trial, shot precipitously, and their properties sequestered 
by the state. ^Walker was referring to the I hirteen Martyrs of C, avite. lo instill 
fear and to create a psychological impact on the duIio populace, some executions 
were individual, some were collective, and the victims buried without coffins. 

In the meantime, 1 0,279 Spanish soldiers disembarked; 6, 1 5 1 soldiers were 
still en route. Governor-General Polavieja petitioned for an additional M 0,000 
more” to make a total striking force of 30,000. 

On 21 November, the Manila-Dagupan train was destroyed by the 
Katipuneros. Its passengers were taken captive and only a few managed to escape. 
The cable linking Luzon with the outside world was also disconnected by the 
Katipuneros. Walker sent an immediate appeal for help to Vice-Admiral Buller for 
^ more spacious ship to accommodate the British women and children in the event 
that the Katipuneros would overrun Manila. Reacting promptly, Buller dispatched 
H.M.S. Pigue under Commander Graham. About the possibility of the 
Katipuneros gaining control of Binondo, the economic nerve center of Manila, 
Walker was worried for two reasons. Firstly, the aggregate value of t he British bank- 
ing and commercial investments particularly the Hongkong-Shanghai Bank was 
in the neighborhood of $100 million dollars: a fabulous sum by the standards of 



416 



, H l \sON The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



those times. Aiul secondlv. the* Spanish colonial government announced in the 
Official Gazette that it was disclaiming any responsibility for any property dam- 
aged bv the Spanish troops or the Katipuneros during the course of the “rebellion.” 
'fhe Colonial 1 decree of 20 September was to become a touchy issue; Walker had 
no recourse except to elevate it to the British Foreign Office for it would involve 
“questions to be decided by the international law.” 

Another issue between the Spanish colonial authority and Walker arose from 
a „ announcement in the Official Gazette dated 25 September 1896 to the effect 
that the proper. v of foreign citizens might be severely affected by the revolution 
“bv fire or bombardment from the guns of the Spanish troops or by rebels, and 
that the Spanish government could not be made accountable or subjected to in- 
demnification or Compensation claims. Walker at once solicited the legal assistance 
of the British 1 oreign C office and awaited specific instructions on how to deal with 
Ihis is-iK-. rlK- British Foreign Offices reply was .ha, ,he Amencan and 

French claims in Cuba were no, disputed due to the present rebel!, on. Lord 
Salisbury who sough, the opinion of the lawyers of the Crown mat,., anted rhar 

, foreign power cannot, as a matter of international right be made responsible 
goneraih for injuries inflicted on the persons or property of the Brit.sh sub|ect 
'resident, in the country bv insurgents engaged ,n open and armed host, in to 
i„ government which injuries the government had no power to prevent, n 
such a c ase. foreigners cannot claim to he placed in a bene, struatton than the 

natural born subjects of the country. 

Quite a few celebrated eases and decisions were forwarded to Walker for his 
perusaTand guidance. As early as 2S February I S6I . the Larv Offices ot the Crown 
he do I be I lf. I larding. Richard Be, hell, and William Atherton subnutted a 
memorandum to l.ordj. Russell. In effect, they believed rha, the Venezuelan gov- 
eminent could no, he held responsible |for damage!] generally tnflteted on the 
nroDcrtie, or persons of British subjects or other foreign restdenrs the country 
by insurgents engaged in open armed hostility to the government and which .met- 
rics the government had not the power to prevent. 1 hey averted: .. . 1 ! the coun- 

try be invaded bv an enemy and the foreign property is injured by the invading 
army he has but little to claim for compensation." Moreover “injury caused by in- 
surgents or rebels is subject to the same rule.” But, they asserted: “It, indeed the 
government has the power to do so neglect or willfully abstain from putting down 
insurgents, it may he regarded as an accomplice in the act complained ot and this 
would be a right of the foreigner to demand compensation. “ 1 he government of 
the injured foreigner, the cases attended, would in such a case have a right to 
demand compensation in his behalf. 

The queen’s advocate, Robert Phillimore, in his note to the earl ot Clarendon 
dated 17 May 1866 expressed his opinion agreed with the Law Offices ot the 
Crown. 



417 



Tin ['HI! M'I’ISI HI VI >1 I I 1« 



HI 'i< >M > 



It may also be appropriate to i ite the ’i I )o. ember ! 8 t opinion of the Law 
Offices of the Crown, composed of Rn b.iril Rag. ill. iv. I* ’bn ! lolker. and J. 1 arker 
Dean, offered to the earl of Derby. I bey pointed out that tlu British subjects car- 
rying on their business or residence in Spain bas e nud.imi upon the Spanish gov- 
ernment for compensation for the losses v. bn h mas h.ise been sustained b\ actso 
the troops or insurgents during the civil war. cm ept in t he e\ c nt of Spanish govern 
ment compensating Spanish subjects who may have ,,ul| rud similat losses. 

While the I .aw Offices of the ( town. composed of Henry lames, barrer 
Herschell, and J. Parker Dean, in their 1 1 > Ma> memorandum addressed to 

the earl of Granville stressed the french point of view on the light of inc ctnnit} or 
losses occasioned by war in reference to the I rein h <. •(’ tu ,Kt ult 1 * 10 
government. They cited Monsieur ( .ballemel I acorn elm SJU ! ’- u 11 crl 

ment desired to maintain the principle which the\ h.ul .ilwaoup k i * iat . „ 

vidual, who had suffered losses occasioned by ssar had no ngu to mc cmnity 

Again, on 10 August 1882, they put forward the french government P oslIU n t la 

“foreign subjects suffering from a war have no greater title lot tom l en. at 
i • r , , i ,.v ( c*pt in c. iscs of wanton anu nn- 

the natives of the country where it is carried on c . [ . - 

1 r 1 , r 1 1 , • r e xcesses or breach of military 

necessary destruction of neutral property and oiiki 

discipline.” t . . . * 

The Uw Offices of, he Crown, com posed of |. Parker I W I . jamej. 

F. Herschell, on 10 August 1882 brought to the- tinciiito" ol t.tr .1 .i.tim t it 

opinion of the Italian government which mamtained .he prop ''«■ 

to indemnity existed in all cases of injury ami losses ea.tsetl bv a war to neutrals 
which were not justified by force majeure or by militai > nceessits. 

Lastly, the opinion of the law Offices of. he < Town, contpt.sed ot Rtch rd 
Webster, Edmund Clarke, and J. Parker t )ean, atldresset I ... the earl oi Ictdcstctg 
was also put forward for the enlightenment of Consul Walker. 1 bey argued ru 
the injury resulted from acts of private or wanton or unnecessary destruction o 
property not justified by military necessity and encouraged by lax and incident 
discipline, a neutral government might have a special claim to compensation on 
behalf of its subjects.” They emphatically stated that “in case of an insurrection 
where the subjects of the neutral state are wantonly injured through the m«s- 
eonduct of officers or soldiers of the state, the government of such neutral state is 
in some cases entitled to intervene and claim compensation. It is not sufficient that 
a pnma facie case should be made, but very clear and strong evidence should be 
required by the government invited so to intervene.” I Airing the American Civil 
War, a foreigner whose goods were destroyed by the inevitable casualties oi war, m 
the place in which he was resident, or in which his property might be could not 
claim the official interference of his own government, to obtain compensation 
for his loss.” He must seek the same remedy as the citizens in the place in which he 

was resident or in which the property was in the hands of the government of that 
country. 



418 



OU \M >N The Philipp: fte Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



Coded mcssaucs shuttled hack and forth between the British Consulate in 
Manila and the British foreign Office in London on the one hand, and the British 
Legation in Peking and the British Consulate in Manila on the other, concerning 
the problem of the t liinese community. Altogether the e 

of Manila and Sft.OOO in the province of Manila, not including the Chinese living 
in other parts of the archipelago. The problem of the Chinese partook of an en- 
tirely different nature. A number of Chinese were being thrown into prison because 
of their alleged involvement in some form of revolutionary activity and others were 
subject to fi-ciuem harassment bv the Spanish secret police on trumped-up charges 
of maintaining gambling houses. 

The Chinese problem became more and more acute as the Spanish secret 
police made it a habit to barge into the Chinese houses at night without warning 
on any pretext The C liinese who were being victimized happened to be the most 
respectable British subjects." "If the Chinese paid the police, a present or money, ^ 
Walker declared, "the latter released them, if not. they are marched oft to prison. 
Nihil mmw, subtoli! 1" cserc ising his "unofficial protection to the Chinese con- 
nuinitv. Walker cited die case of "some 100 Chinese petty shop keepers, t hese 
Chinese shop keepers who wished to fan, hie made i, a cardinal point to offer a 
■present in mono to ordinary policemen and ,he lieutenant ot the police hot ,, 
some instances. ,he Spanish see, police could not he proptnated and so the 

CUnese "were all sen,. One of, he Chinese. Yeun Qui ha. .a Bnnsh sub- 

ject. was harassed In the seere, police who on three occasions made tore, hie u, rt 
on the pretext that gambling was going on •*“ 

co effect his rclca sc through, he imcrccssio, , ot the evil governor of Man la. Walker 
was fully aware of the lact that the Spanish colonial bureaucrats "in o" '■ xtx P 
tions were underpaid." I 1c went on to say that "it is only by receiving presents an 
by extortion .ha, the officials are able to retire to Spam coorpamttvely well off after 
holding office here for three years." In this connection, the Foreign C ftice can 
cloned him “to be a little more polite in bis language” in complaints addressed to 

the local Spanish officials. , , . , 

At 5 p.m. on 3 I )ecember. Lord Salisbury wired Walker, informing him that 

the Chinese government in Peking had put in a request “to extend the necessary 
protection to the Chinese subjects in Manila." Walker favored the idea of extent - 
ing any form of assistance or protection to the Chinese residents in view of die d e- 
teriorating situation and the impending danger to the Chinese community. How- 
ever, the Spanish colonial government maintained that the Chinese were in no 
grave danger and besides the extension of the British protection to the Chinese 
would create a “had impression” on the Spaniards in the archipelago. Accordingly, 
Walker was tasked by Lord Salisbury to “listen to any application which the Chi- 
nese may make and to afford them such unofficial assistance and advice as may 
seem necessary.” He was further instructed to keep close touch with Hei Majestys 
Minister at Peking. Apparently, the point Walker raised earlier in the Foreign Of- 



419 



(Iff I’l lit Il’I'IN! Kl V< >1 I V.l > Hi X >NI ) 



fice was logical based on existing re.ili t ies. In Ins v. < »i J s. it assistance is gi\en to the 
Chinese it should be officially not unoffi tails. I I- uvc. lie ought to Ik gicen full 
powers to protect Chinese interests. I le timber argued rh.it undoubtedly these 
men are in great danger whatever the Spanish government may sav to the contrary." 
He became frantic when he received an urgent appeal from the ( hme.se headman 
to effect the immediate release of SOD ( binese prisoners m the hands of the rebels 
at Imus.” The widespread rumor in Manila was that on more than one occasion, 
Chinese prisoners were being killed especially v hin tiu I ihpini> tunc us were 
being bombarded bv the Spanish troops as the Indians hate the <- h.neseasmuch 
as they do the Spaniards. I ler Majesty s Minister M u I >onald at I eking cabled 
Walker and told him bluntly: The Spanish government ob|ec ts to your acting in 

official capacity.” In order to implement du- .md s [ Hc! * K c ikc(i\o rom 

Lord Salisbury, Walker still badly needed additional funding in run the a airs o 

the Chinese. For all the extra work he would do 1,1 mtl ' , u s ° 1 K ? ’ , 

Chinese,” he needed only £48 monthly ami in his own words tins amount would 



not be exorbitant. . ,, ir 

, , c , I t,|,. I, is subordinates in the British Foreign 

Lord Salisbury, or most probably b |s su . 

r^\cr* jj / i i tit - flu - i-vncliscs (o llH n iTCtl n\ al kc I 1 n tilC 

Orrice, could not comprehend exact l\ me c .pc . . , . . 

i. , ^ . ... . • f | lc . ( liinese. \\ .ilker explained that he 

discharge of his added assign men t vis-a-vis tnc 

i r w * . . ^ Smiiisli fluentlv, two Jerks, stationery, 

needed a Mandarin interpreter who spoke ^p. , . .. . 

and extra office- spacer In another coded dtep.neh ol Her M.ti.-xtvx Monster 

MacDonald, it was made- crystal clear to Walker that any expenditure i tat e.m not 

be- recovered from individual application may prohal.lv have- to he met >y rout- 

self.” Walker had to use his sound judgement on matters hemg presented to him by 

the Chinese petitioners in accordat.ee with the spec ific me,, net, on issued by the 

Foreign Office, It seems that Walker had an ttherim tnn.ivc- helnncl htssero^ stand 

to give aid and protection to the Chinese in di sl ILSS * '^ LLl)IC 1 ll) 1 v 

the British Foreign Office, “his one idea seems to have been to get an increased 
allowance out of the business.” Her Majesty’s Minister MacDonald considered 



Consul Walker “hopeless.” 

Walker became overzealous in “his taking charge of the Chinese interests. 
This became again the subject of complaint of the Spanish colonial government 
particularly in reference to the unsavory statement he addressed to the Spanish 
governor-general. In this regard, he bad “exceeded” his instructions and was ad- 
monished by the Foreign Office. He was told to comply strictly with Lord 
Salisbury’s instruction and to explain his tactless action to the Spanish governor- 
general and even to the point of extending an apology. 

From December 1896 to January 1897, Walker was flooded with petitions 
‘for the redress of the wrongs and oppression by Spanish petty officials who bleed 
them in a pecuniary point of view whenever they can.” Walker as always had to 
turn to the .Spanish governor-general for “redress officially. 

Walker felt that the Spanish colonial decree of 20 September 1 896 would not 
hold water because the question of compensation would have to be settled by in- 



420 



t M I \sc )N 1 he Philippine • Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



tcrnation.il law and not by a local decree. Article III of the said decree reads: “The 
damages which mav have occurred by accidents of war, inevitable, or accidental or 
those bv rebel forces will not be object of indemnification on the part of the State." 
Fo reign-owned property or goods stored in “godowns" or warehouses were covered 
by Article III. 

On 2 l December 1 896 the S.S. Alfonso XII arrived, carrying on board General 
Camilo Polavieja and his military staff and about “1,300 marines and chausseurs." 
Polavieja had to replace General bchaluce — the segundo cabo of the Spanish forces 
who left as an invalid for Spain. Rumor spread all over Manila that Governor-Gen- 
eral Blanco was to be replaced by Polavieja, the former being blamed lor his soft: 
policy vis-a-vis Filipino revolutionaries and his utter failure “to crush the rebellion 
at its commencement without waiting for the arrival of the European troops from 
Spain ” On the contrary. W alker telegraphed Lord Salisbury saying that under the 
tense situation, Blanco' did his best and bided his time: “...If the few European 
troops here had met with a reversal at the commencement of the rebellion," he con- 
tinued, “the whole of the native troops might have gone over to the rebels and no 
one of t hem could have answered for the consequences." A few days later, the Of- 
ficial Gazette published an official telegram announcing the appointment ot 
Polavieja as “Captain ( ’.eneral and Governor General ol the archipelago. 

1 n t he morn i ng of 1 8 l December, after the celebration of the High Mass at the 
Manila Cathedral, Marquis de Polavieja took his oath of office in the presence of 
his military staff in their resplendent uniforms, high ecclesiastical dignitaries, and 
key Spanish bureaucrats and civilians. From the cathedral, the newly inducted 
Spanish governor-general rode in a state carriage pulled by a “team of six horses to 
the town hall where he received the kevs of the town and fortress from the mayor. 
The outgoing Blanco handed him the “baton of office’ and shortly afterward tie 
religious, civil, and business leaders as well as the chevaliers and different C rders 
of Knighthood” were presented. Invited to grace the colorful turnover ceremony 
were members of the Foreign Consular Corps, the doyen of which was Monsieur 
de Berard, the French consul who delivered a speech and presented tic 4 * e P re ' 
sentatives of the foreign governments. Each consul was subsequently introduced 
to Governor-General Polavieja. After the ceremony, the Foreign Consular Corps 
paid its respects to Blanco and thanked him profusely “for his ready support 
and invaluable assistance” which he extended to the consuls during his brief 
term of office. 

From November 1896 to February 1897, Polavieja was getting ready for an 
offensive drive against General Aguinaldos forces in Cavite. On 14 February 1897, 
the Cavite campaign got underway as the Spanish colonial army had been beefed 
up. He set up his headquarters at Parahaque (a town about 6 miles from Manila 
and about a mile from the pueblo of Las Pinas). 1 he Filipino forces numbering 
about 2,000 fortified themselves in trenches just on the right of the bank of the 
Zapote River. On 1 S February, leading a contingent of Spanish soldiers, Colonel 
Barranguirer executed a short march toward Pamplona (a pueblo some 7 miles 



421 



I f H. I'HII ll'l’INI Kl Vi >1 t I M > 



I » HI > < »N. I > 



from Manila) after a bloody clash lasting for about bun hours. I he advancing 
Spanish soldiers dislodged the Filipino troops in then entreiu hrnents and recap- 
tured the town “with great frenzy and determination. 

Moving southward to the left side of I ake bonbon batangas], General 
Jaramillos unit was, as planned, to join eventually v.irh ( ieneral I ^lehatiihres army, 
which represented the right wing of the pincer movement. I achamhre ore ere is 
10,000 men from Lake Baia to advance toward die direction of the sout nvestern 
section of Cavite. His objectives were ( 1 ) to encircle the whole pnnineco 
including Batangas, ( 2 ) to drive the I ilipinos to the sea. < > > to iccaptiirc t test g 
holds which were in the hands of the hilipino revolutionary forces dnee t ie co ™ 
mencement of hostilities, and (4) to take Irnus the- Sebastopol of t ie e 
And in the military operations that followed , Jaramillo took posse ss ion < 
ofBignay [Binan] situated to the west of bavuvugan on I akc Bon 10,1 • 

Meanwhile Spanish Admiral Montojos fleet kept on sK ,n ^ c n.iq 
trenches in many strategic spots in Las Linas, Novclct.i, Naic. anc a u u 
February, the fortified town and trenches of S.lang were placed under siege by tne 
combined forces of Generals Lachambre, Marne, and ( oionc . ca b 

ensued and the Filipino defenders of the town otfcTt cl a ilt ic nnintc rcSI ' ’. . 

ing 400 men. According to the Spanish report, the Spanish casua 

mal, ‘only 18 soldiers and a few officers. , 

After Silang, the next military target of the advancing Spams 1 anm WJS 1 e 
town of Perez Dasmarinas. Lachambre knew the importance of t k n 

overall defense strategy of Aguinaldo: it was “the gate that barred the way to Imus. 
After a most desperate and sustained resistance by Aguinaldo s men, erez 
Dasmarinas fell on 24 February. The church and convent were taken alter a terce 
engagement and stiff resistance. The Filipino forces sustained heavy casualties, wit i 
about 1,200 dead and “some 500 were burned alive, while the convent was being 
gutted by flames.” The Spaniards suffered only a slight loss: “one captain, sol- 
diers killed, and several wounded officers and soldiers." It was a brave performance 
by Aguinaldo’s gallant men who fought without an artillery cover and stood un- 
told hardship without complaint. 

“i ^^ber sounded optimistic in saying that in a short time he wou re P° 
the taking of Imus” and the “decline and fall” of the “Rebellion which had done so 
much havoc to British commerce and trade and affected severely the sugar and 
hemp production...” as the cultivators, in most cases, “joined the rebels.’ On 27 
March, Walker wired a cryptic note to Lord Salisbury. The coded text reads: 

...Imus taken. Great loss of enemy. Pardon granted to insurgents who sur- 
render. 

Immediately following this news about the successful Spanish campaign in 
Cavite, Walker dispatched to Lord Salisbury a lengthy assessment of the revolu- 
tion, touching on the main objective — the overthrow of the Spanish regime — and 



422 



oi l \m )N The Philippine' Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



focusing on the “clerical dominance which they [Filipinos] strongly protest 
against." 

With the capture of Imus, however, the revolution was far from over. The 
arena ot war shitted to Nueva heija, a province north ot Manila. 1 he Filipino revo- 
lutionaries launched a surprise attack on 8 September 189 against the town ot 
Alliaga and fortified themselves in the Spanish garrison occupied by the gtuirdia 
c/V/V located in the center of town. During the ensuing fight, the Spanish captain in 
charge ot the garrison, slumped to the ground, shot through the head. His men 
made a heroic stand. 

Soon a contingent ot reinforcements rushed ahead under the command ot 
General Nunez and C olonel Monet. 1 his Spanish counterattack inflicted heav\ 
losses’ on the Filipino troops until the remaining were all driven out ot the town 
proper. Concerning the siege ot Alliaga, \Calker quoted an account published in 
the El Comcrcio : 

Many tonified themselves in the Old Tribunal. General Nunez and 
Captains Don Buenaventura Felix and Ambrosio Flores were wounded. Gen- 
eral Nunez was seriously wounded in the arm and thigh by a musket ball in- 
cluding ten soldiers. General Nunez handed over the command to Colonel 
Monet. I .a ter, the solders succumbed to their wounds. The Filipino rebels were 
well-armed. 

The reinforcements under the command of General Castillo and Colonel 
Monet made their advance under cover of darkness and bivouacked in the outskirts 
of the town. Monet’s force struck at 5 a.m. at different points, with an artillery 
cover, compelling the Filipino troops to withdraw from their fortified position. At 
8 a.m., the Filipino-held garrison was captured “at the point ot the bayonet. 1 he 
intensity of the assault was such that the losses ot Filipino detenders were \er\ 
numerous.” Half an hour later the vanguard column under Commander 1 rimo de 
Rivera triumphantly entered the town proper. 

With all his skills in the art of intelligence gathering, Walker was unable to 
get inside information on the ongoing negotiations between Go\emoi General 
Primo de Rivera and General Aguinaldo mediated by Don 1 echo 1 aterno. Because 
of the delicate nature of the negotiations, Primo de Rivera must have withheld in- 
formation from Walker. The contents of Primo de Riveras dispatches to Madrid 
seeking definitive instructions on how to handle the revolutionary leaders at Bia 
na-bato must have been kept in utmost secrecy. 

On 29 December 1897, Walker cabled another coded message to Lord 

Salisbury which reads as follows: 

Peace proclaimed. 27 insurgent leaders embark tor Hongkong on De 
cembcr 27. Receiving indemnification. 



423 



THK PHII Il’PINI KI A * >1 I nos AN I i HI > < >N I > 



Two months after the departure of < .eneral \gumaldn and his companions 
for Hong Kong via Suai, a disastrous fire destroyed almost all the principal Chi- 
nese shops in Calle Rosario and ( .alle Nueva the two mam streets in Binondo, 
the commercial center of Manila. I he total damage was estimated at about $2 
million. It was reported that the fire brigades belonging to several business firms 
performed a remarkable service in putting out the lire. Vs hile the Spanish troops 
rendered a yeoman’s job in isolating the fire, the\ also spent the night looting 
the affected Chinese shops. Walker did not tell the real cause behind this con- 
flagration. 

Consul Walker was partly wrong and partly right in his appraisal of the revo- 
lutionary situation. In the words of a scholar-historian: I he revolution changed 

its character in Biak-na-bato” — a secluded spot nestled in the mountainous terrain 
of eastern Bulacan. What took place next in the unfolding drama was that by late 
June 1897, Aguinaldo and his men regrouped as part of their strategic and tactical 
move, encamped in Biak-na-bato, and decided to resort to guerrilla warfare, 
thereby transforming the Filipino struggle against Spam into a peoples war. 
Aguinaldo needed ample time to make guerrilla warfare a workable and an effec- 
tive instrument of defense and offense. By 1 0 ( Ctober. Primo de Rivera, who suc- 
ceeded Polavieja, received a directive f rom the Madrid government to enter into a 
truce accord with Aguinaldo and his revolutionary leaders. I he truce of Biak-na- 
bato, signed on 18 November 1897, suspended the hostilities between the Filipino 
revolutionaries and the Spanish colonial government. It stipulated the terms, 
which included the surrender of Filipino arms, the exile of Aguinaldo and some 19 
members of the Revolutionary Committee to I long Kong, and an agreed schedule 
of payment to the Revolutionary Committee. According to Major George John 
Younghusband, a British army officer of the Queen’s Corps of Guides, who was 
here to observe the conduct of the revolution, I’rimo de Riveta, in raising the ini- 
tial payment stipulated in the Biak-na-bato agreement, did a great deal of arm- 
twisting: from Limhap [Limjap], “a half-caste” Chinese he got $25,000; from Luis 
Yanco [Yangco] $50,000; and from Chuidian $40,000 in order to gam their re- 
lease from Bilibid prison. The balance of $800,000 lined “the august pocket of 
Primo de Rivera.” Consul Walker regarded Primo de Rivera as a dishonest and 
corrupt official and pointed out that “when he [Primo de Rivera) arrived here, he 
levied, blackmailed right and left, and collected some $2 or $3 million before leav- 
ing.” He was linked to a “second General Weyler” and bragged about pacifying the 
archipelago for which service he received a handsome pension from the Spanish 
colonial government. Walker reported that before Primo de Rivera left, the “rebel- 
lion burst out again not only in the provinces of Luzon, but extended to the island 
of Cebu and Panay. Primo de Rivera had also developed the bad habit of not an- 
swering official correspondence and it usually took him three to four months to 
reply when he did. 

Around siesta time of 27 February 1 897, there was an episode which Walker 
did not fail to ignore because it had a direct bearing on an English sailor who 



424 



I ) l 1 YSC IN The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty s Consuls 



jumped ship and lived with a group of Filipino fishermen. About “20 to 30 
tttlisanes" (the term also used bv the Spaniards to describe revolucionarios) raided 
the customs house and the carbineer gua rd house, slew the Spanish lieutenant and 
a sergeant on duty, l he carbineer native guards joined the raiding party of 
revolucionarios. I hev did succeed in their objective, that is, to cart away the rifles 
contained in several ammunition boxes. As they rushed out to the streets, they shot 
to death a Spanish lieutenant colonel riding in a “gig and a Spanish civilian. The 
Spanish volunteer corps, eazadores . and chansseurs (loot soldiers) with marine 
guards reacted quickly and captured 1 1 native carbineers in a fishing village located 
in the suburb of Manila. In their search-and-arrest operation mission, the Spanish 
troops found an English seaman named John Robertson living among the native 
fishermen. The Spanish soldiers treated him roughly: “His arms were hog-tied and 
a bayonet was fixed behind his neck with a soldiers belt. And together with 16 
native prisoners, he was taken to the Bilibid prison in the suburb ol Tondo. 
Robertson was fortunate in that the Spanish local authorities turned him over to 
Walker “without any punishment being awarded to him for being found with the 
native fishermen. 

Some principal British merchants and residents hurled a different set of com- 
plaints either through Consul Walker or against him. One serious incident he had 
to handle was the “Kirkdale affair." It concerned the master of the British vessel 
Kirkdale , who was in charge of carrying contraband goods “at the height of the re- 
bellion.” Her mixed cargo, consigned to Ker & Co., came all the way from En- 
gland via Singapore; a portion was earmarked for Manila and the remainder for 
Iloilo. The Spanish consul at Singapore confirmed the intelligence report that she 
was bringing in six cases of contraband goods “for the rebels not listed in the ships 
manifest. Walker filed his formal protest against arbitrary detention of the British 
trading vessel on the ground that the ship master denied having contraband goods 
on board the ship. Mr. Weir of Ker & Co. made a declaration that “the 6 cases” 
were intended for Singapore. Governor-General Polavieja sent his private secretary 
to patch things up with Walker. After tedious and exhausting negotiations. Walker 
solved the detention of Kirkdale “with the satisfaction of all parties. In order not 
to jeopardize the interests of the British mercantile firms, Polavieja agreed to allow 
the Manila cargo to be landed, but on condition that armed Spanish soldiers had 
to accompany the vessel en route to Iloilo. 

In the case of Forbes, Munn & Co., Walker successfully worked out the re- 
duction of the duty on 1 50,000 cases of petroleum by getting an exemption from 
new tariff rates. 

With respect to the case of S.S. Glenlocky, Walker through his indefatigable 
efforts succeeded in having remitted the “unjust fine" of $30,000 imposed on the 
owners of the British vessel. 

In spite of all the best of intentions to protect British interests during the 
“most critical stage of the rebellion," Walker was still charged with negligence, 
inaction and inefficiency” by 13 British bankers and merchants. One complainant 



425 



I I If I'l HI II'F'INI HI VO! I I I* >N XNI > hi Vi >Nl > 

was Messrs. Samuel & ( .o. of I oiulon, wimh accused Walker <>t ura\c injury 
caused to British interests. 

The British merchants always turned to the British consul tor legal assistance 
and advice every time they found themselves in trouble with thi local Spams au 
thorities. As he put it aptly. Ins official dut v was to get the m out ot t u u> c t 
they had fallen into. ” . 

Walker dismissed charges of his detractors as grourullc ss. He o ti c n 

to mind having anv “unpleasantries with any me tc hant i \upi Mi ci 

“having refused to assist them whenever it la>* in Ins P (,v * cl - 1 

like Holliday Wise & Co. took up the cudgels lor him saving that the c urges 

. I. | r ■ lfl j ...... lf hirtlier to sa\ that he was most cour- 

were very unjust and uncalled for and w cm i ui 

teous” and “always ready to extend Ins assistance In Ins good oH.ccs m gist com- 
plaints and claims.” In their petition of reinonstiaiKc to I ou Sa is u . I 
cipal British merchants and bankers in Manila poiiiic.il out t u <■ • 

equate manner in which British interests in the I hilippnu Is am s ia 1 

sented during the past five or six years since the departure ol ( onsul Alexander 
Gollan in 1891.” . .. , • 

Anticipating his forthcoming rciiK-mcm from iIk- Hrmsl, dtplonta.tc scrv cc 
W alker wrote Lord Salisbury in October 1 H9 , requesting a piomoti , 

salary and the elevation of the consulate to that ol consulate genua . [ 

a number of weighty arguments: (1) the consulate in Ma.ula had been lu.u g 
many problems which were political in nature; (2) a number of irritants betucc 
the British bankers and merchants and the Spanish local authorities had been crop- 
ping up; (3) the absence of an ambassador to consult with, as in \ 

made it difficult for the British consul to decide on serious cases or give advice 
on the spot; (4) in case of the French consul who had few subjects and tasks, the 
British consul labored under an entirely different situation with 200 sub,ects un- 
der his jurisdiction; (5) aside from manning the consulate in Mam a, t ie rms l 
had to supervise the vice-consuls at Sual, Iloilo, and Cebu; (6) the trade of the 
Spanish-Philippine colony was almost entirely in the hands of British commerce 
houses; (7) the French government would elevate its Manila consulate to that ot 
consulate general; (8) as the doyen of the foreign consular corps, he had been in 
the service for the past 39 years in many places of the globe; and (9) he was in di- 
rect contact with the Spanish governor-general. In a note of the private secretary 
of Lord Salisbury to F.V. Vilicrs, a senior official of the Foreign Office, dated 14 
December 1897, he said that “the grounds Walker presented were sufficient 
to comply with his request for promotion, but he added that the French gov- 
ernment had no intention of elevating its Consulate.” Because of other more press- 
ing constraints, the British Foreign Office did not grant him his much-desired pro- 
motion. 

In early February 1898, again for reasons of health, he implored the British 
Foreign Office to grant him a leave of absence. This time, he wanted to go to Japan 
or to spend the winters in France and to report for duty to Manila in June 1898. 



426 



Ol I A SON 1'he Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



His application lor sick leave, however, was not approved. He must have been a 
very frustrated and disappointed man until his death. 

Walker succumbed finally to diarrhea just like the first British consul, John 
W. barren ( 1 S et 1 S(vt), who did not survive the rigors of tropical climate and died 
of the same dehvdratiiu; ailment. On 2 Ausust 1898, Consul Ramsden cabled 
Lord Salisbury: 



It is niv paintul dutv to report to vou the sad death ot Edward Henrv 
Rawson Walker at S: 1 S a.m. caused bv general collapse and debility from the 
effects ol the attack ot tropical dysentery. 



Walker had been suffering from diarrhea since 23 June and it was only on 20 
July when his health began to deteriorate and he fell unconscious tor the greater 
part of the night. 1 le experienced no pain and was "very calm to the end. A Sa- 
maritan, Robert Wood, a partner ot the Smith Bell & Co. took good care of him as 
his guest. “Iwery act ot kindness" was extended to Walker by Wood and the em- 
ployees ot the British firm. Or. ]. Doneland was the attending physician. Mrs. 
Walker, who was living in Ungland then, was duly notified and advised by Lord 
Salisbury “to place herself in direct communication with Consul Ramsden. Lord 
Salisbury instructed Ramsden, to comply with her wishes and that he would of 
course endeavour to carry out those wishes to the best of [his] ability. Captain 
Galloway was dulv informed of the death of his father-in-law. 

The foreign consular corps, the Spanish community, and the British men of 
war felt the loss ot Walker and demonstrated their sympathy and respect b\ hoist 
ing their respective flags at halt mast. Owing to a raging typhoon in the bay area 
and the intermittent rifle shots from the Filipino troops, the proper religious cer 
emony and burial could not be performed at the Protestant Cemetery in San Pe ro 
de Makati. Upon the advice of Or. Doneland, Walkers remains were placed in a 
metal casket and temporarily interred in one of the niches at the Paco Catho ic 
Cemetery, with the permission of the Archbishop of Manila. During the i mer 
ment, Admiral Montojo deputized his aide-de-camp, his son, and his chief of staf 
to attend the burial. Govcrnor-Gener al Basilio Agustin did not show up. On 
August, Walkers remains were transferred from the Paco Catholic Cemetery to tie 
Protestant Cemetery in San Pedro de Makati. It is interesting to note that the first 
British consul, John W. barren, negotiated the lease of the British cemetery in San 
Pedro de Makati for a period of 99 years and he was one of the first to be laid to rest 
there. The permission of General Pio del Pilar was first secured because the area of 
San Pedro de Makati was under his military command. Del Pilars men cleaned the 
road of “earthworks, barricades, etc." The cortege of Walker deliberately and si 
lently made its way down the rain-soaked, rugged, and winding road now ma e 
clean and passable upon the orders of Del Pilar. Accompanying the funeral pioces 
sion were Rear Admiral George Dewey in full and splendid U.S. Navy uniform 
and his aides. Many Chinese dressed in their ubiquitous camisa de chino showed 



427 



THh Mill IIM'INI KJV<> II NON \M»HhOM) 



their appreciation for the invaluable serv ices <>t ilu* lace consul. Reverend D.L 
Flemming, the rector of Sc. C *eorge ( hurch at I eadv ille. ( olorado, and concur- 
rently chaplain of the first ( Colorado \ oluntecr Infantry, officiated the burial with 
full and solemn religious rites. 

The death of Walker cast a gloom over those* who had known him as a dedi- 
cated, hard-working, loyal British diplomatic servant. I V ( onsul C )scar I. Will- 
iams paid tribute to him in the form of an official dispatch to Secretary of State 
Day: “In kindly and painstaking manner with which the late lamented Consul 
Walker discharged his delicate duties as your representative after my departure in 
Manila: Words of highest praise of his service to our cause and of deepest regret, 
personal and official over his death. Sometime later. \X alkc i s pc i sonal c ffccts and 
some antiques were sent back on the I I.M.S. Immoruiliu' under the command of 
Captain Sir Fxlward Chichester. I lis horses, carriages, and fine pieces of furniture 
were auctioned off to the Americans. 



More trouble would befall the ill-fated archipelago and ns .3 million ethnically 
diverse people — the outbreak of the Spanish-American Wai. But the piactica re 
suit was,” wrote Major George Younghusband, that on 1 Ma\ Aelmira George 
Dewey with the American fleet entered Manila harbor and completely destroyed 
the Spanish fleet.” As a consequence of Dewey’s victory over Admiral Montojos 
fleet, the political situation in the whole of Asia had consiclciabU altcrec . One re 
percussion of the entry of the U.S. Asiatic squadron into Manila Bay was the exo- 
dus of 1 ,000 Chinese on hoard the S.S. Esmeralda on 1 7 June I 808 for Hong Kong 
and another 1,000 Chinese on board S.S. Juensang, to Amoy (Xiamen). On 7 July, 
many British women and their children evacuated Manila and sought refuge in 
Hong Kong pending the outcome of the Spanish-American War. On 13 August, 
the American expeditionary forces, adhering to the principle of interdependence 
of the naval and army power, landed in Manila. 

From agents of Major Younghusband, it is learned that nearly a month after 
the American expeditionary forces encamped at various strategic spots in Manila, 
a wave of protests rose among the leading Chinese families as well as among the 
German and British bankers and merchants over the nomination of Carlos Palanca 
(or Tan Choi alias Chen Shian Shan) and his son Chen Kong as vice-consul and 
consul of China respectively^TOany prominent Chinese families had old scores to 
settle with Palanca who, they said, extorted vast sums of money from them in a 
variety of nefarious ways. The strong opposition stemmed also from the fact that 
Carlos Palanca, being a Spanish official agent for the Chinese community put in 
the way of other Chinese seeking “unofficial protection” all sorts of obstacles. He 
reportedly mulcted from many Chinese large amounts of money on the pretext 
that they were meant for the Chinese hospital. No exception was made: every Chi- 
nese entering or leaving Manila was required to pay a sum for the maintenance of 



428 



QUASON /' he Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



the Chinese hospital. C hi top of all this exactions, he collected “commercial contri- 
butions and personal taxes." Id make matters worse, the books ot account and li- 
abilities of the C hinese hospital were never shown to the Chinese donors. The 
other earnest concern in the petition of the Chinese community to the American 
governor of Manila was the establishment of a new Chinese Chamber ot Com- 
merce to be modeled after the California Chinese Guild, which replaced the old 
Chinese Tribunal, which was originally formed in response to the Spanish desire to 
pacify the unruly ( hinese coolies, later on. the Chinese Tribunal became a means 
to terrorize the community. I he C hinese tribunal under Spanish Philippines 
wielded enormous power, casting innocent Chinese into jail without due process 
or “fining them without trial, l he C hinese petitioners implored Consul Ramsden 
to transmit their protest to the Tsungli Y.tmen and a copy also to be forwarded to 
the Empress Dowager Tzu 1 I si of Manchu. China. 

It is quite understandable that the British home government was ahvays sen- 
sitive to anything affecting the Chinese interests and properties because ot the 
intermediary role the C hinese played between the British mercantile firms in the 
Philippines and the nu/io consumers. The British firms in Manila, in connection 
with the nomination of Carlos Palanca, called the attention of the British Foreign 
Office and presented their opposition based on the following grounds: (1) Carlos 
Palanca was a naturalized Spanish subject: (2) for a number of years, he exercised 
tremendous influence over the Spanish colonial authorities, levying contributions 
which would "fit either in the interest of himself or personally or in those of his 
Spanish friends without hindrance"; in this respect, he had been despotic and 
tyrannical”; (3) many C ihinese were heavily indebted to the British mercantile firms 
and if the Chinese consul were careless or biased, he would jeopardize the interest 
of some British firms bv allowing to depart from Manila any Chinese merchant 
intending to evade his British creditors; and (4) if Chen Kong were to be made 
consul, he would be under the influence of his father, Carlos Palanca. It is interest- 
ing to note that a large percentage of the financial debacles experienced by several 
Chinese merchants were attributed to Carlos Palanca “in order that he may reap 
some benefits in arranging the composition to be paid by them in dollars. 

The petition signed by 10 German merchants against the nomination of 
Carlos Palanca and his son was similar to that of the British merchants, except for 
a few specific charges. A large number of bankruptcies was ascribed to Carlos 
Palanca, who pocketed a great deal of money throi^gh a subtle form of “arrange- 
ments between debtors and creditors.” In his capacity as a merchant, he suspended 
payments several times without being able “to give his creditors satisfactory expla- 
nation for his failures." As a result, his nonpayment of debts forced a number of 
merchants to go out of business. Many Chinese owed the German firms huge sums 
of money. A Chinese consul, if lie were disinterested, could wreak havoc on the 
German firms by letting fraudulent Chinese merchants leave Manila surrepti- 
tiously. 



424 



THK WUI II'I’IM kivom-ik 'N \M 



) !M \ ( >NI ) 



In times of war and revolution, it was Pounce for western pow- 

ers to send military observers to the scene of conflict. Sue I. was t be case of Second 
Lieutenant Winston Churchill in < uha I die < •erm.m naval officers inside 

the Japanese lines during the Russo- lapanese W .„ -.1 1-0, 1 onS uu the young 
Douglas MacArthur at the Siberian front during the la.e. par. of World War I to 
mention but a few. During the Philippi' 11 * Revolution of I860 isn.s.t aptainEW. 
Norie of the British-Indian Army and Mafor C .<--»rge lolin Mmnghusband of the 
Queens Own Corps of Guilds came to Manila. In Asia, political developments 
were closely watched bv the British raj in India m view of its growing lukewarm, tf 
not hostile, attitude toward the nascent Indian na.ionahs, movement. None was 
in Manila at the opening of hostilities. I le must have left nmncd.utelv as evidenced 

by the fact that his Notes on the Hult P/ nne Islands ( 1 were published in Simla, 

India, on 29 September 1896. Some minor flaws can be detected m Ins treatment 

c ! i i (rr , * 1 1 \ - form <>t i;< >vcrn men i , cuiic*uion»u sys 

or such topics as geography', dcmogr.ipnv, .. 114 

r . 1 m 'm Mf , i.niii ii.ulc.uHlcc,innKrccN.i^rKiiUuraLand 

tern, clergy, military establishments, japam 

historical background. ,. . VT • • 4 

As to , he immediate cause of , lc "p rcst * Mt < a, ...... Noncurm.sd 

that -i, is as yc, uncertain, but it is -enbetl to c among .be »«»», or 

l if , . . ft notnilation against the priesthood and 

half castes and certain sections of the native p< | ■ ' . . . 

the government.” He went on to say: “Though many of -he Spanish priests and 
friars are excellent men and greatly respected, there is no doubt that the people 
suffer much from the exactions of the monastic orders. I here were tumors wide y 
circulating that “the Spanish priests (are) responsible themselves for the present 
rebellion... in order to induce the Government to increase the Spanish orcc in t ie 
islands and so render their own position more secure against the natives whom they 
greatly fear.” Still another one implicated the Japanese m having a hand in the 
revolt against the Spaniards” and in possibly supplying the rebels with ammu- 
nition and arms.” But he was extra careful to say the rumors required confirmation 
because of the gravity of the situation. The immediate reaction of the Spanish 
colonial government was to seek reinforcements from Madrid. I he mounting 
apprehension stemmed from the fact that the Spanish colonial army was largely 
composed of natives, in the proportion of about ten to one European. Moreover, 
the sailors of the colonial navy were “also almost entirely native.” In the event that 
the tide of conflict would tilt in favor of the Filipino revolucionnrios, the proba- 
bility of the native soldiers fraternizing or joining them would indeed be quite 
high. 

Norie ended his five-page report with these words. 

The rebellion broke out when 3,000 rebels attacked the Spanish troops 
at Manila, but were defeated with loss and driven into the hills. Nothing im- 
portant has since been reported and it may be that yet another insurrection 
had been tided over. 



430 



O l I A SON I'he Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty’s Consuls 



On the conirarv. .1 succession of events took place culminating in a full-blown revo- 
lution. 

I'he Philippine revolution was many things, and its military dimensions, 
particularly the Philippine American War, remain an integral part of the whole. 
We must now turn to Major Younghusband who arrived in Manila on 27 October 
1897 on hoard the l r,nnt< from Singapore via Iloilo. His twofold mission: (1) to 
render a militate analvsis ot the revolution, and (2) if conditions obtaining war- 
ranted, to meet with and interview General Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy. The first 
objective entailed the gathering of reliable intelligence about the general conditions 
of the archipelago, causes and conduct of the war, military leadership, discipline 
and training, strength and weaknesses (organization, size, weaponry, and fight 
value) of the opposing forces, tactics and strategy, and logistical support. 

Younghusband was at his best in assessing the comparative strength and 
weaknesses of the l '.S. expeditionary army and the Filipino forces. By the end of 
September 1898. Ins appraisal of the military situation was that “the balance of 
power | is] at this time fairly evenly divided” between the U.S. and Filipino forces. 
‘The Spaniards had altogether become," he added, “a negligible quantity.” 

As of November 1898. he observed that “the military situation was a sufh- 
cientlv curious one." The Spaniards were still clinging tenaciously to many islands 
except Luzon, having transferred their seat of administration to Iloilo. Panay, and 
maintaining slight control of the finances of the adjoining islands. With 50,000 
men, well-armed and well supplied with ammunition, the Filipino troops sur- 
rounded Manila, placing the heartland ot Luzon and other neighboring islands 
under their control. The remaining Spanish soldiers were holed up in a tew coastal 
towns,” while the Americans demonstrated their control of the seas with their su- 
perior naval power. 

He could visualize by this time the inevitability ot the open conflict between 
the American and Filipino troops as a consequence ot the U.S. annexation ot the 
Philippines. “The moment, however, as he foretold rightly, the American troops 
attempt to move out of Manila, their trouble will begin.” Without underestimat- 
ing the value of Filipino experience in warfare, having been fighting tor years toi 
complete independence," he sensed the vulnerability ot the Filipino force to the 
“preponderating weight ol the American navy. 

For the first time, the Filipino troops faced an altogether different war ma- 
chine and they responded differently to the new strategy and tactical problems that 
the Americans would pose. Younghusband did not underestimate the value of the 
Filipino experience in the art of warfare and the great handicaps under which they 
themselves would be operating. He keenly observed: “Aguinaldo’s troops possess 
the outline of an organization, in divisions, brigades, and regiments, and in reality 
divided up into small bands of guerrillas temporarily wielded together and capable 
of dispersal and concentration at will. 

When the Filipino-American hostilities commenced, the Filipino forces un- 
der General Aguinaldo had neither sufficient arms and ammunition nor adequate 



431 



THK PH 1 1 11*1*1 N I KlVnillH )N \NDIU Vo\|) 

food and clothing. Younghusband noted ih.n the natives whether Indian or Fili- 
pino could, however, live royally in the country. 

The “wisest plan Aguinaldo could pursue, according to Major 
Younghusband, would be to carry on the same guerilla tactics which have been 
practiced so successfully against the Spaniards. I his was what \guinaldo exactly 
resorted to and gradually he withdrew his forces north waul until his final capture 
by Captain Frederick Funston at Palauan. Isabela. I he justification for the whole 
plan of guerrilla action is spelled out in this report: 

In the pursuance of such a plan campaign ' \gum.ild< > might gradually 
relinquish seizure of Manila and draw the American troops to regions more 
favorable to his system of fighting, keeping, however, in view the possibility of 
returning suddenly when the American troops were dispersed and perhaps 
entangled in the interior and seizing Manila by coup tie nnitn. Such a seizure 
could, however, only he temporary and t < > serve the purpt >se of mot al ef tec t , for 
the guns of the American fleet would make the place untenable and the < oup dt 
main might end in his army being surrounded and captured ... . 

The closest ally of Aguinaldos forces was, of course, the environment. As 
Younghusband explained in minute detail: 

...after three centuries of occupation by a I uropean nation the means of com- 
munication arc as had now a.s they were in the middle ages. ( )nl\ one railway 
has been built, a length of 1 50 miles between Manila and l )agupan... But the 
line, which is of little strategic value,... is held throughout its length by 
Aguinaldos troops. The only other means of internal communication are af- 
forded by the most execrable roads,... arc so full of pitfalls and boulders as to 
be quite unsuited for the orderly passage of organized t mops with their trains. . . 
the country on either side of them is one continuous riceswamp as far as the 
eye can reach in every direction, making military operations on a broad front 
impossible.... Dotted about amongst these riceficlcls are mounds and hillocks 
covered with thick bamboo jungle, the value of which to a guerrilla enemy the 
Spanish troops have learnt to their cost... and in some of the smallci islands 
covering the whole island, are steep forest-covered hills, through which the 
tracks are so poor and rough. . .. 

In their defensive maneuvers and campaigns, Aguinaldo and his men had 
therefore to consider topography quite closely, applying their full knowledge of the 
whole terrain and its resources to good advantage. 

As to the general composition of the American Expeditionary Forces, there 
were two types of soldiers: those belonging to the Regular Army Corps and those 
belonging to the Volunteer Corps. Unlike the regular soldiers, the Volunteers were 



432 



(HI \NON The Philippine Revolution and Her Majesty's Consuls 



not professional soldiers and were “never meant to be soldiers." Promotions were 
based not on merit but simply depended on political connections or influence. The 
officers of the Regular Armw particularly the young ones, “are very smart and well 
up to the average of am other nation." While the officers in the Volunteer Corps 
were just the opposite, thev as a rule are verv slovenly in appearance and mostly 
reputed to be ignorant of their professions." Younghusband did not speak highly 
of the Volunteers discipline which was much to be desired or to use his words “en- 
tirelv unknown anions the \olunteers. As to the physical condition and appear- 
ance of the American soldiers, he had this to say: “75 percent were firm set, brawny 
men, of full age and powerful build; the remainder were young, but of good phy- 
sique In appearance and dress they are filthy to a degree, few of them know 

anything about a rifle, and fewer still have had any practice in shooting; to march 
in fours, in step, is perhaps the summit of their powers of evolution. He contin- 
ued: . . As to fire discipline there is none, as may be judged from the fact that the 

California regiment fired away the whole of its ammunition, 100 rounds per man, 
on August 13th, whilst barely in sight of, or contact with the enemy. 

Furthermore, he said: “ The American soldier of the wars of the Revolution 
and Secession is dead and buried, and in his place has arisen a stalwart trader, hardy 
adventurer, or a confirmed loafer. 

The American Regular soldiers and Volunteers also used different weapons. 
The Volunteers were given Springfield rifles while the K rag-Jo rgensen rifles were 
assigned to the Regulars. The American Regular soldiers showed a special prefer- 
ence for the Krag- Jorgensen rifles rather than the Lce-Metford. 

As to the soldier's remuneration, his monthly pay was $15 (gold) and while 
QP duty in Manila all ranks were entitled to 70-percent increase in pay. In addition 
he received a monthly clothing allowance of $10. 

Here is an interesting description of the average American soldiers' uniform: 

The American soldier's uniform, as seen at Manila, is noticeable chiefly 
for variety and uncleanness. What the prescribed uniform is it would be im- 
possible to ascertain by walking about the streets, for no two men, except by 
accident, are clad alike, but the following costumes appear to be most generally 
worn. On the upper man a blue serge jumper with turned-down collar, and 
brass buttons; or secondly', a brown canvas coat of the same pattern; or thirdly 
a white coat of unbleached linen; or fourthly a dark blue flannel shirt; or fifthly 
a khaki coat borrowed from the British at Hong Kong; or sixthly a shirt of any 
color or brown canvas, white, and khaki. Boots are generally brown and worn 
with a canvas gaiter as high as the knee, and laced up on the outside. For head- 
dress a small thin brown felt wide-awake, a little larger than a Homburg hat, is 
universally worn by all ranks, and is indeed the only unmistakable hallmark of 
the American soldier. He has also a white helmet, but nothing will induce him 
to wear it. 



433 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< >ND 



The portrait of the average Filipino soldier as described to us In Tninghus- 
band is as follows: 

The physique of the men is not good, and they are a very uneven look- 
ing lot, being of all ages, sizes and shapes, but are from all accounts verv brave, 
and imbued with an admirable spirit. If carefully selected and led by Fumpc.111 
officers, it is considered that the Filipinos would make verv tine troops, and in 
fighting qualities and bearing might he classed with the I )ongras o! the Indian 
Army. It will be remembered that Filipino troops were sent over to assist the 
French in Tonquin excluding the French Regular Infantry. They are doc ile by 
nature and would discipline easily and well. 



As to his uniform, he wore “a coat and trousers of cotton stuff with a thin 
blue and white line in it, as worn by Spanish soldiers. The universal head-dress is a 
wide-awake straw hat with a red, white, and blue, rosette the colors of the new 
Republic at the side. Boots are not much worn. 

The weapons that were mainly given to the Filipino soldiers were Remington 
and Mauser rifles. Around his waist, the Filipino soldier “wears a belt on which are 
threaded two capacious ammunition pouches, and occasionally a bayonet, but the 
majority prefer to this weapon the national long knife which comes in useful for 
other things besides fighting.” 

In stark contrast to the Americans, the Filipino soldiers received only 10 
cents a day and had “to find himself in food.” 

It is safe to say that the strengths and weaknesses of the army of the young 
republic reflected Philippine society then, which had a huge reservoir of young, 
virile, and simpleminded peasants. Its weaknesses were those of a peasantry that 
lacked the sophistication of industrial skills and techniques and an adequate 
schooling. 

What is of utmost significance was Younghusband s trip to Malolos, Bula- 
can, to meet with and interview “the new-fledged President of the Republic, Gen- 
eral Emilio Aguinaldo.” Before doing so, he had to secure the permission of Admi- 
ral Dewey and General Merritt and to find out if they had no objection. Their joint 
reply was, None whatsoever, go right away.” He also sought the advice of Consul 
Ramsden who cautioned him “to go casually and without letters of introduction” 
because his visit might be misconstrued by the Filipino revolutionary newspapers 
and magnified into a political move of importance. So excited was he that thrice 
he woke up just to be able to catch the 6:05 a.m. train for Malolos at the Tutuban 
Station from the Hotel Oriente, the finest hotel then in Manila. Since he needed a 
respectable figure to introduce him to President Aguinaldo, he met through sheer 
coincidence Smith Alliston, an Englishman, who kindly volunteered to extend to 
him the favor. Alliston had previously made for himself an arrangement for a pri- 
vate meeting with Aguinaldo. We are told that Alliston watched with gusto on 13 
August 1898 from the roof of the English Club the naval engagement at Cavite 



434 



'rs':r Rrswuiwn .:*ui Her Mafoty> ( onsuls 



between Admiral Ntomoios dev repit Spanish fleet and Deweys l .S. Asiatic Squad- 
ron and the Capitulation ot Manila. 

Younghusband and Ml ist on n of t at the N ialolos Railway Station which was 
about a little over a mile a\\ a\ from the Barasoam C onvent. 1 hey rode on a small 
hooded heiul on i w < » wheels pulled h\ two hearty little pomes, sloshing through 
a road of 6 to S tiu lies deep in mud the w of st road in the world. It was almost 
9 a.m. when the\ ieav hed the ; : *; aiul decided to take a late breakfast at a 

small pot house in a side stteet. \t the l nion Restaurant, as Younghusband 
dubbed it. the\ oidcicd a tiiM v lass omelette. 3 oxford sausages, and some cafir au 
kit . . . ” 

Ihe Barasoam t oment the temporan residence of Aguinalelo was 
heavily guarded In a scions; mt.inm unit armed with Remington rifles. After un- 
dergoing a routine m\ 1 1 1 1 1 \ v iu\ k b\ the Filipino sentries. the) entered the Ke 
manesque archwavs ot the moment aiul climbed up two flights [aelobe] stt ne 
steps. Again, at t he \ cst ibule ot t he long *. ot ridor, a body of trustee! ^ a\ iteno ^uare 
armed with ( term. in ap aiul a halberd ot the pattern equivalent in the; daws of la n 
Quixote kept Jose w auh. \s the\ saw the aide ele-camp sitting at the tar ene cc r 
ner ot the corridor, the pn\ate scuictarv “bustled up only to let them know Mat 
Aguinalelo was still asleep because he had gone t o heel at past 2 a.m. I he\ hae to 
suffer for a wcarv wait of tom aiul a halt hours. So they while el aw a\ their time, 
strolling leisurelv amuiul the main streets in the town proper. A part) of callers w u 
were also “fellow sufferers aiul seate'el opposite* them in the reception 
dered them “halt an houi ot enjoyment in the convent. 

I i reel and wcarv, but lull of anxietv, the l nglish visitors came back at are 
1:30 p.m. I he private sccrciarv graciously met them again to announc 
Aguinalelo was ready to rcvcivc’ them. As the'\' we' re' ushered m the 1 v * 

they saw Aguinalelo seated erc*ct, calm aiul composc'd, behmei a mahe ' 

covered with state* papers aiul books. “In a digmtieel and quiet mannet. ie . 
up, took a few steps and greet e'el bis 1 nglish guests aiul he said that he was ^ 
make the acquaintance of an 1 nglish Otlicer. W it h the aid ot his pin ate usectet. 
cum interpreter who spoke “excellent l nglish, the dialogue \ounghus ^anc 
with Aguinalelo elealt with mam* touchv issues, the foremost ot which w .as tiequec 
tion relating to the extension of American protectorate over the 1 hilippnuv. 
this subject, Younghusband touched a sensitive chord. Aguinalelo emphatica ) re 
torted that “he aiul his followers had fought for complete independence ane t 
“they would shed the last elrop of their blood in securing it. 1 hese weie ptacti^ 
cally,” Younghusband added, “his very words." “In forsaking his e]iiiet demeanor, 
observed Younghusband keenly, “he went so far as to thump the desk with his fist 
for emphasis." 

At this particular point, their topic of conversation shifted to a standatd cap 
tured from the 3th Spanish l ight Infantry bv a young Filipino general who was 
only 22 years old. Aguinalelo was very proud to show the Filipino flag of the young 
Republic to his English visitors. The colors of the flag, as Major Younghusband 



433 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 



described them, were “red, white, and blue... The white in the to rm ot triangle, 
being next to the flag staff and the red and blue filling it up to usual rectangular 
shape of a flag, on it are a sun and three stars. 

I heir absorbing conversation moved on to the subject ol arms and 
Aguinaldo was up-to-date with his knowledge ot weaponry. I le was quite aware ot 
the effectiveness of the Lee Metford ri tie, which was used .it the Battle ot 
Omdurman. Younghusband was under the impression that the strut embargo on 
arms and ammunitions imposed by the Americans was not ettective. Aguinaldo 
had been expecting a sizeable consignment of “Mauser rifles and ammunitions 
from a German company and another huge shipment ot Murata titles from a 
group of “Japanese ultranationalists.” 

Before Younghusband’s meeting with the 'great man was almost over, Agu- 
inaldo called in the young minister of war, Baldomcro Aguinaldo, and the \oung 
chancellor of the exchequer and introduced them to him. Aguinaldo expressed the 
pleasure at having met a British Officer” in the service of her Majesty's Queen 
Victoria. Younghusband did not fail to notice the son of the president, Lmilio Jr., 
running about the corridor — a smart-looking little boy about years old wear mg 
the rayadillo uniform made of cotton stuff with thin blue and white stripes im- 
ported from Hongkong.” On their way out to the train station, they saw a consid- 
erable number of Spanish prisoners [about 8,000], bareheaded, barefooted, and in 
rags, performing all the most menial offices as domestic servants to individual na- 
tives or as public scavengers. 1 Fully satisfied with his mission, Younghusband and 
his English companion took the late afternoon train. By early evening, he was back 
to his uncomfortable hotel” in Binondo in time to partake of his meal every- 
thing mixed with oil and garlic,” as the late Walker characterized the food sei ved in 
Manilas finest hotel then. 

Sometime later, Younghusband, using the brush strokes ot a keen observer ot 
men and events, did a lasting portrait of President Emilio Aguinaldo: 

Aguinaldo was a young man of only 29 years of age, stands about S feet 
4 inches in height, is slightly built and was dressed in coat and trousers of drab 
tussore silk... He is a pure native on both sides, though showing a slight trace 
of Chinese origin, of dark complexion and deeply pock marked. His face is 
square and determined by the lower lip protruding markedly. 

In capturing the essence of “a great man,” he continued bis vivid sketch: 

1 here is much dignity about his bearing. On the whole, a man ot pleas- 
ant demeanor, even tempered and with strong characteristics, slow ot 
speech,. . . his past career has hallmarked h im as a man of prompt decision and 
prompt action. Even men who knew him well like Admiral Dewey were much 
puzzled to find so quiet,. . . and listless a young [youth?] acknowledged and un- 



436 



l >1 l \Sl >\ 



'v rr:’:r AV: .iu:w n .:nti Her .\/.;;rvrr> C onsuls 

disputed head of so » * i <_■ .1 1 .\ movrmcni But a remarkably prompt action served 
to show ih.u \r,um.diit* was no pupjK*t in the hands ot stronger men.... 

Younghusb.uui valued his meeting with Aguinaldo as a rare privilege and 
concluded his portrav.il with these words: 

\\ hatewr his faults or tailings might be. he is certainly the most striking 
person. iln\ in Philippine Imtors It we fudge men by their deeds rather than 
bv the tittle tattle ot uMoi ntional oitu ism. -\guinaldo has in the face ot c\cr\ 
disadvantage at the earh age ot 7 °. pkued himself in the ranks ot the great and 
acknowledged leaders ot popular risings which where unsuccessful, are stigma- 
tized as rebellions, bur which when successful [: the honored title ot legiti- 

mate rev olut ion 

It is worthw hile noting Nounghusband s scenario ot the power game in Asia. 
The net cHect ot the American acquisition ot the Philippines was that the l nitci 
States would he incxiricablv linked w ith the ‘questions ot widest import and graN 
est hearings m the unfolding ot the new era in the Asian power game. In a larger 
context, the advent ot a new power could seriously a fleet the balance ot power in 
Asia. When he said that "the gathering together ot the eagles tor the hcarn repast 
to which they hope shortly to make it at the expense of C.hina, Ik had alreac) m 
mind the partitioning ot “the C hinese melon or the Battle tor Concessions . 
the European powers. I he transfer of sovereignty from a decrepit power like . [ 
to a “purely new commercial nation like the l nited States would not u 
ticcd because the economic interests ot other European powers were close \ 
twined with any new arrangement that might he' eonsummate'ei. 

Although England cast no covetous eye on the Philippine atchipe a^ ' 
would not tolerate “with equanimity' the presence ot a strong and hosti e [ e 
in such a strategic place as the Philippines. Germany, France, and Russia wet 
and the same in spirit, that is, to present England from gaining direct } t 
rectly from the loss ot Spain in Asia. To Younghusband. Germany us “parvenue o 
the East” had been nurturing “the thinly disguised hope ot securing a s Kite ar . 
rate” of the archipelago. 1 he C Icrman squadrons erratic behavior in the N 
and the provocative incidents that to 11 owed are well known to scholars. Su " 
to say that, in the words of Younghusbanti, “the game [Germany 1 playee was t ie 
most possible one tor her interest... Prance and Russia had no tenitoria eesire 
for the Philippines, but got excited the moment the Peace treaty was negotiate in 
Paris by the American and Spanish peace commissioners. 

Younghusband compared the French display ot interest to 

the attitude ot the ancient spinster who has not taken into supper. Gi\e hei a 
smart young man, teed her amour pro pi o with colored jellies, and give her a tew 



437 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLT 'Tic )\ ANT > HI V( >M > 



crackers with high flown poetic sentiments inside them, .tiul she goes to bed 
perfectly happy. Russia may he likened to the ponderous father who is intensely 
bored with so trivial a matter, hut is egged by the same spinster into consider 
ing that his honor is touched and that he must do something. 1 le consequently 
takes off his coat and trusts that the onlookers will be assured that he is deadly 
earnest without requiring more active proofs of the same. 

But in the final analysis, Younghusband, tenaciously maintaining the impe- 
rial view, declared that “America and England, the real masters of the situation, 
meanwhile, “stand quietly by and await for matters to develop themselves.... 

Some high-ranking American army and naval officers who were interviewed 
by Younghusband toyed with the idea of exchanging the Philippines for the British 
possessions in the West Indies. Such an exchange would be most welcome because 
the West Indies islands are a source of no profit to kngland. ‘W hile the Philip- 
pines, he said, “can vie with Java and Sumatra in being the naturally richest is- 
lands in the world.’ He went on to say, “...under British rule, it is possible to 
prophesy that they would blossom into modest hldorados. But the time is not 
yet...” for many good reasons. 

Younghusband was a dyed-in-the wool product of the British Imperial tradi- 
tion. He was on familiar ground with the spirit and structure of the British raj in 
India. On the subtle ways and manner the Americans should handle their newly 
acquired territory in Asia, he had some concepts to proffer based on the British 
imperial experience in the Indian subcontinent. For instance, from the administra- 
tive standpoint, India was divided into two parts: the native princely states num- 
bering about 525 and the organized Indian provinces. The former enjoyed the 
principle of paramountcy, but with certain limitations since the British Crown re- 
served to itself the right to intervene in cases of misgovernment and gross injustice. 
Every native princely state was under the watchful eye of a British resident. The 
Indian provinces each under a British governor were under the umbrella of the 
governor-general or viceroy who was assisted then in the 1890s by an Executive 
Council of five members. I he flesh and blood of the British administration of In- 
dia was the Indian Civil Service or the corps de elite of the Brit ish I ndian provinces. 

What, in effect, Younghusband was hinting at was that the political equilib- 
rium or balance between the traditional native princely states and the British In- 
dian provinces should be maintained at all times to ensure the endurance of the 
British Indian Empire. I his seemed to be the ideal setup the Americans could have 
adopted vis-a-vis Mindanao, considering the existence of three sultanates in that 
region. 

lo resolve the Filipino-American conflict, Younghusband prescribed two al- 
ternative solutions. I he first was to conduct a systematic or protracted campaign 
against Aguinaldo and his troops, plus a naval blockade of Luzon. The second was 
to “to buy over the leaders” and banish them to “gilded ease” and at the same time 
enlist “his following into the future civil and military” establishments of the archi- 



438 



t H ! \m 'N 



nr hr:\'<: 



Her < ( onsuJs 



pelago. To Younghusb.uul. the latter solution would “in the long run be infinitely 
cheaper." 

1 tuii in; Ins A' .</< • 1 S l >° on a somewhat skeptical tone, he said that “it re- 

mains to be seen whether the stiam ot I mpire buiUling genius is strong enough in 
American view to ensure a like success. 

Thus is the stoi \ ot I I \! consuls plus two British Army officers as revealed 
mainly in the < <>>/>/</.;» and the sopious I nder the exigencies of war 

and revolution. C onsul Walket peitoimed lus duty extremely well to protect the 
lives and propeities of Bntish subjects, trading firms, and hauling establishments. 
Major Younghushaiul s mtclhgeme mission was a success. 1 he value ot the consu- 
lar dispat Jus lies m the ic\ elation of less known facts, though there are many in- 
sights which I I .M ( onsul W alkei. t api.un None, and Major Younghusband pro- 
vide us. . . 

The Xotf' are the woiks ot high ranking British officers, combining a de- 
tailed wealth of facts, views, and personal judgment with a high level ot expertise. 
With a keen eve toi dramatic detail, the Y orrs add much to our knowledge ot tit 
Philippine revolution and the c.ulv part ot the Philippine-American War. 



Notes 

1 This paper is based m.imlv on / cftcr>. seerrt reports. iind cotit d ttlcgMW* of (< 
Rawwn Walker ami ( I\,itnsdcn to 1 ord Salisbury, the British 1 orci^n , 

and are all found I oreign Office “2 O l H). 2016. 20-n. and 2081. Public 
Records ( )f fic e. I ondon. I nglaiul. I lie Public Records Office is now located at kew 

Gardens. j.u-C- 

2. The other important primary sources are the A ores on the I hilippint Italic. \ 

tain 1 .W.M. None published in Simla, India, on 2^ September IS Hi, and I t 
ippincs by Major ( Iconic |ohn Yount;lnisband. I he latter work docs not ha\e a f 
or date of publication. 1 here is a possibility that it was published in K 
Simla, India. I found these two A ’ores marked Secret at the India Othcc l ihiai , 

Friars, London. 



4M) 



The Philippine Revolution 
Viewed from Shanghai, 1 895- 1 897 



Frkdkrick G. Hoy i 

La Siena University, Riverside, California, USA 



S cholars researching Philippine history for the final years of 19th century 
Philippines are constantly frustrated at the lack of contemporary newspaper 
accounts that are reasonably complete, accurate, and balanced. Surprisingly, how- 
ever, the North-China Herald, published in Shanghai, is a genuine treasure trove of 
Philippine coverage from a variety of sources: its own correspondents, letters, in- 
terviews, editorials, and materials copied from other Asian newspapers. 

As Shanghai’s International Settlement d eveloped under British leadership 
after the Treaty of Nanking in 1842 it became the self-governing financial and com- 
mercial heart of China. The port-city of Shanghai “grew from an isolated brick- 
walled human cesspool” to become China’s largest modern metropolis and the 
most important commercial city in the Far East. 1 

Every proper British must have his newspaper and for Shanghai this was sup- 
p ied by the remarkable North-China Herald , beginning 3 August 1 850, eventually 
becoming the weekly mail edition of the North-Chi na Daily News. By 1 895 its 
name was changed to the North-China Herald and Supreme Court and Consular 
Gazette. Proclaiming itself “Impartial not Neutral,” this impressive weekly contin- 
ued through wars, famines, plagues, and depressions until the Japanese closed it in 
late 1941. 2 

A guide to China Coast newspapers published by Harvard’s East Asian Re- 
search Center declares that the North-China Herald “maintained a reputation for 
comprehensiveness, and by the end of the century was certainly a professionally 
managed enterprise with some claim to the authoritativeness which students have 
subsequently granted it.” 3 



440 



1 



Mi >> * m r : r :r AVj . r : \ :ru r.: frv ,V\; rjgt\:s. I $95- / $9"~ 

The eves of ns meuh.mt readership were primarily fixed on China, Japan, 
Korea, and the British l mpuc m Mia. t ^nl\ rarelv did they focus even briefly on 
the Asian holdings of other empires. Magellan and 1 egozpi might just as well have 
never ventured to 1 as Mas 1 llipmas as far as the Nortit-China Herald was con- 
cerned. But this rapnllv changed in the 1 S90s. 

The Philippines Vppears on Shanghai s Horizon 

It is difficult to find am news from the Philippines in the North-China Hera hi for 
the early 1890s. But m I S V)S the archipelago named tor Spains King Philip II 
slowly rose out ot the South t hma Sea to flicker on Shanghais distant horizon. 
Surprisingly, the first Philippine news tor 18^5 to reach Shanghai concerned the 
February Manila 1 omtv I 1 chiu.m 1S‘>S. 21'». first prize for July was unusual: 
it had been jnirv.li.iscd -it tbe l.ib.ujuen.t l ilipin.i outlet ot this l hilippine st.ite 
monopoly hv a nuinhei ot t hincse (19 Inly 1895, 88V 

Commercial references to the' Philippines included a brief item concerning 
an American ship, the Bohemia. w hich had let t Manila tor the l nited States as part 
of an extrcmelv limited trade between these countries (15 February 18)5, -1 
And the Barcelona, the pioneer vessel ot the new line between Barcelona and Ma- 
nila;’ had arrived at Manila on l 2 August (0 September 1895. 399). At the annual 
March meeting of the C hma l ire Insurance fo. in Hong Kong the 1 hilippines 
regrettably was ncwswoi tin because ot disastrous tires at Manila which 
caused heavy losses for the company (8 March 1895, 352). And when the nphoon 
season began in August the commonest news from the Philippines concerne 
weather reports Iron the Manila Observatory and the cable station at Rolinao anc 

their impact on shipping. fCn-mish 

Some of the most provocative news concerned the movements o H 

naval units between Manila (C avite naval base) and Hong Kong, principal } or 
readily observable service in British repair facilities, these included the cruiscn 
Reina Cristina and Castilla . the transport Manila , and the gunboat DonAntontoe 
UlloUy all of which would be met by Ocwey s American fleet at Manila on 
1898. The cruiser Cristobal ('ohm would miss this big party: she was a tota 
after running aground in C'avo de Buenavista in late September 1895 (Ht iruary 
1893, 151; 22 March 1 895, 436; 3 May 1895, 690; 20 September 1895, 480; 

October 1895, 635). , 

The trickle of news from tbe Philippines followed its customary pattern t ur 

ing the first part of 1 896. Sources were principally Hong Kong newspapers (espe 
cially the Press anti the Telegraph) and the North-China Heralds regular correspon 
dent in Hong Kong. Still the Manila Lottery’ constituted the most consistent l ^ 
source from the archipelago, which made the Fabaqueria Filipina the premiei 11 

ippine business connection in Shanghai. 

At the annual March meeting in Hong Kong the shareholders in the C ina 
and Manila Steamship Co. heard good financial news, except that the chairman 



441 



THE PHILIPPINE RE VC >11 I K >N AM > PI Y< >NI > 



“regretted the small carrying capacity of the '/uifiro % which ought to he replaced by 
a larger and more economical vessel (17 April 1896, 602). An omniscient share- 
holder could have cautioned patience as Commodore ( icorge 1 )ewey would be 
pleased to solve this vexing problem come April 1 898. 

A new subsidized line of steamers connecting Manila and Japan with stops at 
Hong Kong and Shanghai was proposed bv the Philippine government. Strong 
support came from the Manila Chamber of Commerce (3 January 1896 , 5). And 
it was good news at the annual meeting of the Luzon Sugar Refining Co. in 1 long 
Kong on 27 March 1896. A dividend was to be paid and the chairman was able 
to take a cheerful view of the prospects of the current vear, there being a fair de- 
mand from Spain and greater facilities for direct shipment thither. 1 bus perhaps 
the old popular name of “Lose-on” Co. could be laid to rest ( 1 0 April 1 896, 566). 
But the report about the Manila branch of the I longkong and Shanghai Bank was 
discouraging. Under a court order it had been seized following a long-standing 
dispute over certain title deeds. And resolution of the dispute within the foresee- 
able future was highly unlikely since the case had been appealed to the 1 ligh C .ourt 
in Madrid (17 July 1895, 1 15). Yet pleasanter sounds were promised by one busi- 
ness connection with the Philippines: the 1 ientsin Public Band C .ommittee was 
focusing on Manila for a new bandmaster, undoubtedlv influenced by Shanghai 
which had a Pilipino bandmaster and a large number of Filipino bandsmen (10 
July 1896, 49). 

But the Philippine news items that probably were most eagcrlv scanned by 
the average Shanghai resident in 1 896 would have been weather reports, which had 
great significance for China Coast residents, particularlv shipping interests. Also 
impacting shipping were bubonic plague epidemics with resultant quarantine at 

Manila (27 March 1896,489; 10 July 1896, 58). 

Spanish naval activity mainly concerned the cruiser Reina Crist'nias repeated 
trips to British repair docks at Kowloon (31 January 1 896, 1 63; 1 0 July 1 896, 58; 
28 August 1896, 360). I he Spanish naval budget incurred another blow with the 
decision to strengthen defenses by sending a battalion of Marine Infantry to the 
Philippines (15 May 1896, 743). 

One item concerning the U.S.S. Olympia , which would become Dewey's 
Asiatic Squadron flagship, should have caught the eve of Rear Admiral Don 
Patricio Montojo y Pasaron, commander of the Spanish Philippine Squadron at 
Manila. On a trial speed run out of Kobe, the Olympias log for 21 January 1896 
indicated an impressive speed of 22 knots under natural draft ( 1 2 February 1 896, 
253-54). Yet from among all possible enemies Montojo's proud but decrepit fleet 
might have to face in future combat, the Spanish admiral might be excused for 

having put the Olympia at the bottom of the list below Britain, France, and even 
Japan. 



442 



{( r l% f t fir Rr:\'Iutu*n \ ':runi from Shmgfkii, I89S-189 



Political l ncajdness in the Philippines 

September 1N 1 )(> produced omimnis warnings about serious unrest among Filipi- 
nos. AikI ilus time it w.is not a limited uprising as at |olo recently or even the larger 
revolt .it C avite m 1 S «! Now the epicenter was Manila, the heart ot Spains Asian 
empire situe 

The lust skew h\ mtoim.mon ot what the ,\orth-( hi tut Hem hi termed 1 o- 
litical t neasmess m tlu Philippines' uime from their 1 long Kong correspondent, 
dated 2 1 ) \iigust Mthougli the Press m Manila is practically muzzled by the au- 
thorities, he explained, it has leaked out that some sort ot conspirao has been 
discovered among the natives m the Philippines, which has caused some uneasi- 
ness and led to the attest ot some tout hundred persons. 1 le explained that the 
priests, conscious ot tlu danget ot am revolt against their authority, are agitating 
for more Spanish t loops and concluded that the excitement in Manila has h*x n 
kept verv quiet, and is now apparentK subsiding ( Notes tiom the South, 
September lS l )(u * »(>). 

The Xorth ( 'hum UnM citing the o September Hong Kong iMy I™ 
admitted to being si ill m the dat k as to the exact nature ot the afha\. 1 heir cr n 
eluding words were modetate: As additional support to the suggestion that the 

fight was onlv o! small importance it is thought that it the tumble had been ot an 
alarming nature instructions would have been sent to the Spanish C onsul to ta^*' 
steps to have all ships proceeding to Manila searched before lca\ ing 1 lon^ c ^ 

Yet one thing was c lear: “ 1 here seems to be no doubt that the N lanila ^ oxcrl * 
is stopping the dispatch ot telegrams from the Philippines 0 1 tern 
434 ). 

Attempting to tint her claritv the muddied Philippine situation, the H 
editor primed several outstanding articles compiled by the 1 long Kon^ l ) 
in its issues for 1 ^ and \ 1 August and I September, simply titled 1 he kc ^e to 
Manila' (1 1 September 1 8 l )(u a A lengthy article tiom the hlon^ ^ 

Daily Press tor 2 C ) August cvenhandcdly assessed the situation. 1 here is sc ' 

trouble in Manila. F.xactlv w hat it is, bv whom and for what purpose it nn as su 
and how it w ill all end, are things over which there is a mysterious \eil. but it 
certain that “the trouble is a conspiracy on the part of either the priests or natnev, 
and “that a serious rising woulel in time take place which it would he \ei\ c \t 

to suppress. . 

An anonymous highlv placeel Manila source gave a different scenario, statin D 

“that the natives are peaceful, but the priests are belligerent, and that the) tnsti 
gated a bogus conspiracy for their own ends and are fully determined to \igotous \ 
pursue their policy of antagonism towards the natives. Because the pi tests lac a 
terrible dread of the natives, and tear a rev oh in the near future.’' they were pressur- 
ing Spain “to very considerably increase the strength ot the European gat rison. 
However, he was certain that there would be no fighting because the Filipinos do 
not want to fight, [and) do not know how to fight. A third version, termed aho- 



443 



THE PHILIPPINE RKVOI I I I( )N \NI ) Hi >NI > 



gether a curious one,” featured Dr. Jose Ri/al. Related by a former Manila resident 
who had contact with a Philippine correspondent, it offered little significant sub- 
stantive information. 

Despite much speculation downgrading the revolt, the ine reasmg seriousness 
of conditions was detailed by the Hong Kong Daily Pre s> on 31 August with the 
priests still the primary suspects in fomenting rebellion. Although this editor ad- 
mitted that it was “difficult to sav whether any reliance can be placed on these re- 
ports,” he gave a generous sampling. “ They strongly support the idea that the 
priests are all along responsible for the agitation, he contended, their object be- 
ing... to prejudice the natives in the eyes of the Spanish ( lovernment by spreading 
absurd fabrications about their increasing restlessness and thereby inducing the 
Government to send a few regiments of soldiers of true Spanish blood in order to 
safeguard the priests authority.” 

As September continued the North-China Herald printed numerous articles 
concerning Philippine conditions, many sketchy and some even contradictory* 
Their regular Hong Kong correspondent in a 19 September dispatch complained 
of difficulty obtaining “authentic information concerning the insurrection be- 
cause of government suppression of the news. Yet he was “certain ... that there has 
been more fighting than was at first allowed, and the position must be more criti- 
cal than stated, or Madrid would not be sending out more reinforcements. It is 
clear, he continued, “that the rebellion is among the natives, and would seem to 
be directed more against the religious orders than the government (25 September 
1896, 532). 

In the same issue (page 544) the North-China Herald published a collection 
of reports headed “The Philippine Rebellion.” An undated excerpt from the Hong 
Kong Daily Press explained the increasing seriousness of the situation: On the 

29th of August the outbreak had assumed very serious proportions. I lard fighting 
between the Spanish troops and the natives had taken place about three miles from 
Manila and it is reported that many were killed on both sides.” A further report 
focused on charges of barbarism by both sides: “Some shocking stories are told of 
fearful atrocities committed both by the Spanish and the rebels.” Kven more sensa- 
tional were the cryptic words from the Singapore Free Press headed “Black Hole of 
Manila, which would have prompted horrible British recollections of Calcutta in 
1857. On a small slip of paper dated 2 September and smuggled out of Manila, a 
former Singapore resident had scribbled hurried comments: “hxciting times”; 

Bodies are being left out unburied to rot”; “G.G. [Governor-C jeneral] says he 
wants no more prisoners”; “Arrests and shootings keeping populace in awful funk”; 

Sentries everywhere.” Of the Black Hole he was very brief (“shut up in small 
room , No water; one small window”), claiming that up to 70 prisoners had died. 
He ended with an ominous twist: “The only fear we have is of native troops join- 
ing rebels — then good-bye, !” 

As reports became more confusing, the North-China Herald wisely decided 
to send its own “special correspondent” to Manila. While en route he filed a sig- 



444 



: *:r AV: \ ;ruYti from SJhinglui. 7iS'9>- /<S’9~ 

nificam iliNp.iiv li tn>m \mm on 1 '> Vptcmbcr whore news had been brought from 
Manila In tin Vo:.;v;.:»; I Ik- only .nlv.uu.igc so tar gained by the Spaniards. " he 
reported, is the capture ot 1 rebels, who were court-martialed and executed by 
being shot in the b.u k \t t .i\ ite the rebels had seized a large monastery, killing all 
the priests I hen battle .t\ was IVath to the Spaniards! Death to the Chinese! 
Death to the I’t tests’ I ivc buiuhesl t lunese who li.ul returned from Manila the 
Jay before had given sik h a bouitx mg account of the situation that hundreds ot 
Chinese w ho were leas me toi \ t an ila. ansi many ot whom has! taken their passages, 
quietly disappeared, and the steamer left \moyj without a single Chinese passen- 
g cr " (23 September lS v) o. MA. 

| his spesial «. or respondent" faced a truly daunting assignment in ferreting 
out the truth tiom the weltei ot s.mtradistory statements, myths, obfuscation, dis- 
tortion, and sen soi ship I I is lengths dispatches would prove a boon tor the Herald* 
confused readers. 

Political l nctisiness F.rupts into Insurrection 

What the Xortb ( htn.i //cnz/r/mitialls considered mere "political uneasiness" soon 
assumed such ominous proportion?. that the editor confidently labeled it a full 
scale insurrection. In response to this significant development the Herald devoted 
major space in the 2 C Vtohe. 1 S‘)(> issue 08“-88) to several informative articles 
under the bold head Hie Insurrection in the Philippines." The first lengthy ar- 
tide was a masterful editorial summary. IVspite the diligence ot Spanish ot ida s 
who were “using then utmost efforts to prevent the serious state ot affairs being 
learned, the editor provided an impressive overview and analysis ot the insur 
rection, largelv "from the information at the command ot our Hong Kong eon 
temporaries.” It depicted a grim picture tor both sides with no eas\ ^solution 

apparent. „ . 

There followed a “private letter, apparently by a lady [ot unspecince nation 

ality] and dated the first week in September, from the (.A/;/// Mail. 1 am very gla 
that you are not here now, she bluntlv began, “as the Manila which has claimec 
you in days gone bv is now dangerous for all white folks. Recognizing that vou 
cannot imagine how frightened we are, she quickly pro\ided a graphic exp lan a 
tion: “ The Indians [ bilipinos] , until now so mild and gentle, have revolted. 1 \er\ 
much fear that they will kill all the Spanish, and we have already had many victims 
of their ferocity/' Af ter describing some of the fighting and atrocities she gloomih 
concluded, “Indeed looking at things all around, if Heaven does not behiend us, 1 
don’t know what will become of us.” 1 ler decision was clear; 1 should like to Rave 
Manila and never come back." 

Next the North-China Herald printed an account of a court martial and ex 
ecution at Cavite on 1 1 and 1 2 September (apparently from the Manila Conuuio). 
At 5 p.m. on 1 1 September, the Court Martial sat; by 10:30 the trial had finished 
and the 13 prisoners (identified bv name and occupation) were sentenced to be 



THK PHII.IfMMNT. RI-.VOIl I l< >N \M ) hi Y< >M > 



shot; they were executed at six minutes past one the next da\. It is reported 
that when the condemned men were notified of the sememe the* urea ter number of 
them burst out crying, but one of them, Victoriano I m lam > a c hemist . said: \\ e 
ought not to cry, because we have well deserved it. I his <dcarl\ demonstrated 
that the Spanish could act with dispatch, at least in conducting trials and exe- 
cutions. 

Further details came from “reliable sources. Rich nat ives are being arrested 
and thrown into prison by wholesale, it was reported, c barged with assisting the 
rebels, and their property has been confiscated, and much incriminating evidence 
has been secured.” Except for Cavite the provinces were cjuiet, but there is much 
general uneasiness, and the priests were coming in from the callages to the large 
convents in the towns.” Additional information was contained m an undated letter 
received by a Shanghai business house from an unidentified writet who stated that 
fresh troops are en route horn Spain and their arrival is expected to hasten the 
end. He felt that this would “certainly afford .1 great sense of rebel , as c onsiderable 
suppressed anxiety is felt which the sound of distant firing and startling rumours 
daily intensify.” 

On 23 October the North-( Jmui Herald printed an extremeh significant ar- 
ticle concerning Spain and the Philippines, a translation by .1 leading I longkong 
paper of an article from the Manila ( \ottiercio , giving a Spanish view of the insur- 
rection. But a caution warned that this view was not at all that adopted l')} other 
foreigners who have resided in the islands.” Even a smooth English translation did 
little to soften the harsh words or hide the egocentric, self-serving psyche of the 
Spanish author who clearly felt betrayed by the ungrateful nirhos. 

For this editor recent events had been “a painf ul surprise and a veritable revo- 
lution, since no one could have suspected or foreseen them. Although Spain had 
been “earnest in the evangelisation and the moral and intellectual education of the 
natives,” she had unfortunately “been too liberal and generous in her government 
of the islands, with the result being the “bitter fruit and deplorable results we all 
know now, this independence being utilised by badly educated minds incapable of 
distinguishing fine points of law to organise insensate rebellions.... Because of the 
incredible ingratitude of Filipinos “it must be confessed, he concluded, that 
three centuries of civilisation have passed without leaving any trace of their pas- 
sage, three centuries of evangelistic teaching without touching certain hearts, 
which must be a stone; three centuries, in short, in which the glorious Castilian 
language has not opened a way for itself, while in a few years the wav has been 
opened for an abused Masonry, secret meetings, wicked ingratitude, ambitions, 
criminal teachings, and compacts of blood and rebellion. 

Although the North-C^hina Heralds comments might have been most helpful 
to Spaniards they probably were received with hostility, if they were ever read in 
Manila or Madrid. In reality, the Spanish rulers of the Philippines have only one 
aim, to make money,” was the harsh editorial response from Shanghai, “and their 
role has been so extortionate and so oppressive that the natives have been driven 



446 



t {« * • - ' . \ \ *nw; li J K S'9 

into rebellion I hs omk Iumoh was severe: Spain seems to have lost the power of 
hold ini: her i ninnies b\ tore e. and uininH hold them any other wav. VC Idle admit- 
ting that the hadl\ aimed and organized rebels would be put down in time by the 
Spanish troops. tins influential British editor maintained that the suppression 
will be onlv temporary, unless there is a change in the Spanish system ot govern- 
ing (2.^(Klnbei 1 *01 02). 

If this pinmment lbitish editor h.ul been a true prophet his readers would 
have awaited the tulfillmeiu ot his predictions. I or surely Spain in the l^th cen- 
tury had demonst iatcd s v ant ilesiie to modit\ her time-tested and tremendously 
profitable cxploii.it i\ c impeiial uavs. 



Tropical Thcrmidor 

With the arii\al in Manila of significant numbers ot fresh Spanish tt oops in early 
October 1N 1 >0. a new phase m Philippine affairs obviously commenced. 1 he 
troops were ranved with gicat displa\ ot enthusiasm, it was reported, mueh as 
though thev weie \uiors from a campaign instead ot raw soldiers on theit way to 
quel fa rising ( M) c \iobei 1 S^o. SPP. Phis stabilization of the military situation 
allowed for somewhat c.rlmei evaluation and analysis by thoughtful non-Spanish 
and non I ihpmo obscivers m several noteworthy article's. 

A clear pkture ot Philippine conditions was given by the A oith ChiiM 
HcvtiUls Special C onesponde'nt m a dispatch dated at Manila. S t. c t e l e 
though he found conditions on a hold the line basis while reinforcements were 
awaited from Spain, he saw no possibility tor Spain to subjugate the. I ilipinc s 
til the ( aiban difficult v is settled (2d October 18^0, 21). 

An anonvmous author in the Sm^iipoir hrcc Press display ed impressbe 
ing skills and acute powers of observation and analysis. 1 he aitiele was not catec 
nor was its place of origin given; but the extent ot his knowledge and understand 
ing of Philippine conditions indicates a resident ot considciablc expe i ie in t 
islands. And his passionate attacks against the priests strongly suggest a non Ou u 
lie, probable an Knglisbman. 1 le explained that the picture of" events was distinct y 
hazy, mcrelv from lack of observers and recorders, plus the tact that Spanish ot i 
cials “thicken the h a/e into a dense cloud by their policy ot concealing, distoitin^, 
suppressing, and adding tt) the truth, so that the reports which reach the outsi e 
world, except from unofficial sources, become pure fiction. Hoi the tiuth one was 
“dependent on non-C 'atholic foreigners.' 

As he surveyed this in-manv-wavs-blessed archipelago the anony mous author 
was struck by a shocking paradox: “Manila and the Philippines teem with natural 
wealth, the soil is fertile in the extreme, the climate is genial, mineials abound, anc 
there is a vast population to furnish labour. Its people ought to be the happiest in 
the world, the richest, and the most contented. But they are pool, miseiable, and 
discontented. 1 he explanation for this regrettable condition was quickly gi\en in 
blunt terms: “ 1 he power of the priests is unlimited, and their rapacity equally with- 






44 "’ 



THE PH I IJI'PI NT RhVOl.t I ION \NI>KnoNl> 



out limit” and “The extent of the domination of the prie sts over the common 
people in their business can hardly be conceived. 1 le asserted that Manila is now 
in the state some of the Spanish American colonies were a hundred years .igo — the 
Government is not only corrupted but it is priest ridden. I Ins theme continued 
under such headings as “Squeeze and Priest and Superstition. Ignorance and 
Poverty.” Although he felt that the rebellion was probabb ovei. this correspon- 
dent feared that “horrible retribution and guerrilla warfare would continue. 
“The rebellion will prove an excuse for plunder, he warned, for retaliation, tor 
repressing learning... and for rivetting the fetters on tighter < .M ( Vtober 1896, 
721 - 22 ). 

During this I hermidorcan period no one responded with finer reports and 
analyses than James W. Davidson, whom the Nnrth-( hnui / /e/v//r/ labeled the Spe- 
cial Correspondence [sic] of the [Hong Kong) Daily Press, and later as ‘Our 
Special Correspondent.” A short letter from him dated Manila, 1 \ ( Ktober, dem- 
onstrated that future dispatches would be invaluable (2S ( Ktober 1 S 96. 1 ). Phis 

was generously fulfilled in his next article, a lengthy, nicely written, balanced, ana- 
lytical report. It was not dated nor was its place of origin given (undoubtedly Ma- 
nila). The North-China indicated that it was I n>m ( )ur Special ( orrespon- 

dent”; it was signed by James W. Davidson (30 October 1<S00, So 02). 

Commendably Davidson had “avoided as much as possible portraying a 
strong partisan view,” not wishing “to favour either the Spanish or the natives, but 
to give each their due.” He had been “dependent mostly upon reports the truth of 
which I have endeavored to confirm by personal observation, because his move- 
ments had been “subject to such exacting espionage that it was impossible lor me 
to witness personally any of the engagements of which I write." And “any little 
excursions even in peaceful districts were refused.” 1 low then was he able to func- 
tion as a conscientious journalist? “I managed however to secure numerous inter- 
views and to acquaint myself with the condition of affairs as viewed by different 
classes,” he explained, “and this I wish to place before vour readers that they may 
judge for themselves.” 

“My experience has been that native reports cannot be depended upon,” 
Davidson confessed. Thus such reports “emanating from native sources can as a 
rule be taken subject to a considerable discount. I he Spanish ( lovernment, he 
explained, “is no doubt possessed of the idea that to let the true condition of affairs 
be known would be undiplomatic.” But Davidson claimed that he had Spanish 
friends “who are anxious that the truth be known, readily giving all information in 
their possession and in whose reports I have perfect confidence. 

Despite these difficulties, Davidson produced a document of impressive fair- 
ness, length, detail, and quality in startling contrast to most other journalistic prod- 
ucts of the era. He began with a balanced and detailed consideration of the causes 
for the rebellion from “the combined oppression of the church and government" 
to “Cuban agents... in the Philippines.” Scattered among his numerous assertions 
and illustrations is occasional praise, such as for ( iovernor-C ieneral Blanco (“a man 



448 



i i< ''i 



swk \ :n 



front S*\: IS95~ 189 



of inccurii' .uul t WK : :k1< hiImoiUv aIocs .ill in his power to cncou ru^c honest 

government i .uni the IcMim -i superior IxkIv of men ). 

Davidson \^.is .u his rcponon.il Ix^t in describing the colorful and cnthusias- 
tie welcome ixi v cm to the thousands of troops Iron) Spain. But his evaluation of 
them as soldiers and ol then equipment was harsh: picked up from the very lowest 
classes”: "I have non seen a more unsoldtcrh -looking lot of soldiers unless it he 

the C Chinese. . 

He then mined t<> the tieatment ot 1 tltpino prisoners ( Horrible Cruelties . 

beginning with the Ul.u k I lole ot Manila.” Details of torture procedures were 
starkly specific . ttom whippings With rattans to thumb screws and other relics ot 
the Inquisition Spanish m-tim anon for torture in order to elicit confessions and 
the names of ..diet . .mspitatois wav not vommeing to Davidson, who noted con- 
fessions In the innocent unable to hear the pain Us he dud also observed in China). 
“Spain makes pteteiisions as a t htisttan nation. Davidson harshly remarked, and 
yet she. with the comma. ue ot the C lundi. indulges in cruel practices the most 
contrary to the merciful teachings of Christianity.'' His hostility toward Spanish 
ethical standards is giaphuulh dlust.ated hv his description ot execution proce- 
dures in the Philippines wind. .0 ., sort of an exhibition... no doubt compensates 

them for the loss of the bull fights. . 

Readers ol Shanghais ,\ \»th < h:n.i Herald were tortunate to have such a de- 
tailed summary ol Philippine c ondmons w ritten bv an experienced reporter who 
gave evidence of an hones, attempt to he fair. If they had been contused by the 
varying, often contradictory, aiul sometimes puzzling reports that had been printed 
since August, they could now ted confident that they possessed a coherent, reason- 
able description and explanation of these events. It reading this lengt iy -Ww c in- 
duced confidence in l Davidson's analyses they could anticipate fitting future n - 
innine news into a rational scenario: a rather quick series of major Spanish victo- 
ries with the arrival of mote Spanish reinforcements, a transition into indecisive 
guerrilla warfare, followed hv widespread reprisals, prosecution, persecution, an 
confiscation. With no fund.inient.il changes in Spain's governance nor any modifi- 
cation of church-slate relations, the whole cycle would he repeated with the out- 
break of another rehellion. The only factors that might fundamentally modify the 
equation would he intervention hv a major power or basic changes and reforms in 
Spain. Neither possibility would ha\e seemed even remotely likely in October 

1896. 



A War of Words, Bullets, Bolos, and Executions 

Others joined Davidson in analyzing Philippine conditions as 1896 waned. Some 
were anonymous and two adopted pen names, Alphia and Pedro. It is regrettable 
that with such keen eyes and ears and such fine command ot English, Alphia, who- 
ever he was, produced only two outstanding articles which the North-Chirm Her- 
ald copied from the Hong Kong Daily Press. The first, obviously originating in 



449 



THK PHILIPPI NT RI V( )ll I K >N \NI ) lii M >M > 



Manila, covered developmenrs during early ( )ctober; n ottered somewhat kinder 
words for priests and politicians than had been recently expressed in I nglish. 

Alphia began with a “most touching story from Manila papers of a village 
schoolmaster in Bulacan province, who had “solemnly abjured, in the presence of 
all the inhabitants of the parish, his adhesion to the abominable and nefarious sect 
ofFreemasons ” He then related the fate of recent Filipino depot tees: ( )n Mon- 

day, the 1 2th of October, 151 unfortunate natives and half castes were shipped of] 
to Spain en route to Fernando Po by the steamer ShnuLi. But their tragic fate was 
soon compounded: “Not content with condemning these poor u retc hes to exile— 
if they should ever be fortunate enough to reach their destination and confiscat- 
ing all the property of those having anything to lose, at the last moment they were 
robbed of even the little their relatives and friends had provided them with for their 
long and pitiless journey.” “The Spanish are openly expressing their hopes Alphia 
added, “that the climate and conditions will soon settle those that don t die on the 
way or are allowed to drop overboard.” I I is hostility was compressed into a single 
sentence: “This is the treatment such a glorious, magnanimous, and loving mother 
extends to her children, which the local gagged and servile Press is so effective in 
praising.” 

Alphia reviewed the abominable atrocities used to extoit confessions and 
confirmed that the details of the Black Hole of Manila were ‘perfectly true." Al- 
though much of his dispatch concerned the fighting or Spanish abuses, he made 
some positive comments. Of the Filipinos he offered high praise: "In intelligence 
they are quite equal to the Japanese and had they been under Fnghsh rule half the 
period they have been subject to Spain they would unquestionably have made their 
mark in the world.” Governor-General Blanco was “a man who has shone high 
above everything in the present troubles,” he generously declared, “of whom Spain 
or any other nation may justly be proud. To his serenity and calmness Spain at the 
present moment owes her possession of the islands and the white race probably 
their lives” (30 October 1896, 762-63). 

In his equally informative second dispatch, dated at Manila, 22 October, and 
simply titled “The Rebellion in the Philippines,” Alphia reported on the arrival of 
more Spanish troops, altercations between Spanish and Filipino troops (“It is a 
marvel how the native troops [not the rebels] have remained so loyal under the 
treatment they received”), and fighting in Batangas and Cavite provinces. He also 
rejoiced over the departure for Spain of the segundo cabo (lieutenant-governor) who 
was sent off under arrest by orders of the governor-general and Blancos severe cur- 
tailment of the powers of the Volunteers. (“Such scandalous abuses were being 
committed by this band of ruffians on the pretext of looking for suspected persons 
that it was high time their almost autocratic powers were cut short. ) 

Alphia sent along his translation of a “specimen of the speeches made at 
Manila at a banquet to newly arrived officers from Spain” on 13 October. I he 
florid words of Rafael Comenga were frequently interrupted: “Great and extraor- 
dinary applause ; Frantic applause several times repeated, entirely drowning the 



450 



; 1895 - 189 ' 



s voice "Br.i\<< and cre.u applause": Xlrc.u applause and Viva Spain”; 
“Great and deafening .ippl.uoc ": and "Enthusiastic and frantic applause.” When 
he finallv coik hilled thu paean t>> the glories ot Spain and the valor or her soldiers, 
the audience MiiptiMn*.;l\ was 'till aide to respond with "thundering applause.” 
*l*his enthusiasm was eiisouraged b\ t omenga (ahly assisted by freejuent toasts); 
“Welcome then \e \s ho ate to he the bulwark and May ot our honour '; “the canni- 
bals are S( |II m t lu woods, the beast ot prey is still hiding in his lair — (Bravo!) — 
and the hour has , onu to e\tet mmate the s.i\ ages ; Show no pardon! (Hear, hear!) 
Destroy! Kill! Id.uuos icspouse to stuh excesses was to suspend all further nitli- 
tarv banquets as being \et\ out ot place at the present moment, especially when 
speakers [such as t omenga make themselves ridiculous — I"he press was also 
“forbidden to upon smh mtlammatotv speeches in future (6 November 1896. 

804-0U 

As 1 866 woie on news ttom the Philippines slowed to a mere trickle. 1 he 
North-Chin.! HcmU'< tegulat source m Hong Kong complained on “ November 
1896 that I it tie authentic ot detailed information reaches us now ot the rebel- 
lion. ’ l ater he had mote inhumation but this had come circuitously through 
Havas news service, appatcnih s ia French Indo-C. Iiina (-0 and 2 November 
1896, 876. 620). But the tehabiltts ot even these limited reports was suspect so the 
A Jorth-Chma Hn.iltl warned that "when reading news from the Philippines, ttom 
whatever source, it must be remembered that all letters and telegrams from Manila 

are subject to strict Spanish censorship" pf December 1896, 9i9). 

Short items com erning c lashes between Spanish troops and Filipinos atul the 
arrival of reinforcements f rom Spam formed the limited dispatches about the Phil- 
ippines. Thus the report from the 1 long Kong Daily Press was unusual in conclud- 
ing its 1 1 )ece tuber 1 866 dispatc h w ith a lengthy and dramatic account of a re x 
attack on a mail/supplv train running northward out of Manila toward Malolos 
(11 December 1866, 1022 do). W ith such a dearth ot significant Philippine news 

in the North-Chin,! Heral/l. it is startling to read this short sentence from the Hong 
Kong China Mail of 1 ” December w hich introduced a Filipino soldier/stattsman 
who would soon become preeminent: "Emilio Aguinaldo, one ot the principa 
leaders of the revolutionary movement, commands the rebels in the C avite 1 to\- 
ince” (24 December 1896, 111). 

And startling also was a single sentence on the same page from the Hong 
Kong Daily Press for 18 December: “It was rumoured yesterday that Di. kizal, 
Pedro Roxas, and Luna, the artist, were on Tuesday publicly shot at Manila for the 
conspicuous part they took in assisting the rebels in the Philippines. 1 he rumor 
was false: Juan Luna lived to die a natural death in France; Pedro Roxas was ex- 
ecuted but not until later; and for Rizal the rumor was inaccurate but sadly only as 
to the time of his execution. 

The Hong Kong Daily Press also provided an extremely formal document 
from William Robinson, governor of Hong Kong, which had appeared in the offi- 
cial Government Gazette on 22 December 18 c )6. It formally declared Hong Kong 



4S1 



THE PHILIPPINE KEVOI L I K )N AM ) III Y( )NI > 



closed to any military or naval activities directed “against 1 Its said Most Catholic 
Majesty’s dominions in the Philippine Islands or elsewhere. ( ommodore C ieorge 
Dewey would feel its effects in April 1898. 

To conclude their coverage of Philippine news lor 1896 , the .Xorth-dhina 
Herald printed several paragraphs about executions which the ( A nui Mail had 
translated from Manila newspapers. Making a sad litany lor the ending ol the vear, 
the names may not now be meaningful, but the pathetic lack of due process in a 
medieval system of justice still makes chilling reading M 1 December 1896 , 1 144). 
Thus the year 1 896 ended with an orgy of Filipino executions by the Spanish. But 
news of the most brutal and senseless of these executions, that ol I )r. Jose Rizal on 
the morning of 30 December, did not reach Shanghai until early the next vear. 



Rizal Sacrificed to Spanish Stupidity 

The first accurate news about Rizal’s death to reach Shanghai from I long Kong 
newspapers was published by the North-dhina Herald on 1 5 Januarv 1 897 (page 
46). It was a stark, single sentence a statement of fact and evaluation: “Dr. Rizal 
was executed at Manila on the 30th ult., the victim of the rancour of the friars/' 
Spain had thereby sentenced herself to death as a viable colonial power. The insur- 
rection was not then terminated; it merely dragged on for years as Spain slowly 
committed suicide as a legitimate governing force in the Par Hast. 

On page 6 of its 8 January issue the North-dhina Herald had printed a vague 
general statement about Rizal’s execution taken from “a recent issue of the Hong 
Kong Daily Press. Declaring that Rizal ( “who is reported to have been shot at Ma- 
nila for alleged complicity in the Philippine rebellion') “is not unknown in 
Hongkong, having spent some time here on his way back to Manila after com- 
pleting his education in Europe,” it briefly sketched recent events in his life. 
There followed copies of three essential documents: a letter to Rizal from Gover- 
nor-General Blanco “on his departure from Manila to Madrid,” and enclosed with 
it letters of recommendation to the Ministers of War and of the Colonies, all dated 
30 August 1896. The governor-general generously declared that Rizal's conduct 
had been exemplary” during his exile in Dapitan and that he deserved pardon 
because he had been “in no way complicated [sic] in the rising that we now 
lament, either in the conspiracy itself or in any of the secret societies that have 
hatched it.” 

The only detailed account of Rizal’s trial and execution to reach Shanghai 
came from the Hong Kong Daily Press, taken essentially from the Manila domercio. 
The charges against this “well-known agitator” were summarized (“rebellious acts 
and illicit associations”) for which the prosecution in a “brilliant oration” de- 
manded “sentence of death for the crime of rebellion.” Rizal’s “long speech exoner- 
ating himself, showing that his name had been falsely used,” was followed by an 
entirely out-of-character maneuver in which he “stigmatised the Philippine popu- 
lation that had risen in arms against Spain as savage, the victim of deceit and abuse 



452 



\ ll n 



V • r ; \ :rziYiS fn ,f *i V’j'.’ijA,;;, I$9^-/89~ m 

of fools, and asserted that there were no respev table or representative persons (as he 
considered) win, svinpatluscd with their ideas.” 

1 execution u.is tetseU described In the ( omenrio. including Rizals sign- 
m S °f a formal ahjiiratHMi of Im errors against church and state (specifically, "I 
abominate Mason r\ as an eneim or the C hurclO, and confession and holy com- 
munion in the , hapel at I on Santiago where he also contracted matrimony with 
Miss Josefina In a. ken I he e\e, ution on the Campo de Bagumbavan was briefly 
described in dispassionate, almost clinical terms 1 1 ^ January 189 , \). W hat is 

factual and v. hat is tahr nation m this had been heatedly debated. Resolution of 
these questions , s doubtless not attainable in this life. \ct it is regrettable that 
Josephine Brackens short hut dtamatic and romantic life was treated so cryptically 
for Shanghai readers. 

I he / IW" then pto\ nled a translation of a long article from a Paris jour- 
nal, Le Petit letups, ot 2 i \ovcmbei IS9<>. After giving considerable background 
on Spain in the Philippines, the author turned to Ri/al, whom he labeled "a native 
of the Philippines, of the pute Indian race, and ot uncommon intelligence, fol- 
lowing a sketch of Ri/.d s recent history this anonymous writer concluded omi- 
nously: “If the unfortunate Ri/al. whom his countrymen cherish tor diverse rea- 
sons, is sacrificed to the raiuot ot the friars, and it ... General Blancos successor 
arrives in the Philippines mote as protector of the secular clergy than as the repre- 
sentative of Spain," then this french observer feared the worst, rebellion of the 
“native regiments" and the I ilipino rebels attaining "a state of paroxysm (1^ Janu- 
ary 1897, 71-72). 

Yet if the analyses and recommendations of General Echaluce, who had been 
second in command when the rebellion had broken out the preceding August, were 
given any standing in Madrid it would he a long and tortuous road ahead tor 1 ili- 
pinos. Having returned to Spain on sick leave the general unburdened himself to 
the London mid ('.hinn !:xpres>. Even though admitting that the ground [in the 
Philippines] had been undermined for several years by secret societies, by the ad- 
mission of natives and half castes n> municipal and official posts ot trust, by revo- 
lutionary propaganda among the native troops, and by disaffection that has spread 
to the native clergy, the native middle classes, and persons ot position and influ- 
ence,” Echaluce was convinced that .Spain would ‘ultimately conquer it she sends 
out enough European troops, but the struggle is likely to be costly and prolonged. 
The general agreed “with the members of the famous religious Orders, the 
Franciscans, Capuchins, Augustins, Dominicans, and Jesuits, who, from the first, 
denounced the Separatist agitation, and the subsequent insurrection, as aimed 
quite as much against the Roman Catholic Church and the monastic orders as 
against the Spanish rule. ” And he also fully concurred with these religious leaders 
“in advocating an energetic policy of repression as the sole means of averting great 
perils for Spanish rule” (8 January 1897, 28). 

General Echaluce would certainly see an “energetic policy of repression dra- 
matically implemented with the execution of Rizal. And his desire for additional 



THK PHIIJPrMM Kl V< )M IK >N \NI > HI ^ < > V .I > 



troops, was clearly supported by Spain as 1 long Kong reports demonstrated: 1 he 

Spanish transport San Fernando arrived at Singapore on the 2 1 si ult. f rom 
Barcelona with additional troops for Manila, where soldiers .ire still wanted, as the 
insurrection shows no signs of subsiding ( 1 5 [anuarv 1 8 1 ) ,(><)>. 

Rebellion Lurches On 

Judging from the infrequent and contradictory reports from the Philippines 
that reached Shanghai in the early months of 189". the execution of Ri/al had 
apparently achieved the results desired bv Spain in crushing the rebels spirits. But 
a private letter from Manila printed bv the Hongkong telegraph on IS January 
indicated that their fighting spirit was far from dead. I be rebellion still goes on, 
this writer declared, “I much regret to say, as it has rendered this part of the world 
a very different place to what it was six months ago. 1 le predicted that the sup- 
pression will be bloody and costly, however short, and lias caused a wound to the 
development and peace of the islands which it will take vears to heal" (25 January 
1897,94). 

A far different picture was given in an official 9 January telegram to the Span- 
ish Consul in Hong Kong from the governor-general, and printed by the 1 long 
Kong Daily Press, which reported rebel forces bad been ‘routed in Bataan and 
Bulacan, suffering heavy losses. Yet on the same clav t lie ( dnna Mai l s special cor- 
respondent reported no 'decisive” engagements and only desultory fighting. 
But he did state that Aguinaldo, "commanding some six thousand rebels from 
Cavite, was lying in this region, endeavoring to enlist recruits and vainly at- 
tempting to form a junction with the rebel forces in Bulacan” (22 January 1897, 
116). 

The Heralds Hong Kong correspondent s report on 23 January indicated a 
stalemate in the fighting, perhaps only temporary because of heavy Spanish rein- 
forcements. I he rebels appear to have entrenched themselves in Cavite, he 
noted, and though they have few arms they seem to know how to use them. 1 hey 
can hold out for an indefinite period, unless the Spanish troops are so largely rein- 
forced as to be able at any sacrifice to crush them” (29 January 1 897, 1 63). 

Some balance in evaluating this confusing situation came from a respected 
London publication, the Economist (apparently in the issue for 19 December 
1 896). The North-China Herald^ February 1897, 199) referred to it as a "leading 
article, titled "Spain as a Colonial Power,” which accused Spain of having 
made three cardinal mistakes” in her colonial policy: "(1) She governs her colo- 
nies entirely for her own advantage. (2) The Spaniards in the colonies remain a 
caste, keeping themselves all of from the natives, monopolizing all power, all high 
offices, and a great deal of the revenues. (3) A great deal too much power is given to 
the clergy.” 

The North-China Herald quoted the final sobering paragraph from this in- 
ternationally esteemed journal which gloomily predicted that no one in charge of 



454 



» > »»; S r; ; . /$95- /$9~* 

the I’liilippii. •• tv: u\l to abolish the evils which .ire at the root of 

discontent. V lu would onb he able to conquer" rather than reform, these basic 
problems would he intensities! In liquoring in islands like the Philippines 

is terrible expen exhatotint; work, while it involves in the very nature 

of things an nu u a d.. least in popular hostility and savageness." 

j he / >. . . , i • id: \ have used a private letter from Manila dated 13 

February as do. ■ m -dv.: iik imvc evaluation of Philippine conditions: 

| he : ■ 1 . ■ -• di .co on and the Spanish troops seem doing little or 

no good tow .mis s- it 1 lu \ keep shooting people publicly, but 1 think 

j,j st |ul\ s.il. . . .1 : . n: . .. i he • nat i\ es to tommit any atrocity. Hie present 

C iovei not is mil in :'h. I'lieMs. w ho get people killed and shot merely to satisfy 
their o\s n ends 1 l eht u.it \ IS V) '. 2 S 



And an .mule in the < < for \2 I chruarv added still further grist to 

the mill grinding aw av at Spanish picstige: I he latest news t tx>m Manila indicates 

that Cieneral I'ol.tv ici.i is still waning tor reinforcements before proceeding to tie 
annihilation of the icheh t auid" It also raised doubts about the accuracy of 
rebel casual tv figures .is supplied In Spain (ibid.). 

l ittle aid to Spanish v. tedibilitx was supplied by an official 10 I chruar\ te e 
eram from Manila to the Spanish C onsul in Hong Kong printed In the Hon^ 
Kong Daily IW». which listed a scries ot’ impressive and lopsided SpanKh \ iaorieb 
(26 February 1 S9T 3 S 0). \gain unofficial sources received at 1 long Kong ot ere 
alternate tacts. \ private lettei which has been received trom Manila, the / td ) 
Press repen ted, “states that the rebels captured three guns at the battle ot Silang an 
that the Spanish Cieneral who is second in command was killed. I he tma s 
ment must have been sobering lor Spanish supporters: 1 he letter also states t lat 

the Spanish soldiers are suffering great privations and that then ate heggin^ an 
praying for food. And a dispatch from the Hongkong lelegraphs con es pone cn ^ m 
the Philippines must have been even more discouraging tor Spanish pat tisans. 11S 
“Occasional Correspondent report eel hcavv Spanish losses in Caute, ine u in t? 
those by cannons that “did great execution with coir tree nuts, which ate \er\ iar 
and inflict wounds which are difficult to heal (3 March 1S C ) * 

The Heralds regular I long Kong correspondent on 13 March ottered sa^e 
advice about handling all reports from Manila: “It is difficult to know what ane 
how much to believe* of the reports... relative to the movements ot the tioops 
engaged in attempting to suppress the rebellion in the Philippines. So he sug 
gested “the proverbial grain of salt" (2b March 189 , 340). lwo v^eeks late i Cj 
March) he frankly admitted that it was “difficult to get at the truth, as the Spanis 
claimed “nothing but victories. 1 hnvever, it was clear that things ate not goin^ 
smoothly for the Spaniards for we mav take for granted or the Madriei Co\ern^ 
ment would not be about to dispatch reinforcements ot seven thousand men 
(9 April 1897, 636). 



4SS 



I'HK PHII IPIMNI KiV<>M I ! ( )V « 



I here was, however, no questioning the importance <>t the Spanish victory 
reported in an official telegram published in the 1 long Kong I Kmc. /Gw of 8 April 
1897 nor of the importance of the Filipino leader lictc.ncil t here Ym I raneisco de 
Malabon in Cavite Province had been captured by < *vmr.ii I i iiambres division 
with 400 rebels killed and 30 taken prisoner. 1 he Filipinos had been commanded 
by Andres Bonifacio. It claimed that this loss constituted a severe blow of great 
moral effect” to the Filipinos (15 April 189 009). 

On 6 May the Hong Kong / hilly /5r printed i telegram w hich had been 
received by the Spanish Consul in I long Kong, dated Manila. 8 -Slay, listing a se- 
ries of Spanish victories in Cavite Prov ince with 000 rebels killed and more than 
200 taken prisoner. The Daily I J ress added that private advices, however, state that 
all that is really known at Manila is that the rebels are retiring t<> the hills tor the 
rainy season, and these [Spanish] victories with great slaughter are thought to be 
imaginary” (14 May 1897, 854). 

Yet claimed Spanish successes continued in ( avite province as ev idenced by 
a telegram to the Spanish Consul at 1 long Kong, received by him on 13 May and 
published in the Daily Press the next day. ( )ur courageous troops, he exulted, 
have captured “the last entrenched positions held by the rebels in the province of 
Cavite.” The Filipinos “suffered great loss ; the Spanish losses were considerable, 
but much less, rhe troops behaved admirable (21 May 189 , 9_9). 

When the probably not unexpected laconic proclamation In the governor- 
general of the Philippines finally came, the North-China Herald .\ Hotted it a single 
sentence amidst a variety of items culled from I long Kong papers for 29 May: 1 he 

Governor-General of the Philippines has issued a proclamation announcing the 
conclusion of the rebellion, and offering an amnesty, with release of many prison- 
ers and commutation of the sentences on others (9 June 1 89 , 990). 



An Insurrection that Would Not Die 



If the Philippine rebellion really had ended, news from Manila in the North-China 
Herald indicated otherwise. The Manila Comercio of 16 June reported numerous 
casualties from fighting in the mountains near San Mateo and concluded that “this 
looks like more trouble brewing in the centre of I.u/.on district (2 July 1867,67). 
An unspecified issue of the China Mail (Hong Kong) declared “that Aguinaldo, 
the rebel commander in the Philippines, has succeeded in breaking through the 
Spanish cordon round Cavite province, and has joined forces with the Central 
Luzon army.” But Hong Kong’s Daily Press asserted that the governor-general’s of- 
fer of* free pardon to penitent rebels who surrendered had been “abrogated” and 
that the rebellion as an organized movement is over (23 July 1 H9 -7 , 1 34). 

Yet apparently from a report in the China Mail (undated) the governor-gen- 
eral himself had serious doubts about the condition of peace in the archipelago. 
From private advices received by last steamer from Manila we learn that a report 

" S P £ 



was current in usually well-informed circles,” the dispatch began in unusually 



cir- 



456 






, \ .r:. /frm 'v/uf^/u ; . 18^5-18^" 



cuicous I.UlgU.I: A 
tous cclcgf.im t> > 



: M | x.,./ :u\ the ( uuernor tdcneral had sent a momen- 



M .nil 



ligious orders wi u nut c\; 
mediately sent ft«>m s >p.un 
of refusal <>t either <*f the . 

The ( b:n.: i • - f 

“as the rep* »rt s < >t the Man: 
the North ( h:n.t ii< ... ... . 

this informatn >n. t> >:;■ ■ hi 
Emilio Agumalilo spc.U d 
being c rushed, he >1 ia .ue 



. t ,.»\e- mv.ent amounting to an ultimatum." If the re- 
„ . t:,»m the Philippines. 40.000 troops must he im- 
• ettei t . eh quell the rebellion." finally. "in the event 
to ,n «. ept his resignation" (.30 July 180~. 201). 

.. .i :.> i!en\ emphatically that the revolt had ended, 

, AS i;u;ms ample prove” 1 1 .' August IS 1 )", 208). And 
, A .. .. ioiies|>ondent in Hong Kong corroborated 
,s i ommeiulators vomments on the leadership of 
\ . : .io 1 he rebellion in the Philippines is far from 

I mg. mote or less severe, is still going on in Cen- 

tral Luzon, and ahh -ugh : tn ''.m i.inis . laim all the victories, there is no doubt the 
rebels arc making a stubborn defense \gumaldo had recently issued a proclama- 
tion in wins h he s . 1 1 It's i up.- I : . : pi nos to take up arms in a desperate struggle for 
liberty" and insisted on 'the banishment ot the priests. An evaluation ot his lead- 
ership was short but tla.ts..: 1 bo man has. it is said, proved himself an able 

and cautious gcnc.al. and cs lule holding lus own against great odds, he has shown 
moderation in v. slots and In hi> sons.de, are treatment ot his captives. Lenitive 
defeat of Agutnald*. seemed lughh tml.keb to this reporter, since He is now se- 
curely ent rein bed m the mountains m the centre ot l u/on. and the Spa mart s wt 
find it difficult .O dislodge bun" 20 Angus, 1 S'r. Wb: this report from Hong 

Kong was dated ' \uguM 1 ' , 

/Vs the vea. concluded. tins same anonymous correspondent pvho had estab- 
lished a reputation lo. modei.mon. .Kstir.nv. and consistency) remained hrm tn 
his position that Spam had not vet non us wai against the msunretos. 1 he rebel- 
lion in the Philippines s.,11 goes on." he declared, "and the insurgents seem as de- 
termined as eve. to m.unt.m, the snuggle." I le then revealed that "Information has 
reached the China Mail to the ellei . that the Spanish government have tried to buy 
over the leader of the mmemem. Emilio Aguinaldo [sic], making lum a definite 
offer of $1 ,700. 000 to bung about a pacific settlement, but so lar the rebel leader 
has declined to entertain the offer." I'nless some agreement were reached, this re- 
porter was convinced t hat "the w .u ma\ drag mi indefinitely, since the rebels have 
hill possession of vast tracts ofcounuv. and the Spaniards seem incapable ot over- 
running the islands" (All >cc ember I S l )~, 1 loS. his report was dated 24 Decem- 
ber I 897 at Hong Kong). „ 

Further news concerning negotiations to buy over Aguinaluo would nave 
to wait until the following vear. Wt other indicators pointed to a steads return to 
normalcy as news from the archipelago resumed its antebellum character. 1 he 
Manila Lottery was back in business and results were reported in Shanghai begin- 
ning in June (2S June I X')"\ 1 12')). And natural disasters supplanted man-made 
catastrophes as newsworthy: Mavon \oleano south of Manila erupted violently 
with terrible damage and loss of life in lulv ansi a severe earthc|uake shook Bolinao 
in northern Luzon in November (23 |ulv 18') , 154; c ) November 18') , 8')2). 



4 8 



THE PHILIPPINE REV( )| l I It )N \NI > Hi u >\l > 



In the North-China Heralcl for 6 August ] H9~ 280 I short single sentence 
had appeared without a head, introduction, or comment. irv: ( apt. Cridley, 

U.S.N., arrived at Yokohama by the ( mein u> sik i eed < apt. Reed in command of 
the U.S. flagship Olympia. Any editor who would then have placed tins news item 
within the orbit of Spanish-Philippine affairs would surels haw uttered summary 
dismissal for extreme journalistic incompetence. 

First Act Intermission 

The North-China Herald's own correspondent in I long Kong on >1 December 
1897 reported the formal end of the Philippine revolt. I he Spanish consul at 1 long 
Kong had received this important telegram from the captain-general of the Philip- 
pines: “I inform your Excellency with great satisfaction the principal leaders of the 
insurrection have laid down their arms, with cries of 1 ong live Spain! 1 ong live 
the King and Peace.’” “From what 1 hear, this correspondent added, "one of the 
leaders of the movement is now in the colony I long Kong to rec eive a large sum 
as ransom for certain prisoners held bv the rebels as hostages, and on payment of 
which and a pledge of unconditional pardon with the promise of equal rights with 
Spaniards for the natives, the insurgents have agreed to lay clown their arms' (14 
January 1898, 52). It would be some months before Shanghai resident s were given 
fuller details (25 April 1 898, 693). 

These arrangements between Aguinaldo and his fellow rebel c hiefs and Span- 
ish representatives were not then graced with the title of “treaty," truce," “pact," or 
even accord by the North-China Heralcl ox any of its sources. Nloi does the name 
Biak-na-Bato, Biyak-na-bato, Biyak-na-Bato, Biak na Bato, nor Biacnabato appear. 

I his should be an occasion for minor rejoicing bv editors who thus were spared 
frequent recourse to brackets, parentheses, and "sics. 

I hus ended the first act in this mighty Asian drama. The intermission would 
be brief. 

For months in early 1898 there was no news from the Philippines in 
Shanghai’s North-China Herald except an encouraging announcement that the 
Manila Lottery was still functioning (21 February 1 898. 261 ). I bis same issue also 
contained the terrible news from Havana, Cuba, about the sinking of the Maine 
which initially probably did not appear to many to bear any relationship to Spain 
and the Philippines. “It is disasters like this,” the editor movingly wrote, “which 
come like thunderbolts from a clear sky, which impress the mind again with the 
feeling of the uncertainty of existence, that indeed in the midst of life we are in 
death.” 

If war between the United States and Spain had seemed a real possibility be- 
cause of the destruction of the Maine, Shanghai residents would have had to be 
extremely unobservant not to have noticed that during April American naval forces 
were focusing on Las Islas Pilipinas. Short news items from I long Kong reported 
one ship after another of the U.S. Asiatic Squadron gathering in the spacious har- 






458 



r : l :ru n: rrvm X/wttg/fcf J. /$95-/#9"* 

bor of this crow n v t»h»r : ul th main Mrnior nax^al officers. Last to arrive on 

22 April w.is ihc ^ I lonolulu via Yokohama, obviously sailing 

under a sense nl : : :uu le the run all the way at 18 knots' despite being 

heavilv lo.ided s*. it!: u' :' ion, supplies, and men tor the Asiatic Scjuadron ^ 
April 1 «S C )N. 

1 he 1~ \pn Ik:;.; Kot /V- had assessed the situation with consid- 

erable acini' s '-"u .! \s .ir untiu t unateb take place one of the scents ot action 
would lie in (lu ! ar I im w he u - the l mted States squadron would make a descent 

upon the Phil ippines i *> \pnl ISOS.O'ML 

The .isscmNiu*: for the second act ot this drama. 1 he 

commander m J»u i ot .„ u - ot the nc« !uior> in naval uniform would amazingly 
claim not to kim« e' en sslu-.e to Uk.uc the Philippines on a map. Even He would 
learn quu kl' not onh about «lu "orld map hut also about the staggering com- 
plexities of internal lon.ii powet point.' 



.Notes 

1 . 



2. I 



3. 



|ohn K I a.rhank. < d . <v - fhurn ,t . vol. 10. Lite Clung, 1800- 

r)]L |., r . I ( .iml't uie.e t ..mb„d,;c ImserMts Press. 1^6). 23“-»0. (Fturbank 
authored this sa non. I lu . u auon ot the treat' s'stcm": I lallett Abend, hr. in Pom 

(Ciarccn ( nc New Y>tk l \mhleda\. l^oran. l v M-P.pp. Ik'* * 

: nml s I ester 1 husks 1\„«. 1 Hrton of Shanghai. Hang An Account Of l he 

(, mirth and herelot»nent < >' ! -' Intem.itional Settlement (Shanghai: Kelly and 
Walsh. I td.. 1‘K’Si. P p .’til l>.\ 

Frank I I. km,;, ed. and t Luke. 1 Re>,arch ( hade to Unn.i Coast Setesp.tpers, 

1822-lHl- M.us.iui 1 .ist \si.m Monographs. 



No. 18. Foreword by John K. 



Fairbank K 



an 



il>, .due: 1 l.us.ud I nnersitv Press. 1 0681. pp. 8. 0. 80-81. 



480 



The Philippine Revolution, Jose Rizal, 
and Philippine Independence 
in the Malay Nationalist Movement 

j 



Rami mi Adam 

Histon/ Department, University of Malaya, K uola lump / Vok/ 



T he nationalist movement in Malaysia emerged later than other Southeast 
Asian movements. It appeared only in the early 20th century as a reformist 
nationalism of the Islamic intelligentsia who were known as kauin Muda 
(the Young Group). I hey were followed by a second group ot Malay intelligentsia 
consisting of junior government servants, journalists, and teachers. At the end of 
the 1930s, the emergence of the socioeconomic and semi-political associations 
marked a new phase in the nationalist movement in the Malay Peninsula. The for- 
mation of Kesatuan Melayu Muda (the Young Union Association) in 1939 was the 
climax of that phase. 

As in any other country, nationalism in the Malay Peninsula was triggered by 
internal and external factors. The spread of religious and secular education, the 
introduction of colonial administration and western cultures alleged to be superior 
to the natives’, the exploitation of the natural resources of the country, the influx of 
immigrants and discrimination against the natives in the land-tenure system, edu- 
cation, job opportunities, and the government sector were dominant factors con- 
tributing to the emergence of Malay nationalism. 

The Pan-Islamic movement, which started in the Middle hast and East Asia, 
spread to other parts of the Islamic world through newspapers and magazines. The 
students who attended higher Islamic institutions in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Jor- 
dan were instrumental in introducing the ideas of progressive Islam as teachers in 
the Islamic schools or madrasahs . They interpreted Islam in a positive manner, not 
only as a religion, but also as a way of life. Islam aimed to make the life of its believ- 
ers more prosperous. 



460 






J 



:pp: nr l n. irprndrnrr 



noi 



x tow.iul turned the Malax* Penin- 

tu-ve at ul Indians. Ihcv came .is laborers, business- 



I he Br msh i »pen 

sula into a seulement s 
men. investors .nut s,* v i u:\ss 1 he opening ot new towns and rubber estates 
encouraged the establishment o' s v nooU. clubs, and other social organizations tor 
the benefit ot tin pe»»p 1 In lmmiejants were trciMo move around and maintain 
their ow n ult me. n :e:on. am: pohtnal tdcoloiw. Ihe extension ot C hinas politi- 
cal activities into tin \lala\ IVntnMii.i was unavoidable. Branches ot all political 
movements m C hina ami India wete formed in the Chinese and Indian settle- 
ments. Issue s i .use d m tin it mothct outlines became the political issues in the 
Malay Peninsula 1 In miuii^ants Kwalt\ was to their mother countries. 

I he ae twities ( > t tin Indians ami the t hinese. w - ho controlled the economy, 
made the \lala\ s se nsitive to the need to survive politicallv in their own country. 

I he efforts of the Malax an t ommunist Paitx were seen as an immigrant plot to 
conquer the iVmnsul.i and to replace Islam with communism, l or this rea- 

son the Malays hep, an to unite against the immigrants. whom they perceived to 
threaten their political sutviv.il atul land owneTship. 

The Indonesian natumahsi movcme'tit was also a dominant influence on 
Malay nationalism. I lu- peoeultutal proximity of the two areas was an important 
factor. I here was so imuh movement ot people between the two countries, espe- 
cially between the Malax Peninsula and lava, Sumatra, and C elebes, that ideas ot 
freedom and anti colonialism in Indonesia quickly spread to the Malay Peninsula. 
Some ol the Indonesian immigrants were nationalist leaders who had to Ic.nc 1 
donesta lor tear ot l hitch reprisal. I hc’v mtluenccd Uveal writers and leaders 
cial organizations. Indonesian literature pave the Malay intelligentsia a com pie un 
sive understanding ol national freedom. 1 iterature was one of the media usee u 
the Indonesians to instill patriotism and demand freedom tor their country, i^u 
hatred for the Dutch encouraged anti-colonialism among Malays, especta > 
radical Noting l moil Association, who we're' receptive to the ideals oi the 
sian revolution and nationalist movement, l'hey were also inspired h> tie 11 
sian leadership to he a part of the Indonesian Republic in 1943- 1 (the 

tegration with Indonesia was expressed through the concept ot McUnu x.na 
Malay Kmpire). .. , j 

Radical-group leaders such as Ibrahim Haji Yaakob. lshak uion of 

and Ahmad Bocstamam discussed in their writings the Philippi ^ as 

1896. They were journalists for important Malay vernacular 1 1 e w s P->P ( - r -' * ^ 

Utusan Melayu ( ihe Malay /Messenger), Majlis (ihe Council)* 

(I he News of Malaya). As editors they were responsible foi pi intin-, [ 
nationalistic articles in their newspapers and thereby became tie po mea 
gandists for Malay nationalism. 



sts ror Malay nationalism. . , , . . i- • i 

In their editorial columns they discussed British policies anc r l( -" P 
economic, and social implications for the natives. Iheycriticizec t ie tin. 
taking away the political power of the Malay rulers and exploiting tie natura e 
sources of the country. In condemning the British, they eited the suttee 



401 



THK PHII.IPPIM*. RhV< )I ri K )N AM > HI Y< >N! ) 



Filipinos as an example of the determination of a people to secure their freedom. 
The Majlis editorial of 21 October 1940 said: 

I he struggle to achieve freedom is not easv It requires .1 great deal of 
sacrifice to fulfill our destiny. All Asian countries had to struggle to win their 
freedom from the western powers. In Southeast Asia, the struggle against the 
western powers was widespread. I he I )iponegoro War against the 1 )tiuh. and 
the Philippine revolution are examples of struggles against colonialism. We 
should follow in the footsteps of our brothers wh< > were willing to sac 1 llice their 
lives for freedom. 

The Philippine Revolution of 1896 was always mentioned together with the 
Indonesian revolution. Malay radicals were more familiar with events in Indone- 
sia, but they also studied other countries revolutions. 

They published articles about the Philippine revolution in the hope of in- 
stilling in Malays the desire for independence. In IJtusan Mclayiu 1 January 1938, 
an article on revolutions around the world mentioned the Philippine revolution in 
two paragraphs, underscoring its utmost significance as a model for the Malay 
struggle against the British. 

Jose Razal was the most popular figure 1 n works on the Philippine re\ ol ution. 
The story of his life, his struggle, and his writings were discussed in the context of 
the freedom struggle in the Malay Peninsula. In 1938, Ibrahim 1 laji Yaacob, the 
editor of Majlis , in an article on why Malays should pursue political freedom, 
mentioned the struggle of Jose Rizal to gain freedom from Spain: 

Jose Rizal s writings encouraged his people defy the Spanish. 1 hs wait- 
ings helped the Filipinos understand political and economic oppression. 1 le 
instilled in Filipinos the pride of a nation through revolution. 1 le was the fa- 
ther of the Filipinos struggle against western colonialism. 

Ibrahim considered Jose Rizal as a brother to the Malays, mentioning that 
Malays and Filipinos came from the same Austronesian stock. Jose Rizal, he said, 
could therefore be considered a leader of the Malay people as well. Leaders of the 
Malay nationalist movement considered Rizal second only to Sukarno of Indone- 
sia as an inspiration. 

I he Japanese occupation from 1941 to 1945 was another important event 
that brought Malaya and the Philippines even closer together. Through its propa- 
ganda about the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, Japan attempted to es- 
tablish itselfas the new master of Asia. Malay newspapers cited the independence 
of the Philippines and other Southeast Asian countries in order to encourage Ma- 
lays to achieve the same goal. The Malay newspapers such as Fajar Asia, Semangat 
Asia, and Malai Shimbun, which were published under Japanese authority, carried 



462 



M'WI 'v V»r Piuhppme h:dff*tu{rnct 

the idea consisicnilx tor three anil a halt years. Ibrahim Haji Yaacob. Ishak Haji 
Mohamad, \bdul Kahim Kaiai. /ainat \bidin Ahmad, and /a' 'ba wrote articles to 
generate support from M.b.ixs tos the Miugglc tor independence in the Philippines. 
Burma. Indonesia. hulia. and v hina . 

In st.ut an \sian brotherhood. la ;. which was published in January 

1943 by Nmsci M.d.u kensctMi s ha 1 he New Malax Oevelopmcnt Body), carried 
an article. 1 rase Out l hflctctucv' on the establishment ot‘ PI JTERA. a group ot 
young Indonesians m the tieedom movement. I hc author. Zainal Abidin Ahmad, 
considered the groups .utixmcs as important in uniting Asian peoples. He said: 
‘Let us promise to erase all differences rn our region created by the western powers 
and let us make \sian co prosperity a real i tv." 

Numerous .mules appeared in Malax vernacular newspapers xvhich xvere es- 
tablished by the lapanese m oilier to persuade Asians to accept Japanese imperial- 
ism and reject the western powers. Malax nationalists, who were also editors ot 
those newspapers, became the tools ot the lapanese. 

I he articles reflected the Ysian desire to be tree from the xxestern poxxers. Ac 
cording to one art u le: 



Nox\ Asians have awakened and are trxing to speed up their efforts to 
achieve the prosperity thex haxe desired tor so long. In 1^03 the victor) ot the 
Japanese army over Russia awakened the anticolonial spirit ot Raja Ram 
Mohan Roy ot India, lose Ri/al of the Philippines, and Or. Wahidin 
Sudirobusodo ot Indonesia. I \en though thev did not organize a great force, 
they had the desire* to tree* thcmselxcs from the' oppression ot the xxestern [ 
crs. It is only now, under lapanese' guidance, that the desire to create a (ore 
Asia can he realized, after 300 hundred years of xvestern oppression. 

I he newspapers port rax ed the cooperation among Asians in uprooting 
cm political and cultural influences. The ideas of all the well-known * c | K ^ r ^^ rs S ^f 
were presented as symbolizing unity among Asians. Lor the first time r 1 ^ ONV n 
Fajar Asia could see the relevance of'other Asian nationalist struggles to t ko 
I heir political perspective on national freedom became more excitin-, con- 
lenging. 1'he example of Jose Ri/al contributed to this new phenomenon, 
eluded “Darina- Baku” (The Sacrifice) bv AMELZ: 



Ki 1 iajar Dcw.mtoro, the father of New Indonesia, said. A c ' "Th* 

only ask favors from the nation but we must also sacrifice our li\cv ' 

Malay rulers should position themselves as effective leaders of the f ' f ’ 
be responsible for the freedom of the country; they should be trainee to sac ri 
ficc for the nation. Only then can we realize what Jose Rizal wrote in < >‘t 
lence of the Filipinos-, that every race of Malay stock is not lazy and is wi mg 
sacrifice itself.' 



463 



THK mil IPI'INI HI V< >1 l "I I< >N \M > IW 'i < )M » 



The Japanese more systematically instilled brotherhood among Asians 
through a literature program. For example, it held an ompetition in I 1 )-*.} 

which was meant to praise the Japanese contribution t<> the liberation ot Asian 
countries from western powers. I he winner was Arturo \\. lolentino, a voting law- 
yer from the Philippines and a member of kiilibiij'i Philippines National l ninn). 
His essay was published in S emangat A ta , another important Malay vernacular 
newspaper in Singapore, the center of the Malay nationalist movement. 

Tolentino’s article was meant to persuade Asians m acknowledge the lapa- 
nese as superior and as the protector of Asian nations 

All over Asia, British and American imperialism tosiered tear, stupiduv. 
hunger and poverty, exploitation, falsehood and greed ( *nl\ the lapanese 
could challenge the British and Americans. Vs ith their ujik ept < >t 1 lakko U hiu 
(World Brotherhood), the Japanese liberated the Asian people from the op- 
pression of the west... The war against the western powers was .1 hob war 
against the devils. It was a war to pursue the truth and to <. nsutc the rightful 
position of the Asian people. * 

To reinforce the feeling of hatred toward the western powers, lolentino cited 
the Philippine experience with western colonization. 1 le encouraged the Malays to 
reject British imperialism: 

In the Philippines the Spanish ruled the country with greed and cruelty 
and forced the people to live in ignorance. After the Spanish left, the Ameri- 
cans hypocritically gave the Filipinos an educational system designed to make 
them great consumers of western products. I hey encouraged a lew Americans 
to be capitalists in the Philippines. 'The Filipinos became materialistic; they 
became victims of American capitalists who were motivated only by profit.' 

Mohamad Basri from Syonan (Singapore), who won second place in the 
same competition, voiced a similar opinion. According to him, the Japanese had 
liberated Asia from western imperialism. Western imperialism had discriminated 
against natives in all aspects of life. The native was treated “like a dog and this was 
one of the examples of how an inferiority complex had been planted by the west in 
the minds and the hearts of the natives.”'* He cited the Philippines as the case to be 
considered by Malay readers: 

According to the Americans, the Philippines will be given independence 
under the Fydings-McDuffie Act. But American control over the Philippine 
economy has been strengthened bit by bit. The policy of the Americans toward 
the Filipinos is like a snake with two heads. 



464 



\ p\m : •‘r 



' ( Rsc.:L jnd Philippine Independence 



\s a mcmbci t>* the * neater Imm \m.i (do- Prosperity Sphere, the Philippines 
wa.s promiseil mdepe ndciu c b\ the lapanesc as a strategy to encourage other coun- 
tries Mil h .is I he M.i.a\ IVmnsuIa to support their Asian brothers and at the same 
time to work toi thci: own independence. 1 he Japanese encouraged Malays to 
work closed with Indonesia in language, cultural shows, literature, and politics. At 
the same time. tl. Ma.avs who kept in mind the independence promised the 
Philippines were aware of their own right to independence as a reward for their 
support tor the ( o Piosperit\ Sphere. 

According to !*;•;, the lapanese began discussions on Philippine inde- 

pendence during a visit to \sia b\ t «eneral lojo, the prime minister of Japan. He 
started in Thailand and pun ceded to Svonan. calling on the Malay rulers, and then 
proceeded to Indonesia and the Philippines. 

1 Its visit to the Philippines, according t o Fajar was an important step 
toward Philippine independence. \ C ommittee for Philippine Independence 
was chaired In lose P. 1 auteld 

A tew months latei. a grand meeting was held in Tokyo under the leadership 
of ( icneral Idjn himself The meeting aimed l) to discuss political preparations tor 
the independence ol \sian countries under Japanese protection, 2) to instill coop- 
eration among Asians, and 3) to unite the peoples of Asia under Japanese control 
in order to eradicate western influence. 1 he Japanese also promised to make Asia 
the center of a new civilization and to put control of Asia's natural resources in the 
hands of Asian nations themselves/’ 

I )uring that meeting, the Japanese appointed the leaders w r ho were respon 
sible for the independence of the Philippines, l hev w r ere, as reported: 



Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Minister for Howe Affairs 
Minister of fdnanee 
Minister of fustier 

Minister of heononiy and A^rieulttire 
Minister of Transportation and Publie Works 
Minister of Higher Court 
(J.uef Secretary for the Cabinet 



J.P Laurel 
Claro M. Recto 
Antonio de las Alas 
Teofilo Sison 
Rafael R. Alunan 
Quintin Paredes 
Jose Y. Yulo 
Francisco Rabedes 



I he independence of the Philippines was welcomed by the people of 
Malay Peninsula. Id them independence w; is the ultimate goal of their cooperat- 
ion with the Japanese. The achievement of the Filipinos was definitely the envy o 

the Malays; it showed them that their dream of achieving independence themse ves 

was not impossible. This was the spirit of the article written by Zainal Abidin 
Ahmad in praising the meeting in 1'ok.yo: 



lo the Asian nations that meeting was the biggest step taken by Asians 
to unite themselves and to create a new vv orld order. Let the Asians take charge 



465 



THE PHII IPPINf RI-VOM I U >N 



of their own destiny and give Asians the kc\ to their own miucss. I mied. 

Asians can write their own history. 

His view was shared bv /.aba, a Malay reformist. In a radio speech, /aba 
commented on Philippine independence and its significance to the Malav nation- 
alist movement: 

Now the Philippines has ac hicved its indcpendeiK e utuier the leadership 
of Mr. laurel, hut I believe the Philippines v. ill continue t<> v.orh with other 
Asian countries fighting to free themselves from the shams of brmsh and 
American colonialism. After the ( hinese and the Burmese, the s lala\ s and the 
Indonesians were given the opportunity to rule their own countries. \\ ith the 
independence of the Philippines, nowall the Asian nations can work together 
to develop the Greater hast Asia ( io- Prosperity Sphere and to defend them- 
selves from western enemies. 

Za’ba, condemned the Americans for making the I ilipmos a western 
people” and tried to show how the Americans had mined the I ilipmos into slaves 
of American culture: 

The Americans created a group of educated h.lipmos who were very 
westernized and materialistic. They thought only of having a new ear, spend- 
ing their money and time to satisfy their animal desires, and they were very 
proud if they could marry white women or associate with white men. Without 
any difficulty, the Americans managed to make the Philippines their naval base 
to attack Japan; and Japan felt it was its duty to f ree the Pilipinos f rom Ameri- 
can control. The Americans might try to come hack to the* Philippines, but it 
will not be easy because the Philippines has matured and its independence can 
not be voided by any power. 

f he Pajar PAuluyu also showed Malays the role pla\cd b\ women in the 
political life of the Philippines. In the* meeting with General Tojo in Manila, a 
woman leader represented the Philippines in welcoming Japanese control in Asia. 
She was Mrs. Jorge B. Vargas, whose speech was short but significant since no 
other countries were represented by women. Io her, the coming of the Japanese 
was the most important event in the history of Asia and the foimation of the 
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere would encourage brotherhood among 
Asians. She said: 

I he women welcome the Co-Prosperity Sphere. Prosperity has long 
been the dream of the Asian people and it has materialized with the coming of 
Japan as the big brother of Asia. We welcome General Tojo as the leader who 
will unite and strengthen the political will of the Asian nations. We pray tor 



466 



M ' V-* ‘'c n'*r .:tui Philippine buiepcndettc* 

chc miuc^ •-* w«»ild luotlutlnnHl whuh wc ho pc will be realized as "the Phil- 
ippines to: tin } iiipmos .uni \m.i tor the \>ian.v" 

lh is \v.is \s .i\ * »• ir.uuit.imiu; \ lala\ women to participate in the political 
movement of then nation. \t tin* time. Malay women were not involved in the 
political attans ot ; iunr v ountt \ \ltluuu;h sec ular education was introduced by the 
Brit is h, ill c response from Malax soctet\ was slow, l he traditional belief that 
women were onl\ meant to be wives and mothers discouraged parents from edu- 
catintttheii dauphu is I inis. Malax women remained uninvolved in sociopolitical 
affairs. rii c \«>ue ot I ilipmo w omen was seen as encouraging Malav women to 
participate in their national affairs. 

Conclusion 

The influence ot tlu Philippine ro\ olution, lose Rival. and Philippine indepen- 
dence on Malax nationalism was \ci\ significant. 1 he Malays looked up to the 
Philippines ,uul otliei \m.ui countries for inspiration in their struggle against the 
British. Bui they did not mp\ the techniques of these revolutions. 1 he Malays did 
not fight the British in am armed revolution or any military action: instead they 
chose to criticize the British and demanded better treatment in the political, eco- 
nomic and social fields. I veil though the radical group worked against the biitish 
by cooperating w ith the lapanesc. thev did not rise up in arms when the Japanese 
denied independence to the Malay Peninsula. They were willing to gain indepen- 
dence through Indonesia and become part of Indonesia Raya. 

Jose Ri/.al was accepted as the brother who had shown them how to tight 
against colonialism. I lis moderate approach was suitable to the feudalistic Malays. 
English education and the police- of indirect rule ot the British had created a bar 
monious relationship between the traditional elites and the British, the Ma ay 
ra kyats, who were obedient to their traditional leaders (the elite and the rulers), 
no alternative, even though the radicals tried to shift their loyalty toward hu oncsta 
Raya. The moderate attitude of the Malavs in the nationalist movement was t ic 
product of that sociocultural habit, lose Rival's nonviolence contomu to 
Malay way of lilc. 

I he Japanese occupation also pushed the Malay nationalist moxen 
adopt the Philippines as a role model. The granting ot Philippine indepen ence 
was seen as a sincere Japanese effort to help Asians to he tree trom western co onta 
ism. 1 he Malay s thought that with Japanese support they could achieve in epen 
deuce as well, even though it was not in the Japanese political program. However, 
the theme of brotherhood among Asians fostered by the propaganda ot the (jtc.uer 
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere had enabled the Malays to feel closer ro the Philip- 
pines in their struggle for freedom from British colonialism. 

The feeling of brotherhood is still in the hearts and minds ot the Malays an 
Malaysians today. I he Deputy Prime Minister ot Malaysia through the lnstitut 



467 



THh I’HII IITINt RIVOM IIiin wmil'i'iM' 



Kajian Dasar (The Institute of Policy Re scare h held a ^ onfcrcnce «>n Jose l\i/al and 
the Philippine revolution late last year as a manifestation <>t that brotherhood and 
in the context of the ASEAN spirit. 

Notes 

1. Fajar Asia, No. 7, 1 5 ( logatsu 2603. Vear < hie 

2. Omar Othman. “How to Ac hieve the C ^-Prosperity of Asia, ibid 

3. Fajar Asia, No. 9. 28 Kokugat.su 2603 

4. Semangat Asia, No. 8, Hachigatsu 2603 
3. Ibid. 

6. Fajar Asia, No. 1 1 Hachigatsu 2063. l ahun I 

7. Ibid. 

8. Fajar Asia, No. 10, Sichigatsu 2603. 

9. Fajar Asia, No. 1 5 Junugatsu 2603. 

10. Ibid. . . 

11. SP 18/8A/25, Review on the Independence of the Philippines. su-ur -o. 

12. Fajar Asia, No. 8, 31 (iogatsu 2603. 



468 



The Chinese Perception of the Revolution 



I'm \ Ionc-vi -\n 
lnsn*ut c ;* V.jderr Accdemio Sinico, Taipei 



F rom the standpoint of a structural approach, there are four kinds of forces 
that construct a socicrv: 1 ) cultural, 2 ) social, }) political, and 4) economic. 

1 hey are, in the simplest terms, represented respectively by four different groups o 
people: 1 ) the intelligentsia, 2) the ordinary masses, 3) political actors, and 4) mer 
chants and producers. A society is in order if the four forces are kept in balance. It 
is challenged if one, some, or all of the four forces develop or progress at different 
speeds. Rapid development of a force or forces creates tensions with respect to tie 
others and thus initiates change or development. If the unbalanced force or forces 
develop radically, the situation becomes uncontrollable, and a radical e\olution 
becomes inevitable.* 

Revolution is another word for ' radical evolution. However, it is diffe 
from ordinary evolution in the way the actors interact. Actors in a revolution are 
likely to be highly emotional. With the emotional drive of aggressiveness, t e> 
are strong enough to destroy the existing order. I he emotion rises from one 
several forces and diffuses quickly to the others. These forces then form a strong 
desire to destroy the existing system and to attack those people who support the 



status quo. 

The 19th and 2()th centuries have witnessed many global revolutions. It was 
thought, according to traditional interpretations, that revolutions originated from 
corruption, inability, flabbiness, and failures of the existing regimes. Crane Brinton 

pointed out, however, that the real i tv was not that simple. He even asserted that 
revolutions were not horn in economically retrograde societies. He emphasized 
that “on the contrary, they took place in societies economically progressive. Eu- 



469 



TUI' mil 1 1*1*1 N I Kl V 



gene Weber echoed this by examining tin stgmfb .m> ->i Resolution and 

counter revolution stem from the democ r.u i do, u me ot t • • ei .htei nth .mil nine- 
teenth centuries anti from the brcakdosvn of then [ ■ :tu on: gr« >s\ t its. 1 hey arc 
quite right. Revolution breaks out when ten am sot ; u > ■: <»\ e: new and bet- 
ter ways of living and are reinforced or per mined bs > bu i tons in the ruling 

machine. 

The Philippines was in the 1 ‘7th tenturs a Spanish u.l«m\. Put she \sas the 
first Asian country to wage a republitan resolution m . s .11 u.ii \ alter the 
French revolution. China responded more than 120 \c.u\ iatti. both icsolutions 
sought goals similar to liberty, equality, and Itate.mt . I he Russian revolution 

came right after the Chinese revolution began 

This article will first introduce the Filipino historical background by com- 
paring it with the Chinese one and then dese r ii>e in mui v ■ •' d, . Ji >pment 

of the Chinese perceptions of the Filipino revolution bom ! > >o t<> 1 >s 

The Philippines and China Before their Revolutions 

The Philippine revolution not only started I b years earlier than the ( h.nese Revo- 
lution of 191 1, but was more aware of liberalism and had a deeper understanding 

of the industrial revolution. 

The Philippines was forced ...open nmch e.irlier .lun < him. In IK-l’whcn 
imperial China was defeated for the first time and forced to open reluctantly five 
ports for trade, there were in Manila 39 Spanish shipping compan.es .together with 
12 companies from Britain, the United States, I i.ukc, aiu 1 )cnmai ^ k re were 
still few foreign companies in China even some seats aftu I k consulates 

of France, the U.S., Denmark, Belgium, and st.on were a tea civ set up m Manila 
when an old-style agent in charge of foreign affaits was esta 1 is tec in C im,i late in 
I860. 9 From then on foreign embassies hael tlie tight to he in t k capita . I he 1 hil- 
ippines developed about 20 years earlier than C .Inna. 

Compared with Shanghai, then the biggest city in ( h.na with a population 
of 380,000 in 1820, Manila was already an international metropolis with more 
than 2 million people in 1 81 5 and 3 million in 1833. 

But the objects or targets of the two revolutions were different from the very 
beginning. The Filipino revolution was against foreign colonists who had occupied 
the country for several centuries 10 and the Chinese revolution was against the do- 
mestic ruling class which was overwhelmingly dominated hv a minority ethnic 
group, the Manchurian." In other words, the Filipinos wanted to get rid of the 
foreigners and govern themselves while the Chinese wanted to overturn the minor- 
ity government and set up a new one dominated by the majority Han people. 

China established her republican government in 1 9 1 2, icplacing the ancient 
regime of imperial dictatorship. The new republic suffered ever since its birth. 
Against the background of a rich and complex political autocratic tradition, it of- 



470 



/ 'v i »;rw /V r .rrx;<>r» of the Rexviuhon 



Table I. Modernization speed of the Philippines and China compared 





Philippines 


China 


First steam ship 


1848 


1863 


International postage 


1854 




Electric communication 


1873 


1908 


International shipping 


1S73 




Railway system planning 


1S83 


1895 


Telephone operation 


1890 


190S 


Railway between Manila and Dagupan 


1891 





Sources Ho Hsiao-hung. Philippine s Ancient History t (Taipei: San-Min Publishing Co., 
1996). p 178 Chino s Modernization Odyssey (Taipei) Biographical lit- 

erature 



Table II. The Population of Manila [sic.) and Shanghai 





Manila 


Shanghai 


1799 


1.522.221 




1808 


1.741.034 




1812 


1,933.330 




1815 


2.052.992 




1818 


2.106.836 




1820 




380.000 


1829 


2.593,280 




1833 


3,153,290 




1840 


3,209,077 




1845 


3.488.258 




1852 




540,000 



Sources: Ho Hsiao-tung, op. cit. . pp. 178-179: Hu Huan-yuon and Chang Shanyu, Chi- 
nese Demographic Geography (Hwa-Tung (East China) Normal University Press. 1987), 
book 2, p. 1 03. 



ten stumbled on the wav to democracy, sometimes fell, unable to move (let alone 
recover) tor long periods of time. 1 ' 

The Filipino people started practicing democracy as early as the mid- 19 th 
century, although under colonialism. The Spanish colonial governments concern 
for three centuries was first of all to improve Spain, not the Philippines. 1 he Phil- 
ippines and Cuba were means to Spanish ends. Philippine society was thus unable 
to develop in a healthy way, for the struggle tor independence was a protracted 
one.” 



471 



I Ml mil IIM’IS'I Ui . « 



77 k ? Eastern Miscellany 






k Omg dynasty; 

, with the largest 
st t ihutors outside 
r : hut i» Ml network 
It is owned bv 
e 1 '><)•*. 

u*\\l\ enhuhtened 



Among the many journals founded in 
Dongfang zazhi ( The !ui tern A// << / 
audience. Its readership rose from arourr: 

Shanghai in March 1904, to over .’oiMinn :n 
that reached 88 cities, many of them with six sa. ; >,,n 
the Commercial Press, an influential publisher 
Eastern MiscelLiny represent*. - *: 1 1 ■ ! 

middle class. A monthly (and since 1 ‘MO. a •cm.momhl ■ a ti,.i.iisprin g for 

new ideas and doctrines; it introduced no\ cl s rci d ,n ‘l rics. Its con 

tributors were famous intellectuals, quite a ame t in - 

i • i i . | l K mu i. h i diii'ii,!! p>>lu\ of the imirnal 

ers, daring analysts, or opinion Katie is. i 

was defined as “a review of review. 

Some of the articles were reproduced f mm oth.-i ,oimi.ik \s lule others, com- 
missioned or selec.ed bv ,he editors. vr. .1 ..ml f 1 ' 1 

to deny that the journal itself had !■»<-' '' , ' 1 1 '' " m IJ '" r ol 

,| rc form but its function within the spec- 
tre i<> mfotm cdiu.itcd public 



lightenment and steady constitution, 

trum of the Chinese contemporary [ )frss m " 

* * u • . .... ,» u 1 out forward challenging kic.is. It therefore 

opinion than to open up new issues ami pi 

•i r\ *, , U m ur how new concepts were formed, hut CO 

provides useful material not so much to see 

see how the literati thought. 

In this paper, I analyze 1 2 articles fiom 

lution. 1 



9 1 



( > 1 ‘H on 



the Philippine revo- 



llie 1910s: “Young Filipinos" 

“Young Filipinos” was written bv a < Tmese in the M.ilippincs. 1 ic briefly intro- 
duced the geography and history of the island country bv Incusing on the issue of 
independence. In the late 1800s bribery was done openly: the priests were hege- 
monic. Domestic phenomena were influenced by independence movements in 
Spanish-occupied America. 1 '' 

The great Filipino hero Jose Ri/.al wrote books to spread the idea of democ- 
racy and successfully awakened the spirit of the nation. In 1 892, the governor 
arrested Rizal and then imprisoned him on a small island. I pon the request of the 
archbishop, Rizal was executed on 30 I Jccc-mbcr I 800. The death of Rizal further 
fanned the flames of revolution. 

The article goes on to say that Rivals spirit was inherited by Ccncral Kmilio 
Aguinaldo. American troops assisted Aguinaldos independence movement at the 
beginning. After the battle of the American and Spanish fleets on 1 May 1898 in 
Manila Bay, the Paris Conference transferred the right to govern f rom Spain to the 
United States. The Philippines was then given a federal government by the Ameri- 
cans, who broke their promise to the Filipinos. I he dreams of the Filipino revolu- 



472 



y Rrtv/ufwn 



nonanes to . ^ r . • : ' Tpciulcnt state, the author said, disappeared like 

bubbles. 

: m v. sv >\v s pc. u etui movements tor independence from 18 l )8 

to 1 l M bcv uist the pu'i;:tsN m education and transportation, different ap- 
pro •ulus i<> an tin: mdcpcndciuc lu\ .tmc possible. Instead of engaging in war. 

Filipinos resort, ,i l«»Nn mg m the l \S. Senate and I louse of the Representatives. 
Manuel i t^ lu • >n i d Ins general ion s mission. anil his efforts proved to he effec- 
tive not <>nl\ in tin In •nn-Lunl hut also in the I ’nited States where Filipino inde- 
pendent was pioposivl In \met k an longressinen in 1 1 >1 A The proposal passed 
smoot h 1 v 1 1 u < m i! • i i hoi ! i , I ta mhet s aiu! it was approved on d August 1 P 1 6 hy Presi- 
dent Wooilrow \\ ilson 

I he ar i u k then dis, ussv s t Ik* pi act ical steps the \oung Filipinos should take. 
For the u)iinti\ tt> mature the follow mj; elements must he considered: 

1 . \jtiofLi! (i( ti r;\(- I lu Philippines is made up ot thousands ot islands. It 
was urgent that it be armed and soon. 

1. Agni'nltur t il supply. \l though the country is rich in natural resources, the 
land cultivated was k ss than percent, not enough to feed the whole country, 
which had to depend on \ letnam. It would be easv to defeat the Filipinos, the 
author said, it the siipplv hue eft food between Vietnam and the Philippines were 
cut. 

3. Month!* Philippine society was still as poor as (Chinese society 

Money was more important than law. 

1 he author writes that the Filipinos were aware of these considerations. I he\ 
therefore proposed popular education, military nationalism, and expansion of ag- 
riculture. Flow ev er, he points out they also asked the legislature to create unneces- 
sary offices or posts simply to create jobs for some Filipinos. 

I he author emphasizes the importance of eugenics, stating that o\ci 50 psi 
cent of Filipinos had C'hinese blood. ' 0 (The national heroes such as Rizal, Luis 
Yangco, and Don Pedro Patcrno were all on the list.) ' 

The 1920s: Independence Movements 

In the 1 920s, some C Chinese . tut hors discovered that while the Filipinos weie plan 
ning ro ask for political independence from the U.S., they were also introducing 
laws to seize economic power from Chinese merchants.*'’ More authors concen- 
trated on the political issues dealing with the Americans. 

An author discusses the policies of President Wilson, who would approve ot 
Philippine independence on the condition that the Filipinos could show that they 
were capable of being autonomous.'" But Governor Wood thought differently, 
believing that most Filipinos preferred to he protected hy the Americans; only a 
minority favored independence. The governor stated that the Filipinos were com- 
pletely incapable of being autonomous. Furthermore, another country would 
surely fill the vacuum il [he American armed forces withdrew. 1 heretore. Cover- 




THF. PM II IPPINI RI \ ( >1 t I !< 



IS'P PI 'it )N! ' 



nor Wood, unlike President NX ilson, took .1 strong position against independence, 
annoying the Filipinos. 

In 1 923, aiming to press the American government for e arlier unit pc ndc nee, 
some Filipinos resigned from the cabinet, organized a ( “mnmsion tor Indepen- 
dence, criticized Governor Wood, and asked that he be replaced \sith a 1 ilipino 
governor. And the birthday of ( ieorge Washington ~~ Icbru.n. -as declared a 

National Day ro pray for independence. 

The author, however, goes on to say that the the or . that 1 ilipmos were too 

immature for independence seemed superior for t\s<> ulM,n • * ,SI ,K ^soiiorm 
depended heavily on free trade with the I nited States, the 1 hilippmes U(H1 c osc 
this privilege under independence. Second, Japan vsas waiting to occup\ t u is an 
once the Americans withdrew. I he Americans the rt t< >re • > inlu IU>1 011 ' to 
the status quo but also to increase the power of 1 lie Aim 1 u an gn\ c 1 nor. u aut lor 
concludes that the Americans seized the Philippine s as a m.ulat mu n wme t Kir 

surplus capital, to supply rubber, and to be the base toi dun c q an u n in t k a 

cific area. The Americans would no. give up .Ik' l*h ilippi 
shed 3 ^ 

' On the issue of independence. ( il.inese .uuliors need ann.I.e, ,„ea which 

• 11 1 11 in., . nf i.rc I wo mention the anti t ninese move- 

might be neglected by western observers. 1 ^ 

ments. . . 

Yu-Kan used statistical data to describe the ( ihinesc P <» P ulanc>n ,n the mam 

islands. Despite the barriers against the immigration <>l ( u,u '\ t ’ ’ tmese 

entered the country and 85,294 left from 1919 to 1 925. I here were roughly 
80,000 Chinese in the whole country in 1926, of which one-tounh were from 
Kwangtung, working as tailors, laundry workets, and t ikc ouit is rom ' n ™)’ 
some working in the timber industry and manufacturing. hit most o t n. C l- 
nese immigrants were retailers spread throughout the diffcicnt is aru 

Wu Han-fang describes how the Filipinos took part m the anti-C .hmese eco- 
nomic movements: 38 

1* By increasing indigenous national economic capacity. 1 hc\ started long- 
term planning to send students abroad, to investigate domestic conditions of in- 
dustry and agriculture, to build grand exhibition halls for displaying products of 
industry and fishery. 

2. By encouraging native retailers to closely link up with native bankers and 
entrepreneurs. This policy harmed the Chinese very much as most of them were 
retailers. 

3. Through customs policy. They signed agreements for duty-free trade with 
the United States, Europe, and Japan while imposing a heavy duty on Chinese 
products. 

4. By passing laws on immigration and bookkeeping in a western language. 
Chinese who wished to come to the islands and do business had to ptty I 240 tax 
each year. Furthermore all the bookkeeping of Chinese shops could not be written 
in Chinese but in a western language. 1 his law was especially harmful to the Chi- 



474 



< Ml / rr ( nr r IVnrpfwn of f/v Rrtv/utwn 



ncsc mikc mnst ot them did not know either Fnglish or Spanish. They not only 
would have to hue the natives to do the job but the business would be totally con- 
trolled b\ I ilipinos 

I he I ihpmos also mobilized the masses against the C hinese, fought them in 
the courts, dcstroved l hmese newspaper agents, and so forth.' By linking up eco- 
nomic allv w ith the l mted States and sacrificing the interests of the local Chinese 
the bilipmos hoped to achieve independence earlier.' 0 

[lie Earl} l l )30s: lire American Agreements 

In the first halt ot du 1 M %o s Chinese perceptions of the Filipino independence 
movement enteied a new penod. Ma Ssu li. who later became an important figure 
in charge of overseas c hmese . i ft airs ot the Republic of China, wrote an in-depth 
article on ( hmese perceptions during these years. 

I le first anal v/ed from three a miles the reasons whv the L nited States decided 
to “give u[ > the Philippines. 

1. / he political angle. I he author quotes from Maximo M. Kalaws Philip- 
pine Social icnce . w huh said that the l nited States was not being kind: it was just 
a big power pretending to keep its promise t o a weak colony, and only on the con- 
dition that l ’.S. interests would be preserved and damage kept to a minimum. 

2. ihc military an^/e. Ma agreed that the American efforts to defend the. is- 
lands were declining because thev were 8,000 miles away from the United States, 
and that Japanese militarv technologv had already overtaken Americas. 

3. I he econo am tingle. 1 lie author discovered that economic relations w ith 
the Philippines h.ul already caused the United States several difficulties: Filipino 
sugar and coconuts had replaced homeland sugar and cotton and caused hank 
ruptev crises; and 3C ()()() l ilipino workers had replaced local American workers. 
American tanners now pushed their state representatives to propose to end the so- 
called transitional period .is soon as possible.'' 

Ma then describes the events from the hrst proposal tor Filipino indepei 
dence — the so-called 1 1.1 LC. (Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law of 1933)— to the second 
proposal — the so-called T.M.l . f IVdings-McDuffie Law ot 1934). 1 he fust \\as 
turned down bv the Philippine legislature not because the Filipino people die 
like it but because members of the majority party led by Manuel L. Quezon were 
against it.' 1 he majority party used it as a doubled-edged sword against the minor 
ity party led by Sergio Osmena to prevent the establishment ot the duty-free quota 
on sugar exported to the United States in order to preserve and promote the inter 
ests ot the sugar capitalists who supported Quezon. Ma Ssu-li says there was little 
difference between the 1 LI LC. and T.M.L. despite Quezons claims that he a 
won for Filipinos immediate and complete independence. He and 1 resident 
Roosevelt had agreed on the following points:*' 4 

1 . the U.S. would give up its military bases; 

2. the issue of naval bases would be settled after negotiations; 



475 



THF PH 1 1 IPPINI* kf V< >1 t I ! ( > v 



I ) PI > 



3. earlier independence would harm relations between the two countries; 

4. it was not the right time to .tite r the content < >t economic articles signed 
between the two countries. 

Ma says that most of the points are exac tly the same as those in the I 1.1 I.C.. 
except the first one. ' But it was in the national interest < >1 the l mted 'Mates lor the 
Philippines to use its own manpower and money to safeguard domestic security, 
which at the time was being carried out by American troops . 

Ma agreed, however, that the I . M l • did gam tor the Filipinos more political 
rights and autonomy because the United States also agreed to the follow ing condi- 
tions: all the American judges were to be rcplat ed by Hlipinos and the Philippine 
legislature would have veto power. I ruler these conditions the Philippine govern- 
ment became semi-independent.' 

The Philippines economy, however, was facing a crisis. I he reason the Phil- 
ippines progressed economically in the past W years was that its piodiuts entered 
the United States duty-free. After independence Philippine- sugar would lose this 
privilege and have to compete with Indonesian sugar, '•'.huh \.as much cheaper. 
The sugar industry was the biggest industry in the I hilippmes, suppoiiing more 
than 1.5 million people directly and 7 million people indirectly. In other words, 
the cancellation of the sugar duty-free privilege would diicctk allcet t u hclihood 
of people in 17 provinces. 4h 

Ma concludes that the Philippines did not h«i\c uiIki the economic abilit\ 

or military force to declare her independence. Moreovci, l.ip.m was waiting on the 

sidelines like a hungry wolf and the United States was still unwilling to give up its 
strategic military bases in the Philippines. I hose who longed lot independence, 
the author writes, did not represent the majority of the people, but were only a few 
leaders competing to become state president and congicssmcn. 

Late 1930s: Earlier Independence on the Eve of the Sino-Japanese War? 



Two authors in The Eastern Miscellany shared Mas views. 

Two years after Mas article appeared, Hwang Ting-ying’s article further 
discussed the issue of earlier independence. 50 Manuel I.. Quezon, president of 
the Philippine Commonwealth, proposed officially to the U.S. president to grant 
the Philippines independence in 1938 or 19.39. Then Ceh Sho-yan translated 
an article of Stephen Duggan published in the Yale Review." Although written 
by an American, its point of view is neither far from Hwang’s nor different from 
Mas. 52 

Hwang uses much more ample academic statistical data than Ma in discuss- 
ing economic problems. He makes it clear that the Philippines started and in- 
creased her dependence on the U.S. market ever since the U.S. occupation. In 
1900, the percentage of Filipino trade with the United States was 1 1 percent, and 
it was more than 70 percent in 1932. 5 ' While the Filipinos were eager to have po- 
litical independence, the American counterparts questioned the necessity of eco- 



476 



v Ml /'*r < '".VC'S fVnrptson of Rnvlurion 

nomic independent after ihc 10 war transitional period. Hwang, like Ma, em- 
phasizes that moii than 2 million people (one-sixth ot the Filipino population), 10 
banks. a() percent ot i.ulw.iv 1 1 .importation, and. more importantly, 60 percent ot 
the eountr\ s nuome would he affected. 

1 1 w ang mentions that leader s sik h as Quezon were aware ot the situation."' 

Quezon toUl tin press in Washington. P.C., that the Philippines was like a 
man whose hands atnl (eet were tied. Phe original purpose ot the independence 
law was to help the Philippines prepare tor true independence. But now it re- 
stricted the Philippine government from establishing a monetary system, signing 
treaties with other countries, and formulating its own national policy. 

1 Iwang liinhet ites the two main attitudes in the l niicd States concerning 
the probabihtv ot earlier independence. 

1 hose opposed insisted on the strategic importance ot the islands in preserv 
ing l .V interests m the western Pacific region. I hose who supported earlier inde- 
pendence emphasized l *..s. eu>nomic interests. Worse, it war occurred, the islands 
would easily he taken over bv the Japanese. I hey showed that the l nitccl States 
had already spent SS22 million on the islands and that S3 percent ot it was tor 
military expenditures. It would he even worse it the l nited States were to improve 
the defense system ot the colonv. 

Quite a tew people partially agreed with both views, f *S. policy toward 
islands was uncertain tor quite a long time." 

Conclusion 

The Philippines started her rev olution tor a republican and independent state ear 
lier than C hina. Because the Filipinos enjoyed the fruits ot modernin introt uce 
by Spain and the l nited States, they used the ideas ot liberalism and nationa isn 
to fight tor the dignity and glory ot their ow f n country 30 years or so ear tei 
the C diinese people. C hina could have done better it Kang^u-wei and Su 
had taken lessons from this neighboring country. , , 

But constrained bv Spanish colonization and Manchutian L °j cc , 
policy, the four factors that construct a society could not develop at 
speeds in either country. Worse, neither was able to prevent internal c ^os ° 
side intervention. Phis delayed the revolution tor no less than 100 \cais. ie 
ippines is celebrating the centennial of the revolution; Chinas repu ican j 
tion is celebrating its 8Sth year. However, both nations are still fighting or a et 
tomorrow. More challenges await them in the 21st century. 1 he torn categories 
people should ensure that the goals ot their revolutions will be accomp 

smoothly and sooner. . .. 

In this article, 1 tried to show what the early 20 th-centuiy Chinese iterati 
thought about the Philippine revolution. 1 am inclined to say that it is un i e > t at 
the revolutions goals could be accomplished at the time when agreements were 
signed between politicians of the states concerned. Politics is just one of tie our 



477 



TUI mil I (TINT RI V« >1 I I K > 



factors that construct a nation. I he balanced <ic\ <■]< .pment > >t t : 1 1 urc t he ect momy, 
as well as society is the decisive factor in the construe 1 1 < n < > r .1 h iltln .md wealthy 
nation. 



Notes 

1. The structural approach I take is different fr<im that oil lud sk.^pol docs 

not define what she means when she uses tlu term .mu niu! p.i y .me See Suites 

and Social Revolution : A ( .omparatu r Anah. : "t 1 ram, / ■ u ... .... 1 •:>:.! ( am- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press. ms .pp It D I he tli ree points she raises 
changes in the social system, mass movements ... overthrow ting order, and 

replacing the dominant authorities with the mass movement own authority and 
program— can be labeled the phenomenon appro.n h Ms ..ppm.uh toes ... anato- 
mize social individuals and groups into four m.iin .it • >r u 

2. Chu Hong-yuan, “The Evolutionary Nature of theC Innesc Revolution." I Sc Amen- 
can Journal of Chinese Studies 1:2. < )ctober l ,,, U. I’* I 

3. Crane Brinton, The Anatomy of Revolution 1 Ness V.rk: Ptcntuc Mill. 19S2), p. 33. 

4. Eugene Weber, “Revolution? Counterrevolution? What Resolution?" Walter 
Laqueur, ed., Rase ism: A Reader i (,utdc: Anal) •/.. Interpretation*. lith/mgraphy ( Berke- 
ley: University of California Press, 19~6), P * i,<s - 

5. The Chinese revolutionaries of 1 9 I I also learned a lot It. .m the Xmericm revolution 
for independence and the famous principle of Abraham 1 ituoln. "of the people, for 
the people, by the people.” 

6. Spain discovered the Philippine Islands en route from America in the 1 6th century. 

7. Ho Hsiao-tung, Philippine’s Ancient //«/oryf Taipei: San Min Publishing C 1976, 
p. 178. 

8. KuoTing-yi, Outline of the Chinese Modern Union 1 1 long Kong: < hinese Univer- 
sity), 1980, pp. 233-234. 

9. Ibid., p. 196. 

10- See Jose Rizal, “Filipinos dentro de Cien Aims’ and .Volt Me Jangere. 

11 • Sun Yat-sen, “China’s Next Steps,” Collections of the National lather ( Taipei: C Antral 
Committee of the Nationalist Party), Second f'.clt t ion , 1 9 . Hi >ok s , p. 1 — 3. Sun called 
the Manchurians “an alien race.” 

12. Harold Schiffrin, Sun Yat-sen and the Origin of Chinese Revolution. 

13. Kuo Shou-hua, Directory of the Philippines ( I at pci: ( . re.it Asia C . 0 .. 1 969 ) , pp. 24-31. 

14. Dongfang zazhi (The Eastern Miscellany , hereafter EM) 1:1, advertisement on the 
back of the front cover, 4:12, advertisement on the back ol the front cover, 4:12, 
advertisement on the back of the front cover. See Marriannc Bastid-Bruguire, "Popu- 
larization of New Concepts: The Political and Social Vocabulary ol Dongfang Zazhi 
Editorials, 1904-191 1 ,” conference paper on European I bought in C .hinese Literati 
Culture in the Early 20th Century, (Paris, September 1 90S), p. 1.1 lcr estimation of 
the readership is based on the “observation that ten to twenty readers were commonly 
estimated per single copy sold of leading periodicals," according to R.S. Britton, The 



478 



i HI '*r < • f /Vn option of tW Rnvlution 

:> i) ’ °:V Shanghai. 1933), p. 1 29. The same source (p. 
1.'.' ir i i u .u c n that the lournal primal **5 % 000 copies in 1931. 

15. 1 M l 1 . p >1 n l> quotations from FM follow the continuous pagination in the 
rr|M : ’ c,m mihlishcd in 1° 1 In the C ommcrcial Press in Paipei), "Essential rules 
of tlu* iuv.l\ published / .;*,vnj \f:urlL:n y. 

16. Marnamu lvistul Ihuguirrc. op cit., p. 2. 

17. Hi ete ui m •, .utuli v iiisi.UN.Miu; or introducing t lie Philippines in this magazine 
slut m:: thus pt iHul l lu* 1 2 dts*. uvsed have direct connection with the Filipino rcvolu- 

t ion 

18. Vn Wen vhu. Noting I ihpmos. FM. 1*1:3. March 191 . I -26. 

19. Ibid . 20 2 l 

20. See \nthom 1 > Smith. .;m/ .Wttsottd/ism in J Glolhil bm (London. Polin’). 

IW. I ik llohsh.iwn. ,itui \\:tion*:ltstn stncf I SO (Cambridge, Unhersin 

1 Sess ) . 1 O' m ) 

21. Nen Wen Jm. op. ^n.. 21. 

22. Ihul.. 22. 

23. Ihul.. 2 * 2*i 

24. Ihul.. 2s. 

25. h seems that the author overestimates the percentage of the Chinese racial influence 
m the Philippines. In /);r<v/v>n of the Philippines by Kuo Shou-hua (p. 10s). the an 
thor quotes some unotEui.il statistics: Dr. Palate and Mrs. Catherine Porter estimate 
that there were from SO, 000 to 1 million Filipinos of Chinese blood, but 5 percent 
of the members of parliament had C hinese blood. 

26. Nen Wen dm, op. ui.. 25-26. 

27. You-hseong. "The Present Status of the Filipino Independent Movement, EM, 
23: 1 8, 25 September 1 2 . S3. 

28. Wu I Ian fang, 1 he Independent Movement of the Philippines, EM, 

March 1026, 2^ 33 and “ The Movement of Economic Independence of Chinese in 

the Philippines," EM, 23:13, 10 ]ulv 1026,45-49. 

29. You-hscong, op. cit., S-t. 

30. Ibid. 

31. Ibid. 

32. Ibid., SS. Another author had the same doubts. Ele acknowledged that F \ 
only expanded its navy hut also practically made Davao province her cole n 

I he Prospect of the Filipino Independence, EM, 32:b, 16 April 1 )35, 4. 

33. Ibid., 56. 

34. I he so-called Filipino Independence," EM, 30:3, 1 February 1 )33, 4. 

35. Yu-kan, Population of the C hinese in the Philippines, EM, 23-18, -5 Septe 
1926, 58. 

36. Ibid., 59-60. 

37. Wu Han-fang, “The Movement of Economic Independence in the Philippines," pp. 

46-48. 

38. Ibid., pp. 48-46. 



479 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< )I.U I l< >N \NI > El \i )Nl > 



39. “Filipino Independence and American Public Opinion. 1 \1. 2H I 10 September 
1931. 6. 

40. Ma Ssu-li, “The Retrospect and Prospect of the 1 ilipino IruiepctnletKc Movement, 
EM, 32:13, 1 July 1935, 160-161. 

41. Ibid., 161. 

42. Ibid., 161-162. 

43. Ibid., 164. 

44. Ibid. 

45. If the Philippines were still a colony, the l 'nited States would be obliged to organize 
the whole system of national defense and security. 

46. Ma Ssu-li, op. cit., 167-168. 

47. M.M. Kalaw, Philippine Social Science. 'Manila: l mversitv of the Philippines Press), 
pp. 335-336. Quoted from ibid., p. 1 0. 

48. Ma Ssu-li, op cit., 173. 

49. Hwang Ting-ying, “Problems of die Pilipino 1 .lrlier I nterdependeiKe. 1 M. 5*-*: 11, 
1 June 1937, 39-51. 

50. Stephen Duggan, “The Philippines Ioclay and li.morrow," Yale Renew. 26:3. Spring 
1937. 

51. Sec Geh Sho-yan, “The Philippines lodav and Tomorrow," EM. M:13. 1 Inly 1637, 
293-295. 

52. Hwang! ing-ying, op. cit., 42. 

53. Ibid., 43. 

54. News from Washington D.C., 1 April 1937. 

55. Hwang! ing-ying, op. cit., 43. 

56. Ibid., 48-50. 



480 



ART, LITERATURE, MUSIC 



k 



Art in the Service of History: 

The Spanish Legacy in Francisco Goyas Painting of the 
Junt a l)c La Rent Campania De Pilipinas, 1815 

Tt K! M 1 \ MlRANOA-TCHOe 
' *r\if\ ;* Michigan Deorbotn, Michigan.. USA 



I n the history ot western art, Francisco Gova y Lucientes 0 46-1828) 
ranks amont; the great masters based on at least two distinctions: one, as a ge 
nius of ' caprtchosidaeL whose expansive imagination and expressive reducthe style 
helped deliver the grit and bite of his satirical images with ineluctable pungency, 
and two, as an artist whose avowed preference tor naturalism and conviction of the 
preeminence of artistic individualitv found expression in unorthodox pictori 
forms that in turn captured with compelling articulation the dichotomies, ironies 
and shifting realities of Spanish life and society during a period ot unprecedente 
transitions. One of the paintings that reflects the latter distinction and has been 
argued at least once to be the most outstanding of Goyas masterpieces is th t Junta 
de la Real Campania dc Filipinos [Assembly of the_Royal Company of the l 'bilippines 
18 IS.' It is the largest of Govas paintings (3.27 m x 4.47 m). It was also his 

public painting.* 

Through a large part of the 20th century, Goy r as Junta de la Rea ompania 
de Filipinos has vied, along with Govas other works, for critical attention an 
scholarship to unlock the mysteries of its origins and its complex, enigmatic, an 
unconventional character. Until recently 7 , discussions of the painting have tocuse 
primarily on its immediately apparent stylistic aspects: a sparse and somber pa ette 
of rose, grey, and brown, barely enlivened by small swatches of red an cream, a 
deep, swarming atmosphere; and miniaturized principal figures barely reco^ntza e 
by their sketchy depiction and juxtaposition against immense space. O \iousy, 
stylistic ingenuity and a foreboding mysteriousness cannot by themselves support 
the attributed importance of the Junta to the history of Spanish art. Goyas longev- 



483 



mi mu iitp. 



.In. 



:n his \olumi- 
mwc .k < lama- 
hangs 
i < *ups ot tour- 



’r .ui« i 
s 1 1 n v 



in \ huirul h» \ ic\v a 
r starulahh s i uitrilv 
< iwd hue also to the 
him; is know n .ihout 



ity was matched by immense cn .itivoiuip'ii .1 
nous body of work, including the luma. • m t< 
tions that are as avidly given to -mother. I ins | - i r : : 
quietly in a small museum in sotitli <entr >. ! :.u 
ists, far smaller than those that throng tin Mu ■> • 
large body of the artist’s oeuvre. Its retnot an atm;. 

uted to the relatively little, mainly lot ah/rd publ if n: 
difficulty of studying it as a historical dm ununt I o mm n 

the Juntas existence between I H2‘) anti 1 HH 1 . I he ic |,,n "I putt base in 
1881 by the french merchant -artist Martel Mr iguibou. •' 11 1 •• 1, ct donated it to the 
museum in ( last res, Fran< e now bearing the art 1 st s name fade d to st 1 1 apprec iable 
interest in the painting or renew interest in ( mya m Spam. It ssa 1 s popularity 

in countries outside Spain such as I rant e and I in land and most notable the 

United States that gave impetus u» extensive tesearth <m the imim m tin ! hit and 
20th centuries and the consequent revelation ol the genius behind his unorthodox 
art. 6 The early and particular appeal and relev ant e of < .« •> a’s art to these three coun- 
tries, whose individual political histories have left distinctive imprints on the glo- 
bal political landscape of the 20th century, are raised to a level ot contemporary 

and universal significance as new facts about the Junta hast some foith. 

In 1984, the Louvre Museum published leanmne Baticle’s findings on the 
history and provenance of the Junta Ac la Real < .mnpania Ac J-ih/mias. revealing the 
circumstances surrounding the commission and completion ot the painting and 
suggesting a political subtext that, in retrospect, may help account for the obscu- 
rity to which the Junta had been relegated and the timidity of < .oyas biographers 
to draw attention to it for almost two centuries, lot 1 ilipinos about to c elebrate 
the centennial anniversary of Philippine independence from Spain, a rediscovered 
Junta de la Real Campania Ae h'ilipinas brings pause to the stream of introspection 
on the Spanish legacy that such a historic event inevitably provokes. As a painting 
of an assembly of Spanish businessmen, the Junta recalls Spanish economic poli- 
cies promulgated in the 18th century in the Spanish peninsula and extended to 
Spanish territories such as the Philippines, with effects still felt to this day. By its 
political context, however, the Junta holds up a mirror to Spams own political evo- 
lution in the 19th century, marked by its own War of Independence, its subsequent 
search for a cohesive political structure, and its attempt to realize ideals of gover- 
nance that had permeated intellectual and political movements in P.urope in the 
18th century and found legitimacy m the triumphs of the I icihIi and American 
revolutions. The upheaval of the Spanish quest, captured as it began and presaged 
as well in the Junta de la Real Compahla Ae h'ilipinas reveals the enormity of these 
ideals and their price, a reality not lost on the Philippines own War of Indepen- 
dence, waged barely a century after Sp ain’s, and in a sense, still being fought a cen- 
tury later. 

Beyond the distinction given to it as one of Goyas most impressive paint- 
ings, th e. Junta de la Real Compania de hilipinas stands by itself as an important 



484 



:v '* v ' * H V v :i'C Service of HiSton' 

picenm. : , \ , :u , of the cponvmous Roval Company of the Phil- 
ippines w»':npan\ involved in Oriental trade between 1"*8S 

• l,UI s ' f iviwcvn Manila and the Spanish port of C adiz, lhe 

coiucp: « ’* • v ".;\.nv was apprised bv king Philip V in 1^33 under a 

merman; a. u sought the retorm ot Spanish colonial trade through 

the c cut : t • : v . ^ns at ; u poll ot ( adiz and the outfitting ot merchant 

s hipMm - s s t:.uk ! he official chartering ot l he Royal C ompany 

the i ' if;';' ^ .w\, ^.une onh after over ^0 vears. I ntil this finally oc- 

curred m s " s ;' ; . • n s!*.are ot t Oriental commerce w;is limited to the galleon trade 
whit h s.ico. betw v: Mam a atul \capuLo, Mexico, between 15 3 and 1811. lhe 
laggard c\nluti the Roval t, ompanv quickened when threats to Spanish com- 
merce and w*. 1 1 : 1 1 \ tow to an msutteiable scale as a result of Spains rivalries and 
Contis ts with I upland I nghsh pu.uv. the closure of trade routes to America in 
1 o and the ho»ut:ngot matkets m Spanish America bv foreign contraband com- 
promised sp.miN v. oinpetu i\ encN\ m both Oriental and huropean commerce, and 
theie was no le.ison to behe\e that the hazards would end with the cessation of 
hostilities in 1 s >. Othci v. onsidet at ions, both altruistic and profit-generated, had 
sustained the [Mopos.d Imni o>iKeption through fruition. 1 he Jesuit priest, bather 
Juan C al\t>. pushed foi the licensing ot the purposed roval company as a means for 
more expedient uMitao between Spain and the Philippines, increased migration to 
the colon\ by ^pamauls. and conscijuentlv greater involvement by Spain in its 
defense and economic well being. \ proposal presented in 1~65 bv the Spanish 
financier braiKisco 1 eatulto de \ tana also encouraged the direction in which the 
administ rat ion of the Sp. imsh king, C harles 111 (rS9-r88) wished to improve 
Spains trade’ status. IV \ lana enumerated the advantages ot developing export 
products as well as building ships direetlv out ot the resources ot the 1 hilippmes, 
with bilipmos as laborers and Spaniards as managers and investors, 11 It would en- 
able Spanish merchants to depend less on foreign sources to participate in the 
China trade, becoming direct manufacturers and traders instead ot mere middle- 
men. In the end, however, it was the discovery of a safer sailing route between 
Cadiz and the Philippines via the C ape of Ciood Hope that overcame any lingering 
hesitancy to pursue the long-proposed enterprise. 1 ' 

\ ianas proposal of l^frS suggested that the main ingredients tor the success 
of a venture such as the Roval C ompanv were significant capitalization and mo- 
nopolist protection, both to be provided bv roval initiatives. When the Royal 
Company of the Philippines became a reality on 10 March 1 85, it was given ex- 
elusive rights to eoiuluet trade direetlv between Manila and Cadiz, but it could par- 
ticipate in the galleon trade as well. It was also given the right to develop Philip- 
pine resources that could he traded for Oriental goods or sold directly in Europe, 
such as cotton, pepper, indigo, sugar, tobacco, and wine. As tor capital, a majority 
of the company's shares of stock were purchased by King Charles HE and the rest 
by Span ish ei t i/.cns. ’ 1 he company s financial operations were conducted through 
the equally newly established Bank of San Carlos (now the Rank ot Spain) of which 






THE PH 1 1 IPPINE REVOI L~I ION \Nl > HI VOND 



Goya was a stock holder. I he banks first president I reruh born I rancisco 
Cabarrus, was a known supporter of the Royal ( .ompanv m its formative sears. 
The extremely influential minister, along with another prominent minister and 
intellectual luminary of the period, Melchor |ovellanos, appears to. ha\e been in- 
strumental in widening Goyas patronage from circles of illustrious Spaniards, a 
number of whom were or would become associated with the Koval ( ompanv as 
shareholders and directors. 

The Royal Company of the Philippines was a short lived enterprise, unable 
to overcome some of the same problems that brought on the demise of t he Manila- 
Acapulco galleon trade in 1811. Aside from the physical hazards of scalar mg and 
the menaces of piracy, competition, and smuggling that continualK undermined 
the monopolistic protectionism of both organizations, the outbreak of the Napo- 
leonic Wars (1807-1 814) seriously reduced business not onlv by the destruction of 
Spanish ships and storehouses but also by the loss of key trading ports in Spanish 
America as the Mexican revolution broke out and spearheaded the secessionist 



movement among Spain’s American colonies. On its own. the ko\al Company 
apparently succumbed to the intrigue and acts of sabotage set oft In jealouss be- 
tween the Cadiz and Manila merchants as well as to its own inefViciency, shortsight- 
edness, and inflexibility. The company underestimated and begrudged the enor- 
mous cost of developing Philippine resources to which a percent of its annual prof- 
its was assigned. 18 In a report on the company in IN • ( h ' homa.s de C omvn, a fac- 
tor for the company, also complained of the ineffectiveness of ro\al protection 
against infringements on the company’s monopoly by its competitors— the United 
States, England, and France, particularly in their smuggling ot European goods 
into the Philippines. 19 Despite infusions of additional capital and modification of 
some of its exclusionary policies several times during its existence, the Royal Com- 
pany continued to falter. In 1829, with Spanish-Americas independence almost 
complete and the new economic concept of free trade prevailing, the Royal Com- 
pany of the Philippines was terminated and Manila was opened to world trade. 
The complex and drawn-out I i tigat ions that followed the tei initiation ol the Royal 
Company involving the distribution of assets among the king, the Royal Bank of 

Spain, and the company’s major member corporations, the (.ituo ( itevnios, presum- 
ably account for the removal of the Junta from its original location and its unveri- 
fiable provenance after this year. 20 

Philippine historians generally agree that despite the failuic of the Royal 
Company of the Philippines as a maritime trading venture, its stimulation ot Phil- 
ippine agriculture and manufacturing uncovered the islands wealth and potential 
and established certain agricultural industries such as tobacco, hemp, and sugar 
that helped sustain the country’s export economy into the 20th century. 1 he ag- 
ricultural program of the Royal Company came on the heels of similar agricultural 
incentive programs begun under the administration of Philippine Governor-Gen- 
eral Jose Basco y Vargas (1778-1787). Governor Basco founded the Economic So- 
ciety of Friends of the Country in Manila in 1 779, modeling it after the peninsular 



486 






\ 1 1 HOI 



> 



:t: :*? Vr: :«r <>/ H:>:on 



protoc\ pc *»f : , u :u:iu- : n x t organized in Spain and promoted throughout the 
Spanish cr:;v:c m me ! nO s under the ministries of C ount Eloridablanca and 
MeLruu l«»\x-l!an.*s 1 iu peninsular and the colonial economic societies shared a 

common go.i :ca\mg puNu interest in the land and developing agriculture 

within an o\era’.’ p an ot uonomu progress. I hev provided technical information 
and awarded funds and prizes for improvements in farming and increased produc- 
tion. I lu sox n i n s •. iu ulentalU Iwaine patrons ot various educational and cultural 
efforts as well, im: .umg the establishment of a school ot drawing in Manila as well 
as tin. ula t mg w r it mg and language texts. 4 

Spains pio«.;iams ot eu'nomu lefortn tvpified bv the economic societies and 
t he maritime 1 1 ade i cot gum. \u ion part In effect uated bv the Royal Company ot the 
Philippines wete vn\ isioiuxl to help bring Spain abreast ot the economic progress 
being expei ieiu ed In I mopean vountno in the 18th century. Economic progress 
was one of the mam t>b|c\ti\es ot the 1 uropeun Enlightenment, a movement ot 
intellectual awakening that spread throughout Europe in the 18th century. It gave 
rise to critical attitudes tow aid existing political, religious, and economic ideas and 
practices In us emphasis on reason, science, and individual freedom."* I nder the 
Spanish Bouibons. whose blood relations also ruled I -ranee, Spain witnessed the 
movement evolve and teach its height in the work of European intellectuals 
pl)ilosof>lh ' led In the blench Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, and Diderot, non- 
french thinkeis such as |ohn I ockc, C esare Beccaria, and the Scot physiocrat (eco- 
nomic philosopher) \dam Smith, \mong Spains ilusn\itios[\\\c\\ ot the fc.nlighten- 
mctit) the movement found proponents for the elimination ot perceived obstacles 
to progrcsxivixm such as religious dogmatism and intolerance, political tyranny, 
prejudice, ignorance, and inequality/' The removal of these obstacles to an 
individuals rights to intellectual and physical well-being on earth were offered in 
the philo.wpht's discussions on justice, education, and forms of government as well 
as in the physiocrats defense of the principle ot Liisscz filin'. The purpose ot gov- 
ern men i. accord ini; to \ lomcsquicu, was to guarantee constructive individual free- 
dom, including freedom of conscience and freedom from oppression, exploitation, 
and ignorance. A government's role, according to the physiocrats, was to maximize 
human economic potential and national prosperity through tree trade and private 
property, finally, the protection of individual liberty must he upheld by govern- 
ment, according to Beccaria, bv the equal application of justice and the humane 
treatment of offenders/*’ 

In his discussion of the international impact ot the Enlightenment, Olwen 
Hufton makes at least two points that commonly applied to the countries affected 
by the Enlightenment, including Spain. Hufton writes that the Enlightenment 
reached hut a small group of intellectuals (around 300 of the ilustrados subset ibed 
to Diderots i'ucyclopcdic) who, in their individual positions ot power or influence, 
selectively upheld and promoted ideas compatible with their own beliefs and per- 
ceptions. In addition, the Enlightenment offered no blueprint and few useful mod- 
els for the practical exercise of the ideals it advocated." In Goyas time, the con- 



48 " 



rui run ippini kivoii iion \\i>wn<>m 



cept, validity, and feasibility of popular sovcrci^ntv was iiist berjnmni; to be clari- 
fied and proven in the nascent government of the l mted States, ami although the 
same ideal seemed to simmer .it the heart <>t the brent h revolution. I ranee did not 
present the best example of a peaceable transition. 

The Spanish Enlightenment is generally described and circumscribed by the 
largely economic reforms instituted and promoted unde the rule ot ( hades III 
(1759-1788) through ministers such as I squillac he I londablaiua. and lovellanos. 
Free competition was tested in the relaxation of grain (une controls under 
Esquilachc in 1766 and in the economic societies promoted by I l< >i idablanca and 
Jovellanos.*' Jovcllanos Report on Agrarian !mw<A\ a hallma.h document lor 
its time, consolidated progressive economic t bought m ^pam as \ .t II as m the solo- 
nies, outlining ways for a sweeping reorganization of the empires agricultural 
economy including ending government favoritism, domination ot S P^ l -d interests 
in the use and holding of land, and restrictions on luc tiad< 1 lu s t attc mpts at 
economic reform, however, were virtually nipped in the bud In uae iion,u\ oppo- 
sition. Esquillache was blamed for the grain riots ..I 1 '(>(>. and the reforms out- 
lined by Jovcllanos’ Informe were published quite late m the century alter C hades 
Ill’s reign, when the events of the French Revolution ( I S') 1 ')')) had begun to 

dominate and scuttle Spanish affairs, narrowing the government s earlier openness 
to reformist ideas. At the end of the 18th century, monopolistic pm i leges, whether 
extended through the Church or the C aown, continued to be the lifeblood of Span- 
ish enterprises.” The stalling of a meaningful land redistribution program in Spain 
until the 1830s and the troubles of the exclusionist Royal ( ompany of the Philip- 
pines reflected the disruptive influence that Ltissez June had begun to impose on 
these rooted, jealously guarded institutions. 

Although the attempted economic reforms under C .hades III and efforts 
under his reign to widen cultural and educational access through the founding of 
such institutions as the Academy of History and the Academy ol Fine Arts are of- 
ten cited as marks of substantive Enlightenment influence in Spain, contrary ob- 
servations such as Hufton’s seem to prevail. Jams Tomlinson concurs, noting that 
Spain’s employment of the principles of the Enlightenment was highly selective, 
subject to what was useful, practical, and tolerable to the Spanish stated She adds 
that the little sparks of enlightenment (Lis luces) detectable in Spanish policy dur- 
ing its considered most enlightened period were quite spoiadic and often inspired 
by more obtuse goals. For example, the re-expulsion of the Jesuits m 1767 (having 
been expelled at least once before) based on their suspected complicity in the grain 
riots of 1766 was actually an act to further the State’s policy of regu/ismo — of insur- 
ing a strong monarchy through a centralized bureaucracy that would exclude the 
Catholic Church and its overreaching influence." 

Spains selective response to the Enlightenment was exemplified in the char- 
acter and policies of Count Floridablanca, a man of relatively bumble lineage who 
rose to become the distinguished minister of Charles III. Remembered in Spanish 
history as one of Spain’s most prominent and brilliant ilustrados , Floridablanca in- 



488 



V. I K \\| > \ H HOI \n sk tf*r Sthuy of History 

trodiucd pi.Kiu.ii uti'imv siuh .in the agricultural societies described earlier and a 
huge v anal proicv t manor uli/cd in v loy as portrait ot the minister), acting on his 
and t h.ulc's Ills msu'ii ot Spain within the told ot prosperous and enlightened 
Luropc 1 lowv \ei. the inmistet. a know n regal ist > was evidently greatly horrihed by 
the events ot the 1 uiuh levolution. in particular the beheading ot the breach king 
Louis \\ I 1 he threat the resolution posed to the stahilitv ot Spain's political insti- 
tutions ami to ns temtotial mtei;iiiv. instigated reversals in Moridablancas progres- 
sivist positions, t onttadutm*; his own lansenist conviction on freedom ot con- 
science and uulependeiK e ot ^ i \ s 1 authority, Horidablanca enlisted the support ot 
the Inquisition. Spams highest religious tribunal arid major censor, in destroying 
and in banning the entt\ into Spain ot revolutionary material. Political assemblies 
were disallowed and well known retormists and breach sympathizers whom 
Mondablaiu a labeled tfoi the fust time in recorded history) as LibtrmUs. among 
them ( abaitws and |o\ellanos. were banished.'' Later, at a pivotal juncture in 
Spanish hi st or v. 1 lot nlablaiua s \ imoii and convictions would be tested once more, 
with results that would reflect and augur Spains hesitant, and ultimately reaction- 
ary disposition tow aid the political ideas of the l uropean hnlightenment and their 
implications tot a new order. 

1 hroughoui his ^ areer as a court painter from the early l 80s to 181^ Gova 
painted [nut rails of figures attached to the Spanish court whose reputed integrity 
or ability seemed to matter little amid the partisanship and corruption ot the reign 
of C diaries 1\ . the fur ious sweep of events that catapulted Napoleon Bonaparte to 
power and plunged Spam into the Napoleonic War, and the vindicthe onslaught 
of the Spanish Restoration. In 1"^)2, a tew years after the exile ot Cabarrus and 
Jovcllanos, Horidablanca himself was banished tor rocking Spains relations with 
France in denouiK ing the treatment of the French monarchy by the French re\olu 
tionaries. In 1 c )~\ ]ovcllanos was taken back from exile to assist the beleaguered 

government of Manuel Hodov, the Spanish monarchs personally chosen minister, 
who had angered an already hostile bureaucracy for negotiating the 1 teaty of 
Ildefonso w hich bound Spain t o Frances support in war. In 1801, Jo\ellanos 
once again arrested and exiled based on charges ot plotting against the kin^, u 
perhaps more truthfully as a res ult ot his unpopular regalist position and pioposa s 
for church reform. 

Between 1801 anel 1808, as Napoleon Bonaparte emerged over the Nan 
quished French l directory (France's post revolutionary executive body) anel e ^ an 
his campaign for domination of Hurope, Spain walked a collapsing tightrope 'le 
tween France and Hnglund. The vulnerability ot Spains position was aggravate > 
the mockingly regarded ministry ot Manuel Godoy. A former toyal bodv^ua 
raised to First Minister, Godoy attr; ictcd the vilest expressions ot public hatred an 
the onus ot discredit tor everything gone wrong in Spanish attains due to iis | ei 
ceived lack ot qualifications and to evidence as well as rumors oCiis aggran 
ment and his licentious relationship with the queen, Maria Luisa. Godo\ s con 
cessions to both England and France tailed to prevent England s declaration of war 



489 



I HI PI III IPIMNI HI Vi >11 I l< > v * \M > HI 

on Spain in 1804 and the invasion of Spain In 1 r.nia- in ISO \\ hen Spam began 
the War of Independence against Frame on 2 M - s,,s |n\cliano\ and 
Floridablanca were drawn out of exile once again t<> help hart a ^ >ui sc lor a Span- 
ish government without a king, an heir, and a minister hi t <>\cr a month earlier, in 
March 1808, Napoleon had secured the abdication nt < harles W a ml sent the 
Spanish monarchs to exile together with ( iodoy. i he heir apparent 1 erdmarul \ II, 
was kept away as well in Valcn^ay, France, and w< mid m >t be ret ur ned n > Spain until 

18 14. 37 

T hose who have followed (iovas career and observed his art. tiom the hal- 
cyon scenes of Spanish rural life as a tapestry cartoonist m the 1 Os to the sar- 
donic and macabre Disparates ( l ollies or Madncsslcsn and I'nitura * A ecp.o (Black 
Paintings) of his advanced years, point to an increasing loss ol optimism in (.ova’s 
art from the 1790s and through the years of Ferdinand Alls restoration in which 
he lived. 38 In 1799, Goya offered Los Caprichos ( Imaginings or fantasies) for sale, 
a series of prints that the artist described as a general comme nt on eirant human 
behavior influenced by custom, ignorance, and self-interest. Beginning with the 
Caprichos, Goya’s art, particularlv his noncommissioned works such as the 
Disparates, suggests a path of a growingly obsessive predilection tor the grotesque, 
monstrous, and unseemly that would culminate in the Black 1 amt mgs that cov- 
ered the walls of his home in his last years. According to 1 ornlinson. ( .ova’s art dur- 
ing the War of Independence and the early years of the Restoration revealed most 
poignantly his sense of the decline of the lui lighten merit m Spain. 1 be decadence 
of the trinity of Gharlcs IV, Maria I.uisa, and ( jodov suggested in several of the 
Caprichos and the calamities of the Napoleonic Avar ( I )isasircs dc ( tuerra) appeared 
to have collectively and steadily shattered the artist’s sanguinity. I lowever, in the 
perpetuation of cruelty and madness under Ferdinand \ II and m the restored 
monarchs repudiation of the Cadi/ Constitution, the nadir of the F.nhghtenment, 
in the artists eyes, may have been irreversible reached. 

I he Cadiz Constitution of 181 2, considered one of the most important con- 
stitutions in world history, emerged out of the work of the revolutionarv juntas 
and constitutional committees convened and sequestered in the island city of 
Cadiz during the Spanish War of Independence (1808-1814). 1 he Central Junta, 
initially led by Floridablanca and upon his death by Jovellanos, set the tone and 
guiding principles upon which a restored Spanish government might be founded. 
Under a predominantly liberalist atmosphere, the principles written into the Cadiz 
constitution reflected ideas that had been included in precedent-setting liberalist 
documents such as the U.S. Constitution of 1787 and the French Constitution of 
1 79 1 . 11 Underscoring this liberalist tendency was the constitution's major prin- 
ciple statement of sovereignty essentially residing in the Spanish nation. ‘ ' This am- 
biguous but apparently expedient principle was symptomatic of the tenuous 
threads that held the Spanish nation together through the crisis of war. The prin- 
ciple and the Cadiz constitution in general succeeded, albeit temporarily, in hold- 
ing particularist and regionalist dissent in abeyance until the end of the war while 



490 



V s * ; > \ n HOI in iff ;#V Srrt'u r Histon' 



providing *• ,- comment ih.u enabled the Spanish state to continue to 

survi\ev. M'Naapi. I he king, once restored or installed, was 

to be bou: ;'.e pum.uih through a mandated cooperative legislative 

function v. ^ v s spamvh Par h.imcnO and bv various restrictions on mo- 
narchic. u pi, s , .is the tcquirvmcnt ot a ministerial countersignature to 

royal decrees h s.. v p ,w mom\. the Spanish constitutionalists, both liberal 
(/ tbn.:.: and a: w v-.* .>» . hoped to achieve the primary goal behind 

the tor mu att» e \ ad utnent. namely. the prevention ot despotism.' H 

Besui »: p: ..vipicot national sovereignty, the unprecedented liber- 

al! sc character > t tlu i adt , oust nut ion was revealed among others in its confirma- 
tion o I tight to prop^ : \ .uni freedom ot the press and in its provisions tor more 
efficient and Imnuin unlnial punches. N particular relevance to Philippine 
histoi \ is w <. .is the painting ot the lunui* were the C adi/ constitutions provi- 



sions on Spanish c m.\ nslup. making the Spanish colonies the equivalent ot prov- 
inces and gi\ in;; t lu n inhabitants equal legitimacy and rights under the law as those 
ot the peninsula I oi tin leaflet ships ot the overseas colonies, the ramitications ot 
equal citizenship pointed among others toward equalitv ot representation at the 
C'ortes and equal it \ m Itee italic, that is, trading with countries other than Spain, 
and ihe\ demanded both passionately. the revolutionary government ot 
Flondablaiw a and |o\ellanos w ere greaih indebted to the colonies tor subsidies in 
the war against I taiuc and attempted to satisfy their demands shortly atter the 
declaration of tlu Spanish Wat of Independence. Important gestures ot concession 
during the wai n > demands foi more equitable overseas representation included the 
assignment of tlu* tilth seat in the Rcgcncv (which replaced the Central Junta) to 
the delegate toi Mexico and New Spain, Miguel Lardi/abal y Uribe. In addition, 
up to SS o\*erseas delegates were allow ed to represent the colonies in the Cortes of 
1810. finally, the C emral luma and the Regency also indicated their support tor 
free trade. I low ever, in the constitutional debates that followed regarding the 
American Question (w Inch included the Philippines) on the issues ot representa 
tion and tree trade, the rift between Peninsular and American Spaniards began to 
surface and widen. ' 1 he debate on the equalitv ot peninsular and colonial topic 

sentation in the Sp. mish C ones was mired in numbers as the issue ot proportionate 
representation, the number ot constituents the overseas delegation could have, ini 
plied potential, and to the peninsular de legates, unacceptable colonial dominance 
in the ( .ones. 1 he debate on representation raised other sensitive issues as well, 
particularly the notion of racial equality.' 8 On rhe matter of free trade, the debate 
was equally rancorous. Its intolerable implications for the Spanish economy as well 
as the specter ol punitive reaction from the powerful Cadiz junta and its merchant 
bloc reduced support of its passage from the Liberates P Although there was genu- 
ine interest in assuaging colonial grievances particularly from young, energetic lib- 
eral constitutionalists such as / \gustin Arguelles and Diego Munoz Torero, the hesi- 
tation ot the I ibcrals to sanction f ree trade significantly contributed to theit loss of 
support from the overseas delegation and the erosion of their early dominance at 



491 



THI ■ PHII.IPPINI KIAOH !l()N \M)|i!'i<M' 

the Cortes. " Within two years of the calling of the ( < >r u*s. the American colonics 
appeared to have solidified their resolve to separate from the empire 

On 2 August 1814, the Cadiz ( onstitution was ratified. In the following 
September, the Spanish War of Independence ended and I erd in and \ II ilec uled to 
return to Madrid. I he king had chosen to stay in \ aleru ia up* »n Ins retur n t< > Spain 
in May, defying the C iortes which had me >vcd h.u I. to Mailt ul from < adiz \rguing 
that the Cortes was called during the war not to draw up a i oust nut to n hut to raise 
funds for the army to fight the french, the king dec lared the ( < >t tes illegal and the 
Cadiz constitution null. Supporters of the ( .adiz constitution. I aeiuh [Partisans 
or a francesados and Josefinos , anyone marked hy their association or svmpatln with 
Joseph Bonaparte’s reign (installed hy Napoleon after the ahdu.it ion of ( harles 
IV), were either jailed or exiled. I he Spanish Imposition, aholished earlier In the 
Cadiz constitution, was reinstituted and the machines of a dual political military 
government, also prohibited bv the constitution, was put into motion in the pen- 
insula as well as in the rebellious overseas colonies. In April I «S I S. ( »oya was or- 
dered before the Inquisition to defend his painting of the A akerl Maja as well as his 
employment under Joseph Bonaparte in which he was decorated with an order of 
allegiance. '' About the same time, C iova was commissioned to paint the Junta de la 
Real Compania de Pilipinas. 

On 30 March 1815, the Royal ( Company of the Philippines met at its head- 
quarters in Madrid to regroup and resume Business that had been disrupted hy 
Spain’s involvement in the Napoleonic War. The meeting was called hy Miguel 
Lardizabal, the Mexican delegate named as the fifth member of the Regency dur- 
ing the war. Rewarded for his experience and influence in Spanish American af- 
fairs as well as for his loyalty to the king, I.ardizahal was appointed by hcrdinand 
VII as Universal Minister of the Indies, which also gave him the title of President 
of the Royal Company of the Philippines. ‘ The Indies Minister apparently invited 
Ferdinand VII to this meeting, not expecting that the king would come, since no 
such precedent had ever taken place in the history of Spanish business. I he king, 
however, arrived, unannounced. 'Phis first postwar meeting of the company and 
the king’s attendance motivated the directors to commission a painting to com- 
memorate this assembly. ‘ ' As was his custom, C iova prepared a study for the paint- 
ing. 56 I he study, found at the Statlische Museum in Berlin, contrasts markedly 
with the final version. 

In painting the final version of the Junta de la Real ( .onipu n in dc Pilipinas* 
Goyas use of various artistic paradigms and references reveals the characteristic 
eclecticism of his personal style as well as his recognition of revered traditions and 
masters of art in his time. I he influence of I .eonardo da Vinci's Last Supper is evi- 
dent in the seating arrangement given to the king and the Roval Company's direc- 
tors. Classical traditions dominant in Spanish painting of this time are likewise 
suggested in the painting’s symmetries, for example, the opposing seating arrange- 
ments given to the stockholders at each end of the directors’ table, the more or less 
centrally seated king flanked by the directors, the suggestion of a side of a parallel- 



iY of His ton 



v 



cpipcii m :ui the imposing, vcrticalitv ot the enclosing archi- 

iccmrc 

vvn n the panning ot the ///wwa nd its ambitious scale 
allii^ic v: iu! nobihiN oKomext associated with a history painting) 

the rii/jn s ;> x ;\unt mi; v rcatcxl in t iovas time aiul long before it. 1 he 

allusion :• .* hail utupusuonablc connotations. 1 he Royal Com- 

pam ot the n l SI ^ was. aher all. and despite its misfortunes, still the 

most powc iiw , . v organization m Spain and in Spanish colonial trade. ^ 

I he lompam s v' wamms k Imied the hc.uls ot Spains major guilds and institu- 



tions. its siian iit '.di : s omiui\I among the most distinguished and influential in 
Spanish m > v u t\. aiui not a tew tanked amom; Spams i/asniu/os. I his assembly ot oO 
Match is I a .at he an*.; ot the uppet middle class incarnate/*' 0 justified the ex- 
pectation ol a maiest u and tutuu;l\ uplifting "monument. vV Goyas rendition 
how eve i . depatts tiom this t.Kile norm. 

I he A/';:.; i sis an exceptionally dark painting, 

hxcept lot the him; and two ducctots AUmarri/ and Omulrvan) whose portraits 
( »ova painted about the same time, main ot the company s other directors are 

barch tecogm/able. 1 heett.Kcment oi uuli\ iduallv recognizable features applies as 

well to the pol\ plot iuotips ol stockholders who seem to have been picked out ot 
the general sunk ol tiguies and faces appearing i n Ciovas other works featuring 

massed groups. mkIi .is In,ju:>st:on Srcnc. However, piercing through the harsh 

shatlow s. ,i \ .is i s m t .u n ol 1 1 ght t rom an opening on the right creeps across the cen 
ter ol the paiming tow.iuls die left then upwards along the figure ola stockholder 

whose head tips slight 1\ b.wk. revealing a figure shown standing inside an embra- 
sure. 1 he resent idem itk at ion ot this isolated figure as that of Miguel Lardizaba 
deduced from the Koval Company's meeting records, political events involving 
him and herdm.md \ 11. and most importantly through a portrait done ol the min- 
ister by (.ova himself in ISIS, , s pivotal to an understanding ot the polmca 
subtext suggested in the junt.i dc Li Red ( ompaniti dc FilipitMS. 

According to the minutes and notices of the meeting of the Royal Company 
of the Philippines ol 30 March ISIS. t | lc organization met in the assembly room 
of the Royal C ompanv s headquarters, a much smaller space than the one su^cs 
in the final painting ol the Jinita. There were 14 directors present, including 
Lardi/abal. When 1 erdinand VI 1 appeared, Lardizabal reportedly graciously con- 
ceded his chair as President of the Roval Company to the king, then sat to the kings 
right as the meeting proceeded."' In C, ova's sketch, the space given to the assent v 
is smaller, possibly more faithful to the size of the recorded meeting room. All seats 
are filled in an informal clustering of figures on each side of the kin_,. In tie 
painting of the Jimt,u however, there are only 12 chairs, the second chair on tie 
king’s extreme right is vacant, and 1 ardizahal now stands in isolation from t ae t- 
rectors’ group under the said embrasure."' But perhaps just as important as t e 
obvious sliilt in 1 aidi/abals position are other changes and details applied to the 
final version ol the jimur. the drastic enlargement of space and disproportionate 



493 



I MI. I»l||| 1 1*1*1 N I- Rl V( )I 1 I l< »• 



diminution of its main figures, the painting s smot I hi n. : »i.u I.:: tlu- IimIcsmicss 

of the stockholders anti their obvious disconnection font. pi -miing figures, 
and finally, the inclusion of unexpected figures that ins est the painting ss uh a star- 
tling sinister cast. Outlined through the stifling d.ul.nc and seated among the 
oblivious stockholders, for example, is a hunched, almost ompu tei\ «.o\ered fig- 
ure with the barest hint of a face and hands discernible \hhougn easiis presum- 
able as a monk, this figure recalls similarly garbed figuies m ses et a! • >! ' mv as other 
works, notably the Disparate de Mtedo I Madness/ 1 «>l is <>t 1 eat In / >:*!>.;>, itr de 
Miedo , a gigantic, shrouded ghostlike figure stands before a group of fallen, ft ight- 
ened soldiers, one trying to flee.' Another ch.uactet recalled In the Uguic hut with 
its face revealed is the crone-like companion to a noman m * A /./;,/ nnd 

Clementina , often identified as a procuress in 1 tit century Baroque paintings. 
Both likenesses suggest the sinister. In the /until, this vccimg hguu docs likewise, 
chilling the atmosphere of reverential grandeur the /untu as a Insim . painting is 
purported to project. I he ironic passivity and eerie tec lusisc ness of this figure 
punctuates the Junta with a somberness edging toward moibidiu that effectively 
subverts the grand notions for which it was originally commissioned. 

At the end of the Napoleonic War. Spain was faced with h.mkmpuy and an 
overseas empire in rebellion. As Minister of the Indies. Miguel I anli/abal iccom- 
mended conciliatory reforms, among them the appointment of mou ( teoles 
(American-born Spaniards) to important positions in both Spain and America. 
'I he minister also invited the overseas colonies to present statements of their griev- 
ances to the peninsular government, promising that a new ( ones would be 
called. 68 The subsequent actions taken hv Ferdinand VII including a royal decree 
sanctioning direct military government in the rebelling colonies suggest that 

Lardizabal’s sympathies and conciliatory overtures wc,v n<) ' welcomed. In Septem- 
ber 1815, Lardizabal was imprisoned, then exiled to \ergara, Spain, where he died 
in 18 24. 69 



I he revelation of Miguel Lardizabal’s role in the painting of the Junta de In 
Real Compania de hilipinas and his tragic fate resulting liom Ins political insolve- 
nt ent, promotes the suggestion of a pol 1 1 ical com men tat y unde i lying Moyas tinal 
version of the painting. The Indies Minister’s plight under the retrogressive reign 
of Ferdinand VII seen in light of Goya’s own perilous brushes with it (similarities 
between the Junta arid Goya’s Inquisition Scene are notable) and the persecution of 
many of the artist’s friends and patrons additionally supports the suggestion. Fi- 
nally, a political underpinning may also serve to explain some of the confounding 
contradictions in the painting of the Junta that critics have attempted to decipher 
without the aid of historical data. 

In her commentary to the history of the painting of the Junta , Jeannine 
Baticle writes that the Junta was a reflection of Govas disenchantment with the 
political developments that followed Ferdinand V I Is return as well as his grief over 
the fate of Lardizabal and others in whose company he found intellectual and cul- 
tural comradeship. 1 Janis Tomlinson, however, disputes the suggestion of the 



494 



J 



V \\ ;>\ * HOI \r: :k tJ%c Srrrur of History 

painting <»! tu, .. as a political a>mmcmarv, basing her opposition on the ab- 
sence ot v lea : ii< u ument.mon regarding Govas political position and insisting that 
Gova could not haw insetted elements in the Jutua that would have jeopardized 
Imposition as a c out t pamtet or his life as a citizen amid the reprisals and persecu- 
tions ot 1 .s 1 *v In lomlmson's opinion, dova made a natural and appropriate deci- 
sion to relocate 1 auh/abal in the final version ot the Junta to concur with the 
simple iav t o* the change in the Indies Ministers status vis-a-vis the Royal F om* 
panv. lomlmson cotuedes. however, that the political subtext underlying so much 
ot ( iov.is \\i»iks vim mg the W at and Restoration prevents the categorical denial ot 
the same m the vase ot tlu* Junta. It' this were present, she suggests it might be found 
in the paintings diminished and blurrv representation ot Ferdinand \ 11. 

lomlmson s opinion that a political comment might be tound in Goyas 
reduced and ctt.ucd icprcscm.uion ot Ferdinand \ 11 helps elucidate a major con- 
tradiction in the that viitus such as Fred l icht had observed in an earlier 

stiuK ot the painting, sans historical data. Although there is agreement among 
( iov.is biographers and c ritics that a planing ot facial features was a frequent char- 
acteristic ot t invas mass portraiture. 1 icht points out the ironic application ot this 
style to the piesiding, principal figures ot' the Junta — a surprising reduction to near 
anonymity ot uuh\ icluals ot' elevated stature and distinction. ' 1 he classical-intlu- 
enccd Spanish tradition ot court portraiture in Govas time emphasized the clarity 
of the sittoi s image from a distance and painstakingly gave the sitter dominance 
according to his/her station with appropriate decorative or illusory lavishment. It 
added to ii as well as an aura ot elegance and eternalism. ' From Goyas sketch to 
the final version of the Junta. Ferdinand Yll's portrait is simplified and reduced, 
drawn just slightly larger than the portraits of the company directors. Moreover, 
save for a slim dash of red on his chest, the monarch's image has become quite 
undistinguished. 

In addition to the Juntas lack offigural articulation, Lichts analysis ot the 
painting bares its contradictions in composition and perspective, such as unclear 
viewpoint, unusual foreshortening ot ground, an extremely wide, vacant center, 
drifting patterns, and a vast and hollow emptiness. " lomlinson believes that some 
of the perspective idiosyncrasies ot the Jinitii might have actually been intended b\ 
Goya to achieve an illusory extended spatial effect, that is, designing the paintin 0 
to dominate a wall and to appear to extend to adjoining walls, which would have 
worked effectively tor the Roval Com pane's assembly room. *’ Lichts observations, 
however, appear to be more concerned with these idiosyncrasies visually disorient- 
ing effects on the viewer as well as the disconcert that they provoke. 1 he inchoate 
atmosphere enveloping the painting and the draining hollowness ot space that 
seems to suck in its principal figures evoke a simultaneous and conflicting sense of 
restlessness and vacuousness. This indescribable unease adumbrates in the disor- 
dered and inattentive assembly of stockholders, many of whom seem lost in sleep, 
thought, or torpor. As in its perspective, the uncharacteristic comportment of 
the Junta s groups of figures suggests an eerie fragmentation and a loss of focus. By 



THKI'HII imM KFVOIl I ION \NI»HI jOND 

this effect, Goya once again circumvents existing aesthetu iminis v l.issu im stan- 
dards that emphasized clarity, unity, and harmony, whatever the tvpc of art, 
whether portraiture, history painting, or genre painting Ironu alls i »ovas refer- 
ences in the composition of the Junta , such as I ).i \ nui and \elasijue/. rendered 
their own masterpieces in the classical style, a style that bespoke petinanetKe and 
tradition. In the Junta , however, ( ioya uses them to intimate, instead, of something 
unsettling, foreboding, and evanescent. 

Without belaboring the issue of a political comment m ( »ovas painting of 
the Junta , Baticle and lomlinson concur that the paint mg re flee t s the artist s sense 
of a changed world. In Baticle s opinion, the paintings i om posit ion of a side of a 
parallelepiped represented Goyas dream of a well ordered hierarchical society. I he 
threatening collapse of this society, once supported and invigorated In the ideals of 
the Enlightenment, is depicted in the disquieting dispersal and desuhorv behavior 
of the members of the assembly, and in its turbulent at mosphere. lomlinson con- 
cludes that ( joy as painting of the Junta was an attempt to mediate the paradoxes of 
a changed world, fusing realism ( bistorta ) with fantasy \ tap) nho\ to suggest that 
this rational world had become irrational and disordered. I Ik uiioi i hodox bleak- 
ness of the painting, which lomlinson believes was quite possibU t be most striking 
or questionable aspect of the Junta to its contemporary \ieweis could base been 
the artists most direct expression of the darkness that bad descended alter the 
twilight”* 1 of the Enlightenment. 

If an overt political commentary could not be expressed oi depicted in the 
Junta for the reasons given by lomlinson, Goya unccjuiv ocalK cxpicsscs bis senti- 
ment towards the Lardizabal affair and the general condition of Spanish affairs in 
his portrait of the Royal Gompanv President (National Gallcix, I iaguc). 1 be por- 
trait shows Miguel Lardizabal in the uniform of the Minister of the Indies holding 
a note inscribed with the Latin words bluet i bus Republic tic l.xpuh /o ( Exiled 
through the vicissitudes of political events ). In his pictorial epitaph to 
Lardizabal, “fluctibus” sums up Goyas bewilderment at the ironic events of Spanish 
politics horrifyingly unfolding before his eyes and the ideological and human casu- 
alties swept along with them. To the note in Lardizabals hand, Goya imprints his 
signature and the year 1815. 

According to Baticle, the news of Goyas painting in its final form expectedly 
infuriated the king. However, although the king was known to harbor an intense 
dislike for Goya and may have expected such insolence from the artist whose works 
on many occasions had bordered on parody or unflattering realism, he was less 
prepared for and additionally incensed by the complicity of the Royal Company's 
directors with Goyas action and the conspiracy of silence that met his reproach. 83 
By 1818, relations between the king and the Royal Company had so deteriorated 
that the king threatened to imprison its directors if another loan that he demanded 
(after one he obtained at the 1815 meeting) was not approved. ,V| Until the year 
1815 was definitively assigned to the painting of the Junta by Baticle s research, the 
uneasy relationship between Ferdinand and the Royal Company of the Philippines 



496 



V V \N . ' \ ! i Ml H 1 r; ;»; ;/V Vr; ;*r <>/ Hi* ton 

th.it u.u iuii .* v ! v s v crulo bctw ccn l S 1 1> and 1 S 1 S made an attribution to the Junta 
ol a date late i than i S 1 (> eutemelv doubtful. 

I he c on! v : that developed between I'erdinand \ 11 and the Royal Company 
of the Philippines foretold of the behemoth forces that would struggle against each 
other throughout the I'hhventuix to resolve the matter ot the true seat of Spanish 
so\ eren.uit \ as w e as tlu political, mk tab and economic tensions exacerbated or 
given birth t»> h\ the t adi. v onMitution. 1 he constitut ion's amazingly liberal pro- 
visions. v. on side icd \sa\ aluxul ot their time, struck at the heart ot the most tren- 
chant and react ionat\ Spanish institutions, dooming the document from the start, 
according to c onteinpoiat\ observers.'' Between ISBtand 18 3, the C adiz con- 
stitution would alter natch be reasserted, repudiated, remodeled, and eventually, af- 
ter several attempted but futile teworkmgs. discarded in a pandemonium of 19th 
ccniur\ Spanish pohti* s stirred up b\ military coups {pwnuncitnnietitos) . a frac- 
tionalized legislature, battles tot monarchical succession, and regional insurrec- 
tions. B\ IS v ilu* monarchical track record of despotism and moral indiscre- 
tion had given nsen to the consensus that a roval sovereign was no longer a critical 

facto i m Spams poluual destinv.' However, neither the monarchy nor the elite 

hureaik iag\ that preempted the powers of the former seriously or consistently 
sought the support and sanction of the general population or considered its re- 
gional diversity and lovalties in implementing radically centralizing programs and 

policies. 1 he threatening disaffection and incitement of the masses had been re- 
vealed m the chronic reassertions of traditional regional autonomies in Catalonia 
and the Basque province's between 1 s 1 -t and 1 and in a clear trend ol socialist 
and anarchist unionizations in the country's rapidly industrializing northern and 
eastern periphery in the latter part of the 19th century. 88 Having initially discov- 
ered their power in the regional guerrilla warfare waged against the French during 
the War of Independence, the Spanish masses would seek permanent empower 
mem, it necessary, lw force, t he Spanish army, having experienced indispensabil- 
itv at the same war and seeing itself as the vanguard ot Spanish order, would at- 
tempt to keep its position in force as well, trading popular, state, or crown interests 
for its own as opportunities warranted. 8 '’ Rv the time ot the eruption ot Philippine 
independence and the as Kent of the 20th century, no Spanish constitution so tar 
constructed could remedy old and new tensions in the empire, galvanizing dissent 
among the peninsula's agrarian and industrially displaced masses, and stoking sepa- 
ratist passions at home and in the remaining colonies, particularly the Philippines. 

In his account of the effects of the events at Cadiz and the independence of 
Spanish America, Mario Rodriguez often returns to the theme ot trade and inde- 
pendence: the role that foreign trade, in exposing Spanish America to foreigners 
and foreign ideas, placed in the growth ot the colonials’ consciousness of their 
rights and their strength. Rodriguez points out an irony that by allowing the 
transplantation of progressive ideas to its colonies and by political concessions at 
Cadiz and Madrid, Spain expected colonial loyalty and gratitude but reaped in- 
stead its own downfall. ’" For the Philippines, the end ot the Royal Company of 



49 



THF. KHII I KIM N I Rl V< >1 l IK >\ \\I > HI Y< >M > 

the Philippines and its opening to world trade resulted as well in the inevitable 
influx of ideas for which it would have avid hosts and propagators \\ uhin a leu 
years of the Royal Company's demise, the colony would lose its right ot represen- 
tation at the Cortes as well. Issues ol equality and lair government, unresolved at 
Cadiz or Madrid, would fester throughout the I9ih venturv as revealed m the re- 
formist publications of the Propaganda Movement, and would remain unresolved 
despite the bloody confrontations following the emergence ol sec essionist organi- 
zations such as the Katipunan. I )uring the Spanish regeru \ ot IS S l l ) IS. a pe- 
riod of little accomplishment, giving it the attribution < >1 Ins t nm, hobos . nothing 
much happened, and nothing much was expected, including Philippine indepen- 
dence. Spains response to the Philippine secessionist crisis ol 1 S ( )0 1 SOS of an 
imposed military authority was similar to that which lost it the bulk ol its Ameri- 
can empire during Ferdinand VII s restoration. The loss ol the Philippines to the 
United States in the Spanish -American War of 1 898 took almost everyone in Spain 
by surprise, causing profound soul-searching, particularly among Spains cultural 
and intellectual leaders. For the Ceneration ol MS, like the tlustmdos ol ISth cen- 
tury Spain, the restoration of Spanish greatness was once more seen through an 
idealism of Europeanization and a new social and political sensibilitv ushering in 
the 20th century/ It became clearer, however, as tins new centurv ensued, that 
Spain was again at face with an unprecedented political transition and that, in the 
incoming political order, despotism had put on a new lace. 

Spains political evolution in the 19th and 20th centuries is considered sym- 
pathetically as a period of tutelage. M The Philippine experience ol the last century 
may be seen likewise. For the Philippine republic, whose political growth has been 
reversed and protracted at times, the suggestions of ( »ovas /mita could not be more 
immediate and relevant. It is possible, for instance, to look at the painting and re- 
alize that the image of Ferdinand VII does not lie so distantly from Philippine his- 
tory as his blurry figure and long past existence might imply; that in a world now 
proliferated by so-called republics, the appeal and opportunity of absolutism per- 
sists, particularly for those eager for power or impatient with the pace of change in 
a democratic process. In addition, the Philippines, like its former sovereign and 
now political equal, still confronts an epic of a political metamorphosis, having 
chosen the ambitious ideals of popular sovereignty and a humane and just but ef- 
ficient government. I hese ideals continue to demand to be given viable concrete 
forms under uniquely Philippine conditions, but with the breakneck speed that 
has marked change and expectations in the ending 20th and beginning 2 1 st centu- 
ries. In Goyas fusion of the real and the imagined and in his encapsulation of a 
changed world, the Junta de la Real Compania de Filipinas leaps into otir time, re- 
minding us how elusive the critical balance of realism and ideals can be but how 
important that we find it. 



498 



V ! i\ \NI v\ v Hi H ,|r; tn the Vr:.vr of History' 

Notes 

v (ss v i. \ v ’.i. Gova and i he IVhumani/ation of Art, trans. by Alexis 
Iv v. \ \ \\ \\ Norton. !°~V . p. 23; C arlos Puentes, “Gova and the Spirit ol 

Ke\ » >Iut ion . \tt New s. I \\\\ 111 lanuarv, 1989) % 94. 

lams \ lotnlmson. ( »<>>.« sn the lu 'tlt^ht of F.nli^htef intent (New 1 Liven and London: 
Vile l m\eiMi\ Press. 1 4 ^>0 . pp 1 SS 1 89; bnriqueta Harris, Goya (London: Phaidon 

Pu ss. I id . lO(,o. 1OO-0. p. 2-\. 

v 1 n d 1 ivlu. ( • 1 hr ( of :hr Modern Temper in elr; (N A.: I niverse Books, 

jo n p .'OS 

a s.uu Inv t anion. / Pentn>ular x trans. bv Paul Burns (Madrid: Peninsular, 

1 ' U > i . p 1 0 t 

S. leanmne Batulv. 1 »o\a et l a luntcdes Philippines, Revue du Louvre et (its Mttsees de 
fr.s t;< ( . \\\1\. Number 2 (19SM, \nnex 1, pp. 10“*, 110. 

0. Sarah Simmons. ( »»).; d ondon: Otesko Books. 19 ), pp. 18-19. 

Bat u le. lunte des Philippines.*' Rerue Du louvre* 110. 

S. Harold I ivermorc. .*! History of Spain (N.Y,: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1958), 
p. >30. 

0. I iveimoie. ibid., pp. dal 342: Mario Rodriguez, The Cadiz Experiment in Central 
. !///< > :ea. / SOS to ISPO { Berkeley ■: l niversitv ot California Press, 19 8), pp. 16-1 . 

10. C iregor io 1 /aide. The Pageant of Philippine History: Politico /, Economic* and Socio- 
( idturaL \ol. 11: from the British Inva sion to Present Times (Manila: Philippine Edu- 
cation C o.. 10 * l M. tn. 26. p. 38. 

11. ( iregorio 1. /aide and Sonia M. /aide, Documentary Sources of Philippine History>\ ol. 

VI. pp. ss l >3. 

12. Natalie \. Robinson. "Mantones de Manila: 1 heir Role in Chinas Silk Trade.” Arts of 
Asia* \ol. \\ 11 (|an bob., 198”) pp. 26-39. 

13. /aide and /aide, / documentary Sources, \ ol. VI, p. 61. 

1 4. /aide and /aide, ibid., "C omvns Account on the Royal Company ol the Philippines 
(181 0), \ ol. \ 1, p. 23V |ohn boreman, The Philippines , Vol. 11, Second Series (Ma- 
nila: I : ilipiniana Book Guild, 1980), pp. 232-234. 

1 5. Pierre ( iavsier and Juliet Wilson, The Life and Complete Works of Francisco Goya: With 
a Catalog Raisonne of the Paintings . Drawings* Engravings { New York: Revnal and Co. 
and William and Morrow Cat., 19“M), p. 93; Baticle, “Junto des Philippines, Revue 
Du Louvre , pp. 38, ~ T 2. 

16. /aide and /aide, Documentary Sources* Vol. VI, fn.l, p. 237. 

17. Gregorio b. /aide, Philippine Political and Cultural History*\ ol. II: The Philippines 
Si Pice the British Invasion (Manila: Philippine Education Company, 1937), p. 36. 

18. boreman. The Philippines , Vol. 11, Second Series, pp. 248-249; Z aide and Zaide, 
“Comyns Account, Documentary Sources , Vol. VI, pp. 238-263. 

19. /aide and /aide, “('omvns Account," Documentary Sources* Vol. VI, p. 267; Fore- 
man, The Philippines , p. 234. 

20. Baticle, “Junto des Philippines,’ Revue du Louvre , 1 10. 



499 



THK PHII IIMMNT RI-VOM I I ( )V « 



21. Ren a to Constantino, The Philippine' I Pa t Per: :sc/i H.mrl.i I.il.i Publishing, 
1975), pp. 1 15. 

22. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, p. 19; / aide. Pageant. \*»1 II ■ pp 5n s ' 

23. Zaidc, Pageant , p. 53. 

24. Puentes, "Revolution, /!r/ AW/t. 92: Roy Porter. The Tniightenment \tl.mtu I ligh- 

lands, N.J.: Humanities Press Intern.mon.il. Inc.. b.uk cover 

25. Peter Gay, Age of Enlightenment ( New York: I nne. Inc.. 1966 pp s '■ * ^wen 1 1. 
Hufton, Europe: Privilege and Protest. I 1 ^ J P * 

26. Hufton, Privilege, pp. 80-83, 91 92. 

27. Hufton, Privilege , pp. 2- P 85-86. 

28. Porter, The Enlightenment, pp. 30-3 1 . 

29. Puentes, “Revolution, Art News , 93. 

30. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. -*-5. 11 12. 

31. K D. Klingender, f/*jv/ /// the Democratic Tradition. < Neu York. Sc hoc ken Books, 
1968), pp. 66, 216-217. 

32. Tomlinson, Twilight, pp. 1 19. 

33. Hufton, Privilege , pp. 264-265. 

34. Klingender, Democratic Tradition , pp. 65-66. 

35. Richard Herr. .S/w/» (Englewood < Jiffs. N.J.: Prentice I l.ill. Inc.. l'» 1 ). pp. 

Douglas Hilt, The Troubled Erin, ty: Codoy and the Spanish AW/nV*. (Tuscaloosa and 
London: University of Alabama Press. 1987). pp. 5b 58; I 10 1 I I. 

36. Klingender, Democratic Trad, non. pp. 70-73; I Id., Troubled Irnnty. P . 181. 

37. Livermore, History of Spain, pp. 346-350. 

38. Tomlinson, Twilight, p. 1 90; Symmons, Coya, p. 1 3: I’cers. PP . 311713. 

39. Symmons, Goya, pp. 13-15. 

40. Tomlinson, Twilight, p. 190; Edgar Peers, Spain: A Con, pan, on to Spanish Studies 
(London: Methuen, 1956), pp. 71 1-213. 

41. Gilbert H. Plan/, and Eugenio A. I lernande/. Constitutions of the Countries of the 
World (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications. 1991 ), pp. 2-3. 

42. Antonio Lopez Pina and Gloria Moran, “ I he ( ionstmition ol 1 8 1 2." Constitutions 
That Made History, cds., Albert P. Blaustein and Jay A. Sigler (N.Y.: Paragon House 
Publishers, 1988), p. 117. 

43. Herr, Spain, pp. 70-71 ; Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. 33-30. 

44. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. 77-78; Pina and Moran. Constant, ons That Made 

History , Art. 172, pp. 1 36- 137. 

45. Pina and Moran, World Constitutions, pp. 1 1 5-1 16; Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, 

pp. 80-8 1 . 

46. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. 36-38; Pina and Moran, World Constitutions, Ar- 
ticle 5, pp.l 17-1 19. 

47. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. 35-38, 54-64. 

48. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. 53-54, 56-57. 

49. Klingender, Democratic Tradition, pp. 126-127; Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment, pp. 
37-38, 58. 



500 



so. 

si 

52 

53. 

54 

ss. 

so 

5”. 

58. 

so. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66 . 

67 . 

68 . 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72 . 

73 . 

74. 

75. 

76. 

77 . 

78 . 

79. 

80 . 

81 . 

82 . 

83 . 

84 . 

85 . 

86 . 



V N \N: ' \ 1 1 * h H { r : ;, v ofHc'tOn 

KltiMviuii-r . pp 12” 128. 

s '*:n:v. , ... pp °2 ° V RiKirigucv. pp. 124 125. 

1 :n \ ' pp h>0 mu, Rodrigue/. pp. 126-12"'. 

s% nuiuMi v < .. pp - • ° ' 1 bigh 1 honus. 1*; :n ( on texts Coy.:: I he Third of May. 

:s <>* ediu-d i'v h'hn 1 leming \ V \ ik, M ^ Press. 19-2), Introduction. 
Rodngue.-. ( _ . \rr> .men:. pp 125 12"*. 

Bainh limit des Philippines. Remedu l out res p. 110. 

I° s e Cudiol. (t • v (N.Y: Harry N. Abrams* 1985)* 

p to 

1 ivIn. \ temper. p 21 ' 

Klinpotuk i. / ». ;/:* p. 21”. 

Ibid. . p 1 ( i S 

buuU limit ties Philippines. Re rue <lu l ouvrts p. 110* 

^ ».issu i .uul \\ ilson. I :?e strut ( < > 'nplete Works pp. ”*0 1* Cudiol, I'nincis tv Ctou** eh 

lag 2 .uni in; pp 2”. 3 V) . 

b.uule. limn des Philippines." AV: ue du l out'rfs pp* 10 * l 10. 

•bill., pp loo 1 K) 

^ , *' ss k i .uul \\ ilson. / ife .;*;</ t ompltte Works Hit;. IS34 and Fig. 1^3^* P* - 
mnions. (r(f).j. p. v ) 1 ; p. Of*. Hi*. ”*2. 

1°^* < mthol. I ”46 ISJS. \6I. 11 of 111. Fig. 188. p. 241. 

^ h l stless monks, m Clissold, Sp.tin. p. 101: Thomas. Third of Mah P* 03* 
Rodriguez. ( .tdre Lxperjfnents pp. 125 12”. 

Raiiele. limit* ties Philippines," Rente du l .ouvrts 110. 

^ nimons, ( ftf y tJ pp i)j 9 n Hg. 6” and 68. 

Pat it It* , limit* ties Philippines, Rente du l our n\ 112. 
lomlinson, Iwili^hts pp. 158-159. 

lathi, .\lodern lcnipei\ p. 211; Ono;a y CJasset, Dehumanizations pp* 1^~ 
lomlinson, Twilights pp. ”9; l iclu* ibid. 

1 at lit , ibid. , pp. 2 1 0-2 1 *4. 

lomlinson, “Unite ties Philippines," Rente du Louvn\ 158-15). ^ 

I iclit, Modern temper, pp. 210-213: t', ussier .md Wilson. Life and Comp ttt <» • 

PP* 224, 226; Sy nimons, (royUs p. 91. 

l-itlu, ibid., p. 69; lomlinson, ‘Twilight* p. 15”. 

Batiele, Jume ties Philippines," Rente du Louvre*, p* 112. . 

lomlinson, Twilights p. 190. Herbert Read in Klingender, Democratic ui itwm 
pp. x-xii. 
lomlinson, ibid. 

Cassier and Wilson, Life and Complete Work , p. 226, Fig. 1546. 

Batiele, Unite des Philippines, Rente du LouerCs 110. 

Klingender, Democratic Traditions pp. 165-166. ^ . v 

Flan/, and Hernandez, World Constitutions , p. 3; Stephen Clissolc , <.pai 
Walken Co., 1969), p. 99. 

Flanz and Hernandez, World Constitutions, pp. 4-10; E. Ramon Arango, Spain. 



501 



THK PHI I II'IMNT. Rf V< >1.1 MON \M> HI Y< >\l > 



From Repression to Renewal (Boulder .mil I orulnn: Westview Press Iik losSi, 
pp. 49-52, 109. 

87. Clissold, Spain, p. 100. 

88. Clissold, ibid., pp. 97, 1 02- 1 03; Arango, Repression Renewal pp ^»2 5 V \ utot \lba. 
transition in Spain: From Franc to Democracy. trails. bv B.irb.u.i lotto New 
Brunswick, NJ: 1978), pp. 41-43; Herr, Spam. pp. 6^ (h. 282 SS 

89. Livermore, History of Spain, p. 362; Arango, Rep re mn Reneuai. pp v» SS. I awrence 
Fcrnsworth, Spains Struggle for Freedom (Boston: Beamn I I ill 195 

90. Rodriguez, Cadiz Experiment. pp. 12-13, 1 18. 

91. Teodoro Agoncillo, “Prelude to 1896, Professorial ( Fair I eeture Series Number 2 

(Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press, 19 1 11 C iiegono 1 /.aide 

and Sonia M. /aide, Ffistory of the Republic of the Philippines , ( ollege 1 iliiion 'Ma- 
nila: National Bookstore, 1983), pp. 180, 201-210. 

92. Clissold, Spain, pp. 105-106; Julian Marias, l hderstanding Spam ( Ann Aibor: l m 
versify of Michigan Press and San Juan: l niversitv of Puerto Rim, 1990), pp. 366 
370, 375-381. 

93. Alba, Transition , p. 49. 



502 



The Past Is No Longer 
Only What It Used To Be 



l I ON \KP C. C ASH R 

B; v ■ C^-sin- >J H . Wo^chusetts, U S A 



I n her MSS novel. Sure of W<n\ Ninotchka Rosea provided as a major 
theme her belief that the Philippines is a land of forever new beginnings. She 
did not mean that as a compliment. She was not saving that Filipinos are dreamers 
who pursue ever higher and broader horizons. Rosea was arguing that to have so 
many Hew beginnings is a sign ot a lack of eontinuitv; evidence of regular inter- 
ruptions caused usually, but not only, bv colonial intrusion complicit with native 
self 'interest . I ost are the peoples true origins, subsequent deviations from which 
begin to resemble the btilhnbini* more than the star apples little solar system. Most 
historic memories, in such a view, w ould therefore border on the cosmic absurd or 
on self-delusion. 

I hat critical image of the Philippine past can be amply documented and 
probably will be, during this conference. 

May I offer, however, an alternative philosophy of the relationship between 
people and what we all experience as time. And may I, with ail respect, supplement 
the linear dimensions of historical nonfiction by comparing them with the less vis- 
ible, because more complexly organic, value of historical “true fiction. 

I will argue that our pasts are our permanent companions. 1 hough, typically, 
these secret sharers proceed by subtle implication, still they are as inseparable from 
us as our personal DNA. Not only does the recent past keep growing, but so does 
the past past, through new knowledge of, or insight into, it; and we are influential 
parts of all these pasts, however remote we sometimes are tempted to consider 
them. 1 h rough the intricacies of memory, we are virtual fraternal twins of times 
we thought had passed us by. 



THf. PM 1 1 I RIM N I Rf V< )I I I ic )N \\l ) MI V >M > 

Then how should one respond to this ultimate int im,u v, this symbiotic coex- 
istence of then and non' 

Some might answer that amnesia a supposedly common afflu lion world- 
wide — is the best safeguard against having to take histor\ seiiousK bv admitting 
that present awareness can help shape the past. ( )thers might decide that measur- 
ing time only by hundred-year intervals is the best way u> immum/e ourselves 
against the need for continuous responsible remembering. ( out rolled tuning in/ 
tuning out can even convert what is celebrated as meaningful into festive mind- 
lessness. 

However, rather than such evasions, a more appropriate response to the fact 
that we are contemporaries of all life, including the life of the* dead, might be to 
continue our usual modest exchanges of honest , if partial, reeollec t ions not only in 
academic journals but in our daily less professional conversations, through what- 
ever media free speech and a free press make available. I he hope has always been 
that error as well as disinformation can be reasonably confined and discredited if 
people learn to listen to one another, democratic societies tlepc nd on that hope: it 
serves as a guide to education; it inhibits indoctrination. 

Indeed, whenever different generations mingle in household oi maikctplace, 
past and present literally can converse with one another, and otherness itself di- 
minishes. * Fraternal twr nn rng in 1 1 me becomes more than .1 metaphor then, as the 
actual source of solidarity is revealed to exist in the extended I ihpmo family and to 
be embodied in an open/opening society. 

Such ordinary exchanges amply illustrate the potential for human insepara- 
bility. However, wherever lives were sacrificed to make a people whole — as in the 
Philippine Revolution or in the Philippine-American War a response that is 
more reverential seems required. NWhat can their descendants ever sa\ to /Ae.vedead? 
In the name of their common cause, written in blood unshed as well as shed, they 
might reply as simply as did the peasant in Andre Malratixs Alans hate. When a 
plane sent by the Republican forces against the Fascist troops of Franco in the 
Spanish (kivil War was shot down in the highest cordilleras, one man sent to carry 
back the bodies complained about the futility of that task. What, he asked, can one 
do for the dead.'' His companion, equally exhausted, replied: We can thank them." 
Had he one breath more, he might have addressed the corpse as well, saving: "We 
choose to remember you, as you remembered us even before we were born.” Our 
utang embraces both ancestors and descendants; and theirs embraces us. 

Still, there is much more to memory than merely not forgetting. Perhaps it is 
historical fiction which best provides access to the full-bodied physical presence of 
the reconstituted past, in a transforming act uniting the living and the dead in 

mutual absorption. We are there; they are here. Sharing their lives, we discover our 
own. 

Historical research reinvigorates the generative mother-lore which is the 
source of our collective and continuing enterprise as a society. Being reasonably 
objective, that research is limited to whatever of substance still stands, after various 

504 



A 



( Kvi \\ <\:t I: l \<rti /<> fir 



saga exemplifies the theme of coexistence among humankind 



angles of insight ha\c vorrcvtcJ each another, loo often* unfortunately* it is also 
art if u ■/•//.' > ..mud vhtonules ot the most prominent families, those hearers of 

protested v. ea.: :: ami wnuieis of sociopolitical power and patronage. One of the 
priiuip.il tumimns ot historual f :,::on tor "true-ftetion. as it has come to he 
known is n> put :uiman ta^cs on. and emotions well within, the resumes of even 
convent lonalU u\ ogni/ed leadership Above all. true- fiction tries to remind 

readers that then lotheats were not mcrelv these so-called elite hut millions of indi- 
viduals who were, and au\ cqualK essential parts of history, whether recorded or 
not; and it incs to do so while not reducing people to computerized statistics and 
undittereni lat cd masse s 1 rue fictions value lies m its ahilitv to convert rvriifc 
stub as the Resolution ot 1 S°t> or of l^So into nrntfithiess experienced by per- 
sons often unknow n. as w oil as u> suggest w hat niig/)t have moved within the cham- 
bers of the heait ot those .dreads famous. 

I Mom I lose* s l\) ( )p; % f v >| example, the last of Ins five Rosales nos c Is. puts 
imagined wouls into the mouths of people as real as General Gregorio del Pilar 
and Apohn.mo Mahmi. Because these words are speculative* Jose has to bring to 
his ssi it mg both intensive inquire and a profound empathy, joined b\ humble re- 
spect. \\ hetieset that works ss ell. the historian can learn from true-fiction just as 
the novelist necess.uih learns from historians. 

I he Rosales ^ ^ 

and m time as well, because even as its chronologv advances, linkage ss ith ^be^i 
mediate past is provided through reminiscence; then, having reached the late -Oth 
century and the corporate environs of Manila, the saga closes by returning to a 
period prior m the Philippine Resolution, and to the llocos mountains ss here te 
am f anners w ere already rcgularlv oppressed by a class of overlords. This circu ar 
pattern symbolizes the recurrence of social injustice, whether by invasive foreign 
posveis oi by internal colonialism readilv identifiable as the Old, ^be Nesv 
the Renewable ( Md oligarchies. But the sagas circularity also expresses fait i t ^ 
rhythmic counterforce of an enduring, determined social conscience ic'iote 
bilipinos personal integrity and ethnic loyalty. , r . . 

1 he Rosales novels cover 1 00 years. In Sionil Joses more recent nove , MJ e 
(still being revised), hundreds of additional years are telescoped into a sen ^ 

separate tableaus. Time is now presented in a more conventional linear fashion, yet 

is so compacted that much of the same sense of co-temporality found in me sagas 
five novels remains, burthermore when Jose presumes to read the mind of - 
del Pilar as he appealed to Spanish liberals abroad through La Sol'tdmi a , or 1L ^ CS 
the mind of General Artemio Ricarte who fled to Japan rather than P cc t? e 
giance to American re-colonizers, the author gives these actual persons as i 
“democratic space” as he does his wholly imaginary narrators. In so doing, Jose acts 
not as a voyeur but as a voyager, a fellow traveler participating in tieir nstones. 
During the 1 c ) c )()s he has continued researching and drafting a novel whose center 
is Ricarte, and one expects this same vicarious sharing to be the mode chosen to 
allow the dead a life heretofore never adequately known. 



SOS 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLITK >N AND HI- Vc >NI ) 



In a family-oriented, compadrinazco- extended culture such as the 1 ilipinos\ 
the dream of dynasty hardly remains the exclusive divine right of empire builders. 
Carlos Bulosan is only one writer who has envisioned historical fiction as a con- 
tinuous stream of bloodlines. In 1949, he announced plans for a tetralogy not 
unlike Sionil Jose’s, covering 100 years of nativist history; but he died with most of 
his project unaccomplished and with some remainders unrevised. 1 lowever, 
Edilberto Tiempo during the early 1960s, serializing Daughters of 1'imc in Sionil 
Jose’s Solidarity magazine, managed to trace, fictionally, several generations of rural 
Nueva Vizcayans born on either side of the turn of the century. In the process, 
Tiempo tried to distinguish between convention as indifferent or congealed 
custom, and the dynamics of a live, evolving tradition. Revised 10 years later and 
renamed To Be Free, I iempo’s masterwork reappeared at an opportune moment — 
during martial law under Ferdinand Marcos. I his time it could be understood 
more readily to be delineating the difference between a country s independence from 
other nations and the degrees of freedom desirable in relationships between 
hacendero and sacada , or between corporate taipan and menial day-wage worker. 
The chronology of the Alcantara family selectively recapitulates, in small, the long 
and arduous struggle for social democracy in the Philippines. 

Filipinos have commonly been characterized as having to be reborn again and 
again, due in part to centuries of successive colonial or military interventions. No 
writer has concerned himself more with dramatizing the blessings and blames in- 
volved in this conflicted heritage than Nick Joaquin. He once wrote, in La Naval 
de Manila, that there is as great a gulf between the pre-Spanish drift of totem-and- 
taboo tribes and our present existence as one people, as there is between protoplasm 
and a human creature. And in his plays, Portrait of the Artist as Filipino and The 
Beatas: A Hymn in Three Stanzas , Joaquin treats as valued heirlooms from Spain 
the Peninsulars rigorous devotion to rectitude and family honor. Yet elsewhere he 
has implied that certain aspects of Western culture have proved irrelevant, ruth- 
lessly intrusive, or injurious to Filipinos; and that they must sift carefully through 
the ambiguities created by so many pasts, in order to make peace with their true 
mother-source, flesh partially “pagan” but vital to the solemn soul. The difficulty 
involved in that defining process is played out in such early stories as “Three Gen- 
erations and Summer Solstice” and then again in his novel, The Woman Who Had 
Two Navels , not only through the identity crises within Connie Vidal but also 
through old Katipunero Monson, who has lived in extended Hong Kong exile 
rather than face post-Revolutionary life in Manila. 

One of Joaquin’s central themes, connected with his call to responsibility re- 
gardless of life’s ambiguities, centers on the famous “adaptability” of the Filipino 
people, too often assumed to mean submissive response to external forces. More 
accurate social science, however, now measures the syncretic Filipinization of for- 
eign importations, rather than focuses on Westernization of the Philippines as if 
the latter were a unilateral, paternalistic phenomenon. Implicit in Joaquin's view of 



506 



V / ( >.*:/> VTKst t: l P $cd 7b /v 



histor % 
ctu l.u \ 



« y;*:m :« »n t't t he I ilipi no s .k u\ c role as benefactor and not only as ben- 
J’b'bal aiul Uk.iI cnciUs, 

^ i v\< : % ,!iainlc\lncv\ iKcasionalh appears in fiction by others, about the 

Philippuu’ K \olimon ot I S°cv thousands of soldiers* whether untrained, virtu- 
all. iin.uiv.rd . or (he regular troops of Spain, might well have been 

driven In , U st .is rn.im i hous.uuls ot different motives, sentiments, attitudes during 
thii c °n!iut loo i ,m .ire the memoirs that could provide clues to the multiplicity 
interior states ot individual combatants or complicit civilians. Consequently, 
° nc ill,u l!on °t uue tu t ion. as .u^ainst the purpose of propaganda, is to tty to com- 
pcns.ite tor abseiues m the historical record, in order to bear larger witness to that 



v * ‘ t » * Ills, ilisioin.fl If. V Oiu, 111 VMV1S 1 U* 5-*' w 

'••u. \ltt u-ilo \.i\ .uro Vikinga's lr.i^iucnt ot a novel, The Birthing of Hannibal^ 
olK-.s example of hovv unholincss van occur in any member, on any ot 
tlu num suics ot ului chroniclers otherwise tend to describe as wholly 
antagonism. Not 1 i.mmbal \ altic? but bis grandfather 1 eon, a hacendero born an 
y >n ""U tlu- novels lengths monologue. Ho boasts of seizing property even 
troin 1" ' olut lon.u \ t ommiucc cottt padres who enabled Leon to escape from S[ at 
isb am ho. it us, wc || . ls ot'killiim bts identical twin brother to confuse the enemy 
UoM as hmd.,1 lotti epitomizes all Filipinos w ho put self before brotherhood and 
nat.on.,1 interest. 1 he landscape of "the other” is filled, it seems, with a mine-held 
ol nut tot s. In stub recognitions, national maturity begins. __ _ 

1 be same van be saitl tit Alfred Yuson s Cireat Philippine Jung}* ‘inerg) 
CXcc l M l ^‘ u w bcrc Nal.mgas dominant mode is political satire, \uson$ is rie 
sophisticated mock-heroic epic. 1 1 is intent is to expose the excesses ot m>t 
ing w bu b elevate the little known turn-ot-the-century Visayan, Leon ia 
seraphic warrior of the Revolution. The ultimate purpose ot Yuson, ho\ve\er,'s 
const nu t collage of Rhh centurv folklore and 20th century movie-making • 
colo i ing all the caricatures and complaints is a timeless native vumo .j_ 

hope derived from the conduct of all those unknown Filipino soldiers 

T 'T' haw — cU„,cd medals that were no. earned. and >«"f ncy , 
what always survives of a Filipino dream as old as prehistory: a drear be 

ot justice, of deliberate resistance to w hatever subverts self-determin ^ 
tall hv one’s own measurement , not short by someone elses; to a ^ ce P ^ niuc | 1 
keeps happening, not only in cemeteries on All Saints' eve, and that ' 

a part ot the past as it is a part of us. ^ , individualized 

be creative tension in Yuson s novel, alti g o . . . i e 
through experimentation, nevertheless represents what ,s observab e ■„ each ot 
these other works, and it, many more that t»uld k summon^ ro f rec dom, 

tension derived from the friction between Filipino fatalism £ , 

between WW« „„ and the erv of Balintawak. with the result tha seemtng form- 
lessness i„ face forcefully signifies those open ends where growth, hke grace. ,s soil 

under construction. , r .. . , 

May that growth, that grace, enjoy another hundred years of solicitude. 

And may the dead live forever. 



507 



The Novel as Historical Document 
of Revolution 



Bm.inda Ty-Casim k 

Sa/onville, Mossochusetls, U S A 



L iterature and history both deal with memory: of the remote past, of 
the past just now passing. I hough crucial to our understanding of Ourselves 
and the world, memory is easily lost. It pales beside the intensity of the moment’s 
claims on our attention, the repeating urgencies of survival. It recedes before spec- 
tacles and extravagant presentations of our selves, irresponsible recreations of who 
we are. Without authentic memory, we lapse into unreality and the dazzle of “blind 
nostalgia” disabled from becoming our authentic selves, from offering our country 
the best in ourselves. 

Though we know nothing is absolute — people caught in the same occur- 
rence will remember it differently: memory trapped in different angles of vision, 
the whole picture scattered among witnesses — we hold as historical facts what 
comes to us through recorded, documented memory. Literal truth in history. In 
the ordering of facts, history is not absolute, itself is open to subjectivity, to gaps in 
vision and experience, to gaps in sources available. 1 he interpretation that narra- 
tion exacts could also render it subjective — what the historian bad the opportunity 
and inclination to record; and contemporarily, the attraction of what is politically 
correct. But unless controverted, we hold the record to stand. 

The farther in the past historical memory is, the greater our need for litera- 
ture to engage our minds and emotions and, thereby, create the image that will 
recreate that memory so that it becomes our own experience of the past. By en- 
abling history to live in us, literature is our access to that past and also to the future: 
the proof we existed. 



508 



ir:?. fit* 



n*\:l l\Kuwrrtt of Rttvlutiott 



B“' s -*':n .uni 'literature have to with mean ins*. Hvents do not merelv 

In h m tin flow ot histon become historical, They must be both in- 

spired atni ' - ; s t inspire In them must be implicated our deepest feelings and high- 
est uleaU our \ ear mnp ai ul the values tor which \ve are willing to die. 1 he Revo- 
lution o* IS'N> arul the Philippine Amcruan War of 1 899 arc such events. As well 
as I l )s \ ami the People Power Revolution ot 198b. 

It is oui spiritual dimension which allows and demands meaning lor our 
lives, tor our soimti\ s hte that pool ot experiences that shape and express our 
nation t hn unimi\ s \ inucs ami vices arc those ot all ot us who inhabit its geo- 
graphical space, its spmtual landscape. 

\\ ithout stionp and significant meaning, literature cannot explain the world 
to us. otirseKes to ouiscKcs. ourselves to the world; can only entertain and mo- 
menta! il\ distiac t us from out sel\ es h\ giving us false or partial memories, allow- 
ing us to c hoose which pan ot lmtor\ we can bear while shielding us from the rest. 

It would be like c housing w hich part ot ourselves to accept. 

I net at urc and historv are ultimatelv about souls, individual and national, 
which literature nourishes. Revolution is a spcciallv spiritual experience, precisely 
because m the face ot terrier and evil, violence and violations — when bravery ap- 
pears to be as helpless as tear redemptive selt-sacrifice exists alongside bestiality. 

I ndergoing revolution. meaning and significance enters into our lives, and our 
count i v s hte. Bv testing our souls and consciences revolution brings us to the lim 
its of out bodies and our souls. Phis self confrontation makes possible our awaken- 
ing tot ruth. 

\\ Inch is the third attribute ot both historv and novels as historic.il docu 
ments; their common ground and allegiance. Both are challenged to discover and 
recover only w hat is true. Neither should take sides; or deliberately falsify. Both are 
subject to confirmation and affirmation, discontinuation and reaffirmation. For 
us to trust and believe, neither must be privileged at the expense of truth. 

In literature, along w* it h truth ot tact, that ot conscience and ot art produces 
the essence ot truth in literature. It is by observing these truths in impartial propo 

tion to reality that Ri/al's novels became documents of our history; the prelu e to 

Revolution. Without its being consumed, truth burns in the Noli Mi’ Tangeteaxi 
the /:/ 

And reality not realism. Emotional and mental reality, as well as physical. In 
its descriptive narrative, in the implications it draws from history, the historic 
novel impartially assembles facts about ourselves, through language makin^tiese 
assemblages images impossible to wipe out from our eyes and minds. Transforme 
under aesthetic heat the past becomes our own experience. 

1 listory is no longer limited to causality and recitations of dates an events. 
Since the 1960s, responding to the totality scheme of the social sciences, it as 
begun to encompass geography and climate, cultural artifacts, the earths up eav 
als, the 1 configurations of states, classes and ideologies. 1 he ultimate significance 
along with sources or determinants. The interaction of psychological and physical 



509 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI V( )NI) 



constraints with national goals and the moral climate brings history into closer 
convergence with literature which absorbs such landscapes, as well as inscapes; how 
bullets and starvation felt in the flesh; what people became because ot what hap- 
pened to them, what they resisted or succumbed to, in their lives. Reasons and an- 
guish of deciding the ultimate questions which comes to everyone. 

Though the past is subject to contemporary interpretations, it should not be 
sundered from its time or period. As a historical document, literature cannot revise 
recorded history or make up public events when it evokes history as scenes in life, 
with all its strangeness and ironies. 

From this reason 1 have increasingly used history as plot after l he Trninsulars 
(1964); even with the contemporary novellas, which are historical novels “written 
in their own time.” In The Three-Cornered Sun ( 1 979) and with Ten Thousand Seeds 
(1987) I enclosed the novels within history as it unfolded and developed. Imag- 
ined, but not invented. Transformed under “aesthetic heat,” accessed directly to the 
mind that can imagine it and feel it as experience. 

History as protagonist. And as characters, representing people who bad lived 
through those times, individuals possessing their attributes, their motives and in- 
tentions and aspirations, their speech and gestures, opinions and prejudices, alien- 
ations and sympathies, struggles and frustrations. It is with such characters in his- 
tory as opposed to historical people (in order to avoid the risk of implicating actual 
individuals in a way they were not in history) that ambiguity — which is not the 
equivalent of uncertainty and invention, expands and extends the meaning of 
events by giving them cohesion. Fact and imagination; objectivity and imagina- 
tion; neither preeminent nor exclusive of the other, enable novels to be historical 
documents. Inadequacy in one, destroys our trust in the historical novel, for unless 
literature imagines responsibly — imagination obligated to facts — it sails into fan- 
tasy, can merely console and distract. 

Through characters aware of themselves we arc given a portrait of 
our country. Our genealogy. Our genesis. Bloodlines. Relations and loyalties. 
Nothing borrowed or imposed. And through such characters, a just understand- 
ing of events. Not events that might have been; but those recorded. 

In The Stranded Whale , , set in the Philippine-American War of 1899, on 
which I have been working since 1968, I have used actual correspondents’ reports 
verbatim in a chapter where the American 8th Army Corps is waiting to attack 
General Antonio Luna across the Calumpit/Bagbag rivers, in April of that year. In 
Dream Eden which was scheduled for publication this year to coincide with the 

10th anniversary of EDSA, the second book of the novel and the fourth EDSA 

and the last coup — closely hew to newspaper accounts. For Nooses of Grass, to be 
set in the Japanese Occupation of the 1940s, I have been gathering newspaper ac- 
counts and books. That novel is buried somewhere within those printed pages, the 
way that sculptors only release the shape already in the stone or wood. Historical 
novels have a life before its first page and after it ends. History continues it; as his- 
tory is its impetus and source. 



510 



\ s i K 'v A>: <. *1* HutonmJ ix <>/ Rnvlution 

v : u » : ' oi events and their interpretation cun be as objective as possible 
by prop. *i : - them to the general picture. Incidents might be true but in their 

dispropi »r * »:*. van be held captive to special interests and private ambitions. 

l*.\cess oi kimb : us to be avoided through well balanced judgments at even* step. 
Tide! n% lias to paid to t.u ts. a> well as the impulses and emotions ot that past. In 
I he V’.;*; ; . \\ ioi example. 1 ha\e been puzzled by the violence that existed 

side In side %% it:, our outage atul willed bartering. I ookingat the current violence 
in on r ouinttv, I wonder it these impulses antedated the Revolution, the War with 
the \meiiv ans; possibb earlier. In the severity of our losses, the intensity of being 
overpowered m weapons and manpow er, was the violence on our part glossed over, 
some kind ot u\ ompense toi being the weaker? There were no lack of witnesses to 
the killing ot \ ml res bomf.uio and his brother, to the assassination of Antonio 
I ,n i l-i and l’.no Koman. but where are the accounts that could have settled the 
matter of responsibility 

I low we respond m history makes us who we are; our country what it is. 

I )o w e own up to our t ransgressions? The challenge to history is also the chal- 
lenge n> historical novels. 1%\ its nature truth can be harsh, but it is liberating. 
Kno%% ledge and memoiv can be painful but they enable us to understand the past. 
\\ ithout that uiuln standing, we can he obsessed bv history yet remain ignorant 
about i > 1 1 r selves: mind and bodv and soul: so that we float directionless in the 
present; subject solely to external forces. Incapable of resisting with our inner 
selves, of asserting the truth of that self. Powerless. Subjects, not citizens. Con- 
sciences astray, knowledge minimal, memory ravaged. So it is to our honor and 
benefit il we are made uneasy bv historical novels which make us relive the past, 
make it live in us. 

In countries, like ours, w hose history has long been in the hands of the pow- 
ers that colom/ccl us; and hav ing passed through a dictatorship which unleashed 
private inclinations to be tyrannical, it is even more important for our literature to 
inform us of our past, to serve as a document of that past, to recover history from 
past revisions and save it f rom future distortions. It is the moral burden of hot 
history and literature. I ruth is endangered from many directions. In every count!*}, 
governments practice dissimulation — political blinders — if not outright lies, to 
make citizens conform. We have to resist by thinking our way through mind con- 
trol of all kinds. Our minds can live and think in historical novels, can confirm 
and disconhrm so w r e do not end up colonized/occupied by our own leaders. If we 
need to be, through historical novels wc can be an alternative state, a government- 

in-exile trying to effect conditions that will give fully human life to the most pow 
erless among us. 

Literature can he objective in providing the rhythm ot hte, the residue in 
speech and gesture and dream of what happened to us. It is in and through t e 
interior lives of characters — mapped in words and charted in visible space that 
literature shows us ourselves; presents us to the world. Filled with the richness ot 
the things about us, historical novels can help us understand our history by reflect- 



THE PHILIPPINE REV< )I UTK )N AND HI V( >NI > 



ing on that history and giving us images by which to sec the empirical world - 
making it not only visible but palpable so th.it we begin to possess the past as 
knowledge as a deep experience of our own. Emotions, along with sentiments and 
dreams and rituals, intact. Moral experience. Not just a list but the essence of what 
happened, the experience available in such historical novels heals, nurtures and 
strengthens. It is such a knowledge, an intimation of who we are that lose ki/al s 
novels gave us — which empowers us to seize our rights, recognize our obligations 
and accept culpability. 

No past can be completely recovered by history but it can be retrieved truth- 
fully and justly. There will be no single verdict or simple explanation. C .omplexity, 
surprise and wonder, unpredictability is in our human nature. But with a just 
knowledge of ourselves, we can sift through the possibilities of the past for what is 
valuable and particularly pertinent to us, so that when we are faced with questions 
of justice and survival, permanent burdens of human life, informed and empow- 
ered, we can decide with intelligence and dignity. 

It is in this way that literature, the text of our lives, prefigures, anticipates and 
signifies us; enables us to fulfill history as a people and as individuals. When that 
happens we converge with our true selves, and become a nation with roots in a 
history of our own that is true, and significant, part of the world s mernorv and, 
already, of the future. 

In history we see our country unfolding. In literature we see our lives unfold- 
ing, and we feel and share the experience of sacredness, as during the Revolution of 
1896 and the Philippine-American War, the Japanese occupation of the 1 94()s and 
Martial Law; EDSA. It is that experience which makes us a nation, though remain- 
ing our individual selves. I he sense of self is in that sense of nationhood. 

Historical novels cannot promise us happiness that is more than ordinary and 
momentary (though it might give that to us); anymore than history can promise 
complete, unfailing knowledge. It can however save us f rom facelessness and ano- 
nymity; from unwise compromises or loyalty to spurious ideas and ideology. Per- 
haps even from vulgarity and false exaltations. Literature, if we pay it serious atten- 
tion; allow it to lift us up, give us moments of laughter and hilarity as well as so- 
lemnity and grief and grievances — all the facets of life because literature is about 
life so that it can no more exist outside history than we can — will help us see our- 
selves and our country honestly, so we do not go about dueling against imaginary 
windmills or pinning fake medals on our chests. 



512 



The Music of the Philippine Revolution 



An i oxio C. Hu \ 

Do Ic S; o Uniwvr\ Mamlo. Philippines 



M usk, like history, is a social process that reveals a particular image of 
man in a given period. 1 ike anv other art, it objectifies the spirit of man, 
and reveals the distinct features, nature, or characteristics of a particular time 
frame. It is an integral part of man's life and is "woven into some aspect of the fab- 
ric of the community life and bv 'dipping deep into the wellsprings of emotion, 
an understanding of an age is yielded" (Fleming and Veinus 1958: 233-23/). 

Music has always revealed a direct relationship with the event or occasion for 
which it is made it) be performed. Expressed in different forms or even stylistic 
nuances, it expresses the collective genius of a particular society or people. A people 
gifted with a strong sense of inusicalitv, the Filipinos turn to music to express their 
innermost feelings. 1 fence, every song they sing, every instrument they play, e\ery 
piece of music they compose is a direct, almost spontaneous reflection of their 
hopes and longings, frustrations and fulfillment, failures and triumphs (Hila 1989.5). 

I he music of a given period specifies the character of the said time frame, it 
can he contemplative, festive, or glorious. Indeed, the music ol a particular period 
tells “not only of its harmonics but also of its conflicts”; and in times ol oppression, 
music reveals a “passionate outpouring of the human heart (Fleming and Veinus 
1958:237). 

It is in this context that this paper will anchor the discussion on the topic. A 
music-loving historian m; ide the keen observation that the revolutions fought 
against the Spaniards and the Americans were not solely done with bolos and 
bullets but also with songs and other forms of music such as the kundiman (Dery 
1994: 163). 



513 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOIATION AND BEY( )NI) 



Of course, many of the musical forms that our musk-makers wrote during 
the glorious epoch of the revolution were a direct result of the experience thcv 
imbibed from more than three centuries of Spanish colonial rule. Thus, during the 
revolution of 1896-1898, one encounters a march, a cLnizui habanera, kunelnnan, 
or paso-cloble. 

Patriotic marches were certainly written to inspire the revolution. I he lilting 
strains and majesty of a march were enough to rouse the daunted spirit of our brave 
revolutionists. Many compositions were written in this genre. I hey reflect what 
the late Maestro Felipe P. de Leon called an active consciousness which inspired 
composers to create songs with “explicit patriotic content and whose “quality and 
flow command immediate fervor in the thick of battle (I)e Leon 1969: 2~3). 
However, one must note that two kinds of marches were composed: the jubilant 
military march and the forlorn funeral march or marcha funebre. 

Julio Nakpil, the prolific composer of the revolutionary period, wrote 
marches in both forms. He sensitively portrayed through his compositions the 
“bravery and sacrifices of the Revolutionary Army” (Alzona 1964: 12). In 1897, he 
composed pamitinan which means “hiding place” of the remontados , those Filipi- 
nos who went back to the mountains because they could not endure the cruelty 
imposed by the Spaniards on the settled communities. In the same year, he also 
wrote “Biak-Na-Bato,” a paso-cloble named after the truce that was concluded be- 
tween General Emilio Aguinaldo and Governor-General Primo de Rivera, which 
put to a halt the fighting between the Filipino revolutionists and the Spaniards in 
1897. The piece was dedicated to General leodoro Sandico, a revolutionary leader 
from Bulakan whom Nakpil admired for his sincere patriotism and courage.” A 
year after, he composed another march, “Pasig Pantayanin,” which was inspired by 
his short stay in Pasig the previous year. 

Among the funeral marches that he wrote were the “Pahimakas” (1897) 
which was inspired by the tragic execution of Dr. Jose P. Rizal in Bagumbayan in 
1896, and the “Kabanatuan” which was written belatedly in 1904 in memorv of 
the treacherous death of General Antonio Luna (Alzona 1 964: 12-14). 

The anthem, Marangal Na Dalit ng Katagalugan,” was supposedly com- 
posed in response to a request made by then Katipunan supremo , Andres Bonifa- 
cio. Professor de Leon said that had Bonifacio “not died as early as he did, this song 
would have been our national anthem,” for he “had intended this music for the 
establishment of the Philippine Republic” (De Leon 1969: 273). Historian 
Encarnacion Alzona said that this particular anthem was not declared the official 
anthem by General Aguinaldo who “preferred” the composition of Julian Felipe, a 
fellow Caviteno (Alzona 1964: 11). Nakpil inscribed the words "himno nacionaV 
on the score and also specified the place and date of the composition, namely 
Balara and November 1896.” 2 It seems rather odd that Bonifacio made the re- 
quest at a time when the revolution had just started and the Katipunan had just 
suffered reverses. 



514 



HU \ 



/ ' r of ;Ar Pfulippinr Rrtwlutjon 



I do not subscribe to the allegation that Aguinaldo "did not declare it the 
of Fa la! ant hem because he preferred the composition of Julian Felipe. In the first 
pi. a c v. c ha\ e no rev ord to show that Aguinaldo had heard it. or even an attestation 
that it u .h ever performed. It ever u was performed, one is curious to know what 
th e in. avion v miUI have heen. who could have sung it. and who could have played 
the .luompamment It has to he remembered that when Aguinaldo "ordered 
Felipe to pimltue a march to he placed during the declaration of Philippine inde- 
pendent e at Kaw u . C av ite. on 1 2 June 1 898. Aguinaldo brought with him a score 
from I long Kong titled I Ivmn of halintawak (which has yet to be found), which 
he requested I elipe to pi a\ on the piano several times. Felipe recalled that after 
Aguinaldo heard it. he rose from the chair, approached him and said: "1 want you 
to compose a hvmn to he used as national hvmn of our country. But it has to be dif- 
ferem from what von have just placed. It must be more serious, more majestic, as 
it will replace the ‘Roval March of Spain. Bring it to me as soon as you have writ- 
ten it I his happened on Sundav, 5 lime 1898 ( Mtlbuhdy Pi Upi tuis! 1992: 9 -98). 

It can easilv he gleaned from this that Aguinaldos request was specific, while 
Bomfac ios w as v ague, in the sense that Nakpil did not elaborate on why and for 
what purpose the request was made. 

Before I proceed to discuss Felipe's music. I wish to state at this point that the 
music of Nakpil s opus is perfect tor an anthem. 1 he lyrics, written anonymously, 
read: 



Mahuh av. Mabuhav vaong Kalavaan 
At pasulungin ang puri't kabanalan 
Kastila v mail ing ng katagalugan 
At ngayo \ ipagwagi ang kahusavan. 

(I I ail. 1 I ail that freedom 

And let honor and righteousness move forward 
Spaniards are disdained bv the people 
And now let order triumph) 

( translation by the author). 

One particular weakness of the composition is bad prosody. The natural in- 
flection of the text is not correctly reflected by the rhythm and so the text does not 
flow and does not have the correct cadence. I he composition was developed later 
into a symphonic piece which was premiered on 30 December 1904 by some 170 
musicians, commemorating the eighth anniversary of Rizals execution. It was 
again performed by the Manila Symphony Orchestra in 1931 under the baton of 
Or. Alexander Iappay, who had "rearranged it into a symphonic composition 
(Alzona 1 964: 11). 

Julian Felipes march, on the other hand, was inspired by Spains National 
Royal March. 1 his the composer readily admitted: ...V7hile I was conceptualiz- 



515 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND ULYOND 



ing and writing the march, the phrase of the C Tief [Aguinaldo, repeated I y came to 
my mind: ‘as if to replace the Royal March of Spain. 1 hese words and mv enthu- 
siasm to express in the hymn of our country the blessed influence of our Mother 
Spain are the reason why the composition has vague melodic reminiscences of the 
Royal March of Spain, as it can be seen in the first beats of our hymn. 1 Miihuhay 
Pilipinas! 1 992: 97). 

Felipes statement is likewise significant because it tells us that he consciously 
used Spains “Royal March,” which was “often played in ( .atholic churches during 
the elevation of the Host and chalice (sic)’ (1 Icrnandc/ 1952: u6). It also tells us 
how Felipe misinterpreted Aguinaldos instruction of “replacing Spains Royal 
March.” 

How Aguinaldo received the new work when it was played to him on 1 1 June 
was further narrated by Felipe: 



...The chief was in the receiving room together with several generals of 
the Revolution holding a meeting. ( icn. I ria.s received me at t he door and upon 
announcing my presence, Don Emilio declared a brief recess. After asking me 
to come in, he asked everybody to listen to my composition. I had to play it 
eight or ten times, while those present were exchanging impressions, judging 
it. All were pleased, and finally, giving their unanimous approval, they officially 
declared my composition as the Philippine national anthem, with the title 
“Philippine National March” (Mabuhay Pilipinas! 1992: 98). 

1 he question that most of you probably have in mind now is, 'Did Felipe 
inform Aguinaldo about the inclusion of a fragment of the Spanish 'Royal 
March ? On the other hand, did Aguinaldo or anyone of those who were listening 
notice it? My answer is no. Perhaps no one in the group had the sophistication to 
notice Felipes subtle infusion of Spains “Royal March” in the new composition, 
which was badly needed the following day, 12 June, for the proclamation of Phil- 
ippine independence. 

Ironically Felipe had actually glorified the anthem of the enemy of the revo- 
lution in our own national anthem, which was played while the Philippine flag was 
being raised to signify our independence from the enemy. 

The lyrics of the anthem came only after a year, when the poet Jose Palma, 
who was then writing for the revolutionary paper La Independcncia , wrote a poem 
titled “Filipinas” to suit the music of the march. The poem was published in the 
First-anniversary issue of the newspaper. It was during his leisure hours, when the 
papers staff sang or played musical instruments to lift their spirit as the military 
situation become worse everyday, that Palma thought of writing the poem. The 
staff members were the First to sing the anthem (Baja 1936:211-212). 

It is also interesting that during the First decade of American rule, otherwise 
known as the “era of suppressed nationalism,” the Americans referred to the an- 
them as marcha funebre or “funeral music.” As its singing could not be stopped 



516 



V 



rfy N'tkppmr Rnvlutwn 



bc«.auw t:u:v w.\s no statute penalizing or prohibiting its singing* the anthem was 
' heard here arul there throughout the Archipelago' (Baja 1936: 213). 

‘ •'‘iot, \ | n Independence." a nuirchd pjso-dofdt piim canto* dedi- 

cate*: to t .enerai \ntomo l una. on A Mav 1 899 with lvrics written bv Fernando 
\la t Mierreto Romu.ildcz 19*> v 1S-19) % 

^ hue I ehpe disclosed that he glorified Spains "Royal March in "Marcha 
Na». tonal some ot our ^ompoNers and musicians sav that a fragment ot the French 
anthem la Marseillaise is also noticeable in t lie phrase "Lupa ng araw.. . Others 
sa\ that the triumphal March from Verdi's opera Aidti is also discernible in the 
phrase Vi dagat at bundok... 

I shouUi s \ that the influence ot the French anthem is perhaps accidental. 1 
do not likew ise share the \ iew that it is influenced bv the triumphal March ot 
AuLi 1 he phrase in c onsiderat ion is. to mv mind, directly patterned after Spains 
Koval Match. lake note, tor instance, the manv repetitions that show close sem- 
hlaiKc to Spams Ro\al Nlarch. Ihe pattern of Spains National Anthem is AA / 
BB while* that ot 1 ehpe is \.\ BB . I he repetitions of AA/BB in Felipes work 
were clear 1\ patterned after that of Spains national anthem. Only the third part 
seems to be* the new addition, w hich has also invited critical comments because of 
the similar uv of ns initial notes to the French national anthem. 

Musical I v. some ot out composers, notablv National Artists Lucio D. 
San IVdroaiul \ntonino Buenaventura prefer the work ofNakpil to Felipes. They 
say that Nakpil s opus has the making of a real anthem, "noble and stirring, de- 
spite the weakness on the prosodv that has alreadv been cited. 

I here were other marches that our valiant Katipuneros sang. One was Alerta 
Katipunan, which was [Popular in C avite in 1898 (Romualdez 195^: 16-1 ). Ihe 
song lilts in triumphant mood as it exhorts the Katipuneros to "remain steadfast 
arul prepared (I Vrv 199m 2). In the same year, in Taguig, Rizal, the "Alerta 
Voluntar io w as also popular, though secretlv sung, as its text was written in Span 
ish. 1 he song likewise exhorts the volunteers to be prepared for independence 
(C 'auavani 1 93m 181). 

I he music of the revolution did not consist solely of the lilting strains of the 
march, but also of the affecting, melancholic undulations of the ki indivuvi.T e 
kundimnn is our typical love song, which is written in triple time, either in minor 
or major key, although predominantly in the minor key. It expresses the loft) sen 
timents of love (I Ula 1993-1994: 1 10). "Its theme generally portrays the faithful 
and true, but often forlorn, pleadings of a lover who knows nothing but sacrifice in 
behalf of his beloved" (He Leon 1977: 9). 

I X* I .eon likewise theorized that the “Spanish practice of forbidding the Fili- 
pinos from uttering anything pertaining to nationalism is the reason for the pas- 
sionate and ard ent emotional feelings contained in the kundiman which served as 
a most subtle medium for expressing the Filipinos love of country, symbolized by 
romantic love" (De Leon 1977: 9). Hence the kitndiman not only expresses the 
lofty sentiment of love but also of heroism. 



517 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOELT K )N AND BEY< )NI ) 



The kundiman that became the favorite song among the Katipuneros was 
“Jocelynang Baliwag.” This was called the “Kundiman of the Revolution because 

. . .Ang kantahing ito ay siyang lalong palasak, kilalang-kilala at ivan ang 
kinagigiliwang awitin (favorite song) ngating mga manghihiinagsik: awiuiu;. 
higit sa lahat ay natatangi at natatampok sa kanilang mga puso. Ito ang himig 
na nagbibigay buhay at gumigising sa kanilang mga alaala noong mga kaliga 
ligayang sandali ng pag-uulayaw at pagsusuyuan: wari bagang nababanaag nila 
sa himigat aliw-iw nito ang larawan ng inang minamahal, atig kabiyak ng puso 
o ang mga anak na pinagbubuhusan ng paglingap. 

Ito ang tugtuging pumupukaw sa damdamin, nagpapasilakbo s.i 
kanilang dugo, nagbibigay tapang at lakas, upang ipaglaban ang katwiran. 
ipagtanggol ang Inang Bayan at sariling I^ihi (Molina, 1940: 22). 

...This song is the most common, best known and best liked bv our 
patriots. Its tune animates them and makes them reminisce about the happy 
moments they had with their loved ones; they imagine through its lyrics and 
tunes the picture of their loved mothers, and wives, and children. 

It is a song that awakens their feelings, that fires their emotions, that 
makes them strong and brave, in order to fight for justice, defend the Mother- 
land and countrymen. (Dery 1994: 16). 

Its printed score was found among “the old worn-out papers of the Orqucstra 
Molina of Don Juan Molina. Stated on the score is the following; "Music, de 
Legitimo Kundiman Procedente del Campo Insurrecto (Music of the Legitimate 
Kundiman that Proceeds from the Insurgents’ Camp) (Molina 1940: 16). The 
piece, which bears no name of the composer, is believed to have been printed after 
the Revolution of 1896. The song, whose lyrics do not conform to the rhythm, is 
divided into two parts that are set for six-stanza lyrics, the first letters of the First 
words of which make up the name Pepita, alluding to the beautiful Pepita 
Tiongson of Baliwag, Bulakan, to whom it is dedicated. I he tune is hauntingly 
sad, which “reveals an underlying pensiveness, a certain nostalgic vein without 
which it would cry for completion (De Leon 1969: 272). I he lyrics of this 
kundiman run as follows: 

Pinopoong sinta, niring kaluluwa 

Nakakawangis o mabangong sampaguita 

Dalisay sa linis, dakila sa ganda 

Matimyas na bukal ng madlang ligaya 

Edeng maligaya kinaluklukan 

Ng galak at tuwang katamis-tamisan 



518 



MU V 



*>? «''V Philippine Rem hi non 



\ r iU 



\d.i k.mg nuningmng na .mi: matunghayay 
Mavumong Imlaklak ag.uf Mimisikal 

Bekwed goddevs of mv soul 
V»w arc like the fragrant s.:»:p»ig*i 
Pure anil dean. ot noble lx\uiiv 
i he yenume sprinu from which flows complete joy 

I I app\ I ilen the throne 
* tlie sweetest |o\ and happiness 
Non ate the da.vling nvmph whose gaze makes 
I he fragrant flower grows instantly) 
i hla and Santos 1 90-*; 9S). 

It must be noted that Filipino composers who wrote patriotic music thought 
aiul felt it hi st to adopt songs w hich were haunting, fraught with melancholy and 
sadness as themes tor their epic struggle for freedom. It is in this light that it was 
quite ease and natural to equate the love for a woman with the adoration and rev- 
erence felt tot the country (Oe Leon 1969; 2 2). 1 hus the forlorn image of a per- 
son pleading to his beloved "finds perfect parallel in the downtrodden Filipino 
soldier risking his life in the battlef ield and pleading for the cause of independence 
(l)e I eon 1969; JTd). 

It is interesting to note that "Jocelvnang Baliwag used a musical stock phrase 
that can he traced to a popular folk kufulinnifh the “Kundiman de 1800. I he stock 
phrase is discerned in the last line of the second stanza, “masamyong bulaklak agad 
sumisikak It echoes the last line of the folk kundiman subtitled Avvit Ng 1 ulubi 
(Beggars of San Roque) that was popular in Cavite and central Luzon (Komualdez 
1953: 20-4-205). 

This ditty is known for the humorous appeal ot its text which somehow he 
trays the serious disposition ot the music. It is said that the true lyrics of this soiiw, 
is a patriotic one which refers to the martyrdom ot Jose P. Rizal at Luneta. How r the 
present text came into being is explained by music historian Antonio Molina, who 
said that it was Francisco Santiago who penned the text to beat a printing deadline 
of a book on Philippine folk songs compiled by Emilia S. Reysio Cruz and harmo- 
ni/.ed by Santiago. Molina further states that what could have been the original 
lyrics as “recalled hv some older persons” are the following. Note the unity ot the 
text and the melody that altogether project a serious, pensive mood. 

Sa dalampasigan ng dagat Maynila 
Luneta ang tawag ng mga Kastila, 

Av doon binaril ang kaawa-awa 
Pobreng Filipino, martir nitong lupa. 



519 



THK PHILIPPINH RhVOI l "I ION AND HI YONI) 



Naramay sa dusa ang ating tanggulan, 

Panganay na Burgos at bunsong si Rizal, 

Sa inggit at takot ng praylcng sukaban 

Pinatay at sukat walang kasalanan (Molina 1978: 2028). 

(On the shores of the Manila bay 
Called Luneta by the Spaniards 
There the miserable was shot 
Poor Filipino, martyr of this land. 

Our defenders fell into agony 
Burgos, the eldest, and youngest, Rizal 
Wicked friars consumed by envy and fear 
Had them killed, though they were innocent) 

(Hila Santos 1994: 95). 

The said lyrics were also set into a clanzn titled “Sa Dalampasigan" in 1 897 
according to De Leon (1969: 278). 

There were other songs apart from “Jocelynang Baliwag” that appeared to be 
love songs but in reality were patriotic songs. An example is the kundiman “Sa Ivo 
Ang Dahil” (Because of You) from General Trias, Cavite, which dates back to 1 87 1 
the year the three priests, Gomez, Burgos, and Zamora, were executed. It has a 
heavy political undertone but for fear that the Spaniards would recognize it the 
song was disguised as a love song. 

The “Neneng” referred to symbolizes the country while the “sword," the 
oppression of the Spaniards. “Although not spoken explicitly, the mention of the 
heart pierced with a dagger that is all but floating in blood is a clear indication not 
of torment in love but of political oppression.” The song reads: 

Di mo Baga namamasdan 
Sa dibdib ko yaring punyal, 

Halos sa dugo’y lumutang 
Sa iyo Neneng, ang dahilan. 

Di mo kaya maampat 
Ang bumubugsong hirap 
Hayo na’t itarak 
Sa dibdib ko yaring sibat. 

Sukat mong pakaalalahanin 

Na ang hirap kong ito’y sa iyo ang dahil: 

Pakatantuin mo magpahanggang libing 
Wala akong ibang sinisinta 
Kundi ikaw at kaw rin. 



520 



HU \ / W Mu>:< of Oh Philippine Rrtvlurion 



t .m \ on not ncc 

I he dagger th.it has pierced my heart 
1 hat floats m blood? 

It is hevause of you. Neneng. 
t an \ on not stop 
M\ painful sufferings? 

C omc now and thrust 
1 he spear into mv heart 

You should remember 
1 hat im sufferings are caused bv you. 

\tul you should know unto death 
I hat \ on are im love. 

No one but you and onlv you) (C auayani 1954: 2 ). 

c )ik* song tliat was popular in Guimba, Nueva Eeija. Ang Mga Martir 
( 1 8 1 )’"’). talks about the killing of Rizal and the three priests. Apart from its being 
patriotic, it is also indicates the Filipinos' political sophistication in treating these 
two significant political events, separated bv almost a generation, in one song. It 
also shows how the "people, in the absence ol newspapers or pamphlets, were 
posted about the political events happening in the country. 1 he protagonists were 
presented as elder and \ ounger brothers who shed blood tor the motherland 
(Cauayani 1 95-t: 201). 

Patriotic songs continued to appear during the second phase ol the re\ elu- 
tion. Practically all over the land, from the lagalog provinces, to the plains oi cen- 
tral 1 aizon, and as far as Bicol and Samar, many songs were sung to inspire the revo- 
lution. I hifortunatelv, manv of these songs were not notated. What appeared on 
record are the texts. These songs were written in the respective vernacular of the 

place of origin or in Spanish (see Derv 1094). 

In all lagalog provinces, there was a tuneful danza y which 1\ lies we re attrib 
uted to Jose P. Rizal. This was printed in El Hera Ido de In Revolution ( Dery 1994.8) 
and was popularly sung by students of public high schools. Truly the song is mo\ 
ing and the message is still very much relevant to our contemporary life. It graphi- 
cally portrays the abundance ol the native land, that suffers in the hands ol its op- 
pressors. Fortunate is the person who can redeem her! T. he song reads. 

Sa dakong sikatan ng masayang araw, 

Mav lupang sagana sa madlang kariktan 
Na sinisiphavo ng palalong asal. 

Ay! Ivan ang bayan ko, bayang minamahal. 



521 



THE PHILIPPINE RI VOI l ' I ION AND M Y< )NI ) 



Mawalay sa kanya’y anong laking sakit. 

Salat sa ligaya maging sa pagibig, 

Aravv ay malamlam, malum bay ang langit. 

Aba kung mamatay na di ko masilip. 

Sa baybayin Pasig mga mangga’y masinsin, 

Sanga’y malalaki t sagana sa lilim, 

Sa sariwang dabon, aravv ay nagaaliw, 

Na nakalulugod sa matang titingin. 

Sa may silanganan ng masayang a raw, 

Bayang kong inirog puspos ng kariktan, 

Lugami sa dusa alipin kung turan, 

Ang makapagligtas, kapalad-palara. 

(In the east where the happy sun rises 
Lies an Eden amidst resplendence 
Oppressed by the arrogant. 

That is my country, my beloved land. 

To be separated from her is intensely painful 
Empty of happiness more so of love. 

The day is gloomy, the heaven, sad. 

Ah, how wretched, if I die without having seen her. 

By the shore of the Pasig 
I he mango groves are thick. 

Their branches are big and they cast big shadows. 

Their fresh leaves are comforted by the sunlight. 

In the east where the happy sun rises 
My beloved country, full of beauty 
Wallows in hardship, treated like a slave. 

He who could liberate her is truly fortunate) 

(translation by the author). 

Indeed, our countrymen of the recent past glorified the country in song. 
Fighting for the greater glory of our country became all the lighter because there 
was music that went with the fighting, that served as a balm to the tired but brave 
spirit, lifting it to greater heights. The songs that kindled patriotism continue to 
have relevance today. Truly, there has not been much change since these songs were 
first heard, as the Filipino today continues the quest for final deliverance from 
many oppressive forces. 



522 



Hit \ I N Mi 



of the Plnlippine Retv/urion 



Notes 



ki artulc iv titled 11 Maestro Julian Felipe, Enc revistas de Hispanidad," 
w hu h appeared m AVi lefts lull d e l ;V£; Y Cultura Hispanic us kn Orients. Vol. 2, 

v K tober l ° * 1 1 he translation was done bv Professor Benjamin de la Fuente 

: . I V pa 1 1 mem of 1 hvtot v of 'IV 1 a Salle l niversitv. The original article bears no 

p.i;.;::*.;; ami the \ou\eim proctam ol Alabuhax Pilipinas does not indicate the source. 
V mu put '* 1 1 S9o alter the siting the title of this hymn, indicating that it was 
* : e p . ved on 2 lanuarx l S9(>, in the listing of Nakpil s compositions on page 13 of 
he i booh 

References 

\l/ona. 1 ik. it n. k ion. ed. and trails. Julio Nakpil and the Philippine' Revolution. Manila: 
t amu lo and Rauermann. Inc.. 1969. 

Kna. 1 m man u el \.:i:on.il flag anti Anthem. Manila. Philippines Education Co., 1936. 

C auavam. t onse|o. "Some Popular Songs of the Spanish Period and their Possible Use in 
the Musk Program of our Schools, unpublished thesis. University of the Philip- 
pines. 1 OS.|. 

( Hi/. 1 milia V l dtp; no Folksongs. 2nd ed. Manila: Community Pub., 1950. 

1 )e 1 eon. Felipe P. Poetrv. Music and Social Consciousness. Philippine Studies, no. ~ 

( \pi il 1 9(*9). 266 2S3. 

Recurring rhemes In Filipino Music. Archipelago* 4, no. A-39 (1 F t). 

S 12. 

I)er\. I ms. 1 he Kundiman and Verses of the Revolution of 1896. IS. 1994. IS 1. pp* 

Fleming, \\ llliam and \ emus Abraham. I biderstanding Music. New Virk: Holt Rinehart 
and \\ inston, Inc.. 195S. 

1 lernande/, Felisa. Comp. Our Outstanding Filipino Composers. IS 1952. 

1 lila, Antonio C '. Musi kit: An Essay on Philippine Alusic. Manila: Cultural Center of the 
Philippines, 1989. 

I lila, Antonio C. “The Kundiman." Anuaiyo/Annales, Vol. 12, (1994): 110-119. 

and Santos, Ramon P. “Kundiman." Encyclopedia of Philippine Art. Manila. 

C uliural C enter ot the Philippines, 1994, pp. 93-96. 

Mahuhety Pilipinas. Manila: PS1.H, 1993. 

Molina, Antonio ). An^ Kundiman ng Hinuigsikan. Manila: Bureau of Printing, 1940. 

Molina, Antonio ). “The Sentiments of Kundiman. Filipino Heritage. The Making of a 
Nation. Alfredo Roces ed., Vol. 8. Manila: Falling Pilipino Publishing Inc., 1978, 
pp. 2026-2029. 

. “The Sentiments of Kundiman." Filipino Heritage. The Making of a Na- 
tion. Alfredo Roces ed., Vol. 8. Manila: Lahing Filipino Publishing Inc., 1978, 
pp. 2026-2029. 



523 



Music and Constructions of Nationalism 
During the American Era ( 1 898- 1945): 

Filipino and American Initiatives 



Ricardo I). Timm. i os 

University of Hav/ou, Manoo, U S A 



Introduction 

Music in the Philippine Context 

M usic as an expressive art in the contemporary Philippines forms an 
important component of national identity. It is deeply imbedded in Philip- 
pine cultures and societies. It embraces a wide range of musical styles, from the 
traditional lunsay song-dance of Cagayan de Sulu to six-channel karaoke through- 
out the immediate and contemporary environment of Metro Manila. Further it is 
significant to both the legendary and empirical histories of the Philippines. The 
rhythmic pecking of the sarimanok that releases the first man and the first woman 
from respective bamboo stalks is part of legend. Pigafetta’s account of kulintan % 
and tagunggu played in Cebu in 1 521 is considered the earliest historical source for 
music in the Philippines (1800). Finally, music has been a principal medium for 
animating, reinforcing, and celebrating events and personalities connected with the 
Revolution of 1 896. The pasyon was pivotal in the formulation of Bonifacio’s revo- 
lutionary rhetoric (Ileto 1 979) and “Jocelynang Baliwag” belonged to the extensive 
repertory of songs used during the revolution. The number of musical works about 
Jose Rizal attests to its centrality for national heroes: works based on his novels 
including De Leons Noli Me langere” (1953) and Pajaro’s “Binhi ng Kalayaan” 
(1960) and his life, such as Villarruz’ “La Lampara” (1980). In its variety, history, 
usage, and relevance music is part of identity formation for the Philippines. 



524 






IK! MU l .snii ( onstructiotis of Nitioruilistn 

\" 1 haw pointed out elsewhere music and dance are especially apt expres- 
sions tor nlentitx lumillos l^Sl). Briefly, I surest five wavs in which the arts 
ser \ e identity; 

1 thc\ au the principal tand often sole) distillation or expression of a people 
rcadil\ .uwsmBIc to the outsider; 

tin \ represent one of the few domains of localized initiative in an increas- 
mgl\ mtei nationalized technological environment; 

' the\ arc a domain in which each culture has something to offer, a strong 
contrast to the more frequent "have vs. have-not relationships of the international 
arena. 

*. ihc\ are themselves an artifact of culture, a national resource that can be 
exported, mass produced and marketed; and 

t hex are central simplv because at the international level ttuiny tuitions con- 
sider them >o. 

Aspects of Identity 

Musk is an important part of identity, whether it be regional, linguistic, or na- 
tional. In terms of region, it mav m, u*k a single town — \ intar is acknowledged b\ 
the lota \ intareno — or a province — Batangas in Jota Batangueno. It can also pro- 
vidc identity among several regions or provinces united by a shared language, lor 
example, the whimsical love song "lsipun Mo Sana is sung throughout 
Bikolandia, not just bv the residents of Albay. Moreover, all Bikolanos probabh 
feel a slight twinge of' dislocation when "Sarung Banggi' by Potenciano Gregorio 
appears in its nationalized version, "lsang Gabi." Similarly the ktilintetng identifies 
the larger region of the "Muslim South (or "Bangsa Moro ) although it belongs as 
well to the material culture of non-Muslim groups such as the Badjaw and Bagobo. 
Wc have already noted its existence in Cebuano musical history, as reporte y 
Pigafetta. 

The Rhetoric of National Culture 

Music is an appropriate component in Zialcitas argument tor ethnie as a concept 
in Philippine nationhood (1990). He defines ethnie as a group with an awareness 
of shared myths, memories, values, and symbols that create a distinctive culture 
(ibid.: 230). His position accounts not only for heterogeneity within a national 
culture; it also suggests that national culture exists beyond the boundaries of na- 
tion as state (244). By extension, then, national culture has relevance an \a i it) 

for the diaspora, a diaspora enabled by the American peiiod. 

In brief, he points out that “...the state may contribute to this sense of nation 
in another way: by bringing about unification through political, religious, eco- 
nomic, and even artistic [my emphasis] means (Zialcita 1990: 232). He also rec- 
ognizes two problems that 



525 



THK PHILIPPINE KI-.VOI l I ION AM) lit Y< )NI ) 



disturb the Filipino’s definition of nation. ( )ne is the persistence o) mstitutii ms 
and symbol systems that are of colonial origin and are important ingredients 
of the sense of nation. This covers a wide gamut from political cent tal i/at ion <>| 
art [my emphasis], religion, and language. Another is the continuing c lash of 
interests between regions and even within region ( 232 ). 

In a comparative discussion on 18th century France, lie advances a number 
of points that arc relevant to the Philippines of the American Ira. These include a 
closer supervision of linkages between economic centers, advances in administra- 
tive and bureaucratic techniques, establishment of secular schools and universal 
education (235). 

National culture itself is a topic of reflection and debate, especially about its 
features and constituent elements. In his essay “The use and abuse of folklore in 
national culture” Azurin (1995) argues for an inclusive definition and an induc tive- 
rationale: “...the domains and ingredients of national culture shall be assumed to 
include the particularities and the commonalities discernible in the diverse cultures 
interacting within the Philippine archipelago” and "... any facet of folk life and 
legacy thriving in the community — whether in reminiscence or observance 
when seen through the prism of a nationwide aggregate of experience and recy- 
clable beliefs, traits, and rituals — then as now — it is thence an ingredient of the 
dynamic lifeways of the national community ( 1 37).” 

It is also a weapon for the proactive, who view national culture as a critical 
alternative to the domination of international (read Western) culture. Monettc 
Alfon reflects this sentiment in a discussion specifically about music ( I 989 ) “[the 
television program] Aawitan Kita... is a defiant commitment to traditional Fili- 
pino [my emphasis] music. A constant reminder to the current breakdancim- 
pseudo-punk, karaoke-inspired generation that Filipino music is alive and wefl 
and exquisitely beautiful.... It is one of the first locally-produced shows to ever 
pay proper attention to... authentic period costumes and historic research in the 
Filipino’s musical heritage. These are production values vital to the preservation 
of our nationalist [my emphasis] heritage (ibid.: 43).” Alfon invokes a national 
culture that is Manila-defined, Tagalog-based (ibid.: 44), and historically vali- 
dated; Alfon’s diachronic view contrasts with the synchronic one presented bv 
Azurin. 

Signposts and Domains of National Culture 

In the one hundred years following Bonifacio’s historic call to rebellion and inde- 
pendence at Pugadlawin, the Philippines has traversed a number of stages in estab- 
lishing its present national identity. For purposes of this discussion, that present 
begins with independence in 1946. For music and dance that present includes the 
international successes of dance companies such as Bayanihan in 1958 and 



526 






I RIMll l OS Mustc and c onstrui Hons of NaHonalism 



I llipincsw .is in 1 V >(^1. Iih1.iv the l ultural C enter ot the Philippines, completed in 
embodies a tangible and (for some) palpable edifice ot that identity. Since 
T>So Mgnifuani projects addressing cultural identity have been undertaken. The 
ans \ ulco sci ics. /nU,;* Swing ( 1 989) and the publication ot the CCP Encyclopedia 
of !'• :.:rrou b; l 1 ) 1 )-!) arc signal tor national culture and invaluable tor its dis- 
semination within the Philippines and abroad. Indicative ot a heightened role of 
mimic m the service of national identity is the National Commission for Culture 
and tlu \i t s Ne t V. founded in 1992. In its founding legislation and in the ear- 
her report of the Presidential C ommission on Culture and the Arts, a national 
position on culture (including music and dance) has been articulated. In the post- 
\mcru.m pcnod. Philippine attention to music and dance shows a trajectory be- 
ginning with performance and expanding to the domains ot presentation, docu- 
mentation. and. most recently, public policy. 

1 his preliminary section itself informs us synchronically and allows us to 
reflex t upon the state ot nation as ethnic and as culture, and — bv extension the 
state ot the Philippines in general. We have considered the nature ot identity, ac- 
knowledged the general function ot music in national culture, viewed current dis- 
cussions about national culture, and surveyed aspects ot national identity specific 
to the Philippines. 



American Colonial Period, 1898-19^6 



Approach 



1 propose to examine activities during the American colonial period that both an- 
ticipate and contribute to the present state ot national culture, this period pro- 
duced apologists such as Molina and Espina positing a Philippine music, the el- 
evation ot ktnuiiman to the status ot Philippine art song, the rise and demise ot the 
vernacular sarsuwchr and the collection and documentation of Philippine music 



and dance. 

We focus only upon documentation while acknowledging the great creative 
output during this time. 1 propose to be both macroscopic and micioscopic. First 
I present an analysis ot documentation materials which are primarily research-ori- 
ented. Then 1 will discuss one case of documentation which is primarily perfor- 
mance-oriented although it has research value, as its use in this presentation illus- 



t rates. 

A significant aspect ot both kinds ot documentation during this period is the 
extent to which Filipinos took the initiative. The impact of the early 20th-century 
pensionados returning to the Philippines, the American presence in public educa- 
tion, and the training of Philippine scholars in the United States are all factors in 
the establishment and erowth ot native scholarship on the 1 hilippines. 

P 



527 



THK I'HII.II'PINI RIVOI.ITION AND M Y< >ND 



Research-oriented Documentation 

Filipino intellectuals of the period documented music and related expressive arts 
from at least three different approaches: taxonomy, nationalist advocacv. and ttenre. 
Taxonomic studies were and continue to he popular. In the flood of 1 ilipi no schol- 
arship during the American period, authors presented Philippine music as a lisim« 
of named genres considered to he indigenous, primarily those that contrasted with 
the prevailing western traditions known in the Philippines. The earliest known 
presentation of this type appeared in 1915 titled “Music of the Philippine Islands" 
by Josefa Jara, a three-page commentary reprinted in two other journals that same 
year. However, the significant work upon which subsequent accounts drew for 
both methodology and purview is Musical Instruments and Airs of I ona | n 
Norberto Rom ualdez. This modest publication, taken from a series of lectures w is 
based upon his observations as a circuit justice traveling throughout the Philip 
pines. Other authors, notably Santiago (1931) and /.aide (1932), also authored 
taxonomic studies. Significantly some of the genres cited were already extinc t This 
first view of Philippine tradition presented a musicscape that often confl ued 
present practice and historical memory. 

A second approach advocated a national platform and a nationalist frame lor 
music. It posited that tradition derives from a recognizably Filipino treatment 
approach to music-making, rather than from an established canon of music <’enr 

That is, national tradition was exemplified by the individual artist w fi,, ^ , 

1 ' 1 'vim created or 

performed “in a Filipino way.” Zaide (1932) embodied this sentiment in his \ 1 

cacy for preservation of indigenous musics. Banas (1923) discussed activity * ' 

digenous and western traditions of music and theater from a Manila-centric f 

Significantly his study documented personalities and institutions (mostly in M 

nila), one of the few works of the period to do so. The most ardent champi * f 

this viewpoint was Antonio Molina whose writings encompassed three hist ‘ 1 

periods and three languages. He initially presented his case in “p or \. x 

nacional” (1917) and developed it further in “El sistema tonal I. 

5} 1 sic i a musica 

Filipina” (1937) and “Ang kundiman ng himagsikan” (1940). The sccon 1 
proach took an apologist position and often an advocacy stance vis-a-vis n ui 
identity. 

A third approach focused upon genres. It suggested that national t r id i r 
consists of musical genres principally from the lowland of the Spanish and Amer' 
can colonial periods. Publications by Reyes-Tolentino and Ramos (19^7) lnc j 
Lardizabal (1933) supported this view, particularly in the context of public educi 
tion. 1 he compendium of Philippine dance music, Philippine National Dances 1 
Reyes- lolentino (1946), was signal in this regard. 

More modest reportage by Filipino journalists and intellectuals provided use- 
ful data on diverse genres: the Tagalog kumintang (Cristobal 1916), the awit and 
korido (Buenaventura 1939), the Maranao bansulat (Ramos 1939), and the low- 



528 






IKIMIIIOn \fusu ,ttui Constructions of Nationalism 



..uni ' Molina 1° *1 b Such materials sometimes comprise the only refer- 

rnu s ai n >ut a inusual genre in transition or in decline. 

\nu iu.iii leseanhers. mostlv anthropologists and ethnologists also focused 
upon spev ilk gentes ami peoples. Output during this period by American nation- 
als uu linied a st i nl \ ot tribal music during the Chicago Exposition (Densmore 
190<> .1 sui\e\ ol nuisK and fiance among the Bagobo, Bilaam Manobo, and 

\I.unia\a ol Mindanao tC ole musical analysis of Nabaloi song (Moss and 

Kioebci . nuiskal analysis of linguian traditions (Calc 1922). a discussion 

ol song texts m eastern Benguet (Claerhoudt 1926). and a preliminary study of 
lolk batp m the lowlaiul area (O Farrell 193"*). Ihe research preference for non- 
low 1. uni vultures formed a pattern that continues to the present. 

Repor tage b\ \mericans, like that of Filipino journalists and commentators, 
piovulesa uselul historical perspective on genres. It also contains revealing insights 
into \mciuan attitudes during this period. Music as nationalism warranted 
Ameikan attention earlv on (Anonymous 1903) and continued (Schartz 1929). 
Ihe (western) musicalitv of Filipinos received comment both positive 
( Brov kerislure 191(i) and negative (Riggs 1904). Data about music activity in the 
provuues were also presented, tor example from Laoag (Laurence 191 ) and from 
San Fernando (Anonymous 1904). The third approach focused upon genres, use- 
lul tor future constructions of national culture. 

Research oriented documentation of the period was a project shared by Fili- 
pinos and Americans. Research and commentary by Filipinos were diverse in their 
approach and focus. They often assumed an implicit or explicit advocacy position 
vis- a -vis a national identity. 1 he majority focused upon lowland traditions, the 
background ot most Filipino authors. In contrast, contributions by Americans 
were generally ethnographic, concentrating on a single or a group of cultures. They 
particularized the subject ol study rather than framing it in any larger national or 
transnational context. For example, the American studies do not establish corre- 
spondences with other Philippine groups or other Southeast Asian ones. Unlike 
the lowland focus ol Filipino writing at this time, American scholarship tended to 
concentrate upon “primitive" upland groups and exotic Muslim ones. The pat 
tern described for the Americans has continued in the present, national period (be 
ginning with independence in 1946), although now both Filipino and American 
researchers are involved. 

Performance-oriented Docunientat ion 

In addition to research, the American colonial period produced documentation 
intended for performance. One such project was an American initiative, the Silver, 
Burden and Company textbook series. The Progressive Music Series, Philippine Edi- 
tion (hereafter Series). Although American-initiated it had significant Filipino in- 
put. It came from public education, one of the major agendas for the American 



529 



THE PHILIPPINE KEVOI I TION AND HI-YOND 



period. T he original The Progressive Music Series was created lor American public 
schools in 1 914 with subsequent printing continuing until 1940. The Philippine 
edition appeared in 1929/1930 (Griffith 1929 and 1930). It consisted of a section 
of Filipino and Filipino-oriented songs introduced at the beginning of each of the 
four volumes. The material of the American original, presumably the 1 920/2 I edi- 
tion, follows. Thus each volume is a bifurcated presentation consisting of a modest 
selection of Philippine music followed by the significantly larger buck of .Ameri- 
can/American-oriented songs. 

The Series reflected in microcosm the Filipino and American collaboration 
noted for research-oriented documentation. The Series lists American educator 
Charles E. Griffith as executive editor. He designed and structured the Philippine 
sections of each volume, a process he describes in some detail ( 1924). The actual 
selection of field materials was the responsibility of a Filipino, Norberto 
Romualdez, cited earlier. Not a musicologist or educator, Judge Romualdcz w as m 
avid music collector and observer. There were other Filipinos associated with the 
Series, including composers Francisco Buencamino, Justo Juliano, and Pet run i 
Ramos; librarian Manuel Artigas, and translator Encarnacion Sul i t . Regional m i 
terials were gathered from students of the Philippine Normal School (now Univcr 
sity). Using Manila-based resource persons (here students) from other provinces 
and regions established a pattern that continues today. 

The Series carries a mixed message for national identity and culture The in 
elusion of Filipino materials in an American-generated textbook certainly tcknowl 
edges Filipino identity and referents, such as the sampaguita flower or rice pi mt 
ing. They provided an important counterbalance to cultural referents norm uiv 
for Americans but exotic for Filipinos, such as cherries, autumn, and snow (Th- 
in some cases, there is cultural explanatory material, which is useful for both 
performance and historical understanding. For example, the “Riddle Son P’ 
( konsos ) from Siquijor in the Visayas provides a lengthy explanation that describ^ 
a tradition in decline: 



'The occasion for its use is really a “singing context.”. . . The poems were 
extemporaneous. . . For lack of singers and dancers this contest is rapidly dis ip 
pearing. The country people, in some places, are still able to present it properly 
(Series Book Three: xxi). 

Ironically, the Series contributes to that decline by presenting only ln p 
glish text (“adapted” by Abbie F. Brown)! Earlier the explanatory note regrets- “Its 
proper rendition, however, is so intricate that younger generations have not culti- 
vated the necessary skill to maintain the musical traditions of their ancestors” 
(ibid.). 

The American educational agenda for English language hegemony is clearly 
reflected in the Series. Volume One (using the 1932 edition) is critical in this re- 
gard; it is the single volume containing vernacular texts; the remaining three vol- 



530 






IKIMIIIOS \fusn tifid Constructions of Nationalism 



nine s .iu vomplctch in English. Significantly the vernacular texts in Volume One 
appear onl\ in association w ill) a “primary English text and are positioned below 
u m the manner of a subtitle. In addition, such selections constitute a minority of 
the . or pus. l\vcl\c songs are presented with the combination of vernacular text and 
a sine aide 1 n»;hsh text. I lowever. the remaining 2~ songs use English-onlv texts, 
adapted or tea ted primarily bv the ubiquitous Ms. Brown. F he 12 songs provided 
\s 1 1 h \ern.Kiilar text include: 

Babagto” (Mister Moon) in Kankanay 
"Bahav pukvutan ( The beehive) Tagbanua in Fagalog translation 
Bulaklak ng karma (C amia flower) in fagalog 
l Xihngan ng hat.f (Childrens hymn) Feyteno in 'lagalog translation 
I lat ana ni Boanerjcs (Boanerjes serenade) in lagalog 
1 cron. I cron sinta' (1 cron, l eron, beloved) in lagalog 
I igava sa pagtatanim ( The jovs of planting) in fagalog 
“Magtanim hindi biro'' (Rice planting song) in Fagalog 
“Paalam (farewell) Tagbanua in fagalog translation 
“Pagtatanim ng palav (Planting rice) Tagbanua in fagalog translation 
“Pambansang aw it (Philippine hymn) in fagalog translation 
“Paruparong bukid ( 1 he meadow butterfly) in Fagalog 

A summary of the culture/vernaculars represented in Volume One shows: 





English-only 


With vernacular 


Total 


Tagalog 


4 


11 


15 


Batanes 


1 


0 


1 


Bontoc 


1 


0 


1 


Bikolano 


1 


0 


1 


Cebuano 


3 


0 


3 


llokano 


1 


0 


1 


llongo 


4 


0 


4 


Kalinga 


3 


0 


3 


Kankanay 


0 


1 


1 


Leyteno 


5 


0 


5 


Pangasinan 


2 


0 


2 


Spanish 


1 


0 


1 


English 


1 


0 


1 


Total 


27 


12 


39 



531 



THK I'MII.II’I’IM RI VOI LTK >N AND HI V( )NI ) 



In Volume One the representation of languages and cultures is significant tor 
present-day national culture. Tagalog is represented in 3<S percent of the sample, 
including Tagalog translations from Spanish, Iaghanua, and I .evteno. I ig.tlog is 
the principal vernacular for this collection. In terms of regional identitv, \ isavan 
items comprise 30 percent of the songs (which may reflect a Romualdc/ regional 
bias) and only 13 percent represent upland groups. Luzon lowland cultures other 
than Tagalog make up another 13 percent. I he Muslim south has no representa- 
tion. 

Volumes Two, Three, and Four contain exclusively English texts, including 
the Philippine National Hymn presented in Volume l our. (It appears with an older 
Tagalog translation in Volume One, see below). The implications of L.nglish for 
nationalism are already clear in 1 929. The Philippines today continues an ambiva- 
lent relationship with its English-language heritage. 

What is the dynamic of a nation that “musics” in the vernacular but sings in 
English? The mixed signal by Americans in this period about "native music but not 
native language” perhaps reveals more about American attitudes than about Fili- 
pino predispositions. It certainly had historical implications for the future, i.e. the 
present day. Because music in American society was (and is) essentially for enter- 
tainment and is not deeply integrated into the social fabric, its use as an icon for 
“ethnic” identity does not threaten or contest American hierarchies of cultural 
value. In contrast, language can be a political tool and therefore a threat, especially 
when the Others communicate in a language an American does not understand 
Anglophone “linguiphobia” in the United States has resulted in English Standard 
schools, attempts to declare English the American national language, and signs in 
employee areas of hotels and hospitals that remind their Pinoy and Hispanic work- 
ers, “Speak English Only.” 

The English-only practice reinforced by the Series generates aspects of cul- 
tural heritage that are divisive rather than unifying. The Philippine Hymn appears 
in Series Book Four only in English; the English text was the norm for the first half 
of this century. In 1963, the present Tagalog text of “Lupang Hinirang” was estab- 
lished by presidential proclamation. Thus, there are entire pre-1963 immigrant 
generations and their overseas-born children who can sing the Philippine National 
Anthem only in English. They (more honestly, we) stand awkward, embarrassed 
or mute when contemporary Philippine nationals and recent immigrants launch 
into a lusty chorus of “Bayang magiliw. . .” (I personally can negotiate the first sec- 
tion, but completely break down between the fast dotted rhythms and the tongue- 
twisting “Sa dagat at bundok...” of the second section!) The immigrant Filipino 
does not stand alone in this dilemma. In non-Tagalog areas of this country there 
are Filipinos of an older generation who are more comfortable with the English 
text than the Tagalog one. 

With the English text there is an even more bittersweet irony for the genera- 
tion of my parents. I hey sang enthusiastically that “Ne’er shall invaders trample 
thy sacred shore” while the de facto invaders led the songs and organized the na- 



532 






I RIMIl l OS Mustc and ( omtructions of Nationalism 



tion.d wll.ibus on Philippine culture, including the Series textbook. This part of 
the \merican heritage is troubling to both Philippine nationals and Filipino- 
\rneric.ins. 1 he ambivalence toward America as ally-but-conqueror and cultural 
pur\evot but destrover continues to be part ol the conversation about national 
identitv. 

1 he graphic materials included in the Series also impact identity. 1 hey 
present an idealized view ot Philippine lite and already mark traditional activities 
as presentational rather than actual, 1 he two panels illustrating “ 1 he joys ot plant- 
ing/ are instructive. In the first panel (Appendix 11) tour children stand at the edge 
ol the paddv. while women in the tar background can be seen transplanting seed- 
lings. 1 Tree ol the children are bovs. all ot whom are wearing just or pifui barong 
tagilog* the lone girl wears a balintawah, Neither garment is typical nor appropri- 
ate toi hard, phvsical labor in the rice fields. In this first depiction the children 
appear to be “in costume watching adult laborers actually working the fields. In 
mv experience, the children would not be observing but in the mud working. 

I he second panel depicts a snrnata during transplanting. 1 he musical group 
standing at let t loreground consists of an adult male singer with guitar, a boy sing- 
ing and clapping, and a girl who also appears to be singing. In the center of the 
panel and at mid-ground is a group ot tour young adult females who are transplant- 
ing rice shoots. 1 hev wear what appears to be balintawak and safakot hats. Incred- 
ible the women have traversed a good 10 meters ot the field but still have no mud 
on their ankles, arms, or saya. Their transplanting technique apparently needs im- 
provement. Rather than protecting the roots bv cupping the hand around them 
and thrusting the entire hand into the mud, the women hold the seedlings above 
the roots, which thcrcbv receive the lull impact of the thrust. 

An adult male and female stand in the background, looking toward the work- 
ers. As in the first panel the children are not working, but singing and observing. 

I he girl wears a western dress and holds an umbrella against the sun; the boy has 
the traditional (but not work-appropriate) barong tagalog. 

In both panels (and in other depictions) everyone is smiling, as if on-stage 
rather than in the fields. Although 1 do not wish to imply an American or Filipino 
agenda, 1 find it remarkable that most ot the children have mestizo features and 
none of them appears to be hayinnanggi. Finally, both representations are age 
graded separating those who observe from those who work. Children are not 
working (presumably because they are in school learning); adults are working (who 
presumably have not had the benefits of education now being offered to the chil- 
dren). Artistic license or American colonial strategy? Whatever the case, the values 
and expectations imbedded in the graphics certainly resonate with American atti- 
tudes about and aspirations for Filipinos. The graphics inform aspects of Filipino 
identity just as the selection of repertory does. 

1 he construction of national culture that emerges from the repertory and the 
graphics of the Series reinforces an identity of rural orientation, unskilled labor, 
and an idealized, sentimental existence. If one accepts Rafael's conclusions about 



533 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI 1 I K )N AND M Y< )\I ) 



the authority of colonial language (Rafael 1993), then these songs with I nejish 
texts carry the “language of power. They provide a construction of national ^ul 
ture easily accessed by Filipinos at that time, particularly because thev were 
couched in the participatory (and very Filipino!) medium of song and d ante. \\ it 
tingly or unwittingly the American-introduced educational system which pro 
duced this Series has informed national culture. Its contributions includes a Ma- 
nila base, aTagalog ascendancy, and an acculturated musical style marked as | j|j. 
pino. 



Conclusion 

The American colonial period provided a sympathetic educational, intellectual 
and cultural ambiance in which music as national expression could develop. That 
ambiance valorized music as marker for an identity with multiple referents, not 
only national but regional, linguistic, and local. That multiplicitv problem.it i/es 
the project of national identity. Contemporary discussion of identity continues to 
include the arts and music within its purview and addresses the domains of perfor- 
mance, institutions, documentation, and public policy. 

Critical to today’s conversations, the American period produced scholarship 
with nationalist agendas (primarily by Filipino nationals) as well as scholarship that 
was ostensibly politically neutral (primarily by Americans). These two approaches 
still obtain in the present but with some significant shifts: their proponents are n 
longer distinguished by nationality and scholarship has shifted significantlv to n 
tive voices. 

An examination of the Progressive Music Series suggests ways in which its con 
tent and processes embodied contemporary issues of national identity’ Amom> 
them are: 

1. the oppositional nature of the American/Filipino dyad; 

2. the modes of collaboration between the two; 

3. the decline or disappearance of traditional culture and ways to prevent it- 

4. the ambivalence toward its English language heritage; 

5. the construction of a Manila-centric and Tagalog-borne national culture- 

6. the nationhood and the problematic of cultural pluralism; 

7. the relevance of national culture to Filipinos in the diaspora; and 

8. the objectification of national culture as presentation and performance 
rather than lived experience. 

In the same way that the Spanish promulgated a religiously based island-wide 
ethnie (Zialcita 1990: 242), the Americans promulgated a secular, education based 
one. That ethnie was and continues to be informed and marked by music and 
dance. Clearly an occupying power advances projects resonant with its colonial 
agendas; the United States was no exception. Those agendas included the attention 
to music and dance in the domains of research and performance. These constitute 
contributions from the American era to contemporary Filipino identity. 



534 



1 KIM 1 1 1 Os Music and ( onstructions of Nationalism 



Bibliography 

\non\ mous 

1 903 I "he Filipino love ot music. Musical courier 47:1 1:27 (9 Sep). 
l l >0 \ 1 ilipmos clever musicians. Music prude review 5 8:6:15 (6 Feb). 

A/ur m . \rnoId M. 

1905 Retnventm^ the Filipino: sense of being and becoming, second edition. Quezon 
l itv: Cniversitv ot the Philippines. 

Alton. Moncttc 

l l )S l ) Television and Music: Ryan Ryan Musikahan and Aawican Rita." Kultura 
2:2:1 (MV 

B.mas. Ravmundo ( . 

1 923 l be music and theatre of the Filipino people. Manila: Oriental Printing. 
Brockerishire, |. 

1 9 1 (> A word about native Philippine and musicians. Metronome 32:L -lb. 
Buenaventura. Polo res V. de 

1 939 ring Hi tea tig maginoo sa mga a wit at koridong Tagalog. Manila: Bureau of Print- 

ing. 

C'anave, PC I. 

1 9*'*0 “Musical development in the Philippines; St. Scholasticas College, Manila. 
Ftude 59:367-368. 

C 'laerhoudt, Alphonse 

1 925- “1 he song id a people: igorotte [sic] customs in East Benguet. 

1 926 Little Apostle of the Mountain Province 2-6 (June- May). 

Cristobal, Kpitanio de los Santos 

1916 Balagtas y su Florante. Philippine review 1:8:36-64 (August). 

1 9en s m o re , 1 ; ra nces 

1906 The music ot the Filipinos. American anthropologist 8:61 1-632. 

Diego, Gcrardio 

1946 Danzas filipinas [Filipino dances]. Revista de Indias 7:25:59/ -399. July-Sep- 
t ember. 

Cole, Fay-Cooper 

1913 I he wild tribes of Davao district , Mindanao. Chicago: Field Museum ot Na- 
tional History. 

Gale, Albert 

1 922 Music. The 7 inguian by Fay-Cooper Cole. Chicago: Field Museum ot Natural 
History. Pp. 446-490. 

Griffith, Charles FI, Jr. 

1 924 The background and teaching ot Filipino tolk songs. Philippine education 2-5 
(July-October). 

1920 The progressive music series , Book One , Philippine edition. Newark. Silver 
Burden. 



535 



THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.l Tl( )N AND BEYOND 



The progressive music series , Booh Two. Philippine edition. Newark: Silver 
Burdett. 

1921 The progressive music series , Booh Three, Philippine edition. Newark: Silver 
Burdett. 

The progressive music series , Booh lour. Philippine edition. Newark: Silver 
Burdett. 

1932 'The progressive music series, Booh One, Philippine edition fen turned j. Newark 
Silver Burdett. 

1927 “The music of the Philippine Islands.” Philippine magazine 25:6:327 ft'. (Nov) 

Hiestand, Dwight W. 

1923 “Philippines, a land where everyone sings.” Musical America 38:20:5. <S Sep- 
tember. 

Ileto, Reynaldo C. 

1979 Pasyon and revolution; popular movements in the Philippines, lP t() T) J () 
Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press. 

Jara, Josefa 

1915 “Music of the Philippine Islands.” Journal oj proceedings and addresses New 
York: National Education Association. Pp. 879-882. 

Lardizabal, Felesa 

1933 “Folk music — its place in our public schools.” Philippine journal of education 
16:1:39-40. 

Schwartz, Laszlo 

1928 “The struggle between folk music and jazz.” Philippine magazine 26- V|p 
(Aug). 

Sentrong Pangkultura ng Pilipinas 

1 989 7 uklas Sining: arkitektura , dulaan, musika, panitikan, pelihula, at sayaw [series) 
Manila: Cultural Center of the Philippines. 

1991 Tuklas Sining: musika III. Manila Center of the Philippines. 

Trimillos, Ricardo D. 

1983 The formalized transmission of culture; selectivity in traditional teaching/ 
learning in four high skill music traditions. East-West Culture Learning Insti 
tute report 9: 1 12: 1 -9. 

1984 Truth, beauty, politics and applause: cross-cultural dimensions in music and 
the performing arts. Asia & Pacific quarterly of cultural and social affairs 
16:2:19-27 (Summer). 

Zaide, Gregorio F. 

1932 The music of ancient Filipinos. Unitas 5:40-47. 

Zialcita, Fernando N. 

1990 The nation as artefact. Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society 1 8:227-254. 
University of Hawaii at Manoa. 



536 



ptt\UP p 




-EDUL/ 

:X!f: ASo 



1 ♦ 
iMsatus*' 

1 !/£kW > 

1 $£*&* \ 

1 IJOKf 


r^BU 

EBkSI 


I S^W z 






m>i 


l££*a 




(I UJ w»<- 

lift.. • . 


l> -k' VL . 





-v / 


if jpi 


ji'jSk * v \rvctitorm 


\\\\ ? ‘ J 

tV, 'A - 









