


Etnoxiam 



€lptbto <&utrmo 


NOVEMBER 16, 1890 
Sued: FEBRUARY 29, 1956 





r 




s 



1Bj> tfjc ipreSiticnt of Hje ^PfFn'Upptne^ 

PROCLAMATION No. 2f>9 

DECLARING A PERIOD OF NATIONAL MOURNING OVER THE DEATH 
OF FORMER PRESIDENT ELPIDIO QUlKINO 

Whereas, the sudden death of former President ELPIDIO 
QUIRINO on February 29, 1956, is a great loss to our people and 
has caused deep sorrow among them; 

Now, THEREFORE, I p RAMON MAGS AYS AY, President of the 
Philippines, do hereby proclaim the period from March first to 
fifteenth, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, as a period of national 
mourning for our beloved former President. During this period, 
flags of all government buildings and installations throughout the 
Philippines shall be flown at half-mast. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done in the^ City of Manila, this 1st day of March, in the year 
of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six T and of the Independence 
of the Philippines, the tenth. 



President of the Philippines 


By the President: 


Fortunato de Leon 
Acting Executive Secretary 


| PflJS Mf | 


Pp tije ^rtsfocnt of tfje ^ftiUppine^ 


IDENT ELPID10 QBIK1NO. 

Whereas, former President ELP1DIO QUIRINQ passed away 
unexpectedly on the twenty-ninth day of February, nineteen hun- 
dred and fifty-six; and 

Whereas, it is fitting and proper that adequate anangements 
be made for the holding of official necrological services and a state 
funeral for our former President, commensurate with the peoples 
love and respect for him with the great debt of gratitude that die v 

owe him; 

Now, therefore, 1, RAMON MAGS AYS AY, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law. do hereby 
create a Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial composed 
of the following: 

Executive Secretary Fobtunato de Leon, Chairman 


Senator Fernando Lopez 
Senator Quin tin Paredes 
Speaker Protempore Daniel Romuat.dfz 
Secretary' Gregorio Hernandez. Jr. 

Secretary Eu logic Balaq 
Justice Alejo Labrador 
C ongressman Eugenio Perez 
Mayor Arsenio H, Lacs ON 
Governor Pedro Sin n- R m r zs 
Hon. Jose Yu 1.0 
Hon. Joaquin M, Elizalde 
lion. Teodohu Evangelista 
E x-Governor Emkeo Quirino 

Assistant Executive Secretary Enrique C. Quema 
M r. Manuel CL Z amor a 


Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of March, in the year 
of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence 
of the Philippines, the tenth. 


Administrative Order No, 1 S 1 



MEMBERS 



By the President: 

Fortunato nn Lnnx 

Acting Executive Secretary 


President of the Philippines 


| |*flgc hr« 1 


Jliograpfjp of tijc late ^resJiiJtnt ©utiino 

+ 

/| ft IrPIDIO QUIIUNO, lawyer, orator, legislator, economist,, diplomat and 
statesman, was bom on November 16. 1 S!>0 in Vigan, Hugos Sur, 
being the third among the nine children of Mariano Quirino and Gregoria 
Rivera, 

Elpidio received the rudiments of education from his parents; later 
he was sent to the private school of Maestro Anastaciu Aquino os' Aringay, 
La Union, Subsequently, he entered the Aringay public school, the Sari 
Fernando provincial school, and the Vigan high school where he completed 
his first year, lie also enrolled in painting and drawing in the Universidad 
Iloctiua. In April, 1908, he came to Manila to attend the Manila High School, 
partially supporting himself by sketcliing. and illustrating lor a couple of 
publications while an elder brother aided him. 1l was here that he learned 
his rules of discussion and debate, heading the Cryptia Debating Club, 
traditional opponent of the Rizal Debating Club led by Manuel Roxas. 
Graduating in April, 1911, he enrolled in the College of Law, University 
of the Philippines, where ho obtained his Bachelor of Laws in March, 1915, 
He passed the bar examination in the same year; was admitted to practice 
in [ho United Slates District Court uf China in 1921, and to the Federal 
Supreme Court in 1934, 

White a student in Vigan, lie accepted a teaching position in one of the 
barrio schools, and, later, while a student in .Manila he successively became 
junior computer in the Bureau of Lands, clerk in Lho principal’s office of 
the Manila High School, and property clerk in the Deportment of Police, 
Manila. Immediately after his admission to the bar lie became a law clerk, 
Philippine Commission, and later in the Philippine Senate. He was Sec- 
retary to the President of the Senate, 1917-1919, then resigned to launch 
his candidacy for membership in the lower house. He won and served 
as Representative from the First District of Hocus Sur, 1919-1922; became 
a delegate of the House of Representatives to the International Bar Con- 
ference in Pelting. China, 1921; Senator from the First Senatorial District, 
1925-1931; re-elected to die Senate from the same district; 1931-1935. Then 
ho became delegate to the Corns Ututional Convention, 1934-1935; Secretary 
of Finance under Governor-General Frank Murphy, 1934-1935; first Sec- 
retary of Finance under the Commonwealth Government, 1935-193G; Secre- 
tary of the Interior, 1936-1938; and elected Senator-aL-large in 1941. Fol- 
lowing the liberation of the Philippines, he was elected President Pro 
tempore of the Philippine Senate in 1945. 

As a member of the Senate before the establishment of the Common- 
wealth Government, he was Chairman of the Joint Legislative Committee 
on Taxation; Senate Majority floor leader and Chairman of ihe Committees 
on Rules, Accounts. Elections and Privileges, and Public Instruction. He 
was a tanking member of the hist Independence Mission to the United States 


1 Pafff three \ 


headed by Manuel Quezon which secured the passage of the Ty dings- Mc- 
Duflic Independence Law in 1934. As member of the Constitutional Con- 
vention, Elpidio Quirino was responsible for breaking the long deadlock on 
the question o£ whether or not the constitution being drafted was also 
going to become the constitution of the future republic. He advocated that 
the matter be left to the people and the leaders of the republic, He also 
was instrumental in defeating the Sing son Encsrnaeion proposal that the 
constitution adopt the freehold ays Lein in regard to mineral lands. As a 
Legislator he sponsored the revision and codification of the scattered laws 
on elections, and of the motor vehicle laws; initiated a major revision of the 
laws on tariff and taxation; fathered the law creating Lhe Junior College 
of Vigrm, Ilocos Sur; conceived the first Land Colonization Act which be- 
came the pattern of the Commonwealth Land Settlement Act; and drafted 
the law on national defense with the assistance of Colonels Ord and Fas ph- 
I lower, then assistants of General Mac Arthur. 

Wliile in Lhe Cabinet, he was C hail-man of the National Information Board, 
the National Relief Board, the National Radio Board, the Board of Trustees 
of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes, and the -Special In ter department Trade 
Commit tec. As Secretary of Finance, he advocated tlie creation of the Natio- 
nal Loan and Investment Board and lhe National Economic Council. As 
Secretary of the Interior, ho advocated the conversion of thickly populated 
and progressive barrios into municipalities, and of municipalities into cities. 
The new cities organized during his incumbency wore Cohn, Iloilo, Zam- 
boanga, Davao, and Bacolod, He sponsored the organization of the State 
Police and the organization of the Office of the Commissioner for Mindanao 
and Sulu, the latter to bring the National Government closer Lo the Moham- 
medan Filipinos, He was responsible for the creation of the National In- 
formation Board for the purpose of informing the masses of the people about 
Lhe Government and what it was doing for thorn and, at the same time, of 
knowing the problems of Hie people. As secretary of the interior, he adopted 
the polio iy of visiting the provinces and the rural communities pursuant to a 
policy of bringing die Government closer to the people, and the people closer 
to the Government. 

Before hi* return to the Senate in 1941, lie was Vice Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of 'he National Development Company and several of its 
subsidiaries. At intervals while not serving the Government in any official 
capacity he practiced law and taught in various colleges and universities in 
Manila, He was Dean uf the Adamson College of Law before his election 
to tlie Senate in 1941. He was President of the Philippine Economic Asso- 
ciation since this organization was founded in T 93-1. 

Elpidio Quirino married Alicia Syquia daughter of Tomas Syquia and 
Concepcion Jimenez, on January 16, 11)21, by whom five children were born: 
Tomas, Armando, Norma, Victoria, and Fe t the second, third, and fifth having 
been massacred together with their mother and other relations in the 
slaughter of South Manila in February, 1945. 


[ Pfifjc firttt ] 




Senator El pi die Quu'lno was inducted into office as Vice President of 
the Philippines on May 28, 1946, He was appointed by President Rgxas first 
as Secretary ol Finance and later as Secretary of Foreign Affairs. 

Vice President Quirinp and Minister Nathaniel P. Davies were Chairmen 
of the Joint Executive Committee for the Inauguration of the Republic of the 
Philippines on. July 4, 1946, 

He took the oath of office as President of the Philippines before Acting 
Chief Justice Ricardo Parte on April 17, 1948^ succeeding the late President 
Manuel Roxas, who passed away unexpectedly while visiting the Clark Field 
Air Base on April 15, 1948. 

President Quirrao made an official visit to the United States at the 
invitation of President Truman, leaving Manila on August 6 and returning 
from Washington D, C. t on August 18 ? 1949, after a successful mission. 

He was reelected President of the Philippines on November 8, 1949, serv- 
ing until the end of his term On December 30, 1953. 

He died of heart attack at 6:30 in the evening on February 29, 1956, in 
his home hi Novuliches, at the age of Eh 






• - 


Present Clpfoto ©uirwo’s j/amtlp 



i Armando, Mrs, Alicia Eyquia Quirlno, 


Victoria, NolUl< PrcsLi.ic. nl Quinno and TtrertiiE. 
Tommy are the only ones living. 


Fc is not in the* pJClure. 


[ FiliCfC s-ix 1 



ILnZi iWeeting toi'tf) Jfrtenbss 



iLatCjst lecture of cr-jjrcjirff rit Quirindp A arc ahoiusL, with PresFctabt jWnflMtfeai/ a nth 
\n the tacfcprvwiKL Mrs. Moran, uras Ecfcen in Ins ftiftlcp home ift tfovdlcfar {out days 
liejtfri: his (?caf?t ujt Ftifi-, 23, J3GC. Party ll?cj it gfpeit hir tfut former Pre-jldept for 
Amhtissiidor ATan-ue! V. JlJoran. 


f J*[r<jr iwnrrri ) 




















































PROGRAM 

OF 

iJctrolofficai $©erUtres atib 
Jftmerat (Ceremonies 

lit Jitmtir of 

©is CxCEllftKp 

Clpfoio (©uirmo 

Ex-Prcsufciit r>/ Itw FhHippiitis 


&>£(jEtiule of Vigils UMjile tfje Remains of tfje Haf* 
ex’^pcesttttnt CfpiiJto (Siiinito Hie in S>tate at 
tje Ceremonial Jtall, jflalnrattnng 

★ 


Frtrfatf — March 2nd 

:i to 5 p.tn. — Vice President Carlos P. Garcia with Undersecretary Paul 
Manglapus. Ambassador Joaquin M. Elizalde and Felino Neri and 
the counsellors, 

j to 7 p,wi_— Secretary Jaime Hernandez with Undersecretary Jose P. 
Trinidad and Messrs. Aurelia Montmola, Pio Pedrosa and Sixto 
Ortiz and the Directors of Bureaus and Heads of Offices under the 
Department erf Finance. 

7 to y p.m. — Secretary Pedro Tuason with Undersecretary Jesus G. 
Barrera , Messrs. Jose Bengzon, Oscar C aside, Ce ferine tie los 
Santos, Roberto Gianzon, Juan Liv/ag and the Directors of Bureaus 
and Heads of Offices under the Department of Justice. 

iJ to JJ p,>H. — Secretary Florencio Moreno with Undersecretary Rafael 
M. Contreras, Messrs. Sotero Bnluyut, Pablo Lorenzo and Vicente 
Grosa and the Directors of Bureaus and Heads of Offices under the 
Department of Public Works and Communications. 

11 to IS Midnight — Malacanang Press; Association. 

12 to 1 a.m.t March -3rd — The National Press Club. 

.S'nlurrfcq/ — March 3rd 

I to 1 a, Till, — Close friends and relatives of the late President. 

7 to 9 d.nu — Secretary Fnrtunato de Leon, Assistant Executive Secre- 
taries Enrique C. Quema, Mariano Yenko, Jr. } Joso Samson anti 
Messrs, Emilio Abello, Teodoro Evangelista, Miirciano Roque, Jose 
P. de Leon and Directors of Bureaus and Heads of Offices under 
the Gfliee of the President. 

10 to U a,m, — Pontifical requiem mass. 

II fl.m. £d I p.m,. March. 4th — Secretary Gregorio Hernandez, Jr., with 

Undersecretary Martin Aguilar and Messrs. Prude neso Langcauon 
and Cecilio Putong and the Directors of Bureaus and Heads- of 
Offices under the Department of Education. 

J to 3 p.nn.- — Secretary Eleuterio Adevoso with Undersecretary Agapito 
Braganza and Messrs, Jose Figueras, Primitive Lovina and AurcHo 
Quitoriano and the Directors of Bureaus and Heads of Offices under 
the Department of Labor. 


t ira ] 


3 to 5 p.m. — Secretary Eulogies Balao with Undersecretary Jose M, 
Crisol, Senator Rupeito K. Kangleon and Mr. Teodoslo Dmo and 
the General Staff and the Directors of Bureaus and Heads of 
Offices under the Department o£ National Defense. 

5 to 7 p.m . — Secretary Paulino Garcia with Undersecretary Rafael 
Tumbukon and Dr. Juan Salcedo, Jr., Dr. Regino Padua and the 
Directors of Bureaus and Offices under I he Department of Health, 

7 to 8 p,m, — Secretary Oscar Ledesma with Undersecretary Perfccto E. 
Laguio and Messrs. CorncHo Balmaceda, Saturnina EL Mendinueto 
and the Directors ol Bureaus and Heads of Offices under (he 
Dapartmcnl of Commerce and Industry. 

S to U pun— Secretary Juaii do G. Rodriguez with Undersecretary 
Jaime Ferrer, Senator Fernando Lopez, Mr. Jose S. Camus and 
the Directors of Bureaus and Heads of Offices under the Depart- 
ment of Agriculture and Natural Resources, 

fl to J.0 p.m. — Deputy Administrator of the Office of Economic Coordina- 
tion Juan Concon with Senator M, Jesus Cuenco, Messrs, Sal- 
vador Araneta, Sergio Qsrnena, Jr,, Gregorio Liearos and Managers 
oi Government Owned or Controlled Corporations. 

W to Ji p.m. — Mrs. Amparo P Viilamor with Mrs. Asuncion A. Pores 
and ranking officials of the Social Welfare Administration, 

Jl to 12 p.m, — Commissioner Dotninador Aytonn with Deputy Com- 
missioner Faustino Sy-Changco, Dr. Pio Joven and Tanking officials 
of the Budget Commission. 

Sunday — Mnrch -ilk 

IB to i cum, — Press Secretary J. V, Cruz with Messrs. Juan C. Grendain, 
Vicente Albano Pads, BaJdomerti T, OJivera, Antonio Arizabal, 
Guillermo V. Sisson and Staff of the MaJacah&ng Press Office. 

I to 7 <i,m. — Former Aides-de-Camp, private secretaries and other dose 
associates of the ex-President. 

7 to 9 cum. — Mass under the auspices of the Province of Ilocos Sur 
to be said by Auxiliary Bishop Juan C- Sisson of Nticva Segovia. 



[ Pogo citron ] 


•funeral Arrangements for tfje late ex president ®«i«no as 
Submitted and approbed bp tljc Simnetunte Members of 
i\)t JfamUp auto t\)t Cummittet on .If antral 
Hcrangntient# auto iBatial 

* 


Friday* Match 2nd, I -'30 p.m- 

The remains of the late ex-President Quir.no will be transferred from 
Novaliches to MalacanaJPfi to lie in state at the Ceremom ^ ^ j 
ln>m 3- 00 p.m, Former members of the late eX-President fmir no s 
5£ wfll Apd vigil ever to »•«* b " 

admitted to pay homage to the late ex-Presiden . 


Saturday, Match 3rd, 10:00 a.m , 


ii uujr / ^ w 

Pontifical Requiem Mass at Malaeafianfi will he said by His Excel- 
lency Archbishop Egidio Vagnozxg D.D., Apostolic Nuncio. The 
President Vice-President, Senate President, Speaker, the Chi 
Justice Cabinet members, heads of diplomatic missions. Sectors 
and Congressmen, Justices of the Supreme Co^ and ^urt ^ 
Anneals judges and relatives and close friends of the late ex 
idenl, and their ladies will be present at the Mass. After e 
Mass, the public will be admitted to view the remains of the late 

ox-president. 

Sunday, March 4th, 0:00 of-rn- 

Requiem Mass under the auspices of the Province of Ilocos Sur will 
T d by Auxiliary Bishop Juan C. Sison o Nueva Segovia. 
After the Mass the remains of the late ex-President wJl be trans- 
ferred to the Session Hall of the House of Repres^tativcs where 
it will lie in state until the funeral. The public Will be admitted 
to pay homage to the late ex-President. 

Monday, March 5!h, 9:00 

Necrological services in the Session Hall of the House of Represents 
tives* 


l Pfiiff itofit* i 


program of J? etiological Serbices 

in the Session Haiti, House of Representatives 

Monday, March 5, 1956, 9:00 A,M* 

'k 

L In Memobtam — O p, 62, No. 2- Buenaventura 

Philippine Constabulary Concert Orchestra 


II. Invocation ------ Mons, Hernando Anti ford a, D,D. 

Aitrdiary Bishop of Manila 

III. Oration Representative Diosdadq Macapaoal 

IV. Ohation — ---Senator Pedro Sabidd 


V, u Ave Maria* 1 Santiago 

Mrs. Lourdes Cor rales Razgn accompanied by the 
Philippine Constabulary Concert Orchestra 

VI. Oration ---------- - President Ramon Magsaysay 

VII, “Nearer My God to Thee” - -- -- -- -- -- - L. Mason 

The Philippine Constabulary Concert Orchestra 

The state funeral will start immediately alter the necrological serv- 
ices, stopping at the San Marcelino church for funeral services 

The route of the funeral is as follows: Congress, Taft Avenue, 
Ayala Boulevard, San Marcelino, stopping at San Marcel i no church. 
After the blessing, San Marcelino, Isaac Peral, Tail Avenue, Buendia, 
Pasong Tamo, Vito Cruz Extension, South Cemetery at Makati, 



[ Pflfle ] 


Other of tfjc ^Funeral Procession 

★ 

from hilltop, novaliches to malacasang 

(Friday, Merck 1$56, I;Jfl p. Ml.) 

ROUTE; 

Novaliches Road 
Highway 54 
Aurora Boulevard 
Santa Mesa Boulevard 
Aviles 

Motor Cycle Escort 

Quezon City Police Department 
Manila Police Department 

Camp Murphy Band 
Composite Battalion 
The Hearse 

Family of the late ex-Freadent Elpidio Quirino 
Chairman and Members of the Committee on Funeral Arrange- 
ments and Burial 

Friends of the late o^-President Elpidio Quirino 

At the Santa Mesa Rotunda (Carriedo Fountain), the Composite 
Battalion will dismount and march to Malacafiang, The Presidential Guard 
Battalion will render full honors upon arrival of the Hearse at Mala- 
caftan g Gate No. 2 . 

FROM MALAGAS ANG TO TIIF LEGISLATIVE BUILDING 
(Simdvtf, March 4lh, W56. Ofl n. m.) 

ROUTE: 

Aviles 

Grail, Solano 
Ayala Bridge 
Ayala Boulevard 
Concepcion 
P. Burgos 

Motor Cycle Escort 

Manila Police Department 

Philippine Constabulary Band 
Presidential Guard Battalion 
The Hearse 

The Family of the late cx-Fresident Elpidio Quirino 
Chairman and Members, Committee on Funeral Arrangements 
and Burial 

Friends of the late ex-President Elpidio Quirino 


F Pn-gr ftnerfaen ] 


FROM TIIE LEGISLATIVE BUILDING TO THE SOUTH CEMETERY 

(Monday, March 5th, 1956, immediately after Necrological 
Service, s u-hich will start at 9:90 a f m>) 

ROUTE: 

Taft Avenue 

Ayala Boulevard 

San Marcel met 

San Marcel in u Church 

San MarceJtno 

Isaac Ptral 

Tcs f t Avenue 

Ruendia 

Pasong Tamo 

Vito Cruz Extension 

South Cemetery 

ORDER OF FUNERAL PROCESSION 
Motor Cycle Escort 

Manila Police Department 
Queion City Police Deportment 
Pasay City Police Department 

Mobile Patrol 

Manila Police Department 
Pa say City Police Department 
Quezon City Police Department 
One Company of Manila Police Department 
Military Escort Commander and Staff 
Camp Murphy Band 
Regimental Commander and Staff 
Composite Regiment, 

Presidential Guard Battalion 
Chaplain 

Scout Car pulling CAISSON 
CAISSON 

The President of the Philippines 

Immediate Members of the Family of the late ex -President 

The Viee President af the Philippines 

Former Presidents of the Philippines 

The President of the Senate 

Tile Speaker of the House of Representatives 


f JTdfft J 


’ 


ORDER OF FUNERAL PROCESSION— (Continued) 

* 

Chief Justice end Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 

Dean of the Diplomatic Corps and Heads of Diplomatic Missions 

Members of lire Senate 

Members of the House of Representatives 

Members of the Cabinet 

Presiding Justice end Associate Justices, Court of Appeals 

Undersecretaries of Department 

City Mayor of Manila 

Vice Mayor of Manila 

Members of the Manila Municipal Board 

National Committee On Funeral Arrangements 

Members of the Cabinet of tire late ex-Presldent Elpidio Quiriuu 

Consular Corps 

Governor and Delegation from Hocus Sur 
Governors, City Mayors, Provincial and City Delegations 
Heads of the Armed Forces of the Philippines 
Other relatives mid close associates of the late ex-Presidcnt 
Bureau Directors and Manager* of Government-Owned or Con- 
trolled Corporations 
Veterans and Labor Organizations 
Popular Representation 



/ 


t Psiae i 


3li£t of J^onorarp J3«il Jiteateirs find tfjrir bfsiigiiateii pi nits 
ass prepared bp £Jj t Committee on jf mitral arraiipmtnte 
and JBuriat of jFonnee JJrtSibent €lpibio ©uirino 

* 

I, Congress Session Hall to the Caisson 
The President 
The Vice President 
The Senate President 

The Speaker of the Hons? of Representatives 
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
The Members of the Cabinet 

II. Congress to Taft Avenue- Ayala Boulevard 
Members of the Senate 
Members of the House of Representatives 

III. Ayala-Taft to Ayala Boulevard-San Marcelino 

Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 

IV. San Mareelino-Ayala to San Marcelino Church 

Heads of Diplomatic Corps in the Philippine? 

V. San Marcelino Church to San Marcehno-Isaac Feral 
Presiding Justice and Justices of the Court of Appeals 

VI. Isaac Per al -San Marcelino to Isaac Feral -Taft 

Undersecretaries of Departments. Commissioners, and officials of 
the same rank 

VII. Isaac Peral-Taft to Padre Faura 

City Mayor of Manila 
Vice Mayor 

Members of the Municipal Board 

VIII, Padre Faura to Vermont Street 

Consular Corps 3n the Philippines 

IX. Vermont to Tennessee 
Judges of the — 

Courts of First Instance 
Court of Industrial Relations 
Court of Tax Appeals 
Court of Agrarian Relations 


[ Ftaffc MccTitpen ] 


I 


X. Tennessee to Remedies 

Officers and Members of the National Press Club 

XL Remedies to Son Andres 

Ranking officials of — 

The Office of the President and offices under ii 
The Department of Foreign Affairs 

Xn. San Andres to Vito Cruz Street 

Ranking officials of the Department of — 

Finance 

Justice 

Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Public Works and Communications 

XIII Vito Cruz Street to Caltex Station 

Bureau Directors and Heads of the Departments -ut — 

Education 

Labor 

National Defense 
Health 

Commerce and Industry 
General Auditing Office 

XIV. Caltex Station to Shell Station 
Board of Regents 

Deans of the University of the Philippines 

Officers of the Alumni Association of the University o£ the 
Philippines 

XV. Shell Station to Taft Avenue — Buendia Street 

Heads of Private Universities and Colleges and other Educational 
Institutions 

XVI. Buendia Street — Taft Avenue to Boundary Makati 
Provincial Governors and City Mayors now in Manila. 

XVII. Boundary Makati la Dian Street-— Buendia Street 
Office of Economic Coordination 

Managers of Govurnmmt-Owncd or Controlled Corporations 




[ Psfff ] 


XVIII. Dian Street — Buendia Street to Railroad Crossing 

Ranking Officials of— 

The Central Bank 

The Rehabilitation Finance Corporation 
Tkc Philippine 1 National Rank 

XIX. Railroad Crossing to Pasong Tamo— Buendia Street 
Officers of various Women's Organisations 

XX, Pasong Tamo to Commonwealth Poods Inc, 

Officers of the— 

Rotary Club 
Manila Lions Club 

Junior Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines 

XXL Commonwealth Foods Inc. to Bagtican Street 
Officers of — 

Veterans Organizations 
Gold Star Mo I hers 
War Widows 

XXII, Bagtiean to Kamagong 

Officers of Labor Organizations 

XXIII, Kamagong to Mania Enterprises Inc. 

Officers of various Chambers of Commerce 

XIV. Maniu Enterprises Inc. to Cemetery Gate 
Former Members of the Quirino Cabinet 

Former Aides, private secretaries,, staff members and close 
associates of the late ex-President. 

XXV. Cemetery Gate to Tomb 

Close Relatives of the lale eX-F resident 

Pall bearers should be waiting at then assigned sections ready 
to relieve the preceding pall bearers as indicated in the aforemen- 
tioned schedule. They are requested to wear white suit with black 
arm hand, or Barong Tagalog with black firm band, if possible. 


I I'fltfl* II LJtf'U't'Ji 


Commutes ok jounced UnvmQcmnUtf 
anil iBiirml 


Executive Secretory Fohtukaio in Lius, e.'Vmijrjmjih 

Sen fi lor Fhbna'iThO Lopez 
S enator QuiafflM Pabi:».K 5 
Speaker Prolcmpore Dan tlx HoJAUJUinv. 
Secretory Gruzcafiio Hebnan'diiz, Jr. 
Secretary Eviageq Uai.ao 
J ustice Alejo Ladradoii 
C obgresenmi Eugenio Pints 
Mayor AflBBRio H Lacson 
Governor PfinitO Smasicm-REvtg 
Hon, JOfiK Ytn.n 
Hon. Joaqutn M, Euzauje. 

Hon, Tpoporei Evangei-i^ta 
E x-Governor EIliseq Qgiihko 
A.vnklaiil Executive Secretory Ekiuqui: C, Qukma 
M r Manuel G. Zamora 

* 

#lemoriat program Committee 

Mr GuiLGEkln) V. SlSOtT,, Ckn?rii?nn 

MEM BEK 5 


Mr, Maieo Femur 
Hr. JoiK A. or. JgBtfs 
M r, Patricio Osmesa 



