Speech delivered on the occasion of the Graduation 
Exercises at the Alabang School of Military 
Police Coca u.and on 22 May 1945. 



General ^ester, members of the graduating class: 

It is a souroe of satisfaction for me to be with you on 
this occasion. Six weeks ago, I had the honor to witness the 
opening of this training course. To-day, I oan see 'that your 
efforts have been duly rewarded. Your graduation is a test!- 

“ V ' 

mony of your ef ficiency in your studies. Allow me to extend 

to you my hearty congratulations. 

> 

The certificate of graduation should not only show that 
you have successfully completed the. prescribed course, but it 
should also be your pledge that you are ready to assume the 
important duties and high responsibilities of the service. 

During the past six weeks, you have learned the necessi- 
ty for discipline of mind, of body and of character. You 
have been taught the valua of efficiency, loyalty and devo- 
tion to duty, the three maepificent pillars on which any 
military organization rests. In the years to come, as offi- 
cers and men of the Military Police Command, you will have 
before you a career of opportunity for splendid service to 
our country. The responsibilities of your work will chal- 
lenge the best that is in you. From nov; on, your actions 
and even your thoughts will be subordinated to' the exigencies 
of military discipline. Bear in mind that any misbehaviour 
will bo a discredit not only to you as an individual, but to 
your organization as well. 




Be industrious. In military service as in all other 
proxessions, officers and men take standing according to 
their efficiency and merit. Efficiency requires time, 
labor and perseverance. Do not deteriorate.- Try your best 
to be always correct in your manners and clean in your attire. 

Remember that in military life, silence is golden. Do 
not get into the habit of discussing with outsiders matters 
affecting your work. The most deadly instrument of destruc- 
tion is the human tongue. It is even more dangerous than 
your rifles. While each gun works alone, each loaded tongue 
has a huhdred accomplices. The havoc of gun is visible at 
once. The full evil of the tongue cannot be -seen and should 
not be underestimated. 

Be careful and moderate in the use of alcoholic bevera- 
ges. Excessive drinking almost invariably leads to trouble 
and often ruin. If you feel like taking a drink, do so but 
do not go so far as to forget yourselves. Reckless drinking 
is neither manly, military nor gentlemanly. Do not touch a 
drop of liquor when on or about to enter upon any duty. 

Do not lall under the claws of that dangerous monster 
known <.is gambling. 'hil e gambling among officers and among 

enlisted men for small amounts of money may look entirely 
innocent, yet it tends to develop in their minds the love 
for that vice and the desire to stake larger sums of money. 

You will soon finds yourselves heavily in debt and your ene- 
mies will take advantage of it to tempt you with bribes. 



- 3 - 





> 



In the performance of your duties, you will come in con- 
tact with people of different classes, rich and poor as well 
as intelligent and ignorant* You must endeavour to treat 
them with kindness and- equanimity* Remember that your prima- 
ry duty will be to maintain peace and order* Try to under- 



stand the people of the region in which you will be stationed 
and learn their customs and habits* Try to obtain their 
willing and unhesitating cooperation. Cultivate tact, pa- 
tience and gentlemanliness. 

I bid you all godspeed and wish you success* Success, 
however, will not come to you unless you strive to attain 
n. Success cannot be inherited* It is personal and must 

be attained through sacrifice and perseverance. Your success 
of to-morrow depends upon how successful you are to-day* 
Thoroughness is the secret of success* The future is an 
absorbing subject of curiosity to the human being, but indi- 
vidual 'destiny Is rarely revealed, notwithstanding fortune- 
tellers, except by- the unfolding of time. 



You are the pioneers of the Military Police Command, an 
organization destined to replace the old Philippine Constabu- 
lary. Try to make it a strong and respected organization 
and march forward into the future with a determination to 
maintain its high standards to win public admiration and 



confidence. 



// 



