
DECEMBER 30, 1961 



Official 0mam(/m/ 



I 



^Presilenl CDiosJaJo ^YYlacapagal 



Q^tce (^President Emmanuel (^Pelaez 



DECEMBER 30, 1961 



Contents 



Program of Events 3 

Admission 4 

Place of Assembly 4 

Arrival of Presidential Party 5 

Oath of Office of the President 6 

Inaugural Ceremonies - 7 

Inaugural Parade 8 

Recession „ „ 9 

Oath-Taking, Band Concert, Fireworks and Popular Dance 10 

Gala Concert by the Armed Forces of the Philippines Band 11 

Presidential Reception at Malacanang on January 1, 1962 12 

Biography of — 

President Diosdado Macapagal 14 

Vice-President Emmanuel Pelaez 18 

First Lady - _ 26 

Vice-President's Lady 30 

The President's Cabinet - « 35 

Members of the Senate 36 

Members of the House of Representatives ^ ^ 37 

Supreme Court „ _ mm 40 

Pictures of — 

President Diosdado Macapagal ^ 13 

Vice-President Emmanuel Pelaez 17 

President and Mrs. Diosdado Macapagal _ _ 21 

President Macapagal's Family 22 

Vice-President Pelaez's Family _ 23 

Mrs. Evangelina Macaraeg-Macapagal ^ 25 

Mrs. Edith Fabella-Pelaez 29 

Presidents Aguinaldo, Quezon, and Osmena 32 

Presidents Roxas, Quirino, Magsaysay and Garcia ^ 33 

Administrative Order No. 373 _ _ 41 

List of Sub-Committees 42 

National Anthem _ _ 43 

Lupang Hinirang _ _ 44 



[2] 



Program of Events 

Saturday, December 30, 1961 

6:00-8:30 a.m. — There will be simultaneous religious services by 
the different religious faiths throughout the Philippines. 

9:00 a.m. — Assembly of participants and the general public at the 
Luneta. 

9:30-10:30 a.m. — Arrival of officials and distinguished guests with 
assigned seats at the Inaugural Grandstand. 

10:45 a.m. — Arrival of Mrs. Diosdado Macapagal at the Inaugural 
Grandstand. 

10:50 a.m. — Arrival of Vice President-elect Pelaez with military 
escort at the Inaugural Grandstand. 

11:00 a.m. — Arrival of the Presidential Party with military escort 
at the Inaugural Grandstand. 

11 $5 a.m. — Military Honors. 

11:20 a.m. — Inaugural Parade. 

12:50 a.m. — Inaugural ceremonies at the Inaugural Grandstand. 
22:55 a.m. — Oath taking of Vice President-elect Pelaez. 
12:00 noon. — Oath taking of President-elect Macapagal. 
12:10 p.m. — Inaugural Address of President Macapagal. 
2:00 p.m. — Oath taking of the Members of the Cabinet, Malacanang. 

6:30 p.m. — Concert at the Luneta by the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines Band. 

7:30 p.m. — Main fireworks display at the Luneta and at the 
following places: San Lazaro Playground, T. del Rosario Play- 
ground in Tondo, University of Santo Tomas campus and Plaza 
Hugo, Santa Ana. 

8:00 p.m. — Popular Dance at Plaza Santa Cruz under the sponsor- 
ship of the City of Manila. 



[3] 



Admission 



Admission to the Inaugural Grandstand will be by invitation. 

Only vehicles bearing a special automobile pass will be permitted 
to enter the Inaugural Grounds, All other vehicles will be ex- 
cluded therefrom until after the conclusion of the ceremonies. 



Place of Assembly 

Saturday, December 30 f 1961 

9:30 a.m — 

Participants in the Military Parade will assemble at the places 
assigned to them. 

The Inaugural Grandstand will be opened to the guests with 
admission cards. 

The general public will assemble at the places designated for 
them. 

10:30 a.m — 

Officials and distinguished guests with assigned seats will occupy 
their respective places at the Inaugural Grandstand, 

ARRIVALS AT THE GRANDSTAND 

9:25 a.m. — The Justices of the Supreme Court 
9:35 a.m # — The Members of the House of Representatives 
9:55 a.m.— The Members of the Senate 
10:05 a.m. — The Members of the Cabinet 
20:i5 a.m. — The Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions 
10:30 a.m. — The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
10:35 a.m,™The Speaker of the House of Representatives 
10:40 a.m.— The President of the Senate 
10:45 a.m. — The wife of the President-elect 
10:50 dtn ( — The Vice President-elect of the Philippines 
11:00 am. — The President-elect of the Philippines 



[4] 



Arrival of the Presidential Party and Salute 
to the National Flag 

Saturday, December 30, 1961 

10:45 a.m. — 

Arrival of Mrs. Diosdado Macapagal at the Inaugural Grand- 
stand. 

20:50 a.m.— 

Arrival of Vice President-elect Pelaez at the Inaugural Grand- 
stand. 

10:50 a.m. — 

President Garcia and President-elect Macapagal will leave Mala- 
canang preceded by a military escort of the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines and will proceed to the Inaugural Grandstand. 

21:00 a.m.— 

The arrival of the Presidential Party will be announced by a 
bugle call which will be the signal for the public to rise. 

12:05 a.m. — 

Salute to the National Flag. 

The Joint Chairmen of the Inaugural Committee will meet the 
Presidential Party and escort them to the Presidential Platform. 

(During the Salute to the National Flag, the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines Band will play the National Anthem and the public will remain 
standing.) 



[5] 



0atl) of Office of tfie president of tfje £)fnitppme* 



"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and cons- 
cientiously fulfill my duties as President of the Philippines, 
preserve and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, do 
justice to every man, and consecrate myself to the service 
of the Nation. SO HELP ME GOD." 

—Section 7, Article VII, Constitution of the Philippines 



[6] 



Inaugural Ceremonies 



Saturday, December 30, 1961 

11:50 a.m. — 

I. Invocation by His Eminence Rufino J. Cardinal Santos. 
12:55 a.m. — 

II. Administration of the Oath of Office to Emmanuel Pelaez, 
Vice President-elect of the Philippines, by Chief Justice Cesar 
Bengzon of the Supreme Court. 

12:00 noon- 
Hi. Administration of the Oath of Office to Diosdado Macapagal, 
President-elect of the Philippines, by Chief Justice Cesar Bengzon 
of the Supreme Court. 

IV. Inaugural address by the President of the Philippines. 

V. March— "Mabuhay". 

(The public will rise and remain standing throughout the oath-taking 
ceremonies of the Vice President and the President.) 

(The oath-taking of the President of the Philippines will be immediately 
followed by four ruffles and four flourishes, a 21-gun salute and the playing 
of the Philippine National Anthem.) 

(The public will be seated upon the commencement of the President's 
inaugural address.) 



[7] 



Inaugural Parade 

Saturday, December 30, 1961 

11:10 a.m.— 

A bugle call will be sounded to announce the start of the parade 
to be reviewed by the President-elect of the Philippines. 

THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES 

ORDER OF UNITS 

1. Parade Marshal Group 

a. Parade Marshal— Major General Pelagio A. Cruz, Vice Chief of 

Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines 

Staff— Jl 
J2 
J3 
J4 
J5 

b. Chief, Philippine Constabulary and Staff 

c. Commanding General, Philippine Army and Staff 

d. Commanding General, Philippine Air Force and Staff 

e. Flag Officer in Command, Philippine Navy and Staff 

2. Fly-By by Philippine Air Force 

3. Commanding Generals Group 

a. Commanding General, IV Military Area and Staff 

b. Commanding General, I Military Area and Staff 

c. Superintendent, Philippine Military Academy and Staff 

d. Commanding General, 1st Division and Staff 

e. Commanding General, III Military Area and Staff 

f. Commanding General, II Military Area and Staff 

4. Armed Forces of the Philippines Group 

a. Troop Commander — Brigadier General Eugenio D. Acab, Deputy 
Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines Staff — Chief 
of Staff of Major Services 

b. Philippine Military Academy First Captain and Staff 

c. Philippine Military Academy Band 

d. Cadet Corps, Armed Forces of the Philippines 

5. Massed Colors 

6. Nurse Corps 

7. Philippine Constabulary Battalion 

8. Philippine Army Battalion 

9. Philippine Air Force Battalion 

10. Philippine Navy Battalion 

11. One (1) Regiment, 1st Infantry Division 



[8] 



Recession 

Saturday, December 30, 1961 

Upon the conclusion of the Inaugural Ceremonies, the following 
officials will retire in the order indicated below: 

The President of the Philippines 

The Vice President of the Philippines 

The President of the Senate 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The Chiefs of the Diplomatic Missions 

(The public will rise and remain standing until after the officials 
above named shall have left the Grandstand.) 



[9] 



Oath Taking, Band Concert, Fireworks 
and Popular Dance 



Saturday, December SO, 1961 

2:00 p.m.— 

Oath-Taking of the Members of the Cabinet, Malacanang. 
6:30 p.m. — 

Band Concert at the Luneta by the General Headquarters Band, 
Armed Forces of the Philippines, 

7:30 p.m. — 

Main Fireworks display at the Luneta and also at the following 
places: 

(o) San Lazaro Playground 

(b) T. del Rosario Playground in Tondo 

(c) University of Santo Tomas Campus 

(d) Plaza Hugo, Santa Ana 

8:00 p.m.— 

Popular Dance at Plaza Sta. Cruz under the sponsorship of the 
City of Manila. 



[10] 



Snaufluration of $refitoent iflacapagal 
anb Vitt Idvmbznt $3el<u? 

cohcert 

b# the 

GENERAL HEADQUARTERS BAND, AFP 
under the directum of 
Colonel Laureano G- Carino 

Saturday, December 30, 19B1 at 6:30 p.m. 
INAUGURAL GRANDSTAND 



L INAUGURATION MARCH ^ P ™„ — Moskowski 

2. NEW HORIZONS - _ - Walters 

3. THE HERO - .... - - - - - Johnson 

4. TRUMPET HOLIDAY - - Walters 



Soloists: a. MSgt Benjamin Y. Gonzaga 

b. SSgt Estanislao F, Serafica 

c. Cpl Pablito- P. Gonzales 

d. Cpl Porfirio M. Laudiza 

e. Cpl Cresencio D. Macaranas 
#, Cpl Engracio C. Victorino 

Pvt Ruben M. Quion 

5. THE SINGING SOLDIERS: 

a. ME-KENI KUYUG -~ Carmo 

b. LEONOR (in commemoration of the Centennial celebra- 

tion of Dr. Jose Rizal) music by Dr. Jose Rizal T 
arranged for the Singing Soldiers by Colonel Carino. 

6. DUTY AND PLEASURE , ^ Leidzen 

7. PRESIDENT MACAPAGAL MARCH „ ^ Carino 



[U] 



Presidential Reception at Malacahang on 
New Year's Day, January 1, 1962 



SCHEDULE OF CALLERS 

MORNING 

10:00.— The Vice President and members of his family. 

10:02.— Former Presidents of the Philippines and immediate members of 
their families. 

10:06.— The President and members of the Senate and their ladies. 
10:12.— The Speaker and members of the House of Representatives and 
their ladies. 

10:20.— The Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme Court and 
their ladies. 

10:24.— Members of the Council of State, the Cabinet, the Auditor General 
and other officials with Cabinet rank and their ladies. 

10:30.— The Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions and their ladies. The Dean of 
the Consular Corps and his lady. 

10:34.— The Presiding Justice and the Associate Justices of the Court of 
Appeals and their ladies. 

10:36.— The Chairman and Commissioners of the Commission on Elections 
and their ladies. 

10:38.— The Undersecretaries of Departments and other officials with the 

rank of Undersecretary and their ladies. 
10:42.— Philippine Diplomatic Officials and their ladies. 
10.44.-^Judges of the Court of Tax Appeals, Commissioners of Public 

Service Commission, Judges of Courts of First Instance, Court of 

Industrial Relations, Court of Agrarian Relations and Juvenile and 

Domestic Relations Court and their ladies. 
10:48.— The Chief of Staff, General Officers and staffs of the Armed Forces 

of the Philippines and their ladies. 
10:50.— The ranking Officers and Staff of the U. S. Armed Forces in the 

Philippines and their ladies. 
20:52.— The heads and ranking officials of the U. S. Federal Agencies in the 

Philippines and their ladies. 

Representatives of United Nations Agencies and other international 
organizations in Manila and their ladies. 

10:55.— Provincial Governors and City Mayors and other provincial and 
city cfficials and their ladies. 

11:00.— The President, members of the Board of Regents and Deans of the 
University of the Philippines and their ladies. 

11:02.— Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices, Boards, Commissions and 
Government Corporations. 

11:04.— Representatives of Religious and Ecclesiastical Organizations. 

11:10.— Representatives of Private Universities, Colleges, and Schools, Vet- 
erans Organizations, Chambers of Commerce and Industries, 
Charitable Institutions, Civic Organizations and Alumni Associa- 
tions. 

11:15.— Office of the President. 

11:20-11:30.— Local and Foreign Press, Radio, T. V. and Motion Pictures. 
AFTERNOON 

3:30-5:30.— The general public. 



[12] 



\ 




PRESIDENT DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL 



[13] 



The President 



f RESIDENT DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL was born on September 28, 1910 
in barrio San Nicolas 1st, Lubao, Pampanga. His mother, Romana 
Pangan, and maternal grandparents, Atanacio Pangan and Teresa de la Cruz, 
were peasants (share tenants) from barrio Gutad, Floridablanca, Pampanga. 
His paternal ascendants were "plebian intellectuals," his father Urbano Maca- 
pagal of Lubao, being a jobless vernacular playwright, grandfather Demetrio 
Macapagal of San Simon, Pampanga, a Catholic church music composer, and 
grandmother Escolastica Romero, of Cavite City, a Catholic catechism teacher. 

President Macapagal grew up "amid abject poverty in a barrio where he 
helped his grandfather, a tenant, pasture carabaos all day. At night, he 
would go out to catch frogs for food. ... No outstanding political leader 
has experienced the same hardships that Dadong Macapagal went thru while 
trying to acquire an education." 

Thru persistent struggle and self-denial, he did acquire an education — 
peerless among politicians. He holds two doctorate degrees; Doctor of 
Laws from the University of Santo Tomas (1947) and Doctor of Philosophy 
in Economics from the same university (1957), as well as the antecedent 
title and degrees of Associate in Arts (UP— 1933) , Bachelor of Laws (UST— 
1936) and Master of Laws (UST— 1941). 

Altho a self-supporting student (except for two years in law college 
when his schooling was financed by Pampanga philantrophist Honorio Ven- 
tura), he acquired his education with scholarly distinction. He graduated 
with highest average (valedictorian) from elementary school (1925), second 
highest average in high school (1929), meritissimus in law and economics, 
and at the completion of his undergraduate law course, topped (highest 
rating) the bar examinations (1936). He also won gold medals for excel- 
lence in oratory and debating and captained the Filipino debate team which 
met the visiting round-the-world debaters from the University of Washington 
(1934). 

His notable scholastic record was a portent of his distinguished profes- 
sional and official career, as follows: 

Legal career: Assistant attorney, Ross, Laurence, Selph & Carrascoso, 
1937-1940; senior partner, Macapagal & Eusebio, 1946; senior partner, Maca- 
pagal, Punsalan & Yabut, 1949; senior partner, Diosdado Macapagal & Asso- 
ciates, 329-332 Madrigal Bldg., Escolta, Manila, 1954 to present time (now on 
leave) ; president, Philippine Lawyers' Association, 1947-49; professor, College 
of Law, UST, 1941-49; professor, Post-graduate School, UST, 1950 to date. 

General public career: Clerk, Bureau of Lands, 1930-31; legal assistant, 
Malacanang, 1941; various positions, Department of Foreign Affairs, 1946-48 
(See diplomatic career); elected congressman, first district, Pampanga, 1949- 
53; re-elected congressman, 1953-57; chosen every year one of the ten best 
congressmen by the press from 1949 to 1957 and the best solon in the Third 
Congress (1954-57); Vice-President of the Philippines, 1957-61; elected 
President of the Philippines, 1961-65. 

Diplomatic career: Assistant, Law Division, Department of Foreign 
Affairs, 1946; chief, Law Division, DFA, 1947; chief negotiator with Britain 
for the return of Turtle Islands to the Philippines, 1948; second secretary, 



[14] 



Philippine Embassy, Washington, D.C, 1948; counselor on Legal Affairs 
and Treaties, DFA, 1949; chairman, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 1950- 
53; delegate, Southeast Asia Conference, 1950; delegate, General Assembly, 
UN, New York, 1950; chairman, Philippine delegation, GA, UN, Paris, 1951, 
(when he distinguished himself in debates with Andrei Vishinsky of Russia) ; 
negotiator and signer, US-PI Mutual Defense Treaty, Washington, D C., 1951; 
negotiator and signer, Japanese peace treaty, San Francisco, California; author 
and sponsor of Foreign Service Act (R.A. 708—1952) , known as Macapagal 
Act. 

Economic career: Member, House Committee on Appropriations, 1950-56; 
member, Committee on Commerce and Industry; member, Committee on Ways 
and Means; member, Committee on Economic Planning; member, Committee 
on Banks, Currency and Corporations; member, Special Committee for the 
Revision of the Bell Trade Act, 1953; member, Philippine Economic Mission 
to the US, 1954; vice-president, Free Enterprise Society of the Philippines, 
1955 to date. 

In his public career, he is widely respected for two outstanding qualities: 
an incorruptible integrity and an abiding concern for the common people, from 
whom he sprung. The late President Ramon Magsaysay told a delega- 
tion in Malacanang, in January, 1954: "I like Dadong because he is honest 
and a man of the masses," In the 1961 presidential campaign, Manila 
Mayor Arsenio H. Lacson supported him saying: "Macapagal is an in- 
corruptibly honest official." 

In his Free Press article of June 15, 1957, Mr. Ty wrote: - 
"One of the few ruthlessly honest elective officials that we have today 
is the personable congressman from the first district of Pampanga, Diosdado 
Macapagal, He is finishing his second term in Congress but materially he 
has nothing to show for the eight years that he has been a political big 
shot. The Liberal Party, to which he belongs, was at the acme of power 
when Dadong Macapagal won a congressional seat in 1949. The LP continued 
to lord it over the Nacionalistas until 1953 but one will look in vain for 
proof of any kind to show that he utilized his office to advance his financial 
interest. 

"The most significant feature of his legislative work is that he has always 
worked for passage of laws that would benefit the common man. There is 
no doubt that his heart is with the masses, as borne out by the bills which 
he sponsored during his incumbency. The Pampanga solon authored, spon- 
sored and fought — against stiff opposition from certain colleagues — on the 
House floor for the passage of the present Minimum Wage Law* Together 
with the former lawmaker from Tarlac, Jose Feliciano, and Augurio Abeto 
of Negros Occidental, Dadong wrote and sponsored the law creating the 
Agricultural Credit and Cooperative Financing Administration (ACCFA) . 
He also authored the law creating the rural health units. 

"Other pieces of legislation which he either authored or co-authored are 
those which provide for the establishment of rural banks; the creation of 
the F20-million communal irrigation revolving fund; and estabUshment of 
barrio councils which have power to enact barrio ordinances. In order to 
enable the government to acquire big landed estates for distribution to the 
landless, Macapagal introduced a bill which is now a law — providing for the 



[15] 



exchange of government property with private estates, especially those in 
Luzon. In order to help facilitate the construction of more barrio roads, he 
also introduced a bill, which likewise became a law, providing that the national 
government would defray 60 per cent of the cost of construction while the 
municipal government would foot the rest of the expenses/' 

Elected in 1957 as Vice-President on the opposition ticket and 
obtaining 116,940 more votes than the winning President Carlos P. Garcia, 
he was excluded from the administration. He forthwith played the role 
of opposition leader, led the fiscalization of the administration, toured the 
barrios throughout the country, and rebuilt the Liberal Party to enable it 
to win three new senators and fifteen new governors in the 1959 local 
elections. j 

His crowning feat as opposition leader was achieved on January 4, 1961 
when on his persuasion the Progressive Party of the Philippines led by 
Manuel Manahan joined the Liberal Party to form the United Opposition 
under the Liberal Party. He thus succeeded where others failed by at 
last uniting the opposition elements in the country and preserving the 
two-party system. 

Nominated as presidential standard-bearer by the Liberal Party on 
January 21, 1961, with former Senator Emmanuel Pelaez as vice-president, 
President Macapagal conducted the most intensive and extensive presidential 
campaign in Philippine history by criss-crossing the country three times, 
from Eatanes in the north to Tawi-Tawi and Turtle islands in the south, 
Polillo and "Alabat" islands in the East and the Pacific coastal towns of 
Samar, Surigao and Davao in the West, reaching virtually every accessible 
town in the archipelago. Former Labor Secretary Eleuterio Adevoso, one 
of the late President Magsaysay's aides and who planned President Maca- 
pagaTs campaign itinerary, attested that Macapagal covered thrice more 
territory than Magsaysay. 

The reward of his indefatigable campaign came when he won the 
presidency in the November 14, 1961 polls with a majority of 651,874 votes, 
carrying with him to victory his running mate and six of the eight Liberal 
senatorial candidates. 

On his victory, U. S. Time Magazine wrote on November 24, 1961: 

"Macapagal's political program is . . * to bring 'decency and 
prosperity* to the Philippines. He has pledged himself to the 'principle 
of command responsibility' on graft. By that he means that 'I expressly 
hold myself, morally and politically responsible to the people, for mal- 
feasance by members of my Cabinet, for the acts of my family and my 
intimates, for the general state of morality in the government, and for 
failure to take prompt and vigorous action/ 

"If he means it, and can do it, a new day will dawn for the 
Philippines," 

President Macapagal is married to Dra. EvangeUna Macaraeg-Macapagal 
of Binalonan, Pangasinan, They have two children: Maria Gloria, 14, and 
Diosdado Jr., 10. The President has two children by a previous marriage: 
Maria Cielo 21, married to Agustin Salgado, Jr., and Arturo, 19. 



[16] 



life f 1 ** 



VICE-PRESIDENT EMMANUEL PELAEZ 



[17] 



The Vice-President 



ICE-PRESIDENT EMMANUEL PELAEZ was born 46 years ago (1915) 
in Medina, Misamis Oriental, on November 30 — which is National Heroes 
Day, and which should suffice to explain, for those who believe that one's 
fate is pre-ordained by the stars under which he is born, why Pelaez' life has 
been an unending succession of successes. Pelaez himself, however, would 
challenge the statement on two counts: he would repel, from the depths 
of a truly modest nature, the slightest suggestion that his achievements 
have been on a heroic scale; and while bowing gratefully to a benign birth- 
star which has spared him any shattering personal blows and tragedies, he 
would attribute the same achievements, since a sense of modesty does not 
preclude frank self-appraisal, to hard work, scrupulous adherence to prin- 
ciples, and the generous expenditure of zeal and dedication in all the 
things he has done. "Men at some time are masters of their fates." 

For instance, the one and only set-back Pelaez has suffered in a brilliant 
political career he literally brought upon himself, by a stubborn, un-political 
refusal to sweep a few convictions under the rug. But even that set-back 
turned out to be just a battle lost in a war that was ultimately won. That 
was in 1959, when his time came up for reelection as senator, and a place 
was reserved for him on the administration ticket — provided he would retract 
his attacks against it, and promise to behave afterwards. Pelaez refused, 
of course; he was forced to rim on a third-party ticket, without machinery, 
without inspectors, without funds, and without any real expectation of 
winning. He landed in tenth place, the first among the independent can- 
didates, with 1,700,000 votes — surely an honorable defeat, but alas, defeat 
nevertheless. And yet, it was unquestionably the lessons of the 1959 elections 
which compelled the Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance to come together 
and forge the United Opposition, leading to the nomination of the Macapagal- 
Pelaez ticket, and the victory of both, Pelaez becoming the youngest 
vice-president in our history. 

If Pelaez' career and achievements have not yet attained heroic stature — 
no man, in any case, is beatified in his life-time — certainly they have hewn 
to a standard of excellence with an almost monotonous regularity that should 
satisfy the most exacting hero-worshipper. The record is dazzlingly lumi- 
nous. As a student, he was valedictorian at the Cagayan de Oro Elementary 
School, completed high school at the Ateneo de Manila with highest honors, 
and topped the bar examinations of 1938 with a general average of 91.3%, 
rating 100% in (auspiciously) Political Law. What added luster to this 
performance was the fact that he was a working student through law school 
and the bar examinations — a self-elected status rather than one dictated by 
necessity, for his parents, the late Gregorio Pelaez, three-term provincial 
governor of Misamis Oriental, and Felipa Neri, were of substantial means. 

Pelaez the young lawyer gained national prominence and stirred the 
people's imagination in 1949 when he was designated to prosecute a powerful 
senator accused of corrupt practices by his peers. Up against a legendary 
political figure, the comparatively unknown lawyer's efforts were initially 
met by the public with a mixture of skepticism and disdain that in due 
time, however, turned to sympathy and encouragement and finally to wide- 




[18] 



eyed admiration as he wove a tightly-knit web of evidence around which 
to trap his prey. The senator was found guilty and suspended, and the 
daring young man found himself swept up by a mighty clamor to run for 
congressman of his province, Misamis Oriental. He won by a record 10,000 
votes* 

As a member of Congress, first in the House of Representatives (1949-53) 
and later in the Senate (1953-59) to which he was elevated on the same year 
that Ramon Magsaysay was elected President, Pelaez' record continued to be 
adorned with the same honors and tokens of excellence that have graced 
all his endeavors. Annually he was chosen one of the 10 outstanding congress- 
men by the Congressional Press Club; annually, one of the Philippines 
Free Press' 10 most useful congressmen; for the entire term, the Press 
Club's nod as one of the 10 best solons; and in 1952-53 the League of Women 
Voters picked him one of the two most outstanding congressmen, In the 
Senate, the Senate Press Club unanimously voted him the most outstanding 
senator in 1958 and again in 1959, and earlier the League of Women Voters 
had conferred the same distinction on him for 1955. 

The year that saw Pelaez launched on a bid for the Senate, 1953, was a 
year of political upheavals, Ramon Magsaysay, the dynamic, colorful, popular 
secretary of national defense and nemesis of Communism, was drafted by 
the Nacionalista Party to be its candidate for president. Pelaez, who had 
become a close friend and dependable supporter in the House of Magsaysay's 
anti-Communist campaign, was a trusted adviser throughout the delicate 
negotiations which preceded the draft. When they were successfully con- 
cluded, it was logical that Pelaez should be harnessed for a senatorial berth 
on the same ticket with Magsaysay. Both won handily, Pelaez coming in 
fourth among the eight senatorial winners. 

The relations between the two men deepened as the challenges and 
responsibilities confronting the Magsaysay adrninistration called for vigorous, 
imaginative leadership, In Malacafiang, Pelaez the friend was Magsaysay's 
closest adviser, helping write his inaugural address and supervising the 
preparation of all his state-of-the-nation messages, planning legislative 
programs, fixing the nation's position on vexing international questions; in 
Congress, Pelaez the senator took the floor to translate those messages and 
plans into living legislation. Their association flourished from a warm and 
sincere friendship and a genuine respect for each other's integrity, patriotism 
and talents, but that was only the lime in the cement. What really held 
them together was a mutual belief in the same things. They demanded 
sacrifice, dedication and missionary zeal from all those in the public service, 
beginning with themselves. They believed in giving the masses a decent 
chance at a decent life. They believed in continued alliance and friendship 
with the United States and the free world on the basis of mutual equality 
and respect. Both were implacably opposed to Communism. 

Those shared convictions and principles led Pelaez to sponsor vital socio- 
economic legislation not only during Magsaysay's time but beyond and 
brought him special assignments in the sensitive field of foreign affairs. He 
helped push the Agricultural Tenancy Law and its amendments — a bold step 
towards agrarian reform aimed at rescuing the tenantry from their age-old 
misery and feudal serfdom and giving them the opportunity to progress 



[19] 



towards ownership of their own land. He sponsored the Anti-Subversion 
Law in the Senate. He led the fight for Senate affirmation of Magsaysay s 
support of the U. & stand on the threat against Formosa. He was appointed 
by Magsaysay chief negotiator and spokesman for the Philippines m the 
1956 talks between Philippine and U.S. panels held for the purpose of 
reviewing the bases treaty— talks that laid the ground-work for the progress 
that has been made since towards modifying provisions in the treaty 
offensive to Philippine sovereignty and dignity. He was vice-chairman of 
the Philippine delegation to the historic Bandung Conference in Indonesia 
in April, 1959. * 

After Magsaysay's tragic death in early 1957, Pelaez carried on a 
stubborn rear-guard action for the perpetuation of the late^ President s ideals 
and governmental program. He succeeded in ramming through the Barrio 
Charter, perhaps the crowning glory of all his efforts in behalf of the rural 
masses, a law that transformed the barrios into active governmental units 
so that the people could effectively work out their own progress and ad y™ce- 
ment through their own efforts. He also authored the Science Act of 1958, 
commonly known as the Magna Charta of Science, which created the National 
Science Development Board and gave new importance and impetus to the 
role of science and technology in the national life. Despite these and his 
other accomplishments, Pelaez found himself increasingly in .disagreement 
with the administration and, when the time for decision came in 1959, he 
formally parted ways with it. 

After his senatorial defeat, Pelaez buckled down to a prosperous law 
practice to try to make up for all the years he had subordinated his family s 
comfort and security to his official responsibilities. But he could not resist 
the renewed call to public duty when the opportunity arose to unite the 
Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance. He plunged earnestly into the nego- 
tiations for unity, which bore fruit in the formal organization of the United 
Opposition under the Liberal Party. Pelaez did not hesitate to go back to 
the political wars, launching his bid to be the United Opposition's nominee 
for vice-president. He won the nomination by acclamation and waged a 
gruelling nine-month campaign together with Macapagal and the other 
opposition candidates which culminated in the dramatic victory of the United 
Opposition. 

Pelaez has been appointed secretary of foreign affairs, the premier post 
in the cabinet, and to this office he may be expected to bring the same passion 
for perfection and tradition of excellence that have illumined his entire life 
and career. He can fall back on a wealth of experience in foreign affairs 
to guide him through the challenges ahead. His participation in the Formosa 
debate, the bases negotiations and the Bandung Conference has been men- 
tioned. In addition, he was acting chairman of the Philippine delegation to 
the United Nations General Assembly meeting in New York in 1957; Phil- 
ippine delegate to the Inter-Parliamentary Union conference in London in 
1957, at which he was elected member of the Inter-Parliamentary Council; 
ranking member of the Philippine delegation to the United Nations 10th 
Commemorative Conference in San Francisco, 1955; member of the consultant 
body to the Philippine delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization 
(SEATO) founding conference, held in Manila in September, 1954; member 
of the Philippine Panel, .Indonesian Immigration Negotiations, 1955; and 
official guest of the Indonesian government on a week-long visit to Indonesia 
in March, 1959, 

Pelaez is married to the former Edith Fabella and they have nine 
children. 



[20] 




PRESIDENT AND MRS. DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL 

[21] 



The President's Family 





Standing left to right; Arturo, 19; Maria Cielo M, Salgado, 21; Agustin 
Salgado, Jr. 

Front row: Diosdado, Jr., 10; President Macapagal; Mrs. Macapagal; 
Maria Gloria, 14. 



[22] 



The Vice-President's Family 




Standing left to right ; Ernesto, 19; Elena, 15; Emmanuel, Jr„ 20; 

Esperanza, 13; Eloisa, 11. 
Seated on arm rest: Ekirique, 10; Eduardo, 11. 

Front row: Edniundo, 9; Mrs. Pelaez; Vice-President Pelaez and 
Elvira, 6. 



[23] 




MRS. EV ANGELINA MACARAEG-MACAPAGAL 



[25] 



The First Lady 



VANGEUNA MACARAEG-MACAPAGAL, wife of the President, is the 
(S only child of the spouses Juan Macaraeg (deceased) and Irinea de la 
Cruz of Pangasinan. She was born in Binalonan, Pangasinan, on November 
1, 1915. 

Her father being a roving division engineer of the Bureau of Public 
Works, to which he was appointed after returning from the United States 
as a government pensionado, Evangelina obtained her education in different 
provinces. She finished intermediate school in Zamboanga City; high school 
in the Philippine Women's University in Manila; and preparatory medicine 
in the Cebu Junior College in Cebu City where she became the Carnival 
queen in 1932, She took up medicine in Manila in the University of Santo 
Tomas where she received the degree of Doctor of Medicine in 1938, in which 
year she took and passed the board examinations to become a physician. 

She practiced medicine from 1938 until the outbreak of the war, and 
at war's end, aided in the rehabilitation work by serving in the PCAU as 
doctor. 

During the war, she met the young widower Diosdado Macapagal who 
was attracted by her intellect and charm and following a persistent courtship, 
the two were married on May 5, 1946 in San Juan, RizaL 

She recalls amusedly that while she was a medical student at the UST 
in 1936, one day all classes were dismissed; there was a bonfire at the campus, 
the university paper issued an extra containing the picture of a UST law 
graduate who topped that year's bar tests. Being a conscientious student, 
she grumbled that her class was dismissed and that so much fuss was 
created "over one guy, whoever he is," She did not then realize that this 
"guy" was going to be her future husband, for the bar topnotcher over whom 
the university was agog was Macapagal. 

As if by fate's design, however, she kept a copy of the extra issued by 
the university paper containing Macapagal's picture as that year's bar top- 
notcher. When she and Macapagal later became acquainted and betrothed, 
she produced the old paper out of her files, to their mutual delight at this 
telltale that they were fated for each other. 

The Macapagals have two children: Maria Gloria, 14; and Diosdado Jr., 
1ft The President has two children by his first marriage: Maria Cielo, 21, 
and Arturo, 19. 

The Macapagals 1 eldest daughter, Maria Cielo, graduated as Bachelor 
of Science in Business Administration from the Assumption Convent. She 
is married to Agustin Salgado, Jr. 

Arturo is a rabid admirer of the late President Magsaysay who ordered 
him airlifted from Mindanao, where he suffered a brain injury from a fall, 
for an emergency operation at the V, Luna Hospital which was completely 
successful He is a sophomore college student at the University of Santo 
Tomas where, also taking after his father, he studies economics. 

The President traces his poll victory to Maria Gloria, who is in second 
year high school at the Assumption Convent, because he says, she wept 
when he lost as a senatorial candidate in 1955, To comfort her, he said: 

[26] 



"Never mind* Next time, Til run for a higher position and win." Now 
Maria Gloria is happy that her father kept his promise to her by running 
and winning for Vice-President in 1957 and for President in 1961, 

Diosdado, Jr., is the future politician in the Macapagal family because 
although only ten, he joins his father in shaking hands with his visitors. 

The President has acknowledged in his speeches that his lady has helped 
him much and given him good luck in his career. He recalls that when they 
were married, he was "an unknown and penniless lawyer" and has since 
risen to high positions "because of inspiration from my wife's frugality, 
simplicity, devotion and encouragement." He credits her for his honesty in 
the public service by having made possible for the Macapagal family to 
live within his meager income as a congressman and law professor. In the 
past election campaign, as an Ilocana, she delivered speeches for her 
husband in all Ilocano-speaking provinces, where he obtained the high 
margins outside his native province, Pampanga. 

Evangeiina is not only a wife to the President but an abiding admirer. 
She looks upon him as "a truly good man with a passion to serve the people, 
especially the common people". Her resolve is to continue giving him the 
sustenance that only a better half can provide in his inspired career of 
service to God and country. As First Lady she plans to adopt simple 
living in Malacanang to which the Macapagals have become accustomed 



[27] 




MRS. EDITH FABELLA-PELAEZ 



[29] 



The Vice President's Lady 

fjTHE VICE-PRESIDENT'S lady, Mrs, Edith Pelaez, has been equipped 
by the circumstances of birth and education to do exceedingly well the 
principal task of her life: taking care of a politician husband who has risen 
to occupy the second highest position in the land, and of their large brood 
of nine lively youngsters, Mrs, Pelaez was born to a civil servant's family, 
and thus grew up with the uncertainties and anxieties, the triumphs and 
disappointments, the frustrations and challenges, the goldfish-bowl existence 
and the loneliness of those who dedicate their lives to that impersonal task- 
master, government. Her father, the late Dionisio Fabella, hailed from 
Pagsanjan, Laguna, while her mother, Rosario Neri, is from Misamis Oriental, 
but Edith herself was born in Roxas City (then the town of Capiz) , Capiz, 
on March 15, 1915. That was where her father, a provincial treasurer, was 
assigned at the time. As she moved from one province to another with 
every change in assignment given to her father, one of the first things the 
young girl learned early in life was that a public servant's time and decisions 
are rarely his own. That realization has helped her since to put up with her 
husband's peripatetic politician's schedule, which at times has him taking 
breakfast with bare-footed fishermen in Cavite, then flying off to some south- 
ern city for luncheon and a speech before a meeting of prosperous business- 
men, and flying back to Manila to catch up with a reception and dinner 
among black-tied diplomats. A "typical" day like that spent by her husband 
no longer surprises her. 

To Mrs. Pelaez, the best assignment ever given her father was Misamis 
Oriental. There, in Cagayan de Oro, she met "Maning" Pelaez, and they 
became childhood friends. She went to High School at St. Theresa's College 
in Manila and then moved on to Philippine Women's University where she 
graduated with a Bachelor's degree in Home Economics* She added a 
secretarial course and had been teaching for six months when young Atty. 
Pelaez, helped by the glamour of having just topped the bar exarninations, 
proposed marriage. They were married on December 22, 1939* 

The training Mrs, Pelaez had acquired in the running and management 
of a home has served her in very good stead in the upbringing and care of 
their nine children. She has never allowed her duties as a politician-public 
servant's wife to take precedence over her responsibilities in the home. 
She does her own marketing, buying whole-sale to save time and money; 
plans her meals to keep her family on a nutritious, balanced diet; and 
supervises the daily house-cleaning. The difficult years she went through 
when Pelaez was a struggling lawyer trying to make his way and a name 
in the crowded legal profession have taught her how to stretch the peso to 
its limits. With his initial success, they bought an old house in Quezon 
City which is still their residence today. They have been expanding and 
re-modelling it with the coming of every child and the steady rise of his 
professional career. One indication of how wise and practical a wife and 
mother she is may be seen right in their backyard, where she has encouraged 
a son to raise poultry — a "home industry" that now boasts a daily production 
of 70 eggs. 



[30] 



When the vice-president ran for congressman of Misamis Oriental and 
later for senator, Mrs. Pelaez seldom ventured out to the political hustings. 
They were agreed that she could help him best by tending to the home 
front and thus relieving him of any worries over his family. In the last 
vice-presidential campaign, however, she was out in the field during the 
last two months* visiting places her husband could not go to and acquainting 
the masses with his record and platform. Foe one thing, there was so much 
more territory to cover than before, and furthermore the children had grown 
older. She proved to be an effective campaigner, winning friends and 
influencing people with her warm sincerity and friendliness. Her most 
valuable asset was her readiness to exchange notes with other wives and 
mothers on the problems of keeping a home and bringing up children; they 
immediately felt a sense of kinship with this politician's wife who so obviously 
preferred spending her time in the kitchen to attending some glittering 
society function. 

The Pelaez children— five boys and four girls—are Emmanuel, Jr., an 
A.B. graduate (major in Economics) now taking up law at the Ateneo; 
Ernesto, a student at the U.P. College of Agriculture in Los Bancs; Elena, 
Esperanza, Eloisa and Elvira, the youngest, all at the Assumption Convent- 
and the younger boys, Eduardo, Enrique and Edmundo, all Ateneans. 



[31] 





L32] 



MANUEL ROXAS 
(1946-1948) 



ELFIDIO QUIRINO 
(1948-1953) 



Past Presidents 




The President's Cabinet 



Hon. Emmanuel Pelaez, Vice-President and concurrently Secretary 
of Foreign Affairs 

Hon. Jose W. Diokno, Secretary of Justice 

Hon. Benjamin Gozon, Secretary of Agriculture and Natural 
Resources 

Hon. Marciano D. Bautista, Acting Secretary of Public Works and 
Communications 

Hon. Alejandro R. Roces, Secretary of Education 

Hon. Norberto Romualdez, Jr., Secretary of Labor 

Hon. Macario Peralta, Jr., Secretary of National Defense 

Hon. Francisco Duque, Secretary of Health 

Hon. Manuel Lim, Secretary of Commerce and Industry 

Hon. Amelito R. Mutuc, Executive Secretary 

Hon. Cesar Climaco, Administrator of Economic Coordination 

Hon. Duma Sinsuat, Secretary of General Services 

Hon. Rufino G. Hechanova, Press Secretary (Public Information) 

Hon. Eleuterio Adevoso, Chairman, Presidential Committee on 
Administration Performance Efficiency and Presidential Executive 
Assistant 



[35] 



Fifth Congress of the Republic 



★ 

THE SENATE 

Hon. Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr., President of the Senate 
Hon, Alejandro Almendras 
Hon. Gaudencio Antonino 
Hon. Eulogio Balao 
Hon. Mariano Jesus Cuenco 
Hon. Estanislao Fernandez 
Hon. Maria Kalaw Katigbak 
Hon. Oscar Ledesma 
Hon. Roseller T. Lim 
Hon. Fernando Lopez 
Hon. Genaro Magsaysay 
Hon. Raul Manglapus 
Hon. Manuel Manahan 
Hon. Ferdinand E. Marcos 
Hon. Camilo Osias 
Hon. Ambrosio Padilla 
Hon. Cipriano P. Primicias 
Hon. Gil J. Puyat 
Hon. Francisco Rodrigo 

Hon. ROGELIO DE LA ROSA 

Hon. Jose J. Roy 
Hon. Lorenzo Sumulong 
Hon. Lorenzo M. Tanada 
Hon. Arturo M. Tolentino 

Hon. Regino Eustaquio, Secretary of the Senate 

I 



t 



[36] 



Fifth Congress of the Republic 



THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

Hon. Daniel Z. Romualdez, of Leyte, Speaker 
Hon. Constancio Castaneda, of Tarlae, Speaker Protempore 

Second District 

Hon. Rogaciano M, Mercado 



ABRA 

Hon, Lucas Faredes 

AGUSAN 

Hon, Guillefmo R. Sanchez 

AKZAN 

Hon. Godofeedo P. Ramos 

ALBAY 
First District 

Hon. Venancio P. Ziga 

Second District 

Hon. Justtno Nuyda 

Third District 

Hon. Josefina B. Duran 

ANTIQUE 

Hon, Tobias Fornier 
bataan 

Hon, Jose R, Nucuid 

batanes 

Hon. Jorge A. Abad 

BATANGAS 
First District 

Hon* Apolinario R. Apacible 

Second District 

Hon. Apolonio V. Marasigan 

Third District 

Hon. Jose B. Laurel, Jr. 

BOHOL 

First District 

Hon. Natalio P. Castillo 

Second District 

Hon. Bartolome C. Cabangbang 

Third District 

Hon, Maximino A. Garcia 

BUKIDNON 

Hon. Cesar M« Fortich 

BULACAN 
First District 

Hon, Teodulo C. Nativtdad 



€ AG AY AN 
First District 

Hon, Trro M. Dupaya 

Second District 

Hon, Benjamin T. Ligot 

CAMARINES NORTE 

Hon. Marcial R, Pimentel 

CAM A RINKS SUE 
First District 

Hon. Juan F. Trivino 

Second District 

Hon, Felix A. Fuentebella 
capiz 

First District 

Hon* Gerardo M. Roxas 

Second District 

Hon. Cornelio T. Villareal 

CATANDUANES 

Hon. Jose M. Alberto 

CAVTTB 

Hon. JUSTENIANO S. MONTANO 
CEBU 

First District 

Hon. Ramoh M* Durano 

Second District 

Hon. Jose Briones 

Third District 

Hon. Maximino Noel 

Fourth District 1 

Hon, Isidro C. Kintanar 

Fifth District 

Hon, Miguel Cuenco 

I 

Sixth District 

Hon. Manuel A. Zosa 

Seventh District 

Hon. Tereso Dumon 



[37] 



COTABATO 

Hon. Salipada K, Pendatun 

DAVAO 

Hon. Ismael L. Veloso 

KLOCOS NOBTE 
First District 

Hon. Antonio V. Raquiza 

Second District 

Hon. Simeon M. Valdez 

ILOCOS SUB 
First District 

Hon. Floro Crisologo 

Second District 

Hon. Pablo C. Sanidad 

ILOXLQ 
First District 

Hon. Pedro G. Trono 

Second District 

Hon. Rodolfo Ganzon 

Third District 

Hon. Ramon C, Tabiana 

Fourth District 

Hon. Ricardo Y. Ladrido 

Fifth District 

Hon* Jose M. Aldeguer 

ISABELA 

(No proclamation) 

LAGUNA 
First District 

Hon. Joaquin E. Chipeco 

Second District 

Hon. Wenceslao Rancap 
Lagumbay 

lax a o del nor tp! 

Hon. Laurentino Ll. Badelles 

LANAO DEL SUB 

Rasid Lucman 

LA UNION 
First District 

Hon. Francisco I. Ortega 

Second District 

Hon. Manuel T, Cases 

LEYTB 
First District 

Hon. Daniel Z. Romualdez 



Second District 

Hon* PRIMO A. VlLLASIN 
Third District 

Hon, Marcelino R. Veloso 

Fourth District 

Hon. Dominador M, Tan 

MABINDUQUE 

Hon. Francisco M Lecaroz 

MASBATE 

Hon. Emiuo R. Espinosa, Jr. 

MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL 

(No proclamation) 

MISAMIS ORIENTAL 

Hon. Vicente B. be Lara 

MOUNTAIN PROVINCE 
First District 

Hon. Alfredo G, Lamen 

Second District 

Hon, Ramon P. Mttra 

Third District 

Hon. Lms Hora 
negros occidental 

First District 

Hon. Vicente F. Gustilo, Sr. 

Second District 

Hon. Inocencio V* Ferrer 

Third District 

Hon. Agusttn M. Gatuslao 
negros oriental 

First District 

Hon. Lorenzo G. Teves 

Second District 

Hon, Lamberto L. Macias 

NUEVA ECUA 
First District 

Hon. Eugenio Baltao 

Second District 

Hon. Felicisimo Ocampo 

NUEVA VTZCAYA 

Hon. Leonardo B. Perez 

OCCIDENTAL MINDORO 

Hon. Felipe S. Abeleda 



[38] 



ORIENTAL MINDORO 

Hon. Luciano Joson 

PALAWAN 

Hon. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

FAMFANGA 
First District 

Hon. Juanita L. Nepomuceno 

Second District 

Hon* Emilio P. Cobtez 

PANGASLVAN 
first District 

Hon. Aguedo F. Agbayani 

Second District 

Hon. Angel B. Fernandez 

Third District 

Hon. Cipriano Trro Primicias, Jr 

Fourth District 

Hon. Amadeo J, Perez 

Fifth District 

Hon. Luciano Millan 

QUEZON 
First District 

Hon* Manuel S. Ekverga 

Second District 

Hon* Eladio Caliwara 
rizal 

First District 

Hon. Rufino D. Antonio 

Second District 

Hon. Jovrro R, Salonga 

BOMBLON 

Hon. Jose D* Moreno 
samab 

First District 

Hon. Eladio T. Halite 

Second District 

Hon* Fernando R* Veloso 



Third District 

Hon* Felipe J, Abrigo 
sorsogon 

First District 

Hon. Salvador R* Encinas 

Second District 

Hon, Vicente L. Peralta 

SOUTHERN LEYTE 

Hon, Nicanor Yniguez, Jr, 

SVhV 

Hon* Salih Ututalum 

SURIGAO DEL NORTE 

Hon. Reynaldo P* Honrado 

SURIGAO DEL SUB 

Hon. Vicente L* Pimentel 

TARLAC 
First District 

Hon. Jose Cojuangco, Jr. 

Second District 

Hon, Constancio K Castaneda 

ZAMBALES 

Hon. Virgilio L. Afable 

ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE 

Hon. Alberto Q. Ubay 

ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR 

Hon, Vincenzo Sagun 

CITY OF MANILA 
First District 

Hon. Fidel A, Santiago 

Second District 

Hon. Joaquin R. Roces 

Third District 

Hon, Ramon Bagatsing 

Fourth District 

Hon. Justo R* Albert 



[39] 



The Supreme Court 
★ 

Hon. Cesar Bengzon, Chief Justice 
★ 

ASSOCIATE JUSTICES 
Hon, Sabino Padilla 
Hon. Felix Angelo Bautista 
Hon. Alejo Labrador 
Hon. Roberto Concepcion 
Hon, Jose B. L, Reyes 
Hon, Jesus Barrera 
Hon, Jose Ma, Paredes 
Hon. Arsenio Dizon 
Hon. Dionisio de Leon 

★ 

Mr, Paulino S. Marquez, Clerk of Court 



[40] 



MALAGAS ANG 

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
MANILA 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER No. 373 

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE INAUGURA- 
TION OF THE PRESIDENT-ELECT AND THE VICE PRESIDENT- 
ELECT OF THE PHILIPPINES ON DECEMBER 30, 196L 

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, CARLOS P, GARCIA, 
President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Committee to take charge 
of the inauguration of the President-elect and the Vice-President-elect of 
the Philippines on December 30, 1961. The Committee shall be composed of 



the following: 

Secretary Dqmlnador Aytona ^ 

„ _ _ f „..„.._„.. Co-Chairmen 

Senator Ferdinand K Marcos J 

Senator Arturo M. Tolenttno Member 

Senator Estanislao Fernanbez Member 

Commissioner Faustino F. Sy-Changco . Member 

Mr. Fernando E. V. Sison Member 

Rep, Vicente L. Peralta Member 

Rep. Gerardo M. Roxas - Member 

Mayor Arsenio rL Lacson Member 

Governor Benigno S. Aquino, Jr, r „ Member 

Secretary Edilberto B. Gallares ... Member 

Mr* Ameltto R. Mutuc . __ Member 

Secretary Jose C. Nable , Member 

Mr. Ruftno G. Hechanova Member 

Minister Manuel G. Zamora Member-Secretary 



The Committee shall meet at the call of either of the chairmen, and for the 
purpose of discharging its functions, may create such sub-committees as may 
he necessary. 

The Committee is hereby empowered to call upon any department, bureau, 
office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance as 
it may need in discharging its duties. 

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of December, in the year of 
Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the 
Philippines, the sixteenth. 

(Sgd) CARLOS R GARCIA 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

(Sgd.) Edilberto B. Gallares 
Assistant Executive Secretary 



[41] 



Sub-Committees 



FINANCE 

Co-Chairmen: 

Mr. SlLVESTRE PUNZALAN 

Commissioner Faustiwo F, 
Sy-Changco 

Members: 

Mr. Estanislaq R. Bernal 
Col, Vicente Tiongson 
Mr. Gemtniano F. Yabut 
Mr, Ernesto Malay 

PROTOCOL AND INVITATION 

Co-Chairmen: 

Mr. Amelito Mutuc 
Secretary Edilberto Gallares 

Members: 

Minister Manuel G. Zamora 
Minister Pedro Angara-Aragon 
Mr. Aguinaldo Maaba 
Mr. EuGENto Eusebio 
Mr. Jose A. Balquiedra 
Mr. Cristobal Osoteo 
Mr. Miguel A. Pajamillo 

MILITARY PARADE 

Co-Chairmen; 

Rep. Gerasdo M. Roxas 
Rep, Vicente L, Peralta 

Member: 

Maj. General Pel agio Cruz 

PROGRAM AND INFORMATION 
(Press, Radio, T V. and Motion Pictures) 

Co-Chairmen: 

Mr. Rupino G. Hechanova 
Secretary Jose C. Nable 

Members: 

Mr* Jose Luna Castro 
Mr. Ernesto ml Rosario 



Mr. Felix G, Gonzalez 
Mr. Osmunbo Abad Santos 
Mr, Teodoro M. Locsin 
Mr, Felix Bautista 
Mr. Manuel V. Villa-Real 
Mr, Emtlio Aguilar Cruz 
Mr, Libekato Marinas 
Mr. Henry Hartzenbusch 
Mr. Baldomero Olivera 
Mr, Francisco Trinidad 
Mr. Ermtn Garcia 
Mr. Luis Garcia 
Mr. Gustavo Gonzalez 
Director Mariano S, Eugenio 
Dr, Jose A, m Jesus 
Prof, Galo B. Ocamfo 

INAUGURAL GRANDSTAND 

Co-Chairmen: 

Mr. Fernando E. V* Sison 
Undersecretary Marciano 
Bautista 

CIVIC PARTICIPATION AND POPULAR 
DANCE 

(Fireworks and Decorations) 

Co-Chairmen: 

Mayor Ahsenio H. Lacson 
Governor Benigno S. Aquino, Jr. 

Members; 

Mr. Primitivo R, de Leon 
Capt. Eulogio Samio 
Dr, Hernani Esteban 
Mr, Antonino Nasul 
Mr. Felino Fineza 
Mr. Jose Chico 
Maj. Donhnador Santos 
Capl Sergio Veneeacion 
Mr, Venancio Ochoa 
Mr, Gil Darang 
Mr. Benjardi Crame 



[42] 



The National Anthem * 



Land of the morning. 
Child of the sun returning, 
With fervor burning, 

Thee do our souls adore. 

Land dear and holy, 
Cradle of noble heroes, 
Ne'er shall invaders 

Trample thy sacred shore. 

Ever within thy skies and through thy clouds 

And o'er thy hills and sea 
Do we behold the radiance, feel the throb, 

Of glorious liberty. 

Thy banner, dear to all our hearts, 

Its sun and stars alight, — 
O, never shall its shining field 

Be dimmed by tyrant's might! 

Beautiful land of love, O land of light, 
In thine embrace His rapture to lie. 

But it is glory ever, when thou are wronged, 
For us, thy sons, to suffer and die. 



* Lyrics by Josh Palma (in Spanish) . Translation to English by M* A, Lane and 
C. Qsias, Music by J* Felipe, 



[43] 



Lupang Hinirang* 



Bayang magiliw, 
Perlas ng Silanganan. 
Alab ng puso 
Sa dibdib mo'y buhay. 

Lupang hinirang, 
Duyan ka ng magiting, 
Sa manlulupig 
Di ka pasisiiL 

Sa dagat at bundok, 

Sa simoy at sa langit mong bughaw* 

May dilag ang tula 

At awit sa paglayang minamahal, 

Ang kislap ng watawat mo'y 
Tagumpay na nagniningning; 
Ang bituin at araw niya, 
Kailan pa ma'y di magdidiUm, 

Lupa ng araw, ng luwalhati't 

pagsinta, 
Buhay ay langit sa piling mo; 
Aming ligaya, na pag may 

mang-aapi, 
Ang mamatay nang dahil sa iyo. 



•New version of the Philippine National Anthem in the national language approved 
by the Tenth National Anniversary Committee* 



[44] 



