
PUBLISHED BY THE COMMON- 
WEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 
1617 MASSACHUSETTS AVENUE, N. W., 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 



Volume III, Number 4 



June 15, 1943 



Maj. Gen. Basilio J. Valdes Traces History 
Of Pliilippine-Americaii Relationship 



In A recent talk given before the members of the faculty 
and student body of the Loyola University in New Orleans, 
Louisiana, Maj. Gen.. Basilio J. Valdes, Chief of Staff of 
the Philippine Army and Secretary of National Defense, 
gave a comprehensive resume of Philippine-American re- 
lations, going as far back as the history of the Philippines, 
its native civilization and culture as influenced by Spanish 
and American occupations. 

Philippine history, which the General calls "replete with 
uprisings and revolts to throw off the foreign yoke" was 
reviewed briefly to show that Filipinos have always loved 
freedom. He called attention to "the greatest Filipino 
patriot of all, Dr. Jose Rizal" who, incidentally, was born 
82 years ago in Calamba, Laguna on June 19- 

Jn HIS description of the role of the Philippines in this 
war, General Valdes, paid tribute to the strength of Philip- 
pine-American cooperation which is founded on more than 
forty years of fruitful teamwork. 

"With the improvement of mutual understanding be- 
tween the Americans and Filipinos," Gen. Valdes said, 
"There began an adventure in cooperation which was to last 
for forty years and which has been* hailed as the ideal re- 
lationship between a large nation and a smaller one — the 
sort of relationship which was later to become the key- 
stone of the Atlantic Charter." 

In explaining why the Filipinos fought as they did in 
Bataan and on Corregidor, the General remarked: 

"Cl 

V/UR Filipino soldiers willingly made their sacrifice 
for liberty — for they were the youth of a people who had 
tasted freedom and were determined never to give it up. 
Forty years ago America came to the Philippines with 
promises of freedom and independence. She had kept those 
promises by her laws and by her acts. When the Japanese 
attacked our land in 1941 we Filipinos were one of the 
few truly free nations in all the Far East, and we were 
advancing rapidly toward the day when the Philippine 
Republic would be established. 

"As America had kept faith with us, so we too were de- 
termined to keep faith with America. The heroes of Bataan, 
and their brothers in the United States and Hawaii, are 



redeeming in their daily acts the pledge of our beloved 
President which he expressed in these words: 'We stand 
with the United States in life and in death'." 

Gen. Valdes closed his speech with a hopeful note of 
eventual Allied victory. He concluded: 

"In one year we have answered the challenge of Bataan 
with more guns, more tanks, more planes, and a more 
determined pledge to carry on until final victory is achieved. 

"In one year we can truthfully say that indeed Bataan 
was not the end, that it was only the beginning, the prelude 
to ultimate victory — our victory.” 

Pertinent portions of the General’s speech follows: 

Not SO long ago, Americans were not very keenly 
interested in the Philippines. At the turn of the century, 
it is true, every American spoke much of the beautiful 
islands south of Japan, which America had wrested from 
the control of Spain. The glamorous word "Philippines" 
was then on every tongue, and throughout the United 
States there was unbounded interest in the new land which 
had just come under the American flag. 

But the years passed, and America turned her eyes away 
from the Philippines. True, there were teachers and busi- 
ness men and administrators and technicians who came 
among us. But they were only a handful compared to the 
great mass of Americans who had nearly forgotten that far- 
off country over which the United States still held sov- 
ereignty. 

But if only a comparative handful of Americans knew 
very much about the Philippines, there was a greater 
American force at work than mere numbers alone. That 
was the living, vibrant American force of democracy, of 
fair play, of liberty and justice for all. 

And so, in December, 1941, the American people re- 
discovered their friends across the sea. They watched the 
bloody story of heroism written across the foxholes of 
Bataan and in the tunnels of Corregidor. There, when the 
Japanese attacked, the world saw how well democracy had 
worked. It was no accident that twenty thousand Filipino 
soldiers were willing to lay down their lives in defense of 
American sovereignty over their islands. 



TToNIGHT I want to refresh your understanding of 
the Filipino people and of the historic accomplishment in 
colonial administration which must be credited to the 
United States on its record in the Philippines through 
forty-odd years. I have lived through that period. I saw 
what America did in the Philippines and, during the past 
two years, I saw the result of America’s policy, rising above 
the stench and bloodstains of furious battle. Later I will 
tell you in detail about some of the military operations 
against the Japanese. 

But first, let us glance back briefly into the past, for a 
fuller understanding of the historical development of the 
Filipino nation. With this background clearly in mind, 
you will be much better able to appreciate the significance 
of the history-making campaign which the Filipino people 
waged against the Japanese under that gallant commander, 
General Douglas MacArthur. 

Our original civilization in the Philippines was the 
Malayan, extending over a land area approximately the 
size of the British Isles. We had our own culture, our own 
books and literature, our own alphabet. We had our Rajahs, 
who governed their more or less limited communities. 
From them we inherited the courage to fight for those prin- 
ciples of freedom which we learned to cherish. 

In 1521 Ferdinand Magellan brought the flag of Spain 
to the Philippines, and the Spaniards under Legaspi began 
to take control in earnest in 1565. The Philippines re- 
mained under Spanish rule until 1898 — a period of about 
three hundred and seventy years. 

!P HILIPPINE history is replete with uprisings and revolts 
to throw off the foreign yoke. Spain brought a colonial 
policy which aroused the hostility of the Filipino people 
and culminated in the Philippine Revolution of 1896; but 
she also brought many benefits of European civilization to 
the Philippines. Spain gave us a codified system of European 
law. She brought the Filipino people a language which 
opened up to them — even if only to a few — the intellectual 
vistas of the western world. Finally, Spain brought Chris- 
tianity to the Philippines, and today more than 80 per cent 
of the Filipinos are Roman Catholic. 

Throughout the years, a long line of Filipino patriots 
raised their voices on behalf of reform. In 1861, there 
was born the greatest Filipino patriot of all, Dr. Jose 
Rizal. From the age of 17 onward, Rizal steadfastly trained 
himself to lead his people to freedom. He studied and 
worked in Madrid, Vienna, Berlin, Paris, London, Dresden, 
and Rome, visiting other places and mastering all the 
major languages of Europe and Asia. His scientific abilities 
won him world-wide recognition as a physician, biologist, 
and engineer. His travels took him to China, Japan, and 
the United States. His ideas on freedom for the Filipino 
people found expression in a prolific flow of pamphlets 
and books — particularly in his novels Noli me T 'anger e (The 
Social Cancer) and El Filibusterismo (The Reign of 
Greed). These novels spread like wildfire throughout the 
Philippines, uniting the people in their common aspiration 
for freedom. Rizal’s thesis was simple: his studies had con- 
vinced him that Filipino culture, industry, and general wel- 

2 



fare had not been measurably improved by three centuries 
of Spanish rule. He felt the great need for reforms. 

By THE 1890’s the people had come to look upon Rizal 
as their great leader and champion. But Rizal himself was 
not in favor of an immediate armed revolution. That was 
left for Andres Bonifacio, father of the Katipunan, the 
secret society under whose banner the revolution finally 
broke out. It was Rizal and his teachings, however, that 
inspired the revolutionists in their supreme sacrifice. The 
Spanish governor, in fear and desperation, lured Rizal to 
Manila with false promises of safety, and then treacherously 
flung the young patriot into prison. At dawn, on December 
30, 1896, the crack of rifles echoed in Bagumbayan Field, 
and Jose Rizal was dead — a martyr to the cause of liberty. 

But the spirit of Filipino freedom was not so easily 
killed. With the news of Rizal’s death, the ground-swell of 
hostility against the Spanish regime became a tidal wave. 
Armed bands sprang into existence throughout the Philip- 
pines, and Spanish power tottered perilously beneath the 
onslaught. 

Small wonder that, when Commodore George Dewey 
and his American fleet arrived in Manila Bay on May 1 
1898, they found the defeat of the Spanish forces an easy 
accomplishment. For the truth was that Spain was fighting 
not the Americans alone, but the people of the Philippines 
themselves, a people determined once and for all to be rid 
of foreign rule and to govern themselves. In helping to 
overthrow the Spanish regime, the Filipinos looked upon 
the American forces as allies and liberators, and they were 
sure that the day of their deliverance was at hand 

However, the overthrow of the Spanish regime was not 
destined to result in immediate independence for the 
Philippines. 

The Filipinos immediately concluded that their struggles 
and sacrifices had been in vain, and that thev c - , 

delivered themselves from one foreign ^ ^ Slm pty 

find themselves burdened wfih Ztr gT t° 
years of Spanish mistreatment and TeLS t'pT d ^ 
were skeptical of American assurances f,: ‘ pln0S 

tions at the start. Four bitter years of ki ,, , dy lnten ‘ 
before ,he American armed 

000 well-armed soldiers, finally succeeded "n ,° u™' I2 ?’' 
last remnants of the Filipino forces b Sl ’ bduin g the 
friendly intentions of the United <5 fa .’ C °‘ l y ab:er the 
onstrated to the Filipino people * ^ WSre am Pty dem- 
The American administration of thm 
the beginning of a new era for th P / hlIl PP ines marked 
era of hope, of progress, and of self- J ,• n ° P eo P le — an 
the Americans came, they brn i ea hzation. For, when 
basic symbol of democracy— eh 8 ^ al ° ng witb tbem the 
was the Filipino nation to thirst 16 SC . lboolc - No longer 
last to them were giy en sur u . m Vain ^ or knowledge. At 
of speech, freedom of the nr em ° Crat ' c rights as freedom 
right to vote, and freedom nf Un ' versa l education, the 
Filipino people and of such l re , lgl0n - The attitude of the 
(who had fought as a miinr ^ erS 3S Manuel L. Quezon 

< c »»src;, Ara " lc ““ cup8 - 



PHILIPPINES 



THE S. S. MACTAN COMES THROUGH 



The full story of how Filipino and American ivounded were evacuated by the Red Cross on the 
mercy ship, ”S. S Mactan,” from Manila to Australia, a few hours before the Japanese occupation of the 
Philippine Capital. 



She was an old-fashioned little ship, perhaps, but 
friendly and familiar to thousands of Filipinos. They recog- 
nized her black hull and her white superstructure, her 
single funnel with the feather of smoke drifting skyward, 
her prow slitting the waters at a proud twelve knots. 

Twenty years ago, she was the fastest inter-island ship 
in the Philippines. She used to make trips out of Manila, 
down through the curling blue waters to the Visayas, to 
Mindanao, as far as the Sulu islands, carrying schoolbooks 
and sewing machines, students coming home for the holi- 
days and business men out to line up a deal in Cebu, and 
government officials coming down to Zamboanga on an 
inspection trip. 



HER name was the Mactan . 

She had served out her time well, and she was tired. But 
her career had not ended. One day in December, 1941, 
planes came out of the sun and poured death onto the 
Philippines. The bombs pitted Manila, aimed especially 
at the strategic docks. They plunged through the docks of 
anchored ships, they tore through masts and rigging, they 
ate great gaping holes in fat freighter hulls. One after an- 
other, the trapped vessels settled to the bottom. By De- 
cember 29, only one ship was left: the Mactan. Her very 
name recalled valor and defiance for Mactan is the island 
where, in 1521, freedom-loving Filipinos killed the invader 
Ferdinand Magellan, who discovered the Philippines for 
Spain. 




Filipino doctors and nurses from the Mercy ship " Mactan .” These were the men and women who nursed the wounded 
soldiers from Manila to Australia. At present they are detailed to various military units by the U. S. government. Front row, 
left to right: Mrs. Visitacion C. Rodriguez, Mrs. Salud Valencerina, Mrs. Miriam Fowles, Miss Bastlta Hernando, Mrs. Maxima 
C. Aspiras, Miss Dolores Bolante, Mrs. Elisa Domingo. Second row: Mrs. Mercedes Santos. Doctors Manuel Escudero, Con- 
rado Topacio, Gregorio Chita, Francisco J. Roman, Bernardo Limlingan, lreneo Pantangco, Mtss Maria Perez. Last row: 
Dr. Benjamin Setias, and nurses George Golookeff, Pedro Carpio and Apolinar Sanchez. 



3 



PHILIPPINE^ 



There was violence in Manila Bay on that day. The 
capital had been declared an open city. Filipino and Ameri- 
can forces had evacuated before the overwhelming num- 
bers of the enemy. President Manuel L. Quezon, with his 
family and official staff, had moved to Corregidor. The gal- 
lant defense of Bataan under General Douglas MacArthur 
was soon to begin. 

In MANILA were 224 wounded soldiers, 157 of them 
Americans and 67 Filipinos. To leave them to the Japanese 
— who would be within the city gates any time now — 
might mean consigning them to death. The Philippine 
Chapter of the Red Cross took over the old Mactan, called 
for volunteers to care for the wounded en route to an 
unnamed destination. Volunteers had to be unmarried and 
obviously expendable. 

Six young doctors, twelve nurses and two attendants 
came forward. Manila-born were Dr. Gregorio Penaflor 
Chua and Dr. Irineo Enriquez Pantangco. Dr. Francisco 
Jose Roman came from Batanes, in the northernmost part 
of the Philippines, and Dr. Manuel Miguel Escudero from 
Zamboanga in the far south. Dr. Conrado Stuart Topacio 
was from Cavite and Dr. Aguilus Limlingan, from Pampan- 
ga. In addition, there was an American medical officer, Colo- 
nel Percy G. Carroll, commandant of the U. S. army’s 
Sternberg Hospital in Manila. 

Of THE twelve nurses, ten were Filipinos, also from the 
various provinces. Two of them, Apolinario G. Sanchez 
and Pedro Carpio, were male. The others were Basilia 
Dunapay Hernando, Elisa Nava Domingo, Mercedes V. 
Santos, Maximina Corpus, Salud Ferrer Valencerina, Do- 
lores Alacantara Bolante, Visitacion Cortes and Maria Al- 
centara Perez. The two attendants were also Filipinos. 

By the afternoon of December 31 this group had be- 
come a closely-knit, hard-working unit. From the various 
military hospitals they had transported the wounded sol- 
diers and carried them aboard the Mactan . 

They worked until long after nightfall, when the Mac- 
tan began its odyssey, under the command of Captain 
Julian Tamayo, with a crew of eighty Filipino seamen. 

The ship was jampacked. Eighty of the wounded were 
bedridden, and the other 144 were suffering from shell- 
shock. There were wounded men everywhere from stem 
to stern — three to a mattress — on decks and below decks. 

T HE FIRST stop was at nearby Corregidor for military 
orders. Since the Mactan was an inter-island steamer, she 
had no ocean charts. But at Corregidor, the Captain got 
hold of a map from a geography textbook. 

Before dawn the ship again weighed anchor. A pilot 
boat guided her through the mine-infested bay out into the 
open sea. 

The China sea was rough. It tossed the wounded men 
around mercilessly. Doctors and nurses were on 24-hour 
duty during the whole voyage. 

One of the patients was Salvador Deyem, a Filipino 
soldier from the Ilocos. Deyem had seen action in Lim 



gayen during the first Japanese landing attempts. His left 
arm had been amputated in a Manila hospital, and on 
board it was necessary to operate again, amputating at 
the shoulder. 

DeYEM’s last thoughts were about the war and the 
enemy, I wish I could kill more Japanese,” he whispered, 
They are easy to kill. They do not seek for cover.” 

Several days later, the Mactan reached Macassar in in- 
vasion-threatened Celebes. The Dutch officials furnished 
much-needed food, water and medical supplies. Here the 
ship picked up an additional patient, an American sailor 
afflicted with poliomyelitis. Here also Salvador Deyem and 
another Filipino patient were buried. 

Fifteen days out of Manila, the Mactan reached Darwin, 
Australia. Here the Red Cross workers presented a com- 
plete medical report to the Australian Army Medical 
Corps. Captain Tamayo was ordered to proceed to Sydney, 
by way of Townsville and Brisbane. 



Between Townsville and Brisbane, fire broke out in 
the engine room. While the medical staff was reassuring 
the patients, Private Jose Senarosa, a wounded Filipino sol- 
dier, offered to go down into the engine room. Armed 
with a gas mask and a fire extinguisher, he braved smoke 
and flames to put out the fire. 

Between Brisbane and Sydney, an 18-year old Filipino 
patient, whose left arm had been amputated, and who ap- 
parently could no longer stand further suffering, jumped 
overboard. His body was never • recovered. 



arrived at its destination. The patients were ’transferred to 
an Australian Army Hospital. 

"After the novelty of our "heroism” wore off, we found 
ourselves billeted in a Sydney hotel and subjected to a Ion* 
penod of enforced idleness,” said Dr. Roman, senior mem° 

StooS? Staff ° n the ^ in -port to 



tzzg? in 108 Angei “ :Cd 

ill, were commissioned’irdiruTite^Sm^^T 6 Sed ° USl 
lieutenants, and assigned to the First et Amiy aS firs 
Regiment now training in California LaJr the™ 
to the Medical Field Service Srh^i 7 * ey were sen 
vania, over whose main entrance i ^ Car !‘ sle ’ Penns y! 
from Jeremy Taylor: "TO PRESFR a < l uotatio1 

IN MIDST OF CHANCES aStT^ A MAN ALIV] 
GREAT A MIRACLE A^TC^CRF J12 7 STlLni E s IS A: 

Four of the women nurse^re ^ HIM ” 

Street Settlement in New Yo 1 rT Servin S at the Henr 
Methodist Hospital i n Los Angeles Tl “ ™ k ' mg at th ' 
are with the California tt„- b ■ 1 le two male nurse 

cisco. ma Umversit y Hospital in San Fran 

And the old Mactan when sh, 
months ago, was in war r •. Was Hst heard of son* 

ervice in the Southwest Pacific 



4 



PHILIPPINES 




Alberto Navarrete 

Citation: “THE DISTINGUISHED SERV- 
ICE CROSS TO ALBERTO NAVARRETE, 
Captain, Offshore Patrol, Philippine Army, 
for extraordinary heroism in action neajr 
Lamao, Bataan, Philippine Islands, on Janu- 
ary 17, 1942. While two Q-Boats of 1st Q- 
Boat Squadron, Offshore Patrol, under com- 
mand of Captain Navarrete, were on patrol 
duty in Manila Bay off the east coast of Ba- 
taan, a group of nine enemy dive-bombers 
appeared and began attacking nearby shore 
objectives. Without thought of seeking per- 
sonal safety or of leaving the scene of action 
as he might easily have done, Captain Navar- 
rete maneuvered the boats of his squadron 
at high speed to positions from which he 
could attack the hostile planes. When sub- 
jected to dive-bombing attack by the enemy 
planes, he continued the fire of his machine 
guns with such accuracy that at least three 
of the hostile air-craft were hit and badly 
damaged and the enemy forced to discontinue 
the attack” 

When two waves of Japanese bombers began attacking 
military installations along the east coast of Bataan, Capt. 
Navarrete, then in command of two Q-Boats on patrol duty 
in Manila Bay along the Bataan shore lines, knew that 
from their exposed position he and his men were in grave 
danger; but instead of ordering his men to run for cover 
as they might have done very easily, he gave orders to 
stay out in the open and be on the alert. 

Each man stood, tense and ready, behind his respective 
post, with every machine gun primed for action, while 
the little Q-Boats recklessly sped toward the enemy planes. 
And as soon as these were within striking distance, Capt. 
Navarrete issued the command to commence firing. A dead- 
ly barrage of 50-caliber bullets met the attacking planes. 
And even when the planes started dive-bombing, the Q- 
Boats held to their positions, firing back in defiance as if 
the crew that manned them were deathless in their daring. 

Then one of the planes started wobbling in mid-air. It 
had been hit. It was the leader of the enemy squadron. 
Then two more planes started whirling about, trailing 
black smoke and now heading toward Formosa. The other 
( Continued on page 6) 



Pedro Q. Molina 

Citation: “THE DISTINGUISHED SERV- 
ICE CROSS TO PEDRO Q. MOLINA, Captain, 
First Provisional Infantry Battalion (Air 
Corps), Philippine Army, for extraordinary 
heroism in action at Nagaasa Point, Bataan, 
Philippine Islands, on January 25, 1942. Dur- 
ing a concerted and extensive attack upon 
enemy positions, the unit which Captain 
Molina was serving as liaison officer was tem- 
porarily stopped and pinned to the ground 
by intense machine gun fire. Observing that 
an officer lying about twenty yards to his 
front was seriously wounded and bleeding 
profusely, he rushed forward to the aid of 
the wounded officer, without considering the 
hazards of the hail of enemy machine gun 
fire in the area, and carried him to safety 
behind the lines. The life of the wounded 
officer was saved by his prompt and heroic 
act.” 

If it is true that war brings out the worst in man, Capt. 
Molina’s action in saving the life of a comrade at the risk 
of his own proves that war also brings out the best in man. 

Capt. Molina was liaison officer of a unit which was part 
of the combined troops of the U. S. Army Air Corps and 
P. I. Army Air Corps, and assigned to defend that particular 
area in the vicinity of Nagaasa Point, Bataan. Toward the 
latter part of January 1942, the Japanese, coming in barges 
from Olongapo, were able to effect a landing at a point 
in Aglaloma Bay. In the furious skirmish that followed, 
the unit in which Capt. Molina was serving, was exposed 
to concentrated machine-gun fire, and temporarily pinned 
to the ground while death took its toll of the gallant de- 
fenders. 

At the height of the fury of battle, Capt. Molina ob- 
served that another officer, Capt. Onrubia, lay about twenty 
yards away right in the path of the enemy fire, seriously 
wounded and bleeding profusely. Forgetful of his own 
safety, he rushed to the aid of his fallen comrade and 
carried him to a safe spot behind the lines. Capt. Molina 

received a bullet wound in the thigh, but Capt. Onrubia s 

life was saved. 

( Continued on page 6) 



June 15, 1943 



5 




Filipinos Hear from Quezon 
On Memorial Day 

In a Memorial Day address broadcast to the Philippines, 
President Quezon paid tribute to the memory of the Un- 
known Soldier whose story of "unflinching courage and 
loyalty unto death ... is written in blood, in the forests 
and hills of Bataan and on the rock that is Corregidor. 

The President said: "Memorial Day this year finds us 
still engaged in the grim task of winning the war. Behind 
us are memories of blood and suffering, of battles fought 
and lost. Ahead of us is the hope and promise of certain 
victory. While we move steadily forward to that certain 
day, it is well for us to pause a moment and pay tribute to 
the memory of the Unknown Soldier. From his gallant 
example we must gather strength and vision for the giant, 
grim task that lies ahead of us. His was unflinching courage, 
his was loyalty unto death. His story is written in blood, 
in the forests and hills of Bataan and on the rock that is 
Corregidor. 

"It is a story of supreme sacrifice. He and his comrades 
fought to the bitter end, knowing that they themselves 
had no hope. They were a lost battalion — men doomed to 
certain defeat. And yet, when the Battle of the Philippines 
was over, Secretary of State Cordell Hull could say to the 
world: 'Corregidor and Bataan stand for reverses that are 
but preludes to victory.’ For there is such a thing as losing 
in victory, and winning even in defeat. Our soldiers fought 
a forlorn-hope battle, and they lost. But not in vain. For 
with their blood they have earned for us the respect of the 
world, the undying friendship of America, the comrade- 
ship of thirty-one United Nations. Shoulder to shoulder 
with these gallant allies we shall, in God s good time, 
march onward to victory.” 

Continuing, he reminded our countrymen in the 
Philippines that the same promise of independence given 
by Premier Tojo during his visit to Manila was given to 
the men of Bataan and Correigidor, who paid no heed to it 
because they knew what had happened to China, Man- 
chukuo, and Korea. 

"Not many weeks ago, on the anniversary of the Fall o 
Corregidor, Premier Tojo came to Manila to reiterate 
Japan’s promise of independence. That same promise had 
been given to the men of Bataan and Corregidor. But there 
was only one answer, and that answer was sounded at the 
mouth of their guns. Those men knew history. They have 
read it as it is written on the face of China, Manchukuo and 
Korea. They knew that surrender to Japan could only mean 
one thing — the surrender of our human freedom and dig- 
nity — the death of our ancestors’ dream of a free and inde- 
pendent Philippines. 

"That is why they fought though they knew that they 
themselves had no hope. And though we mourn over their 
graves today, though our country groans under the iron 
heel of the invader, still we know in our heart of hearts 
( Continued on page 7) 



Alberto Navarette . . . 

Japanese planes followed. And so, temporarily at least, 
all was quiet again on the Bataan eastern front. 

Capt. Navarrete, the hero of this brief encounter, is a 
slender and tall, handsome lad, so bashful and unassuming 
that the honor that came upon him as his due as a result of 
t is intrepid action, must have embarrassed him no little. 
He was only doing his duty was his self-effacing remark. 

Born in Pangasinan and educated in Philippine public 
schools, he was a third year engineering student at the 
Mapua Institute of Technology when he enrolled as cadet 
m the Phihppine Constabulary Academy from which he 
graduated in 1935. 

Where his brother-in-arms Capt. Molina was gay and 
ull of life, Navarrete was pensive, and much too serious 

and quie^efficiency. ' “ ^ ^ hi$ pleasin S P ers °nality 

of Fehru^rVT ^ 7 w heard , from — k was the latter part 
of February-he and his men in their frail, speedy Q-Boats 

were still patrolling the coasts of Manila Bay, hoping to 

make good and real to the bitter end that litde phrasf of 

S/St rCte ^ hlS men karned in school aVd knew 
No by shall invad/BY s 
Trample our sacred shored’ 

Pedro Q. Molina . . . 

Capt. Molina, or P. O n k ... 

thoroughly progressive young FilipS” tat 

genial camaraderie and winning personality h° rpS ' ^ 
among officers and enlisted men. * Y ’ made fnends 

Educated at the Ateneo de Manila h* a , 
pine Army a few years after the nVc '? ed 116 Philip- 
Defense Act, and in 1938 came to g ^ “ 

on"Lr ( o, U , P d and later 
underwent training in Chanute Field He al “ 

to the Philippines in the spring oflS," “T"® 6 * 
can wife, a former army nurst in T ° WUh hlS Amen ' 
James Dickson. She is a native of OklT S ’ M ‘ SS Vir 8 inia 
the Captain is a nephew of Preairl^ la homa. Incidentally, 

icsiaent Quezon. 

It is presumed that Capt. Molina • 
one of the Japanese prison camns J ?° W a P nsoner 111 
pines. But wherever he may be P fhn Cre ln the Phili P‘ 
and remember him with fond' se w .h° know him well 
be spreading cheer and hnh» neSS ’ ° e heve that he must 
for a prison camp does n^t ^j? n ® ^ e ^ ow prisoners, 
like P. Q. 1 spirit of a soldier 



6 



PHILIPPINES 



Filipinos May Now Become Officers 
In U. S. Merchant Marine 



Successful negotiations have just been concluded by 
the Philippine Resident Commissioner with the Secretary 
of the Navy, through the Department of the Interior, to 
allow qualified Filipinos to become officers in the United 
States Merchant Marine. 

A year ago the Resident Commissioner obtained from 
the Secretary of the Navy a waiver of the statutory citizen- 
ship requirement "to permit citizens or subjects of the 
Philippine Islands to be employed as unlicensed members 
of the crew of vessels of the United States, irrespective of 
the limitation of the statute as to the percentage of aliens 
who may be so employed." 

§OON after the acceptance of the Philippine Indepen- 
dence Act or on June 25, 1936, Congress passed the 
Merchant Marine Act, which in effect included Filipino 
seamen among those classified as aliens by not permitting 
them to serve in American vessels, cargo or passenger, 
except within the limitation of the 25 per centum, quota, 
allowed to aliens. On June 29, 1936 another Merchant 
Marine Act was passed under which Filipino seamen were 
further excluded from serving in subsidized American 
cargo vessels. Under this act, Filipino seamen were per- 
mitted employment only as members of the Stewards’ De- 
partment in subsidized American passenger vessels if they 
fell within the limited percentage of iliens allowed for 
employment. 

The pertinent provisions of the Merchant Marine Act 
of June 29, 1936, are as follows: 

"Section 302 (a) All licensed officers of vessels docu- 
mented under the laws of the United States, as now required 
by law, shall be citizens of the Untied States, native-born or 
completely naturalized; and upon each departure from the 
United States of a cargo vessel, it respect of which a con- 
struction or operation subsidy has been granted, all of the 
crew (crew including all employees of the ship) shall be 



citizens of the United States, native-born or completely nat- 
uralized. 

"(b) For a period of one year after the effective date of 
this Act, upon each departure from the United States of a 
passenger vessel, in respect of which a construction or opera- 
tion subsidy has been granted, all licensed officers shall be 
citizens of the United States, as defined above, and no less 
than SO per centum of the crew (crew including all members 
of the ship other than officers) shall be citizens of the United 
States, native-born or completely naturalized, and thereafter, 
the percentage of citizens as defined above shall be increased 
5 per centum per annum until 90 per centum of the entire 
crew, including all licensed officers of any such vessel, shall 
be citizens of the United States, native-born or completely 
naturalized. 

" (c) Any member of the crew not required by this sec- 
tion to be citizens of the United States, may be an alien only 
if he is in possession of a valid declaration of intention to 
become citizen of the United States, or other evidence of 
legal admission to the United States for permanent residence. 
Such alien as defined above may be employed only in the 
stewards’ department on passenger vessels.” 

Since the enactment of this Act, thousands of Filipino 
able seaman, who have served in the United States Merchant 
Marine vessels for many years, had been removed from the 
service, being neither citizens of the United States, native- 
born, nor completely naturalized. 

It is apparent that the suspension of the provisions of this 
Act as they affect Filipinos, has been made possible through 
the Second War Powers Act, 1942, which gives the Secre- 
tary of the Navy the authority to waive compliance with 
the navigation laws to the extent deemed necessary in the 
conduct of the war. 

Furthermore, this suspension by the Secretary of the 
Navy, of the citizenship requirements for officers and unli- 
censed seamen on the United States Merchant Marine 
vessels, has opened a new avenue for Filipino Seamen 
toward further participation in the all out war efforts of 
the United States. 



( Continued f rom page 6) 

that their answer was the only answer to the challenge of 
freedom — for only those are fit tc live in freedom, who are 
not afraid to die for freedom.’ 

Concluding his address in Tigalog, he reiterated our 
determination to keep faith with the honored dead, and 
our hope of final allied victory. 

"Mga kababayan: Ang araw r,a ito ay ininukol sa mga 
namatay sa pagtatanggol ng kmilang bayan at ng kala- 
yaan. Tayung mga Filipino ay dapat sumumpa minsan pana 
hindi tayo titiguil hangang hindi natamo ang mitbi ng ating 
mga kapatid at anak na namatay sa Bataan at Corregidor. 
Ang araw ng ating tagumpay ay da'ating. Umasa kayo. 

X N the same broadcast, Mrs. Quezon addressed herself to 



"the mothers of the Philippines, especially those who lost 
their sons’’ during the war. She said: 

"We are the Guardians of the home. In this holy citadel 
we must resolve to preserve at whatever cost our Christian 
ideals, our Christian culture, our Christian way of life. We 
must preserve the Filipino home, as our soldiers in Bataan 
and Corregidor would want us to — as the symbol of all 
that is true and beautiful, of all that is worth fighting for 
and dying for." 

Father Pacifico Ortiz, of the President’s staff, also spoke 
to the Filipino people. He said that in honoring the memory 
of the Unknown Soldier, "we honor each and every one of 
our soldiers who died for our country." He stated that it 
was "tragic" that "we should call him the Unknown Sol- 
dier," for "he is not really unknown to you, he might have 
been your own son, father, husband or sweetheart." 



June 15, 1943 



7 




For Safekeeping 

A RRANGEMENTS have been made for the Philippine 
National Bank in New York to accept for safekeeping, for 
the duration, war bonds, insurance policies, wills, bank 
books, and other valuable papers of Filipinos in the Armed 
Forces of the United States. Those who wish to avail them- 
selves of this service are requested to send their documents 
by registered mail to Mr. Joseph H. Foley, Manager of the 
Philippine National Bank, 25 Broadway, New York City, 
who will issue the corresponding receipts. 



California, range from 1500 to 4000 dollars under favorable 
working conditions. 

There are about 150 Filipinos in Ventura County en- 
gaged in farm labor, mostly in the citrus industry. Lemon 
and orange pickers get 28 cents plus 14 cents for every 
box. Each picker averages from 35 to 40 boxes a day. Vege- 
table farms pay 60 to 65 cents per hour. About 25 families 
live in this county. 

InReedly and vicinity, there are around 50 farmers whose 
average income is easily 1000 dollars a year. Picking grapes 
yields from 60 to 75 cents an hour. Contract jobs which 
last from 25 to 30 days yield pickers as high as 25 dollars 
a day. They average 10 dollars daily. Last year there were 
more than 15 families, but members drifted to Vallejo for 
defense jobs. 



☆ ☆ ☆ 



Report to the Filipino People 

P RESIDENT QUEZON’S Report to the Filipino People, 
an address broadcast to the Philippines via short-wave from 
Washington, D. C., on February 20, 1943, and published 
in Vol. Ill, No. 2 of Philippines, is now available in 
pamphlet form. 

Copies may be obtained free of charge by writing to the 
Office of Special Services, Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines, 1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W., Washington, 
D. C. 

☆ ☆ ☆ 

Filipinos in Defense and Farm Work 

ARIOUS reports received by the Nationals Division, 
Office of the Philippine Resident Commissioner, from heads 
of Filipino organizations and councils, indicate that Fili- 
pinos in the United States are either working or fighting 

In Vallejo California, where nearly 75 Filipino families 
live in the city and vicinity, about 1000 Filipinos are gain- 
fully occupied in the Navy Yard, and average 88 cents per 
hour. 

Over 400 Filipino families in San Diego proper and San 
Diego county, most of whom are connected with the navy 
in one way or the other, factories and shipyards, have an 
earning capacity of 40 dollars a week. 

More than 100 Filipinos are employed in shipyards, 
railroads, and on farms in Portland, Oregon, where there 
are around 25 families in residence. 

Shipyard workers in Richmond, California, number ap- 
proximately 150 working as helpers and trainees. Trainees 
employed as welders, shipfitters, and machinists receive from 
1.05 to 1.35 per hour; helpers get from 95 cents to 1.15 
per hour. 

The annual income of 11 Filipino families in Fresno, 



NlNETY-FIVE per cent of the Filipinos in Oakland 
work in defense industries; 70 per cent of them are em- 
ployed in Mare Island, and the rest in the Naval Supply 
Depot at West Oakland and the Naval Air Depot in 
Alameda. They average 95 cents per hour. There were about 
100 Filipino families in Alameda and Contra Costa counties 
at the time this data was secured, but since then an influx of 
workers might have swollen the number of families en- 
gaged in defense work. 



In Seattle, Filipinos work as smelters, earning an average 
of 44 dollars a week. Those engaged in making mattresses 
for the army earn 90 cents per hour. Farmers earn 125 
dollars a month with board and lodging. 



Some of the Filipinos in Salinas are labor contractors. 
Each one runs his own camp for the companies which 
operate the farms around this locality. Others work on car- 
rot, lettuce, sugar beets fields, and on other vegetable fields 
The average size of farms where they work is 1000 acre^ 
Work lasts 10 month: in a year. Filipino contractors aver- 
ts 6 from 15 to 20 me, working in their camps, but before 
the war they kept from 60 to 85 men working under them. 

The Representative cf the Office of the Philippine Resi- 
dent Commissioner, Wetern Division, summarizes his find- 
ings after a visit to Filipp communities in Phoenix Yuma, 
Somerton, El Centro, Sar Diego, and Los Angeles, thus 

cents per hour. Most* of fr ° m fifty t0 sixty ' 

however, are working 01 piece ™°\?' ^ ncu * tura * ^borers, 
wage, under the latter arrangement 7 f aS1S Q The avera S e 
a day. Some workers whc are verv effi • r ° m 8 t0 10 doUaIS 
fifteen dollars a day. At the end f C1 ? nt eam aS muc ^ aS 

engaged in cutting lettuce, bunchinTr™ 111 ^ ? e ° ple Were 
citrus fruits.” ® carrots and harvesting 



* * * 



8 



PHILIPPINES 



Valdes Traces History . . . 

( continued from page 2) 

tion forces), underwent a profound change as they realized 
more and more that America truly intended to give inde- 
pendence to the Philippines as soon as feasible. The spirit 
of Filipino hostility and scepticism was gradually replaced 
by a spirit of cooperation and mutual goodwill. 

T HE policy pursued by die United States is dramatically 
illustrated in a story told by Luther Parker, an American 
educator sent to the Philippines in the early years of the 
American administration. Parker landed at Manila on a 
transport bearing six hundred American school teachers, 
all of whom had been sent for the purpose of bringing 
enlightenment to the great mass of the people among 
whom ignorance had been encouraged by the Spanish 
regime as an instrument of subservience. Parker arrived 
at a small village on the island of Luzon, where the children 
crowded about him crying in their native language: "Teach 
us English! Teach us English!” Parker took one of the 
children on his knee, and the first English words he taught 
that child were: "I am a Filipino.” Here is the epitome of 
the policy which America set out to accomplish in the 
Philippines. Parker did not teach the child to say: "I am an 
American subject.” Instead, he began at once to create in 
the child’s mind the aware- 
ness of his own importance as 
a Filipino and of his own re- 
sponsibility to prepare him- 
self for citizenship in a free 
and independent country. 

With the improvement of 
mutual understanding be- 
tween the Americans and the Filipinos, there began an 
adventure in cooperation which was to last for forty years 
and which has been hailed as the ideal relationship between 
a large nation and a smaller one — the sort of relationship 
which was later to become the keystone of the Atlantic 
Charter. 

"Wrm American educators luke Luther Parker came 
also American doctors, engineers, and administrators. There 
was much to be done. Centuries of oppression an unrest 
had left their mark on the country. The health o r e P eo " 
pie was poor. Epidemics were taking their toll y te 
hundreds of thousands. Education was a luxury, aval a e 
only to the privileged few. Philippine economy was is- 
rupted, and the people were impoverished. Medieval means 
of communication hampered political unification. 

Through widespread education, the American adminis- 
tration set out to reverse the usual colonial policy of 1 - 
vide and conquer.” Many institutions of higher leaning, 
like the University of the Philippines were founded. The 
literacy of the Filipinos increased by leaps and bounds. 
The circulation of newspapers and magazines rapidly mul- 
tiplied, with the raising of the educational level. 

The political development of the Islands was equally 
remarkable. 



President McKinley keynoted the policy which America 
was to follow faithfully for forty years, when he said: "The 
Philippines are ours, not to exploit but to develop, to 
civilize, to educate, to train in the science of self-govern- 
ment. This is the path of duty which we must follow or be 
recreant to a mighty trust committed to us.” 

Everyone in the Philippines was subject to Filipino- 
made laws. The Americans maintained no special courts of 
their own — when they broke Philippine law, they were 
prosecuted by Filipinos and tried by Philippine courts pre- 
sided over by Filipino judges. 

The altruistic attitude expressed by President McKinley 
was reiterated by successive American presidents. More 
and more Filipinos came to participate in the administra- 
tion of the government. Finally, in 1916, Manuel L. Quezon 
— then Resident Commissioner — brought back to the Phil- 
ippines the Jones Law, signed by Woodrow Wilson, grant- 
ing increased autonomy to the Philippines. 

PHILIPPINE Senate was now elected, with Mr. 
Quezon as the head. At this stage, most of the members 
of the Governor General’s Cabinet and of the Supreme 
Court were also Filipinos. 

Still later, in 1934, the American Congress passed, and 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed, the Philippine 

Independence Act known as 
the Tydings-McDuffie Act. 
This Act, the last step toward 
fulfilling every promise made 
by the United States regard- 
ing Philippine independence, 
provided that the people of 
the Philippines should draft a 
constitution and set up a democratic government capable 
of assuming all of the functions of an independent republic 
at the end of a ten-year transition period. 

Under the Tydings-McDuffie Act, the Filipino people 
proceeded at once to draft a constitution and to establish 
the transitional Commonwealth Government. 

On November 15, 1935, the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines was inaugurated, with two longtime leaders of 
Filipino participation in the American regime, Manuel L. 
Quezon and Sergio Osmena, as President and vice-president 
respectively. In the second Commonwealth national elec- 
tion, on November 11, 1941, President Quezon and Vice 
President Osmena were re-elected by an overwhelming 
majority. 

Then came December 7, 1941. Without warning — at 
Pearl Harbor, Midway and in the Philippines — Japan 
attacked. The Japanese expected the conquest of the Phil- 
ippines would be an easy task. They counted upon re- 
sistance only by the 14,000 American troops stationed in 
the Islands under the command of General MacArthur. 
But to the eternal surprise of the Japanese, the 17,000,000 
Filipinos instantly sprang to the defense of their country 
and of the American flag. Under the leadership of President 
Quezon, 92,000 Filipino soldiers took their place beside 
their American comrades, ready to fight and die as allies. 



Text of the address delivered by Maj. Gen. 
Basilio J. Valdes at Loyola University, New 
Orleans, Louisiana, on May 10, 1943. 



June 15, 1943 



9 




They knew from the record of the American administra- 
tion of their country that the destiny of the Filipino people 
lay with democratic America — not with the Japanese em- 
pire. In the battles that followed, 20,000 of them sacrificed 
their lives. 

fjVEN now, though much of the territory of the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth is occupied by the enemy, in the 
mountains of Luzon and Mindanao, elements of the Phil- 
ippine Army which evaded capture are resisting and harass- 
ing the invaders, by Japan’s own admission. Among the 
civilian population of the Commonwealth, Japanese efforts 
to win support are met with defiance. In the United States, 
thousands of Filipino soldiers — such as the U. S. Army s 
First and Second Filipino Regiments in California — train 
in preparation for the orders which will launch them into 
combat with the enemy. And in Washington, President 
Quezon — undaunted by the ordeals through which he and 
his nation have passed — tirelessly directs the continuing 
struggle of the Commonwealth against the invader. 

The Japanese, meanwhile, outdo themselves — though 
unsuccessfully — to persuade the people of the Philippines 
that Japan has no designs on their country and will give 
the Filipinos "independence” as a partner in "Greater East 
Asia” (Japan’s phrase for "Japanese-dominated slave- 
states”). The reason for the failure of the Japanese to 
make any real impression upon the Filipino people with 
the "independence” argument is clear enough. The Fili- 
pinos, schooled in the democratic tradition, know how to 
apply common sense to the dissection of propaganda. 

ThE Philippine Army, though barely five years old and 
composed almost exclusively of young men in their twen- 
ties, proved its worth against Japanese soldiers many of 
whom were veterans of former battles in China. The mag- 
nificent showing of our boys proved that our program 
of National Defense, planned by General MacArthur, ap- 
proved by President Quezon, and successfully carried out 
by the United States Military IVIission and the General 
Staff of the Philippine Army, has been sound. 

The gallantry of the Filipino soldiers in Luzon, Bataan, 
and Corregidor has earned for the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines the priceless right to be recognized on its own 
merit as an equal in the brotherhood of arms in the nations 
of the world. 

Today as our thoughts go back a year ago to that blood- 
stained bit of land on the other side of the Pacific, we see 
in perspective, long strides that have been taken since, 
toward keeping faith with those who fought and died in 
the Philippines. 

The young Filipinos and Americans who fought and died 
in Bataan and elsewhere were brothers-in-arms in a battle 
that will live forever in the annals of gallantry. Their cour- 
age and their sacrifice will shine the brighter in the course 
of the years as we realize more and more how much they 
meant to us who have been left behind to carry on; 
especially when we think that they were fighting for such 
things as democracy, peace, and tranquility of existence 
things which, in their desperate plight, they could never 
hope to enjoy again. 



I saw those men fight. I was with them through their 
terrible ordeal. I saw untrained Filipino soldiers, hardly 
out of their teens, turn into veteran soldiers overnight. 
I saw your American boys, most of whom had never been 
under fire, fighting like heroes. I saw the wounded suffering 
quietly, and the Japanese bombs dropping viciously on the 
field hospitals clearly marked with the red cross of mercy. 
I saw the Japanese planes roaring continuously overhead, 
and the shells from the Japanese artillery crashing every- 
where, and the snipers’ bullets whipping through the 
underbrush. 



T WENTY THOUSAND Filipinos and three thousand 
Americans died for freedom on Bataan and other Philippine 
battlefields. One does not speak often of abstract ideals 
under fire, but I know that in their hearts burned the living 
memory of their homes and their kinfolk and their love of 
freedom. 

Our Filipino soldiers willingly made their sacrifice for 
liberty— for they were the youth of a people who had 
tasted freedom and were determined never to give it up; 
Forty years ago, America came to the Philippines with 
promises of freedom and independence. She had kept those 
promises, by her laws and by her acts. When the Japanese 
attacked our land, in 1941, we Filipinos were one of the 
few truly free nations in all the Far East, and we were 
advancing rapidly toward the day when the Philippine 
Republic would be established. 

As America had kept faith with us, so we too were de- 
termined to keep faith with America. The heroes of 
Bataan, and their brothers in the United States and Hawaii 
are redeeming in their daily acts the pledge of our beloved 
President which he expressed in these words: "We stand 
with the United States in life and in death ” 

About a year ago, I had occasion to say that Bataan 
should not get lost in the mists of legends. For Bataan 
be ongs to history. It belongs to us, Filipinos and Americans 
alike. Then Bataan had just fallen— and many were the 
words of praise lavished on the heroes of the Philinnines 
And I said, "Words become feeble in the needs of “he 
moment, in the crying challenge for action.” For Bataan 
was not only a symbol: It was a challenge. 

In ONE y JAR, I am happy t0 say, that challenge has 
been answered wherever democracy is still a living symbol 

— out in the factories that run full bhcT ^ . c , 

a day; on the fields where busy hands 7 ali 7 7* 
producing the foods that the allied nations at war need^in 
the seas where our boys keep constant vigil, fightin* of- 
fering, and dying; in the sheltered quiet of many a home 
where, daily, prayers are lifted for those of their youth 

who are now on the many battle fronts of the world or 
are reported missing or dead. worm, or 

In one year we have answered th , chall ( „ 

w„h more guns, more tanks, more planes, and a more de 
,e, mined pledge to carry „„ until firlaI ° 

In one year, we can truthfully say tha, indeed Bamn 
was not the end, that it wnc nni„ , , mc 

prelude to ultimate victory— Q ur Victory 6 eglnmnS ’ the 



10 



PHILIPPINES 




THEY CALL IT PACIFIC. By Clark Lee. New York: The 
Viking Press, 1943 ■ 374 pp- $3.00. 

SUEZ TO SINGAPORE. By Cecil Brown. New York: Ran- 
dom House, 1942. 545 pp. $3.50. 



The WHOLE world is now aware of the fact that the 
Filipinos were the only people living under an alien flag 
who fought and are still fighting against the Axis. The 
Japanese invasion of the Southwest Pacific was not only a 
test of arms. It is now abundantly clear that it was also a 
weighing of the colonial policies of the western powers. 

These two recent books — one telling the story of the 
brave resistance of the Philippines and the other about the 
collapse of Malaya— testify on how America’s policy was 
validated. 



In HIS book Lee has done an outstanding job of careful, 
straight-from-the-shoulder reporting in the best tradition 
of the American press. He recaptures the reality of the 
people who lived the glories and tragedies of war — the 
stuff that the censors had carved out of the news stories 
he cabled from Manila and Corregidor. Lee gives the facts 
as he saw them or got them from eye witnesses with a 
directness and an understanding of their significance that 
recreates the scene in all its intensity. 

In spite of the confusion arising from the country s un- 
preparedness for war, the Filipinos fought valiantly and 
never doubted to the end that help was indeed coming. 
The assurance of the American officers was enough. 

"Hold everything, Joe,” these American officers would 
say, "Those Japs aren’t too tough. Our help will be here 
any day now. You know me and you can trust me Vr en 
tell you that. Let’s lick hell out of them.” 

It IS A different story that Cecil Brown tells. In Singa- 
pore, an Indian leader says, "We are ready to fig t j* n le 
for the defense of Malaya, but we want to be sure t at you 
British also are ready to fight and die for this country. 

But Lee’s is a story not alone of the magnificent stan ^ 
of the Filipinos and the Americans against t e ne\er 
ending flood of Japanese troops. Before he came to 
Manila, Lee had already watched the Japanese war machine 
in action against China for several years. He ha c ° me 
know many of the Japanese military men, their am ltions 
and plans. And after he escaped from the Philippines he 
covered the Battle of the Coral Sea, the landing on ua a 
canal, riding bombers and aircraft carriers throug i t e 
Southwest Pacific. He tells of his escape from Comg^ot 
on the Doha Nati; of what he saw in Australia, JN 
Caledonia, New Zealand, and Pearl Harbor. 



In ONE of the closing passages Lee tells of a scene which 
he hopes to live long enough to witness: "I want to be there 
when General Douglas MacArthur raises the American 
flag over Corregidor again; and then hauls it down and 
with his own hand raises the flag of the Republic of the 
Philippines, the symbol of a nation which won its right 
to life by learning how to suffer and how to die. 

Cecil Brown is acid in his criticisms of the British civil 
and military officials in Singapore and Malaya. He recounts 
gloomily their lack of foresight, their tardiness in military 
preparation, and their placid assurance that war would not 
come to the Far East. He points out the defects of the 
British policy toward the peoples of Asia and tells of the 
general lack of confidence of these peoples in the British. 
Almost the only relief in his otherwise unflattering picture 
of the British is his constant appreciation of the gallant 
courage of the British and Australian and Indian fighting 
men. 

Brown’s book is, on the whole, uncomfortable and 
yet absorbing reading. It is a day to day account of the ten 
months he spent as a foreign correspondent for Columbia 
Broadcasting System. After escaping from German-con- 
quered Yugoslavia, Brown made his way to Cairo where 
he arrived in May 1941. He covered the Free French and 
British campaign against the Vichy French in Syria, and 
made a short visit to the front of the British Eighth Army 
in the Western Desert of Egypt. Brown was then assigned 
to Singapore where he made his headquarters until about 
three weeks before its fall in February 1942. 

UlS detailed accounts of his never-ending conflicts with 
the British censors are interesting, but do not quite con- 
vince the reader that the writer was invariably right. 

The author’s description of actual scenes are alive with 
action. His account of the sinking of the Prince of Wales 
and the Repulse, which he witnessed from the deck of the 
latter ship, is so vivid that one can see the Japanese bombers 
in formation overhead, and can hear the roar of the diving 
planes and the dull crash of torpedoes. These passages are 
the literary cream of a book which is substantial and con- 
sistently interesting throughout. 

— W.B.C. 

— H.M.R. 

Opinions expressed in this department are those of the 
reviewers and not necessarily of the Philippine government. 



In the next issue of PHILIPPINES will ap- 
pear a review of the latest hook on American- 
Filipino cooperation — 

BEFORE BATAAN AND AFTER 
By Frederic S» Marquardt 



June 15, 1943 



11 



Selected Current Literature 

Books and Pamphlets 

1. Abend, Hallett. Pacific Charter; our destiny in Asia. N. Y., 

Doubleday Doran Co., 1943. 302 p. $2.50. 

2. Marquardt, Frederic S. Before Bataan and After. Indianapolis, 

Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1943. 315 pp. $2.50. 

3. Quezon, Manuel L. Report to the Filipino People; broadcast 

to the Philippines via short wave from Washington, D. C., 
Feb. 20, 1943. Wash., D. C., Office of Special Services, 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, 1943. 10 pp. May be 
obtained free of charge upon request. 

4. Thompson, Paul W. and others. How the Jap Army Fights. 

N. Y., Penguin Books, Inc., cl942. 169 pp. 25c. (See 
Chap. VI: "Lessons of Bataan”, by Col. Milton A. Hill.) 

5. United Nations Information Office, N. Y. The United Nations 

— Who They Are — What They Are Doing. N. Y., U.N.I.O., 
1943. 20 pp. 

6. White, W. L. Queens Die Proudly; a story of the flying fortresses 

which fought in the skies above the Philippines, Java and 
Australia. N. Y., Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1943. $2.50. (To 
be out soon.) 

Periodical Literature 

1. Buaken, Manuel. Our Fighting Love of Freedom. Asia and 
the Americas, June 1943, v. 43, pp. 357-359. 



2. Buck, Pearl S. People, East and West. Asia and the Americas, 

June 1943, v. 43, pp. 328-329. 

3. Bulosan, Carlos. Bataan; poem. Saturday Review of Literature, 

March 20, 1943, v. 26, p. 20. 

4. Bulosan, Carlos. Freedom from Want. Saturday Evening Post, 

March 6, 1943, v. 215, pp. 12-13. 

5. Chandrasekhar, S. Food and population in Asia. Asia and the 

Americas, June 1943, v. 43, pp. 338-342. 

6. Davis, Helen McLaughlin. The Women of Bataan. The 

Woman, June 1943, pp. 13-15. 

7. Gause, Damon J. Escape from Corregidor’s Hell. New York 

Times Magazine, May 2, 1943, pp. 12, 34, 35. 

S. Hernandez, Jaime. Philippine Finances; text of an address 
broadcast to the Filipino people on April 3, 1943. United 
Nations Review, April 15, 1943, v. 3, p. 167. 

9. Menefee, Selden C. Japan’s Global Conceit. Asia and the 
Americas, June 1943, v. 43, pp. 330-332. 

10. Osmena, Sergio. Anniversary of the Tydings-McDuffie Act; die 

text of Vice-President Osmena’s statement on the 9th anni- 
versary of the Tydings-McDuffie Act on March 24, 1943. 
United Nations Review, April 15, 1943, v. 3, p. 166. 

11. Quezon, Manuel L. Quezon’s broadcast; text of the speech to 

the Philippines February 20, 1943. United Nations Review, 
April 15, 1943, v. 3, pp. 167; 168. 

12. Spinks, Charles Nelson. Dictator Tojo. Asia and the Americas, 

June 1943, v. 43, pp. 333-336. 

13. Walsh, Richard J. Repeal Exclusion Laws Now. Asia and the 

Americas, June 1943, v. 43, pp. 322-323. 



Malaria Rampant in 
the Philippines 

IjACK of quinine has resulted in the death of 50,000 
persons in the Philippines since the outbreak of the war, 
according to a statement of the Japanese, as broadcast 
by the Japanese-controlled Manila radio. 

This death toll is in sharp contrast with the annual rate 
of less than 9,000 deaths from malaria in the Philippines 
in 1940. The death rate from this disease was definitely on 
die decline before the war. 

This news report is causing grave concern among Philip- 



PHILIPPINES is published by the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 
Filipinos who desire to receive it regularly are 
requested to notify: The Editor, PHILIPPINES 
1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W., 
Washington, D. C. 



pine Government officials in Washington, because it is 
well known that Japan has under its control almost all of 
the world’s cinchona trees, which furnish the bark from 
which quinine is made. 

It IS possible that the Japanese may be indifferent about 
the fate of the occupied territories, or that they may be 
withholding quinine from the Filipinos in retaliation for 
their lack of cooperation in the "Japanization” program. 
There is the further possibility that the enemy has lost so 
many ships to United Nations forces that he will not risk 
transports even for such vital non-bulky commodities as 
quinine or cinchona bark. 



