The 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 

Of The 

PRESIDENCY 




Her People's Emissary 



A The 

Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 

Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




Her People's Emissary 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 

Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 
Writers/Researchers 

Gloria Georgina Jota (lead writer) 
Minerva Generalao 
Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzonlll 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 

Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Secretary Jose de Jesus - DPWH 
Exec. Director Maria Montelibano - RTVM 
Deputy Director Ida Vargas - RTVM 
Col. Voltaire Gazmin - PSG 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

Neda Secretariat - APO 



ii 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President s 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is.a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "Her People's Emissary", outlines the results of the President's 
quest for international goodwill as well as the meticulous spadework that went 



into the preparations for all of the state visits that made such quest possible. This 
volume also presents the clear contrast between President Aquino's approach to 
the preparation of her state visits to that of her predecessor's. 

This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is 
by no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some 
of those not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
hearts of the people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"The greatest benefit of state visits may well be 
the first-hand knowledge and understanding that 
each leader acquires of another. For in the last 
analysis, it is not historic trends or impersonal 
forces that shape events but peoples as repre- 
sented by their leaders". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

Departure Message for China-Hongkong Visit 
April 14, 1988 



Introduction 



YELLOW MADONNA. JOAN of Arc. Time Magazine's Woman of the Year 
for 1986. These were just some of the international accolades bestowed on Presi- 
dent Corazon C. Aquino, signs that she had gained world renown as a symbol of 
democracy. Her phenomenal ascent to power through the peaceful EDSA revolu- 
tion in February 1986 earned not only for her but for the country as well, the 
respect and goodwill of the international community. 

As a result of her popularity, the President received many invitations for 
state visits to countries which were more than willing to host her. Some of the 
approximately 40 invitations she received were accepted, but a lot had to be 
turned down. The President had to carefully select the invitations to honor as she 
had to prioritize the demands on her time. Her first and foremost criterion for 
choosing which countries to visit was that the visit would produce beneficial 
results for the country. 

But she was also well aware of her role as one of the world's symbols and 
leading proponents of democracy. Thus, her presence in some world events in 
which the primary reason for her being there was as such. 

In her missions abroad, President Aquino took pride in advertising the suc- 
cess of the peaceful EDSA revolution and the courage and unbreakable spirit of 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



the Filipino people that made it possible; thereby implicitly sharing credit for her 
newfound role. 

This role was clearly emphasized by Prime Minister Michel Rocard of France 
during the dinner he hosted for President Aquino on July 12, 1 989: "Your pres- 
ence in Paris, on the eve of the 14th of July is, in our eyes, a token of the 
universality and constant validity of the principles that guide our democracies: 
the respect of dignity and the promotion of human rights, the furtherance of 
equality and the safeguard of liberty. You are most highly respected by all my 
compatriots through your personal courage and your determination in promot- 
ing democracy". 

President Aquino proved to be a consummate ambassador for the country. 
The esteem with which the world regarded her was used to great advantage. She 
forged and strengthened diplomatic relations with other countries she knew would 
be important partners in the development of the Philippines, as in the case of her 
having met with practically all the leaders of the so-called economic superpow- 
ers. 

The President recognized the importance of establishing personal contact 
with other heads of state to ensure their firm commitment and support to Philip- 
pine endeavors. This awareness was vividly captured in a statement she made in 
her program "Magtanong sa Pangulo" on November 19, 1989: "Ang mahalaga 
lyong matipon mo lahat itong mga leaders na ito na minsan mong makausap at 
pagkatapos kung ano man iyong kanilang mga questions maitatanong nila doon 
sa mga members of my delegation. But over and beyond that, it is the person-to- 
person contact that is really most helpful and will be, I hope, of an enduring 
quality". 

Also foremost on the President's mind was the provision of encouragement 
and support to thousands of overseas Filipino workers whom she considered the 
unsung heroes of Philippine democracy. Hence, invitations to world capitals where 
there were large Filipino communities merited her consideration. Her schedule of 
activities for visits to these countries always included a program with overseas 
Filipinos. 



Her People's Emissary 



5 



During those programs, she saluted the sacrifice made by her fellow Filipi- 
nos in leaving their land of birth to work in a foreign country. She also thanked 
them for their contribution to the Philippine economy through the remittances of 
their earnings to their relatives in the Philippines and assured them of the contin- 
ued concern of the Philippine government for their well-being. 

Her statement at St. Margaret's Church to the Filipino community in 
Hongkong best illustrates her concern for, and gratitude to the migrant workers: 
"Nasa inyo ang lahat ng dahilan upang taas-noo ninyong ipagmalaki ang inyong 
gawain, ano man ang inyong gawain, gaano man ito kahamak sa paningin ng 
iba. Tandaan lamang ninyo na dakila ang lahat ng hanapbuhay. Tandaan din 
ninyo na hindi lamang ang inyong mga kabiyak, mga anak at mga kamag-anak 
ang magpapasalamat sa sakripisyo na inyong dinaranas, kundi ang buong 
sambayanang Pilipino. Kayo ay makasisiguro na ang inyong pamahalaan ay 
gagawin ang lahat para sa inyong ikabubuti". 

It was evident that wherever or for whatever reason she may be in a foreign 
location, the President's focus was on her people's welfare and her country's 
pursuit of development. 

With these main considerations in mind, President Corazon C. Aquino lim- 
ited her foreign visits to only 16 countries. Though limited in number, the estab- 
lishment of a set of criteria with which she evaluated her choices guaranteed the 
substantive quality of each of her state visits. 



Presidential 
State Visits 



THE PRESIDENT ONCE remarked that she did not want her state visits to 
be measured in francs, dollars, or any other foreign denomination. Instead, she 
would rather dwell on the alliances and the friendships that her visits had built 
and strengthened. In her mind, this would best ensure the continuous coopera- 
tion and admiration of the world for the Philippines and the Filipinos. 



Indonesia And Singapore: ASEAN Ties That Bind 

Singapore and the Republic of Indonesia were the first foreign countries 
visited by President Aquino. This was not surprising since among the ASEAN 
countries, Singapore and Indonesia were the first to recognize and express sup- 
port to her government. 

It was only five months after she had assumed office that the President 
decided to pay her ASEAN neighbors a visit. This was the time when she was 
still laying the foundations for the newfound democracy in the Philippines. Nev- 
ertheless, the President knew that it was about time for the country to emerge and 
once again be an active member of the family of nations. On her first official visit 
abroad, the President was able to hit two birds with one stone: she was able to 



Her People's Emissary 



7 



define to the rest of the world the Aquino administration's policy framework for 
diplomacy and to reestablish the ASEAN bond of cooperation and friendship. 

United States Of America: Ensuring Democratic Allies 

As a former colony and student of democracy of the United States of America, 
the Philippines enters a virtual validation test each time the country's head of 
state visits the US. The US was one of the few countries twice visited by President 
Aquino. 

The first visit of the President was on September 15-16, 1986 upon the invi- 
tation of then President Ronald Reagan. There were two important occasions 
during the President's visit - her one-on-one meeting with President Reagan and 
her address to the United States Congress. 

President Aquino proved her mettle as the head of government of a newfound 
democracy by impressing both of her audiences. After her meeting with Presi- 
dent Reagan which lasted longer than the scheduled time, President Reagan 
proudly proclaimed: "I'm bullish about the Philippines. I assured her that all 
America wants the Philippine democracy to succeed and to prosper and that 
we'll do what we can to help". 

The members of the US Congress, on the other hand, were enthralled. They 
showed their strong support for her by wearing yellow ties and Cory dolls or 
yellow roses on their lapels. At the end of her speech, President Aquino was 
given a sustained and rousing applause which some observers say lasted for 
about two minutes - the longest the US Congress had given to any foreign digni- 
tary. 

At home, her countrymen shed tears of pride upon seeing their President 
capturing more hearts in America. To some baseball-crazy Americans, Aquino's 
visit was like "being somewhere between the World Series and the Pope's visit". 

The strong support of the US Congress was translated into concrete terms 
when the US House of Representatives quickly voted for a US$200 million spe- 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



cial appropriation for the Philippines. A: the same time, outstanding loans pay- 
able amounting to US$90 million were converted into grants for projects to im- 
prove agriculture, the delivery of health, education and other social services, and 
the provision of food aid amounting to US$32 million. 

More importantly, the President's first visit to the US showed that she was 
in control of the country and could confidently leave it without fear of being 
overthrown during her absence. 

President Aquino's second visit to the US was in November of 1989 when 
she was invited by President George Bush. Her visit was a whirlwind of activi- 
ties. On November 7, she went to New York where she pressed the button that 
rang the ceremonial bell to signal the start of trading at the New York Stock 
Exchange (NYSE). Immediately after doing so, a wall tripper began flashing a 
welcome message to President Aquino and listing the first stock of the day - the 
US$60 million First Philippine Fund or FPF. The President was the first head of 
state to inaugurate an issue in the history of the NYSE. The initial subscription of 
US$60 million shot up to US$90 million. 

Afterwards, the President met the American-Filipino community in New 
York at the Pierre Hotel. In her speech she encouraged her audience to unite and 
help each other. She also promoted Philippine-made products by making it a 
point to refer to her dress as "having been made back home" and encouraged 
them to patronize Philippine-made products to help their fellow Filipinos. She 
also invited the businessmen to take a harder look at investments prospects in the 
Philippines. 

On November 8, she flew to Washington for the start of the official program 
of her state visit. In Washington, the US government's pledge for the Philippine 
Assistance Program, which had difficulty in appropriation, was restored to US$200 
million by a joint conference committee of the US Congress following her meet- 
ing with their leaders. 



In formal ceremonies at the White House, President Aquino's overwhelming 
popularity with the American people and their President was once again brought 



Her People's Emissary 



9 



to the fore with the following statements from President Bush: 'Three years ago 
when you rang the bell of freedom in Manila, America cheered and rose in awe. 
And when your words rang from the rafters of our Congress, our leaders stood 
up and gave you the most thunderous reception given any foreign leader in more 
than a generation. And just yesterday when you rang the bell on the New York 
Stock Exchange, the market climbed 26 points. So, the message is simple, from 
Main Street to Wall Street, America loves the Philippines and America loves Cory 
Aquino". 

By the time the President flew out of Washington, the World Bank had 
approved a package of US$605 million in grants and new loan agreements. A 
Memorandum of Understanding with the USAID granting US$25 million assist- 
ance to the Philippines to support project feasibility studies was also signed. 

On November 10, the President was greeted in Dallas by more than 2,000 
Filipinos and Americans at JC Penny, one of the largest retail department store 
chains in North America. At Anatole Hotel'sTrinity Hall, a bouyant President 
Aquino walked through a giant map of Texas into a replica of a Philippine vil- 
lage complete with palm trees, hibiscus garden, waterfalls, lily ponds, nipa huts 
and lechon and bibingka stalls livened by Texas music and Philippine folk 
dances. The President was overwhelmed by the "Texas Salute". 

Later at a dinner hosted by the JC Penny, the President expressed her appre- 
ciation for the reception accorded to her earlier as well as for her host's initiative 
in promoting Philippine products. She said: "Every Filipino product sold m a 
foreign market is a fragment of the Filipino dream to be strong again and pros- 
perous. To live in the dignity that befits free men. I can't think of any other people 
I'd rather have with us making that dream come true than the people of this great 
state. We are so distant from each other yet so alike in many ways. A gallant 
Texan gave me the most fitting gift on my first official visit to the United States - 
the yellow rose of Texas. There are only two countries in the world where the 
color yellow is a symbol of courage - the Philippines where it stands for the 
people power revolution and Texas". 

President Aquino had come a long way in mastering the art of winning the 
hearts of foreign people. In the eyes of the many people who gave her warm 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



reception, she had become a master statesman. She was observed by many as 
being relaxed and totally confident during the many occasions she addressed 
various audiences in the United States in 1989. Her candor during her speech at 
the International Women's Forum held in Dallas particularly illustrates this: "I 
was suddenly in charge of the whole country like a housewife having the whole 
house for herself to clean. But it was a bit more complicated .... some of the 
members of the military wanted to share my duties as housewife or caretaker of 
the country. This was, of course, out of the question. They didn't look the part, 
and only I had been elected President". 

Aside from the economic gains achieved from the World Bank and the USAID, 
the President's second visit to the US once again showed her popularity with the 
American people and firmly set her in the ranks of world class leaders. 



Japan: Partners For Progress 

The Philippines had always enjoyed warm and cordial relations with Japan. 
Through the years, Japan had proven to be a consistent benefactor and partner in 
the development of the Philippines. This is the primary reason why Japan was 
the only country thrice visited by President Aquino. 

The first visit of the President to Japan in November 1986 laid the ground- 
work for strengthened RP-Japan economic, political, and cultural ties. Her speech 
to the combined Japanese and Philippine media in Akasaka Palace gave a com- 
prehensive report on the gains achieved by her visit: "I can confidently say that 
Japan stands ready to help us, even more than she has done in the past. We are 
confident that assistance, in the forms of credits and grants-in-aid could reach at 
least Yl 00 billion. This represents a significant increase from the Y49.5 billion she 
normally extended in the past. This assistance package includes the Calaca Power 
Project Financing, the 14th Yen Loan, as well as specific projects in the form of 
technical assistance and the transfer of knowhow, especially in agriculture at 
which Japan has excelled, as well as a much needed infusion of funds to our 
rural employment program". 



Her People's Emissary 



11 



Her second visit to Japan, February 1989, was at the height of winter. To- 
gether with other world leaders, she attended the necrological services for Em- 
peror Showa (Hirohito). 

Her third and last visit was severely criticized by the local media. The im- 
portance and significance of the visit was questioned as it came at a time when 
the Philippines was just recovering from the attempted December 1, 1989 coup 
and the killer earthquake. 

The President's visit, however, was imperative. Together with 65 other heads 
of state and government, she attended the enthronement ceremonies for Emperor 
Akihito. But unlike the others, President Aquino managed to make her visit to 
Japan extend beyond the ceremonial - she conducted one-on-one meetings with 
other heads of state and government in an effort to generate much needed sup- 
port and assistance for the country. 

Upon her return, the President immediately reported to the people the result 
of her visit: " .... in providing us earthquake relief in the form of a $200 million 
emergency loan, in considering a $27 million non-grant project assistance this 
year and additional assistance to help us overcome the adverse effects of the 
Middle East crisis, and in considering our request for the early release of the 17th 
Yen Loan Package, Japan's eminent purpose is the buttressing of our newly re- 
stored democracy .... I was reassured by important investors of their decision to 
come and join our industrial program .... I informed Vice-President Quayle of 
the United States of the satisfaction of our government with the progress of the 
Philippine- American cooperation talks .... I am, therefore, happy to be able to 
report to our countrymen that our trip achieved for our nation positive exposure 
and a quickening of the pace of development assistance". 

This substantially answered the criticisms hurled at her visit. 



Negara Brunei Darussalam: A New Friend 



Sultan Hajji Hassanal Bolkiah of Negara Brunei Darussalam had to reiterate 
twice his formal invitation to President Aquino to conduct a state visit to his 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



country before the latter could finally accede to his request. Hence, President 
Aquino's visit to Brunei from August 29 to 31, 1987 was a much-awaited event in 
Southeast Asia's smallest but richest nation. 

President Aquino's first visit to Brunei succeeded in establishing a strong 
bond of friendship and cooperation between the two countries which, at the 
outset, were to be translated into concrete economic gains and, later on, further 
strengthened by a second visit. 

The program of activities on her first visit included meetings with govern- 
ment officials and businessmen from Brunei as well as the Filipino community. 
These meetings resulted in the signing of a 15-point joint 'communique' to facili- 
tate the expansion of trade, communication, and construction between the two 
countries. There was also an agreement which provided for the opening of a 
direct shipping route. More importantly, the President's visit paved the way for 
the involvement and substantial contribution of Brunei to the Philippine Assist- 
ance Program (PAP). 

President Aquino visited Brunei once again on August 2, 1989, on the occa- 
sion of the coming of age of the Crown Prince of Brunei (Berkhatan rites). It was 
an occasion to renew her ties with Sultan Bolkiah who had, by then, already 
visited the Philippines. The friendship between the two national leaders had 
transcended the purely official relation and had become one of a personal bond. 
Such was the friendship that not only was President Aquino a most sought-after 
guest of the Sultan, invitations were extended to other members of her family as 
well. 

China: Sentimental Journey 

During the President's visit to China in April 1988, she also managed to 
include a stopover at Hong Jian, Xiamen from where she traces her roots. In 
visiting this village, the President displayed a facet of her human character - her 
longing to trace her ancestry. Just as she was eager to meet her blood brothers, 
they were eager and proud to claim her as their kin. Pasted on the wall of one of 



Her People's Emissary 



13 



the houses she visited in the village was a xerox copy of the Time magazine cover 
featuring her. 

It would probably not be presumptuous to conclude then that the Chinese, 
known for being shrewd and inscrutable negotiators, gave more than an inch of 
opening to their "sister". 

But the reason for the President's trip was not merely a sentimental one. The 
Philippines has deep cultural, historical, and economic ties with China. And it is, 
after all, a major country in the region. 

The gains achieved by the President in China included the signing of a 
Trade Protocol for increased trade between the two countries which provided for 
the importation by China of several Philippine products ranging from fruits to 
chemicals. The Chinese government also provided food aid to the Philippines in 
the form of rice worth US$300 million. 

But the most important agreement reached by the President with Premier Li 
Peng of China was the promise by the latter that their government would hence- 
forth cease any form of communication or assistance to the Communist Party of 
the Philippines. The Aquino administration thus gained additional points in its 
anti-insurgency campaign in the countryside. 

Hongkong: Tapping Opportunities 

In tandem with her visit to mainland China, the President went on a short 
visit to Hongkong on a two-fold mission: to encourage Hongkong businessmen 
to invest in the Philippines; and, to touch base with the Filipino community. 

In her address to the Hongkong business community she extended an invi- 
tation to its members to invest in the Philippines and join the country in its 
journey towards progress. She also praised the Filipino community lavishly for 
their determination to assist their families and their country by working in a 
foreign land. She also opened the Filipino Social Center in Hongkong to serve as 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



a recreational and social facility for her countrymen. The President's visit once 
again conveyed to Filipinos working abroad the deep gratitude of her adminis- 
tration for their contribution to the Philippine economy. 



Switzerland: A Moral Quest 

The Philippines had maintained cordial and active relations with Switzer- 
land since 1956. But never had Switzerland's support for democracy in the Phil- 
ippines been more pronounced than in 1986, when it recognized the Aquino 
government and ordered the freezing of Marcos' funds in Swiss banks even 
before a request could be made by the Philippine government. 

Since then, Swiss authorities had consistently been cooperative and support- 
ive m providing legal assistance to the Philippines in its court cases involving the 
i en wealth, believed to have been deposited in Swiss banks, of the Marcoses 
and their cronies . 

Switzerland is also one of the top European investors in the Philippines. 

of June^^T^^ party arrived in Geneva, Switzerland on the evening 

excitementi S arriva ^ ^ ad generated a fair measure of expectation and 

Nations Genev^^ 1 ^' AS h ° mG ° f the Euro P ean Headquarters of the United 
office of the ^ CGnter for world political forums. It housed the central 

of fhp 6 nternatlonal Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and was the venue 
of the .n,erna„o„a, Labor Organiza.ion Conference. 

democracy Her ^ ^ >res ' dent ' s speeches in Geneva centered on freedom and 
national Laboro"^ address was before the 75th Annual Conference of the Inter- 
state to address r fh<r Zati ° n (ILO) " Presidcnt Ac l uino was the first Iad y chief of 
handcarried to ManL^^nS 11811 ^ conference - The invitation to do so was 
Phi.ir.rvW \ x , y LO D, rector Francis Blanchard during his visit to the 
Philippines ,n March of the same year. 

Because of the popularity of President Aquino, invitations to the 75th ILO 
Conference were ,n wide demand. For the first time, the 2,000-seat hall could not 



Her People's Emissary 



15 



admit all the attendees. Officials had to open an adjacent room where 500 more 
visitors could watch the President on a giant screen. The entry of President Aquino 
to the Salle Des Assemblies was received with a standing ovation. 

Her speech, which enumerated her administration's accomplishments in 
terms of protecting and upholding the rights and freedom of every Filipino, was 
rewarded with an applause that lasted for 45 seconds. After her speech, the 
President was escorted to a private office where she met with ILO officials. 

The President, however, was not the only Filipino to address the ILO con- 
vention. Crispin Beltran, head of the Kilusang Mayo Uno, had also gone to Ge- 
neva with the hope of rousing sympathy and support for their leftist radical 
group. However, ILO officials gave exclusive prominence and attention to the 
President. This, in itself, was a tacit rebuke of the leftist cause and a show of 
approval for the conservative labor policies of the Aquino government. 

From the ILO Conference, President Aquino proceeded to the ICRC Head- 
quarters where Red Cross President Cornelio Sommaruga extended a warm wel- 
come to the Philippine delegation. He congratulated the President on her unwa- 
vering support for the Red Cross. He thanked her, too, for the facilities and 
cooperation extended to the Red Cross and for the freedom they had been given 
to move in and out of jails and counterinsurgency fronts throughout the country. 
He also said that he wished all other countries were as supportive and open as 
the Philippines. 

The President ended her first morning in Geneva with a luncheon hosted by 
ILO President Blanchard and other officials of the Labor Convention. 

While the President and her official delegation were having lunch, Filipinos 
from all over Switzerland were beginning to arrive at the Intercontinental Hotel. 
Some had come by bus, others by train from as far away as Zurich, Loussanne, 
Frobourg, and Berne. Some were employees of multinational organizations like 
the UN and the Red Cross; others were domestics; still others were housewives 
married to Swiss nationals. Most came in yellow dresses, or yellow Cory t-shirts 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ordered from the Philippines months before. Everyone came with a photo, hope- 
fully to be signed by the President. 

The air of excitement and pride brought back memories of the snap election 
days or the EDSA victory celebrations. For Filipinos in Switzerland, the fervor 
inspired by the revolution had not yet died. When the President finally arrived, 
the jampacked hall burst into cheers and chants. The crowd of over 800 sang a 
lusty version of 'Tie a Yellow Ribbon". The President beamed and thanked the 
audience for doing their part in the nation's economic recovery program. 

After the reunion with Filipinos, the President proceeded to her hotel suite 
where she met with officials from Nestle who pledged to invest an additional 
US$50 million in their ventures in the Philippines. In the evening, she joined the 
World Economic Forum to speak on the political and economic foundations for 
Philippine growth. 

On the second day of her Swiss visit, the President and her party traveled by 
land to the Swiss capital of Berne. The President savored the scenery along the 
way: "Nasabi sa akin noong advance party, ang ganda raw ng scenery on the 
drive from Geneva to Berne. So, naisipan ko na ako na lamang mag-isa ang 
sasakay doon sa auto. It was just such a beautiful scenery yung para bang ang 
impression mo tahimik at ang linis . . . ." (Magtanong sa Pangulo, June 26, 1 988) 

The President arrived at the Hotel Bellevue Palace at 9:30 in the morning 
and was warmly received by government leaders of the capital and a small but 
extremely nationalistic group of Filipinos who had waited for hours for a glimpse 
of her. President Aquino invited them to her Presidential suite at the end of the 
day to the delight and amazement of the Swiss Police, "When I got there 
there were a few Filipinos outside the hotel; then in the afternoon, they were still 
there. Tapos sinabi sa akin nung isang security, 'Naku Ma'm, kanina pa hong 
umaga iyang mga kababayan natin d'yan'. Sabi ko, 'O bakit, ano daw ang gusto?' 
'Wala ho, gusto lamang ho kayong makita at makausap' .... So, sinabi ko dahil 
.... I had a few minutes, so I told my security, 'Sige papanhikin na lamang ninyo 
dito sa kuwarto ko'. So they came up and I said, "Naku, salamat naman sa 
pagtitiyaga ninyo diyan at nakatayo kayo at naghintay kayo para sa akin'. Kasama 



Her People's Emissary 



17 



rin nila iyong kanilang mga anak. So sinabi ko, 'Kung gusto ninyo, magkuhaan 
tayo ng litrato/ Sabi nila, gusto nga raw nila noon, okey naman daw. I told them 
that I was really very happy to see them'". (Magtanong sa Pangulo, June 26, 1988) 

The President and Federal Counsellor Rene Felber also had a confidential 
exchange in the Counsellor's Office at the Foreign Affairs Department. After the 
one-on-one meeting, an official Swiss Delegation led by Felber sat for a marathon 
working session with the President and her official delegation. Talk centered on 
the welfare of 7,000 Filipinos working all over Switzerland. The group also forged 
an agreement that would promote and protect trade and investments between 
the Swiss Confederation and the Philippine Republic for the next 10 years. The 
agreement entailed the protection of both parties from the expropriation or na- 
tionalization of their assets. 

The working session was followed by a working lunch with the Swiss Presi- 
dent where the Memorandum of Understanding providing for a SF60 million 
mixed credit facility for the Philippines was signed. 

But the most notable gain achieved by the President's visit was the commit- 
ment of the Swiss government for assistance in the retrieval of the wealth stashed 
by the deposed dictator and his cronies in several Swiss banks. 

Italy: Advocating Human Rights 

Italy was the staunchest political and economic ally of the Philippines in 
Europe. It was the first European country to recognize the Aquino government 
and was the most generous European economic benefactor of the country, pro- 
viding the largest development assistance to the Aquino government through the 
first RP-Italy Protocol of Understanding. This Protocol of Understanding which 
included a development cooperation program amounting to US$270 million in 
grants and highly concessional loans, was an important product of President 
Aquino's state visit to Italy on June 16-17, 1988. 

President Aquino was fetched by a plane from Cointrin Airport in Geneva 
by the Italian government as an act of courtesy to their much-awaited guest. The 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



welcome given to the President at the Champino International Airport was vastly 
different from that she had received in Geneva. 

Where the Swiss were formal, polite, and restrained, the Italians by contrast 
were dramatic, expressive, and as sunny as their climate. Hence, at the spacious 
courtyard of Quirinale Palace, official residence of the Italian Government, a 
mounted cavalry of 23 gold-crested horsemen lined up to escort President Aquino. 
Meanwhile, a battalion of grenadiers or foot soldiers prepared to salute her as 
she passed. 

While President Aquino was having lunch with President Cossiga, thou- 
sands of Filipinos had already begun to congregate at a giant sports arena called 
the Palazetto Dello Sport. The cavernous stadium, which was the site of the 1960 
Olympics, acquired the air of a Philippine fiesta as thousands of homesick Filipi- 
nos, who had traveled from far-off cities and towns, gathered to catch a glimpse 
of President Aquino. When the President finally arrived at 3:30 p.m., the stadium 
echoed with cheers. 

The program was distinctly Filipino. The President was regaled with songs 
like "Bayan Ko", "Hindi Kita Malilimutan", and "Pilipinas Kong Mahal" and a 
Muslim dance number. In turn, Kris, the President's youngest daughter, offered a 
song for the audience. At the end of the program, the President was presented 
with bouquets of yellow flowers by the different Filipino associations in Italy and 
a marble bust of Ninoy Aquino made by Tomas Concepcion. The grand reunion 
ended with a speech from the President delivered extemporaneously in Tagalog 
which was well-applauded by the crowd. 

The President then returned to Quirinale Palace for the Cercle Diplomatic 
Presentation of the Diplomatic Corps. This meeting was an event much awaited 
by the foreign ambassadors and their wives. It was said that the wives clamored 
for the audience with the heroine of the Philippine revolution long before plans 
for the visit had been finalized. After the introductions, a photo session with 
President Cossiga was held at the reception room. 

At the end of the elaborate ceremony, the two Presidents settled down for 
serious discussions on affairs of state. 



Her People's Emissary 



19 



On her second day, the President, together with Italian Defense Minister 
Vittorio Zanoni, visited the tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Piazza Venezia for 
the formal wreath-laying ceremonies. The Piazza was closed to traffic and was 
surrounded by platoons from all of Italy's defense branches. The ceremony was 
another display of Italy's passionate nature. 

From the Piazza, the President proceeded to the Campidolio or the City Hall 
of Rome where she was introduced to the members of the municipal government 
and was requested to sign the golden book of distinguished guests. After a short 
ceremony, the President had a private talk with Mayor Signorello of Rome. 

After the courtesy visit, the President proceeded to Villa Madama for one of 
the most important functions of her second working day. The Villa Madama 
talks resulted in the signing of nine separate bilateral agreements providing for 
the extension of US$188 million in new loans and grants by the Italian govern- 
ment for several infrastructure and development projects in the Philippines. 

After the extremely productive session, the President moved on to meet with 
private industry leaders from all over Italy and Europe to request for increased 
technical assistance and technology transfer to the Philippines as well as support 
and cooperation in settling outstanding issues with the European Economic Com- 
munity. 

Her departure from Italy was again marked with pomp and ceremony. The 
red carpet was rolled out and mounted cavalry and grenadiers lined the exit of 
the courtyard of Quirinale Palace. President Cossiga himself escorted the Presi- 
dent to her limousine. 



Vatican City: Pilgrimage For Peace 

The State of Vatican City (Stato della Citta del Vaticano), headed by the 
Pope, is the seat of the Papacy. President Aquino, as a symbol of freedom and 
democracy, and the Holy Father, as the world's spiritual leader, were linked not 
only by their faith but also by a common commitment to promote peace, justice, 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



and the full development of man. The visit may be called a "summit meeting" 
between two significant and prominent leaders. Cardinal-Archbishop Karol 
Wojtyla and President Corazon C. Aquino were both recognized as trailblazers, 
establishing many "firsts" in their respective careers. 

Pope John Paul II is the first non-Italian Pope since 1523, the first Polish 
Pope in the Church's history, and the youngest Pope since 1 878. President Corazon 
C. Aquino is the first woman President of the Philippines and in the entire South- 
east Asian Region, and the first Asian leader to lead a successful people-powered 
revolt against a well-entrenched dictator. 

The President first visited Vatican City early in the morning of June 17, 
1988. It was a very special event for the President as she had to quietly leave 
Quirinale Palace with Kris and three security aides to enter Vatican City as a 
private citizen. She had to shed her official identity for a private mass with Pope 
John Paul II. The unscheduled mass said by the Pope was an unprecedented 
event in Vatican history. The Pontiff did not, by tradition, conduct masses for 
visiting heads of state. All presidents and royalties who have had the honor to 
attend his masses had done so as among the regular churchgoers. The Pope, 
however, gave preferential attention to the President as he recognized her as a 
devout Catholic for whom he had only the highest regard. But President Aquino's 
shedding of public status for a few hours (as she was still on official visit to Italy) 
to attend the Holy Mass gave Vatican Protocol Officials a very thin line to work 
with. 



At his personal chapel in the Vatican, Pope John Paul II said the service 
assisted by 12 Filipino priests. After the private mass, the Pope escorted Mrs. 
Aquino all the way to the door, another personal gesture he did not usually 
extend. And after a long handclasp, he said his good-bye. Afterwards, Corazon 
C. Aquino had to return to Quirinale Palace to resume her functions as Philippine 
President. 

The official visit of the President to Vatican City, on the other hand, began 
on the morning of June 18, 1988. Like the Italian government, the Vatican state 
gave the President a lavish formal welcome. 




'Woman of the Year' 



Preceding page: 

President Aquino flashing the Laban sign before 
the US Congress. 



Her People's Emissary 



21 



Church bells pealed to signal the approach of the President and her official 
delegation. They were received at the Cortile San Damaso, the inner courtyard of 
the Palazzia Costolico which is the nerve center of the Vatican, by Bishop Dino 
Monducci and a number of Vatican dignitaries. Swiss guards stood in formation 
to receive and escort the Presidential party to the Sala Clementina to meet the 
Vatican dignitaries while the President was ushered into the Sala del Tronetto 
which is the private hall where new Popes, by tradition, are chosen and an- 
nounced to the public. Here, she was received by Pope John Paul II, with whom 
she sat down for a one-on-one talk. 

After meeting with the Pope, the President and her official delegation were 
ushered into the office of Julio Cardinal Casarolli, Vatican Secretary of State. 
After short talks, the Philippine delegation was introduced to the diplomatic 
corps of the Vatican. The usually sedate body was enthusiastic in its greetings to 
President Aquino. After the ceremonial introductions, the President received a 
blessing from Cardinal Casarolli before entering the Basilica to offer a short prayer. 
On one of the walls of the Basilica, Vatican artisans had labored to complete an 
image of San Lorenzo Ruiz, the first Filipino saint, just in time for the President's 
visit. 

Back at the Grand Hotel, President Aquino hosted a luncheon for Cardinal 
Casarolli, as the Pope, by tradition, never attends socials outside of the Vatican 
and it was his Secretary of State who accepted on his behalf. Again, the attend- 
ance of the Roman Curia was unprecedented in this event. 

In the afternoon, the President paid a brief visit to the Pontifico Colegio 
Filipino, a seminary for Filipino priests and nuns, and received a medal for her 
stand on human rights from the members of the Christian Democratic Party. 

The reception given to Corazon C. Aquino during her visit to Vatican City 
as a private citizen and as the President of the Republic showed the high regard 
the Roman Catholic Church had for the Philippine heroine who had led a suc- 
cessful non-violent revolution. 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Thailand: A Handclasp for ASEAN Brotherhood 

Thailand was but a stopover of President Aquino on the return flight from 
Rome to Manila. Despite the limited time available, the President made the most 
of the stopover by meeting with Thai Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda to dis- 
cuss matters pertinent to the welfare and development of the ASEAN region. 
During the meeting, the President also personally offered her apologies for the 
cancellation of her state visit to Thailand in 1 987. 

The visit highlighted President Aquino's penchant for maximizing every 
opportunity to strengthen relations between the Philippines and other nations. 

Federal Republic Of Germany: Shading Restored Democracy 

The President's visit to the Republic of Germany coincided with their cel- 
ebration of their 40th year as a democratic country and the proclamation of its 
basic law, the equivalent of the Philippine Constitution. Fate must have willed 
this coincidence as there were many parallelisms between the Philippines and 
Germany. 

Both countries had suffered under dictatorships, which spurred their deter- 
mination to start anew as free and democratic states founded on the rule of law 
and the supremacy of the people's will. 

The President and her official delegation arrived at the Bonn-Cologne Air- 
port on July 9, 1989 on an unusually chilly and rainy morning. The excitement 
and enthusiasm generated by their arrival, however, was effusive enough to 
warm the hearts of the President and her team. In a rare display of hospitality, 
the German government broke protocol by setting aside restrictions on noise 
pollution in order to welcome the delegation with a 21 -gun salute. 

A crowd of Filipinos had also gathered at the airport to catch a glimpse of 
the President. The Filipino crowd, who withstood the freezing weather and rain, 
immediately broke into cheers at the President's arrival. After the welcome cer- 



Her People's Emissary 



23 



emony, the President broke through the security cordon to shake hands with her 
countrymen, some of whom were in tears. 

In Germany, the President visited Berlin where she was received by Mayor 
Walter Momper and his wife and the Allied Commanders of England, the United 
States of America, and France. From the Berline-Tegel Airport, she proceeded by 
motorcade to the Berlin townhall or Rathaus Schoneberg where hundreds of 
Filipinos awaited her arrival. At the townhall, the President signed the golden 
book previously autographed by other colorful political names such as President 
John Kennedy and Queen Elizabeth. She also exchanged messages with Mayor 
Momper before a crowd composed of largely Berlin-based Filipinos. 

Afterwards, the President proceeded to the Reichstag building or the old 
German Parliament where she found an opportunity to address, for the first time, 
one of the burning issues that confronted her government: human rights. This 
issue was to face her several times in her visit to Europe. 

Prior to President Aquino's visit, the Communist Party of the Philippines 
had launched a smear campaign against the Aquino administration. Taking ad- 
vantage of the German sensitivity to the human rights issue, the CPP-NDF cam- 
paigned that the Aquino government was condoning massive and systematic 
human rights violations. The President's assurances of the continued protection 
by her administration of human rights in the Philippines must have allayed the 
doubts of her German audience. The German government extended a develop- 
ment assistance package of DM110 million to the Philippines. This, despite the 
fact that the human rights record of a country was one of the main considerations 
in the granting of development assistance by Germany. 

Later in the afternoon, the President flew by helicopter to the City of Aachen 
where she was joyfully greeted by thousands of Filipinos who had been waiting 
for hours for her arrival. At the Aachen Rathaus Auditorium, the President en- 
couraged the cheering Filipino audience to maintain the good name and reputa- 
tion of Filipinos in Europe as being capable and industrious. 

On July 10, President Aquino's visit to the Federal Republic of Germany 
officially began at the Villa Hammerschmidt where she trooped the line of Ger- 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



man soldiers with West German President Richard von Weizsaecker. Private 
talks were afterwards held between President Aquino and President Weizsaecker. 

From the Villa Hammerschmidt, President Aquino proceeded to the Rathaus 
or townhall of Bonn where she met with Bonn Lord Mayor Hans Daniels. The 
President once again broke protocol to greet Filipino well-wishers who had gath- 
ered outside the townhall and were singing Til Be Seeing You". 

Later, President Aquino laid a wreath at the North Cemetery which was the 
monument for the victims of war and tyranny. The solemnity of the moment was 
heightened by the playing of the "Lied von Guten Kameraden", a song that calls 
for the laying down of arms and the keeping of peace. 

The President also met with the German Chamber of Commerce and Indus- 
try to campaign for the correction of the trade imbalance between the two coun- 
tries through increased importation of Philippine products to Germany. The Presi- 
dent also met with Social Democratic Party Chairman Jochen Vogel and Foreign 
Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of the Free Democratic Party. 

In the evening, President Aquino attended a formal banquet with President 
Weizsaecker and 300 German luminaries from the fields of politics, culture, and 
the arts at the Schloss Augustusburg. 

The President's third day in Germany began on a triumphant note. Over 
breakfast, Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation and Vice-Chancellor Juergen 
Warnke informed her of their development assistance package of DM11 0 million 
for the Philippines. During the day, she also met with the leaders of the Green 
Party, the third political faction to touch base with the President, and Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl. 

The President's visit to Germany ended with farewell rites at the Villa 
Hammerschmidt hosted by President Weizsaecker. 

The President's visit to Germany had successfully dispelled the rumors of 
widespread human rights abuse in the Philippines and had reinforced the coun- 
try's image as the cradle of democracy in Southeast Asia. 



Her People's Emissary 



25 



France: A Symbolic Meeting 

If there is anything Frenchmen and Filipinos share, it is their pride in their 
unique revolution and in the democratic society they now enjoy as a result. For 
this reason, in 1989, President Aquino was bestowed the singular honor of being 
the only state visitor among the select heads of state and government invited to 
attend the Bicentennial Celebration of the Fall of Bastille. President Francois 
Mitterand had personally extended this invitation to President Aquino. 

This rare honor was given prominence along the Champs Elysee where the 
Philippine flag was flown alongside the French tricolor during the peak of the 
celebrations. 

The President was personally met by President Mitterand and his wife at the 
Orly Airport. From there, they flew by helicopter to the Esplanades des Invalides 
fronting the mausoleum of Napoleon Bonaparte. Here, the motorcade to the State 
Guesthouse, the Hotel Marigny, began. 

Hundreds of French Republic Guards on horseback were a magnificent sight 
to behold as they cantered forward, blowing on trumpets as they escorted Presi- 
dent Aquino to the State Guesthouse. All roads leading to Marigny were closed 
to traffic to accommodate the Presidential entourage. In simple ceremonies, Presi- 
dent and Mrs. Mitterand and President Aquino exchanged gifts and pleasantries. 

Later at the Elysees Palace, the President was feted in a state banquet hosted 
by President Mitterand. It was during this important occasion that the latter 
verbalized the value the French people and government accorded to President 
Aquino as a guest of honor: "In the heart of a year devoted to the commemoration 
of the Bicentenary of the French Revolution, this week is, for us French, some- 
what exceptional as it is the week of the 1 4th of July, our National Holiday. I 
wanted to invite, for this occasion, a few of those people who are working to 
create a more just and more generous world in the spirit of the universal values 
of human rights and democracy that France proposed to the world in 1789. It is 
only fitting, Madam President, that with this state visit with which you honour 
us, you should be the first to arrive at this gathering of the friends of France". 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The second day of President Aquino in France began with a meeting with 
French business leaders to discuss investment prospects in the Philippines. After- 
wards, she visited the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and proceeded to the recep- 
tion tendered in her honor by Mayor Jacques Chirac of Paris at the Hotel de Ville. 

The highlight of the day was the luncheon hosted by the Counseil National 
du Patronat Francais and her meetings with French Foreign Minister Roland 
Dumas and Prime Minister Michel Rocard. Before the Patronat, the President 
underscored the economic gains made by her country and assured her audience 
that the political, social, and economic situation was ripe for joint ventures and 
new trade opportunities with French businessmen. During the meeting with Min- 
ister Dumas, President Aquino witnessed the signing of a memorandum of un- 
derstanding which provided for the extension of social security to some 12,000 to 
15,000 Filipinos working in France. 

During a press conference at the Hotel Marigny, the President announced 
the signing and exchange of letters specifying the extension of FRF1.0 billion in 
official development assistance from France to the Philippines over a period of 
four years. Her day finally ended with a dinner hosted by Prime Minister Rocard 
at the Foreign Affairs Palace where she was repeatedly praised for her role in the 
bloodless revolution that restored democracy in the Philippines. 

President Aquino was among 46 other chiefs of state who attended the many 
ceremonies to commemorate the French Bicentennial. Even among this crowd of 
world luminaries, the President stood out, being very much applauded and 
cheered. 

As was her wont, President Aquino made the most of her time and the 
opportunity by meeting with several world leaders present during the celebra- 
tions. The President met with Prime Ministers Brian Mulroney of Canada, Rajiv 
Gandhi of India, Sosuke Uno of Japan and President Hosni Murabak of Egypt. 
The President also took time to meet with UNESCO officials and six honorary 
Filipino consuls as well as the Filipino community in France. 

The timing of President Aquino's visit was most opportune as she was able 
to ensure the support of France in the meeting of the world's economic powers, 



Her People's Emissary 



27 



the Group of Seven (G-7), which was to be held in France after the Bicentennial 
Celebration. 



Belgium: A Friendly Call 

As a gesture of appreciation for the open and sincere support expressed by 
King Badouin I and Prime Minister Wilfried Martens during the early days of 
her administration, the President accepted the invitation of the King to pay a 
private visit to the Kingdom of Belgium. The visit was the last leg of her tour of 
Europe. From Germany, she proceeded to France, and from France she moved on 
to Belgium. 

President Aquino was received at the Melsbrock Military Airport by King 
Badouin and together they rode to Laeken Palace, the residence of the Royal 
Couple. At the Palace, they were joined by Queen Fabiola and Prime Minister 
Martens for private discussions. 

Though President Aquino's visit to Belgium was supposed to have been a 
private one, substantial gains were achieved in terms of the signing of a Financ- 
ing Memorandum of ECU10.4 million for Agricultural Education and the Memo- 
randum of Understanding for European Commission assistance for the rural 
development program of the Philippines' Department of Agriculture. 

The President was also able to convince the European Community (EC) to 
open an EC Delegation Office (which is equivalent to an Embassy) in Manila. But 
the more important gain achieved by this visit to Belgium was the establishment 
of goodwill between Belgium and the Philippines. 



Canada: Broadening Avenues Of Friendship 

In contrast to its lukewarm relations with the Philippines during the previ- 
ous administration, Canada manifested strong support and admiration for the 
Aquino government. In 1986, the Canadian ambassador was the first to present 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



his credentials to the new administration. President Aquino has the distinction of 
being the first Philippine President to make a state visit to Canada. 

The level of excitement in Canada over President Aquino's visit was at a 
high gear. Months before her arrival, television documentaries on the EDSA revo- 
lution were already being viewed on Canadian television and newspaper ac- 
counts regularly contained feature stories on the Philippines and the miracle that 
was people power. It was said that the only visits that could rival it were those of 
the Queen of England and the Prince and Princess of Wales. 

The first stop of President Aquino was Vancouver, where she met with the 
members of the Filipino-Canadian community and the Vancouver businessmen. 
During these meetings, she invited them to consider the Philippines as a viable 
area for investment. In addition to her invitation to invest in the country, she also 
shared her pride and joy with the Filipino-Canadian community in having been 
accorded the honor of being the first Philippine president invited to Canada: "I 
am privileged to be the first Philippine president to visit Canada. And I am very 
happy to share this privileged moment with my fellow Filipinos .... Hindi po 
kaila na handa kayong tumugon sa napapanahong hamon sa pagpapaunlad ng 
ating bansa. Kaya't nais ko pong pagtibayin ang inyong pagmamalasakit sa ating 
mga kababayan, at ang inyong pagnanasang tumulong sa kaunlaran at 
kasaganaan ng ating bayan . . . . Sa tulong ninyo at sa aming pagsusumikap, 
darating ang panahon na buong karangalang ihahayag natin ang ating sariling 
kasaganaan bilang isang bansa". 

From Vancouver, the President proceeded to Toronto where she heard mass 
celebrated especially for her at St. Michael's Cathedral and attended a dinner 
hosted by Premier David Peterson. 

On November 6, 1989, the President was given a 21 -gun salute in Ottawa as 
she trooped the line of the Royal 22nd Regiment in their elegant red and black 
uniforms. The Queen's representative and Canada's Head of State, Madame Jeanne 
Suave, accorded President Aquino a warm and stirring welcome: "I greet you 
with great joy and, on behalf of all Canadians, I wish you the warmest of wel- 
comes. You arrive here preceded by the renown of your outstanding qualities 



Her People's Emissary 



29 



and your accomplishments since the moment when, in dramatic circumstances, 
you rallied the defenders of democracy .... I cannot conceal my feelings of 
affection - feelings that I now convey to you in all simplicity. You embody an 
ideal of human solidarity that your presence here today brings home to us in a 
very special way". 

In Ottawa, the President met with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and other 
Canadian government leaders. As a result, Prime Minister Mulroney pledged CA 
$100 million in new aid to the Philippines, over and above the CA $100 million 
previously made available for the five-year country assistance program. 

A memorandum of understanding which aimed to strengthen quality con- 
trol of tuna and shrimps from the Philippines and facilitate their export to Canada 
was also signed. An Extradition Treaty was also forged. In response to President 
Aquino's appeal, Prime Minister Mulroney also promised to intercede for the 
Philippines for debt relief with the World Bank, IMF, and other G-7 creditor 
nations. 

The President's visit to Canada was a resounding success not only because 
of the groundbreaking agreements reached, but more so because of the una- 
bashed admiration that the Canadian government and people showed her. This 
helped ensure the Canadian government's openness to extend assistance aske 
of them by President Aquino. 



Singapore: Cementing ASEAN Ties 

The President capped her international sojourn with her participation in the 
Fourth Meeting of the ASEAN Heads of Government in Singapore in Jan. 26-28, 
1992. The Fourth ASEAN Summit, as it is more popularly known, served as a 
fitting venue for the valedictory address of the President to the other ASEAN 
heads of government. 

Aside from her participation in the summit, the President was also pre- 
vailed upon by the other ASEAN heads of government to meet with them as they 



30 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



were all well aware that this would be the last time she would represent her 
country. Each one of them took the opportunity to bid her good-bye. President 
Aquino had informal bilateral meetings with the five ASEAN-member heads of 
state and Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore as well as Prime Minister 
Habbie Namelliu of Papua New Guinea. Her meeting with Lee Kuan Yew was 
specifically requested for by the latter as he was one of the earliest ASEAN 
leaders to have welcomed President Aquino into the ASEAN family. Namelliu, 
on the other hand, wanted to meet the President not only to say good-bye, but to 
express his gratitude as she was one of those actively involved in the campaign to 
have his country included in the ASEAN. 

The President, once again, gave priority to meeting her countrymen abroad. 
She met the Filipinos in Singapore at the TOA Payoh Sports Hall in the afternoon 
and had cocktails with the Filipino Business Executives Group in the evening. In 
each of these occasions, she reminded her countrymen of the government's con- 
cern for their well-being and extolled them for the success they have achieved in 
another land. She also urged them to support each other in a land where they 
were a minority. 

It is a striking coincidence that the President would deliver her swan song as 
the Philippines' foremost ambassador of goodwill in Singapore, where she also 
had her baptism as an international statesman when she visited in 1986. This fact 
also underscored the President's strong commitment to making the Philippines 
an active player in the ASEAN region. 



Special 
Action Group 



THE SUCCESS AND orderly conclusion of the President's trips ww ^ 
have been possible if she did not have efficient assistance and support, o ^ 
credit must be given to a special operations group - men and women han j» ^ 
by the President to attend to the complicated task of overseeing her foreign 
els. 

At the early stage, from 1987 to 1989, the leader of this ^ 
Cabinet Secretary Jose 'Ping' de Jesus. Ping effectively managed tn 
state visits by thoroughly preparing all technical and substantial aspe 
trip well ahead of time. 

When Ping was des.gnated Presidential Coordinating Secretary in 1988 his 
responsibilities with regard to Presidential state visits were ® 
protege, Aniceto There was 

Chito, then Cabinet Undersecretary, had previously assisted i ing 
had essentially the same management style as his mentor. 

The other members of the special operations group were Col. Voltaire 'Volts' 
Gazmin of the Presidential Security Group (PSG), Radio Television Malacanang 
(RTVM) Executive Director Maria Montelibano (who represented the Office of 
the Press Secretary), and Miguel Perez Rubio from the Protocol Office (later re- 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



placed by Ambassador Sergio 'Serge' Barrera). The Department of Foreign Af- 
fairs (DFA) was also a part of the group - but the personalities differed for every 
region or country to be visited because each destination required a different area 
of diplomatic expertise. 

Each member of the group had his or her specialization: Maria was in charge 
of coordinating with local and foreign media for coverage of the trips; Volts 
provided all the security arrangements; Ambassadors Perez Rubio and Barrera 
attended to all protocolar details; and Ping and Chito orchestrated everything. 

The DFA and other concerned government agencies, on the other hand, 
were responsible for the conduct of ministerial and sub-ministerial meetings with 
their foreign counterparts. Specific bilateral issues for the enhancement of eco- 
nomic, political, and social relations with the country to be visited were taken up 
six to four months before the visit. It was during these meetings where agree- 
ments or memoranda of understanding were formulated, drafted, fine-tuned, 
and submitted to the respective heads of government for approval. It was during 
this stage that the actual negotiations took place. 

The special operations group was privy to the basic rules that President 
Aquino imposed for the preparation of state visits. She required strict adherence 
to these unwritten, but enforced, rules. 

Rule number 1 was that state visits should be carried out with the least cost 
possible. Because of this rule, the budgets for the visits were always presented to 
the President herself for approval. More often than not, initial submissions were 
returned with the instruction to further reduce cost. 

The cost-cutting had gotten to a point where, during the European visit, the 
crew from RTVM cooked tinned food in their hotel room on a portable stove they 
had brought specifically for the purpose. Because cooking and eating in the hotel 
rooms were disallowed by the management, these cooking sessions were con- 
ducted like the most serious of undercover operations. Since they were embar- 
rassed to be discovered by the hotel management, the crew placed all the empty 
cans in bags which they disposed elsewhere so that these would not be found in 



Her People's Emissary 



33 



the hotel trash. As is the usual procedure when crossing the border, they would 
be questioned by the patrol guards as to the contents of their bags. The standard 
reply was: "Equipment". It was only after having successfully crossed the border 
that the RTVM crew would breathe a sigh of relief for not having been inspected. 
It would have been difficult for them to explain why such bags contained Third 
World trash. 

But if austerity was imposed on all, the President herself set the example. 
She had been observed to wear the same dress throughout a day despite some 
changes of location and ceremonies. This she did without losing sight of the 
appropriate use of her attire, for she changed into dinner gown in the evening - a 
thing unthinkable to her predecessor. 

Rule number 2 was that, to minimize cost, the President preferred to take 
regular commercial flights. Out of a total of 16 state visits, she brought her own 
plane to only three of these: Singapore in 1986, China and Brunei in 1988. The 
only reason President Aquino was persuaded to take her own plane was when 
she was informed that the flight would have to be delayed a few hours so as to 
accommodate her schedule. Since this would have meant inconvenience to the 
other passengers, President Aquino relented and brought her plane. 

For the PSG, the President's preference for taking commercial flights was an 
added burden to their security concerns. It meant there would be other passen- 
gers on the same plane that they would have to monitor. 

During the state visits, President Aquino brought along one member of her 
family as well as her own hairdresser. But unlike the previous administration, 
she shouldered the expenses of the two. Even the cash advance which was usu- 
ally provided her during the visits were returned intact when they got back. The 
President always used her own money for her purchases. Not a single centavo 
was charged to official expense. 

This is not to say that President Aquino ever had time to go shopping dur- 
ing her state visits. It was said that unlike other heads of state who try to put in 
some work into their leisure while on state visits, she hardly had any leisure to 



put into her work schedule. She always made it a point to ensure that her time 
would be maximized. That was rule number 3. 

Her average program of activities for the state visits showed that President 
Aquino attended as much as five official functions in a day. Once, during a 
briefing on the proposed scenario for a state visit, President Aquino teasingly 
commented: "Si Chito, ayaw yata ako pagpahingahin". This was when she 
was informed that her schedule would only allow her to retire for the day at 
10:30 p.m. 

If the President had barely enough time to rest during her state visits, the 
support staff barely knew the word sleep during these times. The RTVM crew, 
after every Presidential engagement, had to edit and prepare the tv presentation 
to be sent back to the Philippines the same day. The PSG, Protocol Officer and 
Ping or Chito, on the other hand, had to review and adjust, if necessary, the 
activities for the following day; conduct the final ocular inspection of the venues; 
and, attend to the last-minute details. 

Contrary to the notion that those who were included as support staff for the 
state visits were lucky to travel abroad for free, the truth was that they "only saw 
airports and hotels". Those at home were luckier to have their bosses off their 
backs. 

But there were fringe benefits attached to accompanying the President on 
her state visits. She always recognized those who were there to support her. For 
the cameramen, she was always ready with a smile. For the PSG, she was always 
concerned for their welfare, asking whether they had rested comfortably or had 
adequate meals. For the DFA staff, she was ready to smile and thank them for 
their assistance. 

The President gave strict instructions that her official delegation should re- 
main "lean and mean". That is, only those officials whose presence were abso- 
lutely necessary should accompany her. During the fourth ASEAN Summit in 
Singapore, the Philippine delegation was limited to only 34. The other delega- 
tions numbered 72 to 100. During briefings on administrative matters, she would 



J 



Her People's Emissary 



35 



carefully study the proposed delegation list to ensure that it was kept at a mini- 
mum. This was rule number 4. 

Hence, the PSG was limited to at most 12 per visit. The RTVM crew could 
number from 8 to 20 depending on the number of venues to be covered. Secretary 
de Jesus never brought any of his staff along - he attended to all the requirements 
himself. There were even times when the Protocol Officers would decide not to 
go especially on those visits which had minimal protocolar activities. 

On her trip to Japan in 1989 for the enthronement of Emperor Akihito, RTVM 
sent only a cameraman. Vic Victoria relates how he had to act as cameraman, vtr 
man, audio man, and even make-up artist to their annotator, Christine Cunanan - 
a staffer at the Philippine Embassy in Tokyo who was roped in for the job. 

President Aquino also made sure that her scenario for a visit included at 
least one program with Filipinos living or working in the country to be visited. 
This was rule number 5. She so strongly wanted to reach out to her countrymen 
abroad that she would even break through her security cordon to shake hands or 
talk with them. These caused nightmares to the PSG who were tasked with pro- 
tecting her and providing her a shield from the crowd. 

The President was also a stickler for detail. She studied every briefing paper 
submitted to her and made her own marginal notes which she would discuss 
during the briefings conducted for her and her official delegation. She never 
accepted briefing statements at face value. 

More often than not, the bilateral issues included the trade imbalance be- 
tween the Philippines and the host country. She would then often ask Secretary 
Concepcion, and later, Secretary Garrucho whether the problem may have been 
caused by the inability of the Philippines to subscribe to the standards of the host 
country. She also made it a point to ask the Department of Trade and Industry to 
identify the Philippine products the host country was in need of. She once com- 
mented on this matter: "Huwag naman masabing para tayong mga bata na 
nagrereklamo - let's be prepared to say that there's a trade imbalance between 
our countries and this is what we propose to do about it". Thus, rule number 6 



36 The Aquino Management of the Presidency 

required a thoroughness in her briefings which she herself reviewed, discussed, 
and took to heart. 

This is because she would never have allowed herself to appear to her host 
country as a mendicant begging for support. In each of her visits, she always 
managed to keep her country's dignity. 

Rule number 7 was to maintain transparency in all of her activities. Hence, 
she wanted her countrymen to be appraised of the purpose of her visit even 
before she left; and she immediately reported on the results as soon as she ar- 
rived. Maria, taking a cue from the President, encouraged the local media to 
cover the President's state visits, although there were serious financial constraints 
in undertaking the task. 

Unlike the previous administration, the Aquino government was always 
mindful of the enormous expense that foreign travel entailed. Of particular con- 
cern was how to manage logistics for a media entourage which, though a neces- 
sity in this era of spontaneous global communication, the government could 
hardly afford. The networks and publication outfits, too, did not have enough 
resources to finance the coverage of the President's state visits on their own. It is a 
credit to Maria that she was creative and ingenious enough to think of pooling 
the resources (fax machines, computers, accommodations, transportation, tel- 
ephone lines, etc.) for the media. Hence, the President's state visits were well- 
covered at minimum expense to both the government and the networks and 
publishers. 

Rule number 8 was for the staff to be well-prepared for the visits down to 
the littlest detail. President Aquino wanted to be informed of every aspect of the 
visit, from the administrative to the substantive. She did not want any surprises. 
Ping and Chito were constantly on their toes trying to determine what possible 
questions the President may raise. Her calls during the day meant there was an 
area of inquiry. The staff of Ping and Chito were constantly revising the briefing 
kits. 



These preparations were so meticulous and hectic that it was a common joke 
among the staff members, who rarely got a chance to go home during the days 



Her People's Emissary 



37 



prior to a state visit, that their families would be surprised to see them when they 
finally went home. Some of the staff members, on the other hand, fantasized that 
they would insert a note in the President's briefing kit to remind her to bring 
home a pasalubong (token) for them. They got energized by the fantasy that upon 
her return, she would respond to the note by calling the staff member to the 
Guest House to give the pasalubong personally. Of course, that was a long shot 
since everybody knew the President really hardly shopped on these trips, even 
for herself. 

While the President was abroad, she wanted to be kept well-informed of the 
goings-on in the country. As a result, Ping established a 24-hour center in his 
office which was tasked with sending regular updates to the President and her 
delegation on the various events in the country. This 24-hour center served a 
dual purpose - not only did it send regular updates, it also provided the neces- 
sary information that may suddenly be required by the Philippine delegation. 

The staff manning the 24-hour centers learned about rule number 9 the hard 
way. The President was then on a trip to the US. The delegation suddenly called 
Manila, and since there was a time lag, at the wee hours of the morning when the 
staff were asleep. The problem was that the room assignments had not been 
finalized when the delegation left because the American counterparts had not yet 
given the list of room allocations. Somehow, immediate follow through on the 
matter had been overlooked. By the time the confusion was cleared up, the peo- 
ple on both sides of the Pacific had lost their sleep. Rule number 9, by the way: 
never sleep on the job - everyone, from the Philippine delegation to the staff 
members left behind, had to remain awake and alert. 

The President, consistent with her thrust of accountability and transparency 
in government, wanted a comprehensive documentation of her state visits. Post 
event reports which gave detailed accounts of the undertaking, from the prepara- 
tory stages to the conclusion, were painstakingly prepared by Ping and Chito. 
Rule number 10 - the comprehensive reporting of a state visit - thus, gave the 
President a valuable tool in assessing her foreign sojourns. 



