CONTEMPORARY 

JAPAN 

A Review of East 'Asiatic Affairs 



SEPTEMBER 




VOL.XII NO. 9 



Published Monthly by 

Foreign Affairs Association of Japan 
Tokyo 




MITSUI BUSSAN KAMA, Ltd. 

(MITSUI & CO., LTD.) 

Capital ¥300,449,503 

Reserve Funds - - ¥244,286,148 

(SEPT., 1942) 

GENERAL EXPORTERS AND IMPORTERS, INSUR- 
ANCE AND SHIP AGENTS, GENERAL CONTRAC- 
TORS, SHIPOWNERS, SHIPBUILDERS, SAWMILL 
OWNERS, WHARFINGERS, INVESTMENT AND 
FINANCE, ACQUISITION AND RETENTION OF 
SECURITIES AND REAL PROPERTIES. 

Head Office: TOKYO, JAPAN 

Branch Offices and Representatives : 

HOME : 

Otaru, Hakodate, Kawasaki, Yokohama, Yokos ika, Nagoya, Osaka, Maizuru, T Cobe 
Okayama, Hiroshima Kure, Moji, Yawata, Wakamatsu, Miike, Nagasaki, Saseho', 
Taihoku, Takao, Kcijo, Fusan Heijo, Scishin, Etc. 

ABROAD : 

Daircn, Chinchou, Antung, Ncwchwang, (Yinkow), Mukden, Hsinking, Harbin, Tsi- 
tsihar, Mutanchiang, Cnamusiu, Pdan, Ti men, Tientsin, T; tung, Tniyunn, Krdgan, 
Cancnghu, Nanking, Wuhu, Hankow, Amoy Canton, Hongkorg, Haihow, Hanoi, 
Saigon, Manila, Bacold, Ccbu, DilVaO, Shonanto, Banjermar in, AL.cassar, Balikpapan, 
Mcdan, Palcmbang, Bangkok, Sourabaya, Scmarang, Batavia, Rangoon, etc. 

CORRESPONDENTS : 
Hrrlin : DcuUchc Mitsui Bussan AkitengcselJfc&BJt, Paris & Lyons : Socu te Anony- 
mc Francaisc Bussan, Buenos Abes .' Narnbei Campanie dc Irnportacion y Exportacion 
Sociedad Anonima, Rome : Y, I^ttfefcpttr' ^ 



A National Newspaper For International 

Readers 

STKe dn$(i^i MnnicU 

Published Daily Except Mondays 

History is today being made at lightning tempo. 
In addition to speed, the Mainichi offer to their English 
readers the following: 

JAPAN: An insight into what the Japanese are thinking. 
A day-to-day record, with many photographs, of what the 
Japanese are doing. 

GREATER EAST ASIA: Full coverage of the news from 
the front and of the momentous events occurring in Greater 
East Asia. 

WAR IN EUROPE: Reports from own correspondents in 
the key cities to cover the rapidly moving events. Greater 
lineage of foreign news than in the Japanese-language news- 
papers. 

Subscription Rates: 

Single Copies 7 sen 
(Delivered by Carrier) 
¥1.40 per month 

(By Mail, Payable in Advance) 
¥1.65 per month in Japan, Manchoukuo, and China 
¥2.60 Elsewhere 

(By the Year, Payable in Advance) 
¥18.40 in Japan, Manchoukuo, and China 
¥29.80 Elsewhere 

THE MAINICHI PUBLISHING CO. 

Osaka Tokyo Moji 




The Japan Year Book, 1942-43 
The South Seas Handbook, 1942-43 

FOR 

INTELLIGENT 
OUTLOOK 

and 

RECOGNITION 

of the 

EAST ASIAN 
SITUATION 

Now Ready 
for Sale 



Price (Postage Prepaid) 
The Japan Year Book : 

¥ zo in Japan, Manchoukuo, China 

¥ 25 Elsewhere 
The South Seas Handbook : 

¥ 7 in Japan, Manchoukuo, China 

¥ 10 Elsewhere 



Size 



Two Annuals in Set 
¥25 in Japan, Manchoukuo, China 
¥30 Elsewhere 

(Postage Prepaid) 

The Japan Year Book : 

57<x8 inches ; pp. 1200 ; cloth bound 
The South Seas Handbook : 

5x7V 4 inches ; pp. 350 ; cloth bound 



The Japan Year Book, 1942-43 
The South Seas Handbook 1 942-43 

, Now on the Market 

The Japan Year Book and the South Seas Handbook are in- 
exhaustive sources of information, covering practically every subject 
on this up-and-coming Empire that one may wish to know and the 
counties lying in this rigion. 

Every chapter is specially written for the Year Book and the 
Handbook by competent authorities, with all necessary figures brought 
as up-to-date as possible. They are the last word on reliable data and 
informative material concerning Japan and the South Sea region. 

They present an all-compassing view of the country and the 
region and their activities in every branch of national endeavour- 
political, economic, industrial, educational, cultural, social, etc. 



THE SOUTH SEAS HANDBOOK 



Since the march of the times has caused the world's attention to 
turn intensely to the South Sea region, we have made a novel departure 
this year and will publish the South Seas Handbook as an accompany- 
ing volume to the Japan Year Book. It is a neat resumd of facts, past 
and present, and the more important statistics of the countries situated 
in the region, and even by itself constitutes a vade mecum indispensable 
to those who wish to know something of the place or having to do tn 
this part of the world. The countries dealt with in the volume are : 

The East indies, The Philiphines, Malaya, French Indo-China, 
Thailand, Burma, Hongkong, New Guinea, etc. 

And the matter treated in it roughly includes : area and 
topography, climatic condition, population, history, culture an 
civilization, customs and manners, education, politics, defence, 
diplomacy, relations with Japan, Japanese activities, finances, money 
and banking, economics and trade, industries, natural resources, 
communications, the more important cities and places of hist° rl 
interest, etc. 



NIPPON TIMES 



Japan presented through the Japanese ; indispensable for realizing the 
fast moving situation in East Asia in general ; to understand, appreciate 
the Leader-Empire, its roles, aspirations, immediate and ultimate goals 
in particular; The oldest established, only English-language daily in 
Tokyo under Japanese control ; faithfully mirrors political, economic, 
cultural and social aspects. 

Subscription Rates : 1 Year ¥55.00 (foreign, prepaid, ¥97.00) J 
6 months ¥28.00 (foreign, prepaid, ¥49.00). 

NIPPON TIMES WEEKLY 

• 

A most popular publication, devoted to cultural activities and oret- 
4C as trade; profuseiy illustrated; stands high above all others in East 
Asia; special feature articles and regular departments in every number ; 
i£S Trade and Engineering Section highly reputed as authoritative 
sources for latest information in the field. 

Subscription Rates: all prepaid; Domestic, l Year ¥17.00; 
0 months ¥ 9.00; Forefcn, 1 Year ¥ 23.00 ; 6 month. ¥ 12.00. 

Published by 

THE NIPPON TIMES, LTD. 

EDITORIAL & BUSINESS OFFICE: 

I, UCHISAIWAI-CHO I-CHOME, KOJIMACHI-KU, Tokto 

THE PAPER FOR THOSE WHO WANT TO KNOW 



NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 



Katsuji Inahara, A. B., A. M., 
editor of Contemporary Japan, was 
previously foreign editor of the 
Osaka Asahi Sbimbuh and editor of the 
Tokyo Mainichi (formerly Tokyo Nicbi 
Nicbi) y English edition. He is the 
author of more than a dozen works 
mostly on international problems. 

Yoshinori May£ta, deputy for- 
eign editor of the Osaka Asabi 
Sbiwbtm, served as war correspondent 
in Ethiopia in 1935, then as the 
manager of its Rome branch, and 
after that as correspondent in the 
Iberian countries and Turkey. 

Shighetomo Sayegusa, LL. D., 
formerly embassay counsellor, is 
professor at Takushoku University 
and lecturer at Kenkoku University 
(Manchoukuo). He is the author of 
Shina no Gaikoh oyobi Zaisei (China's 
Diplomacy and Finance), Yyohitoh 
Gaikoh Konsaktt (A Treatise on Far 
Eastern Diplomacy), Shin Toh-a 
Kensetsu no Kohryo (Principles of 
Construction of New East Asia), etc. 

Heizo Soyano is deputy political 
editor of the Mainichi Shit?ibun i with 
which paper he has been connected 
for more than ten years as political 
correspondent. 

Tan£tsugu Sho-sa, rear-admiral 
(retired), is a director of the Ghenron 
Hohkoku-kai (National Service 
Publicists' Association) and the 
author of Nichibei Tairitsu-ron (Japan 
versus America), Rekisbi wa Tenkan-su 
(The Changing History), and Ghendai 
Kaigun (Modern Navies), Fttkamari- 
yttkit Nicbibei no Kiki (The Approach- 
ing Japanese-American Crisis), etc. 
Takizo Matsumoto is professor 



at Meiji University and concurrently 
a lecturer at Nippon Women's Uni- 
versity. He is the author of several 
works, Japanese and English, among 
which Beikokit no Tob-a Shinryakfi 
(American Invasion of East Asia) 
deserves special mention. 

Yeisuke Zensho, D. Sc. (Agric), 
has spent long years in Korea and 
Manchuria, being successively ad- 
viser to the Government-General of 
Korea, lecturer at the Seoul Higher 
Commercial School, adviser to the 
South Manchuria Railway Company 
and the General Affairs Bureau/of the 
Manchoukuo Government. Among 
his published works numbering about 
thirty are Saikin no Shina Kei^ai (Re- 
cent Economics of China), Sengo no 
Shina (China after the War), Chosenjin 
no Shogyo (Commerce in Korea), 
Chosen no KosakitKanshu (The Tenancy 
System of Korea), Chosen no Jinkob 
Kenkyu (Studies on the Population 
Problem of Korea) and Chosen no 
Juraku (Communities in Korea). 

Keisen Motoyama is founder and 
president of the Institute for Study 
of Oriental Folklore and the author 
of about a score of publications. 
They include \—Manshit Hokftsbi 
MingheiZusen (Manchuria and North 
China Folkcraft in Pictures), 2 vols., 
Fukusoh Min^pku Zusetsu (Illustrated 
History of Clothing), Kainantoh 
Mitrykushi (Folklore in Hainan 
Island), Manshn no Minghei (Folkcraft 
in Manchuria), Nippon Mins&foi 
Zushi (History of Japanese Folklore 
in Pictures), 20 vols., and Min^pku 
Shiryo Rjasan (A Collection of 
Folklore Materials). 



THE FOREIGN AFFAIRS ASSOCIATION 
OF JAPAN 

(Founded 193 1) 
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL 

Marquis Moritatsu Hosokawa Count Nobuaki Makino 

Seihin Ikeda, Esq. Hantaro Nagaoka, D. Sc. 

Viscount Kikujiro Ishii Kiheiji Onozuka, LL. D. 

Prince Fumimaro Konoye Baron Kijuro Shidehara 



Toshi Go Katsuji Inahara 

Managing Director Editor 



All contributions and correspondence should be addressed to the M 
mg Director, The Foreign Affairs Association of Japan. Contributions 
should be accompanied by a stamped envelope for return if Qot suitable for 
use. 

Neither the acceptance of and payment for an article, nor the sending of 
a proof, can be regarded as a guarantee of publication. & 

The articles in Contemporary Japan do not represent any consensus of 
opinions ; nor should the views expressed in them be taken as those of 
Contemporary Japan or the Foreign Affairs Association of Japan 

Matter appearing in Contemporary Japan may not be reprinted without tbt 
'Permission of The Foreign Affairs Association of Japan. 



Subscription Rates (Postage prepaid) 
Japan, China and Manchoukuo Elsewhere 
A single copy ¥1.00 ¥ 1,50 

One year ¥ 10.00 ¥15.00 



The Foreign Affairs Association of Japan, 
556-557 The Osaka Building, Hibiya Park, Tokyo 

Cable address : Foraff Tokyo 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



SEPTEMBER, 1943 
Convents 




March of Events 

Their Quebec Conference 

Facts behind Anti-Fascist Revolution 

Significance of Italian Catastrophe 

Metropolitan Government of Tokyo 

Trend of Axis-" Democracy " War 

Monisticism of America 

Industrial Growth of Korea 

Signboards of the Continent 



Katsuji Inahara 
Yoshinori May eta 
Shighetomo Sayegusa 
Hei-^o Soyano 
Tanetsugu Soh-sa 
Taki^o Matsumoto 
Yeisuke Zensho 
Keisen Motoya??m 



Japan's Periodicals — Extracts : 

Naoyuki Takeshi ta : Wartime Mobilization of Students— Toshio 
Sohma: Currency Warfare in China— Saburo Yoshida : Home Life 
and War 

Book Reviews : 

Katsuji Inahara : Amerika Min^okii Dan (America as It Is)— The China 
I Study Institute : Gbendai Shina no Sbomondai (Problems of Present-day 

China) — Takachiyo Uyemura : Gbendaibi no Kob-so (New Conception 
of Beauty) 

Chronicle of Current Events (July 19- August 20, i 943 ) 
Documentary Material : 

Thailand Acquires New Territories, Announcement by the Board of 
Information, August 20, 1943— Capitulation of the Badoglio Govern- 
ment (1) Statement by the Japanese Government, Septemper 10, i 9 43 
(2) Communique by the Japanese Government on Protective Sur- 
veillance, September 14, 1943 (3) J oint Declaration by Japan and 
Germany, September 15, 1943 



1089 
IO99 
1 109 
IIl8 
1126 
1132 
1 140 

1 147 
II56 



1*75 



II9I 
1201 



I2IO 



Where to Get "Contemporary Japan 



JAPAN 



BELGIUM 

DENMARK 

FINLAND 

FRANCE 

GERMANY 



HOLLAND 
ITALY 
SPAIN 
SWEDEN 



SWITZERLAND 
INDIA 

CHINA 



SHOH-NAN 
JAVA 

MANCHOUKUO 

THAILAND 
MALAYA 
TURKEY 



Single copies may be obtained or yearly subscriptions 
made at the following: 

Maruzen and Branches, Kyobunkan, Mitsukoshi 
?n?S ment 4 tC ? re u l ^ tlz] HoteI > Bookstore. 
"D^'TruSs 0 ^ Ni PP° QTimes ^obe). 
Andr. Fred. Host & Son, Copenhagen 
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, Helsingfors 
tri. Le Soudier, Paris 
Wurfel Verlag, Berlin 
A. Asher & Co., Berlin 

Grill's Bookshop, Budapest 
J. H. de Bussy, Amsterdam 
" Messaggerie Italiane " di Bologna 
Libreria E. Dossat, Madrid 

A sSX C E ' FritZCS KgL ^okhandel, 
Alexandre Jullien, Geneva 
Thacker, Spink & Co., Calcutta 
D. B Taraporevala Sons & Co., Bombay 
French Bookstore, Peking 
Oriental Book Store, Tientsin 
Kelly & Walsh, Ltd., Shanghai 
Uchiyama Shoten, Shanghai 
Kelly & Walsh, Ltd. 
G. Kolff & Co., Batavia 
J. W. F. Sluyter, Sourabaya 
Yamato Hotel, Hsinking 
Yamato Hotel, Mukden 
Joseph Kiew Agency, Bangkok 
Kelly & Walsh, Ltd., Shoh-nan 
Grande Librairie Mondiale, Istanbul 



The above list is partly out of date dite to exigencies of war > but it is beino 
continued until it can be properly revised. 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



SEPTEMBER, 1943 




Volume XII, No. 9 



MARCH OF EVENTS 

The capitulation of Italy has not come as a surprise either to Japan 
or to Germany. Both the Axis nations had anticipated 
Capitulates the inevitability when the Badoglio Cabinet, on the 
resignation of Signor Mussolini as Premier and Leader 
of the Government, ordered the forthwith dissolution of the Fascist 
Party. On July 24 at an emergency session of the Fascist Grand 
Council a resolution moved by Count Grandi, requesting the King to 
take supreme command of the land, sea and air forces of Italy an 
adjudicate on State matters in accordance with the provisions at n 
Constitution, was carried by an overwhelming majority. The s ess *° 
of the council lasted until the early hours of the following day 
fact which demonstrated the exertions made by Signor Mussolini an 
his supporters to prevent the culmination of the brewing upheava . 
There, is no doubt that the war reverses suffered by Italy, particular y 
the setback experienced in Sicily, coupled with the air bombardmen 
of Rome prompted the majority members of the Fascist p r ^ s 
Council to approve the course mapped out by Count Grandi i* 1 ^ e 
resolution. But the abrupt dissolution of the Fascist Party gave 



impression that Marshal Badoglio and his ministerial colleagues 
heading toward a defection of their own making. On assump* 1 ^ 
premiership, Marshal Badoglio solemnly pledged to remain l°y a ^ 
the terms of the Tripartite Alliance Pact and to the agreement 
conclude a separate peace. Furthermore, his 'Cabinet S aVe i?u en o 
undertaking separately to Japan and Germany that there would ^ 
change in Italy's policy. Consequent upon the withdrawal or ^ 
German forces from Sicily on August 17, it became apparent 
Italy was seriously contemplating to step out of war. The fact 
on September 3, the day on which British troops started landing 



1089 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



the tip of Calabria Province, a truce was signed between the represen- 
tatives of Marshal Badoglio and General Dwight Eisenhower, com- 
mander-in-chief of Anglo-American forces, is evidence enough that 
Marshal Badoglio had earlier made up his mind to offer the uncondi- 
tional surrender of Italy to Britain and the United States. Although 
the agreement for the suspension of hostilities was concluded on 
September 3, it was on September 8 that a formal announcement of 
Italy's surrender was made. At 7 : 45 p.m. on September 8 Marshal 
Badoglio in a broadcast from Rome said : " The Italian Government 
recognized that it would be impossible to continue unequal resistance 
against the overwhelming enemy power and, with the aim of avoiding 
further serious unhappiness for the people, requested General Dwight 
Eisenhower, commander-in-chief of Anglo-American forces, that 
hostilities be suspended. The request was accepted. Thus every- 
where the Italian forces must cease hostile activity against the 
American and British -forces. The Italian forces, however, will resist 
attacks from other quarters." The official statements issued in Tokyo 
and Berlin rightly characterized Italy's surrender as a deliberate vio- 
lation of the three-Power accord and the agreement not to conclude 
a separate peace. Italy's withdrawal from the Axis front has not 
caused any dislocation in the prosecution of hostilities by Japan and 
Germany. The studied opinion is that the sudden falling away of 
Italy from the Axis camp and its junction with Britain and the 
United States is not an event that can be underestimated, but com- 
pared with the difficulties of fighting shoulder to shoulder with an 
uncertain ally, Marshal's Badoglio 's capitulation may be regarded as 
having left the Axis front more homogeneous and stronger for 
intensifying military operations. 

The attainment of independence by Burma in the midst of war is an 
event, the importance of which cannot be belittled 
tetependw™ even b ? the sternest critics of J a P*n. After the third 
Anglo-Burmese War, the entire kingdom of Burma 
came under the rule of Britain. Since the separation of that country 
from India, the agitation for national political liberation had become 
very active, in spite of the positive measures enforced by the aliep. 
administration. Following the outbreak of war in greater East Asia, 
Japanese forces moved into Burma, and the Burmese people readily 
co-operated with them to hasten the eclipse of British influence from 
their country. Close on the heels of the British defeat in Burma, a 
provisional administrative council was organized with Dr. Ba Maw, 



1090 



MARCH OF EVENTS 



prominent nationalist leader, as chief administrator. In the meantime, 
Premier General Hideki Tohjo in a declaration in the Diet made clear 
Japan's intention of granting independence to Burma. On the basis 
of this declaration, a Burma Independence Preparatory Committee, 
comprising distinguished Burmans from all walks of life, was set up 
to draft an independent constitution. While the committee was 
engaged in its labour, Dr. Ba Maw accompanied by a few front-rank 
leaders visited Tokyo, and conferred with Premier Tohjo and other 
members of the Japanese Cabinet. At this auspices time, Premier Tohjo, 
speaking in the Diet, stated that Burma would be made independent 
within this year. On August i Burma proclaimed its independence 
and regained its legitimate sovereign status. Immediately a strong 
Cabinet was formed with Dr. Ba Maw as Premier and Head of State, 
and a Burmese-Japanese treaty of alliance was signed between Thakin 
Nu, Foreign Minister of Burma, and Mr. Renzo Sawada, Japanese 
Ambassador to Burma. Moreover, Burma declared war on Britain 
and the United States to fight for the consummation of the objective 
of the current war in greater East Asia. Besides Japan, other 
prominent Axis nations have already extended their formal recogni- 
tion to the new independent Government of Burma. Premier 
Tohjo and the Japanese Government in separate statements 
warmly welcomed the independence of Burma, and added that 
Burma's participation in war would strengthen the unity among 
the nations of greater East Asia. Premier and Head of State Dr. 
Ba Maw, in a radio speech from Rangoon on August 2, thanked Japan 
for its immense support for the regaining of independence by his 
country, and urged all other East Asiatic nations to unite firmly with 
Japan for stabilizing co-existence and co-prosperity in this region of 
the Orient. Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose, Indian nationalist leader, 
attended the celebration of Burmese independence at Rangoon, and 
discussed with Dr. Ba Maw various questions of mutual interest. D r - 
Ba Maw pledged the wholehearted aid of Burma to Mr. Bose in his 
movement for the independence of India. Mr. Bose in a public. address 
congratulated Burma for its attainment of independence, and urged 
the Indians to intensify their nationalist activity for the political 
emancipation of their country. 

To return the courtesy of the recent visit to Thailand of Mr. Kazuo 
«t f Thai Aoki ' Minister for Greater East Asia Affairs, the 

Foreign Minister Bangkok Government sent a mission headed by 
its Foreign Minister fe Wichit Wichit-Wathakan to 

1091 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

this country. The mission arrived in Tokyo on August 3. Foreign 
Minister Wichit-Wathakan was received in audience by His Majesty 
the Emperor on August 7. In a press interview two days earlier, the 
Thai Foreign Minister expressed his satisfaction at the war results 
hitherto obtained by Japan, and emphasized that Thailand was doing 
its best for the realization of the objective of the common war against 
Britain and the United States. He continued : " The significance of 
co-prosperity sphere has become clear on account of Japan's generous 
actions as manifested in the attainment of independence by Burma, the 
restoration of foreign concessions and settlements to the Nanking 
Government, the incorporation of four Malay states and two Shan states 
into Thai territory and the assistance that is being given to the 
Philippines to become an independent nation." During his stay in 
Tokyo, the Thai Foreign Minister called on Premier Tohio, Foreign 
Minister Shighemitsu, Greater East Asia Affairs Minister Aoki, Navy 
Minister Shimada and other Government leaders. After making a 
short tour of Japan and Manchoukuo, the Thai Foreign Minister and 
the members of his mission returned to Bangkok. 

When the China affair ensued, the Korean people desired that the 

Military Conscrip. SJSt f m If. mili , tar y conscription should be made 
tion in Korea applicable to them. In response to their desire, 

c J? e ,. J a P anese Government enforced the Army 

Special Volunteer Ordinance in the peninsula in ,938. In the first year 
of the enforcement of the ordinance, the number of applicants totalled 
3,000 and the figure jumped to 144,000 in i 94 t. On the outbreak of 
war in greater East Asia, the number came up to 250,000. In acknow- 
ledgment of the great enthusiasm shown by the Korean people, the 
Japanese Government on August 1, this year, extended the operation of 
the military conscription system to the peninsula. The actual 
enlistment of Korean youths in the military service will begin from 
next year. 

The Philippine Independence Preparatory Committee on September 6 
P.I. Constitution T.Z'L bv ^ ° f ^ C ° nStitUti ° n 

Drafted drawn U P b y the sub-committee for drafting the 

consitution. It is understood that the text would 
be made public shortly. The sub-committee by completing the 
drafting of the constitution, which forms the basis of Philippine 
independence, has taken a definite step forward toward the attain- 
ment of the avowed objective. The draft constitution has been 



1092 



MARCH OF EVENTS 



prepared three months after Premier General Hideki Tohjo promised 
independence to the Philippines. The final decision on it was taken 
at a joint meeting of the representatives of various influential quarters 
in the country, including members of the Philippine Independence 
Preparatory Committee, high officials of the Executive Council and 
distinguished personages of the Kalibapi held for two days from 
September 6. The Philippine Independence Preperatory Committee 
was organized on June 7 and since then it had been working out 
the details of the plan for independence. When the time came for 
drafting the constitution, it appointed a drafting sub-committee to 
undertake the necessary labour. 

The southern Pacific has now become the most important sector of 
hostilities between Japan and the United States. 
SZn Pacific The Imperial Headquarters on August 23 ; an- 
nounced that the Japanese Army and Navy 
garrisons in the southern Pacific, despite their numerical inferiority, 
are stubbornly counter-attacking and repulsing the invading forces. 
A powerful American contingent attempted to land on Vella Lavella 
Island, but the Japanese forces launched furious attacks, with the result 
that the American side lost many of its transports. Meanwhile the 
warplanes of the Japanese Navy repeatedly bombed and machine- 
gunned American landing parties and naval escorts. After a terrific 
encounter, the American side succeeded in landing only part of its 
forces on Bilao. At present, in line with the operations of the. Japa- 
nese Army and Navy garrisons in the southern Pacific, the Japanese 
naval air arm and the surface units are attempting to frustrate the 
American Command's plan of reinforcing its fighting forces. 

In view of the phenomenal increase in demand for funds to develop 
the resources of the southern region, the Southern 
DZilSmeT hem Development Bank has decided to float bonds as 
from the third quarter of the current fiscal year. 
The bank has not only functioned as the principal Japanese monetary 
institution in the occupied areas, but has also shouldered part of the 
financing of the developmental enterprises of industrialists at home 
interested in the southern region. Hitherto it has covered the ac- 
commodations to the latter with loans from the deposit bureau of the 
Finance Ministry and the Industrial Bank of Japan, but under the new 
arrangement it is to raise the necessary funds by bond issues. Un 
account of the peculiar nature of the bank, no underwriting syndicate 



1093 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

wilJ be formed. The deposit bureau and other Government quarters 
are to underwrite the bonds. In regard to the financing of home 
enterprises interested in the southern region, the Southern Develop- 
ment Bank is to accommodate the funds for durable equipment and 
other long-term capital, and the Yokohama Specie Bank and the Bank 
of Taiwan are to lend the operating capital. 

The Nanking Government on August 9 decided to enforce the com- 
Nanking Take, Bold pulsor y P ur chase of the hoarded stocks of cotton 
Economic Step yarns and textiles held in Shanghai for speculative 

P ur P ose s in order to ameliorate the commodity 
price situation in the Yangtze valley. By this measure, Nanking has 
not only put the brakes on the growing spiral of inflation, but has 
contributed much to enhance economic stability in Shanghai and 

which th PV p«,lj° SOme 6 °°>°°°p™ts of cotton goods, on 
tie new steo how T P ? r ° fitS - The enforcement of 

at ofth? NanSS £ haS eliminat£d that P--bility. The primary 
cotton v^sSlSr^ 611 * in f ° rcin S out the hoard ed stocks of 
™teZIZ?o?™Z 1S 1° US£ them aS a - lub "cant to smooth the 
rS tS^ g °° ds and a g" cu1 ^ P^duce between 

oiC^X^^J^^ » cotton and^ung 

By effident distribution of the u ^ f^T* ,nto C " y " 
sninnino- and nth-r «5 ? a g"cultural produce thus made available, 

^,S^3tt£Sr ? Shanghai r>fe stimulat l 

output of manufactured S^^^ 
exchange for further supplies of raw cotton and other agricultural 
crops. Constant repetition of this process is expected to impart a 
tremendous impetus to the economic progress of China. 

The Central Electric Power Regulation Commission of the Communica- 
Power for War " ons Ministry on August 12 decided on the priority 
Industries attribution of electric power to the aircraft, shipping 

light metals, iron and coal industries through amend- 
ments in the electric consumption regulations. The measure adopted 
in accordance with the 1945 Electric Power Mobilization Draft Plan 
approved by the Cabinet on May 3, is designed to assure the supply of 
adequate power to those industries in which extraordinary exertions 

1094 



MARCH OF EVENTS 



must be made to boost production. 

July, the month in which the Railway Ministry in co-operation with the 
' Commerce and Industry and the Agriculture and 
Transit Up Forestry Ministries launched a nation-wide move- 

ment to increase the transit of the priority goods, 
saw a most favourable turn in the transportation situation. As much 
as ten per cent, more coal was sent by rail during that month than in 
the corresponding month of last year. There were also increases 
• respectively of seventy per cent, in the shipment of pig iron, fifty per 
cent, in various ores and twenty per cent, in lumber. The average 
increase for all the priority transit goods was fifteen per cent. 

Despite the various summer season hitches, production at the Yawata 
plant of the Japan Iron and Steel Works during the month 
Steel Output Q £ was most salutary, reflecting the efficiency of 
both the management and workers. Output exceeded 
production allocations in pig iron, steel ingots and finished steel mate- 
rials, the last showing an increase of thirty per cent, against the pre- 
vious month. This favourable tone is expected to continue in the 
coming months. The production of special steels also indicated a 
marked advance, yielding the highest record since the commencement 
of such operation. This is ascribed to the new process adopted at the 
plant of combining open-hearth furnace with electric furnace. 

The "big five" of commercial banks in the first half of the current 
year enjoyed a notable increase in their profits accom- 
Profit Sh ° W P an Y in g increased deposits ahd loans. As their business 
activities are considered a clear index to the success of 
the highly planned banking system established under the exigencies of 
war centring upon increased savings, bond absorption and industrial 
capitalization, much attention has been focussed on the results for the 
first half-year term. The four of the group— the Mitsubishi, the 
Yasuda, the Sumitomo and the Sanwa — netted ¥32,094,000, showing 
an increase of ¥1,896,000 over the previous business term. The 
Teikoku Bank, which opened in April, made a clear profit of ¥6,832,- 
000 for the three months of April, May and June. 

The reorganization of industries in Malaya is progressing speedily with 
timely control regulations laid down by the Japanese 
Malay Indus- military administration. The recently formulated 
trializatwn 7 , r 1 • 1 • 1 • r +"U~ 

five-year plan for the industrial construction or tne 

1095 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



southern region, covering mining, manufacture, agriculture and 
forestry, is being worked out alongside a five-year plan for the fibre 
industry. Malaya is contributing much to the success of these plans. 
The fundamental policy, being applied for the present stage of develop- 
ment, is to produce whatever is needed on the spot so as to dispense 
with supplies from overseas, while concentrating all economic efforts on 
the replenishment of Japan's fighting strength. 

The development of the pharmaceutical industry in Java, aimed at 
securing self-sufficiency in drugs for the island, has now 
in Java reached a stage where various medicinals, including 
quinine, sedatives, lenitives and laxatives, are being 
produced and sold at a low cost to the Japanese, as well as to the local 
inhabitants. Under the Dutch rule, except for the production of 
quinine, care was not taken to develop this line of project Almost 
all drugs had to be imported from abroad. With Japanese occupation 
of the island, immediate steps were taken to utilize the abundant medi- 
cinal herbs obtainable in the area. From some 300 herbs found in 
Java thirty drugs have already been experimentally prepared. 

The second East Asia cultural convention was opened in Tokyo on 
August 24 for a three-day session with a stirrins- 

o£Zt C TZ e f 0n addreSS from Mr - W Amau > President of thl 
Board of Information. He regretted that the 
representatives of Thailand, Burma, Indo-China, the Philippines and 
other southern countries have not been able to attend the convention 
and added : " The fact that the literary men of Japan, China and Man- 
choukuo have assembled here is, indeed, deeply significant." The 
first two days of the convention were devoted to speeches delivered by 
the representative delegates of Japan, China and Manchoukuo. The 
third day session, besides offering awards to writers, transacted routine 
business and adopted resolutions manifesting the determination of the 
literary men of Japan, China and Manchoukuo to create a greater 
East Asia literature through joint efforts. The convention ended on 
August 27. Mr. Amau stated that the construction of a greater East 
Asia co-prosperity sphere was interwoven with the creation of a greater 
East Asia literature, which would solidify further the unity and com- 
radeship among the nations of this region. He continued: " Of 
course, the countries of East Asia have each its own literature. How- 
ever, it is my expectation that while the unique features of each will have 
every opportunity for individual development, there will come forth 

1096 



MARCH OF EVENTS 



a greater literature founded upon a large concept and possessing a 
superior technique. The war has now attained the white heat of fury- 
At the same time, the war between culture no less than the armed con- 
flict is becoming increasingly severe." Major-General Nakao Yahaghi, 
chief of the Army press section of the Imperial Headquarters, explained 
to the delegates the objective of Japan's war against Britain and the 
United States, and urged them to contribute their might to the creation 
of a greater East Asia literature truly representative of greater East 
Asia. On August 26 and 27, the assembled delegates exhuastively 
discussed the subject of evolving a new literature common to all coun- 
tries of greater East Asia. At the outset of the discussion a condolence 
motion was adopted mourning the death of Mr. Toson Shimazaki, one 
of Japan's foremost novelists. Mr. Chen Liang-shih from central 
China said that the mission before the literary men of Japan and China 
was to grasp the traditional ideas of East Asia and implant them firmly 
in "the minds of their fellow countrymen. Mr. Seijiro Yamada from 
Manchoukuo declared that the literary men of East Asia were keen on 
contributing to the consummation of the objective of the current war 
in water East Asia. Several other speakers, including Mr. Kan 
Kikuchi, popular Japanese novelist, and Chinese and Japanese women 
delegates, expressed their considered opinions on the subject and 
endorsed the necessity of evolving a greater East Asia literature. Mr. 
Haruo Sato, Japanese novelist and poet, suggested that it would be 
beneficial to include the promotion of the Japanese concept of national- 
ism as an item of greater sphere culture. The convention formulated a 
series of measures to hasten the birth of a new culture and new literature 
in greater East Asia. A resolution was passed exhorting the literary 
men of East Asia to extend moral aid to the cause of Indian independ- 
ence. It was also decided to send a delegation to the Philippines to 
observe and study all aspects of cultural reorientation there. Lastly, 
the convention agreed to stimulate the interchange of women's culture. 
The first East Asia cultural convention was held in Tokyo nine months 
ago. In the interval many epochal events had taken place in East 
Asia. Consequently, the second convention met under happy cir- 
cumstances and a better atmosphere. The speeches delivered by the 
delegates signified that the artificial cultural barriers of the countries of 
East Asia have become practically non-existent. As a result of the 
holding of the convention, the tendency for having a common East 
Asiatic culture has become more than pronounced in each country of 
this sphere of the Orient. 

1097 ' 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



In conformity with the terms of the Japan-Thailand Cultural Agree- 
ment > cultural niissions will be exchanged between 
CuU^IimL^L the two countries this fall. The Thai Govern- 
ment has decided to send a mission in October, 
appointing either Foreign Minister Wichit Wichit-Watbakan, His 
Serene Highness Prince Varnvaidyakara Varavarn, or Education 
Minister Prayoon Pamon Montri as its leader. The mission will 
include the State dancing troupe, authorities on southern customs, 
manners, medicine and archeology and leaders in fine art circles. As 
to the mission from Japan, the Society for International Cultural Rela- 
tions is negotiating with the leaders of various cultural quarters to 
complete the selection of the personnel. It is understood that Prince 
Nobusuke Takatsukasa will head the Japanese mission. The members 
of the mission selected thus far include Dr. Chuta Ito, noted architec- 
tural authority, Baron Kikan Takaghi, M. D., Dr. Daisetz Suzuki 
authority on Zen Buddhism, Dr. Masao Ohta, well-known literary 
figure, Mr. Kunio Yanaghita, authority on Japanese folklc^re, Mr 
Kohsaku Yamada, noted composer and conductor, Mr. Taikfo Yoko- 
yama, celebrated traditional painter, Mr. Tsuguji Fujita, famous 
oil painter, Mr. Yaso Saijo, popular poet, and Rear-Admiral Jiro 
Nango, president of the Judoh Association of the Kodoh-kan. In line 
with the dispatch of the cultural mission, a plan is also under way to 
send a party of exchange professors. 



1098 



THEIR QUEBEC CONFERENCE 



By KATSUJI INAHARA 

THE Anglo-American conference, which opened at Quebec, 
Canada, on August n, was the sixth of its kind since the 
drawing up of the Atlantic Charter. Following its conclusion 
on August 24, a joint communique was issued by Prime Minister 
Churchill and President Roosevelt. It elicited the information 
that a fresh plan had been drafted to intensify military operations 
and mqintain utmost co-ordination among the land, sea and air 
forces both nations, that a decision was reached to initiate 
offensives against the territories controlled by Japan and extend 
more aids to Chungking, that a new political programme was 
chalked out to facilitate the execution of military projects, in- 
cluding the improvement of relations with the French Committee 
of National Liberation, and that an agreement was arrived at to 
hold at a later date a three-Power conference among Britain, the 
United States and the Soviet Union. 

The first point deserves no comment, for it is natural on the 
part of Britain and America to frame unified schemes for the 
smooth prosecution of hostilities. The second and third points 
are noteworthy, because they not only indicate the launching of 
offensives against Japan in greater East Asia and Germany m 
Europe, but also give hint to the carrying out of political cam- 
paigns injurious to Axis interests and advantageous to the 
strengthening of the power of anti- Vichy elements. The fourth 
point merely recognizes the desirability of holding a tripartite 
conference with a view to appeasing the Kremlin. The fact that 
the communique was quite lengthy and expressive in comparison 
with the earlier cryptic statements denotes that both Prime Min- 
ister Churchill and President Roosevelt intended it more for home 



1099 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



consumption than for the digestion of the international public. 

It is apparent that, from the political angle, the Quebec 
Conference laid considerable stress on hastening the aboutface 
in the attitude of the Badoglio administration, by taking due 
advantage of the dissolution of the Fascist Party and the favour- 
able turn in the Sicilian campaign. On August 17, when the 
Quebec Conference was still in active session, the Italo-German 
forces withdrew from Sicily. As a result of the termination of 
the Sicilian campaign, Prime Minister Churchill and President 
Roosevelt must have decided to exert heavy political pressure on 
the Italian Government. It must be remembered that in the 
midst of the Sicilian campaign General Dwight Eisenhower, 
commander-in-chief of Anglo-American forces, made public a 
demand for the unconditional surrender of Italy. This demand 
might have been renewed after the Italo-German Wes had 
taken up new positions in Calabria Province. It now tianspires 
that negotiations for a truce were started by the Badoglio Cabinet 
before the British contingents landed on the southern tip of 
Italy. Consequently, it can be conjectured that the terms of 
Italy's capitulation were prepared during the Quebec Conference 
by the two Chief Executives of Britain and the United States 

There is no doubt that the Quebec Conference pulled the 
strings to alter the political proscenium of Italy. It is probable 
that the conference concluded on August 24, because by that 
time Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt had been 
assured of Italy s willingness to surrender unconditionally It 
has become known that the Badoglio Ministry signed a truce 
with Britain and America on September 3, the day on which the 
British contingents commenced landing on Calabria Province 
The truce could not have been signed on that day unless fuller 
negotiations had taken place earlier, at least, spread over a period 
of ten to twelve days. It has been reported that preliminary 
negotiations were concluded in neutral European countries 
between the representatives of Marshal Badoglio and British 
envoys. This means that such negotiations took place toward 
the close of the Quebec Conference, which, it is unthinkable, 



1 100 



THEIR QUEBEC CONFERENCE 



would not have propelled Marshal Badoglio's acceptance of the 
capitulation terms presented by Prime Minister Churchill and 
President Roosevelt. 

It may be that, at first, the Quebec Conference framed a 
political plan to undermine the morale of the Italian nation. 
London and Washington did not visualize that the Badoglio 
administration would switch to a policy of withdrawal from 
war in the course of the Sicilian campaign or immediately after 
it. Hence, they gave currency to the Eisenhower demand. 
The moment they came to know that Marshal Badoglio was 
contemplating to secede from the Axis camp, they hurriedly 
drew up Italy's surrender terms acceptable to them and 
transmitted the same to the representatives of the Italian 
Government through the British envoys in neutral European 
countries whom they had approached. Although the Anglo- 
Americal nations compelled Italy to sign a humiliating truce on 
September 3, the official announcement in that regard was not 
made until Marshal Badoglio in a broadcast declaration from 
Rome on September 8 revealed the capituation of Italy and stated 
that Italy would resist " attacks from other quarters." From 
this proviso it is understandable why Marshal Badoglio allowed 
four clear days' grace to the Anglo-American command to land 
its forces on several parts of Calabria Province. 

The Anglo-American political move formulated at the 
Quebec Conference has borne fruit. Unfortunately, Britain and 
the United States did not calculate that Germany, in anticipation 
of an Italian surrender, would get ready effective counter-moves. 
On September 8, with the formal announcement of Italy's 
capitulation, powerful Reich units placed the major portion of 
the Italian mainland under German control and began furious 
attacks on Anglo-American positions. Meanwhile, the Italian 
garrisons in the Balkans were disarmed and the control of the 
Italian insular possessions in the Adriatic zone were taken over 
by Germany. On top of this, Signor Mussolini and other pro- 
minent Fascist leaders were rescued from detention. Simul- 
taneously, a Fascist Republican regime under the leadership of 



1101 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

Signor Mussolini was put up in northern Italy. All these 
swift German steps localized the reaction of Marshal Badoglio's 
submission to Britain and the United States. At present Italy 
has become divided into two areas, one under the domination of 
the Anglo-American nations and the other under the control of 
the new administrative set-up of Signor Mussolini backed up by 
forceful Reich assistance. 

tt • c lon S * s Fascis ™ remained in power, Britain and the 
United States frequently stated that they were fighting Fascism 
and not the Italian people. But when the Badoglio Cabinet was 
formed, they declared that they would have to fight the Italian 
people if they continued to collaborate with Germany At the 
same time, to feel the political pulse of the new administration, 
they proferred the Eisenhower demand as a ballon d'essai. Being 
far better trained and experienced than the United States in 
political manoeuvres, Britain, foresaw that the demarfd would 
be rejected, and that the move would not make a favourable im- 
pression on the Badoglio Cabinet unless it offered its good 
offices. Consequently, the Quebec Conference explored means 
and avenues to win over Italy through political channel instead 
or prosecuting protracted military operations 

Both Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt 
knew from the results of the landing on Sicily that it would be 
extremely costly to wrest the entire Italy by force. The former 
must have thought that it would be profitable to repeat the 
political stroke Britain had applied during the last World War 
to win Italy from the Triple Alliance. With that end in view 
the contacts between the representatives of Marshal Badoglio 
and the British envoys in neutral European countries were 
established. The Quebec Conference remained in session until 
the opinions expressed by the Italian representatives were 
transmitted to Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt 
who, on receipt of them, made known the capitulation terms 
acceptable to Britain and the United States. Had Marshal 
Badoglio rejected the Anglo-American terms and determined 
himself to fight out to the last, Prime Minister Churchill and 



1102 



THEIR QUEBEC CONFERENCE 



President Roosevelt would have been obliged to recast their 
political strategy toward Italy formulated at the fag end of the 
Quebec Conference. 

The relations between the Soviet Union and the Anglo- 
American nations are not wholly satisfactory. Although they 
have made common cause to wage war against Germany, they 
are unable to stabilize a perfect teamwork on account of their 
irreconcilable political desires. The Quebec Conference was 
convened and closed without the participation of the Soviet 
Union. When the question of Moscow's non-participation at 
the conference was being played up in the international press, 
the Kremlin in a brief notification said that no invitation was 
sent to Soviet Russia. Certain quarters commented that the 
exclusion of Moscow was arranged in deference to the existing 
Soviet- Japanese relations governed under the mutual neutrality 
pact. As the conference deliberated on offensive strategies against 
Japan, it was natural for Soviet Russia to have dissociated itself 
from such matters. On the other hand, the conference discussed 
exhaustively the prosecution of hostilities in Europe in a more 
effective manner— an issue in which Moscow is beyond doubt 
vitally interested. Further, Prime Minister Churchill and Pre- 
sident Roosevelt stated that Premier Stalin was informed of the 
proceedings of the conference. Because the sponsors of the 
conference took pains to acquaint Premier Stalin with the subjects 
discussed and decisions reached, it would not be wishful to 
assume that the Soviet Union itself declined to take part in the 
Quebec pourparlers by way of resenting the Anglo-American 
inability to organize a second front in Europe as desired by the 
Red Army. 

So it is obvious that the Quebec Conference paid due atten- 
tion to devise ways and means to improve Britain and America s 
relations with the Soviet Union. The announcement that the 
three Chief Executives would meet in a conference in the near 
f utu re disclosed that the Soviet question had been discussed 
from all possible angles. The Anglo-American nations feel that 
the Soviet Union, instead of remaining as their military ally, is 

1103 



THEIR QUEBEC CONFERENCE 

trying to drive a wedge into their political aspirations. As 
against this, the Soviet Union entertains the belief that Britain 
and the United States, without fulfilling their military obligations 
to it, are making it to shoulder the defence of the eastern front 
for their benefit at the expense of the wishes of the Kremlin in 
its sphere of Europe. In view of this disunanimity, the Anglo- 
American-Soviet collaboration is not functioning properly. At 
the Quebec Conference, it is likely, the Soviet demand for a 
second European front was considered from the standpoint of 
bettering Anglo-American strategic operations against Germany 
and not from the viewpoint of giving substantial relief to the 
Red Army. The Kremlin cannot but regard such an expediency 
as the sidetracking of its expectation. 

Earlier, the Soviet Union maintained that the Sicilian cam- 
paign did not constitute a second front as understood by it 
On September 17 the Moscow newspaper Prdvda, in refuting the 
claim of the commander-in-chief of the Polish refugee forces 
that owing to Italy's capitulation and the establishment of 
Anglo-American hold over southern Italy fifty German divisions 
have been diverted from the eastern front, said that the London- 
Washington operations in Italy could not be construed as a second 
front, and requested the immediate large-scale landing on western 
Europe. It went on to explain that by this summer the German 
divisions on the eastern front have been probably increased to 
212; whereas in August 1941 the Germans had 147 divisions 
distributed along the entire front and the number was increased 
to 179 in August 1942. Thus arguing, the paper asserted that 
the Red Army is still bearing the major brunt of German on- 
slaughts, even though the Soviet Union has made a series of 
important recoveries. It appears that as long as the Anglo- 
American forces refrain from attacking the " European fortress " 
of Germany, the Soviet Union would continue to give vent to 
its dissatisfaction. 

It is imaginable that no concrete formula, political or military, 
was designed at the Quebec Conference to set right the grievances 
of Soviet Russia. If any decision was reached at all, it was in 



1 104 



X 



THEIR QUEBEC CONFERENCE 

the nature of a makeshift to keep the Red Army wholly occupied 
in fighting Germany. The political confrontation between the 
Anglo-American nations on the one side and the Soviet Union 
on the other is, indeed, acute. The Kremlin entertains ter- 
ritorial desires with regard to Poland and the Baltic States. It 
also wishes to extend its influence to the Balkans. Moreover, 
it hopes to secure a sea outlet through the Dardanelles. All 
these expectations of the Kremlin clash with the aspirations of 
Britain and the United States. The rift between the Moscow 
Government and the Emigre Polish administration in the final 
analysis connotes a political struggle between Soviet Russia and 
the Anglo-American nations. The Soviet Union, which is 
fighting valiantly, thereby aiding the war cause of Britain and 
the United States, is justified in seeking a moderation in the 
political aspirations of its partners. But London and Washing- 
ton, which look upon Moscow merely as its sword against Ger- 
many, are not agreeable to give a straight answer to the political 
project of the Kremlin. They are inclined to go on temporizing 
until the time when their alliance with Moscow becomes no 
longer necessary. Perhaps to keep up this temporizing policy, 
Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt decided at the 
Quebec Conference to hold a meeting with Premier Stalin at 

some future date. < 

The collaboration between the Soviet Union and the Anglo- 
American nations is still being maintained, because both sides 
find it useful in the prosecution of their common war against 
Germany. As long as the necessity for joint military operations 
exists, there would be no radical change in the Soviet-" Demo- 
cratic " alliance, though each party may try to give prominence 
to its political propensities. The Soviet Union is aware that 
co-operation with Britain and the United States, till a fundamental 
change occurs in the European situation favourable to it, is the 
wisest course. . Similarly, Britain and America acknowledge 
that the Soviet Union must be kept as their partner until a 
definite improvement in their positions in Europe is forth- 
coming. This way of thinking on the part of the three allies 



1105 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



is frustrating the adoption of a one-way policy. At the Casa- 
blanca parley and the following Washington Conference the 
Soviet Union intimated its inability to attend, for it was not 
anxious to be drawn into any political deal. It is likely that for 
the same reason it stayed away from the Quebec discussions. 
Surprisingly enough, in the midst of the Quebec Conference it 
recalled Ambassadors Maisky and Litvinov, respectively from 
London and Washington — a move which reflected as though 
the Soviet Union's difference with Britain and the United States 
had come to the surface. 

It needs no imagination to perceive that the paramount task 
of the Quebec Conference was to seek a formula for the solution 
of the Soviet question. The indifference shown to it by the 
Kremlin and also the recall of Ambassadors Maisky and Litvinov 
must have upset the plan of Prime Minister Churchill and Pre- 
sident Roosevelt. Perhaps that is why they came to the decision 
of holding a meeting with Premier Stalin. In spite of the latest 
Italian situation, Premier Stalin has not taken any step which 
could be interpreted as a sign of betterment in the Anglo- 
American-Soviet relations. The miscarriage of the Anglo- 
American plan in Italy must have all the more hardened the 
attitude of the Kremlin to seek the earliest formation of a 
second front in western Europe. It appears that the Soviet 
Union would heartily come to harmonious terms with Britain 
and the United States, if and when these two nations organize 
a genuine second European front and consider its long-standing 
political desires in their true perspective. 

Curious as it may seem, there exists a disagreement of views 
between Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt with 
regard to post-war adjustments. To be plain, the post-war 
political programme of Britain differs from that of the United 
States, and this difference is hampering the materialization of a 
constructive understanding with the Soviet Union. Both 
London and Washington each has its own policy with regard to 
Moscow. In order to adjust relations with Soviet Russia, they 
must first of all evolve a unified Soviet policy. The Quebec 

1106 



THEIR QUEBEC CONFERENCE 

Conference failed to settle the Soviet question, because no 
unified Soviet policy was formulated by Britain and the United 
States on account of their individual self-interest. 

The Anglo-American decision to intensify military opera- 
tions against Japan and dispatch aids to Chungking points out the 
earnest adoption of a two-front offensive formula. At the 
eleventh hour, Chungking's Foreign Minister, T. V. Soong, and 
American Secretary of State Cordell Hull took part in the Quebec 
Conference. It may be that T. V. Soong was called to attend 
the conference in pursuance of a representation made by General 
Chiang Kai-shek to Prime Minister Churchill and President 
Roosevelt. Cordell Hull's attendance may have been motivated 
by the necessity of smoke-screening the repercussion of the 
recall of Ambassadors Maisky and Litvinov. It is scarcely 
possible to conceal the diplomatic landslide that has resulted 
from Moscow's recall of its seasoned envoys from London and 
Washington and replacement of them by younger men. 

The conference over, Prime Minister Churchill in a state- 
ment reiterated the previous declaration that a grand scale 
military operation will be commenced before the autumn 
leaves fall" in the East Asiatic sector. The present Anglo- 
American activities in the southern Pacific indicate that the 
London-Washington command is getting ready to test its might 
with Japan. The military preparedness of Japan in greater 
East Asia has been placed on a solid foundation. Further, the 
rapid growth of new inter-country homogeneity inth is sphere has 
assured the successful prosecution of hostilities. The periodic 
guerilla air raids that are being conducted by the American 
warplanes in pacified China and in southern countries cannot 
prove a menace to the defence positions of Japan. In the north, 
after the withdrawal of the Japanese garrison from Kiska, fresh 
measures have been taken, to strengthen securely the northern 
defence of the country.. It is admitted that the mainland of 
Japan can be air-raided ; but what must be noted is that the 
raiders would find the home defence thoroughly prepared to 
frustrate their actions. The recent American air assaults on 



1 107 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



northern Kurile Islands have proved costly. From this one 
must understand how expensive it would be to undertake 
large-scale air attacks on Japan. 

Originally, the Quebec Conference was convened to spur 
the fighting morale of the peoples of the United Kingdom and 
the United States The unfortunate military and political 
abZ^T° nS 1 Vf 17 Cnabled k t0 P 1 ^ a significant role in the 
the £ 1 1 % f; ° n Ae Part ° f * e B^ogHo Cabinet. If 
Ouebec ?n f d n V* k ™ P kce ' the importance of the 
Quebec Conference would have been almost nothing. The 

announcement that offensives airain^ Tot, iTl i \ j 

this Mtnmfl Koo . c "^ves against Japan would be launched 
mis autumn nas not come a* 0 c ,-,^-.- <- 
foreseen from tU J , sur pnse, for such a move was 

Ss^ts to e co a d Wasl i ngton Conference 

simultaneously on the Pacific and p Ct °P eratlonS 

for the partial success of til r frontS ' ExCept 

Q^c Conferen^^^^^ **! fS 

achievements are concerned S ° fal aS P ractical 



1108 



FACTS BEHIND ANTI-FASCIST 
REVOLUTION 



By YOSHINORI MAYETA 

THE overnight collapse of Fascism and the formation of 
theBadoglio Cabinet, which in less than two months caused 
the unconditional surrender of Italy to Britain and the United 
States, are, indeed, excrutiating occurrences. Marshal Badoglio's 
deliberate infringement of the terms of the Tripartite Alliance 
Pact and the understanding not to conclude a separate peace or 
armistice is a deplorable act of exacerbation whose repercussion, 
under the new situation, cannot terminate within a short time. 
When on July 25, with the resignation of Signor Mussolini 
and the dissolution of the Fascist Party, the Badoglio Cabinet 
was organized, it was generally anticipated that Italy w r ould 
soon step out of war. On August 17, when the Axis forces 
withdrew from Sicily, it was still hoped that Marshal Badoglio 
would continue to put up a stiff resistance for the defence of the 
Italian mainland. Information now available discloses that the 
Italian Premier had by that time made up his mind to give in 
to the Anglo-American demand ; in fact, he had concluded an 
agreement for Italy's capitulation on Spetember 3, the very day 
of the landing of Britich contingents on Calabria Province. 
It was on September 8 that the unconditional surrender of 
Italy was formally announced. No tangible explanation is yet 
forthcoming as to the reason why the release of the announce- 
ment was withheld for five days. Newspaper comments and 
semi-official reactions give us the impression that Marshal 
Badoglio took that course to facilitate the advance of Anglo- 
American troops into southern Italy. 

Marshal Badoglio' s coup d'etat succeeded, because he 

1109 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



utilized at an opportune moment the growing deflectionary 
tendency among the key members of the Fascist Party The 
loss of Ethiopia and Libya and the Anglo-American invasion 
of Sicily, followed by intensified aerial assaults on Italian cities 
and ports particularly the July j 9 American air raid on Rome, 
eventuated the rise of a political crisis in the country. In other 
words, the successive war reverses suffered by Italy accelerated 
the emergence of a sentiment to replace the administration of 

cSt^ 
Chancellor Hitler met in' a 

Sic " di ^--n has L been made 

in the Mediterranean sector 1 °u *t C ° nduCt of War 
lure the Ancrlo Am!! r I<: ma ^ be decided to 

S^^^^SSI^ r "-/Italy instead 
launch a powerful Counter oXn" them u from Sk %> ^d then 
main ba S e. P UtrfortSS^^ Italy as the 
Mussolini returned to the cant 1 t A ^ When Si S n ° r 
Rome had already taken 'krf ^ on 
psychological effect on the f u "* **** eXerdsed * 

administration and Fascist^! V ^ ***** ^ 
Signor Mussolini initirnated wf Co ™equenly, when 

from northern Italy, he W] v t0 Continue the war 

Ihe fascist Grand Council m active function was some- 
thing like a combination between a Senate and a Priw Co ^n 
It was organized by virtue of a legislation enacted oY October 

aS th ' SU ? rei ? e P° lltcal bo <^ charged with the task of 
deliberating add deciding on the guiding Srincinl^ r • i 
«rv1inV<; Tf<? ]a<it wti™™~ P, mci p!es of national . 

policies, its last session was convened in the on*,, e 

Ljune, I94 o, when Ital 7 entered the* £~ S 
Germany s side, Signor Mussolim did not convoke a seTsion of 



ino 



FACTS BEHIND ANTI-FASCIST REVOLUTION 



it, the reason being that the Fascist Party heartily approved his 
step. But on July 19, this year, the executive members of the 
Fascist Party not only declined to entertain his war policy, but 
urged its submission to the Fascist Grand Council for 
deliberation. Meanwhile, the court and the military, noting 
the hesitancy on the part of Fascist quarters, supported the 
agitation for the convocation of a session of the Fascist Grand 
Council. Five days elapsed before an emergency session of 
the council was called to be held at 5 p.m. on July 24. It can 
be imagined that during these intervening days some sort of 
behind-the-screen action had permeated to undermine the 
influence of Signor Mussolini. The emergency session of the 
Fascist , Grand Council was called to order eighty minutes 
behind schedule. When it got under way, Count Grandi and 
his followers stoutly opposed the proposals put forward by 
Signor Mussolini, and this testified that they had come prepared 
to turn turde the Fascist apple-cart. 

The emergency session of the Fascist Grand Council was 
attended by twenty-seven members, including Chairman 
Singor Mussolini, Count Grandi, Count de Vecci and General 
de Bono. It commenced its business at 6:20 p.m. and all the 
proposals put up by Signor Mussolini were turned down after 
lengthy discussions. Then Count Grandi submitted a resolu- 
tion which requested the King to take supreme command of 
the armed forces — land, sea and air — and adjudicate on all 
matters in terms of the stipulations of the Constitution. Signoj: 
Fariancci, leader of the ultra-right wing of the Fascist Party, put 
up a counter-proposal, while Signor Skolasza moved a com- 
promise proposition to restrain a definite shake-up. When votes 
were taken by roll-call, the Grandi resolution was adopted by an 
overwhelming majority of nineteen to seven with one abstention. 
The historic session of the council was brought to a close at 3 
a.m. on July 25. The passing of the Grandi resolution amounted 
to the placing on record of the non-confidence of the council 
on Signor Mussolini, who, therefore, had no other option but 
to resign. At the same time, on the strength of the approved 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

resolution the dissolution of the Fascist Party became an 
accomplished fact. It may not be irrational to believe that the 
C-rrandi move was a prearranged affair decided in concert with 
the military and non-Fascist factions. 

re ,i^ h ° Ug ^ 5 c the paSskl S of Grand i resolution, the 
resignation of Signor Massolini became inevitable, it appears 

atlv!7 aS - C T - hen C ° nfident ° f his abn "y to stem the 
lit , If T m %Tu U ™' The same d ^ he visited various 
parts of Rome which had been bombed as Premier and Leader 

cLtt ZZT ^ hdd ^erviews with diplomatic 

uJZ' n ™™ c ™™* to Signor Mussolini was named 
averHnI P * m ' f SU SS^tcd that he was still hopeful of 
sLno^in'T • * ™ at 10:45 P " m - that the resignation of 
and Z» ? ° Ilm V ap u POmtmen1: ° f Marshal Ba dogho as Premier 
^ S ^^^ m ^^^-o£hrl s * a and air 
rorces by Ring Emmanuele III were simultaneously announced. 
, ° Member 9 Berlin newspapers in dealing with the capitu- 
lation of Italy said that, following the Fascist Grand Council 
decision of July 25, Signor Mussolini repaired to Villa Savoia 
and requested King Emmanuele to grant him powers to dismiss 
all elements in the Italian Government that were hampering the 
na Jj lon ' s War effort s and especially those generals and high 
officers of the Army who had surrendered in the Sicilian 
campaign. The audience lasted two hours and the King 
patiently listened to Signor Mussolini's account of the political 
and military situation. When he finished his report, the King, 
however, announced that Marshal Badoglio had already been 
appointed his successor. This final endeavour of Singor 
Mussolin indicated how anxious he was to retrieve the situation 
for the best interest of Italy. 

• u 6 anti ~ Fascist revolution which emerged on the surface 

% u natUrC ° f a P olitical C0U P d>itat was reportedly due to 
tne hardening of an attitude of opposition to Signor Mussolini 
on the part of influential Fascist members, other political 
elements and the military with Marshal Badoglio as leader. 
According to reports, six causes can be attributed to the fall of 



1112 



. FACTS BEHIND ANTI-FASCIST REVOLUTION 

Singor Mussolini and the Fascist Party. They are : (i) the 
Fascist Party neglected to pursue a policy of conciliation toward 
the dissatisfied elements in its determination to establish a 
mono-State political organism ; (2) did not succeed in adjust- 
ing its relations with the general populace and the court ; (3) 
it followed what the opponents considered an exclusive policy 
in selecting its members and in giving employment in all 
branches of industry, thereby creating a resentment among the 
general masses '; (4) it failed to bring about the much-desired 
rapprochement between the regular Army and the Fascist volunteer 
corps, that is, the " black shirt " organization, and also a 
binding understanding between the regular police structure 
and the party police fabric ; (5) the party organs which were 
intended to harmonize the relations between the administration 
and the people, as a matter of fact, did not function in an ideal 
manner ; and (6) those who were placed in charge of national 
economic activities were not, strictly speaking, free from personal 
considerations. 

Of the causes enumerated, the first and second are purely 
political in character ; whereas the third and fourth disclose the 
framework of the Fascist machinery and the fifth and sixth the 
standard of party discipline. The political character of Fascism 
was developed witly reason on the basis of non-recognition of 
the aspirations of other political groups and the contrary 
inclinations of the official circles. The framework of the 
Fascist machinery aimed with reason again at subordinating 
the regular military and police forces to the command of the 
Fascist leaders operating through the " black shirts " and party 
police contingents. The complextion of party discipline in its 
lower strata was not altogether free from traces of personal 
interest. On account of these failures in the party organiza- 
tion itself, Signor Mussolini, despite his sincerity, found it 
difficult to evolve a mono-State politics. 

In October, 1922, the Fascist Party came into power by 
successfully staging the so-called march on Rome. Though it 
remained true to the ideal of mono-State politics, the domestic 



1113 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



circumstances, the elements included within the party plank and 
the actions of the Fascist workers alienated a section of the peo- 
ple who immediately turned inveterate anti-Fascists. Further- 
more, the Fascist Party's failure to effect a compromise with the 
Nationalist Party, known otherwise as the royalist group, 
frustrated the evolution of a single-State politics. It is, there- 
fore, no wonder that the royalists and the dissatisfied anti- 
Fascists jointly formed a subterranean political opposition. But 
the strong control of the Fascist regime gave them no opportu- 
nity to come out in the open. It was only after the Anglo- 
American occupation of Libya and the Italo-German evacuation 
from northern Africa that they found the time had come to 
prepare the ground for positive action. Nonetheless, they had 
to wait for the Sicilian setback and the air bombardment of 
Rome to make a decisive move in alliance with those prominent 
Fascists who had by then decided to overthrow Signor Mussolini. 
This is the political background of the Fascist tragedy of Italy. 

At the Fascist Grand Council emergency session, General 
Federzoni, president of the Royal Academy, acted as the mouth- 
piece of the royalist group. He made no small exertion to win 
over the majority members of the council. Aside from the 
political aspect, it may be held that the council adopted the 
Grandi resolution propelled by the motive of creating a new 
administration better suited to cope with the national crisis. If 
that was so, why a real national Government comprising all 
political elements and including Fascists was not organized? 
Since the Badoglio Cabinet not only ordered the outright dis- 
solution of the Fascist Party, but also took Signor Mussolini 
into custody, several of those who had voted for the Grandi 
resolution must have felt bitterly afterwards the way they had been 
duped. They most probably did not think that the passing of 
the resolution would become a means of carrying out a politi- 
cal reformation; they must have thought that in accordance 
with the decision of the council a strong national Government 
would be formed to intensify the prosecution of war. But Mar- 
shal Badoglio's assumption of premiership sealed their expecta- 

1114 



FACTS BEHIND ANTI-FASCIST REVOLUTION 

tion. He has been the most outstanding 

Mussolini and Fascism for a long time, an 

ed the political change swayed by balance 

though the fate of Italy was hanging ^ me mbership 

The Fascist Patty as at June his year ^ 
of some 4,800,000. Certain quatte* h ^ 

political upheaval to this limited ^f^ation. This vet? 
to them, was not truly representative of ^the ^ 
sion is correct from the viewpoint of then * 
the party which was a little over ten Pf r «f \ musf be noticed 
population. From the political standpoint, it m« 
pupuuuui f „„ rp - e was carried out, the 

that since 1^26, when a membership purge w 
party had made it a policy to include only those persons who, 
r y \ ii „i;fiprl to become members, 

after due tests, would prove qualinea IU - 
^ , . ^ 1 j \ aT ^ flf the infiltration of detn- 

*bs ptocedtt* ^^^P^^Srip did not re- 
mental elements. Hence, the liniited mem F 

fleet as a defect in the party otg^f^ probed into the 
^it««the™inwluA^F^ J incongruity, 
activities of the non-Fascists. ^JWJS d:egular,Army and 
there developed an estrangement bet ween the ^ ^ 
the Fascist volunteer corps. The blacK snirta 
Fascist combatants and also as bodyguards pf Sigiox Mussoko^ 
In the early days of the Fascist administration, the black 
shirts " were indispensable in quelling unruly elements , but 
their raison d'itre disappeared, so the antifascists thought, 
when the Fascist Party stabilized its power, and yet Signor Mus- 
solini showed reluctance to disband them. Ultimately, realiz- 
ing the political significance of the " black shirt organization, 
he reconstituted it as the Fascist volunteer corps. In 1930, tne 
expenditure to be incurred by the corps was incorporated in tne 
national military budget and its membership was confined to those 
who had undergone active military service. Naturally in pay and 
promotion, the Fascist volunteers were given better privileges 
than the rank and file of the regular Army. Moreover, they 
enjoyed political advantages as effectives of the Fascist Party and 
as bodyguards of Signor Mussolini. The regular Army looked 

1115 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



at these privileges with resentment, and as a result, it became 
antagonistic to the Fascist Party. Owing to the granting of 
similar privileges to the Fascist police organization, the regular 
police force, too, harboured a grievance against' the Fascist 
administration. 

The Cabinet of Marshal Badoglio was formed at 8 p m on 
July 25 and, after its investure on July 27, a full-dress ministerial 
conference was held at the Quirinal. On the night of July 25 
Marshal Badoglio in a proclamation affirmed that the war would 
go on and, at the same time, enforced martial law throughout the 
country. The new Italian Government informed Japan and 
Germany that Italy would continue to adhere to the Tripartite 
Alliance Pact and honour its obligations to its Axis nartners 
Baron Guangha, Foreign Minister, in a message to Tapanese 
Foreign Minister Shighemitsu stressed that Italy was resolved to 
maintain its existing relations with Japan, and that it would re- 
main loyal to the Tripartite Alliance Pact. This followed an 
Italo-German conference in northern Italy, at which the Italian 
delegates reiterated the determination of the Badoglio regime to 
go on with the war. Then came the crisis in the Sicilian cam- 
paign, the air bombardment of Rome and the circulation of a 
demand for the surrender of Italy by General Dwight Eisen- 
hower. On August 1 7 the Italo-German forces withdrew from 
Sicily. It can now be visualized that negotiations for a truce 
which was concluded between Italy and the representative of 
General Eisenhower on September 3, must have been started 
before the withdrawal of Italo-German forces from Sicily or 
after it. The British landing on Calabria Province on Septem- 
ber 3 was undoubtedly made with the understanding of the 
Italian high command. If this reading is incorrect why was 
then the announcement of Italy's unconditional surrender re- 
leased on September 8? 

Marshal Badoglio has succeeded completely in carrying out 
his long-cherished anti-Fascist revolution. But at what price ? 
—the sacrifice of national honour. He has humiliated the Italian 
people for no tangible benefit at all. That the Badoglio Cabinet 

1116 



FACTS BEHIND ANTI-FASCIST REVOLUTION 

would decide on Italy's withdrawal from war was foreseen Vhen 
the Sicilian campaign came to an end. Italy's surrender does 
not in any way affect the war strategy of either Germany or 
Japan. Both nations are confident of realizing their mutual 
objectives. They have issued a fresh joint declaration reaffirm- 
ing the solidity of the Berlin-Tokyo unanimity. To a certain 
extent the burden of Germany has been lifted by Italy's secession 
from the Axis front. It is no longer necessary for the former 
to render military and economic assistance to the latter. The 
might of Germany remains untouched. It has not been affected 
in the least by the Italian upheaval. 



ERRATUM 

Read Dartmouth for " Dartmoor " 
in 1. 7, p. 865, July issue. 



III7 



SIGNIFICANCE OF ITALIAN 
CATASTROPHE 

By SHIGHETOMO SAYEGUSA 

WITHIN a short time the political picture of Italy has under- 
gone a temporary change. Not only Fascism, the 
political creation of Signor Mussolini, has been dismembered, 
but also the Badoglio Cabinet has laid down arms. Fascism 
grew up as a new political means to settle the nebulous domestic 
conditions which cropped up after the termination of the last 
World War. The Fascist Party was born at a time when a strong 
political body was needed to guide the revitalization of the 
national fabric. It remained in power for more than two 
decades ; and then on July 25 last, it abrupdy lost its political 
significance with the resignation of Signor Mussolini as Leader 
and Premier in pursuance of a decision reached at a meeting 
of the Fascist Grand Council to return the administrative 
authority to the King in view of the grave situation confron- 
ting the nation. On that memorable day, Marshal Pietro 
Badoglio under order of the Throne formed a new Cabinet 
and announced the dissolution of the Fascist Party, while King 
Emmanuele ni in a proclamation assumed the supreme com- 
mand of the land, sea and air forces of Italy. Almost overnight 
a new sense of nationalism emerged on the surface, and the 
entire Italian people, in obedience to the wishes of 'the King 
and Premier Marshal Badoglio, firmly expressed their resolve 
to do their best in tiding over the wartime crisis But on 
September 8 with dramadc suddenness the formal announcement 
of Italy's unconditional surrender to Britain and the United 
States was made public. Thus the Badoglio administration 
caused a prima facie breach of the Tripartite Alliance Pact, and 

1118 



SIGNIFICANCE OF ITALIAN CATASTROPHE 



Japan and Germany regarded its action as an act of fides Pumca. 

Although the international observers agreed that the political 
change in Italy came as a surprise, they nonetheless pointed out 
that the background for such an upheaval had been in the making 
for a long time. It is popularly believed that the Anglo-American 
landing on Sicily and the American bombing of Rome on July 
19 excited the desire of certain influential leaders to organize a 
new national Government directly under the Throne in replace- 
ment of the Fascist regime. On the whole, it would not be 
incorrect to surmise that the dissolution of the Fascist administra- 
tion was precipitated by the critical military situation arising out 
of the extension of hostilities to Sicily, the air bombardment of 
Rome and the internal political difference that had remained 
ingrained in the country since the inception of Fascism. Of 
these three factors, it appears that the American air attack on 
Rome played the part of a psychological lever to sway the at- 
titude of the Fascist Grand Council. 

It transpires that within the Fascist Party there was a royalist 
group led by General Emilio de Bono, Count de Vecci, General 
Luigi Federzoni and Count Dino Grandi. The first two were 
among the so-called " big four 99 under Signor Mussolini. The 
experts on Italian affairs think that these royalist leaders of the 
Fascist Party, being influenced by the repercussions of military 
reverses, manifested their dissatisfaction with II Duce's policy 
of conducting war. The dissatisfaction reached a perpendicular 
height when the American warplanes raided Rome on July 19. 
In consequence, the Fascist Grand Council convened an urgent 
session on the night of July 24. A resolution moved by Count 
Grandi requesting the King to assume the supreme command 
of the land, sea and air forces of Italy was adopted after a lengthy 
debate, with nineteen voting in favour, seven against and one 
abstention. The resolution in effect not only meant the return 
of the supreme command of the Italian armed forces hitherto 
delegated to Signor Mussolini to the King, but also the divest- 
ment of II Duce's administrative authority and the liquidation of 
the Fascist Party which had supported him. In reality, Signor 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



Mussolini was pressed to tender his resignation to the King 
who, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, 
ordered Marshal Badoglio to organize a new Cabinet and 
implement measures necessary for the smooth elimination of 
Fascism. 

Britain and the United States considered the passing away 
of Fascism an advantageous occasion to intensify their under- 
ground manipulations aimed at the alienation of Italy from 
Germany. Ostensibly as if to counteract their manipula- 
tions, Premier Marshal Badoglio declared that there would be 
no change in the Italo-German relations, and that the war would- 
be continued. Following this, a joint meeting of the high 
officials of the Italian and German Governments was held, at 
which a fresh agreement of views was reached on matters of 
mutual interest. In the meantime, the Anglo-American nations 
made General Dwight Eisenhower circulate a peace proposal 
designed for Italy. The Badoglio Cabinet, in denouncing it, 
mentioned that the Anglo-American peace proposal revealed 
their intention of dominating the Italian people, that the Italian 
Government was determined to honour its obligations to its 
allies, and that the dissolution of the Fascist Party had been 
carried out only to meet the request of the times. Simultaneously, 
the Italo-German resistance offered in Sicily disclosed that there 
was no misunderstanding on the part of both nations. State- 
ments emanating from Italian official quarters and chancellories 
clarified that the Italo-German collaboration would not be affect- 
ed by the political change. In spite of this solemn pledge, 
Marshal Badoglio concluded a truce with the Anglo-Amer- 
ican nations secretly on September 3. On that day British 
forces commenced landing on Calabria Province. The fact that 
the truce was officially made known on September 8 suggests 
that Marshal Badoglio resorted to such a peculiar move to 
facilitate Anglo-American military infiltration into Italy. 

Certain circles are of the opinion that the backstage ma- 
noeuvre of the Anglo-American nations had a hand in the political 
change in Italy. This opinion is based upon their political 



II20 



SIGNIFICANCE OF ITALIAN CATASTROPHE 



machinations against Germany and its allies during the last 
World War, particularly the episode relating to the circulation of 
the Wilsonian fourteen-point peace formula. It will be recalled 
that both Britain and the United States, prior to the disappearance 
of the Fascist Party, had repeatedly stated that they were fighting 
against Fascism and not against the Italian people. And yet 
they gave currency to the Eisenhower demand in the midst of 
the Sicilian campaign, which virtually demanded the uncondi- 
tional submission of the Italian nation to them. Berlin news- 
papers after the surrender of Italy reported that negotia- 
tions for a truce was started toward the close of the Sici- 
lian campaign between the representatives of the Italian Go- 
vernment and the British envoys in neutral European coun- 
tries. If this version is accepted, it implies that the Badoglio 
Government opened negotiations with the British envoys in 
neutral European countries on the basis of the Eisenhower 
demand, though it publicly denounced it. Be that as it may, it 
seems correct that the Badoglio Ministry had decided to with- 
draw from war during or after the Sicilian campaign, keeping 
Japan and Germany in the dark as to its real intention. How- 
ever, Japan and Germany, having anticipated a surrender move 
on Italy's part, took necessary precautions to minimize its 
effect. It is not to be wondered at that the Reich forces are now 
occupying a big slice of Italian territory to frustrate the execu- 
tion of the Anglo-American plan assented to by Marshal Badoglio 
who, in his broadcast announcement from Rome on September 
8, declared that Italy would " resist attacks from other quarters." 

British Prime Minister Winston Churchill speaking at the 
House of Commons on July 26 said : " If Italy persists in acting 
as Germany's ally, she will be subjected to furious attacks in the 
next two months from every direction, north, south, the sea 
and air, and will experience the ravages of war to the full." 
American President Roosevelt in his broadcast speech of July 
28 hinted that the peace terms of the United States to Italy would 
be nothing but-" that country's unconditional surrender. It 
seems that the Anglo-American nations had taken up this 



1121 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



positive attitude with a view to forcing Italy to alter radically 
its policy toward Germany within a stipulated time or as quick- 
ly as possible. It may be recalled that from the time of Italy's 
entry into the European war to the bombing of Rome on July 
19 the London and Washington Governments had maintained a 
comparatively mild attitude toward the Italian people, both at 
home and abroad, as seen in the treatment accorded the 
Italians in the United States and Latin American countries. They 
did so, for they hoped that once Fascism came to an end, the 
Italian people would show an inclination to come to terms with 
them. And now by means of political and military pressure, 
they have attained their objective, though not wholly. 

It is noteworthy that the Italian Government on August 10 
mentioned that Italy was anxious for the return of peace, but at 
the same time affirmed its intention to fight the war till finish 
in collaboration with Germany. It may be that the very re- 
ference to peace was construed by the Anglo-American nations 
as Italy's willingness to conclude a separate agreement with them 
at an opportune moment. If they had interpreted Italy's peace 
sentiment in this light, it must be said that they had received a 
prior hint to that effect. Due to the Cabinet change in 
Italy, the Anglo-American nations might have presumed that its 
tie with Germany had become artificial, and hence they must 
have manipulated to demoralize the Badoglio administration. 
Premier Marshal Badoglio's subsequent pronouncement that 
Italy would discharge its responsibilities toward its Axis partners 
by adhering faithfully to the stipulations of the Tripartite Alliance 
Pact was either genuine or a camouflage to lull the suscipicion 
of Germany. 

The Anglo-American peace proposal to Italy which was 
given currency in the midst of the Sicilian campaign is the 
so-called seven-point demand made by General Eisenhower 
commander-in-chief of the American expeditionary forces in 
Europe. He demanded the immediate cessation of hostilities 
by Italy against Britain and the United states ; repudiation of its 
collaboration with Germany and the simultaneous granting of 



1122 



SIGNIFICANCE OF ITALIAN CATASTROPHE 



facilities to the Anglo-American forces in its territory to launch 
military operations against Germany; withdrawal of Italian 
forces from Greece, Albania, Jugoslavia and France; transfer 
of the Italian munition industry to Anglo-American manage- 
ment ; enforcement of military administration in Italy by Britain 
and the United States ; surrender of the executive members of 
the Fascist Party to them ; and release of Anglo-American war 
prisoners kept in Italy. The terms offered by General Eisen- 
hower practically called for the unconditional surrender of Italy 
to Britain and the United States. It is not known whether these 
terms were actually presented to Italy. The only verification 
obtainable is that these terms were made public by the Anglo- 
American command, and that the Badoglio Cabinet, on coming 
to know of its circulation in the international press, issued a 
statement chastizing the London and Washington Governments 
for their highly objectionable imperialistic proclivity. But since 
Italy has surrendered unconditionally, it can be assumed that 
Marshal Badbglio's resentment was purely a diplomatic gesture 
directed toward Germany and Japan. It is within the range of 
possibility that he took up the Eisenhower demand to initiate 
truce negotiations with Britain and America. 

When Count Ciano resigned as Foreign Minister in Feb- 
ruary, diplomatic sharpshooters of Britain and America trained 
their guns on the political target of Italy. Premier Mussolini 
concurrently assumed the office of Foreign Minister and assigned 
Count Ciano as ambassador to the Vatican. Count Ciano is not 
only Signor Mussolini's son-in-law, but also has been one of his 
trusted lieutenants. He served his Cabinet as Foreign Minister 
for a long time and initialled the Rome-Berlin Axis accord. It 
was understood thjit his resignation was prompted by the neces- 
sity of unifying and strengthening Italy's diplomatic front. This 
implied that the diplomatic activity of Count Ciano was not up 
to the mark, or rather he endeavoured to act in a manner not 
satisfactory to Signor Mussolini. If that is so, it meant that 
there had been a disagreement between Count Ciano and Signor 
Mussolini — a disagreement which the Anglo-American diplo- 

1123 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



matic front connoted as a sign of split in the Fascist Party. Fur- 
ther, it is reported that at the Fascist Grand Council meeting of 
July 24 Count Ciano voted in favour of the resolution of Count 
Grandi. This is another factor which was duly noted by Britain 
and the United States. No sooner the Badoglio administration 
was organized than they began to work for Italy's alienation from 
the Axis bloc. With that end in view, they released the Eisen- 
hower demand and within a short time forced Marshal Badoglio 
to capitulate. 

The Anglo-American nations brought forward the Eisen- 
hower demand, probably thinking that the Badoglio Cabinet being 
wholly against Fascism, would endeavour to negotiate with them 
for a separate peace not on the basis of it, but on the foundation 
of a counter-proposal to be made against it. Meanwhile 
British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden stated that Britain had 
made no overtures to Italy, though it was aware of the demand of 
General Eisenhower. This statement was no doubt aimed at 
the Badoglio Cabinet, indirectly hinting that Britain was pre- 
pared to modify its attitude toward Italy. President Roosevelt, 
too, showed no particular enthusiasm for the demand made 
known by General Eisenhower; may be, in case of an Italian 
gesture, he wanted to shelve it by explaining that it was made by 
a military commander on the spot purely for strategic reasons- 
It is believed that the Eisenhower demand prepared the ground 
for truce negotiations, which took place in neutral European 
countries and, an agreement being reached, the terms of capitula- 
tion were formally signed on September 3 somewhere on Italian 
soil, perhaps in Sicily. 

On August 7 an Italo-German conference was held in 
northern Italy. It was attended by Foreign Minister von Rib- 
bentrop and Marshal Keitel, representing Germany, and Foreign 
Minister Guariglia and General Ambrosio, representing Italy. 
The Italian delegates reportedly sought the German col- 
leagues' understanding of their country's political / change, 
after which the conferees discussed the war situation in southern 
Europe from all possible angles. It may be quite safe to 



1 124 



METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT OF TOKYO 

conjecture that the conferees arrived at a complete agreement 
of views on the new political situation in Italy and drew up 
fresh plans for the joint prosecution of military operations in 
Italy. It is not known whether, when this conference was 
held, Italy had considered the advisability of ceasing resistance. 
Italy up to that time might have been confident of its ability to 
go on with the war. The setback in the Sicilian campaign 
might have undermined the confidence of the Badoglio Cabinet 
to continue hostilities, and as a result, peace sentiment might 
have gained ground in high official quarters. Consequently, 
Marshal Badoglio as the head of the peace faction opened truce 
negotiations and accepted the surrender terms put up by 
Britain and the United States. 

On September 12 dispatches from Berlin revealed that the 
September 3 capitulation agreement contained thirteen pro- 
visions. They included the unconditional surrender of Italy, 
prevention of Italian equipment from falling into German hands, 
handing over of the Italian Navy and air force to the. Anglo- 
American command, placing of the Italian mainland, insular 
possessions, airfields and naval stations at the disposal of Anglo- 
American forces and the Italian guarantee that in case of necessity 
the Italian Government would use its fighting effectives for the 
maintenance of the terms of the truce. It is, indeed, strange that 
neither the Badoglio Cabinet nor the British and American Go- 
vernments released the terms of the truce, even though the formal 
announcement of Italy's surrender was made public on Septem- 
ber 8. This attitude on the part of the contracting parties tends 
to show that there is something more beyond what is already 
known. The Italian catastrophe has not endengered the Reich 
defence set-up in Europe. The dramatic rescue of Signor 
Mussolini and the formation of a separate Fascist Republican 
administration demonstrate Germany's good faith toward the 
Italian people. 



1125 



) 



METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT 
OF TOKYO 

By HEIZO SOYANO 

ON July i Tokyo City and Tokyo Prefecture were abolished 
and the areas covered by them were placed under a 
metropolitan system. As a result of the reorganization, the 
entire locality has been renamed Tokyo Metropolis. The 
establishment of a Tokyo Metropolis by absorbing Tokyo City 
and Tokyo Prefecture has been long under contemplation. But 
no definite step was taken until Japan secured its supremacy in 
greater East Asia in the current war. In view of the changed 
conditions in this part of the Orient, it was thought highly 
desirable to make Tokyo the nerve-centre of all activities in 
greater East Asia. This is the fundamental reason for the 
creation of Tokyo Metropolis. 

The new metropolitan administration of Tokyo has a char- 
acteristic of its own in that it is at once government-controlled 
and self-governing. Notwithstanding that it represents an excep- 
tion to the municipal government system, iris a key provincial 
administrative organization of the Central Government, be- 
cause it is directly under the control of the latter. It is also a 
self-governing body, for it retains the make-up of a municipal 
corporation set-up resembling somewhat like the abolished 
Tokyo Municipality. To be more explicit, it has been inaugurated 
as an organ of the CentrarGovernment by taking in the beneficial 
features of prefectural and municipal administration 

It appears that, irrespective of the intention of making To- 
kyo the melting-pot of greater East Asia intercourse, four major 
internal causes have motivated the sponsoring of Tokvo Metro- 
polis. The first is that inasmuch as the political, financial and 

1126 



1 



I 



METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT OF TOKYO 

cultural elements of Tokyo exercise a significant influence on the 
conduct of State affairs, it is essential that its administrative set- 
up must be part of the machinery of the Central Government 
rather than that of a municipal corporation, or a prefectural 
organ. The second is that a municipal administration cannot 
efficiently look after the expanding needs of Tokyo which is not 
only the heart of national activity, but also accounts for ten per 
cent, of the total population of the country. The third is that 
provincial autonomy cannot work smoothly, especially when it 
is difficult to maintain harmony between prefectural government 
and municipal administration. The fourth is that, since the vast 
growth of Tokyo City has automatically restricted the scope of 
Tokyo prefectural administration, it would be advisable to 
institute a single administrative organ capable of preventing the 
rise of dual control. 

These four causes are self-explanatory. They justify the 
replacement of prefectural and municipal administration by a 
metropolitan government. Moreover, the wartime emergency 
demands that the administrative character of the Tokyo area 
must be so adjusted as would prove extremely useful to local 
defence, strengthening of anti-air raid measures, judicious dis- 
tribution of daily necessities and improvement in communica- 
tions, transportation, water service and educational and cultural 
facilities. For the purpose of effecting such adjustments, it is 
absolutely necessary to have a Tokyo metropolitan government 
instead of a dual administration as witnessed in prefectural and 
municipal administration. The Tokyo metropolitan govern- 
ment has come into being to shoulder all the wartime respon- 
sibilities of the locality. 

It may be contended that the wartime responsibilities of 
Tokyo could have been met without changing its administrative 
character. It must be observed that Japan is prosecuting an 
unprecedented war, which requires the fullest utilization of the 
total power of the nation. Hence, if the municipal set-up was 
permitted to remain, there was the possibility that it might not 
have operated as efficiently as desired by the Central Govern- 

1127 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



merit. It was tecognized that the attainment of the highest 
standard of efficiency could only be assured under a metropolitan 
system controlled by the Central Government. Consequent 
upon this recognition, the metropolitan government of Tokyo 
has been organized. It is now functioning as a State machinery 
to streamline the diverse enterprises of the area in conformity 
with the total war policy of the nation. 

The area of Tokyo Metropolis comprises the localities of 
the erstwhile Tokyo Prefecture and Tokyo City. The thirty- 
five wards of the latter are retained in it, together with the towns 
villages and municipalities which have hitherto been under the 
jurisdiction of the Tokyo prefectural administration. It is 
obvious that the territorial alignment has been made with the 
object of facilitating the smooth operation of the Tokyo metro- 
politan government, which can, at present, exercise unhampered 
control to gear up production activity, air defence and distribu- 
tion of commodities. As an organ of the State, it can implement 
measures without loss of time to enhance the standard of ef- 
ficiency to the required limit. Also it can act as a potential base 
to direct the concentrated movement for regional understanding 
in greater East Asia. 

The governor of Tokyo Metropolis is an official personally 
appointed by the Emperor. He is invested with comprehensive 
powers which combine those hitherto exercised by the governor 
17? Prefecture and the mayor of Tokyo City As an 
tofrftl ^ — G ,™ e f> he is authorized to conduct 
b? a vice mUmC ? al f^V**? met *>polis. He is assisted 

formI™n° Vem , 0r 7 h0 pkyS th6 ^ le ° f d W ™Y°* of the 
former municipal administration. The metropolitan government 

ZtoZ7f a S T tal:iate ' ^ dght bU ^ US 4ec3y i' 
charge of welfare, education, economy, planning, defence com- 

ask T T° nS - ^ SeCretariate * entrusted withthe 

retired T d ° Cuments > statlstlcs > ^counts, appointments, 

k I and Pr ° m0tl0ns : The of welfare Zs under 

cnarge hygiene, sanitation, social work, election for the 



1128 



METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT OF TOKYO 

Metropolitan Assembly, supervision of the municipalities in the 
metropolitan area and popular savings. While the bureau of 
education deals with education, religion and scientific, literary 
and military affairs, the bureau of economy controls all economic 
matters, including agriculture, industry and commerce, distribu- 
tion of materials and control of commodity prices, Such 
questions as town planning, public works, supervision of parks 
and expropriation of land are attended to by the bureau of plann- 
ing ; whereas the all-important question of air defence, ncbid- 
ing the construction of new buildings for that purpose is looked 
after by the bureau of defence. The tram and bus service and 
other communication and transportation facilities are supervised 
by the bureau of communications. The water and sewerage 
service and the ports and harbours are respectively handled by 
the bureaus of water supply and harbours and ports. 

In'order to deliberate and legislate on vital matters pertain- 
ing ;to'the administration of the metropolis, an organ m the 
form of a Metropolitan Assembly has been organized It is not 
vested with such comprehensive powers as enjoyed by the now 
defunct Municipal Assembly of Tokyo. About the middle of 
September the first election to the Metropolitan Assembly was 
held and a keen contest was observed. The total membership 
of the assembly is 100, that is, nearly one-third of the combined 
membership of the erstwhile Tokyo Prefectural Assembly and 
the Tokyo Municipal Assembly, which stood at 29-2. The 
members of the Metropolitan Assembly, like the representatives 
of other prefectural assemblies, are not eligible to contest seats 
in the House of Representatives. All these bodies are local 
legislative organs under the control of the Central Government. 
It has been specified that the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly is 
to convened once a year with its session being limited to less 
than a month, although in case of urgent necessity* an emergency 
session lasting less than a week may be called. 

Only officials of the Central Government are allowed to 
become heads of the ward offices of the metropolis. There was 
some divergence of opinion as to whether the ward assemblies 

1129 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

should be retained under the metropolitan system. It has, 
however, been decided that the upper structure of the metro- 
politan government should be controlled by the Central Govern- 
ment, but the lower structure should be permitted to remain as 
autonomous as possible. That is why the Government-appoint- 
ed officials have been chosen as heads of the ward offices, while 
the ward assemblies have been left untouched to continue 'as self- 
governing bodies, though their membership has been reduced to 
half as compared with before. The retention of the autonomous 
character of the ward assemblies denotes the self-governing 
feature of the lower structure of the metropolitan government. 

The mechanism of the Tokyo metropolitan government' as 
shown above points out that the control of the Central Govern- 
ment has been instituted primarily to augment the standard of 
administrative efficiency and meet all the wartime requirements 
effectively and promptly. The establishment of the Metro- 
politan Assembly is, indeed, noteworthy, in that it has received 
the official sanction to discuss vital matters and legislate 
appropriate measures with a view to assisting the executive 
machinery of the administration. On the other hand, the 
autonomous character of the lower structure suggests ' that 
the executive machinery has left the disposal of all secondary 
matters at the hands of self-governing units, which are best 
suited to tackle purely local problems. 

Under the metropolitan system, it is apparent that Tokyo 
has been given the most needed incentive to become truly the 

thfn~ tf n r nal aCtiVity - AS th£ ^ of Japan aid t 
Sneddon? V* f ^ ^ Ask intercou ^> " hasnow been 
tTon On 3, 1 P ^ medtS ° n a Widei ^tractive founda- 
O fl the lessons to be imparted, and,the l eads to be given, by 
it rest the durable realization of the regional objective S Tapan 

ha miTl t ■ ^ BaSe ° f °P eration * the conduct of new 
harmony that is rapidly emerging in greater East Asia. 

execuSorol t W "l **** ° f the Propolis, the 

execution of the planned reconstruction project of it must be 



II30 



METROPOLITAN GOVERNMENT OF TOKYO 

carried out as early as possible. Due to wartime conditions, it 
may not be possible to execute the planned project to the minute 
details ; but there is every reason to believe that its essential 
points could be carried out without difficulty to reinforce 
additionally the total war structure of the nation. For example, 
the reconstruction of ports and harbours and communication 
and transportation facilities, as well as further tightening of air 
defence demand the prior attention of the metropolitan administ- 
ration which, it is gratifying to know, has already taken charge 
of these matters with determined vigour. 



f 

1131 



TREND OF AXIS-" DEMOCRACY" WAR 



By TANETSUGU SOH-SA 

ON August 17 the Sicilian campaign was brought to a close 
and the Italo-German forces, after offering a sanguinary- 
resistance for five weeks, took up new positions in the southern 
sector of the Italian mainland. Then on September 8 the un- 
conditional surrender of Italy to Britain and the United States 
was announced, the relative agreement being signed five days 
earlier, that is, on the day of British landing on the toe of Cala- 
bria Province. When the Axis forces evacuated Tunisia, it 
was generally anticipated that the Anglo-American com- 
mand would stage an immediate landing on the island of Sicily, 
but it did not risk such a venture for the simple reason that it 
wanted to secure additional strategic advantages beforehand. 
Hence Pantelleria and Lampedusa were occupied as stepping- 
stones. After completing all preparations, the Anglo-American 
invasion contingents under the command of General Dwight 
Eisenhower carried out landing operations in Sicily. No sooner 
they landed than the Italo-German units, despite their quantita- 
tive inferiority, put up a stubborn resistance. This caused a 
delay in the realization of the Anglo-American objective. 

Confronted with the Italo-German stiff resistance, Britain 
and the United States dispatched continuous reinforcements to 
overwhelm the defending forces. While the Sicilian campaign was' 
going on, an unexpected political change occurred in Italy. In 
pursuance of the decision of the Fascist Grand Council, Premier 
Mussolini was obliged to tender his resignation, and Marshal 
Badoglio organized a new Cabinet, simultaneously declaring the 
dissolution of the Fascist Party. Apparently, this abrupt political 
change made its influence felt on the conduct of defensive 



TREND OF AXIS-" DEMOCRACY 99 WAR 

operations in Sicily. Recognizing the impossibility of liquidat- 
ing the Anglo-American invasion of Sicily, the German military 
authorities on the spot ordered a systematic withdrawal of Axis 
troops and equipment to the Italian mainland two weeks prior to 
the time set for total evacuation. The way the total evacuation 
was executed highlighted how efficiently it was planned and 
carried out. 

Synchronizing with the winding up of the Sicilian campaign, 
the Quebec Conference got under way, and Prime Minister 
Churchill and President Roosevelt discussed for the sixth time 
the strategies to be employed in prosecuting hostilities in 
Europe and in the Pacific. Because the Quebec Conference was 
attended by the high-ranking military leaders of both countries, 
it is obvious that a fresh plan has been mapped out to inten- 
sify offensive operations against Japan and Germany. The ap- 
pointment of Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten as supreme com- 
mander of the Anglo-American forces in southeastern Asia in 
fulfilment of the decision of the conference suggests that an 
offensive against Japan would be launched most probably on the 
Burma front in the autumn. The communiqtd released after the 
termination of the Quebec Conference and statements made by 
Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt in a press inter- 
view signified the Anglo-American intention of opening wide- 
spread attacks on Japan in the southern Pacific and Burma, 
as well as carrying out of air raids on the mainland of Japan. 
Besides, it was hinted that fresh operations would be launched in 
Europe directed against Germany to relieve the Reich pressure 
on the Soviet front. Now that Italy is in turmoil owing to the 
calamitous repercussion of capitulation, it can be envisioned that 
the Anglo-American command would make an attempt to obtain 
a foothold on the Adriatic coast of the Balkan region. 

It is apparent from Anglo-American operations in the south- 
ern Pacific and guerilla air raids on Japanese-held positions in 
the continent of China and in the southern countries that the 
London and Washington commands are getting ready for initiat- 
ing offensive engagements. The opinions which are being 



1133 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



expressed by official quarters in this country emphatically 
affirm Japan's preparedness to liquidate such offensive engage- 
ments. In fact, Japan is quite confident of its ability to maintain 
its defence in the strategic areas needed for the consummation 
of its objective. While the position in East Asia remains un- 
changed, new developments have occurred in the state of 
hostilities in Europe. On the eastern front, the Red Army has 
reoccupied a number of key positions ; whereas hostilities of a 
peculiar nature are now on in Italy. Exclusive of the Reich- 
Soviet gigantomachy, it appears that the centre of gravity of 
the European war has shifted to southern Europe. 

With the retirement of Axis forces from Sicily, the control 
of the greater part of the Mediterranean fell into the hands of 
Britain and the United States, and the Suez Canal became a safer 
transportation route for them. On top of this, the uncondi- 
tional surrender of Italy and the departure of the major portion 
ot the Italian Navy to Anglo-American bases of operation have 
stabilized the naval supremacy of Britain and the United States 
in the Mediterranean and in the Atlantic. Concurrently the 
Anglo-American supply line to western Asia and Egypt has 
become much shorter than that via Capetown. It is estimated 
that the recent establishment of absolute command over the 
Suez Canal route by Britain and America has enabled them to 
economize on shipping to the volume of one and a half million 
tons of bottoms every month. This is cert^Ur « iL ™ mon 
on the Anglo-AmeriL side. T^ey 

rW 2£2 f P r f 8 ' A bUt als ° tranSf££ *™ of thek troops 
trom Europe to East Asia with comparative ease anH «fefv 
Insofar as Europe is concerned the Anglo-A^^f^ 
over the Mediterranean means that they will be in a better ra- 
tion to plan their offensive operations against Germany with a 
view to setting up a second front. The inr«c. * i w , 
oJr <• ■ j /- • • • j " xne ln cessant large-scale 

air raids on Germany and western Europe indicate the Anglo- 
American scheme of harassing the Reich ivehrmacht to as 
widespread an extent as possible. They are well aware that it 
would be injudicious to make a direct thrust against the 



"34 



TREND OF AXIS-" DEMOCRACY " WAR 



" European fortress " of Germany. 

On account of the new situation in the Mediterranean, it is 
no longer necessary for Britain and the United States to maintain 
a highly superior combined naval squadron for patrol duty in 
that area. A substantial part of their naval craft can be utilized 
to cover offensive operations elsewhere. It is because they are 
enjoying naval supremacy that they have been able to cause 
the dismemberment of Italy. But if they try to make a 
landing anywhere along the French coast they will find it ex- 
tremely difficult to withstand the German defence pressure. An 
attempt to land on Crete or on the mainland of Greece would be 
equally hazardous. The fresh arrival of German troops in the 
Balkans, the Reich advance into Alabama following Italy's 
capitulation and the disarming of Italian forces in Greece and 
other areas in southern Europe disclose that Germany's Balkan 
defence has been pushed to perfection with utmost speed. As 
the Anglo-American military engagements in the Italian main- 
land are still continuing, the London-Washington command, 
before swinging to action either in the Balkans or in any other 
part of Europe, must try to strengthen their positions in the occu- 
pied area of Italy. 

It is understood that, for the purpose of opening fresh offen- 
sives against Japan, it has been decided to dispatch a number of 
British capitalships to the East Asiatic front. The very appoint- 
ment of Admiral Lord Mountbatten as supreme commander 
implies that attacks from the sea would be intensified. Since 
the ships of the British Fleet stationed in home waters will 
have to be maintained to meet the contingencies of Qerman 
operations, it is self-explanatory that a sizable portion of the 
.capitalship strength of the Mediterranean Fleet can only be 
shifted to the East Asiatic front. Prior to the outbreak of the 
European war, Britain had seventeen capitalships. In the 
course of the European war and the Pacific conflict, it has so 
far lost five battleships, namely, the Royal Oak, Hood, Prince of 
Wales, Repulse and Barfjam, but it has already put in com- 
mission three new capitalships — the Duke of York, Anson and 



"35 x 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



Hoe — each of 35,000 tons. Consequently, Britain still possesses 
fifteen capitalships, of which it can easily spare four for duty 
in East Asiatic waters. It is also likely that Britain and 
America may place on active duty the warships of Italy at their 
disposal. Whether part of these warships would be sent to 
the East Asiatic front or the entire complement would be used 
on the European front depends on the actual trends of war in 
both areas. The general belief is that Britain, as immediate re- 
inforcement, is sending four of its capitalships to this part of the 
world to be merged into the British Indian Fleet, whose 
capitalship strength is estimated at two to four. Under such a 
reinforcement, it would be justifiable to expect breezy naval 
engagements in the near future. 

The execution of the Anglo-American plan for the invasion 
of Europe is related to the question of reaching a harmonious 
understanding with the Soviet Union, which country is still 
bearing the major brunt of the German onslaughts. Should 
the latter decide to differ from the plan of the former the 
London and Washington commands will find it necessary to 
modify their strategies so as to make them satisfactory to the 
projects of the Moscow command. The indifference manifested 
by Soviet Russia concerning the Quebec Conference has certainly 
swayed Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt to 
offer better terms to Premier Stalin. For example, it has been 
reported that a preliminary conference among the Foreign 
Ministers of the three Government would be held to prepare 
the agenda for a meeting between the three Chief Execu- 
tives. Prime Minister Churchill in his recent broadcast speech 
hoped that a meeting with Premier Stalin could be arranged 
shortly. This tendency on the part of London and Washington 
can be interpreted as a sign of their desire to make some con- 
cessions to Moscow. On the other hand, as long as Britain and 
the United States fail to give perceptible relief to the Red Army 
by drawing away fifty to sixty divisions of Reich forces from the 
eastern front to other war sectors, the Kremlin on principle 
would withhold its assent to any scheme purely designed to 

1136 



TREND OF AXIS-" DEMOCRACY" WAR 



accrue benefit to London and Washington. 

There is a divergence in the war aims of the Anglo-American 
nations and those of the Soviet Union. Both the Whitehall and 
the White House are unwilling to reach a prior agreement on the 
territorial expectations of the Kremlin. The Soviet Union's 
approximation of the Polish and Balkan questions is different 
from that of the United States and Britain. The lack of 
community of interest in the joint prosecution of hostilities 
has prompted Soviet Russia to be apprehensive of Anglo- 
American designs on Europe. The material aids that it is 
receiving from them are being dispatched with the ulterior 
object of keeping it engaged in a war of attrition with 
Germany. The intensity of the current summer offensive of 
the Red Army gives the impression that Premier Stalin is 
trying hard to regain as many key areas as possible to insure 
the security of the Soviet Union on the one hand and replenish 
the defence requirements internally on the other. It will not 
be irrational to opine that the fundamental motive of the 
Anglo-American nations is to organize a new Europe best suited 
to their interest by taking advantage of the furious hostilities 
on the eastern front. The Soviet Union cannot be satisfied 
^ess a large-scale European offensive is launched by its 
" democratic " partners. In fact, it wants Britain and America 
to open a direct attack on the "European fortress " of Germany. 

It is interesting to note that the Anglo-American nations 
are no w endeavouring to give equal weight on the conduct of 
military operations m Europe and in the Pacific. They have 
come to appreciate that just as Germany has established its secure 
position jvithm the mainland of Europe, so Japan has organized 
greater East Asia as a solid defence rampart. As it is not pos- 
sible to attack the mainland of Japan without acquiring command 
cver the entire Pacific basin, the Anglo- American strategists, 
besides carrying on the so-called island-to-island operation, are 
novr considering to attack Burma in order to reopen the Burma 
joad for bolstering the resistance capacity of Chungking. Mean- 
while, the United States is reinforcing its air arm in unoccupied 

1137 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



China with a view to raiding the mainland of Japan and Japanese 
positions in the southern countries and Nanking China. The in- 
tensive operations that are raging in the Solomons outspokenly 
elucidate the Japanese determination to decimate the fighting 
power of the United States by giving full play to wear and tear 
tactics. The Japanese air contingents in China, too, are intrepid- 
ly destroying warplanes and airfield installations of America 
located in the hinterland of the continent, thereby upsetting its 
plan of carrying out effective air raids on Japan and Japanese 
positions in greater East Asia. 

The potency of Japan's wear and tear tactics was demon- 
strated during the Guadalcanar campaign of last year By 
mobilizing numerically superior forces and equipment, America 
opened offensives in Guadalcanar. The Japanese forces foueht 
grimly and, after inflicting severe losses on the attacking parties 
both in men and material, withdrew to prepared positions in New 
Georgia and other islands in the central Solomons, as well as to 
northern New Guinea. America had to bear a surprisingly 
heavy sacrifice to occupy Guadalcanar, though its occupation 
registered little or no effect on the actual defence line of Japan in 
the southern Pacific. Again when American forces landed on 
Attu Island in the northern Pacific, it paid dearly before it could 
reoccupy it. The reoccupation of Attu by the United States 
removed any necessity of maintaining a garrison on Kiska Island, 
and so the Japanese units stationed there subsequently withdrew 
without being detected by the American blockade squadron. 
And when the American contingents landed there, they were 
utterly mystified to find that the entire Japanese garrison had 
already evacuated. The reoccupation of Attu and Kiska by the 
United States cannot constitute an invasion menace to Japan. 
The Japanese units landed on these two islands at a time when it 
was necessary to do so for gearing up the northern defence of 
the country. Now that the northern defence has been com- 
pleted to the extent desired, an American invasion from the 
Aleutians is no longer a practical proposition. The only thing 
the United States can attempt from that region is air raids on 

1138 



TREND OF AXIS-" DEMOCRACY" WAR 



Japan; but this country is thoroughly prepared against such 
contingencies. 

The Europe first formula adopted at the Casablanca Con- 
ference was replaced by a two-front principle when President 
Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill toward the fag end of 
the Tunisia campaign met in a conference in Washington. In 
accordance with the two-front principle, it was decided to in- 
tensify operations both on the Pacific and European fronts at 
one and the same time. Hence the American landing on Rendova 
and New Georgia on June 30. In six weeks from June 30 to 
August 15, both inclusive, the American side suffered 20,000 in 
killed, while twenty-four warships and thirty-four transports were 
either sunk or damaged and 85 3 aircraft destroyed. This heavy 
toll factually points out how effective is the wear and tear tactics 
of Japan. 

Judging from the trend of the Axis-"Democracy" war both 
on the Pacific and European fronts, it can be said that both sides * 
are getting ready to launch eventful operations. Should Britain 
and America try to penetrate the Pacific defence line of Japan, 
they will have to prepare themselves for bearing the consequence 
of such a venture. Were they to try the reopening of the 
Burma road by taking an offensive stand this autumn, they 
will find that Japan has not overlooked a move of this nature 
on their part. In Europe, in spite of the new situation in Italy, 
especially in its southern area, and the summer offensive of the 
Soviet Union, the position of Germany has undergone no marked 
change. Its war machine for land fighting remains as powerful 
as it was during the Dunkirk debacle experienced by Britain. The 
initiative to unleash high-power assaults is still in the hands of 
Japan and Germany. The Anglo-American command has yet 
to prove that it can strike powerfully at the " European fortress " 
of Germany and the greater East Asia defence rampart of 
Japan. 



"39 



MONISTICISM OF AMERICA 



By TAK1Z0 MATSUMOTO 

THE Americans are by nature susceptible to material com- 
fort and advancement. Their monistic way of living has 
made them faithful worshippers of Mammon. They are apt to 
judge the utility value of most things in terms of dollar. Inas- 
much as they desire to get on in the world by acquiring material 
prosperity, they invariably lay stress on the observance of the 
efficiency first principle in the conduct of each and every kind of 
enterprise. In war production, in the organization of industries 
and in the formation of political and cultural bodies, they apply 
this principle with nicety and precision. Their devotion to 
dollar can be described as a peculiar type of " economic neono- 
mianism." They take pride in saying that every department of 
activity in their country reflects the operation of the highest 
standard of efficiency. 

It is a fact that individual initiative and originality are fondly 
cherished in the United States. For instance, the educational 
and social institutions in the country have been framed with the 
set purpose of giving full play to individual initiative and original- 
ity. This is the mam reason why the American people have been 
able to create and invent many new scientific things and objects 
They claim that their country accounts for fifteen out of the 
thirty-four major inventions in the world in modern times and 
point out that of the rest, Germany accounts for six France five 
Britain three and other nations five. The blessing of individual 
initiative and originality is at the back of America's creative 
faculty and the ability to display the highest standard of efficiency. 
It is not rare in the United States for a talented professor in his 
thrities to become the president of an important university ; nor 

1 140 



MONISTICISM OF AMERICA 



is it surprising for a young industrial genius to become the 
head of a big industrial concern. 

The constant competition among the American people to 
improve their lot by exhibiting their individual merits and to 
create new tilings for the appreciation of the world at large has 
assured the progressive uplift of their monistic civilization. At 
the same time, their strong notion of efficiency has made them 
a people of action. They accomplish a work not merely to 
satisfy themselves, but to make it a show-object for other peo- 
ples of the world. The sky-lines they have built are, among 
other things, directed toward attracting the attention of the 
outside world to their way of material living. The skyscrapers 
adorning the Manhattan of New York are no doubt impressive ; 
but to a man inclined to live a normal life they exemplify as if the 
Americans were deliberately making a fetish of materialism. The 
geometrical uniformity of these massive buildings strikes him as 
a cruelty inflicted on the tender artistic emotions inherent in 
mankind. 

The monistic mentality of the American people consciously 
and sub-consciously impells them to promote such objects as 
are soothing to the enjoyment of material life. They gratify 
their monistic instinct by having the largest, longest and fastest 
things in the world; -they esteem the power of dollar with an 
unparalleled avidity; and they show an amazing attitude of 
indifference toward those nations whom they consider " sure 
squeeze." In comparison with the Americans, the Japanese are 
more idealistic and less materialistic. The needful materialism 
that exists in Japan is fundamentally poetic in nature ; whereas 
the plastic materialism of the United States is wholly prosaic and 
domineering in character. The Japanese way of living in houses 
of wood and paper has a simple poetic sentiment which is not 
discernible in the American way of living in skyscrapers sprayed 
with an artificial prosaic atmosphere. The Americans value life 
as a thing personal, while the Japanese value life as an object 
impersonal. The Americans struggle to live for themselves and 
the Japanese to live and let live. 

mi 



^ CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

Truly speaking, monisticism as popularly understood does 
not exist in Japan. The family system of this country has com- 
mon security and mutual affection and reliance as its essential 
elements. It discountenances all propensities tending toward 
personal gain at the expense of family and society. The ideal 
of selfless service to the State spontaneously invigorates the 
Japanese people to live for the good of the nation and not for 
individual benefit. In other words, poeticism and patriotism are 
the two cardinal features of the Japanese way of life. That the 
Japanese are poetic is evident from their taste in «//(seventeen- 
syllable verse) composition and painting black-ink pictures. 
Their sense of living for the cause of the nation denotes their 
standard of patriotism. ■ In the family system of America, per- 
sonal competition and personal ambition appear to be unduly 
prominent. In that country, service is not always offered to the 
State unreservedly and unconditionaly. 

To an American, the end is more important than the means • 
and so he resorts to positive and definite measures to obtain the 
desired result. This positive and definitive trait has made the 
Americans a people of action, steadfastly adhering to the ef- 
ficiency first principle. In reaching a decision concerning a 
third party, they do not approve the policy of meeting the just 
grounds of that party ; their decision virtually manifests what 
they are unilaterally enunciating for it. Had the United States 
paid just consideration to the viewpoints of Japan relative to the 
settlement of the China affair, the current Pacific war would not 
have broken out. In external affairs, America's sense of justice 
and compromise takes the shape of an unnecessary domineering 
complex. Its realism and conception of freedom of living reject 
to see the good in the realism and conception of freedom of 
living of those nations which try to ventilate their legitimate 
grievances against it. The United States has wilfully embroiled 
itself in the Axis- Democracy" conflict in order to quench its 
ambitious thirst. n 

Public opinion is the yardstick of American psychology. 
The leaders of the United States, on agreeing to do something 

1 142 



MONISTICISM OF AMERICA 



spectacular or eventful, first of all, take care to rouse public 
opinion in favour of their planned project. AJ1 the measures 
in respect of Far Eastern situation adopted by President Roose- 
velt, following the start of the China affair, were directed toward 
fomenting a hostile sentiment in America against Japan as a 
means to prepare the ground for an American- Japanese armed 
conflict, which ultimately occurred on December 8, 1941? an d is 
now continuing with undiminished fury in the southern Pacific. 
In the past, the United States through the medium of public 
opinion utilized a number of excitable incidents to justify its 
recourse to arms. For example, the American-Spanish War of 
1898 took place after a mysterious explosion in the American 
warship Maine anchored at Havana. The United States par- 
ticipated in the last World War resenting the sinking of the 
Lusitania by a German U-boat in 191 7. 

The possession of vast natural resources has spurred the 
cultivation of monisticism in America. The American people 
think that, because they have evolved an incomparable material 
civilization, they can impose their will on the conduct of life in 
other countries, at least in the regulation of their economic 
affairs. This self-centred material outlook of the United States 
cannot be, under any circumstances, condoned by reputation- 
conscious sovereign nations. America occupies one-eighteenth 
of the entire land surface of the world ; its annual iron and coal 
production accounts for one-third of the total world turnover ; 
and its oil, wheat, cotton and automobile output respectively 
reaches one-half, one-fifth, one-half and one-tenth of the net 
world production. Then, it has high mechanical power and 
admirable technical and scientific knowledge. With all these 
advantages, the United States, instead of attempting to become 
an ideal factor of human concord, is pursing a policy of capitalist- 
imperialistic domination to decorate its " House of Mammon " 
with the economic spoils gathered from outside countries. 

The class and racial struggle that prevails in America can 
be substantially traced to its undue hankering after material 
impunity. Not only the different white racial stocks are at 



1 143 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



variance with one another in the pursuit of their material life, 
but also there exists an actue animosity between the coloured 
people and the white population. The latter is determined to 
gain its ends by restraining the aspirations of the former, with 
the result that the American negroes, who have become as 
materialistic as the American whites, are trying their utmost to 
break the bond of discrimination. On top of this, the class 
struggle has brought the country to the verge of an irreconcilable 
labour-capital confrontation. The working people, objecting 
to the far superior standard of material life of their capitalist 
chiefs, demand that they should be given more economic and 
financial privileges, so that they can lead a better existence, en- 
joying more amenities. The puritan spirit, which propelled the 
founding of America, has become lost in the quagmire of monis 7 
tic sophistry and plutocratic craving. 

The pronounced mundane trait in the American character 
has given birth to a kind of pragmatism which prefers practical 
emotions to fine sentiments and suppressed feelings. The 
emotional life of the American people is matter-of-fact. They 
do not extract forms and substances from within ; they deter- 
emine them from without by applying their scientific mind and 
efficiency. In the domain of fine arts, too, the Americans are 
prone to approach beauty as though they were longing to make 
it the vehicle of their existence. They do not perceive beauty in 
disenchantment; they see it in enchantment. The Americans 
favour realism more than spiritualism. To them, the worldly 
existence is of greater importance than the nourishment of soul. 
Hence, they appreciate realistic beauty more than spiritualistic 
charm or grace. The Japanese are just the opposite of the 
Americans. They exalt spiritualistic beauty more than their 
esteem for realistic aestheticism. The emotional life of the Japa- 
nese people has a peculiar softness and modesty which direct 
them to dive inward to appreciate and create things outward. 

America is the youngest country. It is essentially the pro- 
duct of modern civilization. \![Its growth has been more or less 
natural. Receiving the concentrated assistance of the best of 



"44 



MONISTTCISM OF 'AMERICA 



Western culture, it shortly evaginated a culture of its own, and 
then started exercising its creative faculty and initiative to the 
maximum limit. On the other hand, the development of Japan has 
passed through many historical stages since its founding in the 
neolithic period. It experienced a series of trials and turmoils 
before it managed to consolidate its single-dimensional national 
fabric. In modern times, while the United States has been 
engrossed in giving vent to its expansionist desire, Japan has 
been busily engaged in enchancing its national virility, being 
faced with external menace. It was on the occasion of the 
Manchurian incident that Japan found it indispensable to come 
out in the open to protect its way of living. This jarred on the 
feelings of the United States, whilch nation there and then decided 
" to teach poor Japan a lesson " at an opportune moment. The 
opportunity came with the commencement of the China affair, 
and the American pressure on Japan began to increase until it 
became too intolerable to be borne. All this while the United 
States thought that by driving Japan to war it would have a 
walkover in East Asia. Relying on its material potency, it 
miscalculated the extent of the intrinsic power of this country. 
When Japan swiftly established its supremacy in greater East 
Asia after the outbreak of the present Pacific war, it realized; how 
grossly it had misjudged the potentiality of its " Oriental neigh- 
bour." 

The excess of materialism has blurred the vision of the 
United States. The Americans claim the whole world as their 
trade territory, and yet they deny other nations the right to 
exercise such a commercial claim on the United States. They 
have forgotten that during the u covered wagon " days America 
was a " free " country. They now only remember that America 
is a " closed " country. It is, indeed, strange that the United 
States, which dispatched the Perry mission to open the door of 
Japan, decided to close its door against Japan by way of hinder- 
ing the latter's effort to settle the China affair. Not satisfied 
with its unprecedented material prosperity, America, ignoring 
the historical evidence of Sino- Japanese affinity, resolved to 



1145 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



make East Asia its economic linchpin. This resolution dis- 
closed the aggressive character of the monisticism of the United 
States. The sphere of East Asia does not constitute a danger 
to the material flourish of America. That country, under proper 
economic accord, can acquire immense benefit from this sphere. 
However, the United States, disapproving any system of mutual 
reciprocity other than its own, parted company with Japan. It 
really believed that war would be a " lesson " to Japan ; but war 
has now become a " lesson " to America. 

It would be incorrect to underrate the material power of the 
United States. It has implemented mammoth war production 
programmes and is intensifying military operations in the south- 
ern Pacific. Depending on time element and production 
factor, it is steadily replenishing its war machinery. It has 
already changed its opinion about Japan. Official and non- 
official statements that are being made in the country show that 
America has become fully Japan-conscious. Joseph Grew, 
former American Ambassador to Tokyo, is periodically ex- 
horting his countrymen to take congition of the formidable 
might of Japan. In fact, all quarters are now saying " beware 
of Japan," instead of " poor Japan." The Pacific war has dis- 
rupted the flow of America's material way of life, and the dough- 
boys are rushing to war sectors in the East and the West to fight 
for the preservation and enhancement of their monistic living. 
By wielding the power of dollar and material and scientific skiS, 
the United States hopes to browbeat Japan. This country, 
having won the first round of war, is getting ready to contest 
the second round. America will find Japan prepared to meet 
its new move. 



1 146 



\ 



INDUSTRIAL GROWTH OF KOREA 

By YEISUKE ZENSHO 

THE industrial resources of Korea are playing a commend- 
able role in strengthening the war production structure 
of Japan. The stress of the Pacific war has called for the ex- 
ploitation of the key materials obtainable in the peninsula in a 
more systematic manner than before. The wartime life of 
Korea has been adjusted to fulfil the requirements of emergency 
conditions. After the outbreak of the China affair, Korea wit- 
nessed a boom in the mining of gold. Today, however, its 
activities are more prominent in industrial fields. It is doing 
its best to register broad expansion in the production of iron, 
coal, steel and light metals. 

Korea is endowed with rich iron ore resources. Vast beds 
of hematite are found at Righenin Kankyo'Nando and in the areas 
operated by the Kotobuki Concern and mines in Heian Nando. 
On the other hand, localities for hematite-limonite mixed ores 
are the Kaisen mine in Heian Nando and Sainei, Ghinryu, Kasei 
and Kenjiho in Kohkaido ; whereas those for magnetic iron ores 
are the Mosan mine in Kankyo Hokudo and the Joyo and Sanwa 
mines in Koghendo. The principal one among these iron mines 
is the Mosan mine, which is under the management of the Mitsu- 
bishi interests. The ores available at this mine are not of rich 
quality inasmuch as the iron contents average at thirty-eight per 
cent. But as their deposits are estimated to be extensive, they 
compare favourably with the beds of the Anshan mine in south- 
ern Manchuria. The ores, moreover, comprise solely magnetic 
iron, while the size of ore grains is generally larger than that of 
the Anshan ores. These two features render the ore-dressing 
easier, and for this reason the Mosan mine is considered more 



1 147 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



profitable than the Anshan mine. 

At present, the ores at the Mosan mine are dressed by the 
magnetic method, and the powdered ores with the magnetic 
iron contents of sixty to seventy per cent- are shipped to different 
iron works. Also the exploitation of magnetic ore beds has 
been commenced recently at the Joyo and Sansho mines in 
Koghendo and large-scale production is expected shortly with the 
completion of the additional mining facilities. In Kankyo 
Nando, preparations are under way for the development of ore 
beds at the Tansen mine. Meanwhile, different iron and steel 
production methods have been adopted respectively at the 
works of the Nippon High Cycle Heavy Industry Company at 
Joshin and those of the Nippon Iron Manufacturing Company 
and the Mitsubishi Mining Company at Seishin. Particularly 
notable is the fact that the utilization of small-size blast furnaces 
has been accelerating the growth of the iron industry. 

Both brown coal and anthracite are available in Korea. 
The former is found in abundance in the so-called Kankyo 
Hokudo coal-fields, which consist of the coal-beds of Kisshu, 
Meisen, Kyojo, Kainei, Keighen and Keiko. Other coal-fields 
are located at Anshu in Heian Nando, Hosan in Kohkaido and 
Keishu in Keisho Nando. Besides being used for general in- 
dustrial and household purposes, brown coal is utilized for the 
manufacture of artificial petroleum. The Nippon Nitrogenous 
Fertilizer Company has its low temperature distilleries at Yeian 
Meisen county of Kankyo Hokudo, where heavy oil, paraffine \ 
methanol and bakelite are produced from brown coal. 5 Further- 
more, the Chosen Artificial Oil Company is operating a plant at 
the Agochi coal-field in Kankyo Hokudo, where the hydrogen 
process has been adopted for the liquefaction of coal, and its 
products are widely distributed on the market. 

Anthracite coal deposits are found in a wider area than brown 
coal, the principal anthracite mines now in operation being 
located at Heijo, Sansho, Bunsen, Koghen, Neietsu, Wajun, 
Heinan and Bunkei. Anthracite is used more entensively than 
brown coal for various industrial, as well as household purposes. 

1148 



INDUSTRIAL GROWTH OF KOREA 



The Neietsu coal-beds were developed by the Chosen Electric 
Power Company when it established its thermal power plant at 
Neietsu. On the other hand, the Sansho Development Company 
is operating on a big scale the Sansho anthracite beds to supply 
fuel for the power generation in Japan proper and raw materials 
for the manufacture of nitro-lime, cement and other industrial 
products in Korea. Anthracite is used widely as fuel at those 
manufacturing plants with boilers which are equipped with 
special devices to burn powdered coal and for the thermal power 
generation, the production of various kinds of briquette sub- 
stitutes for cokes and diverse industrial chemicals. It may be 
especially added that the liquefaction of anthracite coal is now 
under study. 

In Korea, graphite is found both in flakes and in lamps. 
Graphite flakes are available chiefly in Heian Hokudo and Kan- 
kyo Hokudo, while graphite lamps abound in Keisho Hokudo 
and Kankyo Nando. Graphite in flakes are used for the manu- 
facture of electrodes, melting pots and carbon material ; whereas 
lamp graphite is used in the electro-chemical industry. The 
chief tungsten ore producing districts in Korea are Neietsu 
county of Koghendo, Shojo county of Heian Hokudo, Yohtoku 
county and Neien county of Heian Nando, Choshin county of 
Kankyo Nando, Chushu county and Teisen county of Chusei 
Hokudo, Seiyo county of Chusei Nando and Kokusan county 
ofKohkaido. Magnesite is found profusely in Kisshu county 
of Kankyo Hokudo and Tansen county of Kankyo Nando, 
while vast deposits of alum stone, one of the raw materials for 
aluminum, have been discovered at Tokusen, Kasha Island, 
Mount Gyokumai in Zenra Nando and at various points in 
Keisho Nando. In addition, Korea is endowed with large 
deposits of alum shale and diverse other raw materials for light 
metals. 

Korea has how embarked upon a scheme to construct a 
light metal industrial structure of its own. Apart from the 
plants of the Nippon Nitrogenous Fertilizer Company and the 
Nippon Magnesium Metal Company, there are several aluminum 



1 149 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

and magnesium plants operated by the Chosen Physico-Chemical 
Metal Company and the Toyo Metal Company. Also an alumi- 
num plant of the Toyo Light Metal Company and a magnesium 
plant of the Chosen Heavy Chemical Company are under con- 
struction. Furthermore, several other companies are planning 

SteS t P antS ,° r CXtend their existin g iLunJL 

and magnesium producing facilities. Besides the metallic re- 

nZ CC L T "tT' ? 6pOSitS ° f ^ Uid lead > nuor-spur, 
mica, phosphoret, nickel, cobalt and manganese are being rapidlv 
exploited to meet the war time demands. For the purpose of 
augmenting the exploitation of metallic resources" many goH 
mines have been ordered to suspend their operation and their 
equipment are being used to extract key metallic ores 

The wartime demands have prompted the growth of heaw 

thanST ^T' Whk Y? e T ndln S -*^maig speel 
thanks to the phenomenal development in the hydro electric 
power industry. The Suiho dam on the Yalu River has been 
nearly completed, and the generating plant lately installed there 
commenced the distribution of power some time ago. Mean- 
while the construction of hydro-electric power generation plants 
is under way at Kokai, Kyosenko, Funei, Kanko and at different 
points in southern Korea, as well as at Seitohsui in the Tomon 
region. A steam power generation plant is being got ready at 

capacity the manufacturing industries of Korea would witness 
an unprecedented activity. Already Keijo, Jinsen Heijo 

Konan, Kankyo, Joshm and Seishin have been trans- 
formed into vast industrial zones. The remarkable develop- 
ment and expansion of the manufacturing and mining industries 
in these areas are substantially due to the stride of the hydro- 
electric power industry, which supplies abundant electric power 
at a very cheap rate to the heavy industrial concerns 

Of the various industries in Korea, the textile enterprise 
experienced some setbacks in recent years, but the metal refining, 
metal work and machine and tool industries have attained a 

1150 



INDUSTRIAL GROWTH OF KOREA 



striking expansion. Pottery, glass, cement and brick industries 
have also risen, reflecting marked increases in demand for their 
products. The liquefaction of coal, too, has seen a happy 
growth. In the soap industry, the most important factories are 
the Chosen Nitrogenous Fertilizer Company, the Chosen Oil 
and Fat Company and the Kyodo Oil and Fat Company, all of 
which are producing soaps from partly manufactured materials 
turned out at their own plants. The oil and fat industry is in a 
prosperous condition, because it is utilizing linseed, seasame, 
cotton seed, rice bran, castor seed and Manchurian soya-bean ; 
whereas the fish oil industry has been somewhat depressed ow- 
ing to poor catches of sardines, which are the essential raw 
material for the manufacture of hardened oil. 

The rubber goods manufacturing industry in Korea has a 
promising future. Already a number of plants have been re- 
moved there from Japan proper. Above Shinghishu on the Yalu 
River, many artificial rubber, nitro-lime and carbide plants have 
been established of late. In the field of paper and pulp industry, 
the Oji Paper Manufacturing Company's plant at Shinghishu is 
turning out wrapping paper by using lumber produced in the 
upper reaches of the Yalu as material, while the Hokusen Paper 
Mill and Chemical Company has commenced the manufacture 
of rayon pulp at its mill erected at Kisshu, Kankyo Hokudo. 
The ammonium sulphate industry is represented chiefly by the 
Nippon Nitrogenous Fertilizer Company, which operates two 
plants, one at Konan and the other at Hongu in Kankyo Nando. 
Besides them, the Kenjiho plant of the Nippon Iron Manufactur- 
ing Company manufactures fertilizer as by-product. The 
leather industry is in a favoured position, being assured of ample 
supply of high-grade cow hides and labour. The leading leather 
enterprise is the Chosen Hide and Leather Company which has 
its factories at Yeitoho and other places. The breweries and 
distilleries have made a notable development in Korea, though 
they are now operating on a restricted scale on account of the 
limited supply of labour and raw materials due to wartime 
exigency and mobilization of materials for war industries ♦ 

Up 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

The same reason has slowed down the operation of rice and 
flour mills and starch making and sugar refining plants. 

Notwithstanding the poor rice crop of last year, the food 
supply situation in Korea has been kept well under control and 
there is no sign of anxiety. Favoured by the economic boom 
prevalent in the recent several years, the living standard of the 
people of Korea has been appreciably elevated. And this in 
turn has caused a considerable expansion in the consumption of 
rice and other foodstuffs. However, these developments are 
being met with effectively by the employment of such measures 
as the regulations for consumption, improvement and expansion 
of farm land and the construction of more irrigation facilities 
in rural areas. A shortage in the supply of farm labour is 
noticeable in certain districts owing to the migration of workers 
to Japan proper, and also to industrial and mining centres with- 
in the peninsula. For the purpose of maintaining the planned 
production level by a judicious distribution of available labour 
a number of new measures are about to be put into operation' 
including the adjustment in the supply of labour in general' 
enhancement of factory workers' efficiency, application of the 
system of the joint factory operation and intensified utilization 
of female workers. Tphe agrarian population of Korea largely 
comprises tenant-farmers, and per capita area of land under tillage 
averages below two acres. In order to remedy this undesirable 
condition, a series of effective arrangements are under considera- 
tion. They are, among others, the redistribution of population, 
reallocation of farm land, reorganization of farming communities, 
creation of more owner-farmers, elimination of absentee land- 
owners, mechanization of farming, use of improved farm im- 
plements, expansion in stock-breeding, rationalization of farming 
methods, encouragement of remunerative sidelines for cash 
income and promotion of more hygienic facilities. 

After the outbreak of the China affair, the position of Korea 
assumed a new importance in connection with national defence 
and economy. Japan desired that the people of the peninsula 
should have the opportunity to take part in the defence of 

1152 



INDUSTRIAL GROWTH OF KOREA 

the Tapanese Empire and in the consolidation of national econ- 
omy. The industrial of growth of Korea after the start ot toe 
China affair and more recently with the commencement ot tne 
Pacific war speaks well of the part it has played in becoming a 
highly potential economic zone. When the European war 
ensued in September 1939, Japan began to build a highly or- 
ganized national defence structure with the object of coping witn 
future difficulties. A similar activity, though on a different 
footing, was sponsored in Korea. As a result, the peninsula 
promptly established a new emergency structure and launched a 
total power mobilization movement with perfect unity and co- 
operation among the Government-General and the people. 
This campaign has achieved remarkable success, especially since 
the outbreak of the current war in greater East Asia and the 
official announcement on the establishment of the system ot 
military conscription in the peninsula. 

Following the reform carried out in the organization ot the 
Government-General in accordance with the project tor the 
simplification of the administration of the Japanese Empire, tne 
Korean National Association was thoroughly reconstructed into 
a genuine civilian body, which is now actively participating in the 
patriotic movement with renewed vigour. The basie structure ot 
the total power mobilization campaign compnses (a) the total 
power sections of the Government- Genetal and prefectural 
administrations which direct the movement and maintain liaison 
among various bureaus and sections and (b) the Total Power 
Liaison Committee, which acts as an organ to vitalize constantly 
closer liaison among various official and civilian institutions 
concerned. The committee also deliberates on and formulates 
the required policies, and its decisions are immediately put into 
force The operational structure of the movement consists 
of (I) the Korean National Association, (b) its local chapters 
Zd(c) patriotic units, which correspond to the neighbourhood 
^<5<;nriation system of Japan proper. , 

The system of military conscription which for long years 
have been cherished by the people of the peninsula is scheduled 



1153 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



to be enforced from 1944. In the interim, the naval special 
volunteer service system has been put into effect, in addition to 
the army special volunteer service system which has been in 
force in Korea since 1938. The application of the army volun- 
teer system was enthusiastically welcomed by the Korean people, 
and the youths began to enlist themselves displaying remarkable 
zeal. The number of volunteers began to increase year after 
year, with the result that the Japanese Government recently 
decided to enforce military conscription from 1944. For the 
present, the Volunteers Training Institutes located at Keijo and 
Heijo are the supreme attractions to ambitious young men of 
Korea. The enthusiasm of the peninsula is conspicuously 
demonstrated by the fact that the eldest sons of many families, 
employees of comniercial and industrial companies, government 
officials, school teachers and other such of the educated class 
predominate among the volunteers. 

/ As a preliminary to the adoption of the conscription system 
from next year, the Government-General of Korea has instituted 
a young men's training system, under which special training 
is being given to youths between seventeen and twenty-one 
years of age who had no chance to receive primary education. 
This system aims at giving the preparatory training required for 
young men to be enlisted under the envisioned conscription 
system. Along with the conscription move, it has also been 
decided to enforce compulsory education in Korea from 1946. 
With the spread of compulsory education, the forward march of 
Korea is expected to reach a new height., According to the 
latest available statistics, the people of Korea number more 
than 27,000,000 of whom over 23,000,000 are in the peninsula, 
about 1,700,000 in Japan proper, 1,500,000 in Manchoukuo and 
some zoopoo in China and the southern region. Through these 
two nation-building projects, Japan has shown how interested 
it is in looking after the welfare of the people of Korea. 

While on one side the forthcoming application of military 
conscription and compulsory education has energized the pro- 
gressive uplift of the Korean people, on the other the adoption 



1154 



INDUSTRIAL GROWTH OF KOREA 

of numerous economic and industrial undertakings has insured 
the rapid industrial climb of the peninsula. The mining of coal 
iron ores and light metals in increased volumes necessitated by, 
the need of wartime demands is greatly facilitating the gto^ot 
heavy and light industries duly aided by the tremendous expan- 
sion in hydro-electric power. From the industrial viewpomt 
the wartime activity of Japan has undoubtedly proved a highly 
propitious blessing to Korea. 



"55 



SIGNBOARDS OF THE CONTINENT 



By KEISEN MOTOYAMA 



TT is a usual practice in China and Manchoukuo for the shop- 
X keepers to advertize their wares by hanging objective 
or symbolic signboards at the front of their stores These 
signs for shops are generally of three kinds, namely '"nien" 

of vatious shapes : some are oblong, some rectangular some 
semilunar and others gourd-shaped. They are mostly' TdZ 

St! 111 -T d indicate J rade f» The ground colour 

of the boards is either green, blue, red or black, and corresponds 
well to golden, yellow or vermilion characters. The black 
ground colour is sometimes matched with white characters - 
but there are very few signboards, whose ground colour is, as" 
in Japan, white or unpainted and have black characters. 

The "chao-pei" is a pictorial or ideographic signboard 
which is projectingly or conspicuously hung up before a shop 
It is intended to describe to a prospective buyer a particular 
article that is available in the shop and not a trade name Both 
in China and Manchoukuo the frontage of each large shop is 

« nT" ^f< <T y ° f t » 6Se S° lde * and other brilliant coloured 
pien and chao-pei signs. They are lavishly displayed to 
attract the purchasing instinct of a prospective buyer As a good 
portion of the buyers cannot read a single ideograph, these signs 
serve the purpose of making known to them subjectively and 
objectively the items of merchandise offered for sale In China 
and Manchoukuo, elementary education is not so widely spread 
as in Japan. Though they are called " countries of characters " 

^I\ limited nUmbe r r ° f thdr maSSCS unde **and ideographs. 
With the exception of government officials, priests and intel- 

1156 



SIGNBOARDS OF THE CONTINENT 



lectuals, the general populace are nearly illiterate. This is the 
reason why, besides pictures being used in the " chao-pei," the 
unique " huang-tzu " has come to develop. The " huang-tzu 99 
is a primitive kind of advertizing signboards. It denotes a 
specific object offered for sale, or an exaggerated imitation of it. 

How a " huang-tzu 99 excites the imagination of consumers 
can be understood from the idea signified in the carp sign 
picture inserted separately. The carp sign is fixed to a pole 
which stands on Lake Ching-po in northern Manchoukuo. 
This vast desolate lake is also called Lake Pierhteng, and the 
inhabitants popularly refer to it as " tahu " (large lake). Lying 
between Tunhua and Ningkuta in Kirin Province, it forms one 
of the sources of the Mutankiang River. It is a site of historic 
interest, being connected with the Hsiaoshen legend. Now, 
imagine a party of coolies, each in a winter hood and coat lined 
with furs, trudging their weary way. Stretching their tired eyes, 
they keep on looking toward the lake. One of them suddenly 
cries out : " Look, there stands a c chao-pei 9 \" " Yes, that's a 
" c chao-pei,' 99 respond many others. Several scores of eyes are 
at once turned to the solitary wooden pole that is seen standing 
on the ice-bound surface of the lake, over which the north wind 
blows drearly. To a part somewhat lower than the top of 
it is clumsily 'fixed a carp of carved wood. " A chop- 
house ! there's a chop-house ! 99 they cry out. By this 
sign of carp, they know at once that there is a chop-house in the 
direction to which the fish points ; and that there is such hot food 
as " tang-mien " and " pao-tzu 99 for them. A set of " huang- 
tzu " is seen hanging down from the mouth of the carp, pro- 
claiming the articles to be had. On finding such food signs, 
these coolies, who have trudged their long weary way across the 
cold ice-bound lake, must undoubtedly feel relieved. They 
realize that their long wading is over, and that they can rest and 
put up for the night. 

The " huang-tzu " design has a close bearing on the folk- 
craft of the continent. " The ' huang-tzu ' is most beautiful 
in broad daytime," says Lewis Crane, author of China in Sign 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



and Symbol. He adds : " When the sun shines brightly in the 
dark blue sky, a * huang-tzu ' blue, red or yellow — especially 
painted golden or silvery — is most fascinating to the eyes of 
a foreigner. And we perceive that there are close relations 
between this old custom and the thoughts of the continent." 
Lewis Crane's description relates to the " huang-tzu " custom 
of Peking. The same can also be said of Manchoukuo, where 
the gorgeous colours of the " huang-tzu " signs and their 
exaggerated forms stand out in striking contrast to the desolate 
scenery around. These signs can be synthetically considered 
and their beauty sensuously appreciated; or if individually 
considered, their multiform shapes and colours stir the artistic 
emotion of a viewer in a quaint way. It will be conducive 
to the appreciation of continental folkcraftto know what kind 
of merchandise the A huang-tzu 9 \ symbols represent and what 
sort of trade they specify. 

The " tien " or " ko-tien " is a cheap inn or doss-house, 
but not a well-appointed hotel which is called "lu-kuan" or 
"lu-she." The " huang-tzu," or the sign for a doss-house, as 
is seen in the picture attached, consists of a red-brown round 
wooden box with a piece of red cloth hung under it. The 
doss houses of this kind are generally intended to accommodate 
travellers with rooms only, but with neither bedding nor food. 
Travellers who put up at such a doss-house always carry their 
coverlets, mattresses, cooking utensils, food, etc. with them. 
On entering the doss-house, one will feel some strange sultriness, 
which is caused by the heat of the fire and the stuffiness of the 
air pervading the whole house. The travellers spread their 
thin mattresses on the floor and go to sleep together. These 
doss-houses are found everywhere, even in the sequestered parts 
of northern Manchoukuo. They cater for the wandering poor 
travellers. * 

There is another kind of doss-house sign, which consists 
of two or three round boxes, each with a piece of red cloth fixed 
under it. Under the last or lowest box another sign of a 
different shape is usually seen hanging. This set of signs in- 

1158 



SIGNBOARDS OF THE CONTINENT 

dicates that the house is doing a side business. This additional 
sign, for instance, which is of semi-circular shape and bears the 
characters €i tsien-ping " (Shantung wafers) on it, shows that it 
sells wafers, too. The additional sign consisting of four square 
boards arranged in cone form with the characters "hao tai 
toufu " (fine bean-curd) on them indicates that the proprietor 
is also a bean-curd dealer. By the shape of the signs hung up 
and even if there are no characters to show the nature of 
business done, travellers are given to understand what the house 
stands for. 

In old China, the prime ambition of many young men was 
to become government officials, for they could thereby rise to 
eminence. In order to qualify themselves for this, they had to 
pass the required examination, which was held far away from 
their villages. When the youths left their villages to appear at 
the examination, the villagers hung up signs of the shape of an 
auspicious carp at their entrance-doors for the purpose of 
wishing them success. This the people did in pursuance of the 
old saying— " the carp ascends the Dragon Gate." In addition, 
this custom of hanging up imitation carps was also auspicious 
to the hosts of doss-houses, for the characters " li-yu 99 (carp- 
fish) are homophonous with the characters "li-yu" (money- 
making). This is how the hanging of carp sign has continued 
to remain in vogue even today, and a doss-house usually puts a 
bamboo basket over its carp sign, perhaps to prevent the " pro- 
fits " from going away. 

The signs for " fan-tien 99 (restaurants) are more gorgeously 
designed than those for doss-houses. There are three classes of 
restaurants : " fan chuang," " fan-kuan 99 and " fan-tien." The 
first two are of first and second classes and the last one of third 
class. Consequently, the signs to be used for these houses are 
of three kinds. Some signs have a circular box resembling that 
of the doss-house " huang-tzu ; " and the upper part of the box 
is conically ornamented with many red, purple, blue and yellow- 
artificial paper flowers. Instead of red cloth, numerous slender 
pieces of scarlet paper are used as a thick tassel, and round this 



1159 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



tassel are tied golden or silvery paper belts. Often the signs 
consist of two, three or more of these boxes. Although they 
look gaudy, their showiness on the continent is relieved by the 
monotonous surroundings. The make of a <c huang-tzu " sign 
becomes simpler or coarser in accordance with the status of the 
house. And the tassel passes from red to yellow. If, on the 
other hand, the proprietor of a resturant is a Mohammedan, he 
never uses red colour in ornaments and tassels, however high- 
grade the house may be. He always uses indigo or deep blue 
colour combined with black in certain parts. 

The <c chieh-mien-pu " sign resembles the restaurant sign. 
The word " mien " means " flour." This sign is usually found in 
front of a shop where some kinds of macaroni and vermicelli are 
sold. Here an oblong board is used instead of a round box:, and 
to the lowest part of it are fixed slender pieces of paper or cloth. 
It is said that the board symbolizes a measure, and that the red 
pieces denote macaroni of superior quality, while the white ones 
show that of ordinary make. It is probable that the idea of those 
pieces of paper which are seen in the restaurant sign is derived 
from this sign of the macaroni dealer or has been suggested by 
it. It is also probable that the round box symbolizes a scoop- 
basket. If so, it may be equally right to think that this sign, 
too, has been suggested by the hanging up of some specimens of 
merchandise. 

There are many instances of merchandise themselves being 
used as their models, full-sized and magnified, or as signs. In 
Japan, it has been the custom from ancient times for brush- 
makers, shoe-makers, clog -makers, fefo-makers, cotton dealers, 
basket-makers, old-clothes dealers, hatters, comb dealers, fan 
dealers, dealers in musical instruments, etc., to hang up the full- 
size or magnified models of their goods as signs in front of their 
shops. On the continent these kinds of signs are exceedingly 
numerous, and conspicuous devices and specialities are seen in 
their structures, colours and ornaments. 

As an instance of showing how cleverly actual goods are 
made signs mention may be made of the sign of a leatherwork 

1160 




" Huang-tzu " of liquor manufacturers and dealers 




: ' Huang-tzu " of cotton (left) and hemp (right) 





" Huang-tZu " of a tobacco-pipe dealer, the jug-shaped symbol hanging from a bar 
intimating that he is a metal worker also 



" Huang-tzu " of a timber merchant (left) and a sieve dealer (right), the former adorned 
with a weathercock and a lantern 




Pawnbrokers' " humg-tzu," the big character on the oblong board of the right " huang- 
tzu " meaning "pawn" and the carved pillar of the left " huang-tzu " denoting 
coins stringed together 



SIGNBOARDS OF THE CONTINENT 



pealer. Signs of this kind are visible in many parts of northern 
Manchoukuo, and each of them consists of a post, an arm and 
several slender pieces of leather ; but considerable attention is 
paid to the method of fitting them up. A sign of this nature 
possesses the structural beauty of folkcraft, as well as the adver- 
tizing efficacy of the sign itself. \ 

Of all signs that are one step more advanced than real-goods 
ones and still symbolize the real goods, the most common are 
those of pharmacists. They are found everywhere in southern 
and northern Manchoukuo. The main feature of each of these 
signs is a white square cardboard besmeared with black plaster, 
and another similar one folded in a triangular form. They are 
magnified imitations of a real object. China and Manchoukuo 
are originally noted for their herb medicine. Yet these signs . 
are seen at every pharmacist's shop, be it a classical or modern 
druggist. The size of these signs varies according to local 
conditions and, sometimes white cardboards bedaubed with red 
plaster, red cardboards bedaubed with black plaster and blue 
cardboards with black plaster are used. Great care is taken to 
heighten colour harmony and ornamental efficacy. Designers 
always aim at advertizing efficacy and making the signs at- 
tractive. Considered from the standpoint of folkcraft, they 
can be taken as excellent specimens. 

As an illustration of real goods not used as signs, the marks 
of pawnbrokers may be cited. A pawnbroker's shop is called 
" tang-pu " in Chinese. Its sign is made by means of a " chao- 
pei." The commonest is the black board on which the char- 
acter " tang " is clearly expressed in vermilion, or the vermilion 
or golden board on which the same character is carved. The 
character is sometimes expressed in green, and the four corners 
of the oblong board are often tagged with ornamental metal 
fitting. Various other dexterous devices are administered to 
make different patterns of attractive sign boards. 

On considering the "huang-tzu" signboards existing in 
various parts of China and Manchoukuo from the viewpoint of 
popular craft and customs, one finds that, besides the peculiar 

1173 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



aestheticism manifested in their designs, structures and coloura- 
tion, they represent interesting ornamental devices appealing 
to the taste of the continental people. The principal ones are 
carp emblem, two-fish and goldfish marks, lotus leaf and lotus 
flower designs, as well as peach and pomegranate decorations. 
Such characters as cc hu-lu," suggesting " medicine of wonderful 
efficacy " at drug-stores and " elixir of life " at wine-shops and 
<c yuan-pao " and <c tung-pao," meaning fortune and treasure, 
are highly favoured by certain shop-keepers. Also such ideog- 
raphs as " hsi " (joy), " fu " (blessing), « shou » (long life) and 
<c wan" (universal) are used as symbols of good omen. The 
custom of hanging appropriate, realistic and figurative sign- 
boards, as traced from the practice of having subjective and 
objective " pl6n," "chao-pei" and " huang-tzu," offers an 
eloquent commentary on the social habits and modes of China 
and Manchoukuo. As works of plebeian art, the signboards 
of the continent form a significant branch of folkcraft. 



1 174 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 



WARTIME MOBILIZATION OF STUDENTS 

The necessity of conducting hostilities in a total manner has obliged 
the Government to mobilize the student population for wartime 
service. Recently it framed the Gakuto Senji Doh-in Taisei Kakuritsu 
Yoko (Fundamental Regulation for the Establishment of the Wartime 
Mobilization of Students), which aims at organizing a system for the 
mobilization of students along with the prosecution of their studies, so 
that they could be drafted into various special services whenever re- 
quired. It appears that the keynote of the system is to train students 
for wartime duties without disrupting the required normal flow of 
school and college education. This is the reason why teachers and 
professors together with their students are being asked to offer collec- 
tive service during leisure hours every day and in holidays and vaca- 
tions. Roundly speaking, the duties which the students will have to 
perform are defence work and services connected with the production^ 
of munitions and foodstuffs. 

It is obvious that under the new mobilization regulation students 
of various denominations in addition to continuing their studies must 
offer concentrated collective service to feed the needs of war. It is said 
that the mode of employing them will be systematic, as well as intensive, 
so as to make them do the greatest possible amount of work in a given 
time. It is also pointed out that these student-workers will not be 
treated in the same category as regular operatives. In many cases they 
will be under the supervision of their own teachers and professors — 
an arrangement which will invigorate their working spirit. Some time 
ago the private and government universities in the country at a con- 
ference decided that the current system of education must conform to 
the wartime life. It seems that the latest regulation framed by the 
Government has taken into account such a decision, and so it marks 
a new epoch in the orientation of national education. 

On July 2 Education Minister Okabe in the course of a radio 
speech stated that the present conflict was a war of science and culture, 
the issue of which could not be settled by the force of arms alone : the 



"75 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



issue could be terminated by giving full play to all phases of national 
activity — military, scientific, cultural and economic. In regard to 
cultural warfare, he expressed the opinion that Japan must eliminate all 
vestiges of Anglo- American individualism, liberalism and " democracy " 
with a view to marshalling the entire force of the intelligentsia for the 
total prosecution of hostilities. He continued that the realities of war 
demanded that education should be conducted on the basis of national 
service. The remarks made by him clarified the Government's in- 
tention of utilizing student population for the benefit of war and war- 
time education and culture. 

At this moment of international upheaval, it is right and proper 
that the methods of education and learning must be regulated in accord 
with the actual conditions confronting the country. In other words, 
education must of necessity be conducted to facilitate the realization of 
the national objective. The recent outcry for "rensei " or training 
of students in consonance with Japanism, indicates the ideological 
awakening of the nation in this respect. Hence, the new wartime 
students' mobilization plan, in a way, can be regarded as an educational 
reform, though, from the viewpoint of national emergency, it resembles 
the character of a temporary expediency. 

It was in June, 1938 that the Education Ministry, in face of opposi- 
tion emanating from diverse quarters, resolved to put into effect the so- 
called system of " shudan kinro sagyo " (collective labour service). On 
the fifth of the same month the then Education Minister General Araki 
sent a notification to the director of all educational institutions under 
the direct control of the Ministry, as well as to all prefectural governors, 
instructing them to arrange for a collective labour service to be offered 
by the students prosecuting studies in their respective jurisdictions as 
part of their practical training. However, the general public at that 
time had not envisioned the multifarious complications that would 
follow with the prolongation of the China affair, and for that reason 
the collective labour service system was not enforced rigorously. 

In the following year, the term "mobilization " was first applied 
in connection with the students' collective service. The Education 
Ministry used this appellation in its notification of February 8, 1941* 
which dealt with a scheme for launching a campaign to increase the pro- 
duction of foodstuffs and fodder through the nation-wide employment 
of students. Unfortunately, the notification omitted to specify the exact 
number of hours to be devoted to collective labour service. It simply 
provided that a period not exceeding thirty days in each school year 

1176 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 



should be assigned exclusively to labour service, with the result that 
most of the schools allotted the minimum number of hours to this kind 
of training. The defect was subsequently rectified with the issuance 
of the Kokumin Kinro Hohkoku-rei (Ordinance for National Service 
Co-operation), which set forth a derailed programme for augmenting the 
output of foodstuffs through the utilization of student labour. 

In June, 194** the Education Ministry ordered the formation of 
cc school patriotic bodies 99 as a means to intensify the offering of labour 
rvice by the students. When General Araki was Education Minister, 
Se tern of " student corps " was organized to stimulate the students' 
a hintary participation in farm work. In order to revamp the student 
v ° organization on an improved scale, the system of school patriotic 
COt f S wa s inaugurated. Under it, patriotic groups in every middle 
b ° ^ j c0 Uege and university were formed, and each of these groups 
S sted of three sections, namely, physical training, defence work and 
C °kural enterprise. Every student was required to join one of these 
c . ns> ^.t the beginning, each institution managed its own group, 
sectl a £ tenvar ds all the patriotic groups were reorganized on a wartime 
kiting with the common headquarters being installed in the Educa- 
. n ]v£inistry. 

T consequence of the enforcement of official control over the pat- 
• roups, the student population in the country automatically came 
xiotxc S ^sedin terms of the provisions of the national mobilization 
to t> e s j? t presen t, side by side with class-room teaching, the students 
plaJ h ing g ivefl P ractical Iessons in such fiel ds as agriculture, munition 
try national defence and technical enterprise. Besides undergoing 
in sua! military training, each student has now been called upon to act ' 
tbC U c ontributive worker of the nation. For instance, certain classes 
aS * dents are now engaged in food production, while some others 
S been drafted into industrial and armament plants. The collective 
haVC c e that they are now rendering to the State i,s beyond doubt note- 
SCrV hv Ifl vieW ° f wartime mobilization > they have become extremely 
W °"ful emergency workers. 

On May i939> the Emperor m a rescript commanded the 



,o discharge their best service to the country. It, in part, 
s . f 1 " Each of you shall faithfully perform your duty and try to be 
said ' jjterary and martial arts, as well as cultivate the spirit of sin- 
vef m d fortitude." According to the writer of this article, the 
cerity # sente nce of the rescript should be taken to mean that the 
foreg olfl f . attac hing greater importance to martial arts than to literary 
Emp efor 

"77 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



arts. As a matter of fact, the history of Japan chronicles many records 
pertaining to Imperial preference to martial virility and denunciation of 
literary effeminacy. The Emperor Meiji once in a message to his 
chamberlains declared that customs and manners should not be allowed 
to change in a way contrary to national polity. " The present form of 
court dress, being patterned after that in the Tang Dynasty, savours of 
literary effeminacy . . . All Our ancient ancestors personally acted as 
commanders of their armies, and all their subjects admired with respect 
theix deportment and manners, which amply reflected the martial spirit 
in them. We desire that the present style of court dress should be radi- 
cally altered." 

At this time of total war, it is absolutely essential that priority 
should be given to make the students proficient in the art of warfare. 
A large section of them is destined to enter the Army or the Navy. 
Furthermore for the purpose of bolstering air power, students are 
required to be trained as efficient pilots, gunners and bombardiers. 

ineir responsibility in respect of national defence and in prosecuting 
warfare is by no means small. They constitute the backbone of the 
fighting virility of the nation. This being the case, it is natural that at 
least under the present abnormal conditions all the students eligible 
for military service should be given thorough training in the art of 
warfare, and that the rest should be utilized for increasing agricultural 
and industrial productions. In step with this, as far as school and 
college education is concerned, it must be given in a manner as 
would assist the students to carry on with the regional activity that 
has been accepted as the immutable policy of the nation. 

' T ^e Fundamental Regulation for the Establishment of the War- 
time Mobilization of Students contains provisions regarding the test of 
the quality of every student so as to determine what line of military 

undi S £ 7 r ? £ £fg istration of the ^sults of the same test. It 
s understood that the Education Ministry will exercise control over 
those students who are fit for military service and will see that they are 
duly trained for the work best suited to their capability. The military 
officer attached to a school will, in co-operation with the instructors in 
charge of physical and mental training of the students make the 
required qualitative test of every student desiring to be enlisted and 
report the results of the test to the Education Ministry. On the basis of 
the said results, the line of work of the student will be decided. This 
means that the personal wish of a candidate will not be entertained. 
The most interesting part of the new mobilization plan is that the 

1178 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 



female students will be given intensive training in Red Cross work and 
nursing. They, too, at present, are offering collective labour service. 
Many of them are working in factories, while others are engaged in 
agricultural enterprises. Those who have technical talents are being 
given proper training. To put briefly, the female students are not only 
enlisting themselves to work in those spheres in which they are suited 
by nature, but also to other fields of wartime activity requiring manly 
exertions. They have self-consciously relalized that they must volun- 
tarily exhibit the spirit of national service as outspokenly as possible. 

As a result of the enforcement of the mobilization plan, the entire 
student population has been called upon to display its profound sense of 
loyalty to the Throne and patriotism. Each student from now on 
must dedicate himself to accomplish the task entrusted to him, remem- 
bering constantly that the national polity of Japan is not a mere con- 
ception, but an actuality which comes to the fore when every national 
performs his duty faithfully and loyally. It is necessary that all the 
educationists in the country must keep this point in view and lead 
their students in the discharge of their respective duties, always keeping 
themselves at their head and ready to bear the brunt of whatever dif- 
ficulties that may beset their path. 

Because of the changed conditions, the patent opinion that the 
duty of the students is study and nothing else can no longer be accepted. 
During hostilities; it is the duty of every student to identify himself 
with one of the wartime projects. The successful waging of war is 
largely dependent on keeping up the production level at - top pitch. 
Not only actual fighting, but also boosting of production must be 
carried out in a total manner. Those students who are physically 
and mentally capable of shouldering arms must enlist themselves either 
in the Army or in the Navy, and those who are fit for industrial and 
agricultural pursuits must offer their service to such fields. In fact, 
they must develop the motto of "learning for the sake of national 
defence.'' In an ancient Japanese book on military tactics, primary 
importance is given to the cultivation of martial arts and secondary 
importance to the promotion of literary arts. This signifies that the 
promotion of military virility has been a tradition in this country since 
the remote past. Now that Japan has been compelled to give an un- 
precedented account of its military prowess, there is no reason why the 
education of the students should not be conducted to enhance their 
fio-hting ability. The latest measure adopted by the Government to 
mobilize the students under a wartime plan deserves particular notice 

1 179 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



in that it has adjusted the educational structure in conformity with the 
total war needs of the nation. 

— Naoyuki Takeshita (The Nippon Hyoron, August, 1943) 1 



CURRENCY WARFARE IN CHINA 

The Chinese way of living has many notable peculiarities. Be- 
ing continental by nature and in outlook, the Chinese people are inclined 
to pay less attention to the question of comfort in daily life. On the 
Yangtze River it is a usual sight to see a raft flowing down. One part 
of the raft is converted into a makeshift dwelling-hut for the raftsman 
and his family, while the other part is utilized to keep a herd of domestic 
animals. One will be surprised to know that it takes no less than six 
months for such a raft to arrive in Shanghai from its starting point in the 
remote upper reaches of the river. On arrival at the destination, the 
raftsman disposes of the timber and livestock, and then he and his 
family finish the return journey overland by taking a longer time than 
that spent on the outward voyage. Likewise, in central China one will 
often come across cattlemen from the interior driving their herds of 
cattle to distant towns to fetch better prices by selling them. Through- 
out the journey these cattlemen spend their daily resting time anywhere 
in the open quite oblivious to physical hardships. The most striking 
feature of China's time-worn method of trading is seen in the manner 
in which ducks are transported to far-off markets. From 1,000 to 
2,000 ducks are towed by a water-borne carriage piloted by two persons 
from Lukianghsien to Suchow, covering a distance of 570 Chinese miles 
in about a month. All these peculiarities suggest tfyat the Chinese 
masses, in maintaining their daily life, do not think much of material 
comfort and relief. 

Almost all the persons who visited Shanghai in 1939 personally 
saw that the economic position of China was far from stable. They, 
however, did not realize that economic adversity to the masses of China 
was not an uncommon thing. Whether in wartime or in time of peace 
they have the unusual capacity to face privations and maintain their 
subsistence with the barest of necessities. This is the main reason why 
the Chinese masses can manage to pull on enduring grimly appalling 
economic setbacks. But it must be remembered that the enduring 
power of the Chinese people principally concerns the question of ad- 



1 Naoyuki Takeshita is an official of the Education Ministry. 

Il8o 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS — EXTRACTS 



justing living economy under difficult circumstances. It has no relation 
with the issue of currency crisis, which generally occurs owing to external 
financial repercussions. Therefore, in dealing with the subject of 
Chinese currency, one must try to observe it quite apart from the 
movement of domestic economy, which has a direct bearing on in- 
ternal living problems and needs. 

In 1939, the exchange rate of fapi against British sterling had fallen 
as low as four pence, with the result that Britain endeavoured to check 
its further depreciation by creating a fapi stabilization fund. To counter 
this British move, the Japanese Government made strenouus efforts to 
maintain the value of Japanese military scrip. Thus an Anglo-Japanese 
currency warfare in China ensued. Whereas Britain tried to boost fapi 
as a means to discredit the circulation of military scrip, the Japanese 
Government stabilized the value of its military currency with the inten- 
tion of gaining the confidence of the people. Along with the gradual 
incerese in the circulation of military scrip, the Chinese people in the 
pacified areas began to prefer it in place of fapi, which by then had 
substantially lost its intrinsic value in the occupied territory. 

Soon after the start of the China affair, Japanese military scrip came 
to be issued in all the occupied districts except Shanghai, where the 
Bank of Japan notes were welcomed. In November, 1937, with the 
landing of Japanese troops on Hangchow Bay, military scrip appeared 
for the first time in central China. In the spring of 1939, the Japanese 
authorities aided the establishment of the Huahing Commercial Bank 
whose notes were intended to be used as a trade currency in a field in 
which Chungking fapi had been enjoying a better position. In April 
of that year, the yen notes of the Bank of Japan were at par with the 
yuan notes of Chungking currency. In the following month, the posi- 
tion of yen as against fapf was unfavourable, its exchange rate having 
risen to ¥113. At the same time, the position of military scrip as 
against fapi became adverse on account of its link with the Bank of 
Japan currency. Besides, speculations in yen in Shanghai undermined 
its value there to a considerable degree. 

Noting the Anglo-American activity to bolster the circulation of 
fapi, the Japanese Government decided to adopt certain appropriate 
measures for the unified maintenance of the value of the currencies 
affiliated with yen in central China. In this connection, expert quarters 
expressed contradictory opinions. One section doubted whether the 
utilization of military scrip as the sole currency in central China could 
be effected without any hitch, especially when the value of the currencies 

1181 



6 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 

affiliated with yen was dependent on the yen-fapi exchange rate. An- 
other section thought it advisable to restrict t^e use of the currencies 
affiliated with yen in order to allow the circulation of fapi to a reasonable 
extent. Still a third group advocated the popularization of the notes 
cTf the Huahing Bank by suppressing the circulation of the currencies 
affiliated with yen. After considering these varied opinions, the Japa- 
nese Government implemented measures for the popularization of the 
use of the currencies affiliated with yen. In consequence, the value of 
such currencies rose steadily, and in September, 1939, the gradual with- 
drawal of the Bank of Japan notes and the scheme for making military 
scrip the sole currency in central China were carried out. 

It was in June, 1939* tnat tne measures for the maintenance of the 
value of military scrip began to be earnestly enforced. In order to 
maintain the value of military scrip, it was found necessary to reduce its 
issuance, simultaneously restricting its circulation. In view of the 
tenseness in Japan's relations with the Anglo-American nations it 
became incumbent on this country to prosecute the currency warfare 
in China by executing a long-range policy ; so it thought expedient to 
limit the use of military scrip in central China in accordance with the 
actual needs of the expeditionary forces. Following the strengthenino- 
of the power of the new Nanking Government, it became favourable 
for Japan to popularize the circulation of the Central Reserve Bank 
notes, concurrently giving effect to the policy of gradual withdrawal 
of military scrip in keeping with the rise of normalcy in the circulation 
of the new fapi of the Nanking Government. 

Considerable efforts were made in March, 1940, to maintain the 
military scrip-fapi exchange rate at ¥80. In s pite of that, the rate began 
to depreciate at the end of August, registering as low as ¥60 in the 
latter half of September. Even this rate, t Jb, fell off in the following 
month. The depreciation in the value of fapi caused a sharp expansion 
in the circulation of military scrip — an upward tendency which became 
all the more prominent with the outbreak of the current war in greater 
East Asia. In January 1941, the Central Reserve Bank notes appeared 
in active circulation and gained stability within a few months. I n the 
following year, when the Pacific hostilities had started in fullscale 
the currency of the Central Reserve Bank, receiving the required sup- 
port from the Japanese authorities concerned, soon expelled all other 
currencies from circulation, and thus it became the sole legal tender 
in central China. As a result of the stability of the Central Reserve 
Bank notes, there has been no fresh issuance of military scrip since 

* 1182 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 



April this year. 

In the spring of 1939, a Chungking-controlled newspaper in 
Shanghai commented that the depreciation of yen was due to a drastic 
decline in its purchasing power. It added that another cause-was the 
resultant currency inflation. Hence, it opined that the economic posi- 
tion of Japan was becoming insecure, and that Japan very soon would 
find itself economically powerless to harness the sinews of war. 
At the same time, it pointed out that the recent stabilization of the value 
of fapi should be interpreted to mean that the economic position of 
Chungking was improving, and that Chungking, after securing its 
financial recovery, would be able to deal an effective blow to Japan. 
That the journal was entirely wrong in its anticipation has been proven 
by the prevailing economic soundeness of Japan and the financial 
stability of the Nanking Government. The Anglo-American nations 
initiated a currency warfare in China with the object of lowering the 
exchange value of yen to the minimum and thereby render useless the 
circulation of military scrip. But Japan foiled their attempt by stabiliz- 
ing the circulation of the Central Reserve Bank notes — a move which 
facilitated the gradual withdrawal o£rrlilitary scrip, as well as the main- 
tenance of the exchange rate of yen. Then the commencement of the 
war in greater East Asia afforded this county an unhampered oppor- 
tunity to vitalize its currency position and that of Nanking. Realistically 
speaking, the currency warfare in China has come to an end, even 
though the readjusted local and exchange value of Chungking fapi is 
being maintained in the interior through the financial assistance of 
Britain and the United States. 

The Central Reserve Bank was opened in Nanking on January 6, 
1 941. At first, its currency was maintained at par with fapi. There- 
after, with the growth of#s solidarity, it displaced fapi and became the 
sole legal tender. By the time the war in greater East Asia had broken 
out, it had already became the principal currency for central China. The 
Central Reserve Bank obtained a credit of ¥100,000,000 from the Bank 
of Japan in July, 1942. In pursuance of the agreement concering 
financial collaboration between the Nanking and Japanese Govern- 
ments, the new fapi has been pegged to yen, with military scrip as a 
support for the maintenance of its value. The amount of Central 
Reserve Bank notes in circulation has, at present, reached a high figure, 
and there is every reason to believe that the circulation will go on in- 
creasing to meet the demand of the times. This fact alone proves that 
the financial structure of Nanking has attained a firm stability. 



0 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



Although the currency warfare in China has become negligible, 
the question of adjusting prices and speeding up the production of 
commodities has necessitated the adoption of a cautious currency policy 
to prevent a reckless expansion in the issuance of the notes of the 
Central Reserve Bank. The war in greater East Asia has created a 
number of additional problems relative to the maintenance of the econo- 
mic well-being both of new China and Japan. There is every need of 
regulating the circulation and issuance of new fapi so as to be prepared 
against a possible currency inflation. The war is destined to become 
a protracted affair. It is essential that the new currency structure of 
China should satisfy the requirements of that contingency. 

— Toshio Sohma (The Kai^p, August, 1943) 1 



HOME LIFE AND WAR 

It is scarcely necessary to point out that in wartime the question 
of bolstering fighting power takes precedence over all other national 
projects. Being engaged in a titanic war, Japan has been compelled 
to concentrate its entire attention on replenishing the fighting virility 
of the nation. For the purpose of prosecuting hostilities in a successful 
manner, it has found it indispensable to give effect to new programmes 
new plans aimed at the complete conversion of the national fabric into a 
total war structure. There are some who think that, in order to utili^ e 
the total fighting potentiality of the nation, it would be better to rein- 
vigorate further the current official plans and programmes. Although 
it would be useful to study the wartime national planning systems of the 
belligerent Powers, it seems that, for the protection of the Japanese 
way of life, care should be taken to directffeie efforts for adjustments 
by taking due note of traditional characteristics, aptitudes and, above 
all, the national way of thinking. 

In the latter Tokugawa period, there appeared several thinkers who 
through their works have left behind a rich store of beneficial sugges- 
tions pertaining to national planning, defence and external policies. 
Among them mention may be made of Seishisai Aizawa. This scholar 
in his book Shinron enlightened the Japanese people on the actual posi- 
tion of their country at that time. The book has five chapters, namely 
(1) national polity, (2) international situation, (3) external menace, 

1 Toshio Sohma, formerly of the administration bureau of the Treasury Department, 
is now a councillor to the metropolitan government of Tokyo. 

^ 1184 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 



(4) national defence and (5) plans for reconstruction. In the first, 
chapter, it is asserted that loyalty and filial piety constitute the keynote 
of Japanese national polity, for the preservation of which every Japa- 
nese must cultivate martial spirit animated by selfless fellow-feeling. 
In the second section, the then prevailing international situation is 
surveyed and in the following two chapters, after describing the Western 
menace, stress is laid on increasing the military preparedness of the 
nation. The last chapter offers a number of reconstruction plans which 
are urged to be executed for insuring national security in the future. 
Today, even under altered conditions, it is seen that the question of 
replenishing fighting power is being entertained, though unconsciously, 
on the basis of the aforesaid five points of Aizawa. It is clear that 
from the suggestions of the feudal writers many valuable ideas for 
advancement and security, strictly national in spirit and in complexion, 
could be gathered. 

From ancient times, Japan has shown a remarkable tolerance for 
the dissemination of the ideologies of outside nations. It has assimilated 
both Eastern and Western ideologies in a national manner, and this as- 
similation has enabled it to foster its faculty for advancement and power 
to protect national integrity. It was only lately, when certain political 
and economic ideologies of the Anglo-American nations were found 
injurious to the interest of the nation, that steps were taken to eUminate 
them. The present war in greater East Asia has brought home the 
need of returning to Japanese way of life and thinking in keeping with 
all the progressive tendencies of the modern world. To that end, it 
has become essential that Japan should augment its fighting power to 
the maximum limit. It is, indeed, a happy sign that the nation has 
swiftly organized itself on^a total war footing. 

After the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5, the German Government 
dispatched a young military officer to this country with a view to 
ascertaining what had brought about a remarkable development of the 
fighting power of the Japanese armed forces in a comparatively short 
time. The officer made a systematic investigation, observed the con- 
duct of military life and studied the geographical, racial and cultural 
peculiarities of the nation. On completion of his inspection, he wrote 
a book entitled Japan, in which he faithfully recorded the results of his 
survey and attributed the dauntless fighting spirit of the Japanese people 
to their lofty sense of selfless service to the State. It is a fact that the 
spirit of selfless service to the State is the most potential weapon of the 
Japanese people — a weapon which is at the back of the successes 

1185 0 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



hitherto achieved in the current war in greater East Asia. 

By the time the German officer made known his viewpoints, the 
interest of his Government had shifted to some other spheres. When 
Nazism came into power in Germany, Chancellor Hitler thought it 
desirable to maintain closer contacts with Japan, with the result that 
Japanese-German relations became firm, ultimately taking the shape of 
mutual collaboration and alliance. The German officer, who remained 
practically unknown until the advent, of National Socialism, made no 
small contribution toward the improvement of German- Japanese 
relations after the reformation carried out by Chancellor Hitler. He 
is no other than Professor Haushofer, now a well-known man in his 
country. 

Professor Haushofer is of the opinion that the family training given 
in Japan has a great deal to do with the showings of Japanese service- 
men. He says that a Japanese prior to his enlistment is trained at home 
to possess a healthy physique and practise self-denial, obedience and 
resolution to carry out a given assignment. From this opinion, one 
will be able to appreciate that the army life of Japan has an intimate 
bearing on home life and vice versa. The spirit of selfless service to the 
State emanates from home life ; and when a Japanese is drafted into 
military service, he naturally dedicates his life to remain true to this 
spirit. The Imperial rescripts governing the conduct of the armed 
forces indicate to what length the Japanese people are ever prepared to 
lay down their lives for protecting their national integrity. In the 
Hdgakuri, a collection of admonitions given by the famous feudal lord 
Kanso Nabeshima to his vassals, it is exhorted that "in bringing un 
boys, first of all courage should be inculcated in them/ 5 The train- 
ing the Japanese people received at home make them courageous to 
perform their respective duties. Because they are courageous, they 
can achieve brilliant results on the battlefield. ' 

It has been a traditional saying in Japan that the best way of ascer- 
taining the intrinsic worth of a man is by observing the personality 
of his mother. Another saying is that one's personality is moulded at 
home under the influence of his mother. The fundamental idea under- 
lying these sayings is that the building up of the character of a person is 
dependent on maternal influence. If an analysis of the meritorious 
figures of Japan is made, it will be seen that many of them distinguished 
themselves because of the right influence exerted either by their mothers 
or by their wives- The successes attained by many of the noted persons 
in the Restoration period were due to the influence exerted and en- 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 



couragement given by their mothers and wives. At this moment of 
unprecedented hostilities, the Japanese soldiers, sailors and airmen, 
fortified by the moral and spiritual support of their mothers and wives, 
are adding new glorious pages to the annals of the nation. The female 
members of every Japanese household are doing their bits to maintain 
the stability of the home front, thereby ajleying the anxiousness of 
their malefolk. The mothers and wives of Japan are sending their 
sons and husbands to the war front, factories and defence areas imbued 
with a deep sense of patriotism and selfless service to the State. The 
home life of Japan has not only the capacity to endure the repercus- 
sions of military demands, but also has the power to facilitate the 
prosecution of hostilities by taking full charge of all household affairs 
and family duties. 

Patriot Shoh-in Yoshida, who contributed a great deal to the royalist 
cause, placed unwavering reliance on the judgment and guidance of his 
mother. Once Yoshida started fasting by way of self-punishment for the 
betrayal of him by one of his right-hand pupils. His mother, on com- 
ing to know of his resolution, admonished him and in a letter urged 
him to give up fasting for the sake of his cause. She added : " Should 
your life be ended, you will possibly be accused of a breach of filial 
piety." After reading his mother's letter, Yoshida abandoned his 
fasting. In his boyhood, his mother inculcated in him a profound 
sense of loyalty and trained him to lead a simple life, nurturing courage- 
ousness and decorum. The mother of Yoshida was an ideal samurai 
woman. It was she who inspired her son to dedicate his life to the 
promotion of national interests, overcoming all hardships, limitations 
and obstacles. 

The mother of JizaytWi Arimura can be cited as another example 
of samurai womanhood. Arimura was one of the seventeen loyal 
warriors who assassinated Kamonosukd Ii, the last chief minister of 
the Tokugawa Shogunate. When she came to know that her son had 
determined himself to take part in the conspiracy to assassinate chief 
minister Ii, she wrote a guarded letter in which she enjoined her son 
to remain faithful to his duty, so that their family would not suffer from 
an y disgrace. Again, when her second son, Yusuke Arimura, was 
ordered by the Tokugawa Shogunate to commit harakiri, she personally 
cleaned and decorated the room in which her son would dispatch him- 
self to death. Just before her son ended his life, she told him that for 
a samurai to have the privilege of committing harakiri was a great 
honour. "I will not lament your death, because you are sacrificing 

1187 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



your life for the country. Therefore, meet your death gladly without 
thinking of my future for a second." 

From the above two instances, one would be able to comprehend 
that since feudal times the women of Japan have been rendering com- 
mendable assistance to their malefolk by carrying out their entrusted 
duties as manfully as possible. In this connection, mention may be 
made of the wife of Tohko Fujita, that of Masazumi Shikamochi and 
that of Umpin Umeda, all of whom displayed the loftiest qualities of 
samurai womanhood. Soon after the outbreak of the China affair, the 
traditional qualities of the women of Japan revealed their characteristic 
excellence. The wives, daughters and sisters united as one released 
their malefolk to do their best for the consummation of the national 
objective. Then, the moment the current war in greater East Asia 
commenced, Japanese women on their own initiative immediately 
organized themselves to become the solid rampart of the home front. 
They are now proving that they belong to a nation where everything 
is judged on the basis of service to the State. 

The home life of Japan is the generating source of national virility. 
Every family cultivates the spirit of loyalty to the Throne and the State 
as its prime duty. This is the reason why filial children are natural 
products of Japanese womanhood. In feudal times > this trait of Japa- 
nese life was greatly developed by the Mito school of learning, and those 
who formed the nucleus of it were all staunch adherents of filial piety. 
The Kodohkan-ki, a work describing the principal features of the famous 
institution of learning called the Kodohkan in Mito, says that Ikoh 
(Yorifusa), the first lord of the Mito clan, used to admire the personality 
of Yamato-takeru-no-Mikoto, son of the Emperor Keikoh. As he 
was a true Shintoist, he exhorted his [clan members to observe 
faithfully all the precepts of the Shinto faith. His successor, 
Ghikoh (Mitsukuni), introduced the Confucian school of learning 
into the clan. It was with the object of keeping alive the teachings 
of these two lords that the Kodohkan was founded. Consequently, 
all the members of the Mito clan, exhibiting a sparkling devotion to 
ancestral heritage, considered loyalty and filial piety as the epitome of 
clan morality. In a national sense, the morality of the Mito clan revealed 
itself as the ethical framework of the family State of Japan, 

The educational policy of the Kodohkan, among other things, 
emphasized the pursuance of such learnings as would make the clan 
members conscious of the need of materializing the ancestral aspirations. 
Moreover, it viewed bun (literary spirit) and bu (martial spirit) as in- 



1188 



JAPAN'S PERIODICALS— EXTRACTS 

separable, thereby enabling the evolution of cultural and martial spirits 
as one fundamental whole. It admired Prince Yamato-takem-no-Mikoto, 
because, in a sense, he was an incarnation of military prowess and filial 
piety. While on the one hand he showed unusual filial attachment for his 
father, the Emperor Keikoh, on the other he was extremely considerate 
to his retainers and benevolent toward the people generally. In the 
early part of the Yedo period, Mitsukuni Tokugawa, lord of the Mito 
clan, set an example of filial affection by doing his best to make his old 
mother happy and cheerful. On the occasion of the great earthquake 
of 185 5, Tohko Fujita in his attempt to rescue his old mother embraced 
death under the dibris* 

It is well known that in Japan home life cannot be separated from 
national life. Every household in this country functions as a unit of 
the nation. All its affairs are conducted with an eye toward propagat- 
ing those moral, spiritual and material qualities which are beneficial to 
the advancement of the nation. On account of this fact, it lays vital 
stress on cultivating loyalty and filial piety, as well as dauntless courage 
to protect the integrity of the nation. The Hagakuri remarks : "A 
samurai will be able to discharge his duties creditably provided he is 
capable of bearing loyalty and filial piety on one side of his neck and 
courage and benevolence on the other side of it." The Shiki Shichisoku, 
a book concerning the seven fundamental rules to be observed by a 
warrior, points out : f c A ruler provides for his subjects and succeeds to 
the ancestral works ; whereas his subjects devote themselves to the 
promotion of the interest of their ruler same as their ancestors used to 
do before them : hence we have complete harmony between the ruler 
and the ruled— a unique phenomenon of our country." These two 
quotations clarify why in Japan home acts as the initial source of national 
potentiality. 

It is interesting to know that in Japan the succession to a house is 
held to b e more important than the succession to property. A man 
becomes the head of a house not so much as to gain material benefit as 
to enjoy the honour of hying up to the tradition of that house. This 
peculiarity in national parlance means that every Japanese deems it a 
high honour to render service to the State without pondering over the 
question of material gam Herein is revealed the Japanes? sense of 
self-sacrifice and loyalty. In the past, loyal feudal warriors rendered 
selfless service to their clans without debating the issue of material 
prospects. To them, loyalty was a thing sacred. The feudal history 
is full of records of loyal warriors. In modern times, too, the traditional 

1189 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



sense of loyalty is being cherished with unblemished faithfulness. 
Confronted with a super-emergency, the Japanese people as one 
man offer selfless service to the State enduring diverse kinds of hard- 
ships, privations and difficulties. They are prosecuting the war in 
greater East Asia, unaffected by material limitations. The people at 
home and on the war front, manifesting serenely the national character- 
istics of loyalty to the Throne and selfless service to the State, are carry- 
ing out their respective duties with confidence and courage. Simul- 
taneously, the women of Japan are contributing their share to the con- 
summation of the national objective. Every household has become a 
reckonable unit of the national fighting organization, and as such, 
home is supplying new energy to the vitalization of wartime life. 

The Manchurian incident and the China affair involved this country 
into a emergency, and the people as a whole determined themselves to 
liquidate it by depending on their power and ability. This determina- 
tion made its weight felt on the conduct of home life, which thence- 
forward began to energize itself to spur the execution of the latest plans 
and programmes of the Government. Then, when the present war in 
greater East Asia ensued, it at once became the mainstay of the solidarity 
of the home front. Thus the home life of Japan has become inseparably 
associated with wartime life. Today, the women of Japan, like their 
male compatriots, are not only offering their best service to the State 
in a selfless manner, but also are looking after all the family interests 
efficiently to prevent the upsurgence of any disorder arising out of the 
repercussions of wartime exigencies. Although home life has been 
merged into wartime life, the social affairs of every household are being 
conducted as though the country was not faced with an unprecedented 
emergency. For the purpose of enhancing family morale, every 
household is laying added emphasis on loyalty, filial piety and courage 
in training its young members, so that they would remain true to 
national ideals and traditions. This activity of home life is certainly as 
potential as waging war. 

— Saburo Yoshida (The Chuo Koron, August, 1943) 1 



Saburo Yoshida is a member of the Institute for the Study of Mental Science. 

1 190 

. 4 



\ 



BOOK REVIEWS 

Amerika Minzoku Dan (Africa as It Is). By Katsuji 
Inahara. The Kytighin-sha, Tokyo, pp. 402. 3. So yen. 

With the aggravation of Japanese- American relations as a sequel 
to the China affair, the interest of the Japanese people to become acquaint- 
ed with things American became pronounced, and the intelligentsia of 
the country began to pay close attention to the movements of American 
diplomacy, especially laying stress on observing the conditions which 
had prompted the Washington Government to discard its time-honour- 
ed isolationism in favour of interventionism. Immediately on the 
outbreak of the Pacific war, the Japanese populace self-consciously 
realized that the United States was unilaterally aiming to superimpose 
its own policy in the conduct of affairs in East Asia. 

Of late many books have been published exposing America's 
aspirations in East Asia and its military preparations directed toward 
initiating a showdown with Japan. Yet very few of them have 
subjectively and objectively analyzed the reasons and motives of 
its surrender of the Monroe Doctrine and acceptance of a policy of 
intervention. The diplomacy of today's America is being prosecuted 
on the fixed basis of interference in alien matters. The author of the 
book under review surveys the reasons of America's diplomatic 
aboutface and gives attractive explanations of the national psychology 
of the American people and their racial sentiment. 

The writer remarks that the Monroe Doctrine has never been 
definitely defined in the United States. It has always remained as a 
vague or indistinct diplomatic ideal. In Japanese parlance, he calls it 
" mohro shughi " (vague doctrine), the world mohro meaning vague. He 
points out that since the Monroe Doctrine has not been rationally defined 
and applied in the United States, it is natural that it should be regarded 
in Japan as somewhat "mohro." In the past, the Japanese people 
impelled by necessity endeavoured to acquire knowledge of America's 
industrial sphere, and so they neglected to scrutinize its racial sphere. 
At present, owing to war, interest is developing to study America's f 
history, literature, culture and racial mentality with the object of gaining 

1191 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



a comprehensive view of its characteristics, merits and demerits. 

The author of this volume is a well-known writer on diplomacy. 
For a number of years he has closely watched the trends of American 
diplomacy and politics. All his mature observations have been in- 
croporated in the book under review. He has analyzed America's 
" democratic " spirit and racial mentality in a very thoughtful manner. 
He describes America as it is and refers to its characteristic phases in the 
light of the way of thinking of a conscientious American. He displays 
unusual skill in submitting his viewpoints, and each of his arguments 
has a refreshing subtlety of its own. 

In the preface, the writer mentions that the book is, in a sense a 
sketch or a valuation or a sideview of the United States and its people 
On account of the war-torn condition of the world, the foreign policy of 
the United States has assumed the garb of a policy or international con- 
trol, and in consequence, dollar imperialism has become again a pro- 
minent factor in the conduct of world politics and world diplomacy 
The work may as well be called " a reader on dollar imperialism " The 
author has exhibited his journalistic ingenuity in depicting the power 
of dollar in America and the influence it exercises on the shaping of the 
diplomatic and political policies of the nation. 

In alluding to the racial sphere of America, the writer gives a lone 
explanation of the complex racial fabric of the country, which is com 
posed of heterogeneous European races. In this regard, he makes a 
constructive survey of the negro problem and portrays the actual state 
of antagonism existing between the white and the coloured peoples 
Then he deals with the position of Jews in the United States and bv 
quoting facts and figures, discloses how the Jewish community' has 
carved an enviable position for itself. He also takes note of the in- 
filtration of the Americans into Canada and Latin America After 
that he dwells on America's conception of pan-Americanism In 
respect of its Oriental policy, mention is made of its attitude of racial 
discrimination toward the Japanese and Chinese and the wish to con 
trol the economic life of East Asia-a wish which germinated after the 
Russo-Japanese War. It took a definite form during the Manchurian 
incident and began to be practised earnestly with the protraction of 
the China affair, leading to the culmination of the now continuing 
Pacific war. & 
The author expresses the opinion that the various European races 
of America have not yet formed a homogeneous ethnical entity The 
antagonism between the Anglo-Saxons and other racial groups no 

1 192 



BOOK REVIEWS 



doubt exists ; but this antagonism sinks into insignificance when one 
considers the perpetual animosity prevailing between the negroes and 
the white people. Unless the negro question is adequately solved, the 
United States is bound to be involved in unpleasant difficulties in the 
future. He adds that the purely Anglo-Saxon stock in the country is 
comparatively becoming smaller, and as such, the United States can no 
longer be called a country where the Anglo-Saxons predominate. Con- 
cerning the Jewish hold over America, the dominant financial and 
commercial influence of the House of Morgan is cited as a factual 
illustration. 

The book delineates on the events which enabled the United States 
to carry out a programme of annexation of adjacent and distant ter- 
ritories. After touching on the purchase of Louisiana and Florida 
and acquisition of Texas, it alludes to American advance into the 
Pacific coast, acquisition of Alaska and Hawaii, penetration into the 
Carribean Sea and the formulation of a Pacific policy to control the 
economic life of East Asia with the Philippines as the advance politico- 
economic base. It is asserted that the expansionist desire finally com- 
pelled the United States to adopt an interventionist policy in areas 
outside its legitimate geographical and political sphere. At present, 
though Washington is pursing its policy of intervention in a positive 
manner, the domestic labour-capital confrontation is hampering the 
execution of its preconceived schemes. Moreover, as the labour- 
administration teamwork is not functioning smoothly, the production 
of war materials in the country is falling short of the planned figures. 
War has caused the appearance of a number of delicate internal 
political and economic problems, which are retarding the unified 
invigoration of the current national sentiment. 

A whole chapter has been devoted to discuss the Monroe Doctrine 
from all possible angles. Through the employment of a sheaf of 
arguments it is averred that the United States was obliged to use the 
doctrine and live up to it as a matter of politico-diplomatic expediency 
pending the completion of its preparations for shifting to positive pan- 
Americanism and then to interventionism, particularly in respect of 
China. It is due to its policy of interference in China that America 
embroiled itself in a war with Japan, simultaneously becoming the 
mainstay of the "democratic" belligerents in the present international 
conflagration. It is added that President Monroe's message to Con- 
gress in December, 1823, which became known as the Monroe Doctrine, 
outlined a purely defensive formula to protect the integrity of the Western 

1193 



\ 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



Hemisphere from outside aggression. Strange to say, however, it did 

not include any specific condition which debarred the United States from 

entertaining an expansionist foreign policy based on circumstances 

developed and opportunities available. Therefore, it is no wonder 

that the Monroe Doctrine underwent revisions at the hands of 

Presidents Polk, Grant and Cleveland, the last-named, acting on a 

recommendation of the then Secretary of State Olney, transformed it 

into a legal weapon of invasion of foreign land. Each subsequent 

President sharpened the edge of the weapon and at last, at the hands 

of President Roosevelt, it acquired the needed fineness to hew a path 
of full-scale intervention. 

The book also records the expansion in America's naval arma- 
ment, Washington's intention of pursuing a Pacific policy inimical to 
the national interest of Japan, the attitude taken up by America in con- 
nection with the Manchurian incident and the China affair, President 
Roosevelt's open disinclination to see a just settlement of Sino- Japanese 
differences and the current desire of America to perpetuate its own 
pattern of international status quo in opposition to the aspiration of 
organizing a new world order of the Axis group of nations. The 
author, in treating all these points, has tried to give a dispassionate pic- 
ture of America in each case for the fruitful appraisal of the Japanese 
reading public. 

Ghendai Shina no Shomondai (Problems of Present- 
day China). Compiled by the Shina Kenkyu-kai (China 
Study Institute). The Kohka Shoh-in> Tokyo, pp. 247. 2.20 yen. 

The Shina Kenkyu-kai was founded a decade ago to study and 
investigate into all kinds of Chinese problems. It has among its mem- 
bers persons from different quarters, such as press, academic and 
business. Its work has hitherto been limited to a mutual enlightenment 
of its members on Chinese questions through an exchange of informa- 
tions individually collected by them. Consequently, it did not release 
publications based on facts and figures gathered. However, the 
outbreak of war in greater East Asia made it change its previous 
policy, and it decided to place the facts and figures collected by it at 
the disposal of the public in book form. The present publication 
is its maiden attempt in this direction, which consists of five separate 
essays written by five prominent members of the institute. 

The subjects dealt with in the volume are (1) the greater East Asia 
war and the problems affecting southwestern China by Minoru Maita, 

1 194 



BOOK REVIEWS 



LL. D., (2) war and the position of Chinese merchants in the south 
by Akira Nagano, (3) an outline of Chinese currency system by Keizo 
Tsuchiya, (4) the income tax system in China by Ikujiro Kobayashi and 
(5) the revival of East Asiatic literature by Wataru Masuda. Besides, 
it has an appendix which records the important developments con- 
cerning the China affair. From the nature of the subjects discussed, it 
is obvious that the volume contains some highly interesdng reading 
material. 

Dr. Maita points out that so Jong as southwestern China, under 
the control of Chungking, collaborates with the Anglo-American war 
efforts, a complete solution of all the Chinese problems cannot be 
attained. It is absolutely necessary for Japan to take such steps as 
would accelerate the disappearance of Anglo-American domination 
from southwestern China, thereby paving the way for the return of 
durable peace and stability on the continent. He admits that the ob- 
jective of the war in this part of the world would not be realized unless 
Chungking is made to surrender its regrettable policy of continuing 
resistance against Japan. To achieve this end, he suggests the inten- 
sification of military campaigns against the regime of General Chiang 
Kai-shek and the implementation of more appropriate measures to 
stabilize the authority of the Nanking Government. He also sees that 
the maintenance of tranquillity in East Asia in the future will not be 
t assured if Britain were to retain its control over India. Acknowledging 
that the regaining of political independence by India would automatically 
eliminate any future probability of an external menace directed toward 
East Asia, he, in the interim, advocates the need of cementing closer 
contacts between China on the one hand and Sikkim, Bhutan! Nepal 
and Tibet on the other. ' 9 r 

f ^riW^r^, 3 rediStiC Pkture of the economic activities 
of the Chinese mercantile community in the south. He says that the 
Chinese residen s in each southern country exercise a weighty influence 
on he conduct of economic life, Therefore, a reorJanLtion of 

S0 ^S " 1CS l meanS a adjustment ofohe economic 

activities of the Chinese merchants in tune with the conception of 
regional economy, which is the fundamental basis of the projected 
greater East Asia co-existence and co-prosperity structure. He men- 
tions that prior to the outbreak of the greater EastAsia war! the ChSese ■ 

^?X£?T?l m !t e S ° U ^ CXtended valuable ™™mic aids 
to Chungking ; but after the establishment of Japanese supremacy in 
greater East Asia, the overseas Chinese on their own accord aligned 

1195 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



themselves with the Nanking Government, simultaneously manifesting 

a desire to co-operate with Japan in the construction of a regional ^ 

economic sphere in the south. He is of the opinion that the change of 
attitude on the part of the Chinese overseas community cannot but be 
welcomed, for it not only has a vital bearing on the organization of the 
envisaged greater East Asia co-prosperity sphere, but also on the ter- 
mination of hostilities in China. Chungking's loss of support of 
the overseas merchants, has placed it in a predicament to revamp its 
financial structure, which is gradually becoming weak-hinged. It is 
transparent that the war has given the Chinese residents of the south a 
propitious opportunity to play an active part in the development of 
regional economy in this section of the Orient, as well as contribute 
their share in the consolidation of the power of the Nanking Govern- 
ment. 

Mr. Tsuchiya holds Britain and the United States responsible for 
the chronic currency confusion in China. He produces facts to show 
that the Anglo-American nations strengthened their economic control 
over the continent by reforming the Chinese currency system to their 
best advantage. He urges the building of an altogether new currency 
system for China with the object of liquidating once and for all the 
financial aspirations of Britain and the United States. For this purpose, 
he recommends the pursuance of a realistic financial policy by Japan 
primarily to secure the permanent stability of the new currency structure^ 
of the continent. Recounting the modern history of Chinese currency, 
he concludes that the Anglo-American financial manipulations precipitat- 
ed the rise of a series of Sino- Japanese differences, some of which ulti- 
mately developed into political issues. The London-Washington 
policy of extending financial aids to Chungking not only hindered the 
settlement of the China affair, but also eventuated the outbreak of the 
present war in greater East Asia. The reorganization of Chinese 
currency for the enduring benefit of Chinese economy and also that 
of greater East Asia economy is a matter of paramount importance. 
The future financial stability of the continent is dependent on executing 
a judicious reformation of its currency structure. 

Mr. Kobayashi's survey of the income tax system of China is 
constructive. He gives all the necessary documentary informations 
with pertinent comments thereon, and maintains that the incidence of 
tax has so far been falling heavily on the shoulders of the massed He 
hopes that the new China would perfect an equitable income tax system 
which would distribute the burden of taxation fairly among the tax- 

1196 



BOOK REVIEWS 



paying nationals. Mr. Kobayashi recognizes that an income tax 
revision cannot be carried out without reorganizing the entire financial 
structure of the nation, especially the part related to the domestic sources 
of revenue. This being the situation, he thinks that it is high time to 
institute a thorough inquiry into the available sources of revenue and 
income tax, keeping in mind the question of improving further the 
economic status of the masses. 

Mr. Masuda at the outset explains that the literature of East Asia 
possesses excellent merits. It has contributed appreciably to the 
promotion of world literature. The purity and thoughtfulness of 
classical Chinese literature are being admired by international literary 
enthusiasts. The literature of Japan, too, has a typical charm which is 
admitted even by Western writers and critics. At present, when all the 
countries in this part of the world are attempting to construct a o-reater 
East Asia co-prosperity sphere, it is desirable that efforts should be 
made to create a greater East Asia literature widiout encroaching 
upon the individual literary activity [of each nation. By revival 
of East Asiatic literature, he means the promotion of a new type 
of literature which would be common among all the neighbouring 
countries. As such a project cannot materialize without reviving and 
readjusting the literary arts of each country, he submits a detailed 
plan for the regeneration of the literary arts of East Asia. Hence, 
the emphasis on the revival of East Asiatic literature. 

GhZndaibi no Kohso (Nj5if Conception of Beauty). 
By Takachiyo Uyemura. The Seikatsu-sha, Tokyo, pp. 234. 
2.06 yen. 

The author believes that, in forming a new conception of beauty in 
the midst of the present gigantomachy, stress should be laid on giving 
prominence to the role of aestheticism in the preservation and advance- 
ment of world harmony. He asks the reader to digest the saying of 
Dostoievsky that " beauty rescues the world." He sees no reason why 
the Japanese people, who have already evolved a unique conception of 
beauty through their numerous fine art works, should not develop a 
new aesthetic sense, systematically utilizing the lessons imparted by 
the new conditions that have matured of late. It is true that the old 
Japan has left behind a rich store of artistic creations. The beauty of 
most of them is characteristically national— a trait which is also being 
honoured in the production of modern fine art objects. Now that the 
world is changing, the time has come for Japan to change its conception 



1197 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



of beauty in order to present it from a universal angle. This does not 
mean that Japan should forsake its traditional art technique ; what is 
required is that Japan should endeavour to give shape to a new tech- 
nique which would conform to the sentiment of " Japan of the world." 

Many distinguished artists of Japan are inclined to hold the view 
that the art world of the nation must concentrate on restoring the 
traditional conception of beauty for the better understanding of outside 
countries. It is, therefore, natural that they should demand the sup- 
pression of Western art techniques which are being utilized by 
international-minded artists to produce objects not wholly indigenous 
in conception and in design. To these conservatives it must be 
pointed out that, as Japan has become an important factor in the 
preservation and progress of world harmony, the artists of this 
country, in addition to producing purely national objects, must turn 
out such products as would typify its international artistic talent 
and creativity. This explains why it is worthwhile to evolve a new 
conception of beauty, having the new elements as its ingredients and 
motifs. 

The book consists of seventeen essays which previously appeared 
in several art magazines and journals in the recent few years. The first 
chapter contains the author's views on the new conception of beauty 
The remaining sections are devoted to a narration of the aesthetic merits 
of Japanese formative arts, modern and classical painting, the influence 
of war on Japanese fine arts, the peculiar aesthetic sense of the Japanese 
people and the relation between home life and the art world. The 
author says that on account of close external intercourse it has become 
impossible for Japan to adhere strictly to its traditional pattern of 
aestheticism ; in fact, the fine art products of Japan are showing more 
and more international colour, while the new artists are keen on dis- 
playing external touches in their works. In the preface he states that 
Japan's latest political and economic undertaking has in turn given it 
a new artistic responsibility to create an original type of art which 
would exhibit its latest emotions, sentiments and feelings. He 
continues: "This great mission cannot be performed easily or 
light-heartedly. It requires a further stimulation of the genius of the 
Japanese [nation. To this end, we must make a thoroughgoing 
self-examination and abandon all that is unnecessary and invigorate all 
that is useful." 

It is noteworthy that the author makes a distinction between pure 
fine arts and nationalistic fine arts. He even says that the development 

1198 



BOOK REVIEWS 



of pure fine arts relative to the evolution of a new conception of 
beauty would be hindred should the nationalistic sense be applied to 
their movements. Hence he submits that it would be unwise to mix 
nationalism with genuine aestheticism. On the other hand, he 
approves that fine arts reflecting nationalism must be cultivated 
as a patriotic vehicle. He wishes to separate pure fine arts from 
nationalistic fine arts principally to permit the former to undertake 
the task of giving a new direction to the conception of beauty 
commensurate with the current notion of Japan's position in the 
world. In other words, he wants the aesthetics of Japan to become 
a potential international factor side by side with the usual 
advancement of traditional aestheticism. At the same time, he declares 
that well-thought-out steps must "be taken to improve further the 
standard of industrial fine arts, so that the objects produced under these 
caetgories will have more international appeal and charm. In this 
regard, he lauds the present activities of the Seisan Bijutsu Kyokai 
(Industrial Fine Arts Association) which has been founded under the 
auspices of the Sangyo Hohkoku Kai (Industrial Patriotic Association). 

The author convincingly argues that it would be erroneous to 
retard the emergence of the present-day sense of beauty, that is, beauty 
which is discernible through the medium of the now developing aesthe- 
tics. It is necessary that, along with the national conception of 
artistic grace, an international approach of beauty should be given 
effect to. Nationalistic or patriotic considerations should not be attached 
to the question of beauty for beauty's sake. There are persons who think 
that the taste of Japanese women for foreign-style attire should be 
supressed. They do not seem to understand that there is no harm if 
the women of Japan try to evolve a new perspective of beauty. It is 
undeniable that any one desirous of fully appreciating the beauty pecul- 
iar to the age in which he or she lives must exercise his or her faculty of 
discernment to the utmost. It must be remembered that there is static, 
as well as elastic beauty. The sense of elastic beauty urges a person to 
cultivate the artistic taste of the times. Herein is revealed the desira- 
bility of having a new conception of beauty. 

Owing to war, the conception of beauty has already undergone a 
visible change. While on the one hand patriotic aesthetic sense has come 
to the fore, on the other the sentiment for having a new type of Japanese 
aesthetics assimilating the forms and designs of the southern countries is 
increasing steadily. The latter tendency can be construed as a Japanese 
desire to create a new conception of beauty having the fundamental 



1 199 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



notion of regionalism as its motif. The war artists, who are painting 
actual scenes of battles fought and typical aspects of the social, artistic 
and daily life of the southern peoples, are, besides, contributing to 
nationalistic fine arts, laying the outline for the appearance of a new 
approximation of beauty. This book is a critical treaties on art and 
contains instructive suggestions for the guidance of the art world of 
Japan, 



1 200 



CHRONICLE OF CURRENT EVENTS 



July ip The Japanese Navy air 
formations on July 15, attacking the 
enemy positions on Robiana Island, 
dealt tremendous damage to them 
and at the same time in an engage- 
ment with about fifty planes which 
came attacking shot down nineteen 
of them. Ten Japanese planes have 
not yet returned. The following 
day, attacking Vanikoro Island, Santa 
Cruz Islands, Tulagi Island and 
Guadalcanar Island, the Japanese 
Navy air forces inflicted damage on 
enemy warships and vessels at anchor 
in those places. On July 17, en- 
gaging 167 enemy planes that came 
raiding Buin on Bougainville Island, 
the Japanese Navy air forces shot 
down fifty-eight planes. The Japan- 
ese damage consisted of nine planes. 

The following announcement is 
made by the Imperial Headquarters : 
(1) Part of the Japanese garrison 
forces on New Georgia Island de- 
toured to the rear to the foremost line 
of the enemy and attacked the spot 
where the American forces landed 
east of the Ai River on the night of 
July 17 and their automobile units, 
giving terrific damage to their land- 
ing facilities and enemy military 
strength there. At the same time, 
the Japanese forces annihilated the 
enemy automobile units and are now 
enlarging the sphere of their opera- 
tion with good results. (2) The 
Japanese garrison forces near Munda 
on New Georgia Island several times 
repulsed the advance of the enemy 



forces equipped with tanks and also 
bombarded enemy torpedo-boat 
flotillas, which attempted landing 
operations on July 17 and put them 
to rout. 

The United States War Depart- 
ment announces that American bom- 
ber plane units for the first time 
raided Rome this morning. Reports 
from Italian sources in confirming 
the bombing add that in the air raid 
the ancient San Lorenzo Church was 
destroyed. The air attack lasted for 
three hours from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. 

The British Eighth Army operat- 
ing along the eastern coast of Sicily 
reaches a bridge eight miles southeast 
of Catania. 

Kanichi Naito, chief civil adminis- 
trator, is appointed Mayor of the 
Shoh-nan (Singapore) Special Muni- 
cipality, it is announced by the War 
Ministry. 

July 20 The first conference of the 
chairmen of the nine regional ad- 
ministrative councils, which were 
recently established for making 
smooth the liaison of local administra- 
tion in Japan, is held at the Pre- 
mier's official residence. 

Mr. Renzo Sawada, former Am- 
bassador to France, is appointed 
Japanese envoy to Burma. 

July 21 Japanese Navy fighter 
plane units attacked a powerful 
enemy formation of more than 150 
planes that came raiding Eleventa 
near Buin on Bougainville Island of 
the Solomon Group on July 18 and 



1201 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



in an engagement shot down twenty- 
seven of them. In addition, the 
Japanese Navy eagles destroyed 
one ship-based plane and one B-24 
aircraft. The Japanese Army anti- 
aircraft batteries there launched 
intensive gunfire against the Amer- 
ican raiding planes and shot down 
one B-24 bomber, one Avenger ship 
bomber, one Grumman fighter plane 
and damaged twelve B-24 bombers, 
thus scoring brilliant war results in 
concert with the air duel staged by 
the naval warplanes. On the same 
night, an enemy airplane squadron 
consisting of several B-17 "flying 
fortresses " came attacking there. 
One of them was shot down by anti- 
aircraft fire. 

Air units of the Japanese Navy 
before dawn on July 19 hit Canton 
Island in the Phcenix group and in- 
flicted heavy damage on the air 
base there, it is revealed. 

Pope Pius xii in a letter to Cardi- 
nal Luigi Maglione, Papal Secretary 
of State, written simultaneously as 
his notes of protest to the American 
and British Governments, deplores 
the American bombing of Rome. 

July 22 Mr. Hachiro Arita, form- 
er Foreign Minister, and Dr. Tadao 
Yamakawa, member of the House of 
Peers and once Director of the 
Treaty Bureau of the Foreign Office, 
are appointed advisors to the Foreign 
Office. 6 

An agreement respecting the re- 
trocession of the French Concession 
in Shanghai is signed at Nanking by 
Chinese and French delegates in the 
presence of Foreign Minister Dr. 
Chu Min-yi and the French Charge 
d' Affaires. The French Concession 
will be handed over on August 1, 
when the Shanghai International 
Settlement will be formally restored 



to the Nanking Government. 

In the first quarter of the current 
fiscal year, 1943-44, covering the 
three months of April, May and June, 
national savings reached the amount 
°f ¥7,904,000,000, which is twenty- 
nine per cent, of the way to the 
goal of ¥27,000,000,000 set for the 
whole fiscal year. 

In a categorical statement, the Ar- 
gentine Information Bureau denies 
the report recently circuited in 
various quarters regarding the change 
of Argentina's foreign policy. 

The United States Navy Depart- 
ment announces the loss of the 
United States submarine Triton, a 
new submarine of 1,450 tons, launch- 
ed in 1941, as it has failed to return 
to its base. 

July 23 General Yang Chih-yu, 
commander of the independent fourth 
corps of the 27th Chungking Army 
with 200 subordinates surrenders to 
the Nanking Government's Ling- 
chwan defence headquarters in 
Shansi Province. 

The arrangement and terms of 
understanding concerning the sur- 
render by Italy of its administrative 
rights in the International Settlement 
of Shanghai are signed today by the 
representatives of Italy and the 
Nanking Government. 

July 24 The following announce- 
ment is made by the Imperial Head- 
quarters: (1) The Japanese Navy air 
forces, which have been repeatedly 
attacking the enemy forces in the 
oolomon area, raided enemy war- 
ships in Rendova Harbour on the 
afternoon of July 21 and scored the 
following results: One medium- 
size transport— sunk instantaneously. 
Two large-type transports— dam- 
aged. One large-type destroyer- 
sunk. More than ten vessels for 



I202 



1 



CHRONICLE OF CURRENT EVENTS 



landing purposes — sunk. One Japa- 
nese plane has not yet returned. 
(2) Several Japanese naval special 
service ships, destroyers and their 
covering air units, which have been 
engaged in supplying and reinforcing 
operations in the Solomon area, 
engaged about sixty enemy planes in 
that area on July 22 and shot down 
nine of them, but one Japanese 
special service ship was sunk. 

Nine P-38 warplanes were down- 
ed by Japanese Army airmen in a 
furious air-duel staged with twenty 
enemy planes at a point south of 
Madang, New Guinea, it is reported. 
During this engagement, the Japa- 
nese side suffered the loss of three 
planes. Furthermore, the Japanese 
air units raided an enemy landing 
place in Nassau Bay, New Guinea, 
and after bombing the enemy troops 
and causing heavy casualties, all 
planes returned safely to their base. 

July 2 j Crack ground units of 
the Japanese Navy at Ysabel Island 
engaged thirty enemy sbd dive- 
bombers and twenty Grumman fight- 
ers that appeared over the island in 
a furious land-sky combat, and 
succeeded in downing three planes 
with their ground guns. 

A hydroplane unit of the Japanese 
Navy damaged an enemy destroyer 
and a transport and sank more than 
three torpedo-boats in the Solomon 
area on the night of July 23. The 
hydroplane unit delivered an attack 
on several enemy ships that entered 
the Kula Gulf on the night of July 
23 in an attempt to effect landing 
operations on New Georgia and 
inflicted damage on one destroyer 
and one transport. The same night 
the unit espied a goup of enemy 
torpedo-boats in the waters north of 
Gizo Island, northwest of New 



Georgia, and sank more than three 
of them. 

A formation of eight American 
Consolidated B-24 bombers raided 
the Japanese-occupied Otorishima 
(Wake Island) early on the morning 
of July 25, with the result that a 
furious aerial combat followed be- 
tween the Japanese and American 
forces. The Japanese forces shot 
down two American planes, damaged 
another and caused all the others to 
depart. In this aerial battle two Japa- 
nese planes self-blasted themselves. 

July 26 King Vittorio Emmanuel 
in has accepted the resignation of 
Signor Benito Mussolini from his 
positions as Duce and Premier, ac- 
cording to the Stefani News Agency. 
The Italian Government announces 
that Marshal Pietro Badoglio has 
been appointed Premier as successor 
to Signor Mussolini. Upon ac- 
cepting Signor Mussolini's resigna- 
tion, King Emmanuel issues a pro- 
clamation to the Italian people asking 
them to unite their efforts for the rise 
of the Italian nation. New Premier 
Marshal Badoglio, too, issues a 
similar proclamation to the people. 
The Italian Government announces 
that hereafter the Italian Army will 
take charge of peace and order in the 
entire country. 

The Japanese air units in the China 
area during the three days, July 23, 
24 and 25, made successive raids on 
Hengyang, Lingling, Paoching, 
Chihkiang and Kienow, all of which 
are advance bases of the American 
air forces in China, and blasted their 
runways and attached military faci- 
lities. Moreover, the Japanese units 
shot down twenty-eight enemy 
planes in the vicinities of Hengyang, 
Lingling and Kweilin. The Japa- 
nese loss consisted of eight planes 



1203 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



destroyed. 

The Italian Government announces 
the appointment of its Ambassador 
to Ankara Baron Raffaele Guariglia 
as Foreign Minister of the new 
Cabinet. 

July 2j Concerning the recent 
Cabinet change in Italy, the Italian 
Government authorities explain that 
this change is neither a revolution 
nor a coup d*etat, being merely a step 
to overcome a constitutional crisis. 
According to the majority decision 
reached at the Grand Council meet- 
ing of the Fascist Party, Premier 
Benito Mussolini tendered his re- 
signation to King Vittorio Em- 
manuel in and the Cabinet change 
was effected in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution. 

Italian Ambassador to Japan Mario 
Indelli calls on Foreign Minister 
Mamoru Shighemitsu and informs 
him under instructions of his home 
Government that there will be no 
change in the policy of Italy on the 
attainment of the three Power's 
war objective, in spite of the Italian 
political change. 

July 28 Ten factories in central 
China are returned to the Nanking 
Government with due ceremony. 
Out of 140 enemy factories there 
placed under the control of the 
Japanese Army, 130 have been 
returned to China thus far. 

The following announcement is 
issued by the Imperial Headquarters : 
A Japanese submarine on July 20 
encountered an enemy naval unit 
composed of one cruiser of the San 
Francisco type and three destroyers in 
the sea area south of San Cristobal 
and, after breaking through the guard 
cordon of the enemy destroyers, 
came close to the cruiser and attacked 
it. The enemy cruiser was thus 



sunk. 

The Italian Government holds its 
first Cabinet meeting under the 
chairmanship of the new Premier, 
Marshal Pietro Badoglio, and decides 
upon the dissolution of the Fascist 
Party. Anent this, the Stefani News 
Agency says : " The dissolution has 
been effected by the new circum- 
stances that have arisen in the political 
life of the State." 

German Ambassador to Tokyo 
Heinrich G. Stahmer holds a thirty- 
minute talk with Foreign Minister 
Shighemitsu at the latter's official 
residence. This is his second meet- 
ing with the Japanese Foreign Minis- 
ter in connection with the recent 
political change in Italy. 

The Thai Government decides 
to send its Foreign Minister W. 
Wichit-Wathakan and suite to Japan 
to return the courtesy of Thailand for 
the recent visit of Greater East 
Asia Affairs Minister Kazuo Aoki 
there. 

An enemy air unit of six bombers 
and fighters raided Hongkong on 
July 27, but was immediately put to 
rout by the ground batteries. This 
was the first enemy air raid on Hong- 
kong since November 28, last year. 

July 2 9 The Imperial Head- 
quarters says that Japanese Navy 
fighter units in the skies of Bougain- 
ville Island attacked 105 enemy planes 
that came raiding that island on July 
25 and 26 and shot down twenty- 
seven of them. The Japanese units 
also engaged about seventy enemy 
planes that raided the western ex- 
tremity of New Britain Island on^ 
July 28 and brought down five of 
them. In these two combats, Japa- 
nese side had one destroyer sunk and 
twelve planes lost. 

The first transfer of enemy assets 



1204 



CHRONICLE OF CURRENT EVENTS 



in south China to the Nanking Gov- 
ernment is completed at the head- 
quarters of the Japanese forces in 
south China. The Japanese supreme 
commander hands over a list of 220 
items to Chen Yao-tzu, governor of 
Kwangtung Province. 

July 30 The ceremony for the 
formal retrocession of the French 
Concession in Shanghai to the Nan- 
king Government is held at the 
Shanghai Municipal Office within the 
French Concession. Present at the 
function are French representatives 
including the Consul-General at 
Shanghai De Margerie and Chinese 
delegates, including Foreign Minister 
Chu Min-yi and Mayor Chen Kung- 
po of the Shanghai Special Munici- 
pality. 

Japanese Ambassador to Berlin, 
Lieutenant-General Hiroshi Oshima 
left Berlin on July 28 to call on 
Chancellor Adolf Hitler and German 
Foreign Minister Joachim von Rib- 
bentrop and saw them the following 
day at the Fuehrer's Headquarters. 
The conference lasted for about two 
hours, whereafter the Japanese Am- 
bassador returned to Berlin. The 
main topic of discussion was con- 
nected with the European situation 
centring around Italy. 

July 31 The formal conclusion in 
Nanking of a treaty on taxation of 
Japanese subjects between Foreign 
Minister Chu Min-yi of the Nanking 
Government and Ambassador Masa- 
yuki Tani of the Japanese Govern- 
ment is announced by the Board of 
Information. In addition, the sup- 
plementary agreements and terms of 
understanding relating thereto are 
also signed. All this signifies the 
transfer of taxation rights to China 
by Japan. 

The following communique is re- 



leased by the Imperial Headquarters : 
The Japanese air forces in the China 
area, continuing their attack on every 
advance base of the American air 
forces in China, scored the following 
results during the period from July 
26 to 30: (1) Intensively attacking 
Hengyang and Kienow every day, 
the Japanese forces blasted their 
airfields, railway stations and neigh- 
bouring military facilities. (2) En- 
gaging enemy planes that came 
challenging them, the Japanese forces 
shot down sixteen of them. The 
Japanese damage consisted of four 
planes lost. 

August 1 Burma declares its in- 
dependence today and Dr. Ba Maw 
assumes the posts of Head of the 
State and Premier under the new 
independent Cabinet formed simul- 
taneously. The regenerated Burma 
declares war on the United States 
and Britain and enters into an 
alliance with Japan, which nation 
recognizes the new State immediately, 
and thus the Japanese Military ad- 
ministration is abolished. 

The Nanking Government form- 
ally recognizes the newly formed 
independent Government of Burma. 

The military conscription system 
to begin from next year is enforced 
in Korea. At the same time the law 
permitting the youths of the pen- 
insula to enlist in the Japanese Navy 
as volunteers, proclaimed on June 
28 this year, goes into effect. 

The International Settlement of 
Shanghai is formally returned to the 
Nanking Government, thus freeing 
China completely from the century- 
old extra-territorial rights. 

A large formation of 213 enemy 
planes, consisting of ninety-nine 
large planes and 114 small planes, 
raids and bombs Ysabel island four 



1205 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



times. Ten two-motored enemy 
bombers are shot down. 

August 2 The Manchoukuo Gov- 
ernment extends its recognition to 
Burma. The Thai Government, too, 
recognizes Burma. 

August $ Foreign Minister 
Shighemitsu cables acknowledge- 
ment stressing close and firm co- 
operation between Japan and Italy 
on receipt of a telegraphic message 
dated July 31 from the new Italian 
- Foreign Minister, Baron RafTaele 
Guariglia. 

According to the Imperial Head- 
quarters, Japanese Navy air units 
attacked the enemy warships and 
vessels at Rendova port and its 
neighbouring military facilities three 
times on August 1 and scored the 
following results: (1) Sunk: one 
large-sized transport, four medium- 
sized transports, six small-sized trans- 
ports, one destroyer and more than 
six vessels for landing purposes. 
(2) Damaged : one cruiser and one 
vessel for landing purposes. (3) Shot 
down : nine fighter planes. (4) Set 
ablaze : a torpedo-boat base, wharves 
and supply dumps on Bau Island 
outside the port. In the attacks the 
Japanese side lost two planes. 

With the incorporation of the 
Fascist Army into the Italian Volun- 
teer Army, War Minister General 
Antonio Sorice proclaims the pro- 
hibition of the Fascist salute, it is 
stated. 

The United States Office of Econ- 
omic Warfare notifies 16,000 ex- 
porters within the country of the 
cancellation of all export permits to 
Argentina granted up to May i 3 this 
year. 

August 4 Burma's foreign policy 
will be based on the principle of 
respect for justice and the rights of 



respective countries, it is clarified by 
Burmese Foreign Minister Thakin 
Nu in a press conference with Bur- 
mese ancl Japanese newspapermen. 

Premier Field-Marshal Phibul 
Songgram of Thailand sends a mes- 
sage of felicitation over the birth of 
independent Burma to Foreign 
Minister Thakin Nu. 

Another " colour riot 99 broke out 
in the United States, this time in the 
Harlem negro quarters of New York, 
on August 1 and five persons were 
killed, more than 500 wounded and 
damages totalling §5,000,000 were 
caused, says a Buenos Aires dis- 
patch received in Tokyo. 

August j The German military 
authorities announce that German 
forces on the eastern front withdrew 
from Orel on the night of August 4. 

German units operating in Sicily 
withdraw from Catania City. 

Foreign Minister Joachim von 
Ribbentrop in a telegraphic message 
to the Burmese Foreign Minister 
formally extends Germany's recogni- 
tion to Burma. 

Dr. Ernst von Woermann, new 
German Ambassador to Nanking, 
presents his credentials to President 
Wang Ching-wei. 

The following announcement is 
made by the Imperial Headquarters : 
Japanese Navy air units in an engage- 
ment with about seventy American 
fighter planes over Munda on August 
4 shot down twenty-five of them. 
The Japanese loss consisted of four 
planes. 

Thailand will closely co-operate 
with Japan in the successful pro- 
secution of the war," declares Thai 
Foreign Minister Wichit-Wathakan 
in a press interview in Tokyo. He 
arrives in Japan to return the visit of 
Great East Asia Affairs Minister 



1206 



CHRONICLE OF CURRENT EVENTS 



Aoki to Thailand. 

Head of State and Premier Dr. 
Ba Maw of Burma decides to 
appoint Dr. Thein Maung, Finance 
Minister of his Cabinet, as the first 
Burmese Ambassador to Japan. 

August 8 War production in 
Japan is progressing at a steady 
tempo, Premier General Hideki Toh- 
jo reports at the Cabinet meeting, 

Slovakian Premier Vojtech Tuka 
sends a cable to Burmese Foreign 
Minister Thakin Nu recognizing 
Burma's independence and adds that 
his country is ready to commence 
diplomatic intercourse with Burma. 

August 9 The following cow- 
tnuniqui is issued by the Imperial 
Headquarters : A Japanese Navy 
destroyer unit gave battle to an 
enemy destroyer squadron supported 
by aircraft and torpedo-boats in the 
waters west of Kulambangra on the 
night of August 6 and sank one of 
the destroyers. In this engagement 
the Japanese unit suffered one des- 
troyer sunk and another heavily 
damaged. A Japanese Navy air 
fighter unit on August 6 intercepted 
sixteen enemy fighters that came 
attacking Shortland Island and shot 
down fifteen of them. Only one 
plane was lost by the Japanese side. 
Another Navy air unit delivered an 
attack on the port of Rendova on 
August 6 and obtained the following 
results : Sunk : two medium-sized 
transports, two small-sized trans- 
ports and some eight landing boats. 
Damaged : one medium-sized trans- 
port and one tugboat. Shot down : 
More than five fighters. In this 
attack, one Japanese plane was lost. 

Admiral Nobutake Kondo and 
Vice-Admiral Naokuni Nomura are 
appointed members of the Supreme 
War Council. 



The Japanese forces in the vicinity 
of Madang, northern New Guinea, 
repulsed an enemy air raid on August 
5 after downing three planes and 
capturing four enemy fliers. 

August io The sixth British- 
American conference is opened at 
Quebec with the arrival of British 
Prime Minister Winston Churchill. 
The first division of the conference 
is intended for conference between 
British and Canadian representatives 
and the second division between 
Prime Minister Churchill and Pre- 
sident Roosevelt. 

The death in action of General 
Aphanacenko, former commander- 
in-chief of Soviet forces in the Far 
East, is announced by the People's 
Defence Commissar. He was killed 
on the Bielgorod front. 

August ii The Nanking Govern- 
ment carries out a large-scale econ- 
omic purge of Shanghai through 
the promulgation of the compulsory 
purchasing of cotton yarn and fabrics 
by the Government as the result of a 
decision reached at the Supreme 
National Defence Council. 

August 12 On the morning of 
August 12 an American air unit com- 
posed of five Consolidated B-24 and 
three Boeing B-17 bombers came 
flying over northern Chishima (Kurile 
Islands). A Japanese Army air force 
at once gave battle and shot down 
three of the raiders. One of the 
Japanese planes has failed to return. 

August 13 A squadron of Ame- 
rican bombers, operating from a 
Mediterranean base, again raids 
Rome. This time the raiders drop 
incendiary bombs. 

August 14 Latest informations 
gathered show that American war- 
planes in a formation of five Con- 
solidated B-24's and three Boeing 



1207 



CONTEMPORARY JAPAN 



B-17's attacked the northern Chi- 
shima (Kurile) Islands on August 
12. Two Boeing B-iy's and one 
Consolidated B-24 were shot down. 
The Japanese plane believed to have 
been lost was found to have made a 
forced landing on a nearby island. 

The Japanese Navy air units gave 
battle to more than fifty-five Ame- 
rican planes that attacked Buin on 
Bougainville Island on August 12 
and shot down thirty-four of them. 
The Japanese losses in this air com- 
bat were some damage on the ground 
in addition to one plane which failed 
to return. 

Rome is proclaimed an open 
city by the Italian Government. 
The belligerent nations are notified 
through the Vatican of this decision. 

August 1 j An inspection party 
consisting of twenty-five prominent 
inhabitants of Malaya and Sumatra 
arrives in Tokyo for a three-week 
tour of Japan. 

The Imperial Headquarters states 
that Japanese Navy air units, on 
August 13, carried out an attack in 
the Lunga area and mopping-up 
operations against enemy planes in 
the Rendova area, obtaining the fol- 
lowing results : (1) Attack in Lunga 
area. The Japanese air attack force, 
under cover of night, attacked an 
enemy convoy and sank three large- 
sized transports, while a contingent 
of the force attacked enemy air- 
dromes, destroying one place and 
setting another on fire. (2) Mopping- 
up of enemy planes in Rendova area. 
The Japanese fighter plane unit inter- 
cepted ten enemy fighters over 
Munda and shot down six of them. 
In these operations, the loss on 
Japanese side was one plane which 
has not yet returned. 

Seven enemy bombers attacked 



Balik Papan in Borneo at dawn on 
August 14. It was the first enemy 
air raid on Balik Papan after Japanese 
occupation. 

August 16 The second grand 
convention of Japanese, Manchou- 
kuo and Chinese organizations on 
the development of East Asia gets 
under way at the Concordia Society 
Hall, Hsinking. Japan is represent- 
ed by Admiral Sankichi Takahashi. 
Premier Hideki Tohjo and the Italian 
Foreign Minister, Baron Raffaele 
Guariglia, wire congratulations to 
the convention. 

August 77 Japanese Navy air 
units, attacking enemy convoys on 
August 15 off Vella Lavella Island 
m the Solomon Group, sank four 
warships, including one heavy crui- 
ser and four large-sized transports; 
damaged sixteen warships, including 
two cruisers and four transports*! 
and shot down twenty-eight planes. 

Both the Italian and German 
authorities announce in a special 
war report that the entire Axis 
forces have made an orderly with- 
drawal from Sicily to Calabria Pro- 
vince on the Italian mainland in 
accordance with a prearranged plan. 
All military facilities in the city and 
harbour of Messina were destroyed 
prior to the evacuation. 

Two enemy four-engined bombers 
appeared over Balik Papan, Borneo, 
on the morning of August 16. The 
ground batteries shot down one of 
them. This was the second raid. 

August 18 Air units of the Japa- 
nese Navy raided at dawn on August 
17 the airfields at Port Hedland and 
Broome on the northwestern coast 
of Australia. 

Premier Marshal Pietro Badoglio 
in his first broadcast to the Italian 
nation, since the formation of his 



1208 



CHRONICLE OF CURRENT EVENTS 



Cabinet, declares that Sicily will 
remain a part of Italy as before and 
valiantly encourages the Italian to 
be strong against the invaders. 

August ip An enforcement ag- 
reement is signed between Mr. 
Kenkichi Yoshizawa, Japanese Am- 
bassador to French Indo-China, and 
Vice-Admiral Jean Decoux, Gov- 
ernor-General of French Indo-China, 
regarding the supply of Japanese 
products to French Indo-China for 
the current year of 1943* 

The appointment of Finance Min- 
ister Dr. Thein Maung as the first 
Burmese Ambassador to Japan is 
formally announced by the Burmese 
Government. 

The first radio broadcast to Hun- 
gary from Japan is made today on 
the occasion of the celebration of the 
Saint Stephan's Day, national holi- 
day of Hungary, when Baron Taka- 
haru Mitsui, president of the Japan- 
Hungary Cultural Society, and the 
Hungarian Minister to Tokyo, 
Nicholas de Vegh, send their greet- 



ings from Station Tokyo. 

A Consolidated B-24, bombed and 
machine-gunned the Japanese hos- 
pital ship Buenos Aires Mara at 5:57 
a.m. on August 17, while it was 
cruising in the southern Pacific, it is 
disclosed. The same ship was sub- 
jected to a torpedo attack by a 
submarine in the eastern China Sea 
on April 25 this year. 

August 20 A Japan-Thailand 
treaty concerning the incorporation 
of four Malay and two Shan states 
into Thailand is signed at Bangkok 
between Thai Premier Phibul Song- 
gram and Japanese Ambassador Teiji 
Tsubokami. Article 1 of the treaty 
says : " Japan recognizes the in- 
corporation into the territories of 
Thailand of the states of Kelantan, 
Tregganu, Kedah and Perlis and the 
islands belonging to those states." 
Article 11 provides : " Japan re- 
cognizes the incorporation into the 
territories of Thailand of the states of 
Kengtung and Mong Pan in the 
Shan region. " 



1209 



\ 



DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL 



THAILAND ACQUIRES NEW TERRITORIES, ANNOUNCEMFNT rv 
THE BOARD OF INFORMATION, AUGUST 20, 1943 

Following the conversations between General Hideki Tohjo Prime 
Minister of Japan, and Field Marshal P. Phibul Songgram, Prime Minister 
of Thailand, on July 4 of this year, the Governments of the two countries 
have been engaged in negotiations for the conclusion of a treaty between 
Japan and Thailand concerning the territories of Thailand in the Malay and 
Shan regions. Having reached an agreement on the draft treaty the treaty 
was signed today, August 20, 1943, at Bangkok between Mr. Teiji Tsubokami 
Ambassador Eitoordina^ and Plenipotentiary of Japan to Thailand, and 
Field Marshal P. Phibul Songgram, Prime Minister and acting Minister of 
Foreign Affairs : — 6 uj. 

of TSkrS OVemment ° f * e Empire ° f Japan the Royal Government 
Being unshakably determined, in close co-operation between the two 
countries, to prosecute the common war against the United States of America 
and the British Empire to its successful conclusion and to establish a 
greater East Asia based on justice, have agreed upon the following articles : 
Article r. Japan recognizes the incorporation into the territories of 
Thailand of the States of Kelantan, Trengganu, Kedah and Perlis and the 
islands belonging to those States. 

Article 2. Japan recognizes the incorporation into the territories of 
Thailand of the States of Kentung and Mong Pan in the Shan region. 

Article 3. Japan will cease the administration which it at present 
exercises in the territories specified in the two foregoing articles within sixty 
days from the date of coming into force of the present treaty. 

Article 4. The frontiers of the territories specified in the Articles 1 
and 2 shall be in accordance with the boundaries of the States as at the date 
of the signing of the present treaty. 

Article 5. The matters of detail for the execution of the present treaty 
shall be decided through consultations between the authorities rnnmnp^ 
of the two countries. wiicernea 
Article 6. The present treaty shall come into force on the date of its 
signature. 

CAPITULATION OF THE BADOGLIO GOVERNMENT 
(/) S tatement by the Japanese Government, September 10, ipjj 

The Badoglio Government of Italy has surrendered unconditionally to 
the United States and Britain. J 
By this move, the Badoglio Government has committed a regrettable 

1210 



DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL 



act of betrayal of the Japanese-German-Italian Tripartite Pact and of the 
solemn agreement not to conclude a separate peace. 

However, as the Japanese Government had anticipated such a situation 
and accordingly has taken all necessary measures, the development will have 
no effect on the general war situation. Japan further strengthens her firm 
confidence in sure victory. # 

By rendering still closer the ties of co-operation between Germany and 
other European allies and the countries and peoples of greater East Asia, 
Japan is determined to crush her long standing enemies, the United States and 

Britain. . . . ' . 

Our one hundred million people, heightening still more their fighting 
spirit and strong will with a tradition of three thousand years, must with one 
mind and one spirit further demonstrate their fighting power and achieve the 
solemn objectives of the war, thus setting the mind of our August Sovereign 
at ease. 

(-2) Communique by the Japanese Government on protective 
surveillance, September I4> 1943 

1. The Imperial Army and Navy on September 9 following the separate 
surrender of the Badoglio Government of Italy immediately carried out the 
disarming of the Italian troops and the detention of the Italian warships and 
vessels in the various parts of East Asia. 

2. The Italian rights and interests in the area occupied by Japan have 
been taken over by the Imperial Army and Navy. In other regions the Army 
and Navy have co-operated with Japan's Allies in taking over Italian rights 
and interests. As regards the non-combatants in the Japanese-occupied 
areas, they are placed under protective surveillance. 

GO Joint declaration by Japan and Germany, September ij, 1943 
The Government of the Empire of Japan and the Government of 

Greater Germany jointly and solemnly declare as follows : 

The treachery of the Government of Marshal Badoglio affects in no way 

the Three-Power Pact, which remains in force without the slightest change. 
The Government of the Empire of Japan and the Government of Greater 

Germany are determined, jointly with all the measures at their disposal, to 

carry on the war to the victorious conclusion. 



I2II 



Published by Katsuii U^u 

^nkyusha.zJ^guracbo ,45 Toki i of Japan. 

s*e Regu J sbigo ^ m. PMb -> * * 

inters' Afc^f^W ^ fi 




RADIO TOKYO 

News Broadcasts from Tokyo 



(1) For Pacific Coast of 
North America 

Tokyo 0:03- 3:40 a.m. 

San Francisco 7;0U — 10:40 a.m. 

JVW3 11,725 kcs., 25.51m. 
JLG2 9,505 kc/s., 31.57 m. 

AM. 

0:03— News in English 
1:00— News in English 
2:00 -News in English 
3;0J— News in English 

(2) For India 

Tokyo 0:00- 1:15 a.m. 

Calcutta 8:30— 10:15 p.m. 

JVW2 9,075 kc/s., 31.01 m. 
JZJ 11,800 kc's., 25.42 m. 

AM. . , 

0*00— News in Hindustani 
0:20— News in Urdu 
0:4*)— News in Tamil or Bengali 

(alternatively) 
1:0 J— News in English 

(3) For Southwestern Asia 

JVW2 9,675 kc s., 31.01m. 
JZJ 11,800 kc/s., 25.42m. 

AM. „ . 

2 : 00-Newsin I-rcnch 
2:20— News in Arabic (except 

Mon.) . j /t..„„ 
2:40 -News in Iran U«fes., 
Thurs. & Sat.) or Turkish 
(Sun., Mon.. Wed &*ri.); 
3:00— News in English 
3;20-News in Nipponese 

(4) For Europe 

Tokyo 4:00— 7:00 a. m. 

Berlin, Rome -8:00-11:00 p.m. 
London 7:00-10.00 p.m. 

JLG1 I5rl05 kc/8., 19.86 in. 

JZJ 11,800 kc/s.» 25.42 in. 
AM. 

4:00— News in German 
4:30— News in Italian 
6:00- News in English 
5:3 ) News in Russian 
5:50— News in Ercnch 
6:20- News in Dutch 
6:30~News in Nipponese 

(5) For Eastern North 
America 

Tokyo 7:15— 9:15 a.m. 

New York 5:15- 7:15 p.m. 

Riodc Janeiro 7: 15— 9:15 p.m. 



JVW3 11.725 kc/s., 25.51 m. 
JLG4 15,105 kc/s., 19,86 m. 

A.M. 

7:20— News in English 
8:20— News in English 
8:50— News in Portuguese 
9:00— News in Nipponese 

(6) For South America 

Tokyo 9:30-10:30 a.m. 

Buenos Aiies 9:30—10:30 p.m. 

JZK 15,160 kc/s., 19.79 m. 
JZJ 11,800 kcs., 25.12 m. 

Am. 

1 9:30— News in Spanish 
10:00— News in Nipponese 

(7; For India 
& Southwestern Asia 

Tokyo 10:45-11:45 a.m. 

Calcutta 7:15- 8:15 a.tn 

Iran 5:15— 6:15 a.m. 

Iraq, Arabia ...4:45— 5:45 a.m. 

JZK 15,160 kc 's., 19.79 m. 
JZJ 11.800 kcs.. 25.42 m. 
A.M. 

11:25 -News in Arabic 
11:35 — News in Ercnch 



(8) For Pacific Coast 
of North America 

Tokvo 0:00- 5:00 p.m. 

Mexico 8:20- 1:20 a.m. 

San Francisco 7:00—12:00 p.m. 

JZK 15.160 kc/s., 19.79 m. 
JLG4 15,105 kc/s., 19.86 m. 
JZJ 11,800 kc/s., 25.42 m. 

PM. 

0:0n— News in Spanish 
0:25— News in Nipponese 
1:00— News in Engljsh 
1:30— News in English 
2:ii7 -News in English 
3;00-Newa in English 
4:00— News in English 

(9) For Europe 

Tokvo 5:15- f':00 p.m. 

Berlin, Rome ..9:15-12:0 I a.m. 
London 8:15—11:00 a.m. 

JZL 17.783 kc's., 16.87 m. 
JLG4 15,10j kc/s., 19.80 m. 

P.M. 

5:15— News in Nipponese 
5:40— News in German 
0:10 -News in Italian 
6:40— News in Engli h 
7:15— News in German 



7:30 -News in Italian 
7:4"»— News in En. jlish 



(10) For Australia 

Tokyo 5:15— 7:15 p m. 

Sydney 6:15- 8:15 p.m. 

JZJ 11.800 kc s., 25.42m. 
JZK 15,160 kc 's.. 19.79 m. 
PM. 

5:15— News in Nipponese 
6:00— News in English 
7:00— News in English 

(11) For China 

Tokyo 7:Z0— 9:15 p.m. 

JZJ 11,800 kc/s., 2r».42m. 
JVW2 6,G75kcs., 31.01 m. 
P.M. 

7:30— News in Nipponese 
7:^0— News in Cantonese 
ja[a— News in Fukienese 
?. »a JJ ews \ n Standard Chinese 
9:00— News in Russian 

(12) For South America 



Tokyo .. 
Buenos Aires- ■ 



8:15-9:45 p.m. 
8:15— 9:15 a.m. 



JVW3 11,725 kc's., 23.51m. 
.ILG2 9,505 kc's., 31.57 m. 
P.M. 

8:15— News in Spanish 
8:50— News in English 
y:-0— News in Nipponese 

(13) For South Sear, 

Tokyo 9:30— 11:40 p m. 

Saigon, Manila 8:30 - 10:40 p.m. 
Bangkok 7:10- IMOp m. 

JZJ 11,800 kc's., 25.42m. 
JVW2 9,675 kc/s.. 31.01m. 
PM. 

t:30— News in Tagalog 
9.43— News in Mai ai 
I0:0()-News in Thai 

10. -JQ-Newsin Ik nch 
11:00— News in Buimcnc 

11. -2J— News in Nipponese 

(14) For Eastern North 
America 

Tokyo 10:00- 11:40 p m 

New York 8:00- 9: 10 a m. 

JVW3 11,725 kc/s., 2:i.Miii. 
JLG4 15.105 kcs., 10 n 
P.M. 

10:00 - News in English 
11:00 • News in English 
1 1:16 — News in Portugln 
11:30 -News in Nipponese 



