
J 




o 



SPEECH OP MAJOR GENERAL BASILIO J. ViiLDES DELIVERED ON THE 
OCCASION OP THE AWARD TO HIM OF THE 
DISTINGUISHED SERVICE STAR 

(BRONZE CLASP WITH A CITATION STAR AND T.'.'O ANAHAW LEAVES) 

BY THE SECRETARY OF NATIONAL DEFENSE 
ON 4 DEC.JMLER 1945 AT CAMP MURPHY 

This is not an oration, it is a heart to heart talk to you 
my comrades, &iy officers and men, friends, who during r.iy 
incumbency as Chief of Staff have invariably given me your 
unstinted loyalty and most valuable cooperation. It is a 
heart to heart talk to USAFFE officers and men who with me 
suffered untold privations and undescribable hunger during 
those hectic months of our stubborn but 0 radual dwindling re- 
sistance on Bataan and Corregidor. Then the clouds of war 
began darkening our horizon, by order of the President of the 
United States through the President of the Philippines, ten 
Philippine Arcjy divisions were culled to the colors. Many of 
the men that responded had had only the minimum of five and a half 
months of military training as required by the National Defense 
Act. Enemies of our organization tried hard to discredit that 
work performed by that brilliant strategist, General of the 
Armies Mac Arthur, in the organization and training of the 
Philippine Army. Little or no value at all was given to the 
efforts exerted by recognized military leaders such as General 
of tne Ar...ies Eisenhower and his life lon 0 companion Colonel 
Ord whose untimely death was a severe blow to all of us. These 
detractors of our Nation .1 Defense program went as far as to 




assure that the Philippine array officers and men could not fight 
and would run at the first encounter. History and the statements of 
various American Generals in Bataan and Corregidor have belied 
these accusations and have proved to the whole world that the 
Filipino when he fights for a noble cause and for the defense 
of his home and his beioved ones is second to none in the field 
of battle. The stories of heroism of officers and men could fill 
many p^ges, When the moment to obey the order of reduction of 
rations carnet all of you tightened your belts and kept on 
fighting. When the order of surrender was given, you obediently 
submitted yourselves to the consequences of such order. Many 
of our comrades died of weakness and disease in the horrible 
"March of Death" and those who survived met de th in the prison 
carats where the Japanese military authorities heartlessly and 
cruelly saw to it that these men who hud suffered and sacrificed 
so much, received as little as possible of the essential 
comforts of life. 

This is a heart to heart talk to you officers and men of 
the Guerrilla Forces of the Philippines who through your mag- 
nificent resistance against the enemy and your determination to 
uphold the dignity of the United States of America and of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, demonstrated in a most eloquent 
way that you are made of the fiber of which every Filipino can 
be proud of. During three dark and seemingly endless years you 
kept your faith in America and in our gallant leqders, General 
of the Annies Douglas MacArthur, our beloved President Quezon 



- 2 - 



£Uid ^ rtsident ' ^ 8L ena » I visited some of your units and spent several 
days with you in the field during the fighting. Many of the men 
were barefooted, had practically no clothes, and existed on meager 
lotions. When told to attack and capture an objective you did 
so unhesitatingly and with the smile of Victory in your faces no 
matter what the dangers were. 

Tois is a heart to h<.art talk to tnosc officers and men 
who served with me in the old Philippine Constabulary, an organi- 
sation whose record and exploits will forever remain engraved in 
the hearts of the Filipino people. You grew old in this semi— 
military organization, and gave the best years of your lives to the 
service of our country. I hope that the Gover.mient will do you 
justice and -runt you the gratuity or the retirement that you have 
so conscientiously earned. 

To you all again my profound thanks for your valuable assis- 
tance in the solution of the many intricate problems affecting 
the Philipi ine Army. Credit therefore belongs to you. There have 
been numerous problems affecting the guerrilla forces that have 
remained unsolved, not because of lack of interest in their 
welfare, as some have tried to state, but because the final decision 
rested in nigher headquarters. 1 want you all to know that even in the 
darkest days during the last period of my administration 1 have 
never wavered in my sincere desire to help you. 

Give to General Jalandoni, my successor , my old friend 
and loyal subordinate, the same support and the same loyalty 
that you have given to me. He deserves it. He is an officer with 
a brilliant record behind him. I know th ,t he will always fight 
for you. He will not fail you. 



3 



to the Secretary of National Defense your full 
cooperation so that his administration will be a complete 
success. I assure you that he has the best interest of the 
Philippine Ariay at heart. 

vastly , let me remind jou that we owe our loyalty to 
our Coriander- in-Chief , President Sergio Osmcna. You well 
know that the problems of peace and order throughout the 
country are important and require immediate attention. He 
expects that the Philippine army maintain its efficiency in 
its highest level. 

God bless you all. 



nmd 



- 4 - 



