Commonwealth of the Philippines 

DEPARTMENT OF public WORKS and communications 

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Manila 


iipril 26, 194b 


MEMORANDUM for 
Hon. Ismael Mathay 
Commissioner or the Budget 


SUBJECT: Establishment or Communications Service by 

Telegraph, Radio, Airplane courier ana 
Vehicle courier Between Manila ana Certain 
Points in Liberated Areas. 


The services outlined in the attached memorandum of 
the same subject matter will become eriective May 1, 194b 
except the following, which will be announced at a later 
date : 


1. Radio facilities at ana between the following 

points: Iloilo, Cebu, Zamboanga ana oatbalogan. 

2. Motor courier service between Manila ana Pasig, 
Rizal, Cavite, Cavite, Batangas, Batangas ana Cabana tuan, 
Nueva Ecija. 

b. Motor courier service between Manila ana Aparri, 
caguyan, stopping at nayombong, Nueva Vizcaya ana Hagan, 
Isabela. 

4. Motor courier service between Manila ana ^orsogon, 
sorsogon, stopping at Luceana , Tayabas, Daet, Camarines 
Norte, Naga, Camarines Sur and Legaspi, Albay. 


UE COP* 



.ON _ 


May 194b 


? l5izo ]£rt^ 


(SOD. ) SOTEhO B. CaBaHUG 
Secretary of Public works ana 
Communications 


APO soo 

a'6 April 194 d 


SUbJaCT : astablishment or Communications Service by Telegraph, 

naaio, Airplane Courier ana Vehicle courier Between 
Manila ana certain Points in liberatea Areas. 


1. a communications service by telegraph, raaio, sare- 
hana airplane courier ana motor vehicle has been establishea 
between Manila ana certain points in the liberatea areas, as 
set forth below. 

The initial services to be proviaea are the following 
a. Telegraph service between Manila and the following 
locations (others to be aesignatea later): 


(1) 

Malolos, Bulacan, 


(2) 

San Pernanao, Pampanga, 


(») 

Paniqui, Terlac. 


(4) 

Dagupan, Pangas inan. 


b. Raaio facilities at ana between the 

following 

locations: 


(1) 

Taclooan, Leyte. 


(2) 

Iloilo, Iloilo. 


(3) 

Cebu, Cebu, 


(4) 

Zamboanga , Zamboanga . 


(b) 

Catbalogan, ^amar. 


(6) 

Such other locations, not to exceeu eleven 


in number, as the Commonwealth 
may select. 

Government 


Basic: Memo t^TAll Members or the Philip^me Commonwealth ana all 

Provincial Governors, subj: '‘Establishment or Communications 

Service by Telegraph, Kaaio, Airplane Courier and. vehicle 
Courier Between Manila ana Certain Points in Liberated Areas, 
iJ ata Apr 4b , 

c, Motor courier service between the points on the scheaul* 
set rorth in Inclosure 41 herewith. Maximum weight allow- 
ance for messanges ana parcels transported by the motor 
vehicle courier service for each locality named will be 
SO pounds for each motor courier trip, 

5. The safehana air courier service will be maae available to 
the Commonwealth Government for the carrying of messages ana parcels 
between Manila ana the following Provincial Capitols (others to be 
designated later): 

a, Tacloban, Leyte, 

b, Lingayen, Pangasinan, 
c» Cebu, Cebu, 

a. The maximum weight allowance for messages ana parcels 
to be transported by safehana airplane courier service for 
each of the localities namea will be limitea to 5 pounds 
for each airplane courier trip. 

4 » Use of these restored facilities ana services is to be 
restricted to the highest Government officials ana to official busi- 
ness. They are not to be maae available to the general public. Mes- 
sages ana parcels will be aepositea for aispatch with the following 
officials (others to be designated later): 

a, Manila Secretary of P.W. & Com. Malacan- 

anpalace. 

b, San pernanao, Pampanga-Pr ovine ial Treasurer, 

c, Malolos, Bulacan .... .Provincial Treasurer 

a. Tarlac , Tarlac ...... .Provincial Treasurer 


e. Paniqui, Tarlac ........ congressman Jose Cojuangco. 

r. dagupan, Pangasinan „ . . . Municipal Treasurer 

g. Lingayen, Pangasinan . . . Provincial Treasurer 

h. San I’ernanao, La Union . provincial Treasurer 

i. Tacloban, Leyte ........ Provincial Treasurer 

5, The above services will be initially operated unaer the 
control, direction ana coordination of the chier Signal officer, 
Philippine Army. Later, when available personnel ana facilities 
permit, the above services will be transferred to and operate com- 
pletely under the civilian control or the Secretary of Public works 
and Communications. 

6, In order that items may not be transmitted by the above- 
listed means that may in any way disclose information that could 
be utilized by the enemy if intercepted or captured by him, a cen- 
sorship will be exercised by a Civilian Censorship detachment es- 
tablished pursuant to agreement with the Commonwealth Government. 

This detachment will have representatives at the appropriate places 
for the purpose of censoring the traffic to be handled by the above- 
mentioned means. 


line Is - 

Motor Courier t>erv to be ^st'a for 
Philippine Army and Philippine 
Commonwealth 


COPY 



May 3 , 1940 


3 


