BRIEF BIOGRAHIY 
Released, by 

The Jesuit Philippine Biireau 
51 East 83rd Street, New York 
December - — -ooOoo— — 194S 



MAJOR GENERAL BASILIO JOSE VALDES, Chief of Staff of the Philip- 
pine Army and Secretary of National Defense, was born in Jianlla, July 
10, 1892« His father was Dr. Benito Valdes, Doctor of Medicine, Grad- 
uate of the Dnlversity of Madrid and former classmate of Dr. Jose Ri- 
zal at the medical school. 'Hie friendship between Dr. Benito Valdes 
and Dr. Jose Rizal caused the General's father a great deal of trouble. 
During the terrible days of October 1896, when the iidiole atmosphere of 
the Philippines was saturated with the spirit of rebellion against 
Spain, the General's father, then a prominent physician and President 
of an important club, was arrested and accused of being a friend of 
Rizal, and of cooperating v;ith the rebels. On learning of her hus- 
band's arrest, the General's mother yiho had been very sick follovdng 
the birth of her last, son, suffered a relapse. She knew that in those 
days arrest was inevitably followed by the firing squad. The anxiety 
caused her death. Dr. Benito Valdes was finally released from the 
prison as no evidence could be found against him, and rushed home on- 
ly to be in time for his wife's death. He then departed for Spain 

with his four oldest sons. The young Basllio was entered at La Salle 

College in Barcelona and studied there from 1897 to 1901, when he and 
his brother, Francisco, returned to the Philippines. Basllio studied 
at San Beda College for two years and in 1903 was transferred to St. 
Joseph's College, Hong Kong, A year later he returned to Manila and 

finished his High School course at the Manila High School in 1911. 

In June of the same year he entered the College of Medicine of Santo 
Tomas University. He was granted his degree. Doctor of Medicine, in 
March, 1916. He was the valedictorian at the graduation exercises. 
Evidently his record had been rather extraordinary for Immediately 
following the graduation he was approached by the President of the 
University of the Philippines, Honorable Ignacio Vuiamor, and of- 
fered a position as Instructor in the College of Medicine in the Uni- 
versity of the Philippines. The young Dr. Valdes accepted the offer 
and was appointed as Instructor in the Department of iiysiology of 
the College of Medicine of the University of the Philippines. 

World War I was then beginning its third year, Dr, Yaldes fol- 
lowed the war conmuniques and began to feel a specinl urge to aid the 
men wounded in the war. His desire to go to Franco became more and 
more intense and -'’inally in September 1916 he resigned hie position 
in the University of the Philippines and sailed for France. 

On arrival in Paris he offered bin services as a surgeon to the 
French -Minister of Foreign Affairs, Monsieur Bertholot. 1110 follow- 
ing day he found himself working at the French Red Cross Hospital No, 



- 1 - 



101 as aasistaot to Captain Cotta, a vexy able young suxgeon. The 
experience gained working with him was very valuable. 

In 1917 idien the United States entered the war, Dr. Valdes 
volunteered to Join the -Army Medical Corps. His application was 
not favorably considered because Filipino citizens were not consi- 
dered American citizens, end American ^tlzenshlp was a prerequisite 
for a commission. However, he was offered a cammlsslon In the Red 
Cross without salary. He accepted as his only desire was to serve. 

On Xuly 10, 1917, he was commissioned Captain of the American Red 
Cross and loft Paris for Hllitary Hospital V.R. 76 where ho was 
placed as assistant to Colonel William L. Keller, U. S. Medical Corps, 
one of the foremost American surgeons. 

In lune 1918, Captain Valdes was promoted to the position of 
Chief Suigeon of the Military Hospital ARC-Eil-BARRIOS, Haute Uarne, 

At the time he was only 26 years of age and looked so young that ho 
had to let his moustache grow to look a little older. 

In February 1919, he received orders to close his hospital. 

Upon his return to Paris, he was appointed a member of the Inter- 
Allied Commission to Germany, a position coveted by many officers 
of much higher rank. The Commission had its headquarters in Berlin. 

As a member of this Commission, he had to travel extensively through- 
out Germany, having to inspect all the camps in which prisoners of 
war wore confined, 'ihere were at that time 800,000 Russians! 

While a member of this Commission, he was sent to Prague, Czecho- 
slovakia, to study the needs of the people. He found the hospitals 
full of children practically emaciated from lack of food. As a re- 
sult of his report, the American Red Cross establiriied a branch in 

Prague. 

A month later he isas sent to Kovno, Lithuania, to study the sani- 
tary conditions there and to submit a report. An epidemic of typhus 
fever was then killing many people. He found that the hospitals were 
badly In need of medical supplies and equiisnent. They were using bur- 
lap as sheets. They had no gauze, and were covering the wounds with 
tissue paper. They had practically no medicines. He considered the 
situation so serious that he wired the Chief of the Red Cross Commis- 
sion in Berlin for help. In less than a week, he received 116 cases 
of medical supplies and hospital equipment. 

In July, 1919, he wae promoted to the rank of Major, and design 
nated Deputy Gommissioner of the American Red Cposs in Germany. 

In August, 1919, he was appointed Ghief of the Medical Service 
of the American Red Cross Commission to Albania. He organized hos- 



- 2 - 



* ^ 



f 






the sailed from France to New York, crossed 

IQiq Francisco for Manila on Nov. 27, 

y. He arrived in Manila on Decenber 24, 1919. 



pon his return from France he was appointed Associate Profes- 
sor or Surgery in the College of Medicine of the University of Santo 
omas. He devoted the rest of his time to the private practice of 
s profession. In June, 1921, he joined the Philippine Conatabulary 
an was appointed First Lieutenant and Medical Inspector; promot- 
ed to Captain and Surgeon in 1922; was promoted to Major and Surgeon 
in 1925, and to Lieutenant Colonel and Chief Surgeon in 1926. 



In 1922, he v®s appointed "Member of the Board of Medical l&cam- 
iners," and in 1926, appointed President of the Board, a position 
vdiich he held continuously until 1932, waging a campaign against 
quacks and against improper ways of advertising. 



In 1932, the Legislature created the position of Commissioner 
of Health. In January, 1933, he was appointed Acting Commissioner 
of Health and Welfare, a position which he occupied until March 1934, 
when he vias promoted to the ranlc of Brigadier Geneial and made Chief 
of the ^ilippine Constabulary. Constabulary then consisted of 

4500 men. With the support of Governor General lluriiiy and the Hiil- 
ippine Legislature, he increased the force to 8000 men, created ma- 
chine gun units and created the Air Corps to handle air patrol. 

Ihe inauguration of the Philippine Commonwealth in 1935 prevent- 
ed the dovelopment of the Constabulary as it was absorbed to form the 
nucleus of the Philippine Army. 



He was appointed First Assistant Chief of Staff of the Philip- 
pine Army in December, 1935, and in Januar;’', 1936, was promoted t 0 ‘ 
the rank of Major General and appointed Deputy Chief of Staff of the 
Philippine Army. 

In 1938, the Philippine Constabulary was separated from the 
Philippine Army end recreated as a distinct organization. General 
Valdes was then appointed Acting Chief of the Philippine Constabulary 
in addition to his duties as Deputy Chief of Staff of the Array, 

In January, 1939, Major General Basllio J. Valdes was appointed 
Chief of Staff of the Ihilippino Army, 

Sometime later he was honored by having conferred upon him the 
Cabinet post of Minister of National Defense on December 22, 1941. 

Gradually, as his military duties increased, the General had 



- 3 - 



