
CARLOS P. GARCIA 

(November 4, 1896 — June 14, 197 0 


L 




CARLOS P. GARCIA 

(November 4, 189B— June 14, 1971) 


“LIFE is whcst you make 11. With fie necessary canseq nences of you; 
good deeds, you build the ladder by which rung by rung you climb to sublime 
destiny or as necessary effect of your wrong or bod ac(s, you build the 
dungeon of your own life's imprisonment or bondage. There is no escape 
from the universal law of cause and effect. You always reap what you 
sow" 

Thus Carlos P- Garcia expressed his philosophy oi lile and thus has he 
lived and patterned his career. For Carlos P. Garcia of Tallbon, Bohol, 
si Off tod as a public school teacher and rose to the highest position within 
tiie gill oi his people - the presidency of (he Republic of (he Philippines, 

Starting his public career as a public school teacher. President Garcia 
had boon lor six years lire representative of the third district of Bohol; nine 
years as Governor of Bohol; and Senator lor three terms from 1941 to 1353. 
He was the only senator who served in the Senate for three successive 
terms without interrupt lOh frotn 1341 until his oSoetiCTi to the vice-piesidency 
of the Republic, He had been minority floor leader in the Senate since 194E; 
the only three-tenner governor of Bohol and only senator who had been 
steadily voted by die Press as the most outstanding and most useful since 
1949 through 1953 without interruption. 

During liis incumbency as senator, he had boon a member of the 
Electoral Tribunal and the Commission on Appointments and of the high 
councils of the Nacionalista Party. He herd been vice-president of the NP 
National Directorate from 1947 to 1953 and executive vice-president of the 
NP sinco 1954- As a senator, lie had boon chairman of the Committees on 
Foreign Relations, Government Reorganization, Revision of Laws, National 
Defense, Mindanao and Sulu, and the Advisory Committee. 

Carlos P, Garcia was elected vice-president of Ihe Philippines in 1953 
and was appointed concurrently secretary of foreign affairs. 

Ramon Magsay say's tragic death in 19S7 placed Carlos P, Garcia in 
the presidency in what maybe considered a distinct disadvantage ... he 
was succeeding a tremendously popular leader. But President Garcia inr 
mediately set to task in uniting the nation behind his leadership and was 
thereafter, in 1957, elected to the presidency in his own right. 

President Garcia clearly and unpretentiously considered himself as a 
carelaker at the start of his own term. There was no proclamation of 
great changes, whether political, social, or economic. It soon became 



President Ramon Magsaysay and Vice President Carlos P. Garcia at the inauguration of the 
newly elected President and Vice President of the Republic* held at th# Luneta in 1953. 
Mrs. Loonila D. Garda is seated directly behind the then newly-elected Vice President of 
the Philippines. 


apparent (hat Iho stalesman in him was more compelling Ilian his modesty, 
lor in mid- term, President Garcia had enunciated and implemented whai 
has been known as Iho Filipino First Policy, 

This nationalistic policy, administered through the Central Bank, gave 
u tremendous boosst to Filipino economic enterprise, and one of its imme- 
diate consequences was the establishment ol the first fully Filipino oil firm. 
Tl was a policy, however, that was discontinued when President Garcia lost 
his bid for a second term. 

History wilt most likely remember the Filipino First Policy as President 
Garcia's great contribution to notional development. 

Before his death on Juno U r 1971 Carlow P. Garcia hod just boon elected 
President ol the Constitutional Convention, to w hie It he would have lent the 
same humility, sagacity and courage that had distinguished his lile both 
os a man and as a public figure, The Presidency ol the Constitutional 
Convention waii, according to general observations, a vindication of Carlon 
P. Gcucia, But it is sale to say that Carlos P. Garcia never needed any 
vindication. He was, to iho very last, a gentleman in public service. 

Among other high positions. President Garcja had been nussioner to 
Washington for the Philippine Hehabilitalion and Wat Damage Claims 
(1945): delegate to the World Conference at San Francisco (1945) !o draft 
the Charter of the United Nations; cited among the few Filipinos in the 
World's Biographical Encyclopedic and the WHO IS WHO of the United! 
States; delegate to Iho [nterparltortientaiy Union Conference? ol Dublin, 
Ireland (1950); delegate to the SEA (Southeast Asia) Baguio Conference 
(1950); chairman, Philippine Delegation to the Geneva Conference In 1954 
lor Korean Unification; presiding officer of the SEATO Conference in Manila 
(1954) that produced the Manila Treaty and the Pacific Charter; chairman 
of the Philippine delegation to the SEATO Conference in Pakistan t 1956); 
chairman ol the Philippine delegation to the SEATO Conference at Canberra, 
Australia (1957), 

A lawyer by profession, the President passed the bat m 1933 among the 
ten tepnotchers in spite of illness. He finished hjs law course at the Phil- 
ippine Law School in 1923, graduating as valedictorian. Since his primary 
grades, he had always been a( lliq head of his class. During his college 
days, he had been winner ol Malcolm's four -year low- course scholarship 
prizes and elso of oratorical contests. He was generally hailed as the Prince 
o| Visayan poets living. 

The hardest and most perilous days ol Ids lile were those duiuig the 
Japanese occupation. He was hunted for three consecutive yoats by the 
Japanese soldiers lor his spurning the order to surrender in May, 1942, A 
prize was fbied On his head by the ministry of interior but he fearlessly 
Stuck to his decision not to surrender, On Ihroa occasions ho was cornered 


3 





Chief Justice Ricardo Paros administers the oath of office lo then Vice President Carlos P,. Garcia 
as President ol the Philippines, which post he assumed following the tragic death of President 
Ramon. Magsctyscry in a plane crash in Cebu in IS57i Standing between the two officials is 
the late Eulogio Rodrigues, shea president of the Senate, 


by Japanese soldier* but he escaped capture. He was shipwrecked in 
September, 1942, while trying to escape capture by the Japanese but he 
survived with his lather. He had been in the "Wanted List" of one of the 
rival guerrilla factions ol Leyte before Colonel Roper to Kanglecm took com- 
mand of the Leyte Guerrilla. In December, 1943, a letter from President 
Manuel L. Quezon, then in Washington, reached Bohol confirming and ap- 
proving the civil government of Bohol organized during the Japanese oc- 
cupation with Carlos P. Garcia as high adviser. 

Bom on November 4, 189B, President Garcia married Lcoriila Dimataga 
of Gpon, Cebu, by whom he has one daughter — Mrs, Linda Gencia'Campos. 
The President's father was Policronio Garcia who had been mayor of Talibon 
for four terms. His mother's name was Ambrosia Poleslico. Mrs, Leonlla D, 
Garcia is a pharmacist by profession having graduated from the College 
of Pharmacy of the University of Santo Tomas. 

The President had attended the Talibon Elementary School, Cebu High 
School, Si! liman University and the Philippine Law School, His diversions and 
paslimos include playing chess, swimming and reading. His favorite books 
and authors include philosophy, poetry, history , economics (English and 
Spanish); Shakespeare, Bacon, Plato, Aristotle, Gervcmtes, tngersoil, Vargas 
Vila and others. 

He has travelled all over the Philippines and abroad, sojour ning for some 
time in Hie United Stales, England, Ireland, franco, Switzerland, Belgium, 
Tlaly, Spain, Portugal, Thailand, VTelitam, Pakistan nnd Australia. 


r 





S; 


: I 




President Carlos P, Garda, then Vico President and General Jesus Vargas, Hie AFP chief of 
staff, led the welcomes of the then U, S, Vice President Richard Nixon when the latter arrived 
to attend the 10th Philippine Independence Day anniversary. The trio are shown in lively 
conversation on their way to ihc reception line where members of ihe diplomatic corps waited 
to greet the U« S> Vice President 


l 



MALACAftANG 

Manila 

PROCLAMATION NO fifiS 

DECLARING A PERIOD OF NATIONAL MOURNING OVER THE 

DEATH OF CARLOS P, GARCIA, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES AND PRESIDENT OF THE 1971 

CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION. 

WHEREAS, the death of Carlos P. Garcia, former President of the 
Republic of the Philippines and President of the 1971 Constitutional Con- 
vention, is a great loss to our people and has caused deep sorrow among them; 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proel aim 
a period of national mourning of one month beginning June 15, 1971 for 
our beloved former President. During this period, flogs of all govern- 
ment buildings and installations throughout the country shall be flown 
at half mast, 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF. I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
I he seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done in flic City of Manila, this 14th day ol June, in the year ef our 
Lord. ii in el ceil hundred and seventy-one. 


fSgd ) FERDINAND E. MARCO® 

President of the Philippines 

FSy the President: 

(SgtU ROBERTO V, REYES 
Acting Execittioe Secretary 



7 





m — 


;fly - 7 ;;- 




President Caries P. Garcia, standing on. a podium with President Ghiang Kai-shek of the Re- 
public ol China, receives military hosiers on arrival in Taipei during his stale visit la Taiwan. 
Flanking the two heads of stale are Mrs. Garcia and Madame Chiang- 


MALACAfrANG 

Manila 


ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 291 

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE. i’UNEI^^L 
ARRANGEMENTS AND INTERMENT OF THE NATE CARLOS P. 
GARCIA, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC Ot PH h 
PHILIPPI NES AND PRESIDENT OF THE 1371 CONST1 1 UTIONAL 
CONVENTION. 


WHEREAS, Curfew P. Garcia, former President of the Republic of the 
Philippines and President of the 1971 Constitutional Convent Eon, died unei- 1 
pect&dly on June 14, 1971, to the deep sorrow and anguish of the Filipino 
people; 

WHEREAS, it is only fitting and proper that adequate arrangement 
be made for the holding of official necrological services ami a state funeral 
for the former President, commensurate with, the people s love and respect 
for him; 

NOW, THEREFORE I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by lsff, do hereby create 
a Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial, composed of the 


following; 

Hon, CARLOS P. ROMULO - Chainnau 

Secretary of Farcipm Affairs 

Hon, ALEJANDRO MELCHOR, JR ■*.. Member 

Executive Secretary (or his representative) 

Hon, JUAN PONCE ENRILE Member 

Secretary of NaMmud Defense {or his represen tative) 

Horn LORENZO M, TAN AD A Memhoi 

Rcprese the Senate 

Hon. JOSE D. ASPIRAS .. - Mom her 

Representing the Houiie of Reprcaentnfivcs 

Hun. ENRIQUE M. FERNANDO - Member 

Repress the Supreme Court 

Hon, GILBERTO M DUAVIT , ..... . Member 

Representing the Constitutional Convention 

Hon. LINO CHATTO - - - Member 

CiOIV-THOr, Province of Roller 

Hon. BENJAMIN ROMUALDEZ ... Member 

Governor, Province of Leyte 


The Committee is hereby empowered to create such sub-committees 
as may ho necessary to assist it in the performance of its functions. 

Done in the City of Manila, this 14lh day of June, m thq year of Our 
Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one. 


(Sfid.) 


By the president: 

(Sgd) ROBERTO V, REYES 
Acting Executive Secretary 


FERDINAND E. MARCOS 
President of the Philippines 


9 


r 



President Garcia and the then first Lady, Mrs. Leamla D. Garcia, made a happy couple an the 
dancefloor at the asollo tendered by friends for the First Lady al the Sty Hoorn, on Tuiv 16- 
] 9R5t. 


j 


SCVUNTK CoilCJHE&ij OI TILL Htfr-UBLIC 
OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Fourth Special Session J 

[SENATE RESOLUTION No, 231 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND AND SINCERE GRIEF OF THE 

SENATE UPON THE UNTIMELY DEATH OF FORMER PRESIDENT 

CARLOS P. GARCIA, AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADJOURNMENT OF 
THE SESSION IN TOKEN Or MOURNING AND RESPECT FOR HIS 

UNDYING MEMORY 

Whereas , iorrner President Carlos P, Gaicia died on June? M, 1971, 
at Ills residence nrt Bohol Avenue, Quezon City; 

Whebehs. former President Cartes P- Garcia in lne lifetime served his 
country with distinction, as Governor of Bohol, Congress-man, Senator, Vice- 
President of the Philippines, President of the Philippines for a number of 
years and incumbent President of the Constitutional Convention: Now, 
therefore, bo it 

Resolved, That the Senate express, a?; it hereby ok presses, its profound 
and sincere grief upon the untimely death oi former President Carlos P, 
Garcia; 

Resolved, further. That Iho Senate adjourn Us session lor tins day in 
token of rdomtiing and respect for his undying memory; anti 

devolved , Jjjjufly, That the Secielary of the Senate, be as he hereby 
is, directed Lo transmit a certified copy of Use Resolution [o (he bereaved 
family of the late former President Carlos P, Garcia, 

Adopted. June 15, 197 J 


P. S. R. No. 3G 


u 



President Cailos P, G-aicia pi spares to make the next move in a game o! chess, his acknowledged 
lovotite past-time, in which lie excelled. 



Seventh Congress or thh R public' 
or the Philippines t 

Fourth Special Session 


(K R. No, 78 1 


{RESOLUTION No. 34 1 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND CONDOLENCE OF THE 

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON THE DEATH OF HONORABLE 

CARLOS P. GARCIA AND PROVIDING THAT THE HOUSE ADJOURN 
IN TOKEN OF MOURNING. 

WHEREAS, Honorable Carlos P. Garcia passed away in Quezon City. 
On June l4 r 1971; 

WHEREAS, Honorable Cotlos P r Garcia, as Member of the House oi 
Representatives for the Third District of the Province of Eobol in the Seventh 
and Eighth Philippine Legislature, as Provincial Governor of Bohol, as 
resistance leader during the Japanese occupation oi the Philippines, as 
Senator of the Philippines, as Vice’President of Ihe Philippines, as Secretary 
of Foreign Affairs, as President of the Philippines, and as President of the 
1971 Constitutional Convention, labored with singular love, dedication and 
patriotism lor his country; and 

WHERE AS, his last thoughts before he died in line oi duty was of his 
country and hiu ler&t plaa and pray or was far its unity: Now, therefore, be if 

Absolved by the House of Raprescniotivo^ To express, as it hereby does 
express, the moat profound sorrow over the passing away oi Ihe Honorable 
Carlos P. Garcia, patriot and statesman; and 

Resolved, further. That a copy of this resolution be transmitted to the 
family of the deceased, and that upon adoption hereof the House adjourn 
in token of mourning. 


Adopted, June 15, 1971. 


Republic oi the Philippines 
1971 CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 
Manila 


RESOLUTION NO 7 

RESOLUTION OF CONDOLENCE OVER THE DEATH 
OI’ PRESIDENT CARLOS I\ GARCIA OF THE 
1371 CONSTITUTION Al, CONVENTION 

WHEREAS, on June J£ h 1971 the Honorable Carlos P. Gcrrcia suddenly 
died ol a Jiectrl attack a I Ins residence in Bohol Avenue. Quezon City, 
Philippines, barely 72 hours after his historic election and assumption ol 
the Presidency of this Constitutional Convention; 

WHEREAS, by the untimely demise of its President this Convention has 
lost a beloved leader, and the Filipino nation, a hue Filipino, an outstanding 
statesman, a sincere and patriotic citizen and a hue servant of his people: 

WHEN LAS, our beloved President hud devoted a greai pari of his 74 
years in selfless, dedicated and sincere service to our country and people 
as a teacher, Representative, Governor, Senator, Vice President and later 
President of the Republic, and finally as President of this Convention; 

WHEREAS, notwithstanding his recurrent heart ailment and against the 
ad,vioe of ills physician President Garcia heeded the damn oi his coiteli 
merits lo run as a Delegate to the Convention declaring that this would bn 
r, my lined acl of service lo our people' 1 : 

H 

WHEREAS, in President Garcia ore embodied and enshrined the very 
virtues and sterling qualities which this Convention seeks to inculcate in 
our people a passionate love of country, sincerity of purpose, devotion 
!o duty, courage of conviction, spirit of sacrifice, sobriety, honesty and 
integrity, selfless dedication, nobihty and humility; 

WHEREAS, although this Convention and the Filipino people- have 
suffered an irreparable loss in die untimely death of Carlos P. Garcia, poet, 
plii losophoL , guerrilla leader, outstanding statesman and a true Filipino, 
nevertheless his colleagues m this Convention will forever consider him as 
ujt inexhaustible fountain oi id spiral ion in their herculean and awesome 
lusk oi adopting a Constitution which lo him should embody and give 
r (?rr]i*fr I ion to the fondosi hopes, cherished ideals fmd Inghesl aspiratinni 
of our people; 11 


4 


WHEREAS, the. greatest honor which iho Delegates can render unto 
ihetr departed leader is to answer his plea lor unity, which in fact his 
sudden death has accomplished because of then common griel, and hi^ 
stirring call lor sursum cordo — to lilt our hearts in soilless and dedicated 
•■service la Cad, country and people; 

NOW. THEREFORE. BE IT RESOLVED BY THE 1971 CONSTITUTIONAL 
CONVENTION Of THE PHILIPPINES IN SESSION ASSEMBLED; 

That, deeply and profoundly mourning the irreparable loss of its dear 
President Carlos P. Garda, it oilers, as it hereby offers, its sinceresl con- 
dolence and deepest sympathy to his family: 

Thai the Convention enjoins all Filipinos and their fellow men ia mourn 
I lie untimely departure of ilreii President arid to join the Delegates in solemn 
prayers for the eternal repose of his soul: 

Thai immediately filler the adoption of this Resolution I he Convention 
shall adjourn out of respect and in affectionate esteem of its beloved 
leader and convene on the day of his Interment for the necrological services 
as a final tribute lo him from his dear colleagues; and 

That copies of tins Resolution duly signed by all the members of Iho 
Convention shell be sent to the bereaved family of the late President, 

UNANIMOUSLY APPROVED at Manila. Philippines, this 14th day of 
june, in the year of our Lord, 19?!. 

A nested to by; MARIA CLARA L. LOliRtGAl 
Acting Secretary 


15 


SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES 

PRESIDENT GARCfA^ FUNERAL AND BURIAL 

IS June mi (Tne&daH) 

Sbllfl aan. — Family Muss at Residence 

T: OQ p.m. — From Residence to Constitutional Con vent ion Hall, Manila Hold 
4: 00 p.m.-— Mass at Constitutional Convention Hall 

Iff June 1971 t H edncwlajiir) 

■|;00 p.m. —At Con&litutLcma) Convention Hall 

11 Jtitic 1911 { Thursday) 

H:(KJa.m. — Necrological service* at Const I ut( tonal Convention Hull 
3: IKI — From Const ilulional Convention Hall to Muhicunang 

i£ June 1971 ( Friday ) 

— Still at Malap aSang 

It: 00 a. tu. — Mas?, celebrated by Hulino J. Cardinal Santos 

Htiimtly to lie delivered by Bishop Epifnnia S urban 

19 June 1971 { Snl urdfltf J 

a.m.—From Malacariang In Nichols Air Base for airlift to Tagbilaran, 
Bohol 

1 0 : ?nfl a.m, — At Tagbilaran Airport 
1 1 : 00 n.m.' — At Residence 

p.nc — To Cultural Center for necro log teal services 
4:3(1 p.m- — To Tasbiiarari Cathedral for Mei^s 
6:00 p.m. — To Provincial Capitol {lie in state) 


16 


20 J ii nr 1971 (Sunthttf) 


inn. — Leave Tagbilaran for TaJibon Parish Church 
(By helicopter) 

12rUI> ihhul — Return u> Provincial Coiiiluh T&gbilarsn 
(Lil 1 iai slate) 


21 ill tit Ht7l ( i>J snuitTif ) 

Ei: 30 a,m. — To Tagbilaran Cathedral for Muss 
J>:(H) ann. — Depart Tagbilaran for Manila 
11:0(1 a.m. — Arrive Manila direct to Congress 


22 Jane 1971 {Tuesday) 

7: nil inn. — State necrological services 

Speakers: 

1. President Pro-Tempure of the Constitutional Convention 
Sol ero Laurel 

2 Chief Justice Roberto Concepckm 
:i. Speaker Cornel io Villareal 
I. Senate President Gil Fnyat 
j. President Ferdinand FI. Marcos 

11:00 a,m. — To Manila Cathedral for Mii^ — celebrated by Rufino J. Cardinal 
Santos 

1 11: 30 am — To Libingan Ng Mga Bay an i 

11; 30 Ei.riL. — At Libingon Gale (Foot procession from gale to burial site) 

]^: (10 Noon — intermenl 


17 


CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION HALL 
Manilla Hotel 


rJmriwJtfjtir. -fame 17. 0)7 1 

[, ECUMENICAL SERVICES ten lx- poHipithl-^ by Delegate Prie.sf> 
Minsters, and Imams (Chairman — Delegate Fr. Pacsflon OrlbO 


A. OVERTURE 'Almdahao” 

Philippine Navy Band 

lit. INVOCATION 

Delegate Fr, Facilku Qni/ 

IV. ORATION 

Delegate Teopisto Cfuingona 

V. ORATION 

Delegate Oscar Ledesma 

VL ORATION 

Delegate Damocao Alunte 

HYMN 

Choral group 

Vll. ORATION 

Delegate RauJ. Manglaput 

VTR r ORATION 

Delegate Diasdado iVTacapagal 

IX. ORATION 

Delegate So ter o Laurel 

X. “BALAJv* 

Delegate Natal to Bacalso 


\L RESPONSE \ttv, Fernando C Campo*: 

XII. £I PILIPINAS KONG MAHAL s Philippine Navy Band 


IS 


Constitutional Convention Mali 
schedule of vigil 


iy UO 

to 

S: 

m 

ip.m 

Group 

r 

M: IK) 

to 

10: 

m 

pjn. 

i L oup 

ii 

111 MO 

111 

12: 

00 

p,m 

Cn aip 

in 

111; (111 

to 

1: 

uu 

a.m 

Group 

[V 

LMI 

to 

2: 

«u 

a.m 

Group 

V 

2: 01) 

to 

IS: 

tin 

1MB. 

Grwp 

VI 

Oil 

to 

1: 

no 

a.m, 

i it oup 

vn 

4:00 

to 

i>: 

ihi 

FJ.Itj 

Gro up 

VIII 

tir OU 

to 

& 

ou 

a,m. 

Group 

IX 

S: OU 

lo 

10; 

uo 

a. in. 

Group 

X 

lo mi 

to 

12; 

;EIU 

noon 

Group 

XI 

12:00 

in 

2; 

;IK) 

p.m 

G roup 

m 


DulegaU Ramon Eneamticicu ' 
DoloigaU Antonin He Gu/man 

Delegate Hoherson Alva re/; 

Delegate Dome trio Quirino 

Delegate Mereeditas Teodmu 
Delegate Cesar Serapin 

Delegate Cetrerino Padua 
Delegate Reynaldo Fajxu-th 

Delegate Oseai Leviste 

Delegate Rioxirdn Quint' 

Delegate LjH:i do Lima 
Delegate Clemente Abtlildo 

Delegate Emilio tie In Cm? 

Delegate Manuel Mai line? 

Delegate Margarita Teves 
Delegate Jems Garcia 

Delegate Domingo Volo.su 
Delegate Valeriana Yanelia 

Delegate .hi Mo Oxnim- 

Delegate Liningdlng Pnngandaman 

Delegate Jo.se No I led o 
Delegate Dante Satraga 

Delegate Ffciberto Misa 
Delegate '\n tan to Oil node 


Committee; on Vicil 

Delegate Rey Villa— Chairman 

Delegate Jose P. Leviste, Jt — Viee-ChaiirnMi 

Delegate Richard Gordon — 

Delegal' A M um BarMoro — Meinbn 
Delegate Gabriel Yniguez — Member 
Delegai. Beniamin Revet — MernHei 


19 


Malacanamgi Palace 
SCHEDULE OF OFFICIAL VIGIL 


3: Oft 4: 00 p.m. 

4: 110 p r m.— 5:00 p m, 

5:00 p.m- (5:00 p.m. 

Hr (M3 p, in, 7:00 pjii. 
7: 00 p.m,- 8:00 p.m. 

thftll pin.- 9:00 p.m. 

0:00 pm,-) 1:0ft p.m. 

11:00 p. tn .-12: 00 

(midnight) 


12:00 - 1:00 a.in. 

(midnight) 

1:00 turn.- 2:00 a,m, 

2:00 a.]ii - 00 amu 

3:00 iun,- 4:00 a.m, 
4:00 a.m.- 5:00 a.m, 
5: 00 a m,- 6: Oft a,m, 
0:00 a.m,— 7:00 a„m. 
7: (M3 a,m t - 8; 0ft a. in. 
00 ;un,— 9; 00 u.m, 

!1:00 am .-10:0ft ».m. 


THURSDAY, J 13 VIE IT, 14171 

The President: of the Phil ippines and members uf 
his family and stall 

The Viet President of the Philippines and meim 
hers of his family and staff 

Former President Diosdado Macapagal and mem- 
bers of his former cabinet 

The Senate President and members of the Senate 

The Speaker and members of th House of Rep- 
resentatives 

The Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the 
Supreme Court 

The President Protempore and Delegates to the 
Constitutional Convent ion 

Members of the Cabinet, the Auditor General 
and other officials with Cabinet rank, Malacahang 
Press Corps, including members of the Corps who 
covered the late President 

FRIDAY, JUNE IS, 1171 

The Presiding Justice and Associate Justices of 
the Court of Appeals 

The Chairman and members of (ho Commission 
on Elections 

The Undersecretaries of Departments and other 
oil k: sals with the rank of undersecretary 

Philippine Diplomatic officials 

Judge* of the Court of Tax Appeals 

Commissioner-; of (he Public Service Commission 

Judge* of Courts of First Instance 

Judges of the Court of Industrial Relations 

Judge* of I he Court of Agrarian Relations and 
Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court 

The Chief of Staff and Commanders uf the Major 
Services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, 
and Bureau Directors under (he Depart men) uf 
National Defense 

AI?P General QfHeor.y who served during Presi- 
dent Carlos P. Gnrek’s term of office 


20 


10:00 iirin.-ll : 00 a.nn 

12.00 - 1; nt) p.m. 

(llOQIl) 

1:00 p.m — 2: 00 p„m. 
2:00 pun. 3:00 p.m. 

3:00 p.tu,- 1:0(1 p.tu 

1:00 p.m.- 5:00 p.m. 

5:00 p.in.- 0: (HI p.m. 

0:00 p.m.- 7:00 p.m. 

7:00 p.m,- 8: 00 p.m. 

8: 00 pun,- 0:00 p.m. 

0:00 p. in— 10: 00 p.m. 

10: l|0 p.m.— 11:00 p.m. 

11:00 p, in— 12:00 

(midnight) 


Provincial Governors 

Department of Foreign A flairs 

Tile Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices ul 
the Department of Finance 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices <>\ 
the Department of Justice and the Solicitor 
Gene rfil 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of 
the Department of Agriculture and Natural 
Resources 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of OFF, res of 
the Department of Public Works and Commu- 
nications 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices uf 
the Department of Education 

The Bureau Directors and Hoads of Offices ol 
tile Department uf Labor 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of 
the Department of Health 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Officer of 
the Department ut Commerce Eind Industry 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of 
the Department of General Sc r vices 

The Bureau Directors and Heads of Offices of 
the Department oF Social Welfare 

The General Managers of Corporations under 
the Office of Economic Coordination 


SATURDAY, JUNE HI. 1971 


12:00 - 1:00 a.m. 

(midnight) 

1: {10 a.tn.“ 2:0(1 a.m, 

2:00 a.m.— 5:00 a.m. 
3:110 a.m 1:00 a.m, 
■t:U0 a.m— 5:00 n.tn, 

5:00 a.m.— 0:00 a.m. 

ff:00 a.m.- 7:00 a.m. 

7:00 a.m.- 3:00 a.m. 


The Mayors, Vice Mayors and the Members of the 
Municipal Board of Manila and Qucj^on City 

Vetera ns Federation of the Philippines headed 
by Colonel Simeon C, Medulla 

Federation I utei national de Abogudas 

The Knights of Hizal 

Philippine Law School and Alumni (Alma muter 
of former President Carlos P. Garcia) 

The Heads of Offices under the Office of the 
President 

Cabinet Members. Undersecretaries of former 
President Carlos P. Garcia 

The President of the Philippines and Members 
uf his Cabinet 


21 


NECROLOGICAL SERVICES 
I'lLTUKAI, OlNTEtL TaUBM .A t< A A Cm 
Sitiuvdiiit. June Hi. tU7t< til jmji. 


1 ITS MFMORIAM Third PC Band 

!| INVOCATION Julio Cardinal Rosales 

III. ORATION Delegate Diogenes Dorp 

2nd DisIriH of Bohol 

IV ORATION .......... . t Hon. Venancio P. luting 

City Mayor 
Tagbiiaran City 

V. ORATION . . Hon. TeucLum Galago i 

RepresDnl alive, 3rd Di si riel 
Bohol 


VI. **AVK MAB1A” , 

VII, ORATION 

VIII RESPONSE 

IX “NEARER MY GOT) TO THEE' 


Mrs. Maria Et? Ltimayag 

Hon. Lino I. Cliatto 
Provincial Gu^ ernur til Bohol 

Ain . Torn ancle C. Campos 

Third PC Band 


22 


NECROLOGICAL SERVICES 


Session Hall, House 

of Representatives 

T'm'.sfJfp/, -J if u-e- i'l. 

fSUf fid 7:3ft 

1 IX \tEMO]R J AM —OP fi2, Nn - 
bi, Buenaventura 

PbjJjpiMLii- Army Band 

11 INVOCATION 

Most Rev. Mnnaiui Gnreos Gwviola 

III, ORATION 

Hon, Sot era Laurel 
Frew tt rut Prat r-mpor j 
C o? i -s’f ? Ni [ i o na f Cm \ re?i r i-m 

IV, ORATION - 

lion. Koberlu Concepcion 

Chief Justice of thr Supreme Conn 

V. ORATION 

Hun, Coriielio Villareal 

.S"p(4)ftri‘ flfulwC f tf Ifiqirc^i-U fmhjKv 

VI. ORATION 

Hon, Gil J. Fuyal 
JVrisrdexj tt r flu- Senat* 

VU -BAKASIN MO SA GUN IT A" 
bv Tony Maique/ and 
NASA SA TYO + 

l>y Leupolda Silot — 

i.VIr Aranda Sigmon, Reyna 
1 Accompanied on the organ bv 
Kelly Colonia l 

♦ 

vm ORATION 

His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos 
FVcsidouf of die Philippines 

IX, NEARER MY GOD TO THEE' 
by L Mason _ 

Philippine Arnij Ban a 


ftj 


Session Hau, ( House of Representatives 

SCHEDULE OF VIGIL 

(SENATE) 

June 21 . tH7l ( Monday j 

12:0[) noon — LOO p.m, — Sen. Lorenzo M. Tanada 
1:00 p.m. — 2: OH p.m. — Sen. Lorenzo Sumulong 
2:00 p.m. — 3:00 p.m.— Sen. Arturo Tnlentino 
.3; (ID p.m, — 4:00 p.m* — Sen. Emmanuel Pelara 
4:00 p,rn, — 5:00 p 4 nt. — Sen. Jovilo Salonga 
5:00 p.m.— 6:00 p.m. — Sen. Magnolia Anton inn 
6:00 p.m.— 7:00 p.mu — Sen. Helena Benitez 
7:00 p.m*— 3:00 p in. — Sen Eva Estrada Kalaw 
3:00 p.m. — 0:00 p.m, — Sen. Jose W Dloltnn 
0:00 p.m, — 10:00 p.m.— Sen, Genaio Magsaysay 
10:00 p.m .—11:00 p m. — Serb, Wenceslan R. Lagumhay 
11:00 p.m.- — 12: 00 m.n.“Sen, Salvador Laurel 
12:00 m,n. — 1:00 a.m. — Sen. Rene Espina 

June 22. f,97l (Tuesday) 

1:00 a.m. — 2:00 a,m. — Sen, Sergio Qsmefsa, Jr. 

2:00 a.m. — 1:00 a,m.— Sen. Leonardo Perez 
2:00 a m.— 4:00 a,m. — 

4:00 a.m.— 5:00 a.m. — 

5:00 a.m. — 6:00 a.m. — Sen. Benigno Aquino, Jr, 
fi:00 a.m. — 7:00 a.m.— Sen. Dnminador Aytona 

7:00 am.— — Senate President Gil J. Pnyat 

— Senate President Pro Tempore Jose J, Roy 
—Minority Floor leader Sen. Gerardo Roxa<t 
—Sen. Alejandro Almendras 


24 


SCHEDULE OF VIGIL 
(HOUSE or rffhesentativksi 

fthmtiutj, June 21, 1071 


11. -flW a.m. — 12:00 noon 

Hon. Jose D, Aspiras 
Hon. Niconor E. Yniguev, 

Hon. Pablo A. MaLasarte 
Hon. Mohammad All Dimaporn 
Hon. Carmelo Z, Bar Wo 

12, ‘flfl mam — 1:00 p.w. 

Hon, Jorpe A. Abnd 
Hon, Roque R. Ablan, Jr. 

Hon. Felipe J. Abrigo 
Hon, Aguedu F. Agbayani 
Hon. Juliano A, Alhft 

1:00 p . iH . — 2:00 p . wt , 

Hon. Rodolfo B, Albano., Jr, 
Hon. Jose TVL Alberto 
Hon. Felipe B, Almazan 
Hon, liidanan M, Amii 
Hon, Rafael C. Aquino 

2:00 p.iro — 3-00 p + »t. 

lion, Felipe B. Adelina 
Hon. Ramon D. Ba^atsing 
Hon, Gaudeneio Bodnya 
Hon. Emerito S. Calderon 
Hon. Ferinin Z, Caram, Jr. 

3:00 p . tn . — p . Hr . 

Hon, Natalio P. Castillo 
lion. Ltieas V. Canton 
Hon, Vie ente M, Carl ties 
Hon. James L. Chkmgbiun 
Hon, William L. Chiongbian 


4:00 jj.mi. — 5:00 p.m. 

Hon. Joaquin E. Chipeco 
Hon, Eduardo M. Cojnangcu, Jr. 
Hon. Angel D. Concepcion 
Hon. Amando D„ Cope 
Hon. Andres A. Cosalan 

5:00 p.m.—GMO 

Hon. Raul A, Daza 
Hon. Antonio M. Diaz 
Hon. Irfopuldo D. Diaic 
Hon, MiLcacAiia R. Dirtiaporo 
Hon. Roberto C- Diokno 

0:00 p,m. — 7 d3® p.m. 

Hon. Tito M, Dupayit 
Hoti, Ramon M. Dura no 
Hon, Salvador R. Encinas 
Hon, Mbises A. Escuela 
Hon. Emilio R. Espinosa, Jr. 

7:00 p.m.- — #:0i) p. m . 

Hon, Robert B. Estrella 
Hon, Ramon H. Felipe. Jr. 

Hon., Cesar M. Fortich 
Hon. Felix A. Fuentebella 
Hon. Teodoro B. Galagar 

S:00 p.nr.— “0:00 p.nr, 

Hon. Agustin M. Gatuslao 
Hon, Hep tali A. Gonzales 
Hon. Eduardo R. Gullas 
Hon. Armando C, Gusli lu 
Hon, Carlos R. Imperial 


25 


*fM tt.m.—lfklm p m 


injm p.iH -n.ita p », 


Hum, Alfredo G. Lamm; 
Hon, Jose 13 Laurel. Jj 
Hon. Francisco B1 Lecaro? 
Hon. Rafael L>. Les&ispi 
Hon. Jose J Losdo, Jr. 


lion. Leonides C de Leon 
Hon. Expedite M. Leyisir 
Hoti, .7o>;r B Limj-ad 
Hon, Ai'tcmii> Al, Loyola 
Hon. Rnimilo JJ. Lnmatiig 


pju . — i rniilnitjlitf 

Hon Lamberto L Alaeiai 
Hon F Mad non a 

Hnn. Constantin K. Ma^Earu 
Hon. Artemio E. Mate 
Hon. Pedro C Medal in 


T'iic*d«]/, Jmif t<J7l 


J Jill ft, wi H — imh, 

Hon. Rogamauo M. Mercado 
Hon. K anion V. Milra, ,ir. 
Hon. Justiniano S. Montand 
Hnn. Roberto L. Mrintcliham 
Hon. Teodnlo C. Natividad 

2:(Hi fi.iri . — J:Wfl ft .in, 
Hun, Constant mu C Njiviira 
Hon. Jose P. Ncri 
Hon. Pablo V. Ocampo 
Hon. Joaquin Ortega 
Hon John H Osmcna 

:l:Wt a.nL — Jdifi mm, 
lion, Fernand, i V. Pajarill,. 
Hon, SflUpada K. Penilaltiii 
Hon, Mariano Pena florid a 
lion. Benjamin G. Perez 
Hon. DernoeriU) O I ? la / 


f:IWI fMii H — jJJfl ir.rrt. 
Hon. Cora/;nn V Priniieia. 1 ; 
lion. Jose G. Pnyat. Jr. 

1 Ih hi. David M, Pn/jun 
Hon, Francisco G. ffceyi 
lion. Rodolfo M, liivilln 
Hon. Pedro K. Roe 

5:(Ht a . mo 

lloii. Joaquin I?.. Roces 
Hon, Pablo R. Roman 
Hon. Rol>erto M, Sabido 
I lou. Guillermo E£. SuorUv 
Hon. Frisco F. Fan Juan 
Hon. Lorenzo F. Samienm 
a. tn. — J :tip a. in 

Hon. Lele.tino N. Sybieo. J 
Hun Gloria. M Tdbiami 
I Ton. Gndofiedo M. Tan 
Hon. Herminio C. Teves 
lion, Simeon Al. Valdez 
Hon Fernando I! Velose 


t Jin a an — $:Q& (i. im 


Hon. Marcel inn n VrtoFn 
lion Jose (U Venecia, Jj 
lion. Antonio f'. VLUjn 
Hon, Jose V Yap 
Hon. Enrique A. Z&ldnar 
Hon. Manuel A. Zosa 
Hon- Jose C Zulueta 


HONOR A FEY PALL BEARERS 


The President of the Philippines 
The Vie* 1 President of the Philippine!! 

The Former President oi Ihc Philippines 
The President of the Senate 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The President Fiotcmporc of the 1371 Con &tHu licit ml Cut iven Lion 
The Dean of the Diplomatic Missions 
The Chairman of (he Committee on State Funeral 
The Governor of Bohn! 


1971 Constitutional Convention 
PALLBEARERS 


Delegate Jesus Barrera 

ndtogalL- Edmnndu Cea 

Delegate Rosdlejf T r Urn 

Dolegtde -Tose Crmcepcinn, Jr, 

Delegate Angus to Syjuco 

Delegate Ramon Encamaeinn 

Delegate Vicente Pimentel 

Delegate Anaclcto Badoy, Jr, 

Delegate Emilio tie la Cruz' 

Delegate L minding Pangandaman 

Delegate M. A. T. Caparas 

Delegate Pedro Exmundo 


ORDER OF STATE FUNERAL PROCESSION 

From Manila Cathedral tu the Lisin can nc mga Bayani 


Motorcycle Escort — Manila Police Department 
Mobile Patrol — Mimiln Polite Department 
One Company of Manila Police Department 
Military ELscort Commander and Staff 
Camp Aguinaldo Band 
Regimental Commander and Stall" 

Composite Regiment 
Presidential Guards Battalion 
Chaplain and Vicar General 
Scout Car nulling CAISSON 
CAISSON 

The President of the Philippines 

Immediate Members of the family of the late President 

The Vice President of the Philippines 

Former Presidents and First Ladies 

The President of the Senate 

Tlic Speaker of the House of Representatives 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The President Protempore of the Constitutional Convention 

The Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions 

Members of Ihr Cabinet 

Members ot the Senate 

Members of the House uf Representative}. 

The Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 

Delegates to the Constitutional Convention 

Presiding Justice and Associate Justices, Court of Appeals 

The Chairman and Commissioners of the Commission on Elections 

National Committee on Funeral Arrangements 

City Mayor of Manila 

Members of the Cabinet of the late President Carlos P. Garcia 
and other former Cabinet Members 
Governors and City Mayors 
Ileadi uf the Armed Forces of the Philippines 
Other relatives and close associates of th-c late President 
Delegation from Bohol 


MESSAGES OF CONDOLENCE 


PbesIHSWT FERDINAND E. MARCOS 

The death at President Car Jos P- Garcia leaves a deep wound upon 
I be entire Filipino nation. 

He died in the highest service to I he nation, presiding over the saver- 
c i(j n effort la rewrite a Filipino Constitution for the Filipino people. That 
his life should end at the beginning of this great effort makes our loss even 
greater, lor now we can only miss the sobriety, patience, dedication and 
wisdom that were among the greatest qualities of iho man. 

As President of the Republic, ho fought for the primacy of Filipino 
interests, embodying his credo in his famous J "Filipino First" doctrine. 

As President of the convention, ho vowed to give to the convention 
I lie full maturity and wisdom of his efforts in rewriting a Constitution that 
will be this nation's covenant with the future. 

On his death, the Filipino nation lost a true statesman and leader, a 
Filipino whoso greatest passion concerned, first and last, the wcll-baing of 
the Filipino nation- 


Vice President FERNANDO LOPEZ 

President Garcia's deqth was a tragic Joss to the nation. For out 
people arc passing through confused times and his noble, selfless and 
dedicated services were urgently needed. 

His election as President of I he Constitution a] Convention made him 
the symbol of unity of a people divided by ideological and partisan strife. 
There was hope among the many that the new Constitution and the leadership 
iit would inspire would put an end to the debilitating and almost suicidal 
ilruggles that daily consume the energies ol our people and blind them to 
visions of greatness ahead. And this hope was mainly because of the 
realization that the new Constitution would bear Ihe imprint of the states- 
manship, tho experience,- the patriotism, and menial honesty of President 
Garda- 


29 


He realized all this, and against the counsel of loved ones that his 
already frail health would be further endangered, lie accepted the challenge 
of seeking the leadership of the Convention, His work ended before it began. 
But if lie did not complete the rewriting ol the Constitution, ho performed 
perhaps a greed er task- ’-provided us the example of a public servant whose 
lirsl sacrifice in the pursuit of national welfare is himself. Ho loved his 
people more than himself and his example should begin to bother our 
collective tend individual Consciences, 

Sew/ite Phesidemt GIL I. PLfYAT 

Few Filipinos have been given the opportunity far service to the people 
as the late President Guilos P. Garcia. He was elected by the people of 
Bohol as dieir congressman and governor. The country voted him Senator r 
Vico President and President- A lew days before liis death lie was elected 
President of she Constitutional Conve alien al 1971, All of these positions 
or distinctions were given Lo him by the people because the people 
(ell lie wk:tk a FUipino who, when given a task consistently performed ably 
and with dedication. And even though he was given the opportunity to serve 
in various positions of distinction, one characteristic of the late President 
Garcia was that he never lost the common touch. He was his usual humble 
person, approachable and a Jr tend of all, 1 knew him since I was a student 
in my elementary grade and he was taking up law. He was boarding in one 
of my father's houses in Intramiiros. 

The people will long remember, and I hope will never forget, Garcia the 
nationalist. His loyalty la his party should be cm example to many con tem- 
poral y politic 1 on* T It will always be a matter of conjecture for all oi us 
whether destiny was kind to him or npi when he died a few days after his 
election as President of the Constitutional Convention of 1371. One thing we 
are sure of, if lie would hove lived to complete his Iasi mission, he would 
have done so as a true Filipino and as a dedicated and patriotic public 
servant, two attributes that chai aclerized his entire career. 

S^DAKDiE CORNEL! O T, VILLAREAL 

Please accept our heartfelt sympathy for you and your family in your 
loss, which is so areal that no words can express what Mrs. Villareal and 
1 wish lo say. We can only send you our love and hope ihat you and 
your beloved family will be given strength to been your sorrow bravely. 

You lost a beloved husband. ! lost a friend, but the country has lost a 
good man, a great leader, and a great Filipino, 

From a humble school teacher, he rose lo the highest position within 
the gill of our people. He was a real nationalist but a brother to every 
man. His life was full of deeds, and because of this, and many more, bis 
memory will live long and forever in the hearts ol our people, 

Mrs. Villareal and my children join me in sending you our love and 
sympathy. 

Chief Justice ROBERTO CONCEPCION 

President Carlos P, Garcia died as he had lived in the service of his 
people. A grateful nation grieves his untimely demise, for liis passing is, 
indeed, a tragic, irreparable loss, In those limes of turmoil, we needed liis 
wisdom and patience, his sense o| direction arid equanimity, his serene 
fortitude and steadfast adherence fa the Rule of Law, his spirit of dedication 
to the commonweal and abiding faith in the Divine Providence, May his 


30 - 


memory shine through ihe years as a beacon light to ail his countrymen, 
whom he loved so much. 

* Fonwrit President DIQEDADQ MACAPAGAL 

The demise of President Carlos P, Garcia is an incalculable loss to the 
Convention and to (he nation. Twice it lias been my privilege to contend 
with him lor exalted posts. 1 defeated him Jor (he presidency in 1961, and 
[ came to have genuine esteem for him when I came to know him more 
thereafter. He defeated me far the presidency qf the Convention but I was 
not sorry because I Ml That he deserved the honor and responsibility. 

The Convention, will miss him but it will draw inspiration from the 
brief but splendid role that ho had played, Ho was tho Convention's hope- 
far unity: now his memory is our symbol of dignily, decency and duty, By 
his untimely passing,, we now realize the magnitude and nobility of things 
he stood for, and remembering him. We hope to rise above potty bickerings 
and place the national interest as the sole object of our Convention. 

EMktiton HIHQIllTO of Japan 

I deeply regret to learn ul the death of Mr. Cculos Garcia foimoi 
President of Ihe Philippines and hasten lo express to your Excellency my 
sincere sympathy ond condolences. 

Chief or State FRANCISCO FRANCO of Spain 

Iteciba vuoslra excel encia el tostimonio do mi senlido pesar con irlslo 
motivo fallecimienlo senor Carlos P. Garcia i lustre ox-Presidenle Pilipinas . 

President BENJAMIN HENRY SHEARBS of the Republic of Singapore 

I am deeply grieved to learn ol Lho death ai the Former Filipino Prosi’ 
dent Mr. Carlos P. Garcia, Please convey my deepest sympathy and 
condolence to the bereaved family. 

PniiME Minister EISAKU SATO of Japan 

I am deeply shocked and grieved at the news of the sudden demise 
of Former President C. P. Garda, great leader of tho Philippines. On behalf 
of the people and government of Japan, I wish to extend la your Excellency 
and through you to the family of the late President our most heartfelt con- 
dolences and sympathy an Ihe passing away of tho great statesman of 
your country. 

APOSTOLIC NUNCIO AND DEAN OF DIPLOMATIC CORPS 

Deeply grieved by sudden demise of fotmer Philippine President and 
Constitutional Convention President Carlas Garcia. In the name ol the 


31 


Diploma lie Corps accredited to Philippine Republic allow me to extend La 
you arid your dusting ilLGhed family l he sentiments of our expressive sympathy 
and solidarity in bereavement tor that noble figure. 

Apostolic Nunc to CARMINE RGCCG 

Having jusl heard to my deep sorry ol sudden decease ai your dear 
husband President Carlos Garcia whose generous and unselfish dedication 
to his country will be always greatfully remembered permit me to parfich 
pate in the grid of your distinguished family extending my profound con- 
dolences and special prayers lor eternal repose of his noble soul. 

Ambassador and Mrs, HENRY BYRQADE ot the United Slates 

When the sad news of the death of the President reached us Mrs. 
Byroade and I were shocked and saddened by this loss lo you and to the 
Philippines, Please accept our deepest sympathy. 

Ambassador ahd Mbs. HAN LIH-WU oi China 

Grieved by sad news of passing oi your distinguished husband who 
led Philippines al a crucial period guided l ho formation of SEATO and a 
great friend of China stop please accept our heartfelt condolence 

Ambassador TQSHIO UR ABE ol Japan 

Mrs. Urabe and myself were deeply shocked and grieved at the news 
of the sudden passing away of formei President Garcia, We should like 
to express our most sincere condolences and sympathy an the untimely 
demise of the late President with whom we have long enjoyed personal 
association and have always held in high esteem and admiration. The 
people of Japan will join the people of the Philippines in mourning at the 
loss of the great leader of your country. 

Ambassador KU5NO UTOMO of Indonesia 

It is indeed shacking not only to Eire Filipino people but also to 
friend® everywhere, lo note ol the passing of a great loader and s talesman - 
To us here in the Embassy and in our own community, and to his many 
friends in Indonesia, the late President Garcia has left an indelible memory. 
As we mourn for his passing we recall the many contributions he had 
rendered in the public service of his country and in the field of international 
relations. 

On this solemn occasion therefore, may l and Mrs, Kusno Utomo, on 
behalf ol the Staff Members of this Embassy and their ladies as woll as 
the Indonesian community and ol our own, convey our most heartfelt com 


32 


dolence to you for the untimely demise of your beloved husband. It is our 
hope that these expressions of commiseration will help assuage (lie deep 
sorrows you have on the President's passing. May he res! in peace, 

Ambassador JOHN CUftf.E of the United Kingdom 

The staff ol the Britannic Majeniy'ii Embassy join my wile and myself 
in sending you condolences in your groat loss. It was indeed a tribute to 
the late distinguished President to have been elected to preside over the 
historic Constitutional Convention and a Iragedy that he was not shared for 
this further public service. * 

Amraskadgb LY CH1NLY oi the Khmer Republic 

It is with profound sorrow that we have Jeartied of the decease of 
Hi* Excellency Carlos P. Garcia, your beloved husband and former President 
of Ihe Republic of the Philippines and incumbent President of the Constilu- 
t ional Convention. 

On the occasion of this cruel loss. may my wife and 1 be permitted Id 
express lo you. Madam, and your family our heartfelt condolences. 

Please accept, Madam. With my deepest respects, the assurances of 
my highest consideration. 

Ambassador and Mrs. JULIO MEWINO SALCEDAS of Portugal 

On this sad occasion we wish lo extend lo you and your family our 
sympathy and sincere condolences. 

Ambassador HAH YAACOB BIN MOHAMED of Singapore 

On behalf of my sell and Ihe embassy staff convey my dearest con- 
dolence lo you acid family on the demise of your beloved husband Presi- 
dent Carlos P. Garcia. 

Ambassador SE RYUN KIM of Korea 

We are deeply grieved lo learn of the dealh ol your beloved husband, 
Please accept our heartfelt condolences and sincere sympathies in your 
hour of bereavement. 

Ambassador and Mrs. LUIS MELQ LECARGS of Chile 

Mi sehora y yo hemas guedado profundamente impresicnados con el 
sensible fallecimiento del gran hgmbre publico y querido amigo Presidents 
Cgrlos P. Garcia. Mienlras enemos la oportunidad de veiia personalmente 
reciban ud. y todos las suyos nuefltras mas sentidas manifestaciones do 
condolencia. 


33 


Ambassador EUGENIO RUBING of fiqly 

With deep sympathy join mourning President who accepted njy 
credentials. 

Former Ambassador and Mrs, CHARLES E. BOHLEN oi the United States 

J 'My wife and I send you our deepest sympathy. 

Minister and Charge d'affaires ISABURO MUKUMOTQ 0 f Japgn 

With much sorrow I learned that your husband. President Carlos P. 
Garda, passed away lost night, June 14, 1871, 1 realised on his sudden 
dcalh how much he will bo missed and mourned in the country, for which 
he did so much as a most distinguished citizen. 

I wish to express to you my profound sympathy and sincere condolence 
on Uils sad occasion. 

Consul General ERNEST E. BlMKE of Israel 

Deeply shocked by the sudden and untimely demise of your dear 
husband stop pleaso accepl my most heartfelt sympathy and kindly convey 
same to all members of your family. 

Ambassador and Mrs. VICENTE ARENAS 

Kindly accept our deep condolences for the death of President Garcia 
and may the Lord bless his soul. 

Ambassador JOSE ALEJANDRINQ 

Embassy staff join me sending you and family our deepest sympathy 
and condolence on passing away oi Don Carlos whom I personally hold 
in highest esteem respect and admiration. His death is irreparable loss to 
Philippines, Wo hope you will have the fortitude to bear your grief. 

Ambassador MAURO CALINGO 

li is with deep sorrow that we have learned of the passing away of 
President Carlos P, Garcia, one of the truly great sons of the Philippines, 
who dedicated hie life ill the service of our people, His death has deprived 
our country of his wisdom and patriotism, especially now when we aro 
writing a new constitution for the Republic, The Embassy Staff join Mrs. 
Galingo and mo in conveying deepest condolences and sympathies. 

Delegate TEOPISTO GUINGONA, Jr., of Ruai 

Regardless of his faults as a human being, ex-Presidenl Garcta lived 
a simple life and remained a dedicated public servant to the interest of 
the Filipino people whom he had so much loved as soon from his onum 
ciaiion of the Filipino First Policy. 

His death, therefore, will be fell more by the people who have just 
last a great champ ion of their cause. 


34 


COMMITTEE] ON FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS 
AND BURIAL 


Chairman — Hon. Carlo:; P. Romulo 

Secretary of Foreign Affairs 
M ember# Hon. Roberto V. Keyca 

Acting Executive Secretory 
Kon T Juan Ponce Kurile 
Secretary ojF National Defense 

Hon, Lorenzo M. Tanada 
Representing the Senate 

Hon, Jose D, Aspir-U-s 

Representing the House of Representatives 
Hon. Enrique M- Fernando 
Representing the Supreme Ccmrf 
Hon. Gilberl/j M. Duavtt 
Representing the Constitutional Convent ion 

lion. Lino Chatto 
Governor, Province of Bohol 

Hon. Benjamin Romuuldez 
Governor, Province o/ Leyte 


CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION COMMITTEE 


Over-all Chairman — Delegate Gilbefctu Duavit 
O ver-cH Vice-Chairman — Delegate Antonin R, Tupaz 


Suh-C ommittees; 

Ecumenical Services — Delegate Gregorio Tingson 
Physical Arrangement — Delegate Pacifica A. Ortiz 
Reception and escort — Delegate Victor de la Scma 
Trip to Bohol jwrtietptrtion— Delegate Natalio Castillo 

Delegate Domoeao Alonlu 
Delegate Sergio Tocho 
D elegate Domingo Veloso 
Delegate Reseller Lim 
L Edison and Coordination with 

Over-all Committee — Delegate Arturo Facilicador 
Vigtl Arrangements — Delegate Reynaldo Villar 
Necrological Sendees — Delegate S Otero Laurel 
A ssiitonce— Delegate Ma, Clara L. Lobregat 


SENATE COMMITTEE 

Sen. Lorenzo M. Tafia do 
Sen, Lorenzo Sumulong 
Sen, Alejandro D. Almendras 
Sen. Dominader R. Ay tuna 
Sen. Benigno Aquino, Jr, 


HOUSE COMMITTEE 
Rep. Jose D. Axpira.s 
Rep. Meaner K Yniguez 
Rep. Muhammad Ali Dunaporo 
Rep, Pablo A, Malasarte 
Rep. Carmelo Z. Barbera 


35 




IK.i : ■ ■' 


► .. !• ■■ 

v*’ 1 1 u; ■ ■ 

'i *: ft* r . 


*: •' i 

* 

.... • - ■■ • .*_* 


J ■ : ' ' ; 

». ... v - - .* 

v* —v ... >. ; f r, 

,* V. 




















*' 


















- 

* ' , l ' ^ 



































/ 








