MorsivSNfi Lien, TO 


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 



Strorii 
of tlfP 

CooBtitotioMal ffiommtaatott 

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 
VOLUME ONE 


Prepared by the Editorial/Publication Unit 
under the supervision of 

Hon. FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary-General 




1 




CECILIA MUNOZ PALMA 
President 

The Constitutional Commission of 1986 



President of the Philippines CotmtanCT'' 
addressing the Inaugural Session of The 
tutional Commission of 1986, presided 
Vice-President Salvador //. Laurel. 






REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 

QUEZON CITY, METRO MANILA 

Itccorb of tl|c (ffonotitutionol (ff otnmtooion 

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 


HON. CECILIA MUNOZ PALMA 

President 

HON. AMBROSIO B. PADILLA 

Vice-President 

HON. NAPOLEON G. RAMA 
Floor Leader 


HON. JOSE D. CALDERON 

Asst. Floor Leader 

HON. FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary- Gen eral 

Hon. Yusup R. Abubakar 
Hon. Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
Hon. Felicitas S. Aquino 
Hon. Adolfo S. Azcuna 
Hon. Teodoro C. Bacani 
Hon. Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 

Hon. Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Hon. Joaquin G. Bernas 
Hon. Florangel Rosario Braid 
Hon. Lino O. Brocka 
Hon. Jose D. Calderon 
Hon. Crispino M. de Castro 
Hon. Jose C. Colay co 
Hon. Roberto R. Concepcion 
Hon. Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 

Hon. Vicente B. Foz 
Hon. Edmundo G. Garcia 
Hon. Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Hon. Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Hon. Alberto M.K. Jamir 
Hon. Jose B. Laurel, Jr. 

Hon. Eulogio R. Lerum 
Hon. Regalado E. Maambong 
Hon. Christian S. Monsod 


HON. AHMAD DOMOCAO ALONTO 
Asst. Floor Leader 

HON. ROBERTO M. SAN ANDRES 
Sergean t-A t-Arms 

Hon. Teodulo C. Natividad 
Hon. Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Hon. Jose N. Nolledo . ^ 

Hon. Bias F. Ople 
Hon. Ambrosio B. Padilla 
Hon. Cecilia Mufioz Palma 
Hon. Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Hon. Napoleon G. Rama 
Hon. Florenz D. Regalado 
Hon. Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 

Hon. Cirilo A. Rigos 
Hon. Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Hon. Ricardo J. Romulo 
Hon. Decoroso R. Rosales 
Hon. Rene V. Sarmiento 
Hon.' Jose E. Suarez 
Hon. Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Hon. Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
Hon. Christine Tan 
Hon. Gregorio J. Tingson 
Hon. Efrain B. Trefias 
Hon. Lugum L. Uka 
Hon. Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Hon. Bernardo M. Villegas 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


PABLO P. LIWANAG 
Chief, Editorial! Publication 

Editor in Chief 


HEIDI M. PASCUAL 

Supervising Editor 


Editors 


Avelina M. Atanacio 
Loma P. Manarang 


Josefina T. Tamayo 


Ma. Priscila O. Palmiano 
Herminia N. Saet 


Editorial Assistants 


Ligaya M. Cinco 
Teresita L. Cordial 
Remedios S. Esquivias 


Angeles S. Hamtig 


Yolanda A. Bacero 


Milagros G. Kagaoan 
Joseph Zeus A. Luna 
Ma. Lina Marciana C.T. Nario 

Indexers 

Fe B. Evanglista Preciosa I. Perez 

Typists 

Conchita A. Aquino Lydia Abad Malig 
Rhodora L. Pagayon 


ROBERTO P. NAZARENO 
Technical Assistant for Operations 


FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 
Secretary-General 


Table of Contents 


Plenary Sessions 

Pages 

R.C.C. No. 1 (June 2,1986) 1 

R.C.C. No. 2 (June 3,1986) 11 

R.C.C. No. 3 (June 4,1986) 35 

R.C.C. No. 4 (June 5,1986) 59 

R.C.C. No. 5 (June 6,1986) 69 

R.C.C. No. 6 (June 9,1986) 73 

R.C.C. No. 7 (June 10, 1986) 85 

R.C.C. No. 8 (June 11, 1986) Ill 

R.C.C. No. 9 (June 13, 1986) 141 

R.C.C. No. 10 (June 16, 1986) 145 

R.C.C. No. 11 (June 17, 1986) 157 

R.C.C. No. 12 (June 18, 1986) 173 

R.C.C. No. 13 (June 19, 1986) 179 

R.C.C. No. 14 (June 20, 1986) 193 

R.C.C. No. 15 (June 23, 1986) 197 

R.C.C.No. 16 (June 24, 1986) 211 

R.C.C. No. 17 (June 25, 1986) 219 

R.C.C. No. 18 (June 26, 1986) 237 

R.C.C. No. 19 (June 27, 1986) 257 

R.C.C. No. 20 (June 30, 1986) 263 

R.C.C. No. 21 (July 1,1986) 281 

R.C.C. No. 22 (July 2,1986) 301 

R.C.C. No. 23 (July 3,1986) 315 

R.C.C. No. 24 (July 7,1986) 335 

R.C.C. No. 25 (July 8,1986) 357 

R.C.C. No. 26 (July 9,1986) 383 

R.C.C. No. 27 (July 10, 1986) 421 

R.C.C. No. 28 (July 1 1, 1986) 449 

R.C.C. No. 29 (July 14, 1986) 471 

R.C.C. No. 30 (July 15, 1986) 527 

R.C.C. No. 31 (July 16, 1986) 599 

R.C.C. No. 32 (July 17, 1986) 667 

R.C.C. No. 33 (July 18, 1986) 719 

Appendices 

Rules of the Constitutional Commission of 1986 781 

. Committee Report No. 1 on the Preamble 

to the Constitution 788 


at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on May 12, 1981 789 

Joint Working Draft on the Bill of Rights 794 

Proposed resolutions approved on Third Reading 797 






7^i 


* .,* ,w ^ . 0 

y»« ?#• 


Sv. ■.!:{. '■ ■'^'"' ;■ ■*' ■'• 


r j 





'»■ ♦ « ♦ 


. « ■* ■* 

.-^V 

V 

•wi. 

* • 


:^P- 

. . f • » / 4 



t#* 

~J-i 

|n » 

J ^ 

f* 'v^t f ^ 

'm 

.V. ‘ * 

•4 '■ * /» 



Vti 



> f • • 


1 1 >»)- ■ ‘ 




f 










t 


1 


..A 


■ i 

J 


i 




REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 

QUEZON cmr. metro Manila 


^ccorb nf tlje CTonotitutfonol fiTommiosiott 

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 


R.C.C. NO. 1 
Monday, June 2, 1986 


At 10:01 a.m., the processional began with the entry 
into the Session Hall of the Members of the Constitu 
tional Commission of 1986. 

Then, preceded by the Acting Sergeant-at-Arms 
bearing the Mace, the Vice-President of the Philippines 
entered the Session Hall followed by the Acting ecre 
tary-General of the Commission. 

The honor guards carrying the National and the 
Constitutional Commission colors entered the ession 
Hall. 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 10:05 a.m., the Vice-President, the Honorable 
Salvador H. Laurel, opened the session. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. By virtue of the powers 
vested in me under Proclamation No^9, \ 
open this Inaugural Session of the Constitutional Com- 
mission of 1 986. 

For the purpose of this Inaugural Session, I would 
like to announce that at a preliminary meeting of the 
Members of the Constitutional Commission a few days 


ago, the following were elected: 

The Honorable Napoleon G. Rama as Acting Floor 
Leader. (Applause) 

The Honorable Jose D. Calderon as Acting Assistant 
Floor Leader. (Applause) 

The Honorable Ahmad Domocao Alonto as Acting 
Assistant Floor Leader. (Applause) 


Professor Flerida Ruth Pineda Romero as Acting 
Secretary-General. (Applause) 

Attorney Roberto M. San Andres as Acting Sergeant- 
at-Arms. (Applause) 

As temporary Chairman ot this Constitutional Com 
mission, my duty is simple and brief. Borrowing the 
words of my late father. Dr. Jose P. Laurel, who, 51 
years ago, also presided over the Constitutional Conven- 


tion of 1935 as its temporary Chairman, I quote: “My 
duty today is simply to preside over this body to enable 
it to elect a permanent Presiding Officer or President of 
this body.” 

But before we proceed, I would like to state for the 
record that the Members of the Constitutional Com- 
mission now present here were all chosen by President 
Corazon C. Aquino for their “probity, independence of 
mind, nationalism and patriotism.” While their probity, 
independence of mind and nationalism are yet to be re- 
affirmed, I believe that they have already demonstrated 
a glimpse of their patriotism by agreeing — I repeat, by 
agreeing — not to run for any elective office in the first 
local and national elections to be held under the Consti- 
tution and by agreeing not to accept any appointment 
to any government position while the Commission is in 
session and for at least one year after the completion of 
their work. 

Such self-denial can only earn for them the necessary 
initial credibility that is so essential to the writing of a 
constitution. The writing of a constitution, truly re- 
flective of the sentiments, ideals and aspirations of our 
people, is the most important task of this generation. It 
is a task that will place our nation, long derailed by 14 
years of martial misrule, back on the tracks of constitu- 
tional democracy, which is the key to political stability 
and economic recovery. Everything that will take place 
in this Constitutional Commission will be important. 
Every word uttered during its deliberations may later be 
cited to bring out the true intention and spirit of a 
disputed word or phrase. 

For this reason, the entire proceedings will not only 
be recorded; it will be broadcast live by radio and tele- 
vision. And so the entire nation, if not the entire world, 
will be watching, aware that the constitution being 
fashioned will be the constitution of the future, the 
constitution of our children and grandchildren. In the 
language of a great jurist, the constitution that you will 
fashion will be henceforth binding on both rulers and 


2 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


people, equally in war and in peace, and it will cover 
with the shield of its protection all classes of men at all 
times and under all circumstances. 

To the Members of the Constitutional Commission 
who are here now, and whom I would like to refer to as 
patriots - to the patriots now here assembled — let us 
now bow our heads in prayer as we ask the Good Lord 
to enlighten your minds so that you may pour out into 
the writing of our fundamental law the noblest thoughts 
of our valiant race. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody will please re- 
main standing to sing the Philippine National Anthem. 

Everybody remained standing to sing the National 
Anthem. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Please remain standing for 
the invocation, which will be ecumenical, to be led by 
the Rev. Cirilo Rigos of the Protestant Church, His 
Eminence, Ricardo Cardinal Vidal of the Roman 
Catholic Church, Dean Adriel O. Meimban of the Iglesia 
ni Cristo, Bishop Sotero Mitra and Dean Abdul Raffih 
Sayedy of the Islamic faith. 

INVOCATION 

CARDINAL VIDAL. The Lord be with you. Let us 
pray: 

God, our Father 

We, the sovereign Filipino people, 
stand in Your presence to pray. 

We pray especially and exclusively 
for each and for all of the 
fifty distinguished Members of the 
Constitutional Commission of 1986. 

These fifty Filipino men and women, 

these fifty national, regional and sectoral representatives 

of the more than fifty million Filipinos, 

have solemnly sworn to faithfully and conscientiously 

fulfill their duties, 

and each one of them has prayed “So help me God.” 

As we watch them begin “to hasten the return of 
normal constitutional government,” 
we pray to You, 0 God, to help them. 

We firmly believe that without Your help, 
they shall find it extremely difficult 
to draft a fundamental law that is 
“truly reflective of the ideals and aspirations 
of the Filipino people” 

because we, the Filipuio people, are Your people 
whom You love and who love You. 

As they go to work day after day , 

as they endeavor to complete their work within the period 
provided by law 

help them, 0 God, to frame a constitution for our land, 
a constitution that promotes the good of every FUipino 


and of the whole nation of Filipino men and women, 
a constitution that binds all Filipinos together as Your 
sons and daughters, 

a constitution that preserves and perfects the state of our 
Filipino culture . . . 

that recognizes and respects our sense of Filipino values . . . 
that defines and directs our set of religious traditions, 
a constitution that serves the common good and shares it 
equitably with the common tao, 

a constitution that builds bridges of love and justice and peace, 
and breaks down walls of self-seeking and image-building, 
a constitution that helps make the Philippines a more beautiful 
place to live in 

as it makes the Filipinos a better people to live in it, 
a people with a better chance to survive 
and a chance to survive better. 

This, we know, is a tail order 
that is why we call to You, 0 God, 
and count on You. 

We trust that You will not fail us now 
as You have never failed us before. 

And so, 

we thank You in advance 

for this one blessing we obviously need 

even as we thank You 

for the countless blessings 

that we have received from Your bounty, 

through Christ, our Lord. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Please be seated. 

The Acting Secretary-General will call the roll. 

THE ACTING SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 


Monsod 

Present 

Alonto 


Natividad . . . . 

Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nieva 

. Present 

Azcuna 


Nolledo 

Present 

Bacani 


Ople 

Present 

Bengzon 


PadlQa 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Munoz Pabua . . 

Present 

Bernas 


Quesada 

Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Rama 

Present 

Brocka 


Regalado . . . . . 

Present 

Calderon 


Reyes de los . . 

Present 

Castro de . . . . 


Rigos 

Present 

Colayco 


Rodrigo 

Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Romulo 

Present 

Davide 


Rosales 

Present 

Foz 


Sarmiento . . . . 

Present 

Garcia 


SiiarP7 

. Present 

Gascon 


Sumulong . . . . 

. Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Tadeo 

Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Tan 

Present 

Laurel 

. Present 

Tingson 

. Present 

Lerum 

. . Present 

Trehas 

. Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Uka 

. Present 


MONDAY,] UNE 2, 1986 


3 


Villacorta Present Villegas Present 

Mr. Vice-President, the roll call shows 48 Members 
responded to the call. No one is absent. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the 
presence of a quorum. 

OATH-TAKING OF CON-COM MEMBERS 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Will the Members now rise 
and take their oath of office. (All the Members rose.) 

Please raise your right hand and repeat after me. 

PANUNUMPA SA KATUNGKULAN 

Ako, si r*g 

na hinirang sa katungkulan bilang ay 

taimtim na nanunumpa na tutuparin ko nang buong husay 
at katapatan, sa abot ng aking kakayalian, ang mga tungku- 
lin ng aking kasalukuyang katungkulan at ng mga iba pang 
pagkaraan nito’y gagampanan ko sa ilalun ng Republika ng 
Pilipinas; na aking itataguyod at ipagtatanggol ang umiiral 
na Saligang Batas ng Pilipinas; na tunay na mananalig at 
tatalima ako rito; na susundin ko ang mga batas, mga kautu- 
sang legal, at mga dekretong pinaiiral ng mga sadyang 
itinakdang maykapangyarihan ng Republika ng Pilipinas; at 
kusa kong babalikatin ang pananagutang ito, nang walang 
ano mang pasubali o hangaring umiwas. 

Kasihan Nawa Ako ng Diyos. 

Congratulations. (Applause) 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that a Com- 
mittee of Five be appointed to notify Her Excellency, 
the President of the Philippines, that the Constitutional 
Commission has convened and that it is ready to receive 
her message. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the Chair, therefore, ap- 
points the following to constitute the Committee of 
Five: The Honorable Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon, rep- 
resenting the youth; the Honorable Sister Christine A. 
Tan, representing Metro Manila; the Honorable Ahmad 
Domocao Alonto, representing Mindanao; and the 
Honorable Crispino M. de Castro, representing Luzon. 

As members of the Committee, you will notify the 
President that the Constitutional Commission is now 
ready to receive Her Excellency’s message. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. In the meantime, the 
session is suspended. 

It was 10:22 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:25 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

THE ACTING SECRETARY-GENERAL. Ladies and 
Gentlemen, Her Excellency, the President of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines, Corazon C. Aquino. (Applause) 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The Constitutional Commission is now 
ready to hear the message of Her Excellency, the Presi- 
dent of the Philippines. (Applause) 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Ladies and Gentlemen, the 
President of the Republic of the Philippines, Her Ex- 
cellency, Corazon C. Aquino. (Applause) 

ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDENT 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Vice-President Laurel, Chief Justice Teehankee, 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Members of the 
Cabinet, Dean Adriel O. Meimban, Bishop Sotero Mitra. 
Rev. Cirilo Rigos, Dean Abdul Raffih Sayedy and His 
Eminence, Ricardo Cardinal Vidal, Commissioners of 
the Constitution, distinguished guests, ladies and gentle- 
men; 

You are here today vested with the full authority and 
the complete independence to write our country’s new 
constitution. Nobody, not even I, your President, can 
interfere with or overrule you in this great task. Our 
nation has placed its trust in you. Do not let it down. 

I join you today only to honor your beginning. What 
happens from here on is a matter for you and you alone. 

Today, apart from wishing you well and saying that 
the hopes and prayers of our nation are with you, I 
want to make only two points. The first is, please be 
quick. Nobody can impose a deadline on your delibera- 
tions but you know that our whole nation is eager for a 
new constitution and the subsequent elections as soon 
as possible. The people expect a constitutional draft 
within three months for their sovereign acceptance or 
rejection. So eager are they to have, in the shortest time 
possible, a full-blown democratic republic. 

Second, please limit yourselves to your constitutional 
mission. Your task is to design a constitution that will 
provide for a new legislature, not to do that legislature’s 
work for it. That is for the people’s elected representa- 
tives to do. 

You must define and protect our individual freedoms 
and rights; you must decide how our different institu- 
tions of state will relate to each other. Do not be dis- 
tracted by political debates and matters of policy that 
do not belong within your constitution-making exer- 


4 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


cise. You are here, appointed by the people’s wish, 
to write a constitution; you are here not as elected 
politicians. 

Bear in mind that you shall be pondering, debating 
and writing a constitution not only for our contempora- 
ries with their present concerns but also for succeeding 
generations of Filipinos whose first concerns we cannot 
presume to know beforehand. Future Filipinos must 
always be free to decide how to address these concerns 
as they arise. Even the wisest cures for present maladies 
should not be imposed on succeeding generations that 
will have their own unique problems and priorities. 

True and long-lived constitutions, a wise justice has 
told me, should be broad enough to be able to meet 
every exigency we cannot foretell, and specific enough 
to stoutly protect the essentials of a true democracy; in 
short, open-ended documents that will always be 
relevant. Remember that constitutional changes are not 
safe or easy to come by. Our first attempt at consti- 
tutional revision was followed by a dictatorship. And 
this, our second endeavor, was preceded by a revolution. 

Future Filipinos and their legislatures and supreme 
courts can best assess and address the challenges they 
will meet, if they enjoy the widest latitude of thought 
and action. In writing a constitution, have the fullest 
confidence that the wisdom of our race has not ex- 
hausted itself in us. Our race has grown in wisdom over 
time. I believe it will continue to do so. 

Yours is indeed no easy task. On the other hand, 
depending on the result, yours will be no small glory. 
Our people have suffered much. I hope we shall always 
concern ourselves with the needs of our people. 

Thank you and Godspeed. (Applause) 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that the session be suspended. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair declares a sus- 
pension of the session. 

It was 10:33 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:42 a.m., the session was resumed. 

the VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Will the Members of the Constitutional Commission 
please return to their respective seats because we will 
now go into the main purpose of this Inaugural Session, 
and that is, to comply with Section IX, Paragraph 3 of 
Proclamation No. 9 which requires the election of the 
President and Presiding Officer of the Constitutional 
Commission. It is mandated to be the first order of 
business. 


Will the non-Members of the Constitutional Com- 
mission please clear the hall so that the Constitutional 
Commission can now proceed with its first order of 
business. 

The table is now open for nomination for President 
who will also be the Presiding Officer of this Consti- 
tutional Commission. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
suspend the session for 30 minutes so that we can go 
into a caucus. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. May I know the purpose of 
the caucus? 

MR. RAMA. The purpose of the caucus is to narrow 
down any issues or conflicts regarding the election of 
the President and expedite the election of the President 
of the Constitutional Commission. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

The Gentleman from Mindanao is recognized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I would like to inquire from the 
Acting Floor Leader if the caucus is for the whole 
membership or for a limited group. Who will attend the 
caucus? 

MR. RAMA. The caucus will be composed of all the 
Members of the Constitutional Commission for pur- 
poses of defining certain rules and regulations. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Will the Acting Floor 
Leader indicate the room in which we will hold the 
caucus? 

MR. RAMA. I think the Secretariat will indicate what 
room exactly. 

THE ACTING SECRETARY-GENERAL. The lounge 
is ready to receive the Members. It is over there. Snacks 
will be served. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Where will the caucus be, in the 
same hall where we are now? 

THE ACTING SECRETARY-GENERAL. No, in the 
lounge, please; it is over there. You will pass this way 
(pointing). 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Vice-President, it is about a 
quarter to eleven now. Usually a caucus lasts about two, 
three, or four hours — I do not know how long. How 
would the Chair limit the caucus this afternoon? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. May I know how many 
minutes’ suspension the Acting Floor Leader is asking 
for? 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


5 


MR. RAMA. It might be necessary to suspend the 
session for an hour. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection fora 
one-hour suspension? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. No objection, Mr. Vice-President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. There being no objection, 
the session is suspended. 

It 10:45 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 12:10 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

ELECTION OF PRESIDENT 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Pursuant to Paragraph 3, 
Section 9 of Proclamation No. 9, tlie election of the 
President of the Constitutional Commission shall be the 
first order of business. 

The table is now open for nominations for President 
who will be the Presiding Officer of this Constitutional 
Commission. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, 1 move that Com- 
missioner Guingona be recognized to make a nomina- 
tion. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Serafin V.C. 
Guingona is recognized. 

NOMINATION SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER GUINGONA 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I am aware that we are working under a time con- 
straint. To us, time is of the essence. Because of this, 
and because the person whom I propose to nominate is 
one whose outstanding qualifications are already known 
to all of us, I shall, Mr. Vice-President, make my 
nomination brief by saying that it is my distinct honor 
and privilege to nominate the Honorable Cecilia Munoz 
Palma, bar topnotcher. one who has ably occupied 
responsible positions in the three departments of our 
government — the e.xecutive, the legislative and the 
judicial — one who has had the distinction of having 
been appointed the first woman prosecutor, the first 
woman district judge, and the first woman Justice of the 
Supreme Court in this country, a respected parliamen- 
tarian and a dedicated civic leader, to the presidency of 
the 1986 Constitutional Commission. With the aid of 


the Divine Providence, under her able and inspiring 
leadership and through the efforts of the Members of 
this Commission, we could endeavor to write a consti- 
tution which would establish in this country a political 
community in which the members would enjoy, in the 
words of Dr. Jose P. Laurel, “bread and . freedom, 
security and liberty for all." 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. (Applause) 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that Com- 
missioner Alonto be recognized to second the nomina- 
tion. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ahmad 
Domocao Alonto is recognized. 

MR. ALONTO. Mr. Vice-President, this Representa- 
tion and those of my time have the, honor and the 
pleasure to second the nomination of the distinguished 
lady parliamentarian, justice and executive. Commis- 
sioner Cecilia Munoz Palma. (Applause) 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, it appears that there 
are no more nominations forthcoming from the floor. 
Therefore, I move that the nomination be closed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion to close the nomination? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Hilario G, 
Davide, Jr. is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Vice-President, I move that the 
nomination of Commissioner Munoz Palma be con- 
sidered and declared unanimous. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion? (Silence) The Chair hears none: the motion 
is approved. (Applause) 

The Honorable Cecilia Munoz Palma is hereby de- 
clared unanimously elected President of the Constitu- 
tional Commission of 1986. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 


6 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that a Committee of Three be 
appointed to escort the President of the Constitutional 
Commission to the rostrum. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair appoints the 
Honorable Yusup R. Abubakar, Ma. Teresa F. Nieva, 
and Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. to constitute a Committee of 
Three to personally escort the new and unanimously 
elected President of the Philippine Constitutional Com- 
mission of 1986 to the rostrum so she may take her 
oath. (Applause) 

The members of the family of the President of the 
Constitutional Commission are requested to kindly 
come forward and witness the oath-taking of the new 
President. 

I repeat, will the members of the family of the 
Honorable President of the Constitutional Commission 
please come up to the rostrum to personally witness 
the oath-taking and the turnover. 

OATH-TAKING OF THE PRESIDENT 

At this juncture. Commissioner Cecilia Munoz Palma, 
escorted by the Committee of Three and members of 
her family, ascended the rostrum and took her oath of 
office as President of the Constitutional Commission 
of 1986 before the Vice-President of the Philippines, 
the Honorable Salvador H. Laurel. 

PANUNUMPA SA KATUNGKULAN 

Ako, si Cecilia Munoz Palma ng Bauan, Batangas, na 
hinirang sa katungkulan bilang Presidente, Constitutional 
Commission, ay taimtim na nanunumpa na tutuparin ko 
nang buong husay at katapatan, sa abot ng aking kakaya- 
han, ang mga tungkulin ng aking kasalukuyang katungku- 
lan at ng mga iba pang pagkaraan nito’y gagampanan ko sa 
ilalim ng Republika ng Pilipinas; na aking itataguyod at 
ipagtatanggol ang umiiral na Saligang Batas ng Pilipinas; na 
tunay na mananalig at tataUma ako rito; na susundin ko ang 
mga batas, mga kautusang legal, at mga dekretong pinaiiral 
ng mga sadyang itinakdang maykapangyarihan ng Repub- 
lika ng Pilipinas; at kusa kong babalikatin ang pananagutang 
ito, nang walang ano mang pasubali o hangaring umiwas. 

Kasihan Nawa Ako ng Diyos. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Congratulations and God 
bless you. (Applause) 

Madam President of the Philippine Constitutional 
Commission of 1986, I now formally turn over this 
gavel to your safe and competent hands with the full 
confidence of the Filipino people. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. Mr. Vice-President. 
( Applause) 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. And may I also turn over 
to you these seven volumes. These are the seven volumes 
which my father personally collected when he was with 
the Constitutional Convention of 1935. These are 
originally in twenty-two volumes of manuscripts which, 
after six years, I was able to edit and make into a more 
compact set of seven volumes. I am also personally 
turning these seven volumes over to the President of the 
Constitutional Commission of 1986 so that they may be 
used as reference by the Constitutional Commission. 
With these. Madam President, I wish you Godspeed and 
God’s light. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

In behalf of the Constitutional Commission, I hereby 
accept these seven volumes presented to us by the 
honorable Vice-President Salvador H. Laurel with the 
confidence that we will make good use of these books, 
which will surely be very useful in our deliberations. 

( Applause) 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

ACCEPTANCE SPEECH OF THE PRESIDENT 

MRS. MUNOZ PALMA. Honorable Vice-President 
Salvador H. Laurel, distinguished Members of the 
Constitutional Commission of 1986 of the Republic of 
the Philippines, honored guests, my countrymen: 

From the Book of Psalms of the Old Testament, it is 
written that “every good gift comes from above” and 
“all that the Lord wills. He does in Heaven and on 
Earth.” 

The honor and responsibility bestowed upon me so 
kindly by the distinguished Members of the Constitu- 
tional Commission of 1986 is a rare gift from the 
Almighty Who plans and rules the destinies of men an 
nations. In all humility, I accept with deep gratitude the 
Presidency of the Constitutional Commission create 
under Proclamation No. 9 of President Corazon • 
Aquino, as a gift from the Filipino people who fin 
themselves in the threshold of a new era of liberation 
after more than a decade of authoritarian rule and are 
now seeking to regain once more the purity of the ideals 
of the Filipino soul and of the Filipino nation. 

I accept the presidency of this august body as a 
testimony to the cause of truth, justice and freedom 
which broke the shackles of bondage and brought us o 
this assembly, assigned with the task of picking up an 
sorting out the broken pieces of our shattered democra 
cy and creating a structure of government under a basic 
fundamental law which will govern the life and destiny 
of the Filipino people not only for today and tomorrow 
but hopefully for all ages to come. 

While conscious of my inadequacy and unworthiness 
as there are more able and worthy Members who can 
head this Commission, I nonetheless accept and receive 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


7 


the mantle of responsibility, emboldened by the 
thought that I have the inspiration and guidance of the 
men and women composing this Commission who, after 
all, will be the architects to build the new Philippine 
government for the new Philippine State. 

True it is that the Members of the Constitutional 
Commission come from different walks of life and ages 
and are of diverse creeds and social, economic and 
political persuasions, but it is this diversity that ensures 
the formulation of a document where traditional princi- 
ples of democracy, handed down by the Malolos Consti- 
tution, the Philippine Constitution of 1935 and the 
Constitution of 1973, will be enriched by new concepts, 
born from the social complexities and changes of the 
times and strengthened by a recapture ot our values for 
truth, justice and morality, and glorified by our love for 
country and faith in the Divine. 

The Constitutional Commission assumes its tasks in 
the midst of clouds of doubt and mistrust generated 
principally from its appointive character and the alleged 
inadequacy of representation of all sectors of society in 
its composition. While we are aware of laws and imper- 
fections, we the Members of the Commission none- 
theless accepted the trust and mission given to us by our 
new President who holds in her hands the mandate of 
the people, because we see in the creation of this body a 
vital and crucial step in the attainment of a permanent 
social, economic and political stability and normaliza- 
tion for the nation. We are here to contribute our 
talents and expertise, and whatever we may lack in 
wisdom and experience, we compensate with our 
unquestioned love and loyalty to the Filipino people 
and the generations and generations of Filipinos to 
come. 

We pledge that in our work we shall not be obsessed 
and controlled by our own personal ideas, biases and 
inclinations but that we shall labor together with open 
minds and hearts motivated by one consuming desire— 
to establish a just and humane society and create a free 
people in the international community of free nations. 

I remember what our national hero, Jose Rizal, once 
wrote when his family and friends were urging him to 
escape from Dapitan and he refused, and 1 quote; “1 
have no reason to say that God has abandoned me. Let 
us ever do our duty. Let Him (God) do the rest.” 

Yes, my friends, let us do our duty with dedication, 
giving our utmost to attain the highest ideals for our 
people and let the Almighty do the rest. 

Let me close with this revelation: that our people 
throughout the country in their respective churches 
and homes are storming the heavens with their prayers 
for the success of the Constitutional Commission, that 
it may draft a basic law that serves the good of all the 
Filipino people, preserves its territorial integrity, 
respects human dignity and protects basic human rights 
and freedoms, gives justice to all that no one may be 
exploited or trampled upon, and builds a nation 


founded on truth and love for the Creator of life and for 
one’s fellowmen. 

In the Holy Bible it is written, and I quote: 

A house built on rock will remain firm and indestructi- 
ble when the rains fall, the winds blow and the floods 
come; but when a house is built on sand and the rains fall, 
tire winds blow, and the floods come; that house will be 
swept away and be ruined. 

On this day, when we have taken our oath to serve 
in this Constitutional Commission, let us pledge to 
ourselves and to the Filipino people that in the spirit 
of unity, wisdom and self-sacrifice we shall create a 
Constitution founded on the solid rock of equality, 
justice, liberty and peace, reminding our people, how- 
ever, that it is the people themselves who have the final 
responsibility to give life to the words written in their 
Constitution. The people have to live by the Constitu- 
tion, defend it with their lives, if necessary, in order that 
their Constitution will be an impregnable bulwark of 
their libert ies. 

Again, my colleagues, from the bottom of my heart, I 
thank you for the mandate you have given this humble 
Member, coworker and friend. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move that we suspend the session 
until two o’clock this afternoon after our lunch and 
caucus. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is sus- 
pended. 

It was 12:33 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:48 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
President, Honorable Cecilia Munoz Palma, presiding. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

ELECTION OF VICE-PRESIDENT 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I call on Com- 
missioner de los Reyes to make a nomination. 

NOMINATION SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER DE LOS REYES 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rustico de los 
Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, the man I 
am going to nominate is a bar topnotcher, super athlete. 


8 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


author of several law books, three-time Senator, 
seasoned parliamentarian and statesman. I think he is 
overqualified for the position of vice-president. 

It is a distinct honor and privilege to nominate my 
professor in criminal law and civil law, who gave me 
good grades incidentally. Commissioner Ambrosio 
Padilla. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ambrosio Padilla 
has been nominated. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that Com- 
missioner Alonto be recognized to second the nom- 
ination. 


tutional Commission, ay taimtim na nanunumpa na tutu- 
parin ko nang buong husay at katapatan, sa abot ng aking 
kakayahan, ang mga tungkulin ng aking kasalukuyang 
katungkulan at ng mga iba pang pagkaraan nito’y gagampa- 
nan ko sa ilalim ng Republika ng Pilipinas; na aking itata- 
guyod at ipagtatanggol ang umiiral na Saligang Batas ng 
Pilipinas; na tunay na mananalig at tatalima ako rito; na 
susundin ko ang mga batas, mga kautusang legal, at mga 
dekretong pinaiiral ng mga sadyang itinakdang maykapang- 
yarihan ng Republika ng Pilipinas; at kusa kong babalikatin 
ang pananagutang ito, nang walang ano mang pasubali o 
hangaring umiwas. 

Kasihan Nawa Ako ng Diyos. (Applause) 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, for purposes of 
registering the unanimity of this Constitutional Com- 
mission, I move that the nomination be closed. 


MR. PADILLA. May I say a few words? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, of course. The Vice-President 
will address the body. 

ACCEPTANCE SPEECH OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT 


THE PRESIDENT. It has been moved that the 
nomination for the Office of Vice-President of the 
Constitutional Commission be closed. 

Does the Chair hear any objection to the motion to 
close the nomination? ( Silence) 


MR. RAMA. The nomination is closed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, I do not get it. Is 
Commissioner Abubakar objecting to the motion be- 
cause I asked, if there is any objection, and Com- 
missioner Abubakar raised his hand? 

So, there being no objection to the motion to close 
the nomination for Vice-President, the Chair declares 
Commissioner Ambrosio Padilla the duly elected Vice- 
President of the Constitutional Commission. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that the 
Vice-President be allowed to say a few words to the 
Constitutional Commission. 


THE PRESIDENT. First, can we appoint a com- 
mittee to escort Vice-President Ambrosio Padilla to 
the rostrum to take his oath as Vice-President? 

The Honorable Teodoro Bacani, Jose Colayco and 
Ma. Teresa Nieva will please escort the Vice-President. 

OATH-TAKING OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT 

At this juncture, Commissioner Ambrosio B. Padilla, 
escorted by the Committee of Three, ascended the 
rostrum and took his oath of office as Vice-President of 
the Constitutional Commission of 1986 before the 
President, the Honorable Cecilia Munoz Palma. 

panunumpa sa katungkulan 


MR. PADILLA. My dear Members of this Constitu- 
tional Commission: 

I am deeply grateful for this elevation to the high 
position of Vice-President of this Constitutional Com- 
mission. I am grateful to all those who have been 
responsible for this, for their generosity in awarding me 
this high position — not only to the Members who 
nominated me but to all, and particularly to Com- 
missioner Francisco Rodrigo who generously yielded to 
me during the session. I am very grateful to all of you, 
my dear friends. 

We are entrusted with this difficult, delicate and far- 
reaching task of formulating a new, permanent Consti- 
tution of the Republic of the Philippines that will em- 
body the ideals, aspirations, dreams and traditions of 
our sovereign Filipino people. I am certain that with 
God’s divine guidance and grace, with your full coopera- 
tion and the leadership of our President, we will not, as 
we cannot afford to, disappoint our sovereign people in 
this task of formulating our Constitution, not only for 
this generation but for many generations to come, that 
will ensure popular democracy with the blessings of 
truth justice and freedom so that we, our country and 
our people, may enjoy lasting peace, political stability 
and economic prosperity. 

Thank you very much. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 

recognized. 

MR. RAMA. 1 ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized rer.arding the next item. 


Ako, si Ambrosio Padilla ng Maynila at Pangasinan, na 
hinirang sa katungkulan bilang Bise-Presidente ng Consti- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is rec- 
ognized. 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


9 


MR. DA VIDE. I understand that the next item in the 
agenda is the election of the Floor Leader and the As- 
sistant Floor Leader. I move for a deferment of the elec- 
tion of both the Floor Leader and the Assistant Floor 
Leader until such time as the Commission shall have 
decided on the issue of the Steering Committee. In the 
meantime, I move that the Acting Floor Leader and 
Acting Assistant Floor Leader be allowed to continue to 
serve as such until the election of the permanent Floor 
Leader and Assistant Floor Leader pursuant to any dis- 
position on the issue of the Steering Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. BENGZON. I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion is seconded. 

Is there any objection to the motion as seconded? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that the table be opened for 
nomination for the Secretary-General and the Sergeant- 
at-Arms. 

THE PRESIDENT. The table is open for nomination 
for the Office of the Secretary-General. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Minda Luz 
Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I have the honor 
to nominate Madam Flerida Ruth Romero as Secretary- 
General of the 1986 Constitutional Commission. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I move, Madam President, that the 
nomination be closed. 

(Several Members seconded the motion.) 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion is seconded. 

Is there any objection to the motion to close the 
nomination for Secretary-General? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. (Applause) 

Professor Flerida Ruth P. Romero is elected Secreta- 
ry-General of this body. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that the election of the Sergeant- 
at-Arms be considered as by acclamation. 

THE PRESIDENT. The table is open for nomination 
for Sergeant-at-Arms. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask. Madam President, that 
Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I have the honor 
to nominate Atty. San Andres as Sergeant-at-Arms. 

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. San Andres is nominated for 
Sergeant-at-Arms of the Constitutional Commission. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Rosales be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosales is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. ROSALES. Madam President, I move that the 
nomination be closed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to close the nomination for Sergeant-at-Arms? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 
{Applause) 

Mr. San Andres is elected Sergeant-at-Arms of this 
body. 

MR. RAMA. As to the next item. Madam President, I 
ask that Commissioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I would like to 
move that the formal organization of the committees be 
deferred until we shall have determined such commit- 
tees, the scope of their responsibilities and the number 
of the members that shall compose them. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion that No. 3 in the agenda. Organization of the 
Committees, be deferred? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is a special 
item here which is not written in the agenda. 

May I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recognized. 


10 


MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, I move that the Com- 
mission pass a resolution of thanks to the Honorable 
Salvador H. Laurel, Vice-President of the Philippines, 
for his services during the caucus and today’s session of 
this Commission. 

ALL MEMBERS. I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion is seconded. 

Is there any objection to the motion that a resolution 
of thanks be drafted, prepared and transmitted to Vice- 
President Salvador H. Laurel for his cooperation and 


services in this opening session of the Constitutional 
Commission? (Silence) The Chair hears none; tlie 
motion is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. I move that the 
session be adjourned until tomorrow at three o’clock in 
the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at three o’clock in the afternoon. (Applause ) 

It was 5:07 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


11 


R.C.C. NO. 2 
T uesday, June 3, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:17 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

Everybody will please rise for the Prayer to be led 
by the Honorable Gregorio J. Tingson. 

Everybody rose for the Prayer. 

MR. TINGSON. Let us pray. 

PRAYER 

Our Omnipotent and loving Heavenly Father, we are 
faced with the awesome task of writing the fundamental 
law of our country, so destitute, so deprived and so 
discouraged. We confess that we, who have been man- 
dated to accomplish this work, are so weak and devoid 
of knowledge and understanding. 

Help us, we beseech Thee, to understand the real 
needs of our people; that perhaps we do not need more 
material opulence but spiritual fulfillment; more com- 
passion for the weak aikl the poor among us; and to 
realize that righteousness exalts the nation but sin is a 
reproach to any people. 

Thank you, dear Lord, for giving us this enviable 
honor and privilege to be participants, not mere passive 
spectators, in building, through this Constitution, a 
Philippines honored by man, blessed by God and a 
great hope for generations to come. 

This is our heartfelt praise and petition through the 
matchless name of Jesus Christ, Our Lord, Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

the PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . 

. . . Present 

Alonto . . . 

. . . Present 

Aquino . . . . 

. . . Present 

Azeuna . . . . 

. . . Present 

Bacani 

. . . Present 

Bengzon . . . . 

. . . Present 

Bennagen . . . 

, . . Present 


Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brockd Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 


Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present* 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present 

Lerum Present* 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad F*resent 

Nieva Present 

Nolledo Present 

Ople Present 

Padilla Present* 

Quesada Present 

Rama Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 44 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to present a couple of 
parliamentary inquiries. I notice in the Provisional 
Rules we have adopted that every session must begin 
with the National Anthem, followed by a prayer. 

The second parliamentary inquiry. Madam President, 
is: yesterday, we elected the Secretary-General and the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, but we notice that they did not take 
their oath of office on the same day. So, may I move for 
an amendment to the Order of Business that before the 
referral to committees the two officers of the Com- 
mission take their oath of office. 


Regalado Present 

Reyes de los ... Present 

Rigos Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 

Rosales Present 

Sarmiento Present 

Suarez Present 

Sumulong Present 

Tadeo Present 

Tan Present 

Tingson Present 

Trenas Present 

Uka Present 

Villacorta Present 

ViUegas Present 


*Appeared after the roU call 


12 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

With respect to the first question regarding the sing- 
ing of the National Anthem, may we refer to the 
Minutes of the caucus — whether the amendment pre- 
sented by the Honorable Tingson also carried the singing 
of the National Anthem everyday or only during the 
first session day of the week. 

The Minutes of yesterday’s caucus are not yet 
finished, but the Secretariat recalls that the motion of 
the Honorable Tingson referred only to the Prayer 
everyday, not to the singing of the National Anthem be- 
cause the rule, as is, refers to the singing of the National 
Anthem during the first session day of the week. 

With respect to the second question, may we request 
the Secretary-General and the Sergeant-at-Arms to take 
their oath of office now. 

At this juncture, the Secretary-General and the 
Sergeant-at-Arms ascended the rostrum and took their 
oath of office before the President of the Constitutional 
Commission. 

OATH-TAKING OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL 
PANUNUMPA SA KATUNGKULAN 

Ako, si Flerida Ruth P. Romero ng Maynila, na hinirang 
sa katungkulan bilang Secretary-General ng 1986 Constitu- 
tional Commission ay taimtim na nanunumpa na tutuparin 
ko nang buong husay at katapatan, sa abot ng aking kakaya- 
han, ang mga tungkulin ng aking kasalukuyang katungkulan 
at ng mga iba pang pagkaraan nito’y gagampanan ko sa 
ilalim ng Republika ng Pilipinas; na aking itataguyod at 
ipagtatanggol ang umiiral na Saligang Batas ng Pilipinas; 
na tunay na mananaUg at tataUma ako rito ; na susundin ko 
ang mga batas, mga kautusang legal, at mga dekretong pina- 
iiral ng mga sadyang itinakdang maykapangyarihan ng 
Republika ng Pilipinas; at kusa kong babalikatin ang pana- 
nagutang ito, nang walang ano mang pasubali o hangaring 
umiwas. 

KASIHAN NAWA ako ng DIYOS. (Applause) 

OATH-TAKING OF THE SERGEANT-AT-ARMS 
PANUNUMPA SA KATUNGKULAN 

Ako, si Roberto M. San Andres ng Quezon City, na 
Wnirang sa katungkulan bilang Sergeant-at-Arms ng 1986 
Constitutional Commission ay taimtim na nanunumpa na 
tutuparin ko nang buong husay at katapatan, sa abot ng 
aking kakayahan, ang mga tungkulin ng aking kasalukuyang 
katungkulan at ng mga iba pang pagkaraan nito’y gagampa- 
nan ko sa ilalim ng Republika ng Pilipinas; na aking itata- 
gnyod at ipagtatanggol ang umiiral na Saligang Batas ng 
Pilipinas; na tunay na mananalig at tatalima ako rito; na 
susundin ko gng mga batas, mga kautusang legal, at mga 
dekretong p&iaiiral ng mga sadyang itinakdang maykapang- 
yarihan ng Republika ng Pilipinas; at kusa kong babalikatin 
ang pananagutang ito, nang walang ano mang pasubali o 
hangaring umiwas. 

KASIHAN NAWA AKO NG DIYOS. (Applause) 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move for the reading and approval of 
the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

Mr. Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, this afternoon we 
have received this Journal No. 1. May I invite the atten- 
tion of my colleagues to page 9, the portion with 
respect to the approval of the Provisional Rules of the 
Commission, which is Appendix No. 1. On page 1, line 
6, of the Provisional Rules, there is a conflict between 
what was approved or provisionally adopted and what 
has been appended. Under the Rules that has been 
provisionally adopted, there are supposed to be three 
Assistant Floor Leaders to be elected. The understand- 
ing we had yesterday was that this would be left as it is 
until after a discussion by the Steering Committee will 
have been finished. 

So, there is either a typographical error or a mistake 
by the Secretariat in mimeographing Appendix No. 1. 
I, therefore, would like to raise that point, and I object 
to the motion to approve the Journal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it the Chair’s understanding 
that Mr. Bengzon is presenting a motion to amend the 
Journal as prepared? We will have the Journal read first 
after which we can present motions to amend or correct 
it. 

MR. BENGZON. In that case. Madam President, if it 
is not yet the proper time, I am willing to wait. I am just 
calling the attention of the Chair to this matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you very much. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we have already 
been furnished with copies of the Journal. I move to 
dispense with the reading of the Journal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the reading of the Journal is dis- 
pensed with. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


13 


THE PRESIDENT. We will first take up the point 
raised by Commissioner Bengzon. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, will the Secre- 
tary-General please repeat the last amendment? 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move that we 
correct page 1 of Appendix No. 1. 

MR. DAVIDE. Anterior amendment, Madam Presi- 
dent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is rec- 
ognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. The anterior amendments are on pages 
3 and 4. 

On page 3, line 3, under the headings “The National 
Anthem” and “Invocation,” after the word “purpose,” 
insert a comma (,), the word NAMELY and a colon (:), 
then the names of the five religious leaders who de- 
livered the invocation. 


On page 4, second paragraph, under the headin; 

the President,” insert between the word 
Body and “gave” AND THE AUDIENCE. On line 1 
“Address of the President,” ad. 
- . , ,, after the word “authority”; and on lin 


0 me word “authority"; ana oi 

“complete ” "" 


I move for the approval of the proposed amendments. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amen ments proposed by Commissioner Davide? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may we 
request that the lines, as corrected, now be read. We 
cannot understand all these amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
read the particular lines as amended. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. The last amendment 
reads: “The President underscored the full authority 
GRANTED TO and THE complete independence vested 
in the Constitutional Commission.” 


MR. BENGZON. I am not an authority on grammar, 
but I think it does not sound right. 

THE PRESIDENT. Actually, this is just a brief sum- 
mary of the speech of Her Excellency, President 
Aquino. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is rec- 
ognized. 

MR RODRIGO. My observation regarding the inser- 
tion of the words “GRANTED TO” is based not only 
on grammar but on substance. Madam President, it 
might appear that the authority we have is granted to us 
hv the President, which is not correct. Our authority is 
reallv derived from the people, and the proclamation by 
Se President is only incidental. So, I think that as the 
sentence is worded now, it is clearer; it cannot be 

misunderstood. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. In order to avoid varying interpre- 
tations, why can we not just leave the address of the 
President as it is? 

MR RODRIGO. I believe that is better, Madam 

President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. On page 3, the first 

paragraph reads: “Thereafter, the National Anthem was 
played, followed by the Invocation led by five religious 
leaders who were invited for the purpose, NAMELY. 
reverend CIRILO RIGOS, RICARDO CARDINAL 
VIDAL, BISHOP ADRIEL O. MEIMBAN, BISHOP 
SOTERO MITRA, AND PROFESSOR ABDUL 
RAFFIH SAYEDY.” 

On page 4, under the heading “Entry of the Presi 
dent,” the second paragraph should read: ‘ The Bo y 
AND THE AUDIENCE gave the President a standing 
ovation.” 

Under the heading “Address of the President, the 
first line should read: “The President underscored the 
full authority GRANTED TO and THE complete inde- 
pendence vested in the Constitutional Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner de los Reyes 
satisfied? 


the PRESIDENT. Yes, Mr. Davide is recognized. 

MR DAVIDE. I am willing to withdraw the proposed 
amendments to the heading “Address of the President.” 
However in line with the proposal of the Chair, I move 
that the’ entire speech of Her Excellency, President 
Corazon C. Aquino, be incorporated into the Journal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR BENGZON. Madam President, may we now go 
mv amendment? On page 9, line 6 of Appendix 
1 should be corrected to read: “AND THREE (3) 


4- Tl'ly.x/''.*. T la O H O T*C 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to amend line 6. Rule 1, of Appendix No. 1? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 


14 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, also on page 2, 
Section 4, line 21, put an S after the word “Leader” to 
make it plural; insert THREE (3) between the words 
“his” and “Assistants”; thus: “with his THREE Q) 
Assistant Floor LEADERS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Also, I propose an omnibus amend- 
ment to the effect that should there be any other state- 
ments in this Appendix No. 1 that refer to this concept, 
they should be amended accordingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed omnibus amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is rec- 
ognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move for the approval of the Journal 
of yesterday’s session, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
approval of the Journal of yesterday’s session, as 
amended? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the Journal, 
as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Refer- 
ence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Motion and Communica- 
tion, the President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 1, entitled: 
resolution urging the commission to first 

DECIDE ON THE ISSUE OF SYSTEM, TYPE AND 
FORM OF GOVERNMENT. 


Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 2, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PREAMBLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 3, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON DECLARATION OF PRIN- 
CIPLES AND STATE POLICIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 4, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 5, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON DUTIES AND OBLIGA- 
TIONS OF CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 6, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY TO 
ENSURE THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE REPUBLIC 
OVER SABAH AND OVERSEAS RECOGNIZED BY THE 
1982 UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW 
OF THE SEA. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 7, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON CITIZENSHIP. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


15 


Proposed Resolution No. 8, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SUFFRAGE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Re.solution No. 9. entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION LIMITATIONS ON THE EXERCISE OF THE 
AUTHORITY TO PROCLAIM MARTIAL LAW OR SUS- 
PEND THE PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS 
CORPUS BY LIMITING ITS DURATION AND REQUIR- 
ING CONCURRENCE BY THE LEGISLATURE, EX- 
PRESSLY VESTING UPON THE SUPREME COURT 
JURISDICTION TO INQUIRE INTO THE SUFFICIENCY 
OF THE BASIS OF SUCH PROCLAMATION OR SUS- 
PENSION AND TO SET ASIDE THE SAME IF NO BASIS 
EXISTS, AND GRANTING THE LEGISLATURE THE 
AUTHORITY TO REVOKE OR EXTEND A PROCLAMA- 
TION OR SUSPENSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 10, entitled: 

incorporate in THE NEW CONSTI- 

rTTTTcxr PROVISION RESERVING TO FILIPINO 
WHntn ^ CORPORATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS 

PITT7C is WHOLLY OWNED BY FILIPINO 

nicD the privilege AND RIGHT TO 

DISPOSE, explore, DEVELOP, EXPLOIT OR UTILIZE 
THE natural resources OF THE COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 1, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO GIVE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE 
QUESTION OF WHAT FORM OF GOVERNMENT THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION WILL ADOPT IN THE 
PROPOSED NEW CONSTITUTION OF 1986. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 12, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THAT RIVERS, LAKES, BAYS 
AND LAGOONS AND OTHER BODIES OF WATERS 
BELONG TO ALL THE PEOPLE AND SHALL BE MAIN- 
TAINED AS COMMUNAL FISHING GROUNDS, AND 
FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Proposed Resolution No. 13, entitled; 

RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING THE RECITATION OF A 
PRAYER AT THE OPENING OF EVERY PLENARY 
SESSION, COMMITTEE MEETING, PUBLIC HEARING 
AND OTHER DELIBERATIONS OF THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 14, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO RETAIN THE PROVISIONS OF ARTI- 
CLE X, SECTION 1 1 (1) OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION 
AND TO MAKE THE SAME MANDATORY AND AP- 
PLICABLE TO CASES PENDING BEFORE THE 
COURTS. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. and Maambong. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 15, entitled. 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL 
PROVISION WHICH WILL ASSURE RECOGNITION OF 
THE CORDILLERA REGION, PREVENT ITS FUTURE 

dismemberment, and for other purposes. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. and Maambong. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 16, entitled: 

resolution to provide for a new ARTICLE ON 
CONSERVATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Azeuna. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 17, entitled: 

resolution to provide for REGIONAL GOVERN- 
MENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azeuna. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 18, entitled: 

resolution to provide FOR CONSTITUTIONAL 
WRIT OF AMPARO. 

Introduced by Hon. Azeuna. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 19, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ON THE ROLE OF FARMERS AND 
WORKERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azeuna. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


16 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 20, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR AUTHENTIC LAND 
REFORM. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 21, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
THAT NO TRANSACTION INVOLVING PUBLIC FUNDS 
WHETHER OF GOVERNMENT ENTITIES OR GOVERN- 
MENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED ENTERPRISES 
SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM AUDIT. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 22, entitled: 

RESOLUTION WITHDRAWING THE RIGHT OF BALIKBA- 
YANS WHO HAVE EMBRACED FOREIGN CITIZENSHIP 
TO ACQUIRE LANDS IN THE PHILIPPINES. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 23, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ESTABLISHING A PRESIDENTIAL FORM 
OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE PHILIPPINES WITH 
SPECIFIED FEATURES. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 24, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MAKING THE PREAMBLE MORE CONCISE 
AND EMPHATIC. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 25, entitled: 

RESOLUTION LIMITING OWNERSHIP OF PRIVATE 
LANDHOLDINGS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 26, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO AMEND THE BILL OF RIGHTS BY PRO- 
VIDING THAT THERE IS NO DOUBLE JEOPARDY IN 
CASE OF MISTRIAL. 

introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Citizenship. Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 27, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RESOLUTION OF 
THE SABAH ISSUE IN THE TRANSITORY PROVI- 
SIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 28, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A TRIAL IN ABSENTIA 
OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS WHO HAVE MAL- 
VERSED PUBLIC FUNDS OR PLUNDERED THE NA- 
TIONAL TREASURY. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 29, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DETERMINE, AT FIRST INSTANCE, 
THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT TO BE ESTABLISHED. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Jamir. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MOTION 

URGENT MOTION TO CONSTITUTE THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL COMMISSION AS AN AD HOC COMMITTEE 
TO IMMEDIATELY CONDUCT PUBLIC HEARINGS ON 
THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT THAT SHOULD BE SET 
UP BY THE COMMISSION AND TO DECIDE ON SUCH 
FORM OF GOVERNMENT WITHIN A SPECIFIED TIME. 

(Motion No. 1 - Constitutional Commission of 1986) 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Steering Committee. 

COMMUNICATION 

Letter from Mr. Abraham F. Sarmiento, President of the 
National Alliance for Justice, Freedom and Democracy, 
enclosing the original of a petition signed by an initia 
564 qualified voters asking appropriate action for t e 
disqualification of Messrs. Bias F. Ople, Regalado t. 
Maambong, Rustico F. de los Reyes, Teodulo C. Nativi 
dad and Alejandro D. Almendras from the Constitu- 
tional Commission. 

(Communication No. 1 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares a suspension of 
the session. 

It was 3:54 p.m. 


To the Committee on Privileges. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


17 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 4: 19 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. RAMA. 1 ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I was just 
about to make a comment on the letter of Mr. Sar- 
miento but I am yielding the floor to Commissioner 
Bengzon. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. bengzon. Madam President, before that, may 
I ask tor a reconsideration of the referral of Proposed 
thp"d^o' entitled: RESOLUTION PROVIDING 
OF the SABAH ISSUE IN THE 
. PROVISIONS. This was committed to the 
Committee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions. 
I thin It should be referred to the Committee on 
Preamb e. National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. In view of the fact that the committees 
are still being formed and we are about to finish the 
Business for the Day, and since we are here to undertake 
the early drafting of the Constitution in accordance 
with the expectations of the people, I move. Madam 
President, that with the unanimous consenf of the body, 
we start discussing the prejudicial issue of the form of 
government. This has to be determined first before we 
can proceed to other matters. 

In the meantime, I would ask that the motion filed 
by Commissioner Nolledo be taken up for considera- 
tion. This is Motion No. 1, entitled: URGENT MOTION 
TO CONSTITUTE THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION AS 
AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO IMMEDIATELY CONDUCT 
PUBLIC HEARINGS ON THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
THAT SHOULD BE SET UP BY THE COMMISSION AND TO 
DECIDE ON SUCH FORM OF GOVERNMENT WITHIN A 
SPECIFIED TIME. 

Commissioner Nolledo has informed me that he 
would amend the said motion in order to accommodate 
a preliminary discussion on the form of government. 
May I, therefore, move that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment to refer Proposed Resolution 
Committee on National Territory? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is ap- 
proved. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bengzon is 

recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. With respect to page 6, the last in 
the Order of Business, on the last portion of the com- 
munication or letter coming from Mr. Abraham F. 
Sarmiento involving some of our colleagues here, I 
understand that the President has not even seen a copy 
of this letter. In view of this. Madam President, and 
since it involves matters which are very delicate as well 
as the integiity of the Members of this body, I move 
that this statement in the Order of Business for today 
be removed tentatively until the proper time. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to delete tentatively from the Order of Business, 
page 6, the communication referred to? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none, the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. With due respect to the Acting Floor 
Leader, I move that we take up a resolution, which is 
relevant to yesterday’s event on the inauguration of the 
Commission, which, I believe, is of high importance 
before we go into a preliminary discussion on the form 
of government. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide please 
specify. 

MR. DAVIDE. Since the Commission has approved a 
resolution of thanks to His Excellency, the Vice- 
President of the Republic, this Representation would 
like to propose a resolution expressing the sense of grati- 
tude of the Members of the Constitutional Commission 
to Her Excellency, President Corazon C. Aquino, foi hei 
trust and confidence in the Members of the Commis- 
sion, in appointing them to the body as well as com- 
mending Her Excellency for her patriotism, nationalism 
and unwavering adherence to democractic traditions 
in pledging noninterference in the work of the Com- 
mission, thereby assuring the independence of the 
Commission. 

MR. RAMA. I have no objection. Madam President. 


18 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this reso- 
lution just read by our distinguished colleague, the 
Honorable Davide? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Not that I doubt the integrity of the 
President but I am concerned about the image of the 
Commission. Already we are subject to criticism be- 
cause of the fact that this is an appointed body and a 
formal expression of our thanks for what is due us 
would seem to indicate a fawning attitude toward the 
President, and I think it will impair the image of inde- 
pendence which the Commission should have. For that 
reason, I would like to express my preference that the 
resolution of thanks to the President for having given all 
that is due the Commission should not be approved. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I just would like to inquire from 
Commissioner Bernas whether the objection is on the 
first portion of the resolution. There are two points to 
the resolution — one, that of thanks, and the second 
portion, on commending the President for her pledge of 
noninterference and for assuring the independence of 
the Commission. 

FR. BERNAS. I object to both parts, with all due 
respect. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide, is it possi- 
ble for the Secretariat to be given a copy so that we can 
read the entire resolution because it is not just a ques- 
tion of deleting a particular portion? If we are given a 
copy, we can read it and offer some suggestions. Is that 
all right? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. I will now 
turn over two copies of the resolution. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretariat will please prepare 
copies of this resolution. 

Mr. Floor Leader, do we have anything in the next 
business? 

MR. RAMA. I would like to restate my motion, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Acting Floor Leader 
kindly repeat the motion. 


MR. RAMA. In view of the fact that we have no 
other business to take up because the committees are 
still being formed, I move that we make use of our time 
by discussing the prejudicial issue which is very neces- 
sary for our work — the nature or form of government 
that we must have under the new Constitution. And to 
that end, I would like to call on Commissioner Nolledo, 
the movant of the urgent motion, a motion that is 
related to the discussion of the form of government we 
must have. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Acting Floor Leader? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The honorable Vice-President is 
recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I have no objection to the motion. On 
the contrary, I would encourage discussion on the form 
of government to be established, whether it be presiden- 
tial or parliamentary. However, I was requesting the 
Floor Leader to give me an opportunity to announce to 
our Members that at the luncheon meeting of the Philip- 
pine Constitution Association which was attended by 
fellow Commissioners Azeuna, Bengzon, Foz, Guingona 
and Regalado, they handed me a copy of their draft of 
the new Constitution. I am forwarding this to the 
Madam President with the request that the Secretariat 
be directed to mimeograph additional copies so that 
each Member of this Commission may have a copy of 
this draft. I am now submitting to the President the 
papers that were entrusted to me by the PHILCONSA. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will make of record that we 
are receiving the folder of the Communication from the 
Vice-President. The Secretary-General is instructed to 
make as many copies as necessary for distribution to the 
Members of the Constitutional Commission. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is rec- 
ognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, may I be rec- 
ognized. 

I think there was a pending resolution which was 
objected to by Father Bernas but which was not thrown 
to the body for any reaction. 

THE PRESIDENT. Not yet, because we are printing 
copies of it so that we will know the exact text of the 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


19 


resolution. We will take that up as soon as the copies are 
ready. 

MS. QUESADA. All right. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will the Acting Floor Leader yield to 
a few clarificatory questions? 

MR. RAMA. With pleasure. 

MR. SUAREZ. As I understand it, we are bound by 
the Rules of the Commission. Is that correct? 

MR. RAMA. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. But at present we are governed only 
by the Provisional Rules drafted by the Commission. 

MR. RAMA. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I also heard the Acting Floor Leader mention a while 
ago that we should unanimously suspend the Rules 
before we go to the freewheeling discussion on the 
matter of the form of government. Did I hear right? 

MR. RAMA. That is correct. That is the effect of the 
unanimous consent of the body. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will the Acting Floor Leader take up 
the suggestion that he should file a formal motion to 
suspend the Rules in connection with the freewheeling 
discussion on the form of government so that we will be 
free to discuss this without applying rigidly either the 
permanent Rules or the Provisional Rules of the Com- 
mission? 

MR. RAMA. I am amenable to the suggestion. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. So, may I request that the President 
have a ruling on my motion for a freewheeling dis- 
cussion of the nature of government. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Point of inquiry. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Objection, Madam President. 

I thought that the pending motion is to suspend the 
Rules. We cannot go into a freewheeling discussion until 
a motion to suspend the Rules shall have been approved 
by the body. 


MR. RAMA. That is why I am asking the President to 
ask the body regarding that motion to suspend the 
Rules. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Point of inquiry. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Honorable Nolledo is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I understand I was called upon by 
the Floor Leader to state my urgent motion to consti- 
tute the Commission as an ad hoc committee to imme- 
diately conduct public hearings. It seems that I cannot 
begin my motion because there are many justifiable or 
unjustifiable interruptions. What is my status now? 

THE PRESIDENT. As the Chair understands it, first, 
there is a motion to suspend the Rules and consider the 
Honorable Nolledo’s urgent motion which has been 
referred to a particular committee. But before any 
action is taken, we want to find out whether there is 
any objection that we suspend the Rules in order to 
consider Commissioner Nolledo’s motion for this 
particular afternoon. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF RULES 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to suspend 
the Rules for purposes of our acting on this particular 
motion of Commissioner Nolledo before receiving any 
report from the Steering Committee on the same? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is rec- 
ognized. 

DISCUSSION ON THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. 

I will not speak for a long time although I am known 
for that. A copy of the motion was distributed to the 
honorable Members of the Constitutional Commission. I 
think the Secretariat has distributed the copies, together 
with my letter to my colleagues asking for their support. 

I would like to state that there are similar resolutions 
filed by the Honorable Davide, Jr., de los Reyes, Jr., 
Suarez, Tadeo and Jamir. In connection with these 


20 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


resolutions, I have here in my possession a letter to the 
honorable President of the Constitutional Commission 
sent by the Honorable Vicente B. Foz, also asking 
similarly for the consideration of the form of govern- 
ment. Commissioner Foz stated here that the drafts of 
the 1935 Constitution and the 1973 Constitution, many 
provisions of which are now embodied in the Freedom 
Constitution, should be the basis of our discussion. So, 
without prejudice to amendments that they may 
present, I would like to state my motion. 

I respectfully move before this Commission that we 
constitute ourselves as an ad hoc committee to imme- 
diately conduct public hearings on what form of govern- 
ment this Commission will adopt for the Philippines; 
and after the public hearings shall have been conducted, 
that we should discuss in plenary session the merits of 
every proposal submitted from the different sectors of 
our society on that form of government and, at the 
same time, fix a timetable for the public hearings not 
exceeding six days, the maximum period; and for the 
discussion in plenary session also for a period not ex- 
ceeding six days without prejudice to the immediate 
discussion on the form of government if so minded by 
this Commission. That is my motion. 

I do not wish to state further the reasons for the 
motion. They are contained in my letter to my col- 
leagues and are stated in the urgent motion itself filed 
with the Secretariat. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I propose an amendment 
to the urgent motion made by Commissioner Nolledo. I 
propose that instead of constituting the Constitutional 
Commission as an ad hoc committee to immediately 
conduct public hearings, an ad hoc committee, not the 
Constitutional Commission itself, be created to conduct 
public hearings. In that way, we save time and allow the 
other committees to attend to the other business. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, is it the point of 
Commissioner Sarmiento that a smaller committee, 
instead of the whole Constitutional Commission, be 
constituted and called the ad hoc committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Personally, I have no objection to 
the amendment but the reason I would like the whole 
body to be constituted as an ad hoc committee is that 
the question is transcendental in character and the 
amendment essentially alters my motion. And so, 
instead of myself deciding, 1 submit it to the body for 
decision. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments on 
this motion of the Honorable Nolledo? (Silence) 

The session is suspended. 

It was 4:40 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:55 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. The parliamentary situation is that there 
is a pending motion filed by Commissioner Nolledo 
which Commissioner Bengzon would like to amend. 
May I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I clarify this, Mr. Floor 
Leader. 

When we suspended the session, there was a proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento. May we ask 
Commissioner Sarmiento, if he is insisting on his amend- 
ment. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I believe the 
situation is that there is a motion by our Acting Floor 
Leader for a freewheeling discussion on the form of 
government. The motion for an ad hoc committee of 
the entire Commission and for the conduct of public 
hearings is a completely separate and independent 
motion. I think the parliamentary procedure would be 
that there be a proposal to amend the motion of the 
Acting Floor Leader and for the Acting Floor Leader to 
accept or refuse the amendment. We cannot leave the 
motion of the Acting Floor Leader pending and attend 
to another motion which is sought to be amended. We 
have to go to the prior motion of the Acting Floor 
Leader. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, for the informa- 
tion of the honorable Vice-President, the Acting Floor 
Leader and I have agreed that his motion will be con- 
solidated with mine. That is why I added the expression 
at the end of my motion “without prejudice to a free- 
wheeling discussion of the form of government among 
the Members.” We have agreed. In other words, in 
effect, we withdrew his motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the motion that 
was before the body is the Gentleman’s particular 
motion for the whole Constitutional Commission to 
consider itself as a committee of the whole to discuss 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


21 


or to conduct public hearings on the structure of 
government tliat will be adopted. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And that later on to discuss this in 
plenary session, but without prejudice to a freewheeling 
discussion, if the body so minds. 

THE PRESIDENT. Later on. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. But then Commissioner Sarmien- 
to proposed to amend that, so that instead of the ent:re 
Commission being converted into a committee of the 
whole, there be only a smaller committee to which it 
should be referred. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. That was the situation when the 
session was suspended. 

What does the Acting Floor Leader say? 

MR. RAMA. That is the correct situation. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Are there any remarks on the proposed amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, the main motion 
of the Acting Floor Leader was for a freewheeling dis- 
cussion. As amended, it will be without prejudice to a 
freewheeling discussion. I think the idea is that e 
Members of this Commission be given an opportunity o 
explain their views on whether they are for the presi en 
tial or parliamentary or some other mixed system, u 
do not see any reason for another motion to consti u e 
this Commission or even a portion of this Cornmission 
as an ad hoc committee and undertake public hearings 
for a period of six days. This will unduly delay t e 
important task of this Commission in expediting e 
formulation of a new Constitution. 

As a matter of fact, I will make a side remark, Madam 
President. There is, for example, a resolution to i^^^ ^ ® 
the Preamble or the territory or the Bill of Rights— al o 
these are fundamental portions of a Constitution la 
had been there since 1935. We will not advance. We will 
just say “a resolution to include . . .” Perhaps there is a 
definite text of a preamble that a Member wishes to e 
considered in reference to, say, the Prearnble in t e 
1935 Constitution or even the 1973 Constitution, e 
should have a point of reference on which we can pro 
pose some amendments and maybe insert one woid or 
substitute another, and that will expedite our work. But 
I see so many resolutions, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me. We will let Com- 
missioner Padilla finish his statement first. 

MR. PADILLA. But the resolutions do not specify 
the exact text. So I would suggest, of course, subject 
to the correction . . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. In connection with that, Madam 
President, I wrote a letter to my colleagues specifying 
the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions, most provisions 
of which now appear in the Freedom Constitution, as 
the bases of discussion in the plenary session should we 
decide to adopt the presidential system as the form of 
government. 

And in connection with that. Madam President, 
because I consider that as argument against my motion, 

I would like to rebut the arguments. It is not good to 
ignore the people. We must feel the pulse of the people. 
We must hear them first because if we go to the drafts 
of the 1935 Constitution and the 1973 Constitution or 
the Freedom Constitution immediately without hearing 
the people, then an impression may be created that we 
are railroading everything. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo, may the 
Chair please be clarified on this? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. There are two matters that are 
before us. First, shall this Commission consider itself as 
the committee of the whole or shall it form a smaller 
committee to act on the structure or to discuss the 
structure of government? And, second , can this Com- 
mission this afternoon enter into a preliminary dis- 
cussion of the merits of any kind of structure of govern- 
ment. Is that what is included? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is right. Madam President. 

Assuming that I agree or the body agrees with the 
amendment of the Honorable Renato Sarmiento, we are 
not prevented from having a freewheeling discussion as 
contemplated by the honorable Vice-President of this 
Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. And as the Chair understands it, 
there are Members who are ready to discuss this par- 
ticular point this afternoon. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I am ready to listen to them. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us then proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There is an amendment by the 
Honorable Renato Sarmiento — I do not know if there 
is anyone who would like to amend that amendment. As 
I said, it alters my urgent motion substantially. And so, 
I submit to the body. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


22 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we address some points of in- 
formation to the second proponent, Commissioner 
Sarmiento? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I understand that instead of this Commission being 
constituted as an ad hoc committee to conduct public 
hearings, the Gentleman would limit the same to a com- 
mittee of the entire body constituting itself into an ad 
hoc committee. Did I understand my friend correctly? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman did not specify the 
number of the members of that proposed committee. 
Will he be kind enough to state, if he has an idea, how 
many members would compose that ad hoc committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. What I have in mind is Proclamation 
No. 9. The committee will be composed of national, 
regional and sectoral representatives. So, the committee 
will be composed of, say, 10 national representatives, 10 
regional representatives and 1 2 sectoral representatives. 

MR. SUAREZ. And does the Gentleman have an idea 
or suggestion as to how these Members would be de- 
signated or appointed? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I leave that to the wisdom of our 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Gentleman have any objec- 
Oon if the appointments are made by our Madam Pres- 
ident in order to abbreviate the proceedings? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have no objection. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments? 

Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, apropos of the 
amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento, may I intro- 
duce the following suggestions: that the President be 
given a discretion to determine the number of the 
members of the committee and to appoint the members 
of the committee provided that, firstly, anyone of the 
48 Members of this Commission may attend the public 
hearing, if he or she wants to, and secondly, this com- 
mittee will be tasked with providing and determining 
the rules on how the public hearings will be conducted 
because 1 assume that these public hearings ideally will 
not only be conducted in Metro Manila but also nation- 


wide. So, I would suggest that this committee be tasked 
with determining the mode of procedure and manner by 
which these public hearings will be conducted. 1 wonder 
if Commissioner Sarmiento would agree to such a pro- 
posal, and if he does, then we can word the amendments 
accordingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I would agree to the amendment 
being proposed by Commissioner Bengzon. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Nolledo is 
recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In view of the amendment to the 
amendment, I have no objection to the amendment of 
Commissioner Sarmiento. I withdraw my objection. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, will the sponsor 
to the amendment agree to the following amendments: 
instead of 30 members, let us have 15 members? 

In our Rules, that committee has the biggest number 
of members. That said Committee on Style has only 1 5 
members. If we have 30 members, it might be too 
unwieldy; we might as well have a committee of the 
whole. I wonder if the sponsor of the amendment will 
accept the amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. The amendment precisely leaves to 
the discretion of the President the number of member- 
ship of the committee. So, I was going to suggest to 
Commissioner Rodrigo that all of these ideas, even on 
the number of membership of the committee, be ad- 
dressed to the discretion of the President because the 
amendment leaves to the discretion of the President the 
number of members of the committee. 

MR. RODRIGO. Did I hear something to the effect 
that 30 members shall compose the committee? 

MR. BENGZON. That was amended by me, after 
which Commissioner Sarmiento had agreed. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments on 
the amendments, as amended? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Vice-President is recog- 
nized. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


23 


MR. PADILLA. I think there are too many subjects 
in the amendment. Actually, I feel that these are all out 
of order because the basic motion was for a freewheel- 
ing discussion on the floor. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, point of order. 
We have suspended the Rules. 

MR. PADILLA. This motion says “an ad hoc commit- 
tee”; then it says “conduct public hearings”; then comes 
“the entire Commission”; “no, reduce it to 30, to 15”; 
then the Members are to be appointed by the President, 
etc. I think this is a deviation from the basic concept of 
the original motion of the Acting Floor Leader for a 
freewheeling discussion among the Members here 
present. And we can suspend the Rules only as far as the 
freewheeling discussion proposed by the Acting Floor 
Leader is concerned. We cannot suspend the entire 
Rules especially with regard to the formation of the 
committees and the powers and prerogatives of these 
different committees. 

Madam President, if there is this ad hoc committee, 
whether composed of the entire 50 or 30 or 15 or even 
5 members, and we conduct public hearings for one 
week, and then report to the plenary session for another 
six days, I believe we will be defeating the purpose of 
the Acting Floor Leader in suggesting just a freewheel- 
ing discussion among the Members. 

MR. BENGZON. May I clarify, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. The motion of the Acting Floor 
Leader for a freewheeling discussion has been approved. 
So we are going to go into a freewheeling discussion, 
and in this freewheeling discussion comes the motion of 
Commissioner Nolledo. This is part of the freewheeling 
discussion. So if we had just disposed of his motion, as 
amended, and created this committee, and that would 
have been finished, then the next would have been for 
anyone of us to be able to stand up and really articulate 
his ideas on the type of government. The motion of 
Commissioner Nolledo is part of the freewheeling dis- 
cussion of this body. So, there is no conflict. Madam 
President. 

the PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the matter 
has been clarified, that a lively freewheeling discussion 
will come after we approve this committee to conduct 
public hearings because actually in the Order of Business 
we have the motion of Commissioner Nolledo about the 
creation of an ad hoc committee, which we referred to 
the Steering Committee. But then the Acting Floor 
Leader asked that instead of waiting for the report of 
the Steering Committee, we consider it now by suspend- 
ing the Rules. And so, precisely, there was an agreement 
to suspend the Rules and we were discussing the merits 


of considering the entire Commission as an ad hoc 
committee. That is the parliamentary situation now. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Therefore, I think we are ready to 
vote on that. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion, as amended, is to 
authorize the President to create a smaller special com- 
mittee that will promulgate the rules. 

MR. BENGZON. It will be tasked to determine the 
mode, procedure and manner in the conduct of public 
hearings, the number of the membership of which com- 
mittee is left to the discretion of the President, provided 
that anyone in this Commission is free to attend these 
public hearings, if he or she so desires. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think that is clear enough. We 
are ready to vote. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was listening to the proposed func- 
tion of the committee. Is it limited to determining the 
manner of the public hearing or will the committee 
itself conduct public hearings? 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee is expected to 
conduct public hearings. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, it is not limited 
to just determining; it will conduct public hearings. It 
will also determine how these public hearings will be 
conducted. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. That was not clear in 
the beginning. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. May we call for a vote on that 
now? 

As many as are in favor of this particular motion as 
explained by Commissioner Bengzon, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against the motion, as amended, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand. ) 

The results show 33 votes in favor and 8 against; the 
motion is carried. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


24 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized to speak on the nature of government. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I think Commis- 
sioner Bernas will talk on what he thinks should be the 
form of government. Before that, may I make a very 
important clarification. 

I would like to speak on this matter, too. I have my 
own opinion now as to the form of government that we 
should have, but I want to make it clear that what we 
say here now — this is a freewheeling discussion — is not 
our hard-line position yet because we need public hear- 
ings. And so, we have our position now but I want to 
make it clear on the record that we are flexible on these 
positions depending on the result of the public hearings. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I speak mainly upon 
the request of Commissioner Rama, and in the spirit of 
the remarks of Commissioner Rodrigo, what I would 
like to say is not my firm belief. Rather, what I would 
like to do today is perhaps to set the parameters of the 
discussion, the outline for the discussion, on the forms 
of government. 

I believe that in the present state of the discussion on 
the matter, when we speak of forms of government, we 
are primarily speaking of two possible areas of dis- 
cussion; namely, a classification of government based 
on the relationship between the executive and the legis- 
lature and a classification of government based on the 
relationship of the national government to the local 
government. When we classify governments on the basis 
of the relationship between the executive power and the 
legislative power, we generally classify governments into 
the presidential system, the parliamentary system or 
some kind of a combination of the two. And, as we are 
very familiar with the matter, we can say that the 
primary characteristic of the presidential form of 
government is separation of powers between the execu- 
tive, legislative and judicial branches of the government 
characterized by the independence of the three but with 
the President holding some paramount position of pre- 
cedence. And for that reason, it is referred to as a 
presidential form of government. Moreover, in this 
system we have fixed terms both for the executive and 
for the members of the legislature. 

In the parliamentary system, the primary characteris- 
tic, it would seem to me, is that executive power is 
exercised by a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister 
which for all practical purposes is a committee of the 
legislative body, and the executive and the members of 
the Cabinet hold office at the pleasure of the legislative 


body. In other words, it is without a fixed term. And 
the mechanism for terminating the tenure of the mem- 
bers of the Cabinet and of the Prime Minister is by a 
no-confidence vote whenever there is a fundamental dif- 
ference or disagreement between the legislature and the 
executive department. And the democratic character of 
this system is manifested by the fact that when there is 
a vote of no confidence, the point of disagreement is 
thrown to the people. The executive also has a weapon 
against Parliament in that he can dissolve Parliament. 
And when there is a disagreement between the two, this 
is thrown to the people. When national elections are 
held, the people align themselves either in favor of the 
legislature or the executive. If a majority of those who 
were in Parliament are reelected, then that would be an 
indication that the executive has lost the struggle with 
Parliament. 

So, if I may speak in terms of advantages or disad- 
vantages, one of the advantages of the presidential 
system is that we have stability of government. At the 
same time, however, it suffers the disadvantage that we 
have to wait for a long time before we can replace 
people we might not be satisfied with. Whereas, in a 
parliamentary system, it is possible for the sentiments of 
the people to be immediately felt and reflected in the 
selection of a new executive and a new Parliament. 

So, very roughly, I would say that those could be the 
parameters of our discussion on whether we select a 
presidential system or a parliamentary system. Our 
experience in the Philippines has been primarily with 
the presidential system. We have never really expe- 
rienced a parliamentary system. But in the period of the 
1973 Constitution, we experienced what was referred to 
as a modified parliamentary system. It was a presidential 
system with the President having the power to dissolve 
the National Assembly and with the National Assembly 
possessing the power to exercise a vote of no confidence 
but not against the Chief Executive but against a minor 
functionary; namely, the Prime Minister. So, the govern- 
ment which terminated with the February revolution 
was a government which predominantly was presidential 
with some characteristics of the parliamentary system. 

As we very well know, the idea of dividing power 
among the executive, legislative and judicial depart- 
ments is primarily for the purpose of limiting power. 
Constitutions are made not for the purpose of granting 
power to government because governments have power 
inherent in them, but rather for the purpose of limiting 
power. And the principal device for limiting power is by 
dividing them into these three departments, the idea 
being that power can be exercised only with the 
cooperation of the two departments. And the aberration 
takes place when one department is able to complete an 
official act without the cooperation of the others. For 
instance, in the legislative process, power is jointly exer- 
cised by the legislature and by the executive. Aberration 
takes place when the executive alone can complete a 
legislation without the help or without the check of any 
other authority. We also know that this system was 


C-254 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


irannASiSNG ubrar? 

25 


transplanted to the Philippines from the United States, 
this system of limiting power through a horizontal 
system of distribution of power; najnely, the executive, 
the legislative, and the judiciary. In the American sys- 
tem, aside from this horizontal system of dividing 
power, there is also the vertical system of dividing 
power; namely, the powers of the national government 
and the powers of the local government or the state 
government. There are certain state powers which are 
beyond the reach of national government, and there are 
certain governmental powers which cannot be exercised 
by the national government because they are reserved 
for the state government. In that sense, what is effected 
is a limitation of power, which is intended to prevent 
the possibility of concentrating power, resulting in a 
dictatorship. When the system was transplanted to our 
land by the Americans, what they transplanted was the 
system of the horizontal distribution of power, not the 
system of vertical distribution of power. Looking at the 
history of the United States Constitution — and I think 
this is a very important point to consider — the federal 
system of the United States which created a national 


government was a system designed by the elite of 
American society precisely for the purpose of neutraliz- 
ing the power of the masses. When the state govern- 
ments were confronted by restless farmers and restless 
debtors — and this became a problem for them — they 
niet among themselves and agreed on a strong federal 
government, a national government, a bigger govern- 
ment which would be less accessible to the masses and 
to that extent, less subject to the influence of the 
masses. So, there is this thesis in the American systern 
that the federal government of the United States is anti- 
democratic. When the system was transplanted to us, it 
became worse because not only was a central govern- 
ment created, but the central government was also given 
complete discretion in what powers the local govern- 
ment should have. In the American system, at least the 
states retained certain untouchable powers. Here the 
powers were completely in the hands of the national 
government. And the question is sometimes asked 
whether our system, borrowed from the United States, 
will guarantee that liberty will not be lost, dictatorship 
will not take place. It is a system which has worked in 
the United States. It seems to me that it is a system 
which has not worked in the Philippines and we ask our- 
selves why. Perhaps, the answer is economic. The great 
masses of poor and disadvantaged people in the Philip- 
pines create a situation of dependence upon patrons. 
When you have a situation of severe, almost absolute 
dependence on patrons, if there is this great economic 
inequality, no matter how strong are the guarantees of 
liberty you might have, liberty will always be en- 
dangered. And it seems to me that is what happened in 
our country. 


Very briefly, therefore, our discussions perhaps could 

be along these lines, not so much on whether we should 
have a bicameral or unicameral government — that is 
secondary, I think — but whether we should have a 


system of preeminence, or a presidential system with a 
strict division of powers with term, or rather a more 
responsive parliamentary system but more complicated 
in its operation than a presidential system. The other 
question we must face is: Should we continue a system 
where practically all governmental power must come 
from the central government, from Manila? Must we 
continue the overdominance of Manila over the rest of 
the country? These, I submit, are some things we could 
consider in our deliberations. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will the Gentleman yield to a few 
questions? 


FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 


MR. SUAREZ. I heard the Gentleman mention the 
fact that he is a little apprehensive about the institution 
or establishment of a presidential system of government 
for the reason that while there is acknowledged stabili- 
ty since it provides for a fixed tenure, it is not that 
these elected government officials enjoy a fixed tenure. 


FR BERNAS. At this stage, I would tentatively 
^ntemplate a situation where we would have a fixed 
>rm but with an easy terminable tenure. What I mean 
under the present system, if we have a presidential 
/stem the only way of ousting an unsatisfactory presi- 
-nt would be by the cumbersome process of impeach- 
ment What I am suggesting is, perhaps we should 
iscover some easier way of making the president 


MR SUAREZ. So, if we would institute, for exam- 
ple a system of recall during the term of the presidency, 
would the Gentleman have any objection? 


FR. BERNAS. I would consider that very seriously as 
a possible alternative. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would that be a compelling reason for 
him to support the presidential structure? 


FR. BERNAS. It is a strong reason, but not yet 
compelling. 

MR. SUAREZ. Let us go to the federal system of 
government that is now prevalent in the United States. 

The Gentleman is aware of the fact, 1 suppose, that 
the United States is a huge land mass. It is not separated 
internally by seas, by straits, by bays, by lakes; is that 
correct? 


FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 


26 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. And the Philippines, upon the other 
hand, is separated by oceans, by waters, so much so that 
we have something like 7,104 islands. Is the Gentleman 
also aware of that? 

FR. BERNAS. It is directly for that reason that our 
situation, perhaps more than that in the United States, 
calls for greater autonomy of local governments. 

MR. SUAREZ. Regional autonomy but not a federal 
system of government; is my understanding correct? 

FR. BERNAS. The name really does not matter. 
What I have in mind is a system where a central govern- 
ment does not have all the powers; there are certain 
powers retained by the local governments which may 
not be touched by the national government. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, basically, not a prin- 
cipal feature of the federal government as is known and 
operated in the United States. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Com- 
missioner Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished Gentleman yield 
to some clarificatory questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Did I get the Gentleman correctly as 
having said that the parliamentary system is more 
responsive but rather complicated? 

FR. BERNAS. I did say that — that there are 
characteristics of the parliamentary system which make 
it more immediately responsive to these changing 
conditions. 

MR. DAVIDE. In that respect, therefore, the parlia- 
mentary system would be most suited to the needs of 
the time especially in our country? 

FR. BERNAS. This has to be balanced also with the 
need for stability. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the need for stability not be 
recognized by the system of recall within a given 
period? For instance, if we fix the term of the members 
of the legislature to six years and the term of the Prime 
Minister also to six years as well as that of the President 


and allow a recall somewhere at the middle of the term, 
would it not assure a certain degree of stability? 

FR. BERNAS. That would be a possibility. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, would I be correct if I 
say that the Gentleman is in favor of a modified parlia- 
mentary system of government? 

FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, that is the direc- 
tion in which my thinking is going at the moment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman yield to a few 
questions? 

I think we have to look into the historical background 
of the government of the United States. Is it not true 
that the United States started as practically independent 
autonomous states? 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. And these states decided to cede 
some of their sovereignty to the national government? 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, this is one of the features of a 
federal system — that autonomous local governments 
originally had the sovereignty but they decided to cede 
some of that sovereignty to the national or federal 
government. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. In the presidential system, it is the 
other way around — the people delegate the sovereignty 
to the national government and the national govern- 
ment, in turn, delegates or cedes some of these powers 
to the local government. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct, at least under the sys- 
tem of the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. Under that, sovereignty is 
vested by the people in the national government. How 
then do we grant sovereign or autonomous powers to 
the local government? Who will decide on this? I 
suppose it is we in framing our Constitution, and the 
people, in ratifying it. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. But this Constitution which we are 
framing must be couched in general terms; we cannot 
go into specifics. Is that right? 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


27 


FR. BERNAS. That would be right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the Gentleman have any idea 
on how we should word this general provision? 

FR. BERNAS. In as far as framing this general pro- 
vision is concerned, it will involve, I think, a careful 
cataloguing of the powers of government. After we 
have catalogued the powers of government, we will 
make a decision as to which of these powers should be 
retained by the national government and which of these 
powers should be given to the local governments. 

Let me give an example. For instance, regarding 
national defense, who has the last say on national 
defense? We will make a decision on that. In the dis- 
position of national resources, we will have to make a 
division of the various types of natural resources — 
mineral land, forest land, agricultural land. And with 
respect to each of these questions, we will determine 
who has the final decision on the disposition of such 
matters. So, it will involve the careful cataloguing of the 
powers of government and distribution, and perhaps a 
cautionary general provision saying that whatever is not 
distributed in the Constitution is deemed retained by 
the national government. 

MR. RODRIGO. But the process of allocating powers 
to the local governments follows the unitary system; 
meaning, from the national we allocate more powers to 
the local governrnents. As a matter of fact, this Consti- 
tutional Commission is a national commission. 

FR. BERNAS. It is a national commission. It is a 
national convention, a convention capable of giving to 
the local governments powers which are untouchable by 
the national government. In other words, in the process 
of ratification of whatever we may propose here, we will 
be asking the people if we should strip the national 
government of some of its powers in favor of the local 
governments. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, basically it is the unitary system 
that we follow with modifications. 

May I clarify my question. We have already stated 
that the procedure in a federal form of government is, 
we start with autonomous states, autonomous regions 
and then these autonomous regions decide if they will 
cede some of their powers to the national government. 
So, it is from below to the top. But under the present 
situation, we cannot go through a procedure like that. 
It has to be from top to bottom now. From the central 
government, we cede more powers to the local govern- 
ments. It might be provided in the Constitution to cede 
more powers but the powers are lodged from the top, 
and the top then cedes more powers to the bottom. 

FR. BERNAS. When we are speaking of a constitu- 
tional commission or a constitutional convention, 
perhaps it is irrelevant to speak of whether it is a local 


or a national body. That classification, it seems to me, 
would be irrelevant because it is either a constitutional 
commission or not; and it can only be something that is 
binding on the rest of the nation especially in a com- 
mission like this. And in the matter of distribution of 
power to the national government and the local govern- 
ments, it would also seem to me that whether it is par- 
liamentary or presidential is irrelevant. What we are 
talking of is whether it is federal or unitary. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, federal or unitary. 

FR. BERNAS. So, when we say parliamentary or 
presidential, we are classifying governments on a hori- 
zontal level; but when we talk of federal or unitary, we 
are classifying governments on the basis of their vertical 
relationship. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is right, yes. Can that objective 
of giving more autonomy to the local governments not 
be accomplished in a presidential system by providing in 
the Constitution in broad terms that more local auto- 
nomy should be given to the local governments? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. As a matter of fact, the United 
States has a presidential system but it is a federal 
system. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, thank you very much. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? My obseiwation is pertinent to the matter now 
discussed by the Commission because this is a reality. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is asking 
to be recognized. He may proceed. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. This is a reality prevailing in the 
South. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Because of the insistence of 
Muslim leaders in Southern Philippines that they be 
given more power, more say in the determination of 
policies in the region, the national government created a 
legislative assembly for Region IX composed of the 
Provinces of Sulu, Zamboanga and Basilan, whose 
Speaker is appointed by the President and whose seat is 
in Zamboanga City. This assembly legislates for its 
region on matters concerning powers which the govern- 
ment has delegated to it. Representatives from each 
province, including the Speaker of the regional assem- 
bly, if I still remember, are appointed from Manila. So, 
we have here a regional setup which has proven to be 
successful because the people feel that they still have a 
regional assembly to whom they can appeal and who 


28 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


knows and feels the interest of the region. The Speaker 
is elected by them and each region — Sulu, Cotabato, 
Lanao and the other regions — is represented. It is still 
working and there is no reason why it could not 
succeed. 

It has succeeded and the people realize that the 
national government has not only appropriated power 
or neglected them, but has given their representatives 
the power to legislate or to declare policies for the 
benefit of the people and the region itself. It is working 
and it is successful. 

I suppose many of the Members of the Commission 
do not realize this because this applies only to the 
southern region, Region IX. I personally know the rep- 
resentatives of these provinces to the regional legislative 
assembly in Zamboanga, and they hold regular sessions. 
This regional body is not exactly autonomous in the 
sense that the government has delegated all powers of 
sovereignty or even part of its sovereignty to this 
regional body, but the regional body became more 
conscious of its responsibility. 

On the basis of this arrangement which prevails only 
in Region IX, other regions of the Philippines are en- 
couraged to institute a regional legislative assembly so 
that the question of welfare policies will be debated by 
the representatives of the region itself. This does not 
need any constitutional proviso; the authority of the 
government to pass the law creating this regional auto- 
nomous government has not been contested because the 
people accept this and are glad that this was created. 

I do not see any reason why people from Luzon or 
the Visayas will contest the regional autonomy of 
Southern Mindanao, if it is accepted by the people. It is 
for their benefit; it is responsive to their will, their 
sentiments and their welfare. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair inquire if Com- 
missioner Abubakar has any question to address to 
Commissioner Bernas so that Commissioner Bernas may 
sit down, if he no longer has any other questions. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Was this arrangement which had 
been instituted in Mindanao implemented? Would it 
meet the situation? 

FR. BERNAS. I think the Commissioner has brought 
up very important points. As a matter fact, in my own 
thinking on this matter, I would use the autonomous 
government of Mindanao as a starting point for our 
discussion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman through with his 
interpellation of Commissioner Bernas? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I appreciate the remark of Com- 
missioner Bernas, and I merely took the floor to clear 
up whatever cloud or whatever situations are unknown 
that are prevailing in the region. That is my only pur- 
pose, and I wish to congratulate Commissioner Bernas 


for his scholarly dissection of the nature and forms of 
government. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Commissioner Villacorta had previously asked to be 
recognized. He may proceed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I just would like to give a few reactions to the re- 
marks of Commissioner Bernas. First of all, in evaluating 
the merits of the presidential and parliamentary sys- 
tems, I think we would be doing an injustice to the 
parliamentary system if we call the Marcos govern- 
ment a modified parliamentary system. What we really 
had under Mr. Marcos since 1972 was a dictatorship that 
was cosmeticized by a so-called parliament, with a 
supposed Prime Minister who was actually appointed by 
Mr. Marcos and not elected by Members of Parliament. 
Moreover, although the Marcos Constitution specified 
the procedure governing the election of the Prime Minis- 
ter and Members of Parliament, most of these proce- 
dures were actually not followed. Under no circum- 
stances, therefore, could we consider the Marcos govern- 
ment as having had a semblance of the parliamentary 
form of government. 

I would like to mention that in weighing the merits 
of both systems, we should consider the political culture 
of Filipinos who, according to many scholarly studies, 
favor a strong national leader. One of the questions that 
we should ask ourselves is: Which form of government 
would best guarantee the reduction of the possibility 
that another dictator might emerge? 

I would also like to make an observation about the 
Gentleman’s reference to patronage as the overwhelming 
or overriding factor in Philippine politics. I think if we 
were to adopt either the parliamentary or the presiden- 
tial system without meaningful changes in our electoral 
process, there will not be any success in reducing the 
patronage system. Instead of relying solely on the 
American electoral system, it is time to look into some 
of the European countries’ electoral systems. 

For example, the party list system would insure more 
the possibility of mass-based political parties’ participa- 
tion in political contests, and actual representation in 
the legislature. 

Lastly — this is not just an observation on what Com- 
missioner Bernas has said, but a reaction to some points 
raised earlier — there seems to be a school of thought 
here that the best working draft is the 1935 Constitu- 
tion simply because it was the only one duly ratified by 
the people. We must remember that the 1935 Constitu- 
tion was framed during the American colonial period, 
with the express condition that the draft constitution 
will have to be submitted to the then President of the 
United States and subject to the approval of the said 
president. Without discrediting the 1935 Constitutional 
Convention Delegates, we should reflect on whether the 
framers tailored the 1935 Constitution to adopt the 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


29 


ideals of the American presidential system in order to 
ensure its approval. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


have been something else. Writers talk about a semantic 
constitution. 

MR. TINGSON. Finally, if the administration of the 
former President did adhere to the characteristics of the 
form of government we had and if he exemplified moral 
leadership in this country, would the government then 
existing have worked? 


MR. TINGSON. Will Commissioner Bernas answer 
some clarificatory questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. 

MR. TINGSON. First of all, may I also give my com- 
mendation to Commissioner Bernas for a very enlighten- 
ing lecture and discourse on the forms of government. 

Does Commissioner Bernas agree with this quotation: 
“For forms of government, let fools decide; what is best 
administered is the best government.” Does that sound 
sensible to him? 

FR. BERNAS. I put it differently. I have always 
believed that monarchy is the best form of government, 
provided I am the king. 

MR. TINGSON. Very good. 

In the 1971 Constitutional Convention, we adopted 
the parliamentary system. If I recall it right, we said in 
the deliberations that the parliamentary system was 
more responsive, more responsible and more accounta- 
ble to the people. Does Commissioner Bernas agree that 
it is not so in a presidential type of government? 

FR. BERNAS. i think it is a question of the decision 
of the 1971 Constitutional Convention favoring the par- 
liamentary system for being more responsive. 

MR. TINGSON. I understand that today, throughout 
the world, there are more governments of the parlia- 
mentary type than of the presidential type, is that true? 

FR. BERNAS. I have not made a head count. 

MR. TINGSON. I do understand that there are more 
governments of the parliamentary type. 

Lastly, there is a saying in Filipino: “Walang matuwid 
sa politika na mali sa konsensiya.” “Nothing is political- 
ly right that is morally wrong.” Could we apply this to 
our discussion on the form of government? 

FR. BERNAS. There are forms of government which 
might be called “immoral.” The form itself does not 
characterize the government as moral or immoral. It is 
more on the uses to which the form is put. So when I 
called the system we had as “semi-parliamentary” to 
which Commissioner Villacorta objected, I was referring 
to the form of government; whereas, the substance may 


FR. BERNAS. I would follow the advice of some 
world leaders who do not answer questions based on 
“if.” 


MR. TINGSON. I see. 

Thank you so much. Commissioner Bernas. (Ap- 
plause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Villegas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

I would like to discuss further reference of Commis- 
sioner Bernas to economic factors. 

I am very convinced that man does not live by bread 
alone and that there are more important issues than 
economic issues. There is no question that economic 
development is the most immediate concern of the 
national government, considering the fact that 70 per 
?ent of our population is living below the poverty line 
meaning, we are having a hard time putting body and 

soul together. 

I am attracted to a form of government that tries to 
combine stability and responsiveness because our 
problem will take a long time to solve. Probably some 
neoole may think that is having your cake and eating it 
too I agree with Commissioner Villacorta when he said 
thal President Marcos never gave the modified parlia- 
mentary system a chance to work. 

I think we should really try to emulate the strong 
leadership in the French system, where there is a very 
strong President while having a parliament In that way 
we in address our efforts to some of the roots of 
poverty, such as patronage and lack of political will and 
readership. We can direct our attention to such que^ 
tons as land reform and upliftment of the Poot. And 
unless we have a strong national leadership, political will 
cannot be mobilized. 

At the same time, I would like to say that I am 
attracted to a unitary form of government because r^ht 
now, talking about autonomy can be misleading. The 
Philippines is still, somehow, plagued with regionalisni, 
and we are not yet ready to talk about federalism. At 
least that is how I see it. I would rather use the phrase 
“decentralization of authority” instead of autonomy. 


30 


TUESDAY, J UNE 3. 1986 


I am very much in favor of what is known as the 
principle of subsidiarity, allowing local governments to 
take care of what they can competently solve in their 
respective regions. For example, I see a great need for 
decentralizing decision-making in the executive branch. 
There is no reason why there cannot be a Central Bank 
office, for example, in Cebu, that can decide on foreign 
exchange transactions. I do not see why the Cebuanos 
have to come all the way to Manila for a lot of questions 
addressed to the Central Bank. This could be applied to 
all the ministries. I know that there are already some 
attempts by the Ministries of Agriculture and Food and 
Agrarian Reform to delegate authority to their respec- 
tive officials in the various regions. I favor this kind 
of decentralization; but definitely, I do not think we are 
ready for what we call “federalism.” 

I would also like to comment on the cultural need for 
adopting a system which we can call “enlightened pater- 
nalism.” I know the word “paternalism” is taboo to a 
number of people and it does connote the patronage 
that Commissioner Bemas is referring to. Let us take a 
look at the Japanese who were able to combine some of 
the favorable factors of paternalism with the modern 
factors of industrial progress. We can call Japan, Singa- 
pore, and Korea as examples of enlightened paternal- 
ism. Since most of us here are parents, I am sure you 
know that one can have a good or a bad father. Even 
from the management point of view, some people are 
trying to work with “enlightened paternalism” as it 
should apply to many Asian societies. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Garcia be 
recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. I would just like to make some re- 
marks following Father Bernas’ discourse, and to react 
to the point of Commissioner Villegas. 

Basically, my contribution to the thoughts expressed 
today will not be on the different forms of government 
but rather on the substance of what I believe is the ques- 
tion today. I believe the question should be on the basic 
problems of the country such as poverty, hunger and 
land. We have the problem of power which is basically 
on the participation of the majority. We have to con- 
sider what system — presidential or parliamentary — will 
truly empower the people. The different sectors of our 
society, especially the farmers, the workers, the urban 
poor, the fishermen and all those who have been ex- 
cluded from the political decision-making that shaped 
their lives, should have a better say. I find this problem 
the basic question. 


That is the reason I find this discussion today 
fascinating and very constructive wherefrom we can 
learn. One of the first resolutions we adopted was 
excellent for we opened the doors of this Commission 
to the people through public hearings. The fact that 
some of us have been going to the different provinces 
trying to find out what people think would later on 
make this nation aware that we have empowered the 
people to determine the solutions to their real problems. 

I would like to end with this point: The problems of 
hunger, poverty and land are essentially a problem of 
power or a problem of participation of the m.ajority. We 
may have very good ideas regarding land reform but, if 
the farmer is not consulted or if he does not, in a sense, 
become the creator of his own history, then we will not 
be judged very well by history. That is why I would like 
to make this appeal to my brothers here — we are not 
simply going to be the only authors of this Constitution, 
but also our people. Let us write this Constitution 
together with them. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I address a question to Com- 
missioner Bernas, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas may yield, 
if he so desires. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. The system of recall that Commis- 
sioner Bernas has articulated could also go the other 
way around by producing instability, could it not? In 
other words, if the recall would be too easy, then that 
would defeat the very purpose for the installation of 
such a system. 

FR. BERNAS. It would depend on the terms of the 
recall. 

MR. BENGZON. Therefore, instead of a recall as 
called for in a parliamentary system, how about 
liberalizing the mode of impeachment? Does Com- 
missioner Bernas think that would be better? 

FR. BERNAS. I have no fixed ideas on this. 

MR. BENGZON. As long as one can insure stability 
and at the same time put the President or the head of 
government on his toes, realizing that he could be im- 
peached, would that not be satisfactory? 

FR. BERNAS. A liberalized impeachment after a 
pattern of the “no-confidence” vote on parliamentary 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


31 


system, yes. A recall, as I understand it, is something 
that is exercised not by the parliament but rather by the 
electorate. So in that sense, perhaps it could be superior 
to impeachment in terms of popularity but more 
expensive. 

MR. BENGZON. With respect to the regionalization 
of certain powers or giving the regions certain auto- 
nomy, I am not only speaking of the political will or 
the political aspect of the people’s life. I would also like 
to extend this discussion not only to the economic 
aspect but also to the community life in various respec- 
tive areas. Some people say that we cannot give too 
much right and power to our people because they are 
not yet ready for it, or they have not yet been properly 
politicized, or they do not know yet how to exercise 
their rights. My thinking is, if we do not begin now, 
when are we going to begin? So, would Commissioner 
Bernas agree with the thought that all communities 
should determine the solutions to their respective pro- 
blems because they are in the best position to know 
them? And, therefore, would the Gentleman agree that 
the Constitution we are going to draft should be general 
but in such a way as would give people in the barrios 
freedom to determine and decide for themselves the 
solutions to their particular problems? 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly. As Commissioner Garcia 
was saying, a very important thing is the reality of 
people’s participation. If the basic Christian communi- 
ties in the Catholic Church succeeded in many things, it 
is largely because their own sufficiency was recognized 
by the church. So, I agree with Commissioner Bengzon 
that we should recognize the responsibility of basic 
communities, and that we should not exercise over- 
paternalism which kills initiative and growth. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo asked that 
he be recognized earlier. 

MR. TADEO. Ano ba ang pamahalaang ninanais ng 
pitumput’ limang bahagi ng ating mamamayang magbu- 
bukid? Gusto ko lamang susugan ang sinabi ni kasa- 
mang Ed Garcia tungkol sa uri ng pamahalaang ninanais 
ng magbubukid. Sa wikang banyaga ito ay “democratic 
representation in organs of political power or a form of 
government which will insure the broadest class in 
sectoral representation, including the system of propor- 
tional representation in legislature.” Ang gusto naming 
pamahalaan ay binubuo ng mula sa kanayunan, ng mag- 
bubukid, manggagawa, urban poor, minorya, taong 
simbahan at mga estudyante. Lahat sila’y bahaging 
huhubog ng pamahalaan, mula sa pambayan at panlala- 
wigan, hanggang sa pambansa. Naniniwala kami na ang 
people’s power ay napapanahon na upang maging bahagi 
ng ating Saligang Batas, hindi isang people’s power na 
nasa amin ang people pero wala naman sa amin ang 
power. Tanggapin natin na kung nasaan ang political 
power, naroon ang may kapangyarihang gumawa ng 
batas. Kung ang political power ay nasa ^kamay lamang 
ng naghaharing uri na tinatawag nating elite democra- 
cy,” naniniwala kaming presidential man o parliamenta- 
ry ang pamahalaan, ito ay mananatiling elite democra- 
cy.” Kayat sa panig ho ng magbubukid, ang ninanais na- 
ming pamahalaan ay democratic representation in 
organs of political power. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will Commissioner Bernas yield to 
just one question? 


MR. BENGZON. Yes, that is the word — “paternity.” 
I do not want to use the word “Christian” because other 
Filipinos are not Christian. 

FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, there is a current 
example now of how government can go to the grass 
roots. We can translate the structure of basic Christian 
communities into secular organizations and have them 
achieve secular ends. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, but if we could provide the 
basic right and opportunity to these respective com- 
munities to really be aware of their problems and to 
really be encouraged to discuss the solutions to their 
problems, that would be the best. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, that would be very important so 
as to make sure that they have a way of having their in- 
fluences felt in the corridors of power. 

MR. BENGZON. Without feeling that they are being 
patronized. 

Thank you. 


FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

I was listening to Commissioner Bernas’ analysis of 
he advantages and disadvantages of a presidential 
iystem vis-a-vis a parliamentary system. I happen 
o have served under a presidential system for three 
erms in the defunct Congress and also under a semi- 
,arliamentary system” in the Batasang Pambansa. 
)uring the three terms that I served in the old Congress, 
felt that we were freer in the discharge of our duties to 
epresent our people and there were less intrusmns into 
egislative prerogatives. Malaya kami bilang Kinatawan 
ig aming bayan, distrito o lalawigan, at kayang-kaya 
laming tutulan ang ano mang sabihin ng Pangulo noon, 
lowever, while it is true that we were exercising our 
egislative responsibilities in a freer atmosphere, there 
i^ere a lot of stalemates because the executive and the 
egislative branches tended to run into rival situations, 
nd it meant a lot of lost time. 

The main criticism against the presidential system is 
hat we were involved in a tug-of-war struggle for power 


32 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


between the president and the Congress. I remember 
that. So, there was a hue and cry for a system whereby 
there will be less check and balance. In a parliamentary 
system we will be given enough rope to hang ourselves 
without the traditional check and balance. 

I agree in part with Commissioner Villacorta. We are 
arguing the facts of life here. I am here not to apologize 
for anybody. In fact, I would admit many things in 
order to arrive at a better Constitution for our country. 

I would not be here, if I were going to defend anybody. 

So, while it is true that the parliamentary system may 
be more responsive, I would like to ask Commissioner 
Bemas: Does the semi-parliamentary system deal with 
problems like initiation and implementation of pro- 
grams? Remember that the Members of Parliament who 
were also Members of the Cabinet were the chairmen of 
the committees. They initiated and implemented pro- 
grams like those on public works. When they ran for 
reelection, they ran as incumbents, and they were per- 
ceived by the people as having undue advantage over the 
other candidates. In other countries, how do they avoid 
such perception? I am referring to parliaments where 
Members of the Cabinet innovate, author or sponsor 
programs which they themselves implement. Again 
when they run for election, they run as incumbents. 

Unlike our Congress days, we were not Members of 
the Cabinet, and we had no plethora of executive sup- 
port. We ran for Congressmen on our own. I did not 
experience what Senators Padilla and Soc Rodrigo expe- 
rienced, but I did experience running three times as a 
Congressman. So considering the Gentleman’s depth of 
research and knowledge on the matter, what have other 
countries devised to prevent the birth of discontent of 
then constituencies in a situation like that? 

FR. BERNAS. I really have not made a very thorough 
study on this. But since Commissioner Natividad made 
as a point of departure his experience under our semi- 
parliamentary system, perhaps I would begin by the 
observation that it is very difficult to use it as a starting 
point because it is a very peculiar thing. If the incum- 
bents under that system enjoyed extraordinary power 
and advantage, it would seem to me that it was not so 
much because it was a parliamentary system but because 
they shared in the overwhelming advantage which 
executive power had over anybody else. This is not true 
in other real parliamentary systems. So, if you have a 
situation where the parliamentarians do not have the 
overwhelming support of an omnipotent executive, I 
believe that problems of advantage or disadvantage, 
which the Gentleman may have encountered, would not 
take place. I am not aware that in the parliamentary 
system of Britain or even that of Japan, the incumbents 
necessarily enjoy extraordinary advantage. As I said, if 
the incumbents belonging to thfe ruling party — our 
experience of the immediate past — were at an ad- 
vantage, it was because the ruling party was an over- 
whelming ruling party due to the nature of the 
executive power found in Amendment No. 6. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. So, the system itself, the parlia- 
mentary system, as practiced in other countries whereby 
the Cabinet members initiated and, at the same time, 
implemented programs as Members of Parliament, did 
not bring about abuses. 

FR. BERNAS. That is my own impression. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

My questions are directed to Father Bernas. 

I have three questions. Suppose we do not use the 
economic benefits simply as the primary factor but 
rather the promotion and the safeguarding of equality 
and participation among the people, which is the more 
responsive kind of government, the presidential or the 
parliamentary? 

FR. BERNAS. I think that for as long as you do not 
have a measure of economic equality, then all other 
equalities or liberties become largely ephemeral because 
their protection depends on the economic balance. In 
other words, when we draft the Constitution, we will 
deal with two things: First, we try to identify values — 
the values we want to protect and emphasize; second, 
we design systems which will promote and protect those 
values. So, if we say that for us economic equality is a 
value which must, at all cost, be promoted, then we 
must design systems which will insure that this value 
will be protected. 

BISHOP BACANI. Maybe some people are right when 
they say that, if you want the economic situation of the 
poor to improve, then you must give them more polit- 
ical power, and this will enable them to rise up even in 
the economic structure. That is why I would like to 
propose that the economic factor should not be made 
the primary criterion of responsiveness. It is just an 
observation. 

The second question is: We Filipinos do not have a 
very strong national consciousness at present. We are 
really building a nation now. Considering this factor, 
will a federal form of government go counter to the 
growth of national consciousness at this stage of our 
national development? 

FR. BERNAS. I would answer that question by 
saying that when you are building a strong unity, you 
must first build strong individuals, because only strong 
individuals can forge a strong unity. So for us to have a 
strong national government, we must strengthen the 
local governments. If we go back to the history of the 
United States, the lack of national consciousness on the 
part of the original states did not prevent the Americans 
from forming a strong national government. And they 


TUESDAY, JUNE 3, 1986 


33 


succeeded precisely because they had already strong 
state governments. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

Just a final question for my information. Can we have 
both a parliamentary and federal form of government? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. Malaysia and Germany have both 
forms of government, if I am not mistaken. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
adjourn the session until tomorrow at three o’clock in 
the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at three o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 6:28 p.m. 


— " f t 


*• ' I 

V»> J ’’A t 

' i.f, • 

•I 

‘JAKt • . . 


« 





WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


35 


R.C.C. NO. 3 
Wednesday, June 4, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:22 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to 
sing the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Felicitas S. Aquino. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


Davide . . . . , 

. . . Present 

Regalado 

. Present 

Foz 

. . . Present 

Reyes de los . . 

. Present 

Garcia 

. . . Present'*' 

Rigos 

. Present 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Rodrigo 

. Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Present* 

Romulo 

. Present 

Janiir 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. Present 

Laurel 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . . 

. Present 

Lerum 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . . 

. Present 

Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Tan 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Tingson 

. Present 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Uka 

. Present 

PadiUa 

. . Present 

Villacorta .... 

. Present 

Quesada . . . . 

. . Present 

Villegas 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 




PRAYER 

MS. AQUINO. Almighty Father, in whose hands 
lies the destiny of people and nations, we implore Your 
healing grace on a world torn by strife and man’s in- 
humanity to man. 

Grant us Your wisdom, strength and courage, for us 
to be able to work for the preservation of civil liberties 
and the upholding of human rights, to strive for a more 
equitable distribution of the country’s wealth and 
resources, and to be on the side of the poor, the 
exploited and the victims of injustice. 

To this task, we commit ourselves in the name of 
Your Son, Jesus Christ, and the power of the Holy 
Spirit. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . 

. . . Present 

Benias 


Alonto .... 

. . . Present* 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Aquino 

. . . Present 

Brocka 


Azcuna .... 

, . . Present 

Calderon 

. Present* 

Bacani 

, . . Present 

Castro de . . . . 


Bengzon . . . . 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 43 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we read and then approve 
the Journal of yesterday s session. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
;pense with the reading of the Journal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
e Chair hears none; the reading of the Journal is 
pensed with. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam °"%t"uneT 

■tion on the Journal. i |®’ “s 3 

rcooperation of AT LEAST TWO departments. 

Incidentally, I would like to commend the Secretariat 
making a better summary than the presentation 

iterday. 


Appeared after the roll call 


36 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
correction on page 20, line 4 of the Journal of yester- 
day’s session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
correction is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the ap- 
proval of the Journal, as corrected. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the ap- 
proval of the Journal as corrected? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the Journal, as corrected, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Refer- 
ence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communication, the 
President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 30, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE CREATION OF ADDI- 
TIONAL COMMITTEES. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Jamir. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 31, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE USE OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION AS THE WORKING DRAFT IN THE 
EVENT THAT THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM OF 
GOVERNMENT IS CHOSEN BY THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Jamir. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 32, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE USE OF THE 1935 
CONSTITUTION AS THE WORKING DRAFT IN THE 
EVENT THAT THE PRESIDENTIAL FORM OF 
GOVERNMENT IS CHOSEN BY THE COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Jamir. 

To the Steering Committee. 


COMMUNICATION 

Communication from Justice Porfirio V. Sison, Pres- 
ident of the Philippine Constitution Association, trans- 
mitting a draft constitution prepared by the Philippine 
Constitution Association. 

(Communication No. 2 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

DISCUSSION ON THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
Continuation 

THE PRESIDENT. We have an Unfinished Business 
which is the continuation of the discussion on the form 
of government. 

May we know from the Acting Floor Leader if there 
are speakers for this afternoon. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President, there are 
speakers on the form of government in a freewheeling 
discussion under the same terms as yesterday. 

May I now call on Commissioner Villacorta. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much. 

Actually I was caught unaware when the Acting Floor 
Leader said that I was going to be the second speaker. 
But in any event, I just would like to react to the state- 
ments of Commissioners Garcia and Tadeo with respect 
to constitutionalizing people’s power in the different 
branches of government. 

In this connection, the body might consider the 
possibility of incorporating into the Article on the 
Legislative a provision on multisectoral representation 
to the national Legislature. I submitted this as a resolu- 
tion in view of the fact that there is a clamor to enshrine 
people’s power in the Constitution, and it seems that 
one of the most effective means to achieve this ideal is 
to guarantee legislative representation to the different 
major sectors of Philippine society. 

In view of the express need to democratize the law- 
making branch of government, I would like to propose 
that in addition to the regularly elected legislators based 
on district or regional representation, there should be 
significant multisectoral representation in the legislative 
body. These various sectors which include, among 
others, farmers, workers, cultural communities, womeri, 
teachers, professionals and students should elect their 
own representatives to the Legislative. 

That is all, thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


37 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask Commissioner 
Villacorta a question for clarification. 

I agree with Commissioner Villacorta’s idea of having 
representation from different sectors such as: farmers, 
teachers, youth and others, but what are the mechanics 
of electing these representatives? 

MR. VILLACORTA. The specific mechanics can be 
deliberated later, but offliand I think the election of 
sectoral representatives could be done from within the 
respective sectors. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the sectoral representatives be 
elected nationwide, let us say, all the women all over the 
Philippines will elect a representative for women, and 
similarly for the farmers? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, there will be different lists of 
voters for farmers, for students and for youth. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is there any country in the world 
that has already experimented on this? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Since we have just experienced 
a unique revolution, and we, are now in a unique chapter 
in our history, I think we should look up to a brave new 
world and come up with innovations. We start here with 
a tabula rasa and we should come up with some imagi- 
native ideas in forming our new government. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the Commissioner have any 
imaginative but feasible idea? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. There are some ways by 
which we could elect the members from the different 
sectors. One system that we can look into is the pro- 
portional list system which is practiced in West Ger- 
many and in other European countries. Or we can 
simply call it majority electoral system wherein the can- 
didates who get the majority vote become the rep- 
resentatives of the sector. 

If this resolution is approved, then it would be up to 
us to determine the number of seats to be apportioned 
to each sector. 

However, I am not at all implying that the Legislature 
will be composed solely of sectoral representatives, but 
these should be in addition to the elected representa- 
tives from various districts or regions. 

MR. RODRIGO. I like the idea; but I would wait for 
a more concrete and feasible plan on how this will be 
implemented. 

Thank you. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. Commissioner Rod- 
rigo. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, can I ask Com- 
missioner Villacorta a few clarificatory questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Villacorta 
may yield if he so desires. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Like Commissioner Rodrigo, I agree 
with Commissioner Villacorta’s proposal to implement 
the idea on multisectoral representation in the form of 
a constitutional provision, although this may be a little 
more difficult. 

Yesterday, Commissioners Tadeo and Garcia voiced 
out their sentiments regarding the possible exercise of 
people’s power. Is my understanding correct when I say 
that Commissioner Villacorta is in favor of sectoral 
representation such that students, peasants, farmers, 
laborers, and church workers would all be represented in 
the government? 

MR. VILLACORTA. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. And because of the peculiar nature of 
our democratic system, we have a common desire to 
veer away from what you and I consider elite de- 
mocracy, as distinguished from popular or pluralistic 
democracy; is that also correct? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Exactly. 

MR. SUAREZ. I fully subscribe to Commissioner 
Villacorta’s proposition. But let us take the case of 
simple Filipino citizens, like Ka Jimmy, Ka Ed, Ka 
Memong, Ka Bert, Ka Bilog, Ka Dante, Ka Joma, do we 
envision that at some time in the future they should 
form part of the government? 

MR. VILLACORTA. That is right. Commissioner. 

MR. SUAREZ. And to carry the example further, can 
simple citizens, like Ka Fred Villacorta and perhaps Ka 
Sensing, aspire to become senators of our country? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. However, Ka Fred and Ka Sensing 
would be prohibited from running or aspiring for a 
political position until after the first elections called, 
from the ratification of the new Constitution. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I was going to say that, but 
even after one year, I have no political ambition. 

MR. SUAREZ. It is also ditto for this humble Mem- 
ber. I am only carrying the example to its logical con- 
clusion. And so, as we envision in the future, God 
willing, with this new Constitution, a person like Ka 
Jimmy, Ka Memong, Ka Alan, Ka Joma or Ka Dante 


38 


WEDNESDa r, JUNE 4, 1986 


could very well become President of this beautiful 
nation of ours. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, theoretically, although I 
did not have that in mind. (Laughter) 

MR. SUAREZ. Suppose Senator Rodrigo and I will 
be willing to join the Commissioner in drafting, for- 
mulating and even sponsoring a provision that could 
effectively implement his thinking as presented before 
the Commission, will the Commissioner be kind enough 
to accept our offer? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I am very much honored by the 
offer of Commissioner Suarez. I have already submitted 
a resolution which provides the general principles of my 
proposal, but with respect to the specific mechanics of 
choosing the sectoral representatives, I will need the 
help of Commissioners Suarez and Rodrigo and our 
other colleagues. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished Gentleman yield 
to some questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta may 
yield if he so desires. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Democracy is not only in the national 
level. Representation of different sectors should not 
only be in the national assembly or in the lawmaking 
body of the Republic. We have local governmental units 
such as the provinces, cities, municipalities and baran- 
gays - the last being the basic local unit. How would 
the Commissioner propose representation from these 
local bodies? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Is the Commissioner referring 
to the local councils? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I have not given it much 
thought; but now that the Commissioner has mentioned 
it, I think we should be consistent in bringing down to 
the local levels the idea of multisectoral representation. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, in one barangay, for 
instance, we will have to classify the voters by sectors, 
aside from the general class who will be considered as 
belonging to no particular sector. 


MR. VILLACORTA. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. But would it prohibit a member of a 
sector from representing the unclassified sector? Let us 
take, for instance, a lawyer who is also a farmer, how 
would we classify him? Does he belong to the pro- 
fessional or to the farmer sector? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I think he will have to make a 
choice. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would that choice be final, or can he 
opt to join the professional sector, and if he cannot win 
in that political sector, in the next political exercise can 
he also opt to become a member of the agricultural 
sector? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Offhand, I do not see any in- 
firmity in terms of running again under another classifi- 
cation. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, once an individual 
classified himself as a member of a certain sector, he will 
be forever classified under that particular sector. 

MR. VILLACORTA. On the contrary, nothing should 
inhibit a person from running under another sector. But 
I would have to give this matter much more thought. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because if he will be allowed to 
change sectors, that might be dangerous. Anybody 
could just claim himself to belong to a particular sector. 
A doctor of medicine, for instance, would just buy a 
few fishing vessels and he could now join the fishermen 
sector. 

MR. VILLACORTA. The Commissioner’s point is 
well taken. 

MR. DAVIDE. How many sectors has the Com- 
missioner in mind? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I have not really given it a 
count, but the teachers, the workers, the farmers, the 
cultural communities, the women, the professionals, the 
students and the tribes or communities like those in 
Mindanao should be allowed one representative each. 

MR. DAVIDE. The cultural communities are com- 
posed of several tribes. Would each tribe be allowed a 
representation? 

MR. VILLACORTA. That would not be feasible. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, all those belonging to 
the cultural communities will be entitled to so many 
number of seats, for instance, in the National Assembly. 

MR. VILLACORTA. That is right. 


39 


MR. DAVIDE. But would the Commissioner not 
consider it unfair because there are tribes which are 
more in number than the others? For instance, could 
the natives of Surigao del Sur be without representation 
at all? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I think they would have to 
work it out among themselves. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would that proposal be the same with 
respect to the other sectors? For instance, must the 
farmers agree on one representation only? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Depending on the number of 
seats allotted to their particular sector. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does the Commissioner have in mind 
the number of seats to be allotted to every sector? 
Would it depend on their number? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I think the percentage of popu- 
lation would be an important factor to consider. In 
other words, we cannot possibly have the same number 
of farmers’ representatives as that coming from the 
lawyers’ sector since, numerically speaking, there are 
more farmers than lawyers. 

MR. DAVIDE. But if it would be flexible enough for 
every congress, the number would have to be increased 
depending on the increase in the population of the 
particular sector. 

MR. VILLACORTA. That sounds reasonable. 

MR. DAVIDE. Basically, in the apportionment of 
seats for the National Assembly, we consider the popu- 
lation of a particular area, say, one for every 250,000; 
but in that particular district of 250,000 we have 
already a conglomeration of sectors. Kow would the 
Commissioner allocate the composition of the unclassi- 
fied sector? 

MR. VILLACORTA. The Commissioner’s question is 
not quite clear to me. I am sorry. 

MR. DAVIDE. Basically, in the apportionment of 
seats for the National Assembly, we consider the num- 
ber of the population. Let us assume that for one 
district with 250,000 people, one representation is 
allocated to that group. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. But the 250,000 would itself be a 
conglomeration of several sectors. How would we allo- 
cate now a representation for the unclassified sector? 

MR. VILLACORTA. The unclassified sectors would 
have to run at large. In other words, we cannot possibly 
give all sectors in the Philippine .society representation. 


otherwise we will be saddled with a lot of seats for 
various groupings. We would have to allocate the seats 
only to the major sectors. 

MR. DAVIDE. Only to the major sectors? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I made it clear that it should 
only be for the major sectors. 

MR. DAVIDE. What would be the basis for deter- 
mining the major sectors? 

MR. VILLACORTA. It should be the number of 
members of the sectors. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would we, therefore, come to a point 
where a particular sector, which is not classified as 
major, would be without representation? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Nothing would stop them from 
running at large. Could the Commissioner give an 
example of a sector which would be unclassified? 

MR. DAVIDE. For instance, the jobless or disabled 
persons. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, but certainly they would 
have some kind of occupation before they became 
jobless. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but there are so many citizens 
who are jobless. As a matter of fact, the unemployment 
problem has grown so high. There are about three 
million unemployed. I do not know if the former Minis- 
ter of Labor, Commissioner Ople, is still aware of the 
rise in unemployment problem. But, definitely, about 
three million Filipinos are without jobs, and millions 
more are underemployed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If the Commissioner strongly 
thinks that the jobless sector should be given representa- 
tion, I have nothing against it. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. In other words, in trying to allo- 
cate and accommodate representations from all sectors 
especially the oppressed and the urban poor, let us also 
allocate another sector for the jobless. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If the Commissioner so wishes, 
that could be considered. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is necessary. But my main con- 
cern, really, is the mechanics. We must allow full rep- 
resentation from every sector to make our democracy 
real, genuine, and participatory. But let us work on the 
mechanics. 

Thank you. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. 


40 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. In connection with popular or 
grass-rooU democracy, I filed this afternoon, Madam 
President, a resolution to incorporate in the new Consti- 
tution a provision requiring the government to respect 
and promote the right of the people to freely participate 
directly at all levels of decision-making, to encourage 
the formation of authentic popular or grass-roots organi- 
zations, and to respect their autonomy or movements at 
local, regional and national levels. 

Madam President, may I request Commissioner 
Bernas, the Gentleman from Bicol and alumnus of 
Ateneo, to yield to a few questions? I am referring to 
Father Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Bernas willing 
to yield to a few questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yesterday, Commissioner Bernas 
mentioned that one of the reasons against the presiden- 
tial form of government is that it encourages patronage. 
Am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. I did not say that. The Commissioner 
may have misunderstood me. I said that the economic 
inequality in a nation encourages patronage. So, 
whether we have a presidential or a parliamentary 
system the situation will be the same. In other words, 
what I am citing now is what other people have said: 
that we must distinguish between a political revolution 
and a social revolution. The French revolution had three 
objectives: liberty, fraternity and equality. The Feb- 
ruary revolution achieved a certain measure of liberty 
in that we dismantled the authoritarian structures. And 
certainly there was a lot of festive fraternity during the 
revolution but equality still has to be achieved. And for 
as long as we do not have equality, patronage, which 
causes the loss of liberty, will always be encouraged. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Will Commissioner Bernas agree 
with me that patronage will be eroded, if not abolished, 
and equality will be achieved if we have mass-based 
popular, authentic organizations composed of people 
who are “conscienticized” and politicized, who can 
assert their political and economic rights? 

FR. BERNAS. If the Commissioner will allow me to 
answer that question in a longer fashion, I would say 
that in order to achieve equality, we should emphasize 
it as a value which the Constitution must protect. But 
beyond emphasizing equality as a value, we must create 
structures which will protect that value; and one ingre- 


dient of that structure could be this element of greater 
mass representation. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. May I inquire from Commissioner 
Villacorta about the statements he made a while ago. He 
elaborated on his resolution that the mechanics of the 
election of sectoral representatives could be provided by 
the legislative body. Let us say, 160 should be elected 
and 40 should be allotted to sectoral representatives. 
The Gentleman is saying that the mechanics of appoint- 
ing these 40 representatives could be set up by the legis- 
lative body itself. In the previous system, it was the 
President who appointed the representatives of the 
different sectors. Is it, therefore, within the Gentleman’s 
thinking that these 40 may be chosen by the elected 
1 60 people? 

MR. VILLACORTA. No, Madam President, I did not 
have that in mind. I was thinking of this 1986 Consti- 
tutional Commission as the body to specify the mechan- 
ics in electing the sectoral representatives. I hope I did 
not give the wrong impression that I wanted the Legisla- 
ture itself to set the mechanics. I wanted it to be 
specified in the new Constitution. 

REV. RIGOS. But the number of sectoral groups 
increases every now and then. If we put the number in 
the Constitution, it will be very difficult to amend. 

MR. VILLACORTA. The mechanics of selection does 
not have to include the specific numbers. In other 
words, we could allow certain flexibility as to the num- 
ber because as the Honorable Davide has pointed out, 
the percentage with respect to the population changes 
from year to year. 

REV. RIGOS. Another point. Madam President. 
Commissioner Suarez gave several examples of people, 
including Mang Joma. But he forgot to mention any 
Aling Maria or any woman. I am sure he did not mean 
that. As I said, among the names he mentioned in the 
example was Mang Joma. Of course, this is anybody’s 
name. But did we get the impression the Gentleman was 
suggesting that the Communist Party be also represented 
in these sectoral groups? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I cannot read the mind of Com- 
mis.sioner Suarez but I think he was referring to Ka 
Joma not as a member of the Communist Party but as a 
teacher or to whatever sector he belongs. 

REV. RIGOS. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


41 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The short interpellation of Father 
Bernas brought out a very important word which I want 
to clarify and that is the word “equality.” What is the 
meaning of equality insofar as constitution-making is 
concerned, because there is a saying that all men are 
created equal? A certain wit said that is not true; all 
men are created unequal. There seems to be truth in 
this. Some are women, some are men; some are tall, 
some are short. Even identical twins are not really 
identical. And so, the way I understand “equality” is 
that men are equal before God and before the law. 
Som? are talented, some are not; some are strong, some 
are weak. So, may I ask Father Bernas the meaning of 
equality which we will strive and provide for in our 
draft Constitution? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. At present, in 
the literature on this subject, the word “equality” is 
used but it is not meant to be a mathematical equality. 
What is meant when there is an appeal to equality is that 
everyone should have at least the minimum requirement 
to live with dignity. It is not absolute equality, because 
even if w® were to divide the world today into equal 
parts so that each one would get absolutely the same 
share, within a short period we would be unequal again 
because of unequality of talents, and so forth. What is 
ifTiportant is that in a society, everyone should have the 
opportunity to live with dignity. In other words, de- 
niocracy should include a guarantee of freedom from 
hunger, freedom from want and not just the consecrated 
liberties that we usually talK of - freedom of the press, 
freedom of religion, and so forth. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I go further. Madam President. 
Everybody should be given by law the equal oppor- 
tunity to earn his livelihood, at least the basic needs of 
life Should the Constitution go farther than just giving 

ual opportunity? Should it take positive steps to see 
to it that there is equality, at least in providing the basic 
needs, or should it just provide the atmosphere that 
gives everybody equal chances? However, if he is lazy, 
if he does not work, then he does not get his basic 
needs. Or, should we say that even if one does not work, 
the state will provide him with the basic needs? 

FR. BERNAS. I believe that there should be some 
kind of penalty for those who are unwilling to work. 
Certainly, there should be equality of opportunity. But 
in our present situation, precisely to create this equality 
of opportunity, the disadvantaged should at least 
initially be given more support in law so that they could 
overcome some of the disadvantages they already have. 
And this, again, I think is very closely related to the 
problem of structures. 


In the 1935 Constitution, we had a social justice 
provision under the declaration of principles. It was 
honored in speech, but it did not achieve an equaliza- 
tion of opportunities, much less the abolition of gross 
inequities in an existing society. In 1971-1973, when 
the new Constitution was drafted, the social justice pro- 
vision of the declaration of principles was expanded, 
spelled out, to the effect that the state may regulate 
property, profit, and so forth. But all of these had to be 
implemented by a legislative body which, under the sys- 
tem that existed then, was an elitist legislative body. We 
have removed property qualification as a requisite for 
running for office. But the expenses needed to run for 
office put all past property qualifications to shame. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, can we say then 
that the principle should not only be equality before the 
law, but rather, those who have less in life must have 
more in law? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, those who have less in life must 
have more in law. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rosario Braid 
is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I would 
like to continue this reflection on the plight of those 
who are unequal. 

I would like to raise this question to Commissioner 
Bernas: What form of government would be most 
responsive to the aspirations of the majority of our 
people living under subhuman conditions? I want to 
concentrate first on the substance before we go to form 
In a painting, the spirit, the transcendental feelings of 
the artists take precedence and suggest the form. There- 
fore, allow me to let the disparities, the inequalities that 
divide the privileged elite and the majority, surface. The 
gaps are not only economic but also social and cultural. 
We have a small, modern-educated and Western-oriented 
elite on one hand, and a large majority who live in 
traditional cultures, on the other. Our middle class 
which harmonizes the elite and the traditional culture is 
disappearing. Our culture of poverty is also a culture of 
passivity. Traditional culture is indifferent to govern- 
ment because in the past decades, government was a 
distant entity to them. Many had never seen a govern- 
ment agent, except perhaps the military. Total develop- 
ment can only happen if we have a participant citizenry. 
But our educational systems, both formal and nonfor- 
mal, are not able to provide the political education and 
social awareness necessary, if we have to participate as a 
nation. But our educational and communications sys- 
tems are too centralized; they are neocolonial; they are 
irrelevant to the needs of small communities which need 
skills tailored to the economic and social realities. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


42 . 


Therefore, would a presidential, parliamentary, semi- 
parliamentary or a federal type of government be able 
to close these gaps? Perhaps in our consultations, when 
we interact with the people, the representatives of the 
rural poor, the subsistence farmers and fishermen we 
focus on their basic needs and aspirations. Then as we 
catalogue the existing functions and powers of the legis- 
lative and the executive, we should ensure that sharing 
of power to the local communities should be a principal 
consideration. Such devolution of power could respond 
more effectively to the plight and aspirations of 50 or 
60 percent of our people who live under subsistence and 
subhuman conditions. By focusing on these concerns, 
we may be able to finally evolve a government that 
would truly respond to the narrowing of these dispari- 
ties. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. I am not sure if there is a question 
there. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, may I ask Commissioner 
Bemas one question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan may proceed. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, I am very interested in 
the matter of equality of opportunity because in my 
little experience with the urban poor, there is no class 
mobility precisely because there is no equality of oppor- 
tunity. If Commissioner Bernas thinks that the Constitu- 
tion can legislate something, is it possible that a legisla- 
tion can bring about equality of opportunity, or is the 
root cause something else? 

FR. BERNAS. I go back to the relationship between 
values and structures. I think our task here is to choose 
the values to be emphasized in our political system and 
to design the structures which will enable the nation to 
achieve these desires, to attain these values, and finally 
to fortify them. And very much related with this is the 
kind of legislative body we will have, because it is the 
legislative body that creates policy; it is the legislative 
body that allocates the financial resources of the nation. 
So, I think uppermost in our minds should be that 
question. What type of legislative system will deliver 
maximal benefits for the people who are in need of 
benefits? What type of legislative system, for instance, 
can do something about the educational system? I 
think the inequality of opportunity is very much rooted 
in the inequality of educational opportunity. If we can 
find a legislative system that is responsive to this prob- 
lem, and which in the allocation of the financial re- 
sources of the people wUl emphasize education for the 
masses, then, we know that this kind of system will 
contribute very much to the upliftment of the poor. So, 
I do not think that this constitutional body could 
create the formula, but it should be able to create the 
structures which will deliver the proper formula. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I make a suggestion in regard 
to the point raised by Commissioner Bernas. Perhaps 
this body could formulate a system of legislature where- 
by the amount of property one owns can be used as a 
criterion. Suppose 70 percent of our people are poor, 
having a low income, and only 5 percent are rich, having 
a high income, in that case we will see that soon there 
will be economic equality because those who constitute 
the 70 percent will make sure that they will also come 
near the opportunities, the privileges and the posessions 
enjoyed by those who belong to the 5 percent. I do not 
believe that sectoral representation is the best in the 
sense that a certain fisherman will not necessarily be the 
best representative of other fishermen; but I think there 
is a common denominator, concern and aspiration of 
the people. They know they constitute 70 percent of 
the people of the land and yet they get only a few of 
the opportunities for self-improvement. So, there may 
be a common drive among them to bring about greater 
equality. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, ito ay dang paglili- 
naw lamang sa mga sinabi ni Commissioner de los Reyes 
tungkol sa pagpili ng kinataw'an. Ito ay tungkol din sa 
tanong ni Commissioner Rodrigo kung sino ang pipdi sa 
kinatawan, at sa tanong ni Commissioner Davide kung 
ang kinatawan ay manananggol o magsasaka, at kung 
sino ang dapat niyang katawanin. Pinag-usapan din natin 
ang tungkol sa mga mangingisda, mga magbubukid at 
economic equality. Sinabi rin ni Commissioner Rodrigo 
na mayroon daw pong mga taong tamad. 

Lilinawin ko lang po ang sinabi ko kahapon na 
“democractic representation in organs of political power 
or form of government which will ensure the broadest 
class sectoral representation including proportional 
representation in legislature.” Ang ibig ko pong sabihin 
nito ay hindi po kamukha noong panahon ni Ginoong 
Marcos na nagkaroon lamang ng isa o dalawang kinata- 
wan ang mga magbubukid. Kapag ang 75 porsiyento ay 
binigyan mo ng isa o dalawang kinatawan at ang mga 
kasama niya ay mga professionals, lulunurin lamang 
ang kanilang tinig sa napakaraming mga taong iyan. 
Hindi po ganoon ang ibig kong sabihin. Ang ibig pong 
sabihin ng mga magbubukid, sa porma ng pamahalaang 
kanyang ninanais, kung ang nakararami sa kanayunan ay 
magbubukid, magbubukid ang pinakamaraming kinata- 
wan, susunod ang manggagawa, susunod ang minorya, 
ang urban poor, ang estudyante, ang makabayang negos- 
yante, ang taong simbahan, ang makabayang politiko, at 
iba pa. Sa tanong kung sino ang pipili, sa panig ng mag- 
bubukid, napakarami ng farmers organizations — nandi- 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


43 


yan ang Kilusang Magbubukid ng Pilipinas, ang Federa- 
tion of Free Farmers, ang Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries 
Association, at ang Pambansang Katipunan ng Samahang 
Nayon. Makikita natin na napakalaki ng bilang ng ating 
mga magbubukid pero sila ay hati-hati. Ito ay ginawa ng 
mga dayuhan sa tinatawag nating “divide and rule.” Sa 
pamamagitan ng democratic representation, ang lahat ng 
samaliang ito ay mayroong pagkakataong magkaisa. At 
sino talaga ang pipili? Ang dapat na pumili sa kinata- 
wang sektoral ay hindi isang tao, tulad ni Ginoong 
Marcos, sapagkat ang loyalty ng isang kinatawang pinili 
ay babalik hindi sa sektor kundi sa taong pumili sa 
kanya. Kinakailangang ang loyalty ng kinatawan ay 
bumalik sa kanyang kinakatawan. 

Tungkol naman doon sa kinatawan na manananggol 
at magsasaka.ano po ba iyong “primary occupation”? 
Dapat nating makita ang pagkakahati-hati ng uri ng 
magbubukid — nandiyan ang rich peasants, dalawa hang- 
gang limang porsiyento; ang middle class peasants, 15 
hanggang 20 porsiyento; at ang poor peasants, 75 hang- 
gang 85 porsiyento. Sino ang kakatawan? Siyempre ang 
poor peasants; hindi iyong rich peasants na iilan lamang. 

Tungkol naman sa pagkakapantay-pantay o equality- 
para sa mga walang trabaho, kakatawanin sUa ng mang- 
gagawa. Sa punto ng magbubukid, ano ang ibig sabihin 
ng “economic equality”? Ang lupa ang pinanggagali- 
ngan ng buhay naming magbubukid. Ngunit ang lupa ay 
inaangkin lamang ng iilan. Hindi ganyan ang kalooban 
ng Diyos sa lupa. Ang lupa ay nilikha ng Diyos para sa 
lahat ng kanyang mga anak subalit inangkin lamang 
ito ng iilang tao. Ang ibig naming sabihin ng “economic 
equality” ay sundin natin ang kalooban ng Panginoon na 
ang kanyang lupang nilikha ay para sa lahat ng kanyang 
jnga anak. Ang mga magbubukid ay kailangang may 
ariling luP^ sapagkat kinikilala naming siyang panguna- 
hing batayan ng pag-unlad ng aming kabuhayan at ng 
ayunan ang tunay na reporma sa lupa o ang pag- 
lupang aming sinasaka. Sa pamamagitan nito, 
apaunlad namin ang aming kabuhayan, lalawak ang 
s “purchasing power” at uunlad ang mga indus- 
aming umunlad ang mga industriya, lalaki ang 

ng buwis, lalaki ang suweldo ng lahat ng emple- 
Makikita natin ang economic equality ay mangga- 
Vne. sa pagpapatupad- ng tunay na reporma sa lupa, 
aekat ang kabuhayan natin ay nanggagaling sa lupa. 
rfvundin, ang isang mag-anak na may lima hanggang 
^ rn na anak ay magkakaroon ng tahanan, sapat na 
na^ain sapat na damit, at makakapag-aral ang mga 
^ Sa madaling salita ay makakalasap sila ng tmata- 
wag nating pangunahing pangangailangan. 

Tungkol naman doon sa taong tamad, palagay ko ay 
walang katotohanan ito. Naaalala ko tuloy iyong 
kuwento tungkol sa isang ibon na lilipad-lipad sa itaas at 
sinabi sa isdang lumalangoy, “Hoy, tamad ka, isda. 
Hindi ka sanay lumangoy.” Pero kung susubukm lamang 
nating bumaba tayo sa ilog at maranasan natin kung 
paano ang lumangoy, sasabihin nating hindi siya tamad. 
Isipin ninyo ang magbubukid, nagsisikap, nagbubungkal, 
hukluban na ang katawan, kinakain ng lupa ang kanyang 


mga talampakan, pero ang lahat ng kanyang pinaghira- 
pan ay hindi sa kanya napupunta kundi sa napakataas na 
upa sa lupa, sa napakataas na gastos sa produksiyon at 
sa napakataas na halaga ng bilihin. Talagang wala ng 
halaga ang ating pera. Hindi siya tamad, mayroong mga 
dahilan. Suriin natin, bakit siya tamad? Mayroong mga 
dahilan kung bakit siya tinatamad. Katulad ng mangga- 
gawa, anong pagsisikap ang gagawin nUa sa pabrika kung 
PI 7 lamang ang kita nila? 

Kaya gusto ko lamang linawin ang sinabi ko kahapon 
na ang people power ay hindi nagtapos sa lansangan. 
Ang ibig sabihin ng people power ay isang kapangyari- 
han o lakas ng mamamayan na magiging bahagi ng 
paghubog ng ating lipunan. Ito ang tinatawag na de- 
mocratic representation. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, point of inquiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I am sorry to distract 
my colleagues from the lofty thoughts on the ideal form 
of government, but I have a more mundane question to 
ask. I would like to find out the status of the collation 
of our preferences for membership in the 15 commit- 
tees v/hich the Secretariat had earlier listed. We know 
very well that half of the work is in the committees. 
Without the committees, this Commission is practically 
useless. We can go on discussing something like this but 
we will never get on with our work. So the concern is 
the organization of committees. We have not even been 
fully organized. Madam President. My question is: What 
is the status of the collation of our preferences for 
membership in the 1 5 committees that have been listed 
before? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair is glad to inform the 
Commission that this afternoon we already received the 
complete list of preferences of the Members. But the 
Chair is still waiting for the Committee on Rules to 
finalize the report in order that we may know just how 
many committees we will have; how many members will 
be in a particular committee before the final listing of 
membership can be done. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, when is the Committee 
on Rules going to submit its report? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask the Chairman of the 
Committee on Rules to answer the question? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Senator Sumulong 
is not here, so perhaps I can enlighten the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, we have been 
meeting since you appointed us. We will meet again 


44 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


tomorrow at one o’clock, so I think the report will be 
ready by Friday. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair understands that the 
deadline given to the Committee on Rules is Friday 
morning. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I believe Commissioner Sumu- 
long will have it ready by Friday morning. We have 
attempted to formulate a schedule which will help the 
body proceed as expeditiously as possible. Also, we have 
tried to simplify the Rules, which is already quite 
simple. Commissioner Foz has given us several sug- 
gestions on how we may abbreviate proceedings and we 
have taken this into consideration. So, I think. Madam 
President, on Friday we will be able to issue our 
committee report. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Foz satisfied? 

MR. FOZ. I have another question in connection with 
what Commissioner Romulo has reported. After the 
Committee has submitted its report, what is the next 
stage? Will the report, as submitted, be thrown to the 
Commission for further discussion? 

MR. ROMULO. I think necessarily so. We cannot 
legislate for the entire Commission. Ours, I take it, will 
be recommendatory and if the body, as a majority, finds 
it wise and prudent, then it may adopt our suggestions. 

MR. FOZ. In that connection. Madam President, may 
we suggest that instead of discussing the report of the 
Special Committee on Rules in an open session like this, 
the Members of the Commission meet in a caucus to 
discuss this proposed Rules, where Members would be 
free to submit their own proposals to the set of rules as 
recommended by the Special Committee? 

MR. ROMULO. I cannot speak for the Chairman, but 
I think he has no objection to that. Probably, that is the 
most expeditious way of doing it because I am sure each 
of us will have specific suggestions on particular sec- 
tions. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

the president. That will, of course, depend on 
the pleasure of the body whether to take up the com- 
mittee report in a caucus or in an open session. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, parliamentary in- 
quiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, Commissioners 
Tadeo and Jamir and myself have submitted a resolu- 


tion calling for the creation of more committees like 
the Committee on Labor, Committee on Land Reform, 
Committee on Social Justice and Committee on Rural 
and Community Development. We feel. Madam Presi- 
dent, that these sectors which will be represented by the 
said committees deserve equal prominence and projec- 
tion. So, may we request the members of the Commit- 
tee on Rules to take up this particular resolution when 
they discuss the proposed rules which could lead 
eventually to the approval of our permanent Rules, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Romulo please 
answer whether or not the Committee on Rules accepts 
this resolution mentioned? 

MR. ROMULO. Pardon me. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I help 
Commissioner Romulo? I am also a member of the 
Committee on Rules. We have formulated a section to 
meet that contingency. We discussed that matter this 
afternoon. So we are not limiting ourselves to 1 5 com- 
mittees. We are expanding the committees to include 
other committees suggested by the Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. So the Chair will instruct the 
Secretariat to furnish the Committee on Rules with 
copies of the corresponding resolutions. Is Commis- 
sioner Suarez satisfied? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think the present 
preoccupation of the Commission is a very important 
principle or value as Commissioner Bernas had earlier 
termed it especially in terms of an egalitarian constitu- 
tion and, in particular, an egalitarian legislature. May I, 
therefore, request Commissioner Villacorta to answer a 
few questions regarding the proposal for multisectoral 
representation, the proportions of which are not yet 
determined for a future legislature under a new Consti- 
tution. Is the Commissioner aware that the principle of 
sectoral representation is nothing new, that it is an 
integral part of the 1 973 Constitution? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, I am aware of the nominal 
or semantic provision for sectoral representation in the 
Marcos Constitution. 

MR. OPLE. Does the Commissioner know that there 
were actually warm bodies sent by the respective sectors 
to represent them in the defunct Batasang Pambansa? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, if I may say 
so, what Commissioner Ople had under the Batasang 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


45 


Pambansa of Mr. Marcos was a sectoral misrepresenta- 
tion rather than sectoral representation. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Of course, the Gentleman is express- 
ing a valued opinion. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I think I am stating a fact be- 
cause the sectoral representatives were not elected; the 
respective sectors were not even consulted. They were 
beholden to the President then and were appointed by 
Mr. Marcos. 

MR. OPLE. That is precisely the point I would like to 
seek some enlightenment about. During the period of 
the Batasang Pambansa, there were 14 sectoral rep- 
resentatives: those representing the youth, the workers 
and the farmers. I hope that one of them who is here 
will not later on stand up to protest against discrimina- 
tion because they were denied their pay whereas the 
other elected Members of the Batasang Pambansa were 
allowed to collect their pay for services rendered. But in 
any case, the Commissioner might want to know, as part 
of the background to his proposal, who chose the work- 
ers’ representatives, the sectoral representatives, the 
youth representatives, and the farmers’ representatives 
in the Batasang Pambansa. Basically, the law provided 
for an electoral college, but who composed the electoral 
college for workers? I think Mr. Marcos saw to it that 
those who composed the electoral college were capable 
of sympathizing with his policies. And so, mainly, the 
sectoral representatives were drawn from the Trade 
Union Congress of the Philippines at that time, which is 
not to say that the TUCP did not change its political 
position later. Many of them supported President 
Aquino in the elections. Who chose the farmers’ sectoral 
representatives? Not Commissioner Tadeo but the 
Federation of Free Farmers, Huks, Vets, and FAITH, 
identified with Mr. Luis Taruc, and many other organi- 

tions like the Association of Land Reform Beneficia- 
ries and the Samahang Nayon. Therefore, they consti- 

ted the electoral college which nominated the sectoral 
enresentatives to the Batasang Pambansa, and it was 
understandable to politicians anyway that Mr. Marcos 
would tend to favor names of nominees considered 
^mpathetic to his own policies, if not to himself. 

This is half of the controversy. Are we to understand 
that in a future electoral college for workers, the KMU 
will now substitute for the TUCP, on the same grounds 
that the President considers them closer to her own 
basic political thinking than the others? Will this mean 
that Jaime Tadeo of the Pagkakaisa ng Magbubukid will 
just substitute for the Federation of Free Farmers and 
for Mr. Luis Taruc’s Huk, Vets and FAITH organiza- 
tions'^ Will this mean that in the case of the students, 
Chito Gascon of the UP will substitute for the Kabata- 
ang Barangay in the electoral colleges? 

It is all very well to talk of giving all the disadvan- 
taged sectors incapable of otherwise winning elections 
a one-man-one-vote basis of scats in a legislature; but 


there is at work what Malinowski calls the “Iron Law 
of Oligarchy,” even for the disadvantaged sector. A 
small band of leaders will emerge through natural selec- 
tion in order to speak for them. I do not think we ought 
to lose sight of the fact that it was a lawyer, a full-time 
revolutionary, the son of a distinguished family of noble 
heritage in Russia, who organized the disadvantaged 
groups, the workers and the farmers. That was Vladimir 
Lenin. There is, I repeat, an iron law of oligarchy. Any 
kind of mass-based organizations will have to generate 
a small group that will speak for them, negotiate for 
them, and perhaps install their representative in a 
deliberative body. 

The notion, therefore, that you can have a purely 
egalitarian structure is somewhat flawed. You have to 
recognize the fact that a society functions through 
leaders. We have to recognize the fact that across 2,000 
years of the experience of democracy since Athens and 
since the forum at Rome, no one has improved on the 
one-man-one-vote as the basis for a democracy. 

Now, of course, at this point, I feel like requesting 
Father Bernas to address some questions concerning 
equality itself. I just wanted to give a contemporary 
background experienced by some of us as an input in 
the proposal he has put forward which, in some agree- 
able and practical form, we hope we can support in 
the course of the deliberations of the Constitutional 
Commission. I sketched some of the difficulties but I do 
not want the Commissioner to feel daunted by them. I 
think they can be surmounted. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Villacorta. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I just say 
a few words. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Villacorta. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I am happy that despite the 
traumatic experiences under the oppressive Marcos 
dictatorship which cloned the mind-set on which the 
Commissioner based his premises, he is open to the 
idea of multisectoral representation. 

MR. OPLE. I think the remarks are bordering on the 
unparliamentary. That is just a notice of what I intend 
to do. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. But I am happy to note 
that he is open to the idea of a multisectoral representa- 
tion with some improvements which I hope he will help 
us formulate. I think we live in a different atmosphere 
now; it is no longer the atmosphere of repression that 
we had just experienced, and it would be an insult to 
the intelligence of the farmers, the fishermen, and the 
workers to say or to imply that they would not be able 
to choose from among themselves the best representa- 
tives for their respective sectors. I do not think that 
they will allow, especially at this heightened level of 


46 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


consciousness among our people, that the more elitist 
among them will represent them. 

I also think it is an oversimplification to say that the 
KMU will be the favored labor union by the President 
and that Ka Jimmy’s organization is the favored 
farmers’ organization. I think that that is also a very 
unparliamentary remark. 

MR. OPLE. I was citing a hypothetical example with- 
out any malice whatsoever. This is a forum of pro- 
nounced biases and I have no objection to these biases 
being articulated if it is understood that they can be 
reciprocated in full. But may I now request, if the 
Madam President agrees and the body agrees, that the 
Honorable Bemas answer a few questions concerning 
equality as a whole. 

FR. BERNAS. I will be glad to. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Bernas yield? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, with pleasure. 

MR, OPLE. I have been impressed with the presenta- 
tion of Commissioner Bernas on the value of equality. I 
dreamt at one time of going to the Ateneo University, 
but my class origin would allow me only to go to the 
MLQ University, which is not an admission of any 
distribution of ranks between two universities. 

But equality has already been tested constitutionally 
and structurally through a good period of human his- 
tory, and we are very well acquainted with some of the 
major models that have emerged from the test of time. 
There is the Soviet model — the 1917 model; there is 
the American model which is not exactly representative 
of this type of democracy but is probably in most ways 
the most familiar with us. There is also, it is said, the 
Japanese model. In the case of the Soviet model, and let 
us admit it, also the Chinese model, I think the thrust 
toward human equality is built-in. 

The accent is in preventing inequality, which means 
that no one can grow too rich. It is a scandal when 
there are so many who are very poor; which, of course, 
does not prevent that system from generating its own 
inequalities. May it interest you to know, since I am the 
Chairman of the Philippine-Soviet Friendship Society, 
that in Moscow, there is a lane reserved exclusively for 
the members of the Politburo, and if you are not part 
of that hierarchy, it is prudent for you to stay out of 
that lane as a motorist. And, of course, it is very well 
known in that country that unless you belong to the 
Communist Party, you have no access to some of the 
facilities where goods from the West are available on a 
highly selective and restrictive basis. 

And yet, we also know that there are not too many 
millionaires in the Soviet Union. There are 250,000 
millionaires in the United States; in ruble terms, there 


are probably less than one thousand in the Soviet 
Union, and there is no question that there is greater 
economic equality in the Soviet Union. 

Does this translate into political equality? Yes, one 
man, one vote. But you have no choice of political 
party. 

In the United States the economic equality is in- 
finitely greater. The equality of opportunity as such, 
perhaps, is also higher. 

In China — I am just laying the premise for my ques- 
tion to Commissioner Bernas — the tendency in recent 
times under Mr. Deng Xiaoping is to allow a little more 
inequality, from the sameness of one billion people, 
they are allowing some degree of differentiation in 
equalities, a greater diversity of incomes, and perhaps of 
class. I think this is why Mr. Deng Xiaoping has become 
such an attractive, romantic figure on the world stage by 
allowing some inequality in Chinese society as distin- 
guished from the more orthodox type in the Soviet 
Union. 

May I inquire from Commissioner Bemas whether he 
has pondered upon the comparative attractions of these 
models of equality, in the sense that these are actual 
living models available to this institutional body, and 
upon the extent to which they have adjusted their 
structures, their parliaments, their laws, in order to 
achieve a predetermined vision of society? In the case 
of the Soviet Union: equality especially through the 
centralized allocation of resources and five-year de- 
tailed economic objectives. In the case of China: a break 
from the old ideological matrix to allow some competi- 
tion, some inequality. In the case of America: an 
environment which, from the point of view of the two 
models, is entirely responsible and unequal, and yet 
dedicated to fostering growth and equality through 
competition, through opportunity, through initiative. 

And so, will Commissioner Bernas, being a very 
famous authority on the subject, favor us with some of 
his views concerning these concrete models of equality 
that I have enumerated. 

FR. BERNAS. I would say I am hardly an authority 
on the Soviet or even on the Chinese system, so I have 
not studied very closely the structures of the Soviet and 
Chinese Communist governments. 

But perhaps certain historical observations might be 
in order. Both China and Soviet Russia were scenes of 
a revolution, and studies have been made of the pro- 
cesses that follow a revolution. This is particularly true 
perhaps of Soviet Russia when the Czars were over- 
thrown. They were overthrown by relative moderates. 
The experience of Russia was of moderates using the 
same structures and systems of their predecessors in 
order to try to achieve the goal that they wanted, but 
efforts were found wanting. And the process of levelling 
did not take place until the radicals took over. To a 
great extent, it was a bloody experience. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


47 


I think there is a similar pattern in the history of the 
revolution in China — the levelling took place when 
radical elements took over and the take over involved 
a substantial amount of bloodletting. 

So, the levelling followed; the equalization followed 
but apparently even these were not satisfactory. There 
was a search for something more stable and gradually 
the moderates took over again. And I think that is what 
happened in China now. Deng Xiaoping, by communist 
standards, I think, would be considered a moderate. But 
the Commissioner says Deng Xiaoping is allowing 
equalization, and so forth. 

I have been reflecting on this myself. We have a 
situation of great inequality now and other nations have 
had the experience of levelling via massive bloodletting. 
And the question I asked myself is: Is it possible for us 
to achieve greater measures of equality and, at the same 
time, avoid a bloodbath? That seems to be the chal- 
lenge which we face. And it seems to me that it comes 
down really to choosing processes which are nonviolent. 

Let me just, perhaps, give some examples. Will we 
have the political determination to set legal limits on 
property ownership? And, second, would we have the 
political determination to be able to use the power to 
tax as an instrument for equalization? These are 
unbloody instruments which are available to us. 

I am not familiar with the tax system of other coun- 
tries; I am not even very familiar with our own tax 
system. In a conversation with several distinguished 
foreigners recently, I asked them how their tax system 
compares with our tax system. They said that our sys- 
tem does not compare at all. One of them, for instance, 
said that in his country if one had an annual income of 
$18,000 he would be taxed by 65 percent. This is an 
instrument for levelling. 

To go back to the Commissioner’s question, I must 
begin with an admission that I do not have familiarity 
with the system of the Soviet Union or China. But I 
think there are certain general patterns in the historical 
development of the two nations which we can ponder 
on and learn lessons from. And perhaps the question we 
should face is: Can we achieve a measure of equality, 
greater equalization levelling for the purpose of uplifting 
the greatly disadvantaged without having to resort to 
a bloodbath? 

MR. OPLE. I thank Commissioner Bernas very much. 
I thought I would introduce a larger parameter of our 
debates on equality to include some of the models that 
have been acclaimed many times in our own time for 
offering equality but which involve certain trade-offs in 
some other values that we hold dear. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 


MR. LERUM. May I be allowed to answer certain 
statements made by another Commissioner regarding 
sectoral representation in the interim Batasang Pam- 
bansa. 

May I proceed. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. LERUM. Thank you. 

I was forced to speak because of certain statements 
made by another Commissioner regarding sectoral rep- 
resentation in the interim Batasang Pambansa. It is not 
correct to say that the Members of the interim Batasang 
Pambansa were selected or appointed by the President. 
That is not true. What is true is that under the Election 
Code of 1978, there was a provision for sectoral rep- 
resentation. 

The sectoral representatives were voted upon, in the 
case of labor, by the labor representatives from the 
different Sanguniang Bayans. These labor representa- 
tives met on a certain date in the provincial capital and 
they chose one delegate to represent them in the elec- 
tion of the sectoral representatives. In addition to this 
representative from the Sanguniang Bayan, organized 
labor was assigned ten delegates to be chosen by the 
recognized federations; Metro Manila was allotted ten 
delegates. 

In the election of delegates for organized labor, all 
ten delegates came from the Trade Union Congress of 
the Philippines; not a single vote was received by any 
other federation. These ten delegates from the Trade 
Union Congress of the Philippines, plus the ten dele- 
gates from the City of Manila and the delegates from 
the provinces and chartered cities, met on the 27th of 
May 1978 to cast their votes. In the said election for 
Luzon, Assemblyman Ocampo received 51 votes; your 
humble representation received 42 votes, and we were 
proclaimed as representatives of labor for Luzon, rep- 
resenting the workers. 

So it is not correct to say that we were creatures of 
Mr. Marcos or that we were chosen by Mr. Marcos as 
shown by our Record in the Batasang Pambansa. We 
have here Commissioner Davide who was a Member of 
the interim Batasang Pambansa, as well as Commissioner 
Ople. The Record of the Batasang Pambansa shows that 
the sectoral representatives, in fact, even opposed 
cabinet bills. I am referring to Cabinet Bill No. 45, now 
Batas Pambansa Big. 130 which provides for the restora- 
tion of the right to strike and Cabinet Bill No. 49 which 
became Batas Pambansa Big. 227. The Record of the 
interim Batasang Pambansa shows that we, from the 
sectoral group, opposed these two bills and had ex- 
tended debates on the subject. Minister Ople, who was 
the Chairman of the Committee on Labor, is here and 
can attest to this. 

As a matter of fact, I remember that there was only 
one proclamation by the President calling for a special 


48 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4. 1986 


session as a result of our opposition to Cabinet Bill 
No. 49. Because of our opposition to Cabinet Bill 
No. 49, the approval of his bill was delayed. And so, in 
order to expedite its approval, the President called the 
Batasang Pambansa to a special session. 

I have a lot more to say, but I am requesting the 
Members of the Commission to read the Minutes of the 
committee meetings, the Journals and the Records of 
the Batasang Pambansa to confirm what I have just said. 
In the case of the Regular Batasang Pambansa, it is 
correct to say that we were appointed by the President, 
, but the appointment was the result of the provision of 
law that was approved by the Batasan. I remember that 
we stayed up to about four o’clock in the morning in 
the committee discussing this provision. 

However, it does not mean. Madam President, that 
because we were appointed by President Marcos, we 
were creatures of President Marcos. This Representation 
has never been a creature of any President. I have served 
several Presidents and I have been appointed by them 
even if I did not vote for them. The last example of this 
is the present. I did not vote for President Aquino. I 
voted for Mr. Marcos and I did not know I was to be 
chosen by her to represent labor. When President 
Quirino ran and Senator Laurel opposed him, I voted 
for Senator Laurel but later on, Quirino appointed 
me to the Labor Management Advisory Council. In 
the case of Mr. Garcia, I did not vote for him; I voted 
for Mr. Yulo. Later on, I was appointed by President 
Garcia to be a member of the Social Security Commis- 
sion. In the next election after that, I voted for Pres- 
ident Garcia, not for Mr. Macapagal. Later on. President 
Macapagal reappointed me as a member of the Social 
Security Commission. So it seemed that it was my luck 
to be appointed by the very person I did not vote for. 

Madam President, I just want to defend myself from 
the statement that because I was chosen by President 
Marcos in the interim Batasang Pambansa, I was then his 
creature. That is not true. And even if I had been ap- 
pointed by him, it does not mean that I will follow him. 
Even in this Commission, Madam President, I will be 
independent but at the same time I will have to vote in 
accordance with instructions from my sector. When I 
had my appointment, it said: “Labor Leader Eulogio 
Lerum” which means that I am representing the labor 
sector and that I will be bound by instructions from it. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. Commissioner Lerum. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

; 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session. 

It was 4:59 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:26 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, since there are four 
more speakers, may I ask that Commissioner Brocka be 
recognized first. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. I just want to react to Commis- 
sioner Ople’s comments on Commissioner Villacorta’s 
proposal. I do not know if it will sound irreverent, kung 
ako ay magsasalita. Nais ko sanang sumagot kangina 
pero nawalan ako ng buwelo. I think 1 am speaking in 
behalf of the Members of this Commission who are new 
and are not familiar with parliamentary procedures or 
with the language that is being used. 1 hope the Presi- 
dent will bear with me as I make some comments on 
Commissioner Ople’s statements 

Basically, it is on what the Commissioner spoke of: 
leadership and oligarchy. I am very much impressed and 
fascinated to listen to such experienced parliamenta- 
rians. It is such a learning experience for me — and I 
mean this very sincerely — but when he speaks of leader- 
ship, of oligarchy and all that, while being open to 
Commissioner Villacorta’s having a multisectoral rep- 
resentation in the government. Commissioner Ople’s 
very brilliance and articulateness argue very precisely 
for a multisectoral representation in the government. 
Naniniwala akong higit na kailangan dito ay ang mga 
taong “representative” ng mga taong maliliit upang 
masimplehan ang lengguwahe at nang maintinddian ng 
lahat ang ating ginagawang Konstitusyon sa kasaluku- 
yan. 

As I said, while the Commissioner’s talk is very 
impressive, somehow one gets lost in the arguments and 
impressed with the brilliance of it all. Ang ibig kong 
sabihin, ’yung maliliit na tao, sa ganitong sandali, ay 
may gustong sabihin. Ngunit mali ang sinasabi ng katu- 
lad nating mga lider na tayo lamang ang makakapag- 
articulate sa kanilang ibig sabihin. Ang mga tao ngayon 
ay nagsisimula nang ipakita na mayroon silang ibig sabi- 
hin at mayroon silang lakas para sabihin iyon. And I 
think all they need is an opportunity. 

Of course, what Commissioner Ople spoke about is 
true. Subalit, ang pagkakaalam ko, kaya tayo naririto 
ay upang baguhin ang sistema. Kaya tayo naririto ay 
upang bumalangkas ng isang Konstitusyon na makatu- 
tulong sa pagbabago ng sistemang tinatalakay natin 
ngayon. Tinukoy ito ni Commissioner Bernas nang 
kanyang sabihin na anumang structure o porma ng 
gobyerno ang ating pag-uusapan ay mawawalan ng 
saysay at kahulugan kung hindi natin lulutasin ang pro- 
blemang pang-ekonomiya. Kung walang pera ang mga 
tao at sila ay nagugutom, ano pa man ang sasabihin at 
isusulat natin, bagama’t ang mga ito ay magandang 
pakinggan at tingnan kagaya ng “all men are created 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


49 


equal,” ang mga ito’y mawavvalan ng bisa at kahulugan 
sa maliliit na tao. Ukol sa sinabi nina Commissioners 
Benias, Tadeo at Garcia, I would just like to say that 
perhaps while we are discussing the form of govern- 
ment we should likewise consider it a priority to discuss 
our economic problems. I would also like to agree with 
what Commissioner Bernas said that the structure of 
government should be expressive of the value of the 
people. 

lyon lamang po. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de los Reyes 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, 1 have been 
listening to the discussions in this Assembly and I 
believe that we should pay more attention to the sub- 
stance of government rather than form so that the 
government will truly be of the people, for the people 
and by the people. Ayon sa sinabi nga ni Ka Jimmy 
Tadeo, isang pamahalaan na tunay na para sa masang 
Pilipino. 

The French, in their declaration of the rights of men 
and citizens issued in 1789, declared that the inalienable 
rights of man are liberty, property, security and the 
right to resist oppression. Under this banner, the rising 
capitalists of France rallied the other members of so- 
ciety the workers, peasants and intellectuals. This is 
what is actually happening now in our country - the 
fight against the special privileges of feudalism. 

By the time the 1795 Constitution of France was 
passed, the right to resist oppression no longer seemed 
desirable as the new rulers substituted “equality” for it 
— equality before the law and not economic equality. 
These rights set free the productive forces of private 
enterprise - then, the necessary foundation of econo- 
mic progress — and proclaimed an almost unfettered 
individual ownership of property for the purpose of 
profit making. Liberty and equality were proclaimed, 
but today, we have a society where liberty, freedom and 
equality are actually enjoyed by only a few and not by 
the masses of our people, thus giving rise to the saying 
that some people seem to be more equal than the rest. 

It is difficult to imagine what personal liberty and 
equality can be enjoyed by an unemployed person who 
goes about hungry. According to Ka Jimmy’s census, 
there are 8.4 million unemployed people in our country. 
Security of property does not protect the poor man in 
his home and land against the landlord; rather, it pro- 
tects the landlord in his right to evict his tenants. Free- 
dom of the press, under pre.sent conditions, insures the 
owners of newspapers and columnists a million times 
the effective self-expression which is not enjoyed by the 
ordinary man. And equality before the law gives to both 
rich and poor equal rights to hire expensive lawyers. 


thus, actually strengthening through legal process the 
economic inequality which already exists. Real liberty 
and equality can exist only where there is no unem- 
ployment and poverty and where man is not haunted by 
fear of being deprived tomorrow of work, home and 
bread. Only in such a society is real, personal and ever>' 
other liberty possible, not in paper. In short, the con- 
cept of liberty and equality become transcendental 
guarantees, unless the people are given the basic necessi- 
ties of life to make them truly equal to the others. That, 
as I perceive from the Members of this honorable 
Commission, would be delving more into the substance 
of government rather than fonn. 

But to accomplish these goals, I submit that we have 
to change our concept of property which will perhaps 
be discussed more extensively when we come to tackle 
the principles of our government, the economic system, 
whether we shall have capitalism, socialism and other 
related subjects. 

The subject for today and yesterday, as I understand 
it, is merely the fonn and structure of our government- 
the manner of electing our officials, how to remove 
them, if they do not meet the expectations of the 
people, who should be given more opportunities to par- 
ticipate actively in the affairs of the government. The 
right to choose an official through an election does not 
seem to be enough. Oftentimes, people make the wrong 
choice and they have to wait for another election in 
order to terminate the unsatisfactory services of their 
chosen representatives. And what is worse is that the 
so-called people’s representatives do not become their 
true representatives but protectors of vested interests 
inimical to the general welfare. And they enact laws to 
protect vested interests and not laws for the masses. 

What we should study, therefore, because we have 
given preferential treatment to the form of government, 
is a device by which the masses of our people could 
prevent or minimize the repetition of their mistakes and 
how they could participate continuously in the affairs 
of the government in the event that their chosen rep- 
resentatives fail to do their job. 

Narinig ko ’yong mga mungkahi na magkaroon daw 
tayo ng sectoral representation at binigyang pansin ni 
Commissioner Ople na mayroon na tayo niyan subalit 
hindi ito nagkabisa sapagkat ang mga iba’t ibang sector 
ay mahirap pagkaisahin. The different sectors cannot 
unite, and it is difficult to choose which sector should 
be given representation. And, therefore, I submit that 
perhaps it would be a good idea if we adopt the con- 
cept of initiative as followed in the State of California. I 
hope the Members will disabuse their minds of prejudice 
on any constitution that is borrowed from foreign 
countries. 

What is this concept of initiative? I have with me the 
Constitution of California, and under Article II— Voting 
Initiative, Referendum and Recall — this is how the 
provision runs: 


50 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


Initiative is the power of the electors to propose statutes 
and amendments to the Constitution and to adopt or reject 
them. An initiative measure may be proposed by pre- 
senting to the Secretary of State a petition that sets forth 
the text of the proposed statute or amendment to the 
Constitution and is certified to have been signed by electors 
equal in number to five percent in the case of a statute, and 
eight percent in the case of an amendment to the Constitu- 
tion, of the votes for all candidates for governor at the last 
gubernatorial election. 

Samakatuwid, sa pamamagitan nitong “initiative” na 
ito - at ito ay hindi ko ideya kundi mayroon ho tayong 
modelo at ito ay ang Constitution ng California — halim- 
bawa ay nagkamali ang isang distrito sa pagpili ng kani- 
lang kinatawan, sa halip na tumupad sa kanyang tungku- 
lin at hindi makagawa ng batas na makatutulong sa 
nakararaming masa, ang mga tao mismo ay gagawa ng 
kanilang sariling batas. Ito’y isasaayos ng isang namu- 
muno sa pamahalaan, puwede ang Solicitor-General, 
sesertipikahan ng COMELEC na iyong mga pirma ay 
tunay, kung 10 porsiyento o 20 porsiyento at pagkata- 
pos iyang batas na iyan na hindi ginawa ng mambaba- 
tas kung hindi ginawa ng mga tao ay isusumite upang 
aprobahan ng tao. 

Halimbawa, mayroon kayong programa katulad ng 
urban land reform at saka agrarian reform, hindi 
makapasa-pasa sa Senado at sa House of Representatives 
sapagkat maraming kinatawang humaharang dito dahilan 
sa sila ay tauhan ng mga may vested interests, mismo 
ang mga mamamayan, sapagkat natutulog ang kanilang 
kinatawan, ang gagawa ng kanilang batas upang isumite 
sa bansa, at kung ito’y maaprobahan ng nakararaming 
manghahalal ay magiging batas. 

Iyong system of recall ay binanggit na ni Commis- 
sioner Bernas at pakiwari ko ay maaari din nating 
i-adopt iyan upang pagkatapos ng kalahating term ng 
isang opisyal na inihalal at nakitang wala siyang maipa- 
kitang tulong sa kanyang mamamayan, sa pamamagitan 
ng isinaayos na petisyon ng kung ilang porsiyentong 
mamamayan, sesertipikahan ito ng COMELEC, ay 
magkakaroon din tayo ng recall. Mayroon din po niyan 
dito sa Constitution na aking tinutukoy. 

Madam President, 1 submit that it is time to be 
innovative and not to adhere subconsciously by force of 
habit to the traditional concept of form and mode of 
government. If we can incorporate in the Constitution 
the concept of initiative and recall applicable to all of- 
ficials, national and local, the people will be more 
politicized. They will be the other legislature. Kung 
bicameral, sila ang pangatlo na lehislatura; at kung 
unicameral, sila ang pangalawang lehislatura. 

I imagine that if the people are given this right to 
exercise their political rights in a more concrete manner 
as in the “initiative” concept, the government will pay 
more attention to them; their demands will be heard 
and not frustrated or rendered illusory by the inactions 
of their elective representatives. 


Bakit malilimutan ang mga mamamayan? Pagkatapos 
ng halalan, iyong kanilang representante ay nakaupo na 
lamang sa Batasan; hindi kumikilos. Nililimot na iyong 
pangako sa mga mahihirap. Noong nangangampanya, 
lahat pinangangako kahit na langit at lupa, pero pag 
nakaupo na hindi naman tumutupad sa tungkulin. 
Itong initiative, kung hindi siya tumutupad, ang mama- 
mayan mismo ang gagawa, mapapahiya siya. So, the 
representatives will be kept on their toes. 

Contemporary events appear to indicate that this 
Commission should heed the demands of the Filipino 
people, that we frame a Constitution that will enable 
them to participate in a more direct and effective man- 
ner in the affairs of our government uninterruptedly 
and continuously, not only during elections. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that the 
Vice-President, the Honorable Ambrosio B. Padilla, be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President, the Honor- 
able Ambrosio B. Padilla, is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, we all agree that a 
constitution must not only guarantee the rights of the 
people, but it should be an instrument of the people for 
their own promotion and welfare. 

In this freewheeling discussion as to the type of the 
new constitution — presidential, parliamentary, modi- 
fied or mixed — we must all agree that there are many 
problems that have existed and are still existing, among 
them are: unemployment, poverty, lack of opportunity 
for work, the low standard of many of our people for a 
decent life with dignity. These many problems, mainly 
economic or financial, will remain with us for gradual 
solution, whether we adopt a presidential or a parlia- 
mentary system. Many of these problems cannot be 
solved by simply drafting a good constitution. Many of 
these problems, if not all, will have to be solved by 
appropriate legislative measures to be adopted in con- 
sonance with the new charter or fundamental law. 

Madam President, I would like to recall some his- 
torical antecedents in our constitutional history. 

After the Philippine Bill of 1902 and the first popular 
Assembly in 1907, where my late father. Dr. Nicanor 
Padilla y Escobar, who was a physician, had the honor 
to represent the First District of the Province of Panga- 
sinan, and thereafter, the Jones Law of 1916, we were 
naturally under what we might call the tutelage of the 
United States and we were following the presidential 
system. 

When 1 was a law student in the U.P. College of Law 
from 1930 to 1934, what I learned of constitutional 
political law was mainly from our distinguished Pro- 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


51 


fessor, Vicente Sinco, stressing, of course, the political 
system at the time of three separate and coordinate 
branches of government — the executive, the legislative, 
and the judiciary — with proper checks and balances and 
the proper exercise of the inherent powers of govern- 
ment, particularly the power of taxation, the police 
power and the power of eminent domain. 

In 1934, a constitutional convention was called 
which drafted the 1935 Constitution. This was the 
product of many brilliant minds, many patriotic leaders, 
among them, Claro M. Recto, the President of the Con- 
vention, Manuel A. Roxas, the first President of the 
Republic, Justice Jose P. Laurel, President during the 
Japanese occupation, Justice Manuel Briones, Senator 
Vicente Francisco and many other illustrious names. 


The 1935 Constitution has been our fundamental 
law during the Commonwealth and after Independence 
in 1946. Many consider the product of the 1934-1935 
Constitutional Convention as a good Constitution. The 
term of the President was for six years without reelec- 
tion, but President Manuel L. Quezon suggested and 
supported two (2) constitutional amendments: (1) the 
one term of six years to four years with only one re- 
election and (2) the senatorial districts, which were 
composed of several provinces, were made national for 
a Senate whose twenty-four members were elected 
nationwide — eight Senators every two years. That 1935 
Constitution, Madam President, was considered satis- 
factory and even desirable. Of course, it cannot be per- 
fect, as no human product is perfect. Our history 
records that our elected Presidents, President Roxas and 
the other Presidents that followed hun - Quirino, Mag- 
savsay, Garcia and Macapagal - were only elected for 
ne temi. Mr. Marcos was elected President in 1965 and 
°as reelected in 1969. The 1935 Constitution explicitly 
ovides that the maxunum term of a president is only 
ht f8) years. But Mr. Marcos wanted to perpetuate 
^ • If in DOWer. When the Congress decided to call for 
himsel ituPonai ^^rivention in 1971, its Senators and 
a cons yjQt intend to change the basic struc- 

Repres Qv.«;tem in favor of another svs- 


the parliamentary system. That sentiment was 
tern, 11 jjgiieve, by the five Senators in this Corn- 
shared, sumulong, Rosales, Rodrigo, Alonto 


f the presidential system in favor of another sys- 

tern, 
share 

^^^‘p"dma "*However, by Proclamation No. 1081 of 
ana ra Marcos declared martial law. 

Thfra^tv senttaent of the members of the 1971 
Constitutional Convention was expressed in their 
that the 1971 Constitutional Convention should 
ITot oroceed further, but should suspend its proceedings, 
because their feeling was, and I believe correctly, that it 
is very difficult, if not impossible, to enact a free 
constitution under martial law. 


I was not a member of the 1971 Constitutional Con- 
vention, because the members of the Congress, with 
extreme delicadeza, considered themselves as disquali- 
fied for election in that 1971 Convention, which was 
called or created by the Congress of the Philippines. 


The majority members of the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention, some of whom are presently in this Consti- 
tutional Commission, had no intention to change our 
Constitution from presidential to parliamentary system. 
But Mr. Marcos, I believe, was interested in changing the 
structure of our Constitution from presidential to par- 
liamentary, because he wanted to avoid or evade the 
constitutional prohibition of a president remaining in 
office for more than eight (8) years. 

I recall that the President of the Convention, former 
President Diosdado Macapagal, had sponsored, if not 
actively supported, a motion or a resolution prohibiting 
reelection, and that was considered by Malacanang as 
directly pointed against Mr. Marcos. When the voting 
came after lengthy debate, the proposal against reelec- 
tion was lost, which proved that Mr. Marcos had more 
members supporting him in the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention than those who had elected Macapagal 
President, after its first President, Carlos P. Garcia. For 
President Macapagal to continue in office as President 
of the Convention, he had to count on the support of 
the Marcos members. Indeed, that was a very sad 
situation. The proceedings went on towards the draft- 
ing of the 1973 Constitution, where a number of 
objectionable provisions, particularly the transitory 
provisions, were inserted in the 1935 Constitution. I 
will only mention one — that in the Bill of Rights 
against warrants of arrest and/or unreasonable searches 
and seizures, which are essentially judicial in nature to be 
determined by the judge upon examination of the com- 
plainant and the witnesses he may produce. The 1971 
Convention inserted the objectionable phrase “or any 
other officer authorized by law,” which means that the 
Executive, like Mr. Marcos, or the Minister of Defense 
or any other executive officer, if authorized, could issue 
warrants of arrest. And that unfortunate insertion in the 
Bill of Rights led to and justified the Arrest, Search and 
(ASSO), Presidential Commitment Order 
(PCO) and even the last Presidential Detention Action 
(PDA). 

Madam President, thereafter followed worse amend- 
ments to the 1973 Constitution, through the amend- 
ments of 1976, one of which is the abominable Amend- 
ment No. 6 that granted President Marcos the extraor- 
dinary power to legislate. Many other amendments 
followed in 1980, 1981 and even 1984, including the 
intolerable immunity provision. 

During the many years of martial law, Mr. Marcos was 
the Chief Executive (Prime Minister or Premier) in the 
parliamentary system as originally initiated in the 1973 
Constitution. Thereafter, he advocated the return to the 
presidential system with stress or emphasis on a 
“strong” President for our developing country. We all 
know that even under the 1935 Constitution, the Chief 
Executive was already a strong President. But Mr. 
Marcos, under the martial law regime, arrogated unto 
himself more powers and we were the sorry victims of 
that accepted principle that “power tends to corrupt, 
and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” 


52 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


Madam President, many were in the opposition, many 
were fighting against the violations of human rights 
against many victims, many joined the activist move- 
ments, marches, demonstrations and rallies, known as 
“the parliament of the streets.” Perhaps, no one could 
have foreseen that even after the February 7 Snap Elec- 
tion, which was not a free, orderly and honest election, 
for it was tainted by vote-buying, by terrorism and 
other evil practices in our electoral system, Mr. Marcos 
could be replaced after 20 long years of dictatorial 
misrule. It was only the “political miracle” coming 
from the Almighty, with the prayers of peace-loving 
citizens, the rosaries of priests and nuns, the courage 
and determination of many families composed of 
cause-oriented or mass-based sectoral representatives, 
and, more, of the united Filipino people, with the 
grace of Almighty God, that effected in our beloved 
country what could never have been even imagined— the 
toppling of the dictatorship in those four glorious days 
of February 22 to 25. So, we now have a new govern- 
ment, established and fully supported by the sovereign 
Filipino people. Ours is a legitimate government recog- 
nized not only by the Supreme Court but by the inter- 
national community of nations, and we are now in this 
Commission to draft our new, permanent Constitution. 
Naturally, it must be a Constitution for the people, a 
Constitution to serve the best interest of all the people 
constituting the entire nation, not a Constitution for 
the privileged elite, not even for some groups, political, 
economic or otherwise, not even for sectoral or regional 
or local considerations, but a Constitution that will 
satisfy the primordial ends of a fundamental law, and 
that is to insure the blessings of democracy. We always 
add, with the blessings of “truth, justice and freedom,” 
and I hope with progress so that we may move forward, 
not only to give this government political stability, but 
also economic reconstruction, for all sectors in the en- 
tire nation to solve gradually, at least, the many pro- 
blems confronting our nation and our people. We all 
know that these problems are very difficult and the 
solution cannot be sudden. But we must lay down the 
framework through a Constitution that will be respons- 
ive to the needs, to the ideals and aspirations of the 
entire nation, of one united Filipino people. 

Madam President, during the period that I was a 
member of the Senate, the coordinate importance of 
Congress was sometimes being subjected to the pre- 
dominance of the Executive. And that was partly the 
fault of Congress, because in enacting laws for projects 
and appropriating funds therefor, the disbursements 
always exceeded the estimates of available income in the 
budget. And so there was always the “colatilla,” 
“subject to availability of funds.” And invariably every 
year the appropriations by Congress were far in excess 
of the available funds for expenditures in the budget. 
The result was that the Chief Executive could not im- 
plement all the legislative measures of Congress. He was 
practically given the discretion to choose which among 
the many appropriated projects would be implemented 


by him. And that was one consistent weakness, not only 
during the time of President Marcos but even before 
him, making the members of Congress subservient to the 
Executive by requesting him to please implement a 
particular project affecting probably a particular munic- 
ipality, province or region. If that was a defect in past 
administrations, which prevailed every year for many 
years during my incumbency in Congress, we probably 
should be in a position to remedy that bad situation. 
And the remedy is by not over-appropriating funds 
without the backing of actual sources of income to be 
collected mainly from the customs or the internal 
revenue and other sources of government income. 

Madam President, we have very little experience on 
the parliamentary system, because while the 1971 
Constitutional Convention started with the parliamenta- 
ry system, it gradually shifted again to the presidential 
system. One observation I would like to make is that 
while our ideal is separation of powers among the three 
branches — the executive, the legislative and the judi- 
ciary — under the parliamentary system, there seems to 
be some degree of fusion between the Executive and the 
Legislative in the sense that many members of the 
Cabinet of the Executive will have to come from the 
Legislative. And in my opinion that does not contribute 
to independent and coordinate departments but rather 
it is a weakness which further strengthens the powers of 
the Executive whom we call the Premier or the Prime 
Minister in a parliamentary system. Moreover, in a 
presidential system, the people vote directly for their 
President as Chief Executive and Commander-in-Chief 
of the Armed Forces, but in a parliamentary system, 
the people vote for the national leader in an indirect 
way by electing members of Parliament. I believe rather 
firmly that our people want a direct, not indirect, vote 
for the President. 

Madam President, 1 am in favor of the presidential 
system, with proper checks and balances. I am also in 
favor of a bicameral legislature as in the 1935 Consti- 
tution. We should have, as working draft or as starting 
point of reference, the 1935 Constitution, subject to 
improvements and amendments that our political 
experience has taught us. For example, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief provision of the Constitution which is 
lifted, we might say, from the Jones Law intended for 
the American Governor-General, and then exercised 
now by the President as Chief Executive in suspending 
the writ of habeas corpus or declaring martial law under 
specific grounds, should be limited by requiring the 
concurrence of the legislative department, whether by 
majority or two-thirds vote and only for a limited 
period, not for an indefinite period as it was from 
September 21, 1972 until the dictatorship was toppled 
on February 25, 1986. Moreover, we must confer upon 
the Supreme Court jurisdiction to decide the factual 
ground invoked by the President in the exercise of that 
extraordinary power. 

Madam President, I am in favor of autonomy to local 
governments. Autonomy means some decentralization 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


53 


of power of the central government. But I am against 
the federal system. I believe in the unitary system, but 
there must be a recognition to local governments for 
adequate autonomy rather than always resorting to, or 
depending upon, the central government even for the 
solution of some local, provincial or regional problems. 
The only problem, in my opinion, is: What is the extent 
or the scope of this autonomy to local governments? 
In the same manner: What should be the limitations to 
the exercise of the sovereign powers of government, 
like taxation, police power and eminent domain? 

I heard our good friend^ Ajnbassador Abubaka^ 
yesterday speak on the legislative assembly in Region 
IX or Region XII that it is functioning well. I inquired 
from him if the autonomy that was mentioned in the 
Tripoli Agreement of 1976 is functioning and if so, 
why the Muslims still complain and sometimes resort to 
arms under the MNLF, and, worse still, why others are 
even suggesting secession or dismembennent. I have 
had occasion to read the Tripoli Agreement and it 
provides very clearly that the grant of autonomy, which 
is not defined in that agreement, is to be exercised 
“within the jurisdiction and territorial integrity of the 
Republic of the Philippines.” So even under the Tripoli 
Agreement, there is no basis whatever of a claim for 
separation or dismemberment because that would be 
very destructive, if not suicidal. 

I do not intend to continue much longer, as I have 
already imposed upon the benevolence of our fellow 
Comniissioners, but I would like to end by saying: I 
believe that it is accepted by all that a constitution, as 
the foundation or the fundamental basis of government, 
is only the instrument of the people. And we are here as 
instruments of the people to draft this fundamental law 
to better serve the best interest of our country and one 
united people. And a constitution is not so much the 
allocation of powers but I believe it is even more im- 
ortant that there be clear limitations on the exercise 

these governmental powers. And the limitations are 
*^ot for the public officers or for the leaders in govern- 
” ent but the limitations are for the protection of the 
”loole for the defense of their rights and for the 
promotion of their common welfare. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, yesterday there 
was a motion to create an ad hoc committee to conduct 
hearings on the form of government. I would like to 
propose that the terms of reference of that committee 
be expanded so that it becomes a Committee on Public 


Hearings to be conducted nationwide and to give such 
committee powers to create subcommittees for, say, 
Luzon, Visayas or Mindanao, and also to go beyond the 
mere subject of form of government. 

The reason I am proposing this is because of the 
question of substance as well as budget. We all want to 
hear what the people all over the country want. There 
are many organizations which are willing to cooperate 
with us in this task, and perhaps we should already 
constitute ourselves because it takes a lot of time to 
prepare for those hearings, to make sure that they are 
meaningful. 

So, I move that the creation of that Committee be 
amended to make it a Committee on Public Hearings 
and to expand the scope of the hearings to more than 
just the form of government. 

THE PRESIDENT. This is just to refresh our under- 
standing. The motion, as approved yesterday, was to 
create a special committee that will conduct public 
hearings and the subject was limited to the structure 
of government. Now we have the motion of Com- 
missioner Monsod to expand the jurisdiction or the 
subject that will be taken up during those hearings so as 
to include other matters that may have a relation to the 
drafting of the Constitution. Is that correct. Com- 
missioner Monsod? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any comments on that 
particular motion? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have a comment on the motion of Commissioner 
Monsod. I filed a resolution this afternoon to expand 
the scope of the Committee on Forms of Government 
or, if necessary, to form another committee in order 
that the public hearings that we envision to be held in 
the next few days all over the country will not be 
limited to structures of government but will also delve 
into the fundamental values of our people. 

I believe that in the choice of form of government, 
we must also be guided by the aspirations, the ideals, 
and the primary values of our people, for it is almost 
impossible to make a choice of the form of government 
in a vacuum. The form of government must be chosen, 
based on our people’s values, and we must leave that 
articulation to the people themselves. So, I fully agree 
with the motion of Commissioner Monsod to expand 
the scope of the ad hoc committee, so that it will not 
only take up the form of government but also the pur- 


54 


WEDNESDAY. JUNE 4, 1986 


poses or aims of government and the primary values of 
our society. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I ask Commissioner Monsod 
some clarificatory questions to enable me to vote 
intelligently on this motion? 

As decided yesterday, the committee that will be 
formed will hold public hearings to determine the form 
of government, whether it should be presidential or par- 
liamentary, unitary or federal. Now, the motion is to 
expand the functions so that the task of this committee 
can cover all subjects. But how about the other com- 
mittees? We have a Committee on Preamble; a Com- 
mittee on Bill of Rights; a Committee on the Legislative 
and a Committee on the Executive, et cetera? Will all 
these subjects be taken up now by this single commit- 
tee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I respond? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Monsod. 

MR. MONSOD. My proposal is to constitute a com- 
mittee which will organize public hearings all over the 
country because the logistical and organizational aspects 
of such hearings are quite difficult. In other words, 
other subject matters may be taken up in those hearings 
and the appropriate committees may send representa- 
tives to participate in them. We are trying to avoid a 
situation where the Committee on the National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony will go to Davao and, one week 
later, the Committee on Human Rights will also go to 
Davao, because we do not have the budget nor the time 
for a multiplicity of public hearings. Our proposal is to 
consolidate the hearings so that we can listen to the 
wants and aspirations of the people in those communi- 
ties. 

MR. RODRIGO. If we have only one committee that 
will take charge of all subjects, then, firstly, that can 
render inutile the other committees; and, secondly, it 
would take that one committee longer to cover Luzon, 
the Visayas and Mindanao. I think if we were to have 
several committees, we can farm them out. We have 
other problems. Do we have the funds for these hear- 
ings all over the Philippines? And not only that, if 
these committees go out, we will not have any quorum 
in Qur plenary sessions here. So, these things have to be 
studied. But, as of this moment, I am not yet ready to 
vote. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. The proposal to constitute this 
committee does not preclude simultaneous hearings in 
many provinces. The proposal is merely for us to have 
a lead time to organize those hearings. For example, the 
hearings may be held in 26 places or two per region 
during weekends. And the various committees will then 
coordinate with this committee on the organization of 
public hearings. This committee will send informational 
materials ahead and look for organizations in each 
locality that will help organize these hearings, so that 
the hearings will be meaningful. 

The experience of many organizations is that when 
hearings of this kind are organized, the lead time is at 
least two weeks. We just want to be able to organize 
ourselves better. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recog- 
nized. 

MS. NIEVA. I would like to suplement that, and 
maybe this might clarify the point raised by Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo. 

The Bishops-Businessmen Conference has been 
holding national consultations on the issues of national 
recovery and the new Constitution. As Commissioner 
Monsod said, it does take time before we can bring the 
issues to the people. There has to be set up an organiza- 
tion in the different provinces to prepare and get the 
people whom we really want to attend, as we do not 
want only the elite. I think the purpose of the public 
hearings is to hear the masses of our people who are 
generally not heard and not informed. We want them to 
be present, and to do that takes a big organization. In 
our case, we had to have at least three weeks to start 
this project and even then, we covered only six prov- 
inces. This is, of course, due to our limitations and this 
body may have much more power. 

I agree with Commissioner Monsod that the task of 
this committee will be to organize. In the actual public 
hearings, practically all the committees involved will be 
included. The first thing to do is to get this planning 
committee organized so that it can start planning and 
organizing. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Rodrigo satis- 
fied? 

MR. RODRIGO. If the function is organizational or 
the preparation of things in the provinces, can that not 
be accomplished better by our Secretariat instead of a 
separate committee? The Secretariat will also be in the 
position to know whether we have funds for transporta- 
tion expenses and staff support. We cannot just go to 
the provinces without stenographers to take down the 
suggestions coming from the public. 

May 1 ask that the consideration of this matter be 
postponed? I am not against it; I just want to have 
more time to study the matter. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4 1986 


55 


THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Monsod 
say? Commissioner Rodrigo is asking for deferment 
until tomorrow. 

MR. MONSOD. I am willing to have it deferred, 
Madam President, but may I request that we take up the 
matter as soon as possible? 

My second point is, I would like to formalize a sug- 
gestion by our colleague here, the Honorable Vicente 
Foz, for us to immediately have a caucus as soon as the 
Rules has been revised by the Committee on Rules, so 
that we can constitute the other committees perhaps 
during a special caucus on Friday afternoon. I under- 
stand that the plenary session on Friday will be in the 
morning, so I propose that the caucus be in the after- 
noon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? 

Commissioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I just 
make a comment on the proposal made by Commis- 
sioner Monsod. I think the creation of that committee 
will pave the way for the creation of a super committee 
at the expense of other committees. And then the other 
thing is: may I request that the consideration of that 
matter be deferred until such time that we will have 
formulated the Rules? The creation of that super 
committee may affect our proposed timetable on the 
Rules. 

We will be submitting the Rules on Friday; then we 
will have a caucus on Saturday, so I think we can deli- 
berate on that proposal only either on Sunday or 
Monday after we shall have agreed on the Rules. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. In connection with the previous question 
that I raised and the answer given by the Special Com- 
mittee on Rules through Commissioner Sumulong — I 
understand that the Committee will submit its report on 
Friday morning — I would like to suggest that the Com- 
mission meet in caucus Friday afternoon, since the 
session will be in the morning. I suggest that we do not 
leave this building after the session and that we pro- 
ceed to a caucus, preferably at two o’clock, to discuss 
the Rules. . , 

I move, therefore, that the Commission meet in 
caucus at two o’clock in the afternoon of Friday to take 
up the report of the Committee on Rules. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any comment? 

Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 


REV. RIGOS. If the Committee on Rules is prepared 
to make a report on Friday morning, it might be better 
to go into a caucus Friday morning before we meet in 
session so that the session itself will be brief. So, I will 
amend the motion of Commissioner Foz, if he agrees, so 
that we can meet in caucus Friday morning, and meet in 
plenary session in the afternoon. 

MR. FOZ. But, Madam President, I think under our 
Provisional Rules, the plenary session on a Friday is 
supposed to be held at nine o’clock in the morning. Of 
course, we can always decide to meet in caucus even in 
the morning. So, if the committee report will be ready 
in the morning, then I will accept the amendment of 
Commissioner Rigos. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair be informed as to 
what particular time in the morning of Friday the com- 
mittee report will be available so as to afford the Mem- 
bers time to go over it before they discuss it, let us say, 
in the afternoon of Friday? 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, the Committee 
on Rules met yesterday and this afternoon. Tomorrow, 
we will probably be holding our last meeting, so, we will 
be ready to submit our report to the Commission on 
Friday. 

I would like to second the suggestion that we suspend 
consideration of creating a special committee for the 
purpose of holding hearings on the question of form of 
government because there might be a duplication. 
Madam President. We already have 1 5 standing commit- 
tees by virtue of the Rules provisionally adopted by the 
Commission, and among which are those on the exe- 
cutive power and the legislative power. The question of 
form of government will be referred to these standing 
committees so, if we create an ad hoc or a special com- 
mittee to study the forms of government, there will be 
a duplication of work. And if we allow the special 
committee to hold hearings in different places, the 
standing committee might have to do the same in order 
not to be blamed. 

While I may grant that the question of form of 
government may be very important, such that it has to 
be taken up as soon as possible, it may be prejudicial. 
Precisely, when we consider adopting a working draft, 
we will have to decide on the form of government that 
will be preferred by the Commission as more suitable 
to our people. So, in order to facilitate and expedite the 
work of the Commission in its committees, we will 
consider the advisat)ility of using a working draft. We 
will have to choose between the 1935 Constitution 
which adopts the presidential form and the 1973 Consti- 
tution which adopts the parliamentary form. 

In view of all these considerations, I suggest that we 
leave this matter until after we have considered the 
report of the Committee on Rules which will be ready 
by Friday. 


56 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Just a brief comment on the pro- 
posal of Commissioner Monsod. Modesty aside, perhaps 
excluding myself, this august body was precisely com- 
posed and appointed by the authorities because we are 
supposed to be knowledgeable; we are supposed to have 
known through the years, say the last ten years, the 
pulse, the thinking and the desires of the people from 
our districts. And we are only limited and mandated to 
write this Constitution within 90 days. And I am so 
honored that I was picked from out of over 1,000 
names. I like to think that it is because the husband of 
my wife is supposed to have already known exactly 
what our people desire. So, why spend much money — 
which we do not have— in conducting hearings in our 
districts? Everyday, we are receiving mails containing 
proposals from many civic organizations. Are these not 
indicative of the thinking of our people? Let us sit here 
and gather all information, then let us go home to our 
provinces on our own. For instance, I am going home 
this weekend to the best province of the Philippines 
next to Ilocos Norte — Negros Occidental. When I 
come back. Madam President, I will know. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. Commissioner 
Tingson. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. The point is this: Yesterday, we 
already approved the creation of a special committee. 
Now, Commissioner Monsod moved to amplify the juris- 
diction or authority of this committee. Then, there was 
a suggestion to defer it, to which Commissioner Monsod 
agreed. So, there is nothing more to discuss. The only 
point the Chair would like to know is whether the 
motion of Commissioner Monsod will be deferred until 
tomonow or until after the Committee on Rules will 
have submitted its report. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I have already 
agreed to the deferment of my motion, but perhaps I 
just want to make one small comment on the observa- 
tion of the Honorable Tingson. 

If I follow, his logic is: why have hearings at all. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the motion of Commissioner 
Monsod is deferred until after the Committee on Rules 
has submitted its report on Friday morning. Maybe we 
can take it up first during the caucus. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. FOZ. I move for the previous question so that 
we will vote on my motion to hold a caucus on Friday 
morning upon receipt of the report of the Committee 
on Rules. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, just to clarify, the 
caucus will be after the scheduled session on Friday at 
nine o’clock. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? 

Commissioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, since it was 
mentioned that the matter of logistics might be in- 
volved, I suggest that the Committee on Personnel and 
Budget also submit its report at noontime of Friday so 
that both reports can be considered in the caucus. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, is Commissioner Regalado 
suggesting that we have the caucus in the afternoon? 

MR. REGALADO. I suggest that we consider not 
only the Rules but also the report of the Committee on 
Personnel and Budget. 

THE PRESIDENT. But then at what particular time? 
Let us decide that. 

MR. FOZ. Is the suggestion to hold a caucus on both 
Personnel and the Rules? 

MR. REGALADO. Since it was mentioned that some 
logistics may be involved in connection with these hear- 
ings, I suggest that the report on Personnel and Finance 
be submitted also. 

MR. FOZ. But that is a different matter which has 
been deferred. Madam President. The motion, which has 
been approved, is to hold a caucus after the session on 
Friday morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to hold a caucus immediately after the session 
on Friday morning to take up the report of the Com- 
mittee on Rules, and if there is time, the report of the 
Committee on Personnel and Budget? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I think that 
immediately after the session, we will take lunch. So, 
the caucus should be at two o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us put that to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of holding the caucus in the 
morning after the session, say yea. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Yea. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 4, 1986 


57 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are against, say nay. 
(Silence) 

The motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
adjournment of the session until tomorrow at three 
o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at three o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 6:45 p.m. 










THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


59 


R.C.C. NO. 4 
Thursday, June 5, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:12 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Adolfo S. Azcuna. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. AZCUNA. O God, help us to be true to the great 
j.iyj]ege and responsibility You have given us. Give us a 
sense of proportion, wisdom of mind, clearness of think- 
ing truth in speech and love in our hearts, that we may 
work in peace and harmony. 

Help us, O God, to blend freshness in youth with 
wisdom in age. 

Finally, grant that as we propose a new charter for 
people, we heed the counsel of an old poet and 
teller: “Let me write the songs of a nation, and I 
who writes its laws.” Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

the president. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . • 

. Present* 

Brocka 

. Present 

. Present* 

Calderon 

. Present 



. Present 

Castro de .... 

. Present 

Aquinu 

. Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

^VZCUIld 

Bacani 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

. Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Bcngzoii 

Bennagen . . . • 

. Present 

Foz 

. Present 


. Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

ijcrrido , • 0 • 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present 


Guingona . . 

. . . Present* 

Rigos 


Jamir 

. . . Present 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . . Present 

Laurel .... 

. . . Present 

Romulo . . . . 


Lerum .... 

. . . Present 

Rosales 


Maambong . 

. . . Present 

Sarmiento . . , 


Monsod . . . 

. . . Present 

Suarez 


Natividad . . 

. . . Present* 

Sumulong . . . 


Nieva 

. . . Present 

Tadeo 


NoUedo . . . 

. . . Present* 

Tan 


Ople 

. . . Present* 

Tingson . . . . 


Padilla .... 

. . . Present* 

Trenas 


Quesada . . . 

. . . Present 

Uka 


Rama 

. . . Present 

Villacorta . . . 


Regalado . . . 

. . . Present 

Villegas 


Reyes de los 

. . . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 40 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session and that we 
approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved, 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Tingson be rec- 
ognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I respectfully 
ask for the suspension of the Rules for Journal No. 2 


Appeared alter the roll call 


60 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


because I notice that the Prayer recited yesterday was 
included in the present Journal No. 3, but the Prayer 
for Journal No. 2 was inadvertently omitted. 

May I respectfully ask that it be included also in 
Journal No. 2? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Tingson, the 
Secretariat assures us that the same has been included. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Motion, the President 
making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 35, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR SIGNIFICANT MULTI- 
SECTORAL REPRESENTATION IN THE NATIONAL 
LEGISLATURE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 36, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO FORM AN AD HOC COMMITTEE ON 
FUNDAMENTAL VALUES. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 37, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING GENUINE AND BROADER 
LAND REFORM POLICIES AND FOR THE INCOR- 
PORATION IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF A SEPA- 
RATE ARTICLE ON LAND REFORM. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 38, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE ANOTHER PROVISION IN 
THE RULES. 


Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo, Jamir and 
Villegas. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 39, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE APPOINTMENT BY 
THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES OF THE MEM- 
BERS OF THE SUPREME COURT SOLELY UPON THE 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE INTEGRATED BAR OF 
THE PHILIPPINES, AND THE MEMBERS OF THE IN- 
FERIOR COURTS SOLELY UPON THE RECOMMENDA- 
TION OF THE SUPREME COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Colayco. 

To the Committee on theJudiciary* 

Proposed Resolution No. 40, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE GOVERN- 
MENT TO COMPENSATE VICTIMS OF TORTURE OR 
SIMILAR PRACTICES AND THEIR FAMILIES FOR THE 
PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INJURIES IN- 
FLICTED UPON THEM, WHICH COMPENSATION 
SHALL LATER BE COLLECTED FROM THOSE GUILTY 
OF SUCH PRACTICES. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 41, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ENSURING THAT THE RIGHT 
OF THE PEOPLE FREELY AND DIRECTLY TO PAR- 
TICIPATE AT ALL LEVELS OF DECISION-MAKING IS 
RESPECTED AND PROMOTED AND THAT THE FOR- 
MATION AND AUTONOMY OF GRASS-ROOTS OR- 
GANIZATIONS AND AUTHENTIC POPULAR MOVE- 
MENTS, WHETHER LOCAL, REGIONAL OR NATION- 
AL, ARE SECURED AND RECOGNIZED. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 42, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE GOVERN- 
MENT TO RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF ALL WORKERS 
AND EMPLOYEES, UNDER ANY AND ALL CIRCUM- 
STANCES, TO FREE ASSOCIATION AND COLLECTIVE 
BARGAINING AND TO ENGAGE IN CONCERTED 
ACTIVITIES FOR THEIR MUTUAL AID AND PROTEC- 
TION. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


61 


Proposed Resolution No. 43, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION GIVING ADEQUATE SUPPORT 
TO A FAMILY THAT SUFFERS DEPRIVATION BY 
REASON OF THE DEATH, PHYSICAL DISABILITY, 
DETENTION OR IMPRISONMENT OF THE SOLE 
BREADWINNER OR THE INABILITY OF THE LAT- 
TER TO FIND EMPLOYMENT DESPITE EARNEST 
EFFORTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 44, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ENSURING HOUSEHOLD 
HELPERS AND DOMESTICS THE ENJOYMENT OF THE 
SAME RIGHTS AND BENEFITS RECEIVED BY INDUS- 
TRIAL WORKERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 45, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE GOVERN- 
MENT TO PROVIDE REDRESS AND PAYMENT OF 
COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES TO ANY PERSON 
FOR ACTS COMMITTED DURING THE DECLARATION 
OF STATE OF EMERGENCY. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights.’ 

MOTION 

an URGENT MOTION TO AUTHORIZE THE PRESIDENT 
OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION TO CREATE 
A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC RELATIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

iMotion No. 2 - Constitutional Commission of 

^ 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

the president. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

DISCUSSION ON THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
Continuation 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Un- 
finished Business, which is the continuation of the dis- 
cussion on the form of government. There are four 


registered speakers after which there will be a caucus 
as suggested by the President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Will the Acting Floor Leader please call the first 
speaker for this afternoon. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Villegas be 
recognized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I would like to comment on some 
of the issues brought up in yesterday’s deliberation. 

First, I would like to venture some answers to the 
questions asked by Commissioner Bernas about how we 
can achieve a measure of economic equality without 
having to resort to bloodletting. Considering also the 
remarks made by Commissioner Rodrigo, I usually 
prefer the word “equity” to “equality” when referring 
to the economic sphere. As has been experienced time 
and time again, any attempt to equalize income and 
wealth always results in equalized poverty. The varying 
talents and attributes of individuals are not fuUy tapped 
because there is no more motivation to exert varying 
efforts. 

In the last 30 years, there have been outstanding 
examples of Asia-Pacific countries that have attained a 
measure of equity in income and wealth distribution 
that may serve as lessons for the Philippines for at least 
the next 25 to 30 years. They are the newly industrializ- 
ing countries of Taiwan, Korea, Singapore and, even 
lately, Malaysia and Thailand. And although they may 
have differing cultures and political institutions in 
regard to their economic dimensions, they share some 
common traits or denominators. First, there is a strong 
political will of the government to bias development in 
favor of the poor in exercising what has been referred 
to as that preferential option for the poor. Consider the 
way Taiwan was able to introduce a thoroughgoing land 
reform program in stark contrast to our half-hearted 
efforts at land reform, or whether it be Singapore’s insti- 
tuting the central provident fund, a tremendously 
generous policy to help improve the lot of urban work- 
ers; and the same thing can be said of the Malaysians’ 
central provident fund. And so, this is a common deno- 
minator, a strong political will of the government to 
apply what has been referred to many times as giving 
more in law to those who have less in life. 

Then the other common trait is respect for private 
enterprise; that is, allowing private individuals, groups 
and associations to do what they can perform com- 
petently without the state actually taking over. And I 
just would like to supplement some comments made by 
Commissioner Ople yesterday about China, because 
China really presents a very dramatic lesson. First, there 
was the Cultural Revolution, the 1 1 years of vicious ap- 
plication of class warfare by Mrs. Mao Tse Tung and her 
Gang of Four, which clearly did not help the poor in 


62 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


China. In fact, during this period, there was mass starva- 
tion and China had to import millions and millions of 
tons of com, wheat and other grains from the United 
States. This was followed by a dramatic economic 
miracle under Deng Xiaoping, which was referred to by 
Commissioner Ople, under which private enterprise was 
completely respected. Yesterday, Commissioner Ople 
said that right now, China under Deng Xiaoping uses the 
so-called “responsibility system” which allows a small 
farmer to till his own land to produce whatever he 
wants to produce without any dictate from a commune 
and to sell his produce at whatever price the market 
would dictate, removing those price controls that pre- 
vailed during the Cultural Revolution. The rest is 
history. 

In the last six years, China has been growing at 
fantastic rates of 10 to 12 percent in its gross national 
product. In less than three years, China was able to com- 
pletely eliminate its import of millions of tons of corn, 
wheat and other agricultural products because the 
Chinese have become self-sufficient. Thanks to the 
recognition of private enterprises. 

And so, these are the lessons that we can learn from 
our neighboring countries in answering the question 
posed by Commissioner Bemas on how we can achieve a 
measure of economic equity without bloodletting. 

Finally, let me just express some of my reservations 
without really giving strong objections to multisectoral 
representation. I wish, of course. Commissioner Villa- 
corta all the luck in solving the logistical and mechanical 
problems that were brought up yesterday, especially 
when Commissioner Davide questioned him. But my 
own view is that since we accept the premise that 55 
million Filipinos are sufficiently intelligent and are able 
to discern their legitimate representatives, it is not 
necessary to always choose a person from their own 
ranks without flattering them. It could be Commissioner 
Tadeo, a farmer himself, who could represent the 
farmers, or Commissioner Suarez, a distinguished 
lawyer, who could represent the poor farmers and the 
poor workers, or it could be any other person with a 
patrician background. So I have my reservation about 
trying to institute some kind of a tinge of class distinc- 
tions in the Constitution. But as I said, I have no strong 
objections to multisectoral representation as long as we 
work more in perfecting the one-man-one-vote approach 
which has been proven to be most successful in 
democratic countries. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. First of all, I want to follow up the 
thoughts expressed yesterday regarding the mechanisms 


of consultations in public hearings. I have here with me 
a resolution regarding the mechanism of consultation to 
be adopted by the body. I hope that we can distribute 
this for people to study because I feel that getting in- 
volved in public hearings is very important. As I men- 
tioned in my comment the other day, I feel we should 
not arrogate upon ourselves the power to be the sole 
writers of this Constitution, but allow the people to be 
our coauthors. Unless public hearings are held or unless 
the people are able to speak and write this Constitution 
with us, I think this Constitution will not gain the broad 
acceptance that it deserves. With all due respect to Com- 
missioner Tingson’s comment yesterday, I disagree with 
him because I feel that although we have been chosen, 
we are here to listen and to learn. Hence, 1 think in the 
public hearings, we can feel the pulse of our people, the 
direction of their thoughts and the different ideas that 
we should write into the Constitution. 

When we were sharing our thoughts on the form of 
government and also the aspirations of our people and 
our possible dreams, I thought I wanted to make a con- 
fession. After nearly 20 years of marching in the streets 
and after the events of February, where the power of 
the people put an end to dictatorial rule, I believe that 
we are tasked to write a constitution with a bias, a 
constitution for all the Filipino people, but biased in 
favor of the majority — the poor, the 7 1 percent who 
live below the poverty threshold and the 50 percent 
who eat below the food threshold as mentioned by 
Commissioners Villegas and Tadeo. 

So I want to make this clear. I think we should lay 
our cards on the table. In this sense, although this is a 
constitution for all the people, still it must be biased for 
the poor or the majority in this land. I would like to 
note that there is, I believe, from the discussions of the 
past two days, a convergence of substantial ideas regard- 
ing a few points. I would like to make my own personal 
summary of the different thoughts that have been ex- 
pressed here on the floor: (1) That the powers of 
government must be limited; (2) That the freedom of 
all, especially of those who have less in life, must be 
guaranteed. I think this was expressed very well by 
Commissioner Bernas; (3) That economic equality must 
be encouraged and defended; (4) That popular partici- 
pation must be insured; and (5) That people’s organiza- 
tions must be recognized. I think these were some of the 
salient points that have come out during the different 
interventions. 

At the same time, I would like to register a strong 
disagreement with Commissioners Ople and Lerum on 
the thoughts they expressed yesterday. With all due 
respect, I want to make my position rather strong be- 
cause I do not agree with their thoughts. Therefore, I 
would like to rise in defense of the ideas of sectoral 
representation together with regional representation. I 
believe that to truly empower the people, there must be 
measures provicing for genuine sectoral representation 
in whatever form of government we have. In their expo- 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


63 


sitions yesterday, they tried to show how the old dis- 
pensation practiced the politics of exclusion, that there 
was no real effort to try to find out who among the 
different sectors of society, especially those who com- 
posed the majority, are the true representatives of those 
sectors. They were very often marginalized from 
political practice and from political decisions that 
affected their lives. 

This Constitution must precisely empower those 
voiceless and powerless people who normally, even with 
a one-man-one-vote approach, have no real effective say. 
This is precisely the rationale of naving sectoral rep- 
resentation besides regional representation. Those 
people whose interests are largely marginalized and for- 
gotten will have a real chance to become coarchitects 
of their own destiny every time there is an election. 

Having said that, let me follow up some of the 
discussions that went on yesterday and the day before 
regarding our possible dreams. I think the quest of our 
people is a democracy where people are free and pros- 
perous under a sovereign nation. Therefore, when we 
discuss the search for models, I do not think we should 
just go back to the classical models of the past but try 
to reimagine models in terms of a Third World context. 
1 feel this is a very basic approach which explains why I 
would disagree with the approach of Commissioner 
Ople. It is important for us to reimagine and reinvent 
models that are distinctly applicable to Philippine con- 
ditions, so that they meet our basic needs, protect 
everybody’s freedom and ensure equality. 

Regarding the form of government, it is very impor- 
tant that it be truly representative and responsive; that 
it be pluralistic and popular. That is the form of de- 
mocracy which I think we seek to achieve. And, there- 
fore, in terms of representation, it would be ideal to 
have both regional and sectoral representations. In this 
sense I would tend to think that the modified parlia- 
mentary form would be far more flexible for these 
needs. Secondly, we also need a form of government 
that is decentralized. Perhaps, at this moment I am not 
prepared to go all the way to having the federal form, 
but the direction we must pursue, I believe, must be 
towards the decentralized form where relative auto- 
nomy is exercised by all the different regions in this 
country. I also believe in what one of our companions 
mentioned earlier - that it is only in the coming toge- 
ther of strengths that the nation becomes strong. More 
or less, we can say that after having heard the different 
expositions and the sharing of thoughts during the past 
few days, there is some kind of consensus regarding the 
desire to create a democracy that is both popular and 
pluralistic, an economy that is self-reliant and self- 
sufficient, and, finally, to create a self-determined, 
sovereign state. In this manner we can set the stage for 
more equal opportunities especially for the majority — 
the poor and the powerless. 

Thank you very much. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to inter- 
pellations, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Garcia yield? 

MR. GARCIA. Willingly. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to express my gratitude 
for Commissiner Garcia’s support to my urgent resolu- 
tion which was duly approved, but it seems that it is 
destined for the dustbin of history. In view of the ob- 
servations of Senator Sumulong, what kind of public 
hearings should we contemplate? Would the public 
hearings be held in different parts of the country or 
only within Metro Manila? 

MR. GARCIA. Precisely, the resolution I have here 
with me, in fact, has been an ongoing project of the 
Ateneo Center for Social Policy headed by Father 
Bernas and the Lakas ng Sambayanan with which I 
work. We have actually been conducting public hearings 
throughout the country. We have been going to various 
parts of Luzon, the Visayas and Mindanao. And this re- 
solution is the result of preliminary public hearings 
where something like 150 organizations have already 
participated in. Therefore, the thrust would be to con- 
tinue these public hearings because a lot of interest has 
been generated, and we can reach a lot of people who 
have sometimes far better ideas than we would expect. 
We could harness these ideas in drafting the Constitu- 

tion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I was thinking that the people of 
Metro Manila come from the different provinces. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR NOLLEDO. That is why they say that if there is 
a revolution and Manila falls, the whole country falls. 
Considering that the group of Commissioner Garcia has 
already conducted public hearings in different parts of 
the country, would it not suffice if public hearings were 
held in Manila? That was the original contemplation of 
my urgent motion. Then perhaps we can wire the 
governors, the city mayors, the executives of the dif- 
ferent political units to inform the Members of the 
Constitutional Commission as to the sentiments of the 
people from their observations. 

MR. GARCIA. Actually, I think it is envisioned in 
Proclamation No. 9 that the public hearings be held all 
over the country. In other words, we are not confined 
to the halls of the Batasan to draft the Constitution. I 
think we are tasked to write this Constitution together 
with the people in the public hearings. That is why we 
should bring this to the different regions. We cari divide 
the teams. I thought Commissioners Monsod and Nieva 
were trying to tell us that a committee to draft the 
mechanics be formed since it is not easy to conduct 
public hearings. It is not a matter of just opening our 
doors. We have to organize. It requires a whole huge 


64 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


network like NAMFREL’s or the Bishops-Businessmen 
Conference’s network. Perhaps, if they are ready and 
willing to help, we can utilize their resources. So, if we 
divide into teams according to regions, we can, in a 
week’s time, create a tremendous amount of conscious- 
ness in terms of participation of the people in the draft- 
ing of our Constitution and make the whole country a 
school where there is a struggle of ideas and debates 
which, I think, is healthy for a democracy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman agree with Com- 
missioner Sumulong, whose suggestion seems to be a 
reasonable amendment to my urgent motion, that 
instead of proceeding with public hearings under that 
urgent motion duly approved by this body, we just 
accelerate the creation of committees which have direct 
relevance to the form of government? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, that would also be another form. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, for the past few 
days we have heard the distinguished Members of this 
Commission talk of different forms of government - 
parliamentary, semi-parliamentary, presidential, etc. Will 
the Gentleman agree with me that every Member of this 
Commission should reasonably be presumed to have a 
working knowledge of every form of government? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, I believe so. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And in view of the illuminating 
speeches that we have heard, will the Gentleman agree 
with me, if I suggest that this Constitutional Commis- 
sion pass a resolution or agree on a consensus voting? 
For example, we will request the Secretariat to prepare 
a question which runs like this: “What form of govern- 
ment do you prefer — (1) Presidential, (2) Parliamenta- 
ry, (3) Semi-Parliamentary, (4) Federal, (5) Any other— 
please specify the same. 

MR. GARCIA. I agree, as long as it does not bind us. 
That is why I was saying that the important thing really 
is for us to look into the substance — what makes the 
government democratic, responsive, representative, ac- 
countable — rather than we trying to form it. Maybe 
this is not the approach the Members would take, but 
this is my approach. Second, is to bring this to the 
people through public hearings and get their consensus, 
although the straw vote would not bind us, if we can get 
a feel of the body’s thinking. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, that is only a 
premise to a more important statement that after we 
will have voted and the result of the consensus voting 
reveals that a presidential form of government is the 
choice of the majority of the Members of the Com- 
mission, then we adopt the resolution recommended by 
Commissioners Foz, Suarez, Tadeo, and the others that 
the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions be the working 
drafts. Immediately, we proceed to public hearings to 


be conducted by the different committees, the func- 
tions of which are relevant to the form of government, 
without prejudice to hearing further proposals from dif- 
ferent sectors of our society. Will the Commissioner 
agree to that? 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, that sounds a good 
idea, but others might have better ideas. At this point, 
I have not given it much thought. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, inasmuch as the 
honorable Commissioner Garcia mentioned my name a 
while ago that he did not exactly agree with what I said 
yesterday, may I have the privilege to give a short 
rejoinder. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MR. TINGSON. I am sorry if I was misunderstood 
yesterday afternoon. I suppose I was thinking of the 
time when we had to dismiss and I had to speak quite 
hurriedly. But may I, in a sense, apologize to Com- 
missioner Monsod that I was not against his proposal for 
public hearings. May I also correct Commissioner 
Garcia’s wrong impression, because certainly this 
humble Representation is all for hearing from our 
people before we write any provision into our Consti- 
tution. What I was trying to say. Madam President, is: 
Inasmuch as we are mandated to finish this Constitution 
within three months, why do we not take advantage of 
our weekends and fly to our hometowns or districts and 
dialogue with our people? Madam President, I remem- 
ber when I was a humble Member of the 1 97 1 Constitu- 
tional Convention it took us two full days to travel 
to a certain place like Davao, Cebu or Iloilo. When we 
arrived at a certain place, it was the people belonging to 
the upper crust of society who attended our committee 
meetings and who got an appointment to talk to us. The 
people from the barrio did not have the chance to talk 
to us because they did not even have enough money to 
pay for their bus fares from Kabankalan to Bacolod, for 
instance. That is what I was trying to say yesterday. Let 
us all go home on weekends and commiserate with our 
people and dialogue with them. Madam President, 
perhaps, we can have a one-page advertisement in the 
newspapers for those who are really interested to come 
to Manila inasmuch as we are laboring under a time 
constraint. Also, the President of this country could 
issue a decree providing that all kinds of mails addressed 
by the people from the barrio to the Members of the 
Commission be postage-free. That is what I was trying 
to say, and I am sorry if I was misunderstood by my 
colleagues. Commissioners Garcia and Monsod. 

Thank you. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


65 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I understand from Commissioner 
Garcia that there were public hearings conducted by a 
group. If Commissioner Garcia is ready with the results 
of these public hearings, may I request him to formally 
submit to the Commission copies of the results for 
distribution to the Members because by then we would 
be one step ahead in the matter of public hearings. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I am ready. In fact, 
I will give him a copy of the list of all the groups who 
participated in those hearings right at this very moment. 
The results will be mimeographed and will be ready for 
distribution. 

Madam President, I just want to make something very 
clear. Conducting public hearings by other organizations 
is different from the Commission itself going out and 
listening to the people. I think we are also mandated to 
listen to the people. But public hearings require a far 
more organized effort. We should go out as teams to 
different parts of the country. A tremendous effort is 
required to harness all the different groups — regional, 
sectoral, etc. — to sit down with us and discuss issues 
and then air these live so that every province partici- 
pates. 

MR. DAVIDE. My point. Madam President, is that in 
areas where the group of Commissioner Garcia had 
already conducted public hearings on issues relevant to 
the formulation of a new constitution, we could pro- 
bably minimize the number of public hearings to be 
conducted in such places. 

So, I request Commissioner Garcia to formally submit 
to the Commission reports of these public hearings. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I have the 
floor. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I would like to thank Commissioner 
Garcia for articulating a lot of things I wanted to discuss 
yesterday. The idea of going out on weekends is well 
within the plans ot this Commission. Since there aic 48 
of us, we can cover as much as 1 5 areas every weekend. 
The important thing is really to organize ourselves for 
that effort. According to the Floor Leader, this is one 
of the subject matters supposed to be taken up in the 
caucus later this afternoon. Maybe we can discuss the 
procedures and preparatory work that have to be done 
in order to concretize these consultations with all the 
regions of the country. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide with- 
draw his motion in the meantime in order that this 
matter can be taken up during this caucus? 

MR. DAVIDE. Willingly, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, it seems that there is an 
overriding concern among all Members for a wider parti- 
cipation of the people so that they, the speakers, in this 
Constitution that we will draft, could hear their own 
voices. I would like to propose another practical step in 
addition to the ideas already expressed here. I move that 
the President of the Philippines issue a formal invitation 
or an appeal to all citizens and groups of citizens of the 
country who may have constitutional proposals to 
submit their proposals in writing to the Constitutional 
Commission so that they could be considered and deli- 
berated upon as soon as possible. In this way, the littlest 
of our people in the far-off regions could be heard. I 
think everybody will realize that the time constraint 
would not allow us to hold as many public hearings as 
we would want to, even if we go out of Manila, for there 
is also the public demand that people should be heard in 
this Constitution we are going to draft. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment to the motion. Instead of burdening the President 
with this particular duty, may I suggest that the task be 
given to the Secretary-General by authority of the 
President of the Commission. 

MR. RAMA. I accept the amendment. Madam Presi- 
dent. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair make this parti- 
cular inquiry; Can this be in the form of an advertise- 
ment in the ncwspaiier',’ 

MR. RAMA. The Secretariat should decide what form 
it should take. 

THE PRESIDENI. fhe motion has been amended. 

Is there any object ii>n to (he motion? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. May 1 ask that the A cting .Assistant 
Floor Leader be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Calderon is recog- 
nized. 


66 


THURSDAY, JUNES,! 986 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, ladies and 
gentlemen of this Commission: Yesterday, the Honor- 
able Ambrosio Padilla, who as Senator when the 1971 
Constitutional Convention was convoked, gave us an 
insight into the thinking and intention of the then 
Congress of the Philippines which passed the law calling 
that convention. Commissioner Padilla said that it was 
not the intention of the Congress at that time to change 
the form of the Philippine government from presidential 
to the parliamentary system. Implicit in this statement 
was the meaning that it was not the intention of the 
FUipino people to change to the parliamentary system 
because whenever the congressmen and senators spoke 
together as the Congress of the Philippines, they did so 
as representatives of their constituents, the Filipino 
people. This is an observation. Madam President, that I 
wish to confirm. 

As everyone in this Chamber knows, 1 1 Members of 
this Commission and I had the honor to have served in 
the Constitutional Convention of 1971. My 11 fellow 
Con-Con delegates in this Chamber will attest that when 
the candidates for the Con-Con filed their certificates of 
candidacy, the Commission on Elections required that 
they submit a platform. The platform, among others, 
required that they state their preference on the form of 
government, whether this be presidential or parlia- 
mentary. I researched on these platforms. Madam Pre- 
sident, and the records of the COMELEC will bear me 
out when I say that a majority of the candidates for 
delegate, and later a majority of the delegates actually 
elected, were for the retention of the presidential sys- 
tem. 

I remember that on the last day of the debates over 
the system of government, whether presidential or 
parliamentary, those who spoke in favor of the pre- 
sidential system were former Senators Liwag and 
Manglapus, President Macapagal and my humble self. 
However, Madam President, an alarming mystery 
occurred within the convention which probably only 
former President Marcos could explain. While the 
majority of the delegates were elected on a campaign 
platform that promised the retention of the presiden- 
tial system, some mysterious motive induced many of 
them to change their minds and make a somersault on 
the issue. When I saw that the mysterious magic was 
working its spell on my fellow delegates so much so that 
many of them were making an abrupt turnaround from 
a presidential to a parliamentary system, I was forced to 
deliver a scathing speech on the floor of the convention 
attacking this sudden change of mind. I denounced the 
act as “political estafa” because these were delegates 
who were elected to preserve and strengthen the presi- 
dential system, but were turning their backs on this 
promise and championing the parliamentary system 
instead. I, then, said that I might seem unchristian and 
unkind to make so vehement a denunciation and so 
serious a charge but the change of mind to me then was 
a “political estafa” committed against the Filipino 


people. It was deception and imposture of the lowest 
order. 

In a further attempt to prevent the commission of 
this “political estafa” against the Filipino people, a 
group of 32 delegates, including myself, signed a petition 
urging the Constitutional Convention to suspend its pro- 
ceedings when Martial Law was in force. The petition 
was prepared in my house and most of. the delegates 
who signed came to my house to affix their signature 
because I was then under house arrest. 

By a strange coincidence. Madam President, after the 
signing and the filing of this resolution. Minister Pimen- 
tel and I, and a few others, underwent actual detention 
in Camp Crame. I recount all of these. Madam President, 
with the indulgence of my colleagues in this Constitu- 
tional Commission, because of my firm belief that the 
presidential system of government is at once the best 
suited for us, and was and still is, the overwhelming 
choice of the Filipino people to be their form of govern- 
ment. 

The experimental form of government imposed upon 
us by the 1973 Constitution resulted in tragedy and ruin 
for the Filipino people. That Constitution was in itself 
a travesty of what the Filipino people really wanted for 
their fundamental law. This is why its so-called ratifica- 
tion had to be manipulated and contrived. In truth and 
in fact, it was never ratified by the Filipino people. This 
was an observation made by no less than Chief Justice 
Roberto Concepcion, who now sits in this Chamber as a 
Commissioner, when the ratification issue was brought 
before the Supreme Court. 

Although already a moot issue, the manner in which 
we were chosen to be Members of this body — not by 
election but by appointment — continues to concern and 
worry a sizeable number of our people. One way to 
allay their fears. Madam President and ladies and gentle- 
men, is for us to present to them a Constitution that 
truly embodies their ideals and their aspirations and 
which returns to them the form of government which 
they had been used to and which they wanted and still 
want — the presidential system of government not only 
in form but, more so, in substance. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona, the 
last speaker, be recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona may 
proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. I would like to apologize, first of 
all, for not being in the session hall, but I heard the 


THURSDAY, JUNE 5, 1986 


67 


Floor Leader say that there would be four speakers and 
I only heard three, so I thought there will be a fourth 
speaker before myself. 

Madam President, if I may be allowed to borrow an 
expression of Commissioner Ople, during one of our 
preconference/caucuses — this may not be a prejudicial 
matter, but I think it is a necessary one because of the 
announcement made yesterday that the Committee on 
Rules will submit its final report tomorrow — I would 
like to anticipate or preempt a resolution which I expect 
to file, perhaps tomorrow or sometime next week, pro- 
posing the addition of an article on human resources in 
our draft Constitution. This article. Madam President, 
would include provisions concerning the promotion of 
scientific research and invention, patronage of arts and 
letters, conservation and development of national cul- 
ture for national consciousness and sense of identity, 
protection of works of art, development of national 
language, right to inventions, writing and artistic crea- 
tions, scholarships, grants-in-aid and other forms of 
incentives for specially gifted citizens, promotion of 
customs, traditions, beliefs of the various cultural 
communities in the country and other related matters 

The principal component of this article, however. 
Madam President, would be the provisions on educa- 
tion, which at present are found both in the 1935 and in 
the 1973 Constitutions in the Articles on General Pro- 
visions. No one. Madam President, will dispute the 
importance of education and its crucial role in national 
development. Education is recognized as an effective 
social instrument to achieve the purposes of a nation 
and to mold the character of its citizens and would, 
therefore, be one of the principal instruments in bring- 
ing about the much desired moral regeneration in our 
country. As we know, the educational institutions are 
expected to inculcate love of country, teach the duties 
of citizenship, develop moral character, personal dis- 
cipline and scientific, technological and vocational ef- 
ficiency. Education has been described by the Phi Delta 


Kappa, Manila, Philippines Chapter, and rightly so, as 
the largest enterprise of the Philippine government. 

I cannot understand, Madam President, why a state 
function as vital and as extensive as education and in- 
volving at present almost 15 million students, about 330 
faculty members, not including nonteaching, non- 
academic and support personnel, should be relegated to 
relative obscurity in a broadly described article called 
“General Provisions.” 

In the 1935 Constitution, Madam President, Article 
XIII entitled “Conservation and Utilization of Natural 
Resources” and Article XIV of the 1973 Constitution, 
entitled “The National Economy and Patrimony of the 
Nation,” deal in a large measure with natural resources. 
I will readily agree to the fact that natural resources are 
vital to the growth and development of our country. 
But I daresay. Madam President, without fear of contra- 
diction, that human resources are just as vital, if not 
more so, as natural resources. And it is for this reason 
that I respectfully submit or reiterate my proposal to 
the honorable Chairman and members of the Committee 
on Rules to consider the addition of an article in the 
draft Constitution to be entitled “Human Resources.” 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move for the adjournment of the 
session and the holding of a caucus in the caucus room 
as suggested by the President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow, Friday, at nine o’clock in the morning. 

It was 4:12 p.m. 















V, 




i"v''«'*'? ’‘■■‘> ' ■•- ’'1 . ■ ilf' ' ^. • 

‘ j^.VV, .^h •/ I.i ,- '’i';’ 

■ ’•»'’,*/ .» '/r ' 

r • ' . . 

~tf*e 'v/ ••»!** '’•■*' 4»* j '■ i { ‘'’' 

r^- f'V'w 't, V'fP « ^’' *> i*« ■.•< 

jjl‘V ijiu. - 4^(S>»! n.'''= # { ;r,.\« rsl r,V* • : If ., », 

tlrl.WW ^ 

^ *fo» »»''*^t Jt i*i'. ••/•■'“• 't‘t-' ft; 
f#**' ^ iil* »jv4;>v'ls*' *..-li> rtU't'ns ,»• 


*‘- K» »f' ,.^ : ^ •• 

■ ’^. I’’’ /V.'uU'i ,iv >1 . • ' ;. 

S ** ’’’ ^ ■•' *' ■'■'■'*'»«'» t" »'• '• ' 

■ .‘1. J'lfl'Jfii ,'f' tM.i-ftv ' 

wi..*'Lrv|?^'>'^^ ‘•'t **" ’ ■’’”'■ 

■' '' ‘"' "iaft 

'••‘iJJiilU Wl /'•' ’**• ‘ ^* * ' '’• f "if 





’ ■ ^-ViX •)i>' 

4-y5HH-]il#rV. ..ft • *y *,t‘: 111 ; 


‘A.r 

''f * ' . *'■ ' s.'-’ ' 


'' iif •M » i Ak ' ■ 

f! 4t»f Ii''. » •• . 

f> * -i 4. ^■^.■:'V '-'.S: , , 

^‘ •'“ 4* ;■»»'• r'- 1 ;' V <■ ■• 

1^ ; -• •« f' 

. ' -‘sT^'.V ■ ■ ■ 



|^»I;.,' '|^ -jV , , . mtf^> 


. > - '4^ '^' i. >f ' 


r’ Jv^ V, > ' 



, , , *V<,, 

I ■-•••;:^ \ /v-r '• ■ 


. "• y. ■ 





FRIDAY. JUNE 6 , 1986 


69 


R.C.C. NO. 5 
Friday, June 6, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:16 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by Reverend Fr. 
Joaquin G. Bernas. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

FR. BERNAS. Let us just pause for a while and be 
aware that we are in the presence of the Almighty Who 
cares about us and about our nation more than we can 
ever imagine. 

PRAYER 

Almighty Father, enlighten our minds, teach our 
hearts to love, and strengthen our wills to do what is 
right. We place ourselves into Your hands because we 
know that without You, we can accomplish nothing. 
Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

Alrmfn . . . . 

. Present 

Castro de .... 

. Present 

. Absent 

Colayco 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

. Present 

Davide 

. Present 

yVZCUIW 

. Present* 

Foz 

. Present* 

bacani 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Garcia 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . • 

D/%«*noc . . - 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present 

, Present 

Guingona .... 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Jamir 

. Present* 

Brocka 

. Present 

Laurel 

. Present* 

Calderon 

. Present 

Lerum 

. Present* 


Maambong . . , 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . . Present 

Monsod 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . . Present 

Natividad . . . , 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . . Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . . Present 

NoUedo 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . . Present* 

Ople 

, . Present* 

Tadeo 

. . . Present 

Padilla 

. Present 

Tan 


Quesada 

. Present* 

Tingson . . . . 

, . . Present 

Rama 

. Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Regalado 

. Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . . 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 

Rigos 

. Present 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Rodrigo 

. Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 36 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move to dispense with the reading of 
the Journal of yesterday’s session and to approve the 
same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Kindly take the microphone. 

MR. RAMA. The stenographers, by the way, are 
requesting that we speak to the microphone and speak 
clearly for the transcription. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you, Mr. Floor Leader, I 
shall do that. 

I was out of the hall when the discussion on the 
Borneo claim was going on, so I could not make out 
what my distinguished colleagues had debated about on 
the matter. There was nothing, therefore, in the record 
to show that I had remarks to make. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


70 


FRIDAY, JUNE 6, 1986 


But this morning, I would like to take a few minutes, 
for the information and reference of this honorable 
Commission, to say something about the position that I, 
as well as the people of Sulu whom I represent, take 
with respect to the question of the Borneo claim. 

I think the honorable Commission has displayed a 
high sense of wisdom when it decided that the question 
of the claim to Sabah should not be included in the 
draft of the Constitution. The acquisition of this par- 
ticular territory was by accident, when Angkang and 
Sangkalan came to the rescue of the Brunei Sultanate, 
which, out of gratitude, gave away a large territorial 
portion in what was known later as British North 
Borneo. But the Sultan of Sulu, with the recognition of 
the Spanish Government in Manila, had exercised juris- 
dictional rights over the territory for several years until 
he executed the controversial lease to the British North 
Borneo Company, the one single act of the Sultanate of 
Sulu that brou^t the Government of the Philippines 
and that of Malaysia to a clash for a contest of owner- 
ship. It was an accident of history that Sabah became 
part of the Sultanate of Sulu and was subsequently 
leased as “padjak,” which means a lasting lease upon 
payment of the agreed amount of rent. I suggest that we 
leave this matter to diplomatic understanding in order 
to resolve the differences between Malaysia and the 
Philippines on the question of Sabah. 

We, the people of Sulu and those who have resided in 
the area over a long period of time, have always been 
communicating with the people of Sabah without much 
restrictions on the basis of traditionally accepted prac- 
tices such as no-visa entry. This relationship is age-old 
such that today there are many relatives of the people 
of Sulu who are residents by right of birth in Sabah. 

Again, I wish to convey my congratulations to the 
Members of this honorable Commission for voting 
yesterday — when I was unable to participate — for the 
noninclusion of the Sabah claim in the draft of the 
Constitution. If there is ever a right for the Philippines 
to claim the Sabah territory, it is a right based on the 
reward handed to the aforementioned Angkang and 
Sangkalan by the Sultan of Brunei. 

And on the basis of the action of the Commission, I 
think the people of Sulu, as well as of Mindanao, are 
glad because of the wisdom of the Members of the Com- 
mission in not including this claim in the Constitution 
that we are going to draft. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, before we proceed 
further, there is still another item in the agenda and 
that is the Reference of Business. So, we will consider 
the remarks of Commissioner Abubakar as inserted later 
on. 

May we proceed then to the Reference of Business? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Refer- 
ence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

« 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, the President making the 
corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 46, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS AFFECTING THE NATIONAL 
ECONOMY AND CREATING A SOCIOECONOMIC 
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 47, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THE POLICIES ON THE CON- 
SERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATION- 
AL PATRIMONY AND SEEKING TO INCORPORATE IN 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON 
THE NATIONAL PATRIMONY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 48, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT THE GOVERNMENT 
SHALL REFRAIN FROM ENGAGING IN OR AUTHOR- 
IZING TORTURE, OTHER CRUEL AND DEGRADING 
TREATMENT OR PUNISHMENT, UNEXPLAINED DIS- 
APPEARANCE AND EXTRA-LEGAL EXECUTION, AND 
TO TAKE STEPS TO ELIMINATE SUCH PRACTICES BY 
OTHERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 49, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT EMPLOYEES OF ANY 
MEDIA CORPORATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS SHALL 
ENJOY THE RIGHT TO BE PART-OWNERS THEREOF 
OR TO PURCHASE SHARES OF STOCKS THEREIN. 


FRIDAY, JUNE 6, 1986 


71 


Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. We have received information that the 
Committee on Rules is through with the drafting of the 
Rules. So I move that We adjourn the session. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we ad- 
journ. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to say something in 
order to set our records straight. I would like to inform 
our worthy colleague here, Commissioner Abubakar, 
who said he was absent yesterday, that there was no 
vote taken on the question of Sabah. I think some 
newsmen interviewed some of the Members and each 
Member gave his opinion but there was no vote. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR GUINGONA. Madam President, before we 
adjourn may I be allowed to make some brief remarks 
on a very important issue that we discussed yesterday 
regarding public hearings during which our distinguished 
Acting Floor Leader made a motion which was ap- 
proved by this body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

Our distinguished Acting Floor Leader proposed that 
organizations, such as those mentioned by Commis- 
sioner Garcia, that have held and perhaps are continuing 
to hold public hearings, be invited to send materials or 
reports concerning the consensus reached in those 
ublic hearings. I would like to suggest that the Com- 
^ ission, through the President, solicit the assistance or 
^ ooeration of prestigious and responsible organizations 
^Vch as far as we know, have not yet conducted public 
r rings but which have nationwide networks in the 
f rm of clubs or units. And I have in mind civic organi- 
zations like the Rotary, the Jaycees or the Lions, pro- 
fessional and other organizations including the media, 
labor student and faculty groups. We should request 
the leadership of these organizations to appeal to their 
clubs or units, particularly outside Metro Manila, to 
conduct public hearings in their respective areas within 


two weeks and send a report to this Commission on the 
consensus reached in those hearings. Of course, this 
would be without prejudice to the materials that we 
shall obtain from the valuable work of the ad hoc Com- 
mittee on Public Hearings. But, Madam President, con- 
sidering the actual work of the Commissioners in the 
matter of studies, researches, attendance in sessions, 
committee meetings and so forth, coupled with time 
and budgetary constraints, I am afraid that we will not 
be able to obtain enough materials or information from 
the proposed public hearings of the Commission to 
enable us to adequately feel the public pulse. By way of 
example, I do not know how many clubs the Rotary 
has, but let us assume it has 300 clubs. If one-tenth of 
these clubs respond favorably to the appeal of their 
leadership, we would already have 30 responses from 
the Rotary alone. 

And so, if I may be allowed, I would like to respect- 
fully move that this Commission, through the President, 
solicit the assistance or cooperation of prestigious and 
responsible organizations — civic, professional and so 
forth — for their leadership to encourage their clubs or 
units — I am referring to organizations that have nation- 
wide networks — to hold public hearings on constitu- 
tional proposals within two weeks, and to send to this 
Commission materials or reports on the consensus 
reached in those hearings. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona, the 
matter of public hearings, which is among the motions 
of Commissioner Monsod, was deferred. Would it be all 
right if this motion be taken up when we take up this 
whole subject of public hearings? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President, I withdraw 
my motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair will take note of it so 
that it will be included. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. When and if this motion is taken up 
on the floor, I would like to add an amendment to it. 
Franking privileges should be extended not to us but to 
the people so that they need not buy stamps for all 
letters, packages and books that they want to send to 
us within the time that we are deliberating. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, in my enumera- 
tion of organizations, I forgot an important one. I 
would like to add religious organizations also. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


72 


FRIDAY, JUNE 6, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other amendment? 
(Silence) 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. As I was saying, the Committee on 
Rules has informed us that it is ready with the Rules. 
It has finished the drafting of the Rules and it would 
be necessary to have a caucus for expeditious dis- 
cussion and approval of the Rules so necessary for our 
function. 


Therefore, I move that we adjourn the session until 
Monday at three o’clock, and in the meantime we Iiold a 
caucus. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned until 
Monday at three o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 9:34 a.m. 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


73 


R.C.C. NO. 6 
Monday, June 9, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:28 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Teodoro C. Bacani. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

BISHOP BACANI. Before the Prayer, I just like to 
state here that on June 1 the Holy Father asked the 
pilgrims in Rome to pray for our Constitutional Com- 
mission and then united his prayers with us. 

PRAYER 


Laurel 

. . Present* 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . , 

, . . Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Rosales 


Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

, . . Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 


Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 


Ople 

. . Present 

Tan 


PadiUa 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . , 


Quesada . . . . 

. . Present 

Trenas 


Rama 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . . Present 

Regalado . . . . 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . , 

. . . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Villegas 

, . . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 44 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


Father, bless our work today. Let us know what You 
want for our country. Make us pursue our work with 
diligence, love, patience and harmony. Bring lasting 
results to our efforts and give us the joy of knowing we 
are serving You and our countrymen. Amen. 


roll call 

the PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


XHE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 
Brocka Present 


Calderon Present* 

Castro de Present 

Colay CO Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Present 

Poz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of the previous session and that we 
approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Refer- 
ence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


74 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 50, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RULES OF THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Sumulong, Bennagen, Maambong, 
Romulo, Sarmiento and Bengzon. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 51, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ARTICLES ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS IN ORDER TO SAFEGUARD AND ENHANCE 
THEIR INDEPENDENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 52, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ARTICLES ON THE JUDICIARY TO SAFE- 
GUARD AND ENHANCE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE 
SUPREME COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Dr. Jose M. Alejandrino, retired Ambassa- 
dor of the Philippines, transmitting his proposed draft 
of the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 3 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Mr. Ramon J. Liwag, Service 
Chief, Ministry of Justice, transmitting the proposal of 
Mr. Ben R. Timbol of Angeles City for a Batasan com- 
posed of incumbent provincial governors and city 
mayors, to convene for sixty days every year during 
which period the vice-governors and city vice-mayors 
shall be the acting governors and city mayors, respec- 
tively. 

(Communication No. 4 - Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Communication from Mr. Manuel A. Sanico of 4107 
Corregidor-Pitogo, Makati, Metro Manila, suggesting 


incorporation in the Constitution of the following, 
among others: to give meaning to the principle that 
sovereignty resides in the people and government 
authority emanates from them, barangay resolutions 
be brought to the proper legislative/executive body for 
deliberation/implementation, and the creation of a 
National Accounting Commission. 

(Communication No. 5 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication from Mr. Florencio D. Montalvo, 
retired government auditor, proposing an auditing 
power in government vested in a General Auditing 
Authority with a categorical auditing function of dis- 
allowing in preaudit proposed expenditures of public 
funds and uses of property which are irregular, unneces- 
sary, excessive, extravagant and otherwise unconscion- 
able. 

(Communication No. 6 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 50 
(Rules of the Constitutional Commission) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we con- 
sider Proposed Resolution No. 50. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 50 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read only the title of the resolution 
without prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole 
text thereof.* 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 50, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RULES OF THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is recog- 
nized to sponsor Proposed Resolution No. 50. 

SPONSORSHIP REMARKS 
OF COMMISSIONER SUMULONG 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, our distin- 
guished colleagues in the Commission: 


Sec Appendix 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


75 


The resolution now before the Commission, Proposed 
Resolution No. 50, contains the Provisional Rules of the 
Commission as revised first by the Ad Hoc Committee 
on Rules, and then later revised last Friday by the Com- 
mission meeting in caucus. So, Proposed Resolution 
No. 50 now before the Commission contains the Rules 
as ultimately revised by the body in a meeting in caucus 
last Friday. What it only needs is for these Rules to be 
formally adopted by the Commission now meeting in 
plenary session so that this will become the Rules of the 
Commission permanently which will guide the proceed- 
ings of this body during the time that we are deliberat- 
ing on the formulation of a new constitution. 

I, therefore, respectfully ask that the Commission 
now formally adopt the Rules contained in Proposed 
Resolution No. 50 as the ultimately revised Rules of the 
Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I propose an amendment. 

At our caucus last night. Sections 30 and 3 1 on page 
13 of the Provisional Rules were deleted. However, I 
think the last sentence in Section 31 should remain. 
That sentence reads: “On the day set for its considera- 
tion, the resolution shall be voted on Second Reading. 
So my amendment is, after the end of Section 26 en- 
titled “Amendments,” and appearing on page 14 of the 
new proposal, to add a new section, SECTION 27 which 
shall read: ON THE DAY SET FOR ITS CONSIDERA- 
TION, THE RESOLUTION, AS AMENDED, SHALL BE VOTED 
ON SECOND READING. The reason is that after the 
amendments, the thing to do is to vote on the resolution, 
as amended, before going to Third Reading. However, 
when we deleted Section 30 and 31 of the Provisional 
Rules, even the sentence which says: “The Resolution 
shall be voted on Second Reading” was deleted, so I am 
just moving that this sentence be brought back so that it 
will appear there that after the amendments, there will 
be the vote on Second Reading before the Third Read- 
ing. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please state 
his proposal again. 

MR. RODRIGO. On page 14, between lines 21 and 
22, insert a new SECTION 27, to read as follows: ON 

the day set for its consideration, the resolu- 
tion. AS amended, shall be voted on second read- 
ing. And as a consequence of that, change the cor- 
responding numbers of the succeeding sections. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, I have no objec- 
tion to the proposal made by Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SUMULONG. When we were in caucus last 
Friday, we agreed that after the amendments on Second 


Reading, the resolution need not be referred to the 
Committee on Style, but that does not mean that we 
will put the resolution to a vote on Second Reading. I 
think it was an oversight on the part of the one who 
prepared this final draft of Proposed Resolution No. 50 
not to have included that last sentence that the Gentle- 
man from Bulacan had proposed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Rodrigo? Does 
Commissioner Sumulong have any objection or is there 
any clarification that has to be made? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to introduce an amend- 
ment because after going over the Rules, I noticed that 
we have not fixed the number for a quorum in commit- 
tee meetings. I wonder if the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee would accommodate an amendment on page 9. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, will this be an anterior amend- 
ment? 

MR. DAVIDE. If there are no anterior amendments, 
my amendment will be on page 9. 

THE PRESIDENT. Page 9? 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment is for a new 
paragraph to be placed between lines 9 and 10. It reads 
as follows: FOR PURPOSES OF CONDUCTING ITS BUSI- 
NESS, AT LEAST FIVE MEMBERS OF A COMMITTEE WITH 
A MEMBERSHIP OF MORE THAN TEN SHALL CONSTITUTE 
A QUORUM AND THREE MEMBERS OF A COMMITTEE 
WITH A MEMBERSHIP OF TEN OR LESS SHALL CONSTI- 
TUTE A QUORUM. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment acceptable to 
the Chairman? 

MR. SUMULONG. May we hear the Honorable 
Davide give the explanation for this proposed amend- 
ment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the explanation is: 
In view of the timetable giving the committees until 
July 7 to complete their committee hearings and to 
report on resolutions filed before them, the Members of 
the Commission belonging to different committees will 
have difficulty attending the committee meetings sched- 
uled simultaneously in one morning. There is, therefore, 
a need to reduce the number to constitute a quorum so 
that the committees can fully conduct their business 
without difficulty of securing a quorum. If there are 
three committees working in one day but the members 
of these committees are practically the same, they will 
have to run from one room to the other, or leave the 


76 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


committee meeting in one and proceed to another room 
just to fill up the quorum necessary for the committee 
meeting. I doubt very much, if this can be done within 
the timetable allotted to the committees to conduct 
and terminate the public hearings. 

THE PRESIDENT. To clarify the proposed amend- 
ment, five members for a committee composed of 1 0 
shall constitute a quorum. 

MR. DAVIDE. Five for committees with a member- 
ship of more than 1 0. 

THE PRESIDENT. Ten or more. 

MR. DAVIDE. More than 10, Madam President. Then 
three for committees with a membership of 1 0 or less. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, I remember in 
actual practice when I was a member of the Congress of 
the Philippines that usually what happens with respect 
to the work of the committees is that when the com- 
mittee meeting opens, a majority of the members will 
appear just to signify that they are present and that a 
majority constituting a quorum is present. But after 
that, usually we allow the members of the committee 
to go to other committee meetings of which they are 
also members and nobody questions that procedure. 

MR. DAVIDE. That may be true, Madam President, 
on the assumption that the meetings will be conducted 
in the same place. However, the meetings will be con- 
ducted outside of the Batasan, and, moreover, we will 
treat of constitutional issues, not issues for purposes of 
ordinary legislation. The public might criticize us for 
conducting a meeting even with a number less than the 
required quorum. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that satisfactory. Commissioner 
Sumulong? 

MR. SUMULONG. I think there is no harm in includ- 
ing the amendment. For practical purposes, the amend- 
ment proposed by the Gentleman can also help in the 
work of the committees. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the principal idea of the pro- 
posal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Therefore, Commissioner Sumu- 
long is not objecting to the amendment proposed by 
Commissioner Davide. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for a suspen- 
sion of the session to thresh out this matter. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:48 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:55 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I would like to 
modify the proposed amendment after consultation 
with the Committee. As modified, the amendment will 
consist in the addition of a paragraph to Section 8 
which will start after line 9 on page 9. The new para- 
graph will read as follows; FOR PURPOSES OF CON- 
DUCTING ITS BUSINESS, FIVE MEMBERS OF A COMMIT- 
TEE WITH A MEMBERSHIP OF MORE THAN TEN SHALL 
CONSTITUTE A QUORUM, AND THREE MEMBERS OF A 
COMMITTEE WITH A MEMBERSHIP OF TEN OR LESS 
SHALL CONSTITUTE A QUORUM: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, 
THAT FOR PURPOSES OF APPROVING A RESOLUTION OR 
ITS REPORT THE VOTE OF A MAJORITY OF ALL ITS MEM- 
BERS IS REQUIRED. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUMULONG. The amendment of Commissioner 
Davide, as modified, is acceptable to the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment of Commissioner Davide? 

MR. RODRIGO. A minor observation. Madam Presi- 
dent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. It says “TEN OR MORE MEM- 
BERS” or “TEN”? But all the memberships in the dif- 
ferent committees are in odd numbers. So, “TEN” 
really would be a little awkward because there is no 
committee with ten members. 

MR. DAVIDE. For clarification purposes. Madam 
President, the wording of the amendment is MORE 
THAN TEN, and the second is TEN OR LESS. 


MONDAY. JUNE 9 , 1986 


77 


MR. RODRIGO. It should be LESS THAN TEN. 

MR. DAVIDE. Accepted — less than ten, because 
there is really no committee with a membership of ten. 

THE PRESIDENT. The sponsor has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment as 
amended by Commissioner Rodrigo and accepted by the 
Chairman of the Committee on Rules? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment, as amended, is 
hereby approved. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I was just talking to 
the proponent of the amendment and he agreed to a 
further change. 

MR. DAVIDE. For the record, the amendment to the 
amendment — qualifying “vote” to AFFIRMATIVE 
VOTE — has been accepted and, therefore, it will read; 
“AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF A MAJORITY OF ALL ITS MEM- 
BERS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
modification in Commissioner Davide’s amendment? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

ADOPTION OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 50 
(Rules of the Constitutional Commission) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, since there are no 
more amendments or objection to the Rules of the 
Constitutional Commission, I move that we adopt Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 50 on the Rules of the Constitu- 
tional Commission, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the ap* 
proval of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission, 
as amended? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 50 on the Rules of the 
Constitutional Commission, as amended, is adopted 
unanimously. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, pursuant to the time- 
table set under Section 9, Rule II of the approved Rules 
of the Commission, I move for the organization of the 
different standing committees. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we ad- 
journ the session at three o’clock tomorrow afternoon 
so that the committees can now schedule their public 
hearings or consider resolutions referred to them. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:01 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:19 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. -The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Since changes have already been made 
on the membership of the committees, I withdraw my 
motion for adjournment and I move for the organiza- 
tion of the committees. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

ELECTION TO COMMITTEES 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the elec- 
tion of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles: Commissioner Rosales, Chair- 
man; Commissioner Tingson, Vice-Chairman; and Com- 
missioners Villegas, Aquino, Rosario Braid, Nolledo and 
Quesada, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the elec- 
tion of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political 
Rights and Obligations and Human Rights: Commis- 
sioner Laurel, Chairman; Commissioner Bernas, Vice- 
Chairman' and Commissioners Abubakar, Sarmiento, 
Garcia Rodrigo, Lerum, Padilla, Tan, Colayco, Tadeo, 
Villegas, Bennagen, Bacani and Natividad, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Chair calls the attention of the Acting Floor 
Leader that necessary adjustments in committee mem- 
bership may be made later on by the Chair as recom- 
mended by the Members. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. I move that member- 
ship to the committees be subject to changes or ad- 


78 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


justments by the President as recommended by the 
Members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam. President, I move for the elec- 
tion of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on the Legislative: Commissioner Davide, 
Chairman; Commissioner Azcuna, Vice-Chairman; and 
Commissioners Sumulong, Abubakar, Calderon, Rod- 
rigo, Alonto, Aquino, Jamir, Concepcion, Lerum, de los 
Reyes, Guingona, Garcia and Trefias, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the elec- 
tion of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on the Executive: Commissioner Sumulong, 
Chairman; Commissioner Regalado, Vice-Chairman; and 
Commissioners Rama, Calderon, Alonto, Concepcion, 
Foz, Maambong, Jamir, Davide, Natividad, Sarmiento, 
Aquino, Bemas and Lerum, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on the Judiciary: Commissioner Concep- 
cion, Chairman; Commissioner Romulo, Vice-Chairman; 
and Commissioners Colay co, Sumulong, Jamir, Regala- 
do, Suarez, Trefias, Sarmiento, Uka, Davide, Natividad, 
Bengzon and Azcuna, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies: Commissioner Foz, Chairman; Commissioner 
Rigos, Vice-Chairman; and Commissioners de Castro, 
Monsod, Abubakar, Villegas, Nieva, Regalado, Concep- 
cion, Guingona and Jamir, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Local Governments: Commissioner 
Nolledo, Chairman; Commissioner Calderon, Vice- 
Chairman; and Commissioners Tingson, Rosales, Alonto, 
de Castro and Colayco, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Accountability of Public Officers: Com- 
missioner Monsod, Chairman; Commissioner Colayco, 
Vice-Chairman; and Commissioners Nieva, Azcuna, 
Padilla, Tan, Calderon, Tingson, Romulo, Brocka and 
Nolledo, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony: 
Commissioner Villegas, Chairman; Commissioner Tadeo, 
Vice-Chairman; Commissioners Gascon, Bennagen, 
Romulo, Monsod, Sarmiento, Bengzon, Ople, Suarez 
and Uka, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute, honorable Floor 
Leader. There are four additional members to said 
Committee because the membership has been increased 
to 15: Commissioners Bacani, Natividad, Foz and 
Villacorta. 

MR. RAMA. I move that the Commissioners men- 
tioned by the President be included as members of the 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on General Provisions: Commissioner 

Rosario Braid, Chairman; Commissioner Bacani, Vice- 
Chairman; and Commissioners Rigos, Brocka, Natividad, 
Uka, de Castro, Gascon, Nieva, Maambong and Benna- 
gen, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of 
the Committee on Amendments and Transitory Pro- 
visions: Commissioner Suarez, Chairman; Commis- 

sioner Ople, Vice-Chairman; and Commissioners de los 
Reyes, Foz, Padilla, Maambong and de Castro, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following officers and members of 
the Steering Committee: Commissioner Bengzon, 

Chairman; Commissioner Rama, Vice-Chairman; and 
Commissioners de los Reyes, Guingona, Romulo, 
Bernas, Rodrigo, Nieva, Quesada and Alonto, members. 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


79 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair liears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 

election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Privileges: Commissioner Abubakar, 

Chairman; Commissioner Quesada, Vice-Chairman; and 
Commissioners Calderon, Tingson, de los Reyes, Nolle- 
do and Concepcion, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 

election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Style: Commissioner Rodrigo, Chairman; 
Commissioner Trenas, Vice-Chairman; and Commis- 
sioners Villacorta, Sumulong, Guingona, Rama, Nolledo, 
Padilla, Abubakar, Davide, Garcia, Ople, Azeuna, 
Sarmiento and Gascon, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion 
is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 

election of the following officers and members of 
the Committee on Sponsorship: Commissioner Guingo- 
na, Chairman; Commissioner Garcia, Vice-Chairman; 
and Commissioners Villacorta, Sumulong, Monsod, de 
los Reyes, Nieva, Tingson, Aquino, Bengzon, Brocka, 
Alonto, Tadeo, Gascon and Maambong, members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 

election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Human Resources: Commissioner Villa- 
corta, Chairrnan; Commissioner Uka, Vice-Chairman; 
and Commissioners Guingona, Brocka, Quesada, Tan, 
Bennagen, Rosales, Rigos, Rosario Braid and Bacani, 

members. 

the president. Honorable Floor Leader, instead 
of Commissioner Rosales, it be Commissioner Gascon 
as member of the Committee on Human Resources. 

MR. RAMA. I move for the substitution of Com- 
missioner Gascon for Commissioner Rosales. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the 
election of the following additional members ot the 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. That has already been announced. 
Mr. Floor Leader. 

Thank you. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move for the suspension of the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:31 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
4:40 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. With the unanimous consent of the 
body, I move for an increase in the membership of the 
Committee on Social Justice and Social Services from 
15 to 17. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion of the Acting Floor 
Leader to increase the membership of the Committee 
on Social Justice and Social Services from 15 to 17 is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I now move for the 
election of the following officers and members of the 
Committee on Social Justice and Social Services: Com- 
missioner Nieva, Chairman; Commissioner Gascon, Vice- 
Chairman; and Commissioners Tadeo, Monsod, Aquino, 
Brocka, Suarez, Uka, Quesada, Trenas, Garcia, Lerum, 
Tan, Villacorta, Bennagen, Bengzon and Romulo, 
members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tingson be recognized for a simple motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR TINGSON. Madam President, I am very happy 
to inform this body of the very favorable reaction of the 
public, at least from my province of Negros Occidental, 
to what we have done .so far. And when 1 mentioned the 
possibility of this body making representations to give 
the public franking privilege, they also were very elated 
about it. 

Allow me then. Madam President, along with Com- 
missioner Christine Tan, to recommend that the Presi- 
dent of the Commission make representations with the 
national government to grant the public franking 
privilege on all communications sent to the Members ot 


80 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


the Commission relative to the drafting of the new 
Constitution. Also, I would like to furnish the Office of 
the President of the Philippines, through the Executive 
Secretary, a copy of the resolution regarding this recom- 
mendation. 

Madam President, Her Excellency, President Corazon 
C. Aquino, has created and organized the 1986 Constitu- 
tional Commission pursuant to Proclamation No. 9 for 
the primary purpose of proposing a new charter truly 
reflective of the ideals and aspirations of the Filipino 
people. In order to effectively achieve this purpose, it is 
particularly tasked, per provision of Section 9, para- 
graph 7 of Proclamation No. 9, to conduct public hear- 
ings and other forms of consultations in order to ade- 
quately insure the people’s participation in the formula- 
tion of the new Constitution. 

Whereas, one of the most effective means by which 
the public at large can have maximum expression of 
their sentiments and opinion is through written com- 
munications addressed to the honorable Members of this 
Commission. Sending such communications entails 
considerable expenses on the part of the sender. This is 
the reason. Madam President, Commissioner Christine 
Tan and this humble Member would like to make this 
motion. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of Commissioner Tingson? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Basically, I have no objection. But I 
think the recommendation must put a time limit as to 
when the franking privilege should be used by the pub- 
lic. I take it that our deadline to approve on Second 
Reading various proposals would be August 15. So, the 
franking privilege must be only up to August 15 and 
only to communications addressed to the Commission 
or to its officers and members; otherwise it might be 
used for some other purposes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I accept the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment is accepted. 

Are there any further comments? 

Is there any objection to the motion, as amended? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion, as amended, 
is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, for a par- 
liamentary inquiry. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Rules, as adopted, provides 
for the election of a Floor Leader and two Assistant 
Floor Leaders. May I know from the Chair the dale set 
for the election of these officers? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair awaits the pleasure of 
the body to elect the remaining officers: the Floor 
Leader and the two Assistant Floor Leaders. 

In fact, the Chair wishes to recommend and suggest 
that the election be held today, before we adjourn. We 
have already formalized our committees, so the election 
of the Floor Leader and the two Assistant Floor Leaders 
is very important, considering their membership in the 
Steering Committee. 

In the Rules that we have approved, the body recalls 
that the Floor Leader and the Assistant Floor Leaders 
are ex-officio members of the Steering Committee. So if 
the body is ready for the election, the Chair is now open 
for nominations for the positions of Floor Leader and 
two Assistant Floor Leaders. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

.MR. ABUBAKAR. In order to maintain the inde- 
pendence and free choice of the Commissioners, voting 
should not be done in the presence of the public. Let 
the voting be by secret balloting as when we vote for 
our public officials like the President and the Vice- 
President. If we desire to have the voting by acclama- 
tion, then we give every Member a chance to state his 
reasons for his support to a particular nominee pre- 
sented to the Commission. 

So, I believe in an independent judgment, not that 
I feel that each Member lacks the courage to stand up 
and vote for the ones whom he believes should be the 
Floor Leader and Assistant Floor Leaders. However, 
the choice should not be influenced by any other con- 
sideration, except by his conscience, his patriotism and 
his belief that the men he voted for are the best that he 
can pick from this distinguished crowd. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:48 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:10 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Before we proceed to any other business, the Chair 
desires to make some announcements. On motion of 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


81 


Commissioner Nolledo, the President was authorized 
to form an Ad Hoc Committee on Public Hearings. May 
I announce now the following as members of this Com- 
mittee: Commissioners Garcia, Gascon, Bernas, Nieva. 
Monsod, Bennagen, Guingona, Nolledo. Rosario Braid, 
Suarez, Aquino, Villacorta, Quesada, Azcuna, Brocka, 
Tadeo, Bengzon, Jr., Davide, Jr., de los Reyes and 
Rosales. If anyone among those named does not desire 
to be a member of this Committee, will he please inform 
the Chair later on? 

Here are certain announcements: The meeting of this 
Ad Hoc Committee will be on Wednesday, June 1 1, at 
eight o’clock in the morning, at the South Caucus 
Room. Then the same Committee will conduct a work- 
shop for all Commissioners on Friday, June 13, also at 
the South Caucus Room, after the morning session. 

The Chair is now ready for any motion from the 
Acting Floor Leader. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I think the next order is the election 
of the Floor Leader and the two Assistant Floor 
Leaders. I heard Commissioner Abubakar make a com- 
ment on this matter, but he did not make any motion. 
We have two alternatives. Madam President: Either we 
hold this election in the session hall this afternoon, or 
we follow the same procedure we had in the caucus for 
the election of the President and the Vice-President. I 
have no objection to having an election in the session 
hall, but perhaps we could save time if we follow the 
procedure that we adopted in the election of the Pre- 
sident and the Vice-President. We will ask those who are 
not interested in the positions first. The rest may be 
considered interested, subject to the votes of the Mem- 
bers. Then, we could just have one voting. The candi- 
date or the Member who has received the highest 
number of votes may be considered as the Floor Leader. 
The Member who has received the second and the third 
highest number of votes may be considered as the two 
Assistant Floor Leaders. 

Perhaps, we can save a little time without the neces- 
sity of formal nominations, seconding of the nomina- 
tions and speeches to sponsor our respective candidates. 
I believe that the procedure adopted before can easily 
be applied in electing the Floor Leaders. So, I move that 
we go to the caucus room this afternoon to elect the 
Floor Leaders, perhaps, by secret balloting instead of 
holding it in this session hall. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Chair understand that 
we will suspend the session for a caucus? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Then we resume the session to 
formalize the election of the Floor Leader and the two 
Assistant Floor Leaders. 

Is there any objection to the motion of Vice- 
President Padilla? 

Coimnissioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I propose a modification to the 
motion. Why not do it here, rather than spend time 
moving to the caucus room? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I do not question the wisdom of 
the proposal of Commissioner PadUla. I think it would 
be wiser and to the interest of all the Members that we 
elect the Floor Leader and his two Assistants only in 
our presence, meaning without the benefit of public 
participation as we have here. Whether we like it or not 
some may be sensitive to defeat. So I think it would be 
more proper for this distinguished body to conduct the 
election and all other related matters in a caucus. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposal of Commissioner 
Bernas is to hold the election in this hall instead of go- 
ing to the caucus room in order to save time. There are 
ballots here and election could be by secret balloting. 

Is there any other comment? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I have no objection to the proposal 
of Commissioner Bernas, provided that we adopt the 
procedure we followed in the election of the President 
and the Vice-President which is by secret balloting with- 
out the need of formal nominations, seconding of 
nominations and so forth. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar, we can 
request the public to leave the session hall for the time 
being and then we will suspend the session to have a 
caucus right here in this hall. 

Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was going to remark that if we use 
the secret balloting, there should be nominations. Be- 
cause if we follow the procedure that we had in the last 
caucus, anybody could vote for anybody without de- 
finite nominees, the highest number of votes 
possibly be only five, and he who gets it will be declared 
elected. Or, should we follow the rule that if nobody 
gets la mitad mas uno, we will hold another balloting. 
However, if there are no nominees, it would be most 
difficult to reach la mitad mas uno. So, why do we not 
have nominations? 


82 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, as I understand the 
proposal of Commissioner Padilla, we will go through 
a process of reducing the number of candidates by 
identifying those who are not interested in the office. I 
have a feeling that if we ask the Members of the Com- 
mission to indicate whether they are interested or not, 
those who will be valiant enough to want to hold the 
office will be very few, so that will be equivalent to a 
nomination. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we not consider the first 
balloting as a straw vote only to indicate who will be 
the candidates, not as the final voting? 

What does Commissioner Rodrigo say? 

MR. RODRIGO. What is the objection to having 
nominations? That is the ordinary normal procedure. 
Why should we depart from that? If it is embarrassing 
to have nominations, I think it is more embarrassing to 
ask those who are not interested to run. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, is Commissioner Rodrigo 
agreeable that we suspend the session to have a caucus 
right here and then have the nominations during the 
caucus, excluding the public? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I have no objec- 
tion to that. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I move for a 
vote on the motion of Commissioner Padilla, as 
amended. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I will make a fur- 
ther amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Commissioner Padilla proposed that 
we reduce the number of nominees and then elect from 
them. Whoever gets the highest number of votes would 
become the Floor Leader and then the next two, the 
Assistant Floor Leaders. I would like to propose that we 
do not follow this but instead make separate nomina- 
tions for the Floor Leader and for the two Assistant 
Floor Leaders. It is possible that some Members of the 
Commission would prefer to act as Assistant Floor 
Leaders and not as a Floor Leader. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Gascon acceptable to Vice-President 
PadUla? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I do not accept the 
amendment because the precise purpose of my motion 


is to prevent formal nominations, and if we can make 
the nomination in caucus, that is all right with me. But 
I am trying to avoid many nominations because we 
should expedite this. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, may we have the Vice- 
President’s motion now as amended by Commisioner 
Bernas, because the motion of Commissioner Gascon 
was not accepted. 

Commissioner Gascon is recognized. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, in that case, I 
would like to make a second motion that we hold 
nominations for the Floor Leader and then afterwards 
we hold nominations for the Assistant Floor Leaders 
and vote accordingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Also in caucus? 

MR. GASCON. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. The idea is to conduct three votings 
instead of one because there are three positions — one 
Floor Leader and two Assistant Floor Leaders. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, that would mean 
there would be two ballotings; one, for the Floor Leader 
and the second, for the two Assistant Floor Leaders. 

MR. PADILLA. Just to expedite matters, I accept 
that we will have two ballotings. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to suspend the session, then go in caucus right 
here in this session hall, excluding the public, and to 
vote for the Floor Leader? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, we do not even 
have to exclude the public since the nominations would 
be in caucus. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is no need. The session is 
suspended. 

It was 5:25 p. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:06 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. I move for the election of the Floor 
Leader. 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


83 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, consonant with 
what was agreed upon in the caucus of the Commission, 
I move that Commissioner Napoleon Rama be deemed 
elected unanimously as Floor Leader. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; Commissioner Rama is declared 
elected as Floor Leader of the Commission. (Applause) 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Also, consonant with what was 
agreed upon in the caucus, I move that Commissioner 
Calderon be declared elected as Assistant Floor Leader 
for Luzon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; Commissioner Calderon is de- 
clared elected as Assistant Floor Leader for Luzon. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I interrupt the Gentleman on the 
floor. 

Under the Rules, we do not distinguish the place to 
be represented by the Assistant Floor Leaders — 
whether they be from Luzon, Visayas or Mindanao. So, 
may I suggest that the nomination be for the Assistant 
Floor Leader only. 

THE PRESIDENT The motion is well taken. 

MR. RODRIGO. I modify my motion accordingly. 

So, consonant with what was agreed upon in the 
caucus, I move that Commissioners Jose Calderon and 
Domocao Alonto be declared elected as Assistant 
Floor Leaders. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; Commissioners Calderon and 
Alonto are declared elected Assistant Floor Leaders. 
(Applause) 

Is there any other business? The Floor Leaders 
should now take over. 

Mr. Floor Leader, is there any other business? If 
there is none, we will have the oath-taking. 

At this juncture, the Honorable Napoleon G. Rama, 
Jose Calderon and Ahmad Domocao Alonto ascended 
the rostrum. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 6:11 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6:16 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Chair will now administer the oath to the Floor 
Leader and the Assistant Floor Leaders. 

OATH-TAKING OF THE FLOOR LEADER AND 
THE ASSISTANT FLOOR LEADERS 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentlemen please raise 
their right hand and repeat after me, stating their names 
and the positions to which they have been elected. 

OATH OF OFFICE 

I do solemnly swear 

that I will faithfully and conscientiously fulfill my duties 

as preserve and defend the 

fundamental law of the land, execute its laws, do justice to 
every man, and consecrate myself to the service of the 
nation. 

So help me God. 

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Floor Leader, is there any 
other business for the day? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. We will, of course, be dutifully attending 
to our duties in our respective committees but it will 
help if the Commission as a whole and the individual 
Member can be kept abreast of what is going on in all 
the committees. May I know if a provision has been 
made for the minutes of the committee meetings to be 
distributed as promptly as possible for the benefit of all 
the Members of the Commission? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Secretary-General 
say? The Chair believes that it is very necessary that 
minutes of the sessions be taken. That is why we have a 
committee secretary. There are stenographers also who 
attend the committee meetings. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I am referring to the 
distribution of these minutes. Can we obtain a commit- 
ment from the Secretariat, unless it is too much of an 
imposition, that the minutes of all these meetings be 
circulated within 48 hours from the time that they took 
place? 


84 


MONDAY, JUNE 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, for the information and guid- 
ance of all the Members. Is that right? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, on a best-effort basis, Madam Presi- 
dent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Yes, Madam Presi- 
dent, we will do our best especially if the committees 
are meeting all at the same time. Just give us a little bit 
more time when they are all meeting practically simul- 
taneously. But we shall provide everyone copies of the 
minutes of all committee meetings. 

And may I announce, therefore. Madam President, 
that the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers under Commissioner Monsod will meet tomor- 
row at two o’clock in the afternoon. We will announce 
all of the venues tomorrow. There is a blackboard where 
everyone will see all the places and time of the different 
committee meetings. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair has originally an- 
nounced that there will be a meeting of the chairmen so 
that we can take up all these matters right now after the 
adjournment of the session. It can be done in the 
lounge. There will be only 1 7 people. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Vice-President is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. The various committees will be 
holding their respective meetings to decide on several 
resolutions that have been assigned to them. And there 
will also be the Ad Hoc Committee on Public Hearings, 
etc. I was thinking. Madam President, what would be 
the subject or the agenda of the Assembly tomorrow 
afternoon. There may be some matters, like the 
Preamble, but there are several resolutions for inclusion 
in the Preamble. And we have adopted as working drafts 
the 1935, 1973 and the Malolos Constitutions. May I 
suggest that the committee to which these resolutions 
on the Preamble have been referred decide on the exact 
proposed text of the Preamble and refer this to the 
Commission for Second Reading, which would mean 
that there will be some sponsorships, comments, objec- 
tions, debates, etc., up to the period of amendments so 
that we can show our people that we are trying to 


hasten our work in consonance with our time con- 
straints. Perhaps, these matters, say, of the Preamble, 
then afterwards the National Territory, the Declaration 
of Principles and State Policies, can be successively dis- 
cussed seeking the sentiment and the opinions of all 
as to what changes we have decided to make, what word 
to be inserted or deleted in order to adopt the Preamble 
for the 1986 Constitution. That is my suggestion. 
Madam President, which, if necessary, I will convert into 
a motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman, Commissioner 
Rosales, is not here, but the Vice-Chairman, Commis- 
sioner Tingson, is here. Maybe Commissioner Tingson 
would welcome the suggestion of Commissioner Padilla 
so that this can be taken up in the meeting tomorrow, if 
there is one. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, that is a very well- 
taken suggestion because, if I remember right, that was 
precisely what we did in the 1971 Constitutional Con- 
vention. We began with this particular committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Is there any other business? 

Yes, Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I made a previous an- 
nouncement that the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies would meet at ten o’clock 
tomorrow morning, but I would like to revise the 
schedule to two o’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is just one hour before the 
session. The session will resume at three. 

MR. FOZ. I think in an hour’s time we can do some- 
thing in the committee. Madam President. So, that is the 
notice to the members. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move for the adjournment of the 
session until three o’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at three o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 6:26 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


85 


R.C.C. NO. 7 
Tuesday, June 10, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:20 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jose F. S. Bengzon. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. BENGZON. God our Father, Jesus our Brother- 
Mary Your Mother - and the Holy Spirit, our guide 
and shining light, enlighten us. O Holy Spirit, permeate 
our minds, our whole being, envelop us with Your 
bright, white, shining light, that we may do what is 
right for our country and for our people. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . , 

, . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Alonto 

. Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Garcia 

. Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Guingona .... 

. Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

, . Present 

Laurel 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Lerum 

. Present’ 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Monsod 

. Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Natividad .... 

. Present’ 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Nieva 

, Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

NoUedo 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Ople 

. Present’ 


Padilla 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

, . . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Tan 


Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Trehas 


Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Uka 


Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 


Rosales 

. . Present 

Villegas . . . . , 



Sarmiento Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 44 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session and that we 
approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The honorable Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Refer- 
ence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Committee Report, 
the President making the corresponding references: 


^Appeared after the roll call 


86 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 53, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A CONSULTATION MECHA- 
NISM AND PROCESS FOR THE CONSTITUTIONAL 
COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia, Gascon, Bernas, Nieva, 
Rosario Braid, Aquino, Villacorta, Quesada, 
Brocka, Tadeo, Rigos, Bengzon, Sarmiento and 
Monsod. 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hear- 
ings. 

Proposed Resolution No. 54, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING ELECTIVE OFFI- 
CIALS TO SERVE THE FULL TERM OF OFFICE FOR 
WHICH THEY WERE ELECTED AND PROHIBITING 
THEM TO SEEK IMMEDIATE REELECTION FOR SAID 
OFFICE OR TO BE APPOINTED TO ANY OTHER OF- 
FICE DURING SUCH TERM AND WITHIN TWO YEARS 
FOLLOWING THE EXPIRATION THEREOF, AND, 
FURTHER, PROHIBITING WITHIN THE SAME PERIOD 
THE SPOUSE AND/OR RELATIVES BY CONSANGUINI- 
TY OR AFFINITY WITHIN THE THIRD CIVIL DEGREE 
OF SUCH ELECTIVE OFFICIAL TO SEEK ELECTION 
FOR THE OFFICE TO BE VACATED BY THE LATTER 
OR TO BE APPOINTED IN ANY MANNER TO ANY OF- 
FICE EXCEPT TO AN OFFICE FOR WHICH HE HAS 
THE APPROPRIATE CIVIL SERVICE ELIGIBILITY 
AND IS QUALIFIED AND COMPETENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 55, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FURTHER LIMITATIONS 
ON THE POWER OF THE PRESIDENT TO GRANT 
PARDONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 56, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING THE PRESIDENT 
FROM EXTENDING APPOINTMENTS WITHIN SDC 
MONTHS IMMEDUTELY PRECEDING THE COM- 
MENCEMENT OF THE TERM OF THE NEW PRESI- 
DENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 57, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION WHICH REQUIRES POLITICAL 


PARTIES TO CONFORM THEIR INTERNAL ORGANI- 
ZATION TO DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLES AND TO 
PUBLICLY ACCOUNT FOR THE SOURCES OF THEIR 
FUNDS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 58, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO BROADEN THE SCOPE OF THE CON- 
STITUTIONAL PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE BY 
PROHIBITING THE PASSAGE OF ANY LAW WHICH 
ESTABLISHES PRESUMPTION OF THE EXISTENCE OF 
PRJMA FACIE EVIDENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 59, entitled: 

RESOLUTION RESTRICTING FOREIGN BORROWINGS 
OR LOANS. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 60, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF A PROVISION 
IN THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIP- 
PINES PROHIBITING “BLOCK VOTING” IN ALL 
ELECTORAL EXERCISES. 

Introduced by Hon. Jamir, Suarez, Tadeo and Azcuna 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 61, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING UNDER THE ARTICLE ON AC- 
COUNTABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS THAT THE 
RIGHT OF THE GOVERNMENT TO PROSECUTE 
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS FOR OFFENSES RELATED 
TO PUBLIC OFFICE AND THE RIGHT OF THE STATE 
TO FORFEIT ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH BY SUCH OF- 
FICIALS, WHOEVER MAY BE IN POSSESSION THERE- 
OF, SHALL NOT PRESCRIBE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 62, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT SERIOUS ELECTION OFFENSES, AS DEFINED 
BY LAW, SHALL BE PUNISHABLE BY DEATH. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


87 


Proposed Resolution No. 63, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROHIBIT SALE OR TRANSFER OF 
OWNERSHIP OF PUBLIC LANDS TO ANY PERSON, 
WHETHER NATURAL OR JURIDICAL, AND TO PRO- 
VIDE THAT SAID LANDS SHALL BE AVAILABLE 
ONLY FOR LEASE OR CONCESSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 64, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A 
PROVISION AGAINST POLITICAL DYNASTIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 65, entitled: 

resolution to INCLUDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
the new CONSTITUTION A PROVISION THAT NO 
law shall be PASSED ABRIDGING THE RIGHT OF 
PEACE-LOVING CITIZENS TO BEAR ARMS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 66, entitled: 

resolution to insert in the transitory PRO- 
VISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION THE PRO- 
VISION THAT THE RIGHT OF THE STATE TO PRO- 
SECUTE ERRING PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND TO FOR- 
FEIT THEIR ILUGOTTEN WEALTH SHALL NOT 
PRESCRIBE BE MADE RETROACTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 67, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DELETE FROM THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION THE PROVISION GRANTING PRESIDENTIAL IM- 
MUNITY FROM SUITS AND TO PROVIDE IN THE 
transitory provisions that such DELETION 
BE MADE RETROACTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 68, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AMENDING SECTION 10. ARTICLE XII (C) 
OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION, AS AMENDED. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 


Proposed Resolution No. 70, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION THE PROVISION ON THE SEPARATION OF 
CHURCH AND STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson and Rigos. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 71, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE CONSTITUTION OF 
1986 THAT FILIPINO CULTURE, ARTS AND LETTERS 
SHALL BE PRESERVED, ENCOURAGED AND DE- 
VELOPED WITHOUT ANY POLITICAL INTER- 
FERENCE, RESTRICTIONS AND CONTROL. 

Introduced by Hon. Brocka and Villacorta. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. I on Resolution No. 72, as 
reported out by the Committee on Preamble, National 
Territory, and Declaration of Principles, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT A PREAMBLE TO 
THE CONSTITUTION, 

recommending its approval with amendments and in 
consolidation with Proposed Resolution Nos. 2, 24 and 
73. 

Sponsored by Hon. Rosales and Tingson. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, before we consider 
Committee Report No. 1 by the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Princi- 
ples, I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, in view of the 
creation 6f two additional committees, there have been 
some resolutions referred to the various committees 
which should now be referred to the newly created 
committees. For this reason, I move that the following 
resolutions be transferred to the following committees: 
Resolution No. 19, resolution on the role of farmers and 
workers, from the Committee on General Provisions to 
the Committee on Social Justice and Social Services. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Resolution No. 20, resolution to 
provide for authentic land reform, from the Committee 
on the National Economy and Patrimony to the Com- 
mittee on Social Justice and Social Services. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


88 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Resolution No. 25, resolution limit- 
ing ownership of private land holdings, from the Com- 
mittee on the National Economy and Patrimony to the 
Committee on Social Justice and Social Services. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. And Resolution No. 37, resolution 
proposing genuine and broader land reform policies and 
for the incorporation in the new Constitution of a 
separate article on land reform, from the Committee on 
the National Economy and Patrimony to the Committee 
on Social Justice and Social Services. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Last Tuesday, our Vice-President, 
Honorable Ambrosio Padilla, presented to Madam 
President draft proposals of the Philippine Constitution 
Association or PHILCONSA. This afternoon, I had the 
privilege of presenting to the President, and through her, 
to the honorable Members of this Commission for 
possible use as reference material, a draft Constitution 
prepared by some delegates of the 1 97 1 Constitutional 
Convention who identify themselves as the Reconvened 
1971 Constitutional Convention. This draft Constitu- 
tion is accompanied by a transmittal letter signed by the 
following; Diosdado Macapagal, President; Abraham 
Sarmiento, Vice-President; Teofisto Guingona, Jr., 
Chairman, Sponsorship Council; Ramon Diaz, Chair- 
man, Steering Council; and Ceferino B. Padua, Acting 
Chairman, Sponsorship Council. 

With your permission. Madam President, I shall read 
two paragraphs of this letter which consists of four 
pages, and I quote; 

Please be informed that following the official lifting of 
martial law on January 17, 1981, a majority of the Dele- 
gates of the 1971 Convention reconvened on March 31, 
1981 in order to frame a new draft Constitution to replace 
the original of the 1973 Constitution which was umatified 
and misused by the dictatorial government of President 
Ferdinand E. Marcos. The 1971 Convention could recon- 
vene because in its last session on November 29, 1972 the 
Convention did not adjourn but merely recessed since it 
was necessary before adjourning to wait if the proposed 


Constitution would be ratified in a plebiscite. The Delegates 
who reconvened constituted a quorum after the exclusion 
of the Delegates who had forfeited their membership by 
joining the Marcos government ... It has been agreed by 
the Delegates of the Reconvened 1971 Convention that its 
new draft Constitution be submitted to your Commission. 

And now with your permission. Madam President, I 
shall present this draft Constitution, together with 
copies of the transmittal letter, for the consideration of 
the Commission. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
acceptance of this document being presented by Com- 
missioner Guingona? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the said document is accepted, and the Secretary- 
General shall prepare copies of it and distribute the 
same to the Members. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Assistant Floor Leader Calde- 
ron be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Calderon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, Ladies and 
Gentlemen of the Constitutional Commission; 

Yesterday, a lady reporter covering this Commission 
handed me a handwritten note. In it, she suggested that 
the Commission change its plenary session schedule to 
mornings because the current afternoon sessions end 
past newspaper deadlines. If this cannot be done, she 
suggests that this Commission consider creating a Com- 
mittee on Public Information. “After all,” she says in 
her letter, and I quote; “how can you be accountable 
to the people when they do not know what to say about 
the Commission? ” 

The request is simple, but it covers the working 
schedule of this Commission; and because of this, I feel 
it is important enough to take it up in plenary session. 
Moreover, the reasons advanced to support the request 
have something to do with the dissemination of news 
and information on the proceedings and workings of 
this body and that, to my mind, assumes national signi- 
ficance. It seems that many of our friends in media find 
our current afternoon sessions inconvenient for their 
deadlines, such that much as they wish to give more 
detailed coverage of what goes on in this Chamber, they 
are reduced to writing about the bare essentials of what 
transpires. 

If this were an ordinary lawmaking body, dominated 
by political discussion and partisan debate, perhaps this 
bare essential coverage would not matter, and indeed, 
perhaps, an advantage. But, Madam President, this is a 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


89 


body tasked with the drafting of the fundamental law 
of the land. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to en- 
deavor to make the biggest number of our people know 
exactly what is transpiring within this Chamber so that 
they may, if they can, participate in the widest degree 
possible in the making of their Constitution, by reacting 
to the news of what transpires herein. The only way, the 
most effective way, by which our people will know 
what we are doing here is through the media. Unfor- 
tunately, many of our friends in media themselves claim 
they are hampered in doing this more effectively 
because of the constraints of time and distance. Our 
sessions usually start from 3:00 p.m., and last up to 
6:00 p.m. and/or even beyond. Newspaper deadlines are 
usually about 7:00 p.m. for the provincial, and 9:00 
p.m. for the city edition. Most of the newspaper offices 
are in Manila, a long distance from where we are. The 
newsmen covering us have no time to go back to their 
offices to write their stories. What they do is to write 
their stories in the pressroom here in the building and 
phone in their stories to their offices. Considering the 
number of media organizations today in both print and 
broadcast there are not enough telephones in this build- 
ing to enable them all to phone in their stories at the 
same time. There is always a scramble and a lot of 
grumbling from those who are beaten by the others in 
the rush for telephones. These are just minor hazards of 
the job. The overall effect is that there is not an even 
coverage of what transpires in this Chamber. Thus, on 
any given day, one or two newspapers would have, more 
or less, a complete account of what happened here, but 
the other papers would have very short and incomplete 
accounts. There is a disadvantage when the Con-Com 
reporter phones in his story rather late, meaning, very 
near deadline time or after. By that time, practically all 
the other stories are in and the editor has, more or less, 
decided how big a play-up and how much space to 
give the stories already in his hands. This means that the 
Con-Com story has to compete for whatever limited 
space there is left. It often happens that it is relegated to 
the inside pages even if it is an important enough story. 
To help in the appreciation of the importance of stories 
and as a tool in determining how much space to allocate 
to still unsubmitted but unexpected stories, editors 
usually require their reporters in advance to phone-in 
what stories they expect to submit even if details are 
not yet known. In this respect, starting our sessions at 
3:00 p.m. becomes a disadvantage for the Con-Com 
reporter. He cannot phone in at 3:00 what stories he 
expects to write. He must listen to the speeches for an 
hour or so before he can determine the shape of the 
story that is coming out of the session. Thus, by the 
time he is ready to phone in, his “advance tip” to his 
editor is no longer an “advance tip.” Often the Con- 
Com reporter must already write his story even while 
the debates are still going on because he must catch his 
deadline. 

I submit. Madam President, that all these incon- 
veniences can be cured, that we can make it easier for 


our media friends to perform their jobs, and on top of 
it, enable our people to know completely what tran- 
spires in this Chamber by the simple expedient of 
moving our plenary sessions in the morning. All we have 
to do is to reverse our current schedules — hold sessions 
in the morning and public hearings in the afternoon. By 
noontime, the Con-Com reporters would know exactly 
what their story for the day would be. They could write 
their stories at leisure and they could inform the editors 
early enough just what sort of story they have so that 
adequate space could be allocated for the entire story. 
Those of them who wish to cover the hearings in the 
afternoons can still do so. But the point is, the major 
story for the day, which usually comes out of the 
plenary session, will already have been formed. May I, 
therefore, request. Madam President, that this sug- 
gestion from our media friends be commended to this 
body in order that the consensus may be arrived at and 
a decision made regarding it. 

Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:49 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:56 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, in view of the 
manifestation/explanation made by the honorable Com- 
missioner Jose Calderon, may I respectfully request that 
we defer consideration of that matter? May I suggest 
instead that we create two ad hoc committees: one com- 
mittee to study the feasibility of changing the venue of 
our sessions to another place, and; second, another ad 
hoc committee to study the feasibility of changing the 
time of our sessions. I respectfully submit. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Calderon. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I would like to 
make an amendment that a combined ad hoc committee 
be created instead of two. 


90 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. I have no objection to the amend- 
ment. 

MR. CALDERON. Just one committee, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. One ad hoc committee to con- 
sider the feasibility of changing the time and venue of 
the sessions of the Constitutional Commission, is that 
right? 

MR. CALDERON. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, that is the motion now before 
the body. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the movant accept an amend- 
ment? The amendment is to place a time limit to the 
submission of the report of the ad hoc committee, that 
the said committee make its report to the Commission 
not later than the 13 th of June. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have no objection. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is Friday. What does the 
movant say? Is the amendment accepted? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I propose 
an amendment to the amendment? In view of the fact 
that Thursday is a holiday, perhaps we can move the 
deadline to Monday, June 16, instead of to Friday. 

MR. DAVIDE. But we will meet on Friday, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, is it acceptable that it be 
Monday, instead of Friday, to study this matter? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion as amended? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 

The Chair appoints the following to the ad hoc 
committee: Commissioners Romulo, Bengzon, Rama, 
Calderon and Jamir. 

Is there any other business, honorable Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that Commit- 
tee Report No. 1 of the Committee on Preamble, 
National Territory, and Declaration of Principles be 
placed on the Calendar of Business for today. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Floor Leader? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 72 
(Adopting a Preamble to the Constitution) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
consider Committee Report No. I on Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 72 as reported out by the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles.* 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 72 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secre- 
tary-General will read the title and text of the proposed 
resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 72, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT A PREAMBLE TO 
THE CONSTITUTION. 

WHEREAS, it is essential to identify the power that shall 
ordain and promulgate the constitution; 

WHEREAS, it is necessary for any national constitution at the 
outset to enunciate the great national purposes and aims for 
which reason it is adopting a constitution to establish a govern- 
ment; 

WHEREAS, by reason of the intense religious nature of the 
Filipino people, it is but fitting and proper that they should 
invoke Divine Providence, to utter a collective prayer, before 
essaying in a constitution the provisions of a government they 
are establishing: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by this Constitutional Commission in session assem- 
bled, That the following be adopted to serve as the Preamble to 
the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines: 

“WE, THE SOVEREIGN FILIPINO PEOPLE, IMPLORING 
THE AID OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, IN ORDER TO ESTA- 
BLISH A GOVERNMENT THAT SHALL EMBODY OUR 
IDEALS, PROMOTE THE GENERAL WELFARE, CONSERVE 
AND DEVELOP THE PATRIMONY OF OUR NATION, AND 
SECURE TO OURSELVES AND OUR POSTERITY THE 
BLESSINGS OF DEMOCRACY UNDER A REGIME OF JUS- 
TICE, PEACE, LIBERTY, AND EQUALITY, DO ORDAIN AND 
PROMULGATE THIS CONSTITUTION.” 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. May I ask for a suspension of the 
session? 


*Sec Appendix 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


91 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:03 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:21 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee on Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles, Commissioner Rosales, be recognized. 

MR. ROSALES. Madam President, it is the pleasure 
of this Representation to inform this august body that 
after thorough and exhaustive study and deliberation, 
our Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles has finally approved the draft 
of the proposed Preamble of the Constitution we are 
writing and which we are submitting for the approval 
of this Chamber. 

I am yielding the floor, with the permission of the 
Chair, to Commissioner Tingson, who will sponsor the 
committee report. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, we apologize to 
our colleagues for the delay of the draft of the proposed 
Preamble, but I think everyone has a copy now. The 
following are the members of the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Princi- 
ples — seven all in all. We have Commissioner Rosales, 
this Representation, Commissioner Villegas, Commis- 
sioner Aquino, Commissioner Rosario Braid, Commis- 
sioner Nolledo and Commissioner Quesada. 

May I, Madam President, ask Commissioner Rosario 
Braid to read to us as convincingly as she possibly could, 
with emotion, the proposed Preamble as submitted by 
our Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, with the permission 
of the Gentleman on the floor, may we request that the 
sponsoring committee or anyone of them making the 
sponsorship use the rostrum at the front. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid will 
please use the rostrum. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The proposed Preamble: 

WE, THE SOVEREIGN FILIPINO PEOPLE, IMPLOR- 
ING THE GUIDANCE OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, TO 


ESTABLISH A GOVERNMENT THAT SHALL EMBODY 
OUR IDEALS AND ASPIRATIONS, PROMOTE THE 
COMMON GOOD, CONSERVE AND ENHANCE OUR 
PATRIMONY, AND SECURE TO OURSELVES AND 
OUR POSTERITY THE BLESSINGS OF PARTICIPA- 
TORY DEMOCRACY UNDER A RULE OF JUSTICE, 
PEACE, FREEDOM, AND EQUALITY, DO ORDAIN 
AND PROMULGATE THIS CONSTITUTION. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you so much. Commissioner 
Rosario Braid. 

Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Tingson is 
recognized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER TINGSON 

MR. TINGSON. Esteemed colleagues of this Consti- 
tutional Commission: 

Madam President, some 87 years ago, we were quest- 
ing to establish a government based upon our national 
ideals and aspirations as we perceived them at that time. 
We adopted a constitution for that purpose, as we did a 
few more times, as the years rolled by, and everytime 
that we did so, there was always a preface — what we 
call the “Preamble,” a foreword in the entire document 
that we call the “Constitution.” 

In 1899, the Filipino people adopted the Malolos 
Constitution. This is how its Preamble reads: 

We, the Representatives of the Filipino people, lawfully 
convened, in order to establish justice, provide for common 
defense, promote the general welfare, and insure the bene- 
fits of liberty, imploring the aid of the Sovereign Legislator 
of the Universe for the attaiiunent of these ends, have 
voted, decreed, and sanctioned the following . . . 

In 1935, we were a nation expectant of national 
independence. We drafted a constitution for our self- 
government, preparatory to our attainment of full 
sovereignty and independence before we had gained our 
full stature in the world community of free people. 

In the inimitable style of the late Claro M. Recto, 
who was the President of the 1934 Constitutional Con- 
vention, the Preamble to the 1935 Basic Law reads: 

The Filipino people, imploring the aid of Divine Provi- 
dence, in order to establish a government that shall embody 
their ideals, conserve and develop the patrimony of the 
nation, promote the general welfare, and secure to them- 
selves and their posterity the blessings of independence 
under a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy, do ordain 
and promulgate this Constitution. 

In the 1960s, we began to perceive an inadequacy, 
real or imagined, in the Constitution of our country , our 
failure to attain the great aims and purposes for which 
we have established a government, which we did not 
measure against ourselves as a people, substantially 


92 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


washing our hands from the blame. Rather, we sus- 
pected a deficiency in the basic law, being a product of 
a bygone American era, for our continuing inability to 
attain the dignified sovereignty under a regime that 
produced material success in an atmosphere of moral 
rectitude. It was argued again and again that the fault 
did not lie in our Constitution but in ourselves. The 
proliferation of statutes and laws did not assure us that 
we had the legal and constitutional means by which we 
could pursue our aims and purposes, for, after all, 
nothing is politically right that is morally wrong. 

Instead, we went headlong to still another Constitu- 
tional Convention that produced in 1973 a new Consti- 
tution for the Philippines. The Preamble to that Consti- 
tution, which follows, did not materially differ from 
the one of the 1935 document, to wit: 

We, the Sovereign Filipino people, imploring the aid of 
Divine Providence, in order to establish a government that 
shall embody our ideals, promote the general welfare, con- 
serve and develop the patrimony of our nation, and secure 
to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of democracy 
under a regime of justice, peace, liberty and equality, do 
ordain and promulgate this Constitution. 

I am proud to say that I was a member of that 
Preamble Committee, headed by our own colleague 
now — I am referring to Commissioner Domocao Alonto 
- although in 1971 to 1973, it took us three weeks to 
hammer out this Preamble. But this morning, instead 
of three weeks it took us three hours to be able to 
produce a proposed preamble. 

We were not hasty about it or carelessly so, no. After 
all, we already had prepared ourselves for this, some of 
us who participated in the 1971 Constitutional Conven- 
tion. Therefore, I believe that after three hours this is a 
product of something that is good and commendable 
for we believe that prior prayerful preparation prevents 
poor performance. 

And so this morning. Madam President, before we 
even started deliberation, we started with a word of 
prayer because we believe that the preamble of a consti- 
tution is the collective prayer of a people, aspiring to be 
free; aspiring to be prosperous; and aspiring to live up to 
the prayerful expectations of those who died in the 
night that we might live and live abundantly. 

Therefore, Madam President, to the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Princi- 
ples we are now referring the proposed Resolution 
No. 72, the resolution that we have worked on as our 
working draft. 

Resolution No. 72, authored by this Commissioner, 
entitled: RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT A PREAM- 
BLE TO THE CONSTITUTION, has been considered by the 
Committee and the same has the honor to report it back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986, with a 
recommendation that the resolution be approved, in 
consolidation with Proposed Resolution No. 2 which 
was proposed by Honorable Davide, Jr. and which is 


entitled: RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A PREAMBLE; Proposed Resolution 
No. 24, authored by the Honorable Nolledo: RESOLU- 
TION MAKING THE PREAMBLE MORE CONCISE AND 
EMPHATIC;, and Resolution No. 73, authored by the 
Honorable Villegas: RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE 
PREAMBLE OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION THE CONCEPT 
TERMED ‘COMMON GOOD’ AND TO COMPOSE THE SAME 
ACCORDING TO THE IDEAS COMPREHENDED BY THE 
SAID CONCEPT. 

Madam President, the proposed Preamble which your 
Committee joyfully submits now to this august body 
contains only 58 words, compared to the draft of the 
1973 Preamble which contains 60 words. So, we short- 
ened it a little bit. 

So, we have in our hands, of course, a comparative 
picture of the two preambles. May I read it, with your 
permission, for emphasis: 

WE, THE SOVEREIGN FILIPINO PEOPLE, IMPLOR- 
ING THE GUIDANCE OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, TO ES 
TABLISH A GOVERNMENT THAT SHALL EMBODY 
OUR IDEALS AND ASPIRATIONS, PROMOTE THE 
COMMON GOOD, CONSERVE AND ENHANCE OUR 
PATRIMONY, AND SECURE TO OURSELVES AND 
OUR POSTERITY THE BLESSINGS OF PARTICIPATO- 
RY DEMOCRACY UNDER A RULE OF JUSTICE, 
PEACE, FREEDOM AND EQUALITY, DO ORDAIN AND 
PROMULGATE THIS CONSTITUTION. 

The phrase “COMMON GOOD” there would, of 
course, include such subjects as the health of the people, 
which is the priority interest of those we refer to as 
doctors, also “COMMON GOOD” referring to educa- 
tion, employment, shelter, economic needs and food. 
Those are the categories under the phrase “COMMON 
GOOD.” 

On the phrase “PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY,” 
the Committee did have in mind the recent peaceful 
revolution, prayer power that generated the people 
power. That is all within the concept of participatory 
democracy. 

Madam President, we are very pleased with this, and 
we hope and pray that our colleagues would consider 
this very seriously, of course, as we always want to do 
to every provision of our proposed Constitution, but we 
commend this to the approval of the body. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, will the Gentle- 
man yield to a minor amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

Will Commissioner Tingson yield? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. To me this is about the best 
Preamble I have read so far. However, there is still some- 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


93 


thing in iny mind which 1 cannot forget — that there 
have been a lot of lies and so much untruthfulness 
recently, that perhaps on the second to the last line the 
word TRUTH should be inserted between “freedom” 
and “and equality.” Hence, the line will read: “We, the 
sovereign Filipino people, imploring the guidance of 
Divine Providence, to establish a government that shall 
embody our ideals and aspirations, promote the com- 
mon good, conserve and enhance our patrimony and 
secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of 
participatory democracy under a rule of justice, peace, 
freedom, TRUTH and equality, do ordain and pro- 
mulgate this Constitution.” 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the Committee 
appreciates these concerns, but I was infonned by the 
Floor Leader that there will be a time for amendments 
later on. Inasmuch as we feel that the Preamble is a 
prayer, and is something that should have good style of 
phraseology, we could probably leave it to the President 
to propose her own amendments or interpellate the 
Committee members. Of course, we will be happy to 
answer and contribute. The period of amendments will 
come later. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am sorry; I thought we were 
already in the period of amendments. 

MR. TINGSON. Not yet. Commissioner de Castro. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, we are now in the 
period of interpellations. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. With due respect to the members of 
the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles, of which I am a member, it is 
very unfortunate that I was not notified of the schedule 
of the committee meeting yesterday. If I were, I would 
have interposed my objection to the precipitate haste 
with which this Commission is deliberating on the 
Preamble. It is my humble submission that a Preamble is 
like the bedrock, the showcase of any fundamental law. 
A Preamble is the distillation of the spirit, the aspira- 
tions, the deepest yearnings of the people whom we 
claim to represent in this distinguished task of drafting 
a Constitution. It is my submission that it is our sacred 
duty to first address the task of consulting adequately 
and sufficiently the people whom we claim to represent 
in drafting the Constitution, as when we speak of a 
Preamble that is the distillation of the spirit. And con- 
formably with this task, the Preamble should articulate 
the spirit of the body — the skeleton and the muscle 
which comprise the corpus of the Constitution. How 


could we be so presumptuous as to arrogate upon our- 
selves now and prematurely the determination of the 
Preamble, when, in fact, we have not even begun the 
process of consulting the people in public hearings and 
public fora. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I explain by 
way of clarifying a point? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson may 
proceed. 

MR. TINGSON. Our committee simply obeyed the 
mandate of the leadership of our Commission when we 
were asked yesterday to meet after we had unanimously 
agreed with the Vice-President, Commissioner Padilla, 
that we begin deliberations in the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Princi- 
ples. Inasmuch as we also felt that there ought to be 
goals and purposes set before us so that those of us who 
have proposals on the different provisions of the Consti- 
tution could align our thinking with the goals and 
general purposes set forth in the Preamble, we thought 
that this was the right procedure. I do remember that in 
1971, that was exactly what we did — we began with 
the discussion on the Preamble, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I would concede to 
the requirements of urgency; however, it is my humble 
submission that we cannot afford to wax romantic on 
lofty ideals and the motherhood concepts of democracy 
without being able to feel the substance of what we 
speak about. My point is, we cannot sacrifice in the altar 
of expediency the matter of substance. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, in the drafting 
of the Preamble of our original Constitution, the best 
minds, the best language, the best literature were availed 
of by the Members of the Convention that drafted it. 
The statement of the Preamble should not only embrace 
all the expectations of the people in the general provi- 
sions that we are going to adopt, but a preamble should, 
like a prayer, be inspiring. It must not only contain 
supplications to the Almighty but also a general direc- 
tion to the people and what they expect of the govern- 
ment that is to be established. The phrases must be 
carefully selected so that in the recitation and prayer of 
the Preamble, our children will find it beautiful and 
inspiring. 

I have only two comments on the original, as well as 
on the proposed Preamble, as amended. The first is on 
the words: “general welfare” and “common good.” 
Practically, in concept, both embrace about the same 
purpose, the same purview of what we implore Divine 


94 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


Providence to grant us. But of the two, which sounds 
more of a prayer or a supplication for Heaven to grant 
us, the “general welfare” or the “common good”? I 
believe it is more beautiful to say “promote the general 
welfare” because it embraces everything that the 
government and the people are supplicating. “Common 
good” and “general welfare” are about the same. As 1 
said, it was only in the phraseology that the Conven- 
tion differed: “promote the common good” or “pro- 
mote the general welfare.” 

Like a song, it could have the same meaning. Let our 
Preamble be not only all-embracing but also beautiful 
when we recite and read it. I am referring to the beauty 
of the words — the “general welfare” or the “common 
good.” I leave it to my colleagues which of the two 
phrases, which mean the same and all-inclusive of the 
same objective, we shall apply to the Preamble of our 
Constitution. 

My other comment is on the use of democracy in the 
original. Must we classify democracy by inserting the 
word “participatory” in the proposed Preamble? Par- 
ticipation is already implied in the Preamble of the 
Constitution and by qualifying democracy as participa- 
tory gives the effect of democracy being diluted. 

And I submit that the Chairman delivered a very 
enlightening and exhaustive explanation. My attempt is 
only to make the Preamble beautifully written, beau- 
tifully read, as beautiful as it sounds. I believe that the 
blessings of democracy are generalized and that “par- 
ticipatory” cannot qualify the word “democracy.” 
However, the body can decide on what they want, but I 
think the general tone would be about the same. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. I think it will be best if our Commit- 
tee member, Commissioner Villegas, who authored the 
resolution in which we incorporated the phrase “com- 
mon good,” be allowed to explain what he meant by 
that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR, VILLEGAS. Madam President, in a way, I am 
glad it was Commissioner Abubakar who asked the ques- 
tion because it will make specific reference to cultural 
and other specific minorities in the Philippines. 

“General welfare” has been misconstrued by some 
people as “the greatest good for the greatest number,” 
and that phrase is rather dangerous. Even assuming that 
the majority of the Germans, for example, agreed with 
Hitler that the Jews had to be obliterated, that would 
have not morally justified the murder of a single Jew. 


Even if the majority of the Filipinos, because mob rule 
can unfortunately, from time to time, exist, should 
decide that certain traditions of cultural minorities 
should be obliterated, that does not make such an act 
morally justified. 

I would like to assure the body that the phrase 
“common good” has been the result of at least two 
years of consultations with the people all over the Phil- 
ippines which Commissioner Rosario Braid and I con- 
ducted in coming out with the document that was 
distributed to all the honorable Commissioners. The 
phrase “common good” is the only phrase in modern 
parlance that is defined as “a social order that enables 
every single individual in society to attain his or her 
fullest development, economically, politically, culturally 
and spiritually.” The phrase “common good” is the only 
phrase which guarantees that mob rule is not going to 
prevail; that a so-called enlightened majority is not 
going to persecute a minority. And that is why we are 
proposing that this phrase be used because it precisely 
guarantees individual rights. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, since our Commit- 
tee believes that it would be best for the Committee 
members who were present and who participated to be 
given a chance to explain some portions of this pro- 
posed Preamble, may I request that Commissioner 
Rosario Braid be called upon to say a word especially 
on the phrase “participatory democracy.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. Madam Presi- 
dent. We discussed this at length because the word 
“democracy” has been enshrined in all the past Consti- 
tutions, yet in practice would be one thing. And so, we 
wondered if by adding the qualifying adjective “par- 
ticipatory” we can instill in the minds of our people, 
particularly the children, that they have a right to par- 
ticipate actively, that democracy is not just sharing or 
benefitting from a resource pie, that democracy need 
not be the passive recipience of the benefits of develop- 
ment, but that the people actively participate in our 
dynamic society. 

Therefore, this word, this adjective, best describes 
“people power,” which is really a movement, the spirit 
of the people actively participating with no one at the 
top coordinating their actions but that out of their own 
feeling that they are participants of our society, they 
took the initiative. And so, we thought that this phrase 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


95 


is important and we hope our colleagues would see the 
importance of including it. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, with all due respect 
to the members of the Committee on Preamble, I would 
like to request deferment of decision on the resolution 
precisely because of the importance of the Preamble. It 
is a very important part of the Constitution and I feel, 
just as in writing a book, that we do not write the intro- 
duction until we know the substance, the main lines of 
the story. So, too, in this Constitution. We have not 
undertaken the task of public hearings yet. We have not 
undertaken the task of substantial debate and the fair 
struggle of ideas in these halls and, therefore, I would 
suggest that we defer the resolution on such an im- 
portant matter until after we have known the main lines 
of ideas. 

Secondly, I also want to remind ourselves that we 
have gone through nearly two decades of dictatorial rule 
and foreign intervention. It is very important that we 
try to reach one mind, one spirit as we draft this Pream- 
ble so that we can truly understand the importance of 
why we are actually trying to zero in and focus on free- 
dom and popular democracy, on equality and social 
justice, and on peace and national sovereignty. These are 
very important concepts but I think only after sub- 
stantial debate and struggle of ideas, not just in these 
halls but throughout the country, can we finally for- 
mulate the Preamble which this Constitution deserves. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I understand that 
the majority of political scientists and legal minds main- 
tain that the Preamble is not strictly a legal — is that 
correct — or an integral part of the Constitution, 
although we appreciate the presence of that part of our 
Constitution. And as our Committee discussed this 
morning, it is really a prayer of our people and in a 
general term it sets goals and purposes and petitions 
before the Almighty of what we would like to have in 
our country. 

MR. DAVIDE. Parliamentary inquiry. Madam Presi- 
dent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, what is the status 
of the motion of Commissioner Garcia? Was it duly 
seconded or was it a motion to defer consideration of 
this report? 


THE PRESIDENT. Was Commissioner Garcia’s 
motion duly seconded? 

FR. BERNAS. I second the motion. 

MR. DAVIDE. If it is duly seconded, may I rise to 
oppose the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide please 
state his reasons for opposing the motion to defer. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we are taking up 
this report of the Committee on Preamble, National 
Territory, and Declaration of Principles pursuant to and 
by virtue of the urgent motion approved by the Com- 
mission yesterday, and I refer to the motion of Com- 
missioner Padilla to take up the report today. The 
motion to defer would partake of the nature of a 
motion to reconsider the motion of Commissioner 
Padilla, duly approved yesterday. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we address a few clarificatory 
questions to Commissioner Garcia. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Garcia willing to 
answer the questions? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, willingly. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, we would like to 
clarify the parliamentary situation. 

I agree, for one, that the Preamble strikes a note, 
makes an impact on the kind of Constitution we are 
going to fomiulate — and is very crucial and very vital. 
Upon the other hand, there are practical considerations. 
We, in the Commission, somehow have to start our dis- 
cussions on constitutional provisions. Fortunately or 
unfortunately, the Preamble happens to be the number 
one item in any Constitution because it serves as the 
introduction. 

Madam President, assuming that we will proceed with 
the preliminary discussion on the Preamble, without 
prejudice to an open-ended discussion, even after Second 
Reading, which would not deny the right of any dele- 
gate after consultations with the people and the masses 
to submit supplementary resolutions embodying the 
highest ideals and aspirations of our people, will the 
Chair have any objection to that? 

MR. GARCIA. Simply because the Preamble is the 
first thing that comes in the Constitution does not mean 
that it is also the first thing that we tackle in this body. 
In other words, I contend that just as when we write a 


96 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


book, when we write an article, very often we begin 
with substantial ideas, and only after we know what we 
are going to draft, what we are going to formulate do 
we go back to the introduction and give it that spirit, 
give it that beginning that I think it deserves. I believe 
it is the same thing in the creation of this Preamble. We 
could begin, as we had already started, on the form of 
government, and that is the kind of discussion that 
could take place. The Preamble does not have to be the 
very first thing that we have to work on. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the distinguished Commissioner 
yield to interpellations? 

MR. GARCIA. Willingly. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I ask the question, I under- 
stand that the term “Preamble” is derived from the 
Latin term preambulare which means walking before it. 
In proceeding to the consideration of other proposals, 
there is nothing that “walks” before us. Would the 
Commissioner agree with me if I say that in approving 
the Preamble, we are setting out directions that should 
be followed by us in the consideration of the various 
proposals submitted to the Constitutional Commis- 
sion? 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. Spanish poet Antonio 
Machado once said: “Caminando no hay camino se hace 
camino al andar.” I agree that right now there is no 
path that is forged until we start walking, but that does 
not mean that a committee can arrogate upon itself, or, 
in a sense, forge in one direction, stating the entire 
vision until such time when serious discussion, debate, 
and plenty of consultations have taken place. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Reading the words of the Preamble, 
would Commissioner Garcia agree with me that the 
words are broad enough to cover practically anything 
that we will do? 

MR. GARCIA. That is exactly my objection. It is so 
broad. How can we not object to something so broad 
when it does not truly incorporate the concrete desires 
of our people? After twenty years of dictatorial rule 
and foreign intervention in this country, we must be 
able to state in far stronger terms our objectives as a 
people. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is an established precedent that 
the Preamble is not actually a part of the Constitution. 
It is just a decorative part in the Constitution. 


MR. GARCIA. Nevertheless, like in a melody, an 
orchestra or a play, there is a melody which runs as a 
refrain that somehow comes across in many other parts. 
We can only know that once we know the theme of the 
story, we do not even know what story we will be able 
to tell. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Am I correct, if 1 say that the 
honorable Commissioner apparently labors under the 
impression that the substance of the Constitution is 
found in the Preamble? 

MR. GARCIA. Of course not. Commissioner Nolledo. 

I do not say that the substance is there, but basically the 
major theme, the direction, the spirit is there. I think 
the Preamble is important enough for us to defer its 
final formulation until such a time when we are truly 
ready. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As between spirit and form, we .*re 
providing the spirit and the form, the body itself will 
follow later on. 

MR. GARCIA. I do not believe so. I think we must 
have the body and only once the body is there, can we 
then give it form, spirit and flesh, and let it “walk.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I rise to reinforce the position of my 
colleague. Professor Garcia, who took up the note that I 
raised earlier. And as a comment to the position of 
Commissioner Nolledo, it is my position that the 
Preamble, although not essentially a part of the Consti- 
tution, is, however, the distillation of the collective 
spirit of the people for whom and whereof it speaks. 
When Commissioner Nolledo spoke of walking ahead, I 
feel, however, that we cannot walk ahead too far; we 
cannot afford to be vanguards without looking back. 
Today, we have the most unique and the unedited op- 
portunity to be in deep consultations and conference 
with the people to determine how they feel and what 
they feel. Let us not betray the hope and desire of the 
people to be coauthors in this task. It is almost like our 
duty to listen to them before we speak. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, with due 
respect to Commissioners Garcia and Aquino, I think if 
the Committee examines the Minutes of our meeting 
this morning, we said that we needed some preliminary 
statement that would set directions, and that we will be 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


97 


open to the desires, the aspirations of the people. I am 
sure my fellow Committee members remember that we 
said we will present this in all our consultations so that 
the people could give us suggestions, and we could 
improve on the phraseology and provide the spirit in 
which the final draft would be developed. Madam Presi- 
dent. 

This is the spirit in which we drafted the Preamble 
because we feel that in any endeavors such as ours, we 
need a unifying philosophy that would set the stage for 
all the other committees and that the Preamble could 
offer such. It could evolve into what the seventeen 
committees and the public consultations would finally 
provide during the next few months. I think it is in this 
spirit that we have come up with a preliminary draft. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


MR. GARCIA. In the spirit of a fair debate of ideas, 
I would like to withdraw my motion on the condition 
that we hold a freewheeling discussion on the Preamble, 
without any amendments nor any voting. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Garcia withdraw- 
ing his motion on that condition? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, under tlie condition that we will 
have a freewheeling discussion on the Preamble. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. This is just a reply: That is precisely 
what our Committee wants to do, and we are happy 
that Commissioner Garcia withdrew his motion. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani, we are still 
on the motion to defer. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am glad to say that I am in 
sympathy with Commissioners Aquino and Garcia. But I 
would like to proffer some questions to Commissioner 
Tingson. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani, there is still 
a motion to defer consideration. In other words, we 
have to a^ on that motion before interpellations can 
be made. That is why the Chair would like to be clari- 
fied by Commissioner Garcia if his motion includes or, 
rather, covers the fact that there would be no interpella- 
tions at all during this particular period. In other words, 
would Commissioner Garcia object to any interpellation 
being made? 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I am not very sure 
about the actual parliamentary procedure. I was simply 
stating what I thought was a very important fact, that 
before we consider style or spirit, we should consider, 
I think the substance for it is crucial. That is why I was 
thinking that at this very moment, before we go on and 
consider the resolution, we must defer, for the sake of 
apthering more substantial ideas, before we can actually 
write such a preamble. That was the spirit of my 
intervention. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session. 
It was 5:05 p.m. 


resumption of session 

At 5:14 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
Commissioner Garcia is recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to ask Commissioner 
Tingson a few questions. 

First, why did Commissioner Tingson use the words 
“Divine Providence” which is simply repeating what has 
been used before? The phrase does not sound Filipino. 
We, Filipinos, often use “Makapangyarihang Diyos” 
which is a more personal way of denoting God. Why do 
we not use “Almighty God” instead of “Divine Provi- 
dence” for easy translation? 

The second question is: In the order or sequence of 
nouns on the last line — justice, peace, freedom and 
equality — is there any reason for that particular order 
or is it simply because we do not want to deviate from 
the order of the former Constitution? I ask that ques- 
tion because it is commonly accepted in Catholic circles 
today that there are four pillars of peace: truth, justice, 
love and liberty. Peace is the consequence of all of 
these. It would seem better to put all of those four 
ahead of peace — peace being the result of all of them. 
So, I would like to ask whether or not there is any 
particular logic to this arrangement. 

MR. TINGSON. First of all, the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles is conscious of the fact that we have the Com- 
mittee on Style which later on would work on this 
Preamble. However, we want to include the generally 
accepted concepts in this proposed Preamble and then 
leave them to the Committee on Style to put finesse to 
it. 

Secondly, on the question about the phrase implor- 
ing the aid of Divine Providence,” may I ask Commis- 
sioner Nolledo, a member of the Committee, to com- 
ment on this by saying that we did not repeat the whole 
phrase. Instead of the word “aid,” we decided to use the 


98 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


word “guidance” followed by the phrase “of Divine 
Providence.” 

t 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the purpose is 
purely for style. We have no objection if we revert to 
the phrase “the aid of.” But I think it is more emphatic 
if we use “guidance,” because we are manifesting some 
sort of humility. We are subjecting ourselves to the 
guidance of Almighty God. 

BISHOP BACANI. It is not so much on the word 
“guidance” but on the phrase “Divine Providence.” I am 
wondering whether it is really the more appropriate, the 
more Filipino way of addressing our Almighty God. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have no objection, if we change 
“Divine Providence” to “Almighty God.” I do not know 
what the sense of the Committee as a whole is. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, similarly, this 
Representation would like to say we will be very happy 
to see and consider the amendment of Commissioner 
Bacani later on. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, when the period of amend- 
ments comes. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I have only one 
point of inquiry. 

In view of our recent experience, did the Committee 
consider enhancement of human rights or human 
dignity? 

MR. TINGSON. If I remember right in our discussion 
this morning, we did consider human rights under the 
phrase “rule of justice, peace, freedom, equality.” 

Mr. ROMULO. Will the Committee take that under 
advisement? If the last 12 or 14 years proved anything, 
we ought to be concerned with human rights. 

MR. TINGSON. The Committee will be happy to 
consider Commissioner Romulo’s request. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I have a couple 
of questions to ask, if I may. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. I notice that in this proposal, the 
Committee changed the word “liberty” to FREEDOM. 
The word “liberty” is found in both the 1935 and 1973 
Constitutions. I wish to advance the statement tliat I 
have no objection to this, but I would like to know the 
reason for this change. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, since vve decided 
at our Committee meeting this morning that we share 
the participation among the Committee members, may 
I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be permitted to 
answer? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

This change was suggested by Commissioner Rosario 
Braid and her reason is that the term “freedom” is 
broad enough to cover freedom from want. “Liberty” 
could not possibly cover freedom from want, so we used 
a broader term. 

Thank you for the good question. Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

Madam President, as I said earlier, I have no objection 
to the change. As a matter of fact, there could be ano- 
ther reason for changing the word “liberty” to FREE- 
DOM. Although some say that the word “liberty” is 
broader, and, therefore, would embrace the word “free- 
dom” in its concept, in the Webster’s Dictionary the 
main definition of both is the same — a quality or state 
of being free. The reason I favor the change is that this 
word “liberty” was copied from the United States 
Constitution, and at the time the Constitution of the 
United States was drafted, the word “liberty” was a 
very popular term as exemplified by Patrick Henry’s 
immortal expression: “Give me liberty or give me 
death.” 

Now, I recall the comments of Justice Owen Roberts 
of the United States Supreme Court in the case of U.S. 
vs. Sprague where he said that the United States Consti- 
tution was written to be understood by the voters. 
Paraphrasing the learned jurist, I would say: The Consti- 
tution that we are attempting to draft should be written 
to be understood best by our people. My observation is 
that between the words “liberty” and “freedom,” the 
latter is the more accepted term; it is the one that is 
more used by our people. That is why we do not talk 
about liberty of the press, liberty of speech, or liberty 
of religion. Instead, we say freedom of the press, 
freedom of religion and so forth. 

My second question is regarding the use of the word 
“patrimony,” which, in the previous Constitutions, was 
referred to as the patrimony of the nation. 

I ask this question because I noticed in several books 
on the Constitution of the Philippines that the authors. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


99 


in attempting to explain this particular expression, 
related it to natural resources alone. I would like to find 
out from the members of the Committee whether they 
share that view or whether they are more in favor of the 
concept, as expressed by President Sinco in his book on 
Philippine government, that the phrase “patrimony of 
the nation” refers to everything that belongs to the 
Filipino people. It embraces material property, as well as 
intangible possessions. Under the first class of patri- 
mony, we have the land and the natural resources of the 
country which include our waters, forests, minerals and 
all sources of potential energy. The intangible assets are 
the ideals, the customs and the traditions of therace^as 
well as the manpower supplied by the individual consti- 
tuents of the Filipino nation. I would like to find out 
from Commissioner Tingson which of the two inter- 
pretations or concepts the Committee has adopted. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, Commissioner 
Guingona will be happy to know that we have discussed 
with the Committee on Human Resources that the word 
“patrimony” embraces precisely not only natural re- 
sources but also human resources, believing that life in 
this world consists not only in the abundance of the 
things that man possesses, for man does not live by 
bread alone. So, we are happy to let Commissioner 
Guingona know that that is precisely what we meant 
there. We did not want to put “material and human 
resources” because that would add more words to the 
Preamble. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. 

With respect to changing the word “liberty to 
“FREEDOM,” if the intent is to include the concept of 
freedom from want, I think, in addition to liberty, we 
should add the desideratum of freedom from want. I 
think we should be very explicit in this because for 
almost 90 years of constitution-making and constitu- 
tional implementation in our country the plight of the 
masses has not improved. This could be because the 
constitutions that we have had so far did not adequately 
and seriously stress the people’s need for freedom from 
want. So, may I recommend to the Committee that we 
include “freedom from want” in addition to “liberty. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the Committee 
will be very happy to receive, in written form, the 
suggestion of Commissioner Villacorta. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized first; then followed by Commissioner Suarez. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, will the distin- 
guished Gentleman yield to some clarificatory ques- 
tions? 

MR. TINGSON. Willingly, to the Honorable Alonto. 

MR. ALONTO. In the first place, I would like to 
congratulate the Committee for its beautiful proposal. 
However, I have one question for clarification. Does 
not the sponsor believe that the phrase “imploring 
the guidance of Divine Providence,” which is well taken, 
contradicts the first phrase “sovereign Filipino people?” 

I ask so because “sovereign people” do not ask the 
guidance of anybody. But if we recognize that the guid- 
ance of God Almighty or the Divine Providence is 
needed by us as a people, then we have to admit that 
the word “sovereign” which defines the characteristic of 
the Filipino people, does not exactly lie in our hands 
but in the hands of the Divine Providence from which 
we seek guidance. 

REV. RIGOS. May I comment on that. Madam 
President? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I yield the 
floor to Commissioner Rigos, who is a noted Minister of 
the Gospel and a theologian. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. I think the sovereignty of the Filipino 
people precisely rests upon the grace of Almighty God. 
In other words, it is a kind of sovereignty that does not 
pretend to usurp the place of God. I think the use of the 
word “sovereign” there is very fitting. We, on the one 
hand, declare that the Filipino people are sovereign 
people; but on the other hand, we still acknowledge that 
there is One to whom we owe allegiance. 

MR. ALONTO. Why do we not clarify it? Why as- 
sume something we do not have? If we recognize the 
sovereignty of God Almighty, then let us make it plain. 
That is the reason we are seeking His guidance. And so I 
think, if we follow the thoughts of the framers of the 
Malolos Constitution, it would be better, merely stating 
that we are a people, and that we have to live and create 
an institution derived from the guidance and aid of the 
Supreme Legislator. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Alonto through 
with his questions? 

Commissioner Suarez is now recognized; then to be 
followed by Commissioner de los Reyes. 


100 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the sponsor yield to some questions? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. I wish to thank Commissioner 
Tingson for the report which he has submitted to the 
body. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. After Commissioner Tingson was 
interrupted in his joyful presentation of Committee Re- 
port No. 1, will he join me in a brief but emotional 
constitutional journey involving the Preamble of our 
Constitution? 

As I understand it, we are working on the basis of 
three working drafts: the Malolos Constitution of 1899, 
the 1935 Constitution and the 1973 Constitution 
without the amendments. That is quite clear, is it not? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, it is. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the sponsor aware that all of these 
three Constitutions contain a preamble? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, as a matter of fact, we recited 
them a while ago. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Commissioner agree with 
me that in formulating a preamble, it must be a 
preamble without a stigma of colonialism and authentic- 
ally Filipino in character, in identity and in con- 
sciousness? 

MR. TINGSON. We cannot agree more. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does the sponsor also agree with me 
that since the Preamble is symbolic of the highest ideals 
and aspirations of the Filipino people, such must be so 
stated in our Preamble? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, I agree with Commissioner 
Suarez. 

MR. SUAREZ. Now we go to the Preamble of the 
1935 Constitution. Would the sponsor agree with me 
that it contains colonial vestiges which we must rid 
ourselves of? 

MR. TINGSON. The Preamble of the 1935 Constitu- 
tion does not necessarily tell that we were under op- 
pressive colonial rule. Unfortunately, we know that we 
were under colonial rule when the 1935 Constitution 
was written. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am only referring to the 1935 
Preamble appearing in the 1935 Constitution. Since it 
was practically an American-imposed charter, it was 


then amended in the 1973 Constitution in order to 
reflect the circumstances obtaining during that time, so 
much so that the 1973 Constitution reflected the waves 
of turbulence that became prevalent in the early 1970s 
and that induced the 1971 Constitutional Convention to 
introduce two other blessings enjoyed by the Filipino 
people: the blessings of peace and equality. Is the 
sponsor aware of that situation? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, that is true; thank you for that 
observation. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does the sponsor also agree with me 
that the other major change that was effected between 
the 1935 Preamble and the 1971 Preamble had refer- 
ence to the substitution of the word “independence” 
with “democracy”? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. In the 1935 Constitution we were still 
aspiring for independence, but in the 1973 Constitution 
we supposedly already enjoyed independence; that is 
why we were enjoying the blessings of democracy. That 
was the one reflected in the Preamble of the 1973 
Constitution. Is that also correct? 

MR. TINGSON. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. We come now to Commissioner 
Tingson’s proposal retaining the words “justice, peace, 
freedom and equality.” There are suggestions here to 
include other phrases reflective of the sentiments of our 
people. Would the Commissioner have any objection to 
that at the proper time? 

MR. TINGSON. The only trouble about adding more 
words is that our Preamble might be so inordinately 
long that it will not jibe with the beauty of this docu- 
ment that we are trying to come up with. We believe, 
as we discussed this morning, that those words would 
best describe the Filipino people. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Vice-President, the Honorable Ambrosio B. 
Padilla. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let us not sacrifice substance for aesthetics especially 
in the Constitution. But I agree with the sponsor that 
it is a matter of style, but without prejudice to sub- 
stance, of course. Is the sponsor in agreement with us 
that we must make our Preamble warm and humanized 
since it deals with the masses, the common people? 

MR. TINGSON. Hearing Commissioner Rosario Braid 
read the proposed Preamble, I cannot make it any 
warmer than what it is. It would be nice if we could all 
agree and just approve this Preamble today. But, of 
course, I do not propose that. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


101 


MR. SUAREZ. I ask that question because in the 
1935 Constitution the Preamble was expressed in the 
third person. It was coldly impersonal and there was no 
warmth in it. But in the 1973 Constitution we used the 
first person plural. We used the pronoun “We” followed 
by the phrase “the sovereign Filipino people,” making it 
more warm and human. Is that not what was supposed 
to have been the motivation behind the amendment? 

MR. TINGSON. Listening to Commissioner Suarez 
reminds me of what was said on the floor of our 1971 
Constitutional Convention of which he was an honor- 
able member, and I appreciate his recalling of what we 
had decided then but which is still valid for this pro- 
posal. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

My last question is: Should we not make the people 
closer to the Constitution, particularly in the formula- 
tion of the Preamble? 

MR. TINGSON. We believe that it should be so; that 
is why I personally insist that the records in our Com- 
mittee meetings should show that the Preamble is the 
collective prayer of the people. Nothing could make a 
man closer to God and to his people than praying, be- 
cause praying would not make a man tell a lie. He is 
speaking not to man whom he could deceive but to God 
who looks with an X-ray penetrating pair of eyes, and to 
his own heart. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, may we get the assurance of the 
Committee that we formulate the Preamble reflective of 
the highest ideals, aspirations, culture and tradition of 
our Filipino people? 

MR. TINGSON. We give Commissioner Suarez the 
assurance, with the cooperation and approval of this 
honorable body. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes 
is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Tingson 
yield to a few interpellations? 

MR. TINGSON. Willingly. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The Commissioner used the 
word “enhance” instead of the word “develop.” To my 
understanding, when we say “enhance,” we mean that 
we add something more to something that already 
exists, for example, we enhance one’s beauty. She is 
already beautiful but we enhance or accentuate her 
beauty. Is that correct? 


MR. TINGSON. The Commissioner has precisely ex- 
pressed the sentiments of the Committee. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, is it not better to retain 
the word “develop,” instead of saying “conserve and 
enhance our patrimony,” for there is nothing to en- 
hance in our patrimony? We should only conserve our 
patrimony and develop it, which means that we should 
discover this patrimony and utilize its untapped re- 
sources for our development, because we are a develop- 
ing country. Is that not the more appropriate term? Of 
course, “enhance” sounds more literary, but I think the 
more accurate phrase to describe what should be done 
with our patrimony is “conserve and develop.” 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, may I call on 
Commissioner Quesada because I recall that she par- 
ticipated well on this particular phrase this morning. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President, when we chose 
the word “enhance,” we were actually thinking of a 
word that will really improve the word “develop” be- 
cause we said we are in the process of development, but 
we would like to improve the phase of development of 
our patrimony. So, that was the word we thought ap- 
propriate to improve the term “develop.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner de los 
Reyes through? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Not yet, Mr. Vice-President. I 
have two more questions. 

The use of the descriptive word “participatory,” I 
understand from the explanation of the distinguished 
sponsor, is to institutionalize people power, is that 
correct? 

MR. TINGSON. That was in the mind of the Commit- 
tee members inasmuch as we are conscious of the fact 
that there are quite a number of our colleagues here 
who would like precisely not to constitutionalize in a 
sense, but never to forget the virtue and the power of 
the people as demonstrated recently. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Before Commissioner Rosario 
Braid answers the question, I would like to state the 
following so that she could complete her answer, taking 
into account what I will say, Mr. Vice-President. 

When we describe democracy as participatory, it 
seems to imply that there is such a thing as nonparti- 
cipatory democracy. Democracy by its very essence 
means government of the people, by the people and 
for the people, which already connotes participation of 


102 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


the people. And, therefore, there is no need to put the 
unnecessary description “participatory.” As a matter of 
fact, Mr. Vice-President, this people revolution or 
people power came about despite the absence of the 
word “participatory” in the 1973 Constitution, mean- 
ing, that there is no need to insert the word “participa- 
tory” in order to plant into the consciousness of the 
people active participation in a democracy. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario 
Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I explained earlier that this 
word “democracy” has been in the past constitutions 
and yet, over the past decades our people have been 
relatively passive. And so we thought that by including 
this qualifying adjective we could instill this need to 
participate - mass participation rather than participa- 
tion by a few - because we all agree that democra- 
cy by itself has not really worked, so we want active 
participation. Call it whatever, we will agree to a phrase 
as long as it qualifies the word “democracy.” 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Vice-President, just a 
minute. My apprehension is that when we place the 
descriptive word “participatory,” it tends to limit the 
meaning of democracy when we all know very well 
there is such a thing as “representative democracy.” So, 
we limit actually our choice when we say “participatory 
democracy,” and somehow exclude the essence of 
representative democracy. 

My next question is regarding the words “guidance of 
Divine Providence.” I recall very vividly that the Vice- 
President was one of those delegates to the 1971 Consti- 
tutional Convention who proposed to change the words 
“Divine Providence” to “ALMIGHTY GOD.” Unfor- 
tunately, there were those in the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention who did not believe in God — they were 
atheists - and they objected vehemently to the use of 
the words “Almighty God” as a Supreme Being. They 
would rather refer to “divinity” as some sort of a divine 
faith, a divine destiny. And so, the use of the words 
“Almighty God” did not prosper, and as a compromise 
we stuck to the use of the word “Divine Providence” as 
used in the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, is the Commis- 
sioner willing to use “Almighty God” instead of “Divine 
Providence”? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I have not made up my mind 
yet. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader 
is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Will the sponsor yield to some 
questions? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. CALDERON. Is the sponsor aware that this term 
“participatory democracy” was first used by President 
Marcos to justify the creation of the barangays? 

MR. TINGSON. I have not read that, and so I am not 
sure. 

MR. CALDERON. No, my question is; Is the Com- 
missioner aware that this term was first used by Presi- 
dent Marcos to justify the creation of the barangays? 

MR. TINGSON. I am aware now because the Gentle- 
man has mentioned it. 

MR. CALDERON. If President Marcos was the first 
to use this term “participatory democracy,” could it not 
be said that we are trying to immortalize the words of 
President Marcos into our Constitution? He was the 
first one to use this. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, the Committee 
never mentioned that name this morning. And we do 
not intend to mention that name in our future meetings. 

MR. CALDERON. Of course, Mr. Vice-President. But 
I just want to bring out the fact that this term was first 
used officially. 

MR. TINGSON. I thank the Commissioner for the 
information. 

MR. CALDERON. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDEN r. Commissioner Regalado is 
recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I ask just a few questions. 
Apropos of what has been spoken about participatory 
democracy, which we will find in P.D. No. 1 508 creat- 
ing the barangay, mention was made by one Commis- 
sioner here who is a member of the Committee that one 
of the reasons it decided to change the word “regime” 
to “RULE” was that “regime” appears like a “regi- 
mented population” and that we often referred to the 
past dispensation as the Marcos regime. Why do we still 
speak of “participatory” when this was first enshrined 
officially by President Marcos in P.D. No. 1 508? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, as we said, the 
Committee would be very glad to receive and consider 
amendments in writing. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


103 


REV. RIGOS. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is 
recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Vice-President, I am sure the Com- 
mittee is taking note of all these comments for its con- 
sideration in the next meeting. I would like to suggest 
the possibility of constituting the Preamble of at least 
two sentences instead of just one long sentence. For 
instance, we just say: “We, the sovereign Filipino 
people, implore the guidance of Almighty God: To this 
end, we do ordain and promulgate this Constitution.” 
This is just a suggestion I will put in writing. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, usually pream- 
bles are so stated in only one sentence, but there is no 
reason we cannot change it. 

REV. RIGOS. I want to be different, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. There is only one word I would 
like to take into consideration. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Vice-President, this is only 
one word so this body could decide because this is 
important. 

the VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar, 
the Honorable Monsod was recognized first. 

MR. MONSOD. Will the sponsor yield to a question? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. MONSOD. May I ask the Committee if it 
drafted this Preamble in Pilipino? 

MR. TINGSON. I must confess I am not in a position 
to do that because I speak one of the noblest dialects in 
the world, Ilongo, but not Pilipino. But the other Com- 
mittee members, I suppose, could do that, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. MONSOD. May I suggest that the Committee 
consider drafting the Preamble in Pilipino so as not to 
preempt any decision of this body with respect to the 
language or languages that may be used in the Consti- 
tution. 

Also, may I ask Commissioner Tingson whether the 
Committee considered highlighting the dignity of the 


individual in drafting the Preamble. I notice that most 
of the phrases of the Preamble referred to body politic 
or collective bodies that embody our aspirations, our 
ideals, our common good, our patrimony, and so on. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, the Committee 
thought that that is included within the purview of this 
Preamble we are proposing. 

MR. MONSOD. Will the Committee consider at the 
appropriate time such phrase RESPECT THE DIGNITY 
OF THE HUMAN BEING? 

MR. TINGSON. At the appropriate time, we will be 
glad to consider that, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is 
recognized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. The amendment “guidance” will 
make a difference in what we are asking from Divine 
Providence. “Guidance” is a good word, but others may 
not be convinced that they need guidance and they may 
disregard it. Could we not use the original concept of 
the Constitution “imploring the aid”? “Aid” is more 
appropriate because we are imploring help from Divine 
Providence. It is stronger; it is positive; it does not limit 
the choice of what we are imploring from Divine Provi- 
dence. I think that is more positive and is more in 
consonance with the religious belief of the people that 
one can supplicate aid from Divine Providence. So, I 
suggest that instead of “guidance,” substitute IMPLOR- 
ING which is one simple word but makes a lot of 
difference, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is 
recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Vice-President. 

Will the Gentleman yield to just a few questions? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. OPLE. The procedure so far has been analytical, 
which means the proposed Preamble has been broken 
down into components which previous speakers have 
submitted to analysis. At the same time. Commissioner 
Tingson agrees that in the end it is the total impact or 
lack of it of the whole text of the Preamble that will 
matter to the average Filipino reader. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. OPLE. Does Commissioner Tingson hold the 
view that in terms of the total impact on the average 
Filipino reader, this proposed text is supeiior to the 


104 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


previous Preambles that have been presented? Let us 
say, in terms of the ability to resonate in the heart and 
mind of the Filipino reader, to strike a chord of re- 
sponse, to derive inspiration as a Filipino, a patriotic 
Filipino who subscribes to democracy. Does the sponsor 
think that by this standard of the whole text rather than 
the specific parts thereof a greater impact is realized 
from this proposed Preamble as distinguished, let us say, 
from the Preamble of the 1 973 Constitution? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, we appreciate 
hearing from Commissioner Ople that this is better in a 
sense, and Commissioner Rosario Braid was very happy 
of this product of our Committee’s deliberation this 
morning. She said that perhaps it was so because we 
opened our Committee meeting with a prayer and we 
were really given extraordinary direction by the 
Almighty. Since this was the first committee to hold a 
meeting, we decided precisely to seek Divine guidance 
this morning. We would, therefore, suggest that all other 
committees do the same. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. President, I do not trust my poetic 
ear. I think this is one part of the Constitution where by 
tradition there is a license to be poetic rather than 
merely to be precise. I do not agree that the Preamble is 
not an integral part of the Constitution. Only by strictly 
legal standards can we say that the Preamble is not an 
integral part of the Constitution in the sense that it is 
not likely that it will be used as a controlling rule in the 
development of jurisprudence that eventually adds up 
to a perpetually growing dynamic Constitution. I do not 
want to disparage the role of a preamble in a constitu- 
tion. 

Mr. Vice-President, some reservations have already 
been expressed here on the floor concerning “participa- 
tory democracy.” I confirm what has been disclosed 
that this phrase was first invented during a previous era 
in connection with the principle of propagating partici- 
patory democracy at the barangay level. But I see 
nothing wrong in building into the Preamble some 
concepts about, let us say, people power in a manner 
that will not limit the beautiful time, timeless world of 
democracy, in the sense that we are dealing here with 
genera and species. I think most of us would prefer the 
generic name of democracy. The minute we modify it 
into participatory democracy, it becomes self-limiting; 
It becomes a species or a subspecies of the genus. Now, I 
said I have no objection to reflecting people power. I 
would go beyond that in the Declaration of Principles. I 
trust Commissioner Tingson will agree with me that the 
right of a people to revolt should be written right there 
in the Declaration of Principles as a warning to all future 
rulers who may abuse this Constitution. If they depart 
from it, the people should rise in revolt and that right 
must be enshrined in the Constitution. But I am not 
dealing with the Preamble just to anticipate one of the 
resolutions to be filed later. 


There is a sense in which the Committee was very 
preoccupied with the stylistic changes in the hope of 
improving upon the original Preambles of the 1973. 
1935 and the 1899 Constitutions. And I suppose this is 
laudable because we would like posterity to know that 
we put the stamp of our own perceptions living at this 
time on this watershed of a declaration, the Preamble of 
the Constitution. But apart from certain changes of 
style, there is no manifest difference unless we take at 
face value the statements earlier made by Commissioner 
Villegas that there is a real distinction between the 
general welfare and the common good, or unless we take 
literally the statements of Commissioner Rosario Braid 
to the effect that “enhance” as distinguished from 
“develop” is an improvement on the term “develop.” I 
think it can be an improvement in the sense of style but 
it changes the substance of the original word “develop” 
and this has already been the subject of a previous inter- 
vention by Commissioner de los Reyes. I think I will ask 
the Committee to review this very important word “en- 
hance,” if the sponsor agrees. In this high-technology 
era “enhancements” are generally used in terms of 
computers. And what does it mean? It means that if we 
raise an Apple Macintosh 128K to 256K, that is an 
enhancement. It is the same computer. All the micro- 
chips inside are unchanged. A little bit of the power is 
enhanced, including the power supply and, therefore, 
this probably cannot meet the general desire that the 
patrimony of the nation be conserved, as well as be 
developed. And I think somewhere there, the distribu- 
tion of the fruits of development of our national patri- 
mony ought to be inserted and not merely under the 
general rubric of equality. These are some of my 
observations, Mr. Vice-President, and I hope the 
Committee on Preamble will take them into account. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion 
is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I would add only a few thoughts for consideration 
of the Committee on Preamble. In the first place, there 
was a substitution of the word “develop” to “enhance.” 
One may say that most of these things are a matter of 
taste, but if we consider human resources as part of the 
patrimony of the nation, we do not enhance the human 
resources. Generally, we develop them and enhance 
human dignity or enrich the quality of life. I would 
suggest that the use of the word “enhance” in lieu of 
“develop” be studied carefully. As Commissioner Ople 
has wisely suggested, we might use the two words one 
after the other. 

Then, there is the matter of “participatory democra- 
cy.” Apart from its historical flavor or connotation, the 
term suggests that there is a democracy which is not 
participatory. I appreciate the good intention of the 
Committee in using the word “participatory.” And, 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


105 


lastly, there is the substitution of the word “rule” in 
lieu of “regime.” We speak of the rule of law, but not 
the regime of law; again we use the word “regime” in 
connection with justice — like regime of justice. Insofar 
as freedom is concerned, the word “liberty” has a his- 
torical significance. It is the French Revolution which 
popularized the phrase “egalite, fraternite, liberte. ” So, 
I suggest that we consider the restoration of the word 
“regime,” which is broader in scope, instead of “rule” 
because if we say “rule,” it should be the rule of law. 
The problem is not so much what the law is, but how 
the law is enforced. Therefore, it is not enough for us to 
draft a legally excellent constitution, but to take appro- 
priate measures to insure that persons duly suited by 
temperament, by training, by their school of thought or 
way of life, are chosen to carry out the spirit of the 
Constitution. 

I thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is 

recognized. 

MR- NOLLEDO. Will Commissioner Concepcion 
yield to a few questions? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is about the use of the word 
“particip3t®0^ to describe democracy. I would like to 
give the honor to Commissioner Rosario Braid for add- 
ing that word to describe democracy. For rnany years, 
Mr. Vice-President, we have stuck to the term “de- 
iTiocracy” alone. And for many years also under the 
Marcos regime . . . 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, may I raise a 
point of order? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Vice-President, I am prefacing 
my question with some preliminary statements. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. What is the point of order 
of Commissioner Maambong? 

MR. MAAMBONG. We are in a period of sponsorship, 
Mr. Vice-President, and the rule states that during this 
period there can be no interpellation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Vice-President, I am a member 
of the Committee and interpellating the distinguished 
Member is one way of explaining our stand, one way of 
explaining the report of the Committee. Instead of 
talking in defense of the committee report, I am raising 
questions to clarify our stand. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I seek a ruling on the Gentle- 
man’s point of order, Mr. Vice-President? 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. What is the point of order 
of the Gentleman? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The point of order, Mr. President, 
is that there can be no interpellation during the period 
of sponsorship. May I now seek a ruling on that point of 
order, Mr. Vice-President? 

RULING OF THE CHAIR 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Sometimes, our sponsor 
makes reference to other members of the Committee to 
answer or clarify certain points. And I believe that Com- 
missioner Nolledo is probably trying to clarify certain 
points that have been raised by Commissioner Concep- 
cion. On that point, we will allow Commissioner 
Nolledo to answer and clarify matters, being a member 
of the Committee, but really there should be no further 
interpellation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. I 
would like to remind my distinguished colleague. Com- 
missioner Maambong, that we agreed in caucus that the 
Rules shall be interpreted liberally. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, in order to 
keep things in order, as ruled by the Presiding Officer, 
may I, for the record, ask the distinguished sponsor to 
yield the floor to Commissioner Nolledo for the purpose 
of this interpellation. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The sponsor may do so. 

MR. TINGSON. The sponsor would like to yield the 
floor to a member of our Committee, Commissioner 
Nolledo. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Commissioner Tingson. 

For many years, we have stuck to the word “de- 
mocracy” alone without any description, and for many 
years under the Marcos regime, we had what we call the 
“silent majority.” Many people lost their interest in par- 
ticipating in the affairs of the state, of government, and 
of society, because perhaps their freedoms were cur- 
tailed. But because of people power, which reminded us 
all that we practice what we call vibrant democracy, 
then democracy will be more meaningful. And I know 
that was the basic reason we added the expression “par- 
ticipatory democracy” which means vibrant and living 
democracy. We wanted the Filipino people to know 
that and to keep on practicing a living democracy rather 
than a democracy with few people speaking and with 
the majority remaining in stolid silence. 

Would Commissioner Concepcion agree with me if I 
say that the meaning of participatory democracy is 
vibrant democracy? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I stated in my remarks that I 
appreciate the intent of the Committee on Style. But 


106 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


I thought the Preamble should be something that one 
could read without coming across something that would 
provoke debate. In addition, I have in mind the observa- 
tion made, I think, by Minister Ople that, perhaps, the 
matter of participatory democracy could be stressed 
better in the Declaration of Principles or some other 
appropriate part of the Constitution. This is a thought I 
felt should be conveyed to the Committee. There are 
words which generally form part of common phrases. 

MR. NOLLEDO. For my last question, would the 
Commissioner agree with me that the fact that Mr. 
Marcos used the term “participatory democracy” should 
not deter us from using the term too? Mr. Marcos used 
that term but he did not practice it. He used to talk 
about freedom but he did not implement it also. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Vice-President, the problem 
with the term is its notorious history in the Philippines. 
There is nothing wrong with it but it injects a point that 
may raise issues. Is there a democracy that is not par- 
ticipatory? My impression, like that of the others, is 
that democracy - the essence of it - is people’s par- 
ticipation in government, people’s power. Unfortunately 
in the past, our “democracy” iias not been truly par- 
ticipatory. In other words, one of the greatest sources 
of criticism against democracy in the PhUippines, as well 
as everywhere else in the world, is not really that de- 
mocracy is wrong, but that there has not been enough 
participation by the people. That there is democracy on 
paper, but none in practice. I suppose the term “par- 
ticipatory,” as used by the Committee, tends to stress 
that we are trying to establish a democratic system not 
only on paper but in fact, in reality. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The last statements of Commis- 
sioner Concepcion seem to support the need for the 
descriptive word “participatory.” 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, precisely I am for that. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree that there is no participatory 
democracy in our country. Thus, it is the sense of the 
Committee that we would like to impress on our people 
the need for participatory democracy. That is why we 
urgently urge our colleagues in this Commission to 
kindly support our stand. 

Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have a few questions to the 
Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson may 
yield if he so desires. 


MR. TINGSON. I will be very glad to, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Would Commissioner Tingson 
agree with me that the word “democracy” was en- 
shrined in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Would the Commissioner agree 
with me that a preamble reflects — to borrow the word 
of Commissioner Nolledo — the vibrant and alive senti- 
ments, yearnings, sufferings and tribulations of our 
people? 

MR. TINGSON. It is beautifully said. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Would it not be better if, instead 
of using the controversial phrase “participatory de- 
mocracy,” we use a vibrant, alive and contemporaneous 
phrase, the “blessings of people’s power”? 

MR. TINGSON. Instead of “participatory democra- 
cy”? 

MR. SARMIENTO. “Participatory democracy” is too 
restrictive and it reminds us of a past era of darkness. 
Can we not say “blessings of people’s power,” since it 
reflects the contemporaneous needs, yearnings and 
aspirations of our people? 

MR. TINGSON. We did not have in mind merely the 
political aspect of participatory democracy; economic 
participation is needed too to make freedom alive. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But does not the Commissioner 
think that the phrase “people’s power” is too embracing 
to cover economic participatory democracy? 

MR. TINGSON. “People’s power” is more of a 
political connotation than otherwise. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I beg to disagree with Commis- 
sioner Tingson because the phrase “people’s power” 
would cover even economic, social and political power. 
Not only does it connote political power. 

MR. TINGSON. The trouble with using words that 
are of current usage simply because it caught the head- 
lines of the newspapers recently would make our 
Constitution something transitory in nature. We want a 
constitution that would endure until two hundred, three 
hundred years from now, and the phrase “people’s 
power” may be passe' at that particular time, but “par- 
ticipatory democracy” probably would endure longer. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Does not the Commissioner think 
that the term “people’s power” would be enduring and 
lasting since it reflects the collective will and collective 
power of our people? Not only “democracy,” which is 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


107 


Greek in origin, demos kratos — the power of the 
people, by the people and for the people — would last, 
but also “people’s power” although it is very contempo- 
raneous. It reflects the very present yearnings and 
longings of our people as actualized during the February 
25, 1 986 revolution. 

MR. TINGSON. That is why our Committee wanted 
to accommodate those among us here, including Com- 
missioner Sarmiento, who are so geared up, so to speak, 
to protect people’s democracy by using the phrase 
“participatory democracy,” meaning “people’s power” 
also. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have one last question to Com- 
missioner Tingson. May I know if the words “ideals” 
and “aspirations” cover the term “heritage”? Because I 
would like to amend so the phrase would read: “to 
establish a government that shall embody our HERI- 
TAGE, ideals and aspirations” in the Preamble. I think 
“heritage” refers to our tradition of struggle for free- 
dom and liberty, so it should not only be “ideals and 

aspirations.” 

MR- TINGSON. We .would be glad to accept and 
consider the written amendment of Commissioner 

Sarmiento. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. 

the VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is 

recognized. 

MR- RODRIGO. Mr. Vice-President, I have a dif- 
ferent approach to this issue on the use of the word 
“participatory.” Of all the parts of the Constitution, the 
Preamble is the one that is memorized even by grade 
school and high school students. So, unless absolutely 
ecessary, we should not use multisyllabic words which 
re not easy to pronounce. The word “par-ti-ci-pa-to-ry” 
has six syllables. A grade school student will find it hard 

to pronounce. 

Another approach is this: I suppose this Constitution 
will have a Pilipino version, so I was thinking, how do I 
translate “participatory” in Pilipino? All I can say is 
demokrasyang nilalahukan ng taong bayan, but that is 
redundant because talagang nilalahukan ng taong bayan 
ang demokrasya. And everybody knows the definition 
of democracy given by Lincoln — a government of the 
people, for the people, and by the people. And “by the 
people” connotes participation. So, those are my only 

comments. 

TADEO. Mr. Vice-President, hindi na po maka- 
tiis ang magbubukid sa talakayan tungkol sa tunay na 
kahulugan ng salitang demokrasya. Subalit bago ako 
dumako sa salitang demokrasya na pinag-uusapan, gusto 
ko munang linawin na maaari sigurong tanggalin na ang 
salitang “peace” na sinasabi ni Commissioner Bacani 


sapagkat naroon naman ang salitang katarungan. Kung 
nasaan ang katarungan, naroon ang kapayapaan. Ilagay 
natin sa kanayunan. Kapag ipinairal mo ang tunay na 
reporma sa lupa sa kanayunan, mawawala ang kaguluhan 
at magkakaroon ng kapayapaan. Ang unang pinakama- 
halaga’y katarungan. 

Pangalawa, maaari na ring tanggalin iyong “respect 
and dignity of human being or human rights.” Habang 
naroroon ang katarungan, iginagalang muna ang digni- 
dad ng tao at kanyang mga karapatan. Kamukha sa 
kanayunan, bakit naroon ang paglabag sa karapatan ng 
tao? Walang katarungan dahU naroroon ang feudalismo. 
lyon ang mitsa ng paglabag sa karapatan ng tao. Pero 
kapag pinairal mo ang tunay na reporma sa lupa sa kana- 
yunan, naroon na ang paggalang sa karapatan ng tao. 
Wala nang lalabag pa. Kaya maaaring tanggalin na ang 
nasabing mga salita para mapaikli pa natin ang ating 
Preamble. 

Tungkol naman dito sa gasgas na gasgas na salitang 
demokrasya, bakit nilagyan ng “participatory”? Sapag- 
kat ang demokrasya natin noon ay elitist and feudal. 
Ngunit ayaw din ng magbubukid ng salitang “par- 
ticipatory” sapagkat iyon ay nagiging dekorasyon 
lamang. Ang tinatawag na elitist democracy ay nabuo ng 
two-party system. Ang two-party system ang humubog 
sa elitist democracy na sinabi ni Commissioner Concep- 
cion, kaya’t nawala ang katarungan sa ating bansa. Ano 
ang mga salitang tama sa pananaw ng magbubukid na 
bumubuo sa 75 porsiyento ng mamamayan? Ang mga 
salitang tama ay “popular democracy.” Iyon ang mag- 
wawasak sa elitist democracy na hinubog ng ating 
sistemang pampulitika ayon sa interes ng mga dayuhan. 
Habang naroroon ang two-party system, mga kasama sa 
Kagalanggalang na Kapulungang ito, hindi natin mawa- 
wasak ang elitist democracy. Ang magwawasak lamang 
diyan, upang makamit natin ang tunay na demokrasya 
para sa mga tao, ay ang “popular democracy.” Ano ang 
ibig sabihin nito? Ang lahat ay maaari nang makilahok 
o makisali pati na ang “elite.” Ngunit kung pananatili- 
hin pa rin natin ang two-party system, sasabihin ko sa 
inyo na hindi tayo makaaalis, hindi tayo makahuhulag- 
pos sa elite democracy. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the distinguished sponsor 
yield to a few questions? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, Commissioner Maambong. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am sorry if I have to make 
reference again to the overused words “participatory 
democracy.” I seem to recall that in our study of 
Political Science, there seem to be two general types of 
democracy: One is direct democracy, where the people 


108 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


themselves perform functions of government; and the 
other is indirect or representative democracy, where the 
people themselves do not directly perform functions of 
government, but delegate these functions to the rep- 
resentatives of their own choice. This representative 
democracy has been mentioned by some authors as 
“popular democracy,” as used by Commissioner Tadeo. 

When the Committee uses the phrase “participatory 
democracy,” what type of democracy is the sponsor 
referring to? Is he referring to direct democracy or 
indirect democracy? 

I ask this question because there has been some 
allusions to “people’s power” in relation to the use of 
the phrase “participatory democracy.” 

I would like to believe that “people’s power” is not 
representative democracy. That is direct democracy. 

So, what does “participatory” mean, direct democra- 
cy or indirect democracy? 

MR. TINGSON. To begin with, we did agree to use 
the word “participatory” before “democracy” to ac- 
commodate the thinking of many of the Commissioners 
here, so that in a freewheeling discussion like what we 
are obviously enjoying now, they will be able to express 
themselves. But the Committee will be very happy to 
eliminate that phrase later on if that is the sense of this 
Commission. We are happy to be able to elicit participa- 
tion from the membership, which obviously we are 
succeeding this afternoon. We were thinking more of 
a direct, simple and readily understood kind of a de- 
mocracy by our people, because the majority of our 
people have never studied Political Science. And speak- 
ing of “participatory,” they do not understand it. They 
also do not understand habeas corpus, and yet we write 
it in our Constitution. There has to be some kind of a 
balance here. We are not writing a constitution so simple 
that it can be mangled later on. We want a constitution 
that would encompass all the segments of, say, de- 
mocracy. But we agree with the Commissioner that we 
would like to have direct participation by our people as 
they yearn to do and as they understand democracy to 
be. 

MR, MAAMBONG. We may be talking in legal terms, 
but it seems to me that the answer of Commissioner 
Tingson is that “participatory democracy” is direct 
democracy. I just want to clarify that because then we 
are changing the whole nature of our governmental 
system because under the Declaration of Principles in 
both the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions, we had a re- 
publican form of government, which is understood to be 
indirect democracy. There is no such thing as direct 
democracy in our country. It only happened a long time 
ago during the Grecian era. 

So, I would like to repeat my question: Did I hear the 
Commissioner correctly when he said that “participato- 
ry democracy,” per the interpretation of the Commit- 
tee, refers to a direct form of democracy where people 
themselves govern the functions of government? 


MR. TINGSON. We thought we were trying to ac- 
commodate the thinking of some of our fellow Com- 
missioners here; but then, I would say that this implies 
both direct and indirect democracy. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That brings us to another prob- 
lem because in the framing of the Constitution, we 
have to decide whether we are going to use direct de- 
mocracy or representative democracy. We cannot have 
both. So, may I ask the Commissioner to clarify his 
answer, because he said that “participatory democracy,” 
according to the Committee, refers to both direct and 
indirect democracy. 

MR. TINGSON. To me, in my own thinking, when 
the barangay people meet to consider proposals on how 
they could be relevant to the government, that is direct 
participation. That is direct participatory democracy. 
When we elect our senators and congressmen, that is 
representative democracy. So, it seems to me that 
“participatory democracy” here would carry both. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I just beg to disagree. 
Mention has been made of “participatory democracy” 
as used by former President Ferdinand Marcos, who said 
that there was “participatory democracy” in our coun- 
try during his time because he broadened the base of 
participation in government through representatives of 
the people. Under his concept, when barangay people 
meet, that is direct democracy. But that is indirect 
democracy. And the reason why he used the phrase 
“participatory democracy,” if I remember correctly, 
was that he broadened the base of participation of the 
people through their own representatives, which means 
that when he institutionalized the barangay system 
(which was previously known as the barrio) then the 
participation of the people in governmental function 
was increased. How was that done? It was done through 
the barangay captain and the barangay council. That 
was the meaning of the phrase, as used by Mr. Marcos, 
but there was no allusion at all to direct democracy 
when the barangay was instituted. 

Anyway, I would like to proceed to another point. 
There is mention here in the proposed Preamble of the 
word “equality.” I recall that in the 1935 Constitution, 
the word “equality” was never mentioned in its Pream- 
ble. It was only mentioned in the 1973 Constitution. So 
I would like to commend the Committee for using again 
the word “equality” in the present proposed Preamble. 
However, the word “equality” has several connotations 
to the people in the barangay. I come from a very small 
barangay of Asturias, Cebu, and over there, when we 
talk of equality, people think that this means everybody 
is equal. Considering the difficulty of explaining terms 
in the Constitution because we have to be very brief, I 
just would like to ask this clarification: When the Com- 
mittee uses the word “equality,” does it refer to 
natural equality among people, meaning, that equality 
given to them by nature which people enjoy in refer- 


TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 1986 


109 


ence to other people? Is that covered by the word 
“equality”? 

MR. TINGSON. To begin with, Commissioner 
Maambong, not all men are created equal. We have 
agreed on that. We are thinking more of giving every- 
body an equal chance at decent livelihood and in their 
participation in the economic and in the political 
aspects of developing our country. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Do I take it to mean that when 
the Committee uses the word “equality,” it does not 
mean natural equality? I would like to qualify that 
because the Commissioner mentioned that not all men 
are created equal. I would like to recall Abraham 
Lincoln’s Gettysburg address of 1863 where he said, in 
part, “dedicated to the proposition that all men are 
created equal;” he never said that all men are created 
equal. In other words, by nature, men are created but 
they are of varying intelligence and ability. Would the 
Committee consider that when we say equality, by 
nature people are created with varying intelligence and 
ability? 

MR. TINGSON. Actually, I must confess that we did 
j^ot discuss this at length. We would be very happy to 
take note of the Commissioner’s remarks on this. 

MR. MAAMBONG. But definitely, by common sense 
alone when we use the word “equality” in the Constitu- 
tion 'we really do not mean natural equality considering 
that’ people have varying intelligence and ability. Is my 
understanding correct? 

MR. TINGSON. I agree with Commissioner Maam- 
bong. 


MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, since we elimi- 
nate natural equality in the interpretation of the word 
“equality,” I would suppose that the Committee refers 
to political equality. Would that be a more correct 
interpretation? 

MR. TINGSON. Not only political equality but 
equality in economic opportunities. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is that what they call equality in 
opportunity? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That would be all. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you so much. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move for the 
adjournment of the session until tomorrow at three 
o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned 
until tomorrow at three o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 6:43 p.m. 


if. ■ -i» 




:f:;|KK^r*. *<{i' 


>W' 





s ■ ■ ^ > 
r^Cl‘ fiVt^ ^***^^i 

' r^V.-v- '■■• 


.w> 


W /'l .' fc ^ 


v«;» ^ 'f /vj. ' 

^.,,„ 'Vi . ' '’*A»‘' . 

4,'- 

“ "v'. 

-i.., ■-. , 




>*.>4^^ ^ ' -. v. <5./ 

' V- 

-^.t,;. ». ' ■»' ’ ’ •'■ V 

I * . ' 


.. - 

1/ > • ' ' 


!«“ ti- .v.'S<'‘ 

®:sii»L ^ ■ . ' f^* 


i»'‘ v‘” ' ' **■ 

' *-“ difa 


C-fi*' 




WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


111 


R.C.C. NO. 8 

Wednesday, June 11, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:12 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Florangel Rosario Braid. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


Nolledo Present 

Ople Present* 

Padilla Present 

Quesada Present 

Rama Present 

Regalado Present 

Reyes de los . . . Present 

Rigos Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 

Rosales Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 42 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

, . . Present 

Tingson . . . , 

, . . Present 

Trenas 

, . . Present 

Uka 

, . . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . . Present 

Villegas 

. . . Present 


PRAYER 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Almighty God, may Thy 
Spirit guide us so that we may truly understand the 
needs of our country. Sensitize us so that we may feel 
the pulse of our people, especially the poor and the dis- 
advantaged. As we celebrate Independence Day, we pray 
that our thoughts and actions will be infused with the 
spirit of our heroes who fought and fell in the night so 
that we would be free. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

the PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

, APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session and that we 
approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Floor Leader? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 


the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Aquino 

. Present 

Azeuna 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present* 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Colayco 

. Present 


Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present* 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present 

Lerum Present* 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 


MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Refer- 
ence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communication, the 
President making the corresponding references. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


112 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 74, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO CREATE AN INDEPENDENT CONSTI- 
TUTIONAL COMMISSION ON ETHICS AND ACCOUNT- 
ABILITY TO BE CALLED “COMMISSION ON PUBLIC 
accountability.” 

Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 75, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROfflBITING THE DESIGNA- 
TION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT 
AND OF THE OTHER COURTS CREATED BY LAW TO 
PERFORM NONJUDICIAL FUNCTIONS IN QUASI- 
JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES OR AGEN- 
CIES EXCEPT WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE MAJOR- 
ITY VOTE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE SENATE AND 
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. 

Introduced by Hon. Colayco. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 76, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING MODIFICATIONS TO THE 
LAW ON IMPEACHMENT TO MAKE IT MORE EFFECT- 
IVE BY DECLARING ANY VIOLATION OF THE CON- 
STITUTION AS SUFFICIENT GROUND THEREFOR, 
PROVIDING OTHER GROUNDS FOR IMPEACHMENT, 
REDUCING THE REQUIRED VOTES FOR INITIATION 
AND FOR CONVICTION, AND PROVIDING A LESSER 
DEGREE OF PROOF AS BASIS FOR CONVICTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public 
Officers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 77, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO GIVE MORE EMPHASIS TO EDUCA- 
TION AS THE KEY TO NATIONAL STABILITY AND 
UNITY AND THE FULLEST DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
PERSONALITY AND CAPABILITY OF THE CITIZEN, 
INCORPORATING FOR THAT PURPOSE IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON EDUCA- 
TION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 78, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AP- 
POINTMENT TO THE SUPREME COURT AND OTHER 
COURTS TO ENSURE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE 
JUDICIARY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


Proposed Resolution No. 79, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION IMPOSING HIGHER RATES OF 
TAXES ON IDLE PRIVATE AGRICULTURAL LANDS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 80, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ALLOWING SUITS AGAINST 
THE STATE OR ANY OF ITS POLITICAL SUBDIVISION 
OR INSTRUMENTALITY FOR DAMAGES SUSTAINED 
BY REASON OF AN ILLEGAL ACT OF OR NEGLECT 
OR FAILURE TO PERFORM AN OFFICIAL DUTY BY A 
PUBLIC OFFICIAL, MAKING THE LIABILITY SOLI- 
DARY WITH THE LATTER, ALLOWING THE STATE 
OR THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR INSTRU- 
MENTALITY TO BE REIMBURSED BY THE PUBLIC 
OFFICIAL OF WHAT IT MAY BE LIABLE TO PAY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 81, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF 
THE NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION AS A CONSTI- 
TUTIONAL AGENCY. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 82, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE SEPA- 
RATE AND DISTINCT FROM THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Ser- 
vices. 

Proposed Resolution No. 83, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE ENTIRE ARTICLE V, 1973 CONSTITU- 
TION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 84, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE WHOLE OF ARTICLE IV, 1973 CONSTI- 
TUTION EXCEPT SECTION 1 5 AS THE BILL OF 
RIGHTS OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION OF 1986. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


113 


To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 85, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT THE PREAMBLE OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION AS THE PREAMBLE OF THE 1986 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 86, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE ENTIRE ARTICLE II OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 87, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS ON THE PROTECTION OF 
WOMEN’S RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory 
and Declaration of Principles. ’ 

Proposed Resolution No. 88, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS TO DEFINE AND REORIENT 
THE ROLE OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIP- 
PINES. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 89, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 90, entitled: 

RESOLUTION REQUESTING HER EXCELLENCY, PRESI- 
DENT CORAZON C. AQUINO, TO DESIGNATE AND 
APPOINT A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE URBAN POOR 
TO THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon and Garcia. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 91, entitled: 

resolution urging the CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSION TO CONSIDER THE PEOPLE’S PROPOSAL 
FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SERVICES. 


Introduced by Hon. Gascon and Garcia. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 

COMMUNICATION 

Letter from Mr. Jose J. Ferrer, Jr., Chairman, Seventh 
House of Delegates of the Integrated Bar of the Philip- 
pines, submitting the resolutions adopted by the In- 
tegrated Bar of the Philippines at the Second Annual 
Convention of the Seventh House of Delegates and the 
proposals of the IBP Committee on Constitutional 
Amendments. 

(Communication No. 7 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I be allowed 
to raise points of minor correction and amendment to 
the proposed resolutions read in the Order of Business. 

In Proposed Resolution No. 87, the intention of the 
proponent was to have a coauthor, Sister Christine Tan. 
It might have been through some oversight of the staff 
that the name of Sister Christine Tan was omitted. The 
same situation might have applied to Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 88 wherein the intention of the proponent was 
to have Commissioner Edmundo Garcia as coauthor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let it be so recorded that Com- 
missioners Tan and Garcia be made coauthors of Pro- 
posed Resolution Nos. 87 and 88, respectively. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Madam President. 

This morning the Commission was presented, through 
the Office of the President, three copies of the draft 
proposal for the 1986 Constitution from the 1986 UP 
Law Constitution Project. I move that it be officially 
accepted by this Commission and that it form part of 
the official record for reference as working draft. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the draft proposal presented by 
the 1986 UP Law Constitution Project with the text m 
two separate volumes is hereby accepted and the same is 
made part of the records of the Commission and is 
referred to the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


114 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. In connection with the draft resolution 
or draft constitutions that have been submitted to us, I 
ask that Assistant Floor Leader Calderon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, ladies and 
gentlemen of this Commission: I have been asked by my 
colleagues in the 1971 Constitutional Convention, who 
are also my colleagues here in this 1986 Constitutional 
Commission, to convey to Commissioner Serafin 
Guingona our collective and personal gratitude for 
having officially presented to this body yesterday a 
revised draft of the 1973 Constitution from a commit- 
tee of former Con-Con delegates. This committee, toge- 
ther with current Good Government Commissioner 
Ramon Diaz, Audit Commissioner Teofisto Guingona 
and former President Diosdado Macapagal, worked until 
1985 to reframe the 1973 Constitution to make it more 
reflective of our people’s aspirations and removed from 
it the objectionable provisions believed to have been 
imposed by former President Marcos. In effect, this re- 
framed Constitution was the one originally framed by 
the 1971 Constitutional Convention minus the transi- 
tory provisions and other controversial provisions which 
Mr. Marcos used in order to nullify the intent of that 
body. Commissioner Guingona should be admired and 
congratulated for seeing the merit of this work and for 
advocating its use as our working draft even if he was 
not a member of the 1971 Constitutional Convention. 

May I remind this body that among the framers of 
that original draft were great Filipinos, living and dead, 
whose work in the Constitutional Convention cut across 
long years of service to the nation. I refer to people like 
former Governor Miguel Cuaderno, Sr., former Senator 
Raul Manglapus, former Secretary Felixberto Serrano, 
former President Diosdado Macapagal, Mr. Ramon Diaz, 
Dean Vicente G. Sinco, Dean Jose M. Aruego, Dr. Salva- 
dor Araneta, former Senator Juan Liwag, Dr. Sotero 
Laurel and others. These great men can still help us and 
guide us if we use their product as one of our working 
drafts for our deliberations. Also, this will shorten our 
working time. 

The original draft of the 1973 Constitution, minus 
the so-called Marcos provisions, was formulated after 
many months of discussions, debates and public hear- 
ings. If we go through the same process today, we will 
never finish our work in three months’ time. But with 
the refrained 1973 Constitution as our guide, together 
with the 1935 and 1899 Constitutions, we can save time 
by simply reexamining those provisions which were 
already the quintessence of months of discussion and 
public hearings. In short, we can telescope the work 
of months into weeks and, perhaps, even days. 

So, Madam President, in behalf of the former 
delegates of the 1971 Constitutional Convention who 


are present, I wish to reiterate our thanks to Com- 
missioner Guingona. I move that the draft presented 
yesterday by Commissioner Guingona be reproduced 
and made available to each of the Members of this body 
as one of their working drafts. 

I thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Calderon 
presenting a motion that the draft presented by Com- 
missioner Guingona be reproduced and made available 
to each Member of this body? 

MR. CALDERON. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General is directed to reproduce the 
said document and furnish all the Members with copies 
of the same. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The Ad Hoc Committee assigned to look 
into a possible alternative site, like the Legislative Build- 
ing or the PICC, for the Constitutional Commission, 
instead of this Batasang Pambansa is now ready to 
render its report. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know who the chairman 
of the committee is? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I am the Chairman of 
the Committee. The Ad Hoc Committee was commis- 
sioned to do two things: First, to explore the possibility 
of an alternative site for the Constitutional Commission; 
and, second, to thresh out the problem and the question 
on whether we should move our session from afternoon 
to morning. 

The first issue. Madam President, was resolved this 
morning by the Committee which is composed of Com- 
missioners Bengzon, Calderon, Jamir and Romulo. This 
morning, we went to the Legislative Building, specifi- 
cally the Senate, and found out that its hall has been 
converted to an elaborate session hall but without 
galleries. Therefore, even as a site for our committee 
hearings, we believe that the Senate session hall will not 
do. 

Then, we went to the PICC and looked over its facili- 
ties. According to PICC Administrator Andres Navato 
they have all the facilities for the Constitutional Com- 
mission. There are over 100 rooms which could accom- 
modate all the Members of the Commission. The rooms 
are splendidly furnished and the appointments are 
excellent. This is so because the PICC was really con- 
structed to accommodate the participants to the IMF 
Convention held a decade ago. The facilities and the 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


115 


furnishings are according to the standards of a five-star 
hotel. The rooms which are bigger than our rooms here 
are fully air-conditioned unlike our present rooms which 
look primitive. It has facilities for caucuses and a session 
hall which is a little smaller than the Batasan session 
hall. It has also a very big plenary session hall which 
would be too big and too expensive for our purposes. 
The view is really excellent and security is not a 
problem. So, the Committee has agreed and is unani- 
mously and strongly recommending that we move to 
that site as soon as possible. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the facilities for our 
personnel? Could the 369 personnel, more or less, be 
also accommodated in that building? We are not after 
ostentatious rooms and so on, but we are just concerned 
with the convenience not only of the Commissioners 
but also of our personnel. 

MR. RAMA. There is enough space, as a matter of 
fact, Madam President. The space for the personnel here 
could be doubled there. As I said, there are rooms for 
holding caucuses; lounges are everywhere; communica- 
tion facilities are perfect — it has also a post office — and 
it is accessible. So, it is the unanimous view of the ad 
hoc committee that the PICC would be a much better 
site than this Batasan Complex for the 1986 Constitu- 
tional Commission. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I pose just one question: Is this 
for free or are we to pay rental? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, these facilities and 
spaces have been idle and have not been used for many 
months now. Section 9, paragraph 8 of Proclamation 
No. 9 which creates the Constitutional Commission 
says: 

The Batasang Pambansa building and premises are here- 
by made available for use of the Commission. All govern- 
ment entities, agencies and instrumentalities shall place at 
the disposal of the Commission such personnel, premises, 
and furniture thereof as can, in their judgment, be spared 
without detriment to the public service, without cost, 
refund or additional pay. 

Madam President, of course, under normal circum- 
stances they charge rentals but considering we are the 
Constitutional Commission created by Proclamation 
No. 9 we need not pay any rental. As a matter of fact, it 
is just a matter of negotiating with the Central Bank 
which owns the PICC. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, so there is need 
for negotiation yet. Be sure we do not pay any rental. 
Should we not wait until the negotiation with the 


Central Bank is finalized so that we would be sure 
whether we pay rental or not or if we do, how much 
because our appropriation is limited? 

THE PRESIDENT. Another point the Chair would 
like to bring up is the inconvenience and the high 
transportation cost that would entail the personnel 
involved in committee meetings most of whom are living 
near the Batasan area. 

MR. RAMA. At any rate, Madam President, as far as 
the cost is concerned, actually we also pay for the 
power we consume here in the Batasang Pambansa 
Complex. 

THE PRESIDENT. Before the Commission finally 
acts on the report of the Committee, I suggest that we 
consult the Secretariat first. 

MR. RAMA. We have no objection. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Anyway, I understand that the 
Committee was given up to Monday to finish its report. 
Could this consultation be made on Friday or anytime 
today? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President, we will make 
consultations with the Secretariat. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Just one point of inquiry, Madam 
President. 

Since Proclamation No. 9 specifically chose the Bata- 
san Complex as the primary venue for this Commission 
and provided for supplementary sites that we may use, 
will the committees’ moving to a new site not involve or 
necessitate an amendment of Proclamation No. 9? 

MR. RAMA. I do not think so. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I answer that in this sense: I 
think Commissioner Rodrigo could still remember one 
occasion when the President said that after we will have 
been fully constituted, we will be totally free to make 
whatever changes we may want. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. May I quote again Section 9, paragraph 
8 of Proclamation No. 9: 

... All government entities, agencies and instrumentalities 
shall place at the disposal of the Commission such person- 
nel, premises, and furniture thereof as can, in their judg- 
ment, be spared without detriment to the pubUc service, 
without cost, refund or additional pay. 


116 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1 1 , 1986 


Madam President, regarding the possible change of 
time of our sessions, we have talked to some of the 
reporters and a great majority of them said that the 
three o’clock session is quite all right for them because 
their papers are morning dailies and they have adequate 
time to catch up with their deadlines. And with the 
transfer of the Constitutional Commission to PICC, 
there would be no problem for them in commuting to 
their offices in Manila. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you, honorable Floor 
Leader. So, we could take action on the whole report 
by Monday? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I simply would like 
to register an observation regarding the Committee’s 
report. 

I think in terms of process it is very important. I 
understand the basic reason the Commissioners would 
want to transfer, but I believe that we are able to do our 
work really because of the support staff, especially the 
Secretariat. To be very fair, I think we have to consult 
them first before we take action on the report. It is a 
major undertaking to transfer. I am sure they have 
prepared months for this Commission, and I feel it is 
only fair that the Secretariat be consulted. 

Mr. RAMA. It is also important. Madam President, 
that the public see and hear us without too much cost 
for them. The Batasan Complex is very far away, and I 
think PICC, which is right there in Manila, is a site 
where public hearings would be more accessible. 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly, I understand that this is very 
important, but I feel this session must be a collective 
effort between us and the support staff without whom 
we cannot do our work. I feel that is very important in 
terms of process. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Madam President. 

For the record, it should be explicitly stated that the 
consideration and reason for the intention to transfer 
the venue of the plenary sessions of this Commission is 
not so much the convenience, the comfort and the 
security of the Commissioners as it is really our commit- 
ment to maximum public participation in the delibera- 
tions of this Commission. The way it was presented by 


the honorable Commissioner Rama and the way the soft 
sell or the hard sell on the promise of appointments and 
comfort may be an unflattering reflection of the predis- 
position of the Commission when presented in media. It 
should be explicitly stated for the record that the con- 
sideration is that we want to maximize public participa- 
tion in the deliberation of this Commission. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. I have stated that precisely. Accessibility 
to the public is very important here. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I invite 
the attention of the honorable Commissioners; this 
Commission has been provided by the Ministry of 
General Services, through the Administrator, Mr. Roberto 
San Andres, with a support staff of 93 persons who 
are working with and for us subject to the administra- 
tive supervision and control of our Secretary-General 
but are being paid from the funds of the Ministry of 
General Services. So, perhaps, the Committee could 
inquire as to whether or not we could receive the same 
kind of support, if we transfer to another venue. The 
support that we are getting consists not only of main- 
teiiance and security but also of other support ac- 
tivities, such as engineering, and so forth, which we get 
from the ministry for free in the sense that we do not 
pay the salaries of the personnel concerned. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 72 
(Adopting a Preamble to the Constitution) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Unfin- 
ished Business, the continuation of the consideration of 
Committee Report No. 1 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 72. We are still in the period of sponsorship. 

I ask that the sponsor. Commissioner Tingson, be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. Madam President. 

The Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles is grateful for the careful atten- 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


117 


tion and avid interest the Members of this distinguished 
body did show yesterday in composing the words of the 
Preamble to the draft Constitution. Each of us has his or 
her own experience with the Preambles of the 1935 
and the 1973 Constitutions, especially with that of the 
fonner. It is an experience that has a moral and spiritual 
dimension. It is doubtless true that our schoolchildren 
and young people, as far as the Constitution is con- 
cerned, are molded more by the words of the Preamble 
than by any other provisions of the Constitution. The 
words would come tumbling down in sonorous cadences 
in their minds and even in our minds too any time of 
the day or night. The experience is often haunting as if 
the words were part of a sacred ritual. Whenever we 
recall the words and the phrases as they roll one after 
the other, it is very like an affirmation of our being a 
part of a nation under God. I have no doubt whatsoever. 
Madam President, that if God Himself were a Member of 
this august Commission, He would want most to be- 
come a member of this humble Committee on Preamble. 
The Preamble of the Constitution shows who wrote it, 
who ordained and promulgated it. It serves as the by- 
line to the sacred document. In that same breath the 
Preamble announces the great aims and purposes for 
which we are establishing a government. It is a moral 
exercise in words and the most important where our 
government is concerned. The Committee on Preamble, 
therefore, is only too happy to note that its work 
receives careful attention and the most lively interest, as 
evidenced by our colleagues yesterday. 

Is it possible to capture in a few words the soul of 
our country? I doubt it very much. Madam President. 
But if it were possible, then I say that those words 
should form the Preamble to the Constitution we are 
writing. Our talents are woefully inadequate. And how 
we all wish Jose Rizal, Apolinario Mabini and Claro M. 
Recto were here so that we could have a Preamble we 
could all approve even without thinking. But we must 
think because these departed great men of Philippine 
letters cannot be present with us. While we are guided 
by our past Constitutions, upon us, nevertheless, has 
fallen the burden of distilling the words of our peoples’ 
ideals and aspirations at the present time. But we may 
not go too far afield in our quest for formulas, neither 
are we allowed to weigh in the balance our personal 
emotions. Our special interests and unique experiences 
might not be given value as they are, but they should 
always be seen in the context of the whole country and 
the world and, more important, from the wider 
perspective of histoty. After all, we are not a unique 
people and neither is our national experience unique. 
We share a common bond with the rest of the people of 
the world and with history, more than our special love 
for the Philippines would otherwise suggest. The path to 
national self-respect and independence to freedom, 
equality and justice is well beaten. More than to experi- 
ment we are enjoined to exorcise some evils so as to 
render a new Constitution, a tabula rasa, a clean slate 
of our most sincere intentions. Our tasks. Madam Presi- 


dent and colleagues, are clear in their outlines. But may 
I say what I believe to be our deep concern — that the 
Preamble of the new Constitution will once more con- 
firm the constitutional Trinity of God Almighty, the 
spirit of democracy and the Filipino people. 

Our Committee submits to this august body that 
our proposed Preamble has adequately met the criteria 
of good Preambles: namely, (1) substance — what are 
the ideas which must correspond faithfully to the 
Filipino identity and goals; (2) syntax - how ideas are 
sequenced, must be consistent with the relation and 
prioritization of the ideas, (3) lexica - what words 
represent the ideas, must convey the ideas as best as 
possible, must be immune from misleading connota- 
tion, must minimize overlapping of meanings; (4) trans- 
lation — must be translatable into Pilipino and other 
major dialects of our country, (5) phonology - how 
the composition sounds to the ear, must sound nice, 
although this is subjective; and (6) length — how long is 
the Preamble, must be brief and concise as much as 
possible. 

To summarize, did we meet the good criteria of 
substance and legal craftsmanship? Our answer. Madam 
President, is yes, we have met this criterion adequately 
well. The legal minds of this body kept on telling me 
personally that in essence the Preamble of the Constitu- 
tion is obiter dicta - that legal minds do not even go to 
the Preamble on which to base their legal decisions. May 
I ask my colleagues, if indeed the Preamble is obiter 
dicta, why did they insist on their own favorite proposals 
in this Preamble? Why not rather be satisfied that then- 
proposals found their way into the Declaration of 
Principles or into the provision on social justice since 
they are not obiter dicta anyway? We are here to just 
enunciate the Preamble in beautiful language of poetry 
as Commissioner Ople did insinuate yesterday, and in 
simple words as Commissioner Rodrigo did say yester- 
day. We are willing to obliterate or delete the word 
“participatory,” for instance, if that is what the body 
wants. What the Committee wanted to say is that we 
were asked by the Committee leadership to start the ball 
rolling so that we could come up with a Constitution 
before September 2. So, the Committee begs the body 
to give way to this advice: If the Members truly believe 
in their proposals, let us not lengthen the wordings of 
the Preamble. Rather, let their proposals be in the other 
portions of the Constitution, which, in the language of 
the wise legal minds here, are not obiter dicta. 

Madam President, for the information of my 
colleagues here, we prayed before the Committee 
started its work and after it adjourned today. So, for 
emphasis then, may I be permitted to quote again the 
proposed Preamble prepared by the Committee: 

WE, THE SOVEREIGN FILIPINO PEOPLE, IMPLOR- 
ING THE GUIDANCE OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, TO 

ESTABLISH A GOVERNMENT THAT SHALL EMBODY 

OUR IDEALS AND ASPIRATIONS, PROMOTE THE 

COMMON GOOD, CONSERVE AND ENHANCE OUR 


118 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


PATRIMONY AND SECURE TO OURSELVES AND OUR 
POSTERITY THE BLESSINGS OF PARTICIPATORY 
DEMOCRACY UNDER A RULE OF JUSTICE, PEACE, 
FREEDOM AND EQUALITY, DO ORDAIN AND PRO- 
MULGATE THIS CONSTITUTION. 

Thank you. Madam President, and in behalf of the 
Committee, I am now ready for interpellation. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished sponsor yield to 
some clarificatory questions? 

MR. TINGSON. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, when the proposed 
Preamble was read yesterday by Commissioner Rosario 
Braid and this afternoon by the sponsor, the word 
“Filipino” still appeared. On page 2 of the committee 
report, however, the following is one of the proposed 
amendments; “No. 1. On line 5, delete the word Filipi- 
no.” Is the Committee now withdrawing this particular 
amendment? 

MR. TINGSON. We are not withdrawing nor are we 
accepting really any amendment. We will leave it to the 
floor. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. The Committee recommended 
the deletion of the word “Filipino.” 

MR. TINGSON. That is a typographical error. 
Madam President. We did not delete the word “Filipi- 
no.” 

MR. DAVIDE. So, the first recommended amend- 
ment on page 2 of the report should not really be in the 
report, because the first proposed amendment is to 
delete on line 5 the word “Filipino.” 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I repeat. The 
official draft of the Committee includes the word 
“Filipino.” 

MR. DAVIDE. I see. So, we will just disregard the 
first proposed amendment by the Committee. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Another point: Has the Committee 
finally decided on what the scope of participatory 
democracy should be? Should it mean direct demo- 
cracy? 

MR. TINGSON. I think our Committee expressed 
the fact yesterday that it would cover both direct and 
representative democracy. 


MR. DAVIDE. If it would be both, what should the 
mechanics for its expression in terms of the system of 
government be? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I was told by legal 
minds here that the Committee does not have any 
authority to answer questions like that; that the author- 
ity is the Committee on the Legislative or the Judicia- 
ry. We just want to keep the ball rolling and approve the 
Preamble, a collective prayer of the country. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. TINGSON. So, Madam President, I cannot 
answer that question. It should be answered by other 
committees, although I yield the floor to a legal mind. 
Commissioner Nolledo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized to answer that particular question. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

The distinguished Gentleman from Cebu will find 
out, if he looks at the wordings of the draft Preamble, 
that the basic purpose of the Preamble is: 

... to establish a government that shall embody our ideals 

and aspirations, promote the common good, conserve and 

enhance our patrimony and secure to ourselves and our 

posterity the blessings of participatory democracy . . . 

We will notice that the basic things should be done by 
the government because the purpose of the Constitution 
is to set forth the framework of government. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And so when we use the expression 
“participatory,” we would like to emphasize the need 
for participation by the people in the attainment of the 
aims of the Constitution. We do not like the government 
to do everything alone. We would like the government 
to be a partner of the people in the attainment of 
developmental goals. So, when we talk of participatory 
democracy, we do not necessarily refer to the system of 
government because, as indicated by the distinguished 
Gentleman from Cebu, Commissioner Maambong, there 
are two kinds of democracy: the direct democracy, 
which is practically mob rule and the indirect de- 
mocracy, which is electing the representatives of the 
people. We think that these kinds of democracy have no 
direct bearing to the expression “participatory.” So 
when we elect our representatives, we participate in the 
noble task of democratic expressions. 

MR. DAVIDE. But I really see no point in discussing 
democracy, if it is to be qualified by the word “parti- 
cipatory.” If we have to qualify, then we really have to 
give meaning to democracy. There can be no question 
that we should be under a democratic system of govern- 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11,1986 


119 


nient. But the whole trouble is; If we mean participato- 
ry democracy as direct democracy, what will happen to 
the other provisions of the Constitution like the legis- 
lative power, the executive power? So, it is really 
suggested that we clearly define what the meaning of 
participatory democracy is. If it is direct, then we 
abolish the executive and the legislative powers. If it is 
representative, which shall also be embodied in the 
Declaration of Principles when the declaration states 
that the Philippines is a republican state, then we 
exactly define in the Preamble the true meaning of 
“participatory.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think it is not necessary to define 
the true meaning of participatory democracy. I would 
say we could express the intention of the Commission 

here. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I disagree that it is 
not necessary to define the meaning of participatory 
democracy in the Preamble because all the succeeding 
articles of the Constitution are also governed by the 
wordings of the Preamble. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee, through the 
sponsor, has categorically stated that the expression 
“participatory democracy” includes both direct and 
indirect democracy. 

When the people vote for their representatives, then 
the representations enjoy a particular term; but if they 
cannot perform the task expected of them, perhaps the 
people, through .peaceful means as had happened last 
February in a show of people’s power, would take the 
law into their hands, not through violent means, but 
through peaceful means. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, the Committee only 
wanted to show that our democracy must really be 
genuine and authentic. So, in order to avoid the possi- 
bility of misinterpretation, instead of using the word 
“participatory” why not use the word “authentic ? 

MR. TINGSON. That does not seem to be euphonic, 
so I would suggest the word “vibrant.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Again, there was a question on 
whether to use “Almighty God” or “Divine Providence,” 
the Committee had opted to use “Divine Providence” as 
contained in both the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. 
Would Commissioner Tingson agree with me that 
“Divine” means of God or from God, or an attribute of 

God? 

MR. TINGSON. “Divine” would be God himself. It is 
an attribute of God, but we refer to God himself. 

MR. DAVIDE. The term “Divine” is an attribute of 
God. but it is not God himself. 


MR. TINGSON. The word “Divine” is not God him- 
self. It is an attribute of God. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does the word “Providence” mean 
God Himself? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. The phrase “Divine Providence” 
in that Preamble would be “God Almighty.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Is divinity part of God or the at- 
tribute of God? Do we need to qualify “Providence” 
with “Divine” since “Providence” simply means God 
Himself? 

MR. TINGSON. We have to because “Providence” is 
also the name of a state in the United States. 

MR. DAVIDE . I see. 

MR. TINGSON. So, it should be “Divine Provi- 
dence.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Does the Commissioner agree with me 
that “Providence” simply means God Himself and God 
Himself is divine? So, would not the use of the word 
“Divine” be a superfluity? 

MR. TINGSON. No. It would not. Another reason 
why we want to repeat that phrase “Divine Providence” 
is that we also want a beautiful bridge from the past to 
the present and this was used in the 1935 and 1973 
Constitutions. 

MR. DAVIDE. But would the Commissioner not 
agree with me that if we make reference to God, it is 
not a question of beautiful phraseology because God 
Himself is already beautiful? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, but we also need to express to 
Him beautiful words especially in prayer. 

MR. DAVIDE. Instead of describing Him in beautiful 
words, can we not just simply say “Almighty”? 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, we can say “Almighty God.” 

MR. DAVIDE. So, would the Commissioner accept a 
possible amendment during the period of amendments 
to change “Divine Providence” to “Almighty God”? 

MR. TINGSON. The body would decide on that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Commissioner Tingson; 
thank you. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


120 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I like to hear these discussions and interpellations, 
including the sponsorship. In fact, I learned so much 
from these; but I think we have discussed this the whole 
afternoon yesterday and for about one hour today. Al- 
though we interpret the rules as liberally as we like to 
do, still we have overextended ourselves on the matter 
of sponsorship. 

I, therefore, move that we close the period of spon- 
sorship and debate and proceed to the period of amend- 
ments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is sub- 
mitting a motion to close the period of sponsorship and 
debate. Is there any objection to the motion? 

Commissioner Garcia is recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, yesterday I with- 
drew my motion for deferment of the resolution pre- 
cisely to allow a freewheeling discussion on the 
Preamble, on the condition that there would be no 
amendments or voting. Since the Preamble is an impor- 
tant part of the Constitution, we have, therefore, agreed 
to postpone finalizing its draft until after a substantive 
debate on issues and other matters has been done. So, I 
propose that we follow the procedure. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I would like 
to quote from the Journal which says: 

• . . Mr. Garcia withdrew his motion on the condition that 

a freewheeling discussion on the proposed Preamble be 

made without any amendment or voting . . . 

Since there are many unresolved fundamental issues 
such as that on direct, participatory or representative 
democracy, I think it would be premature for us to 
close the discussions on the subject. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, it seems that the 
motion of Commissioner de Castro has two parts. The 
first part asks for a termination of the freewheeling dis- 
cussion and the second part asks that we proceed to the 
period of amendments. I, myself, support the idea of 
terminating the freewheeling discussion since we agreed 
yesterday that we would not yet go into the period of 
amendments until we have discussed the rest of the 
Constitution. I, therefore, suggest that we terminate the 
freewheeling discussion and move to the other business 
and lay aside the Preamble for a while. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner de 
Castro say? 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, if we approve 
the termination of the freewheeling discussion and 
debate, the next move in our Rules is the period of 
amendments. However, SEC. 23 of our Rules provides: 

. . . On the day set for the consideration of a resolution for 
Second Reading, the same shall be read in full with the 
amendments proposed by the Committee, if any, unless 
copies thereof have been distributed and such reading is 
dispensed with. Thereafter, the resolution shall be subject 
to debate and pertinent motions. 

SEC. 24 states: 

. . . During the Second Reading of a resolution, a motion 
to close the debate shall be in order after three speeches 
for and two against, or after only one speech for has been 
delivered if none has been entered against it. 

Madam President, these Rules are made so that we 
can meet the 90-day period of our work. If we con- 
tinue this freewheeling discussion on such words like 
“participatory,” “develop ” and “Divine Providence,” 
I am afraid that when we come to the meat of the 
Constitution, we shall never meet our deadlines. 

I, therefore, move that we close the period of spon- 
sorship and debate and proceed to the period of amend- 
ments as stated in the Rules. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:14 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 4:21 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. • 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I will amend my motion, and it is to terminate the 
period of sponsorship and debate on the matter of the 
Preamble. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to terminate the period of sponsorship and 
debate on the Preamble? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


121 


MR. PADILLA. May I be permitted to make some 
observations and interpellations before we terminate 
the period of sponsorship and debate as suggested? I 
presided over the session yesterday and I was not able to 
express some views. 

THE PRESIDENT. I see. Is Commissioner de Castro 
willing to withdraw his motion for the time being? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Willingly, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President may now 
proceed. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Personally, I approved the change of the word “aid” 
to “GUIDANCE” and “Divine Providence” to “AL- 
MIGHTY GOD,” as suggested by Commissioner Bacani. 

We all agreed on the insertion of the words “AND 
aspirations,” the change of the word “general 
welfare” to “COMMON GOOD ” and the retention of 
the word “develop” rather than “ENHANCE.” 

Yesterday, I heard Commissioner Romulo speak of 
the safeguard or the protection of human rights. Does 
the sponsor have any objection to insert after “COM- 
MON GOOD” the phrase PROTECT HUMAN 
rights? 

MR. TINGSON. We discussed this at our committee 
meeting this morning, and we agreed that the Vice- 
President’s idea carries more force and will not be an 
obiter dicta, if it will be included in the other provisions 
of the Constitution. The idea of protecting human rights 
is already included in the phrase “under a regime of 

justice.” 

MR PADILLA. It may, but perhaps a three-word 
h ase may be more impressive. I am also of the opinion 
h t we should not qualify “democracy” with any 
adjective, not even the word “participatory.” 

^ vt auestion is: When we speak of “blessings,” it 
that we limit this word only to democracy. Will 
^u®*”cnonsor consider the idea that after “democracy” 
the truth, PEACE, FREEDOM AND PROG- 

RESS then to be followed by “under a regime of law, 
Justice and equity do ordain and promulgate this Consti- 
tution”? 

MR. TINGSON. Instead of the word “equality” we 
use the word “EQUITY”? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. 

MR. TINGSON. The Committee would like to know 
the difference between “equality” and “equity.” 

MR PADILLA. My first suggestion is to add the 
words PEACE, FREEDOM after “blessings of de- 


mocracy.” Then, as suggested by Commissioner de 
Castro, add the word TRUTH after “blessings of de- 
mocracy.” To this I would add PROGRESS OR PROS- 
PERITY because this is our aspiration. We are suffer- 
ing; many people are really poor; there is unemploy- 
ment, business recession, lack of productivity and 
others. There is no creation of wealth We should 
express the ideals and aspirations of our people for the 
enjoyment of the blessings of democracy and truth 
because in the past there have been so many deviations, 
if not distortions, of the truth through false propaganda. 
I think our people are entitled to the truth as suggested 
by Commissioner de Castro. I would then add AND 
PROGRESS OR PROSPERITY after the phrase “under 
a rule of law” since the Committee has changed the 
word “regime” to “RULE.” We, lawyers, most of the 
time, pray in our pleadings. In accordance with the law, 
we end with a general relief, justice and equity. Now the 
word “equality” does not appear in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion. It was inserted in the 1973 Constitution, and I 
remember the observations of Commissioner Villegas 
that he would prefer the word “equity” to “equality.” 
Of course, we must have equality before the law; we 
must have equal opportunity, but the word “equality” 
by itself might also lead some people to a misconception 
- that while we are all born equal, there is no such thing 
as economic or financial equality. All we can guarantee 
is equal opportunity, and, of course, equality before the 
law. Some of these ideas have also been the results of 
my observations to interpellations of the other Members 
of this Commission. They are just food for thought, if 
the Committee will consider. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. It is 
good to hear these observations. 

MR. PADILLA. I was thinking that what we want our 
people to enjoy, not only of this generation but also of 
the future generation, are blessings. However, under the 
proposal it seems that we are limiting these blessings 
only to democracy, and then we only say “under a 
regime of justice, peace, freedom and equality.” So, 
these are just some suggestions for consideration. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Francisco A. Rodrigo. 

MR. TADEO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Tadeo is recognized. 

MR. TADEO. Mr. Presiding Officer, mayroon po 
kasing mahalagang tanong si Commissioner Bias Ople 
kahapon na totoong makabuluhan. Ang tanong niya ay 
kung ano ang pagkakaiba ng Preamble ng Saligang Batas 


122 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 1 1 , 1 986 


ng 1986 sa Preamble ng mga Saligang Batas ng 1898, 
1935 at 1973. Napakagandang katanungan. At kahapon 
pa ay nag-isip na ang mga magbubukid kung ano ang 
mapapaloob sa ating Preamble na maglalarawan ng ideals 
at aspirations ng sambayanang Pilipino. Nakita ng mga 
magbubukid ang dalawang bagay na dapat nitong 
taglayin upang ito ay maiba sa 1898, 1935 at 1973 
Preambles. Nakita namin na sa “Divine Providence’’ na 
pinalitan ng “ALMIGHTY GOD” ang dapat na ipalit ay 
GOD OF HISTORY, isang Diyos ng Kasaysayan, kung 
saan ang Diyos ay buhay na buhay na kasama ng mga 
magbubukid, manggagawa, urban poor at mga tao sa 
EDSA. Kung ang gagamitin natin ay “Divine Providence” 
o kaya ay ang “Almighty God,” para bagang ang Diyos 
na iyan ay hiwalay sa atin. Ngunit kung ang gagamitin 
natin ay Diyos ng Kasaysayan, ang Diyos ay kasama sa 
kasalukuyan ng sambayanang Pilipino. Ito ang dahilan 
kaya gusto po namin itong baguhin. Kinakailangang 
magkaroon ito ng pagkakaiba. Tama ang sinabi ng Kasa- 
mang Commissioner Bias Ople. Ano ang pagkakaiba 
kapag pinalitan natin ng “God of History”? Ang Diyos 
ay buhay na buhay na kasama natin sa ating pakikibaka. 

Pangalawa na ginugusto ng magbubukid: Gaya ng 
sinabi namin, ang “participatory democracy” ay humihi- 
kayat ng two-party system na siyang humuhubog 
naman ng “elite democracy.” Upang makahulagpos na 
tayo sa American model, sa kuko ng lawin at agila, at 
upang ipakilala ng 1986 Con-Com ang kanyang pagkaka- 
iba, kinakailangang lagyan na natin ito ng “popular de- 
mocracy” na siyang magwawasak sa “elite democracy.” 

Minsan pa akong tumindig. Sinasabi ninyo na ang 
mapapaloob sa ating Preamble ay ang ideals and aspira- 
tions of the Filipino people. Nagsasalita sa inyong 
harapan ngayon ang kinatawan ng mga magbubukid na 
bumubuo ng 75 percent ng ating populasyon. Sinasabi 
nating ang Preamble ang magbibigay direksyon; “bed- 
rock” and “destination.” Kapag pinalitan natin ang “Al- 
mighty God” ng “God of History” at nilagyan natin 
ng “popular democracy,” masasabi nating tama si 
Ginoong Ople na nabago natin ang Preambles ng 1898, 
1935 at 1973 Constitutions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. With the indulgence of Commis- 
sioner de Castro and before he rises on his motion, I rise 
on a point of parliamentary inquiry. I would like to 
know the parliamentary situation now, but before the 
Chair rules on the inquiry, I would like to recall that 
under our Rules, once the Committee to which a resolu- 
tion has been referred makes a committee report within 
1 0 days, that committee report should be scheduled for 
Second Reading. Within that period on Second Reading, 
the resolution is submitted for sponsorship, after which 
it is again scheduled for further consideration. Then, 
there will be amendments to the resolution. As stated 


in Commissioner Rodrigo’s amendment which is Section 
27 of our Rules, after the period of amendments we will 
have the approval of the resolution on Second Reading. 

I would like to find out if we are indeed on Second 
Reading, specifically on sponsorship. If we are on the 
period of sponsorship, the Rules does not provide the 
time limit for the sponsorship and debates. I believe 
that in the absence of the Rules, since we" are under time 
constraint, it would be for the good and sound judg- 
ment of the Constitutional Commission to limit the 
time for this period. So, I would like to know if we are 
indeed in the period of sponsorship and debate. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair sees the situation that we are in the period of 
interpellations on Second Reading. We are not yet in 
the period of amendments. However, there was a 
motion filed by Commissioner de Castro asking for a 
suspension of the discussion. Somebody, I think Com- 
missioner Padilla, stood up, wanting to make some 
statements, and Commissioner de Castro withdrew his 
motion temporarily. So, that is the situation now. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, if such is 
the situation, then I would like to believe that the 
motion of Commissioner de Castro would be to end the 
debate and sponsorship on Second Reading. Would that 
be correct? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner de Castro can answer that better. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, that is my motion. The Rules 
is very specific and the intention is to shorten our de- 
bate with better understanding because we have only 90 
days to finish the draft of our Constitution. I was just 
thinking that if the Preamble of the Constitution which, 
according to the sponsor is an obiter dicta, takes time to 
discuss, then the meat of the Constitution will take 
more time; so, heaven knows when we shall be able to 
finish this Constitution. I, therefore, move for the 
resolution of my motion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). If the 
Commissioner is withdrawing his motion he will have to 
refde it. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am not withdrawing my motion. 
I just gave our Vice-President the floor for the mean- 
time. I will repeat my motion. Having discussed the 
Preamble since yesterday and for two hours the whole 
afternoon today, I move that we close the period of dis- 
cussions, interpellations, sponsorships and debates on 
the said Preamble. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
motion seconded? 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


123 


SEVERAL MEMBERS. We second the motion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; Com- 
missioner de Castro’s motion is approved. 

Commissioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, am I needed 
here or can I go back to my seat? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I ask for a suspension of the session. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 4:40 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:45 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Garcia be 

recognized. 

the presiding OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Garcia is recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I move that we defer consideration of the Preamble 
until after substantial debate on other issues on the 

Constitution is made. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
anyone who will second the motion? 

A MEMBER. I second the motion. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection to the motion? ( Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP 

MR. RAMA. I move for the approval of some changes 
in the composition of the committees. I move for the 


transfer of Commissioner Teodoro C. Bacani from the 
Committee on Human Resources to the Committee on 
Social Justice and Social Services. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. I move for the approval of another 
change in the composition of committees. I move for 
the transfer of Commissioner Efrain B. Trenas from the 
Committee on Social Justice and Social Services to the 
Committee on Human Resources. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for the 
election of Commissioner Ponciano L. Bennagen to the 
Committee on Local Governments in lieu of Commis- 
sioner Jose C. Colay CO. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. ask that Commissioner Tingson be 
recognized. ^ 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. I had to be there at the back for a 
little while and I was caught unaware regarding the 
motion that Commissioner Garcia presented a while ago. 
And when the Presiding Officer asked for any objection, 

I was on my way to the rostrum that I did not have a 
chance to object to it. I would like to ask for a recon- 
sideration of that motion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). There is 
a motion to reconsider the approval of the motion of 

Commissioner Garcia. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. GARCIA. I move that we defer consideration of 
the Preamble until after substantive debate on other 
issues on the Constitution is made. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We have 
reconsidered the approval of that motio^n, so 
Commissioner Tingson want to propound some ques- 
tions? 

MR. TINGSON. If I am not mistaken, there is no 
other Business for the Day. If we consider ommis 
sioner Garcia’s motion and then we adjourn, we will be 


124 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 11 , 1 986 


wasting several hours of work here in our session. Be- 
sides, as a Committee, we feel that we have a sub- 
stantially good and acceptable basis of a working 
Preamble that we could, in substance, approve. Perhaps, 
after the period of amendments, we can finish the dis- 
cussion of the proposed Preamble even today. And if we 
do, I think the reaction today from the public will be 
much better than the reaction we initially got yesterday. 
We were criticized for quibbling too much on some of 
the phrases and words in the Preamble. And I under- 
stand that even if we approve portions of this Preamble, 
those who have better ideas can later on present amend- 
ments by substitution or whatever before the proposed 
Preamble is finally incorporated into our Constitution. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair wants to make a statement. In order to give way 
to the discussion of this matter, I think that the motion 
of Commissioner de Castro, which was twice approved, 
has to be reconsidered. The motion of Commissioner de 
Castro is to stop the period of sponsorship and debate. 
May we know again the motion of Commissioner de 
Castro which was approved? 

MR. DE CASTRO. My motion was to terminate the 
period of sponsorship and debate, and for us to go to 
other matters regarding the Preamble. According to the 
Rules, if we continue, the next procedure is the period 
of amendments. 

MR. GARCIA. That is precisely what I have objected 
to. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, I support the statement of 
Commissioner Tingson that we proceed to the period 
of amendments since we have all the time this after- 
noon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, the 
motion now is to proceed to the period of amendments. 

Is there any objection? 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I move for a nominal vote on the 
motion of Commissioner Garcia. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Will 
Commissioner Garcia restate his motion? 

MR. GARCIA. I move that we defer the considera- 
tion of the Preamble until after a substantive debate on 
other issues on the Constitution is finished. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair wants to clarify the situation. A motion to stop 
the debate has been approved. 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). And so 
we now go to the period of amendments. That is the 
matter at issue. 

Is there any objection to the motion that we now 
proceed to the period of amendments? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am constrained again to pose a 
parliamentary inquiry because there seems to be a mix- 
up in the procedure here. As I mentioned a while ago, 
under the Rules, the next step after the period of 
sponsorship is not the period of amendments but the 
period of consideration of the resolution for Second 
Reading. This makes a lot of difference. Commissioner 
de Castro seems to be of the impression that the next 
period is the period of amendments, but I would main- 
tain that we are still on the next step which is the con- 
sideration of the resolution for Second Reading. I would 
like to read Section 23 of Rule VI: 

On the day set for the consideration of a resolution for 
Second Reading, the same shall be read in fuU with the 
amendments proposed by the Committee, if any, unless 
copies thereof had been distributed and such reading is dis- 
pensed with. Thereafter the resolution shall be subject to 
debate and pertinent motions. 

This debate, under Section 24, is the one mentioned 
by Commissioner de Castro which is limited to three 
speeches for and two against. That is why I am now 
posing a parliamentary inquiry as to the exact par- 
liamentary situation. Are we going to the period of 
amendments or are we going to the correct procedure, 
which is the period of consideration of the resolution 
for Second Reading? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
regular procedure is that after the period of debate, 
we go to the period of amendments. The rule read by 
Commissioner de Castro upholds this since it says that 
we vote on the resolution, as amended. So we should 
not vote on the resolution until we have gone into the 
period of amendments. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 4:55 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11,1986 


125 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:00 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Garcia be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Garcia is recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. I make this intervention because of 
the importance of the Preamble. I would like to recom- 
mend that we make haste slowly. I appreciate the fact 
that we are all very conscious of our responsibility to 
work within the limit of three months, but I think we 
should not sacrifice substance for speed. I think we have 
had debates on this Preamble, and that is why I would 
like to restate my motion. I would like to move that we 
defer further consideration of the Preamble until such a 
time that we have made more substantial debates on 
other issues on the Constitution. 


ments shall have been completed because we are afraid 
that if we come up with this Preamble without consult- 
ing the people; as we had agreed upon previously, we 
may be subjected to vicious attacks by the public. So, 
what I am trying to suggest is that even without calling 
a vote, let us proceed and go to the period of amend- 
ments, and at that point, we will stop in the delibera- 
tions until we get the complete feedback about the 
Preamble from public hearings to be conducted all over 
the country. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). On the 
parliamentary inquiry, the Chair opines that after the 
period of amendments shall have ended, we automa- 
tically proceed to vote for the resolution, as amended, 
unless there is a motion to defer. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is my parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). That is 
the Chair’s answer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We can 
go to the period of amendments, and after this, proceed 
to the final voting, unless there is a motion to defer. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection to the motion? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 


MR- SUAREZ. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Suarez may state his parliamentary inquiry. 


MR- SUAREZ. Is it theoretically possible to defer the 
sideration of the Preamble until after the period of 
^ endments has been completed without prejudicing 
Doint of Commissioner Garcia to “make haste 
I ^ Iv’’? In other words, instead of deferring the con- 
^•H^ration at this stage, let us go through the process of 
dments; then stop at that point and consider the 
t on for * deferment submitted by Commissioner 
So it is still open-ended up to that point. My 
parl^mentary inquiry is: Is that theoretically possible 

now? 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). That is 
onssible’ that is in order. After the amendments shall 
Lve been presented and approved, and after the period 
of amendments shall have been closed, it is possible to 
consider a motion to defer final vote on the resolution, 
as amended. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, the point is we will not call a final 
vote on the amendment even after the period ot amend- 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
on Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles would like to manifest its objection to the 
motion presented by Commissioner Garcia for reasons I 
already explained a while ago. 

Thank you very much. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I would like to reiterate my motion 
for a vote on the motion of Commissioner Garcia. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Has 
Commissioner Bernas’ motion been seconded? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Let us 


vote. 

Those in favor 
Garcia, please raise 
their hand.) 


of the motion of Commissionei 
their hand. (Several Members raised 


126 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


Those against, please raise their hand. ( Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The result of the voting is a tie — 15-15. 

So, the Chair has to vote. 

Considering that the question is on whether or not 
this same matter can be brought up after the amend- 
ments, I vote against the motion. (Applause) 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
proceed to the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

We are now in the period of amendments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would 
like to manifest that under the Rules, we cannot go to 
the period of amendments because we are supposed to 
be in the period of debate on Second Reading. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair rules that we are through with the debate and the 
interpellations and we are now in the period of amend- 
ments. 

Is there any amendment? 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to make an amend- 
ment supporting Commissioner Tadeo’s comment made 
during the period of interpellations. Earlier, I suggested 
ALMIGHTY GOD, but if that would not be to Com- 
missioner Tadeo’s suggestion, I propose LORD OF 
HISTORY instead. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, the 
proposed amendment is; Change “Divine Providence” to 

“LORD OF HISTORY.” 

Is there any comment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Anterior amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What is 
the anterior amendment of Commissioner Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. The anterior amendment consists in 
the retention of the word “aid,” together with the pro- 


posal of the Committee. But before retaining “aid,” I 
propose to add the word AND so that the phrase would 
read: GUIDANCE AND AID OF DIVINE PROVI- 
DENCE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, we do not feel 
that the proposal would really be of help to the draft 
that we presented. We would rather let the body decide. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, due to my 
ignorance of procedure, I did not explain the reason for 
my proposal to use LORD OF HISTORY. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bacani, there is an anterior amendment so we 
can go back to the Gentleman’s amendment later. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain my 
anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Davide may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The word “aid” has already gained 
historical implications. We find the word “aid” in the 
1935 and the 1973 Constitutions because of its signifi- 
cance and meaning. We need the aid of Divine Provi- 
dence, not just guidance. Guidance is a state of the 
mind, but aid is more positive and affirmative. And so, 
if we want to have His guidance, we must also follow it 
up by imploring His aid. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. I think the Committee will gladly 
accept Commissioner Davide’s amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. So, instead of “guidance” we will 
revert to the word “AID.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, 
instead of “guidance” we revert to the word “AID.” 

Is there any objection to the amendment? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I beg the indulgence of my col- 
leagues for my coming back to explain. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


127 


The reason I would like “Divine Providence” changed 
to LORD OF HISTORY is this: The use of “Divine 
Providence” is not a Filipino way of articulating God, if 
we are referring to God. It is very difficult to translate 
the phrase into Pilipino. If we try translating that into 
Pilipino when the Preamble and the whole Constitution 
is finally translated, we will find that we will really 
have difficulties. Secondly, “Divine Providence” is less 
personal than when we speak of God or the Lord of 
History. That is why I would prefer that this be changed 
to something else. 

LORD OF HISTORY is a very appropriate term 
because we are undergoing a historical process of libera- 
tion and, I might say, reconciliation towards full peace. 
And in order to show that we are a people on the 
march, and that this guidance is with us as we march 
along the way, the words LORD OF HISTORY would 
be more meaningful. The tenn “Almighty God” that I 
proposed earlier is meaningful enough; I think, it is even 
more personal than “Divine Providence,” but I fully 
support Commissioner Tadeo’s concept and suggestion 
for that reason. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
feels that “LORD OF HISTORY” would be, in a sense, 
limiting the concept of God because we, Christians, be- 
lieve not only in the Lord of History, but especially in 
the Lord of Calvary, both of which are joined together 
in the phrase “Divine Providence.” We would rather 
stick to the phrase “Divine Providence.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, the term 
“Lord of History” within the Christian context pre- 
cisely includes Calvary which is the center of the history 
of salvation. So, if you are speaking from the Christian 
point of view, the objections will be even less. The 
difficulty with the notion of “Divine Providence,” even 
though it is a good notion in itself, is that it can speak 
of a God who may not be as involved as the Lord of 
History would show Him to be. 

MR TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, translating the 
Preamble or the Constitution does not need to be trans- 
rteral It could be translation by idea. So, if it is awk- 
ward to translate “Divine Providence” in Pilipino, let us 
translate it with the idea of God. So, we feel that 
“Divine Providence” could be more adequate. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair suspends the session. 

It was 5:15 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:16 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 


Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bacani was recognized ahead. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer. 

If there is difficulty for a big group to accept the 
term “Lord of History,” I propose ALMIGHTY GOD as 
a second choice. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, 
Commissioner Bacani’s motion now is to change “Divine 
Providence” to ALMIGHTY GOD. However, I would 
like to ask the reaction of the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would rather 
leave it to the body to accept or reject the proposal. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I ask the Chairman of the Committee a few 
questions. 

MR. TINGSON. I would be glad to. 


MR. OPLE. This may require recalling Commissioner 
Bacani for a while to the microphone because I intend 
to go deeper into the meaning of the terms “Lord of 
History” and “God of History,” although this is now 
somewhat academic. But I think it will enrich the pro- 
ceedings of this Commission, if this very innovative 
concept is discussed a little bit more. 


I am glad to support Commissioner Bacani * Proposed 
mendment in its final form substituting ALMIGHTY 
jOD for “Divine Providence,’ and I could also support 
‘Lord of History.” But, first of all, I want to under- 


I am not a theologian, of course, but we all know that 
• the Marxist vision of history precisely enthrones history 
in the place of God. This is also known as historical 
materialism and, therefore, there are many schol^s of 
political science, especially of Marxism, that might see 
in these some false expectations that we may be actually 
talking of history as God, whereas, that might not be the 
intention of the proponent and of this Commission 

itself. 


I have no objection to the notion of a Lord of His- 
ry, an overarching presence that guides in the form^a- 
3n of the founding fathers of the United States, that 
tides the destinies of men and nations. But again is 
,uld be susceptible to misinterpret^ation. I 
storians could also say that the historical Christ is 
fferent from the Christ that the average Christian 
lows and worships. The historical Christ is the fore- 
mner of one who is celebrated in the Dead Sea Scrolls, 


128 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 11,1 986 


not the God that we worship, the Son of the Father; but 
the Christ studied according to the methods of his- 
torians. It is not the Christ of the Bible. It is the Christ 
of historiography applying the technology of the 
historian rather than the theologian or the evangelist. 

And so, these proposals are located within a context 
that can distract attention and can cause some con- 
fusion which is wholly unintended by the proponents. 
But I am pointing out that there are communities in the 
world where terms such as the “Lord of History” and 
“God of History,” as defined, can be given a dual mean- 
ing. Therefore, while I would completely support Com- 
missioner Tadeo’s motive in offering the “God of 
History” as an amendment and Commissioner Bacani’s 
original version of “God of History,” I think we will 
all be immensely reassured if the latest version of 
the amendment of Commissioner Bacani, which is 
ALMIGHTY GOD, is accepted instead of the more 
innovative terms earlier offered. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. After conferring with the Committee 
and talking to Commissioner Bacani, and hearing the 
eloquent dissertation of Commissioner Ople, the Com- 
mittee hereby joyfully accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection to the amendment to change 
“Divine Providence” to ALMIGHTY GOD? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
on Style could study and decide on that because it 
could also be “God Almighty” instead of “Almighty 
God.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be recog 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes, 
Commissioner Suarez. 

MR. SUAREZ. I suppose Commissioner Tingson 
remembers the discussions we had in the 1971 Constitu- 
tional Convention regarding the possible employment of 
the phrase “Almighty God.” One of the questions raised 
and which appeared to have been validly accepted in the 
Convention was that the word “God” already encom- 
passes the word “Almighty.” When you speak of God, 
He is omnipresent. He is omniscient. He is almighty. So 
is that not a redundancy, to use the phrase “Almighty 


God”? In other words, let us confine the word “God” 
without an antecedent description of “Almighty” since 
“Almighty” would be a surplusage. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. The Committee certainly does not 
feel we have the monopoly of truth, wisdom, and 
knowledge. So may we call on a theologian, Commis- 
sioner Rigos. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe it is not 
redundant to describe God as Almighty. As a matter of 
fact, we call Him loving, righteous and we do not con- 
sider the terms redundant. It is beautiful to describe 
God as Almighty. Whether we call Him Almighty God 
or God Almighty is the same. So I suggest that we sup- 
port the phrase “Almighty God” or “God Almighty.” 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
is very happy to accept the amended statement; “We, 
the sovereign Filipino people, imploring the aid of 
ALMIGHTY GOD.” 

MR. UKA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. My friends and brothers in the belief in 
the Almighty God: I think if we use the word “Al- 
mighty God” instead of the other appellations, there 
will be no objections from the other sects because your 
brother Muslims, who also believe in God, always say 
this before doing anything or before prayers: All praise 
is due to God, the Beneficient, the Merciful, the Com- 
passionate. Arabic: (Alhamdu lillah ir Rahman ir Ra- 
him). 

I would like to say, too, that the Muslims have many 
similar concepts of God, the Father of all men. The 
Muslims believe that all men are but one single nation — 
that is a verse in the Holy Koran. There are several 
chapters in the Bible, describing Jesus and His Mother, 
Sitti Mariam, or Mary. In fact, the Ten Commandments 
are in the Holy Koran. Father Mercado has been 
studying this. 

Islam and Christianity are but two forms of one 
religion, and the latest exponent of that divine message 
— the Prophet Mohammad — said; “Verily, I have not 
brought a new religion. The religion that I preach is the 
same religion that began from Adam, Noah, Moses and 
Jesus.” He did not bring a new religion. 

And so the word “Almighty God” would be nice. I 
have to say this because we do not understand each 
other, although we are all brothers in faith. The Lord’s 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


129 


Prayer in the Holy Bible is practically the same as the 
Lord’s Prayer in the Holy Koran. There is only one verse 
there that is not found in the Lord’s Prayer of the 
Muslim: “A1 Fathiya.” 

With your indulgence — anyway what is ten or five 
minutes among friends — may I repeat this since this is 
very short. The Christian Lord’s Prayer, found in the 
Christian Bible, says, as Jesus said: When you pray, pray 
thou likewise: 

Our Father, Who art in Heaven, Hallowed be Thy name. 

Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is in 

Heaven. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Before 
the Commission now is the proposed amendment to 
change “Divine Providence” to ALMIGHTY GOD. 

MR. TINGSON. We have accepted that already, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. The Committee will be glad to hear 
the next amendment, if there is any. 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Jamir is recognized. 


Give us tliis day our daily bread, and forgive us our 
trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us, and 
lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil, for 
Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory, forever. 
Amen. 

Here is the Muslim Lord’s Prayer as found in the Al 
Fathiya, the first chapter of the Holy Qur’an. I better 
translate it in English because you do not understand 
Arabic. 

In the name of God, the most merciful and com- 
passionate. AU praise is due to God, the Lord of all the 
worlds. Thee do we worship and Thee we beseech for help. 

Guide us on the right path. The path of those upon 
whom Thou hast bestowed favors, not of those upon whom 
Thy anger has been brought down nor of those that go 
astray. Amen. 

Where is the difference? It is seen that both ask for 
guidance. When I delivered that in an ecumenical meet- 
ing, one friendly priest told me: “Sir, indeed they are 
the same. However, I found one difference in our 
Lord’s Prayer in the Christian faith. There is that phrase 
which says ‘give us this day our daily bread’ — I have 
not heard it in your Lord’s Prayer in the Holy Qur’an. 
Why? ” 

I say the daily bread is simply a sort of reference to 
God’s grace. Anyway, the Muslims believe that God is so 
high and almighty, that we are not supposed to ask for 
hot pan de sal. And that is the reason why most of the 
hot pan de sals are found in the Christian areas because 
iny Christian brothers pray for it; the Muslims forget to 
ask for bread. (Laughter) 

Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. 
(Applause) In the course of our meetings, I will tell you 
more about our similarities, so I hope we will use the 
term ALMIGHTY GOD. 


MR TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, our Committee 
was wondering whether our Muslim brothers from the 
South would accept the phrase ALMIGHTY GOD when 
we discussed this even this morning. We are very happy 
that our Muslim brother. Commissioner Lugum Uka, has 
now placed upon the record that they are also accepting 
the phrase ALMIGHTY GOD. 


Thank you. 


MR. JAMIR. Our amendment consists of inserting the 
word HIGHEST between the words “our” and “ideals,” 
appearing on line 9 of the draft. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I propose 
an anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The anterior amendment will be on 
line 6 of the committee report on Proposed Resolution 
No. 72. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). I 
thought we were using this ( showing a sheet of paper) 
with the two Preambles side by side. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then it would be on line 8 of the 
comparative chart. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). No, I 
think number 8 in the chart means the number of 
words, not the number of the line. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to propose the insertion 
of the following words between the words “to” and 
“establish”: PRESERVE AND STRENGTHEN OUR 
NATIONAL UNITY AND IDENTITY AND. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are very 
careful about adding words. As it is, we have already 
succeeded in subtracting three words from the Preamble 
of the 1973 draft and we are very wary about adding 
more words to this Preamble. I would rather that the 
body consider it. 

MR. DAVIDE. We appreciate the concern of the 
Committee in maintaining a very short Preamble. But 
the Preamble of the Federal Republic of West Germany 
contains 1 17 words, that of the Fifth French Republic 
contains 87 words. I do not think we should really 
be guided by the number of words contained in the 
Preamble, but rather by its substance. 


130 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


So, if the Committee will not accept the proposal, I 
would request that it be submitted to the body. And the 
wording would lead to the insertion between the word 
“to” and the word “establish” the following: PRE- 
SERVE AND STRENGTHEN OUR NATIONAL 
UNITY AND IDENTITY AND. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any comment on the proposal before we vote? 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, say yea. 

FEW MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
nays have it; the amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I pro- 
pose an anterior amendment. I know the Committee 
will be wary of my amendment, it being an addition to 
the draft Preamble. 

After the words “in order to,” I propose the addition 
of the words BUILD A JUST AND HUMANE SO- 
CIETY. I know that the concern of the Almighty God 
is not only the establishment of a government, but 
also the building of a just and humane society. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the Gentle- 
man yield? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Will the 
Gentleman please restate his proposed amendment 
before we go into that. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My proposed amendment is on 
the second line: “in order to BUILD A JUST AND 
HUMANE SOCIETY.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Would Commissioner Sarmiento 
transpose the words “JUST AND HUMANE” to be at- 
tached to the word “government.” In other words, the 
proposed amendment would read: “to establish a JUST 
AND HUMANE SOCIETY government.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Suarez, with 
regrets, I cannot accept because it is my personal belief 
that “government” is too restrictive, too limited. When 
we speak of a society, it is broader in scope; it is 
unlimited, unlike the use of the word “government.” 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Commissioner would make a 
distinction between “society” and “government.” 


MR. SARMIENTO. Society and government are two 
different concepts — society being broader in meaning 
and scope. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will Commissioner Sarmiento kindly 
restate his proposed amendment so that we can be 
guided accordingly. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, my proposed amendment 
reads: “We, the sovereign Filipino people, imploring 
the aid of the Almighty God, in order to BUILD A 
JUST AND HUMANE SOCIETY establish a govern- 
ment,” etc. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Commit- 
tee’s draft does not include the words “in order.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. I would like to second the motion, as 
modified. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, we feel that 
the intended amendment is already covered by the 
following phrase: “the blessings of participatory de- 
mocracy under a regime of justice, peace, freedom and 
equality.” We would rather let the body decide on it. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. May I point out that the amendment 
proposed by Commissioner Sarmiento is the same 
proposal submitted by the 1986 UP Law Constitution 
Project and which we will find in the document dis- 
tributed to us. 

MR. AZCUNA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Azcuna is recognized. 

MR. AZCUNA. While I agree with the direction and 
substance of the proposed amendment, I believe it does 
not belong to the Preamble, the statement in which we 
ordain and promulgate the Constitution, for we are 
talking of establishing primarily a government, not 
building a society. The society already exists and this 
society, by the act of promulgating a Constitution, 
establishes a government. 

So I believe that if the amendment should be in- 
serted at all, it should be after the words “under a 
regime,” rather than ask the Almighty to help us esta- 
blish a society. That society antedates the act of pro- 
mulgating the Constitution. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
would suggest that Commissioner Sarmiento do his best 


WEDNESDAY, |UNE 11, 1986 


131 


to get his proposal incorporated under other articles 
that are not obiter dicta. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any other comment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a 
rejoinder to the comment made by Commissioner 
Azcuna. 

I believe that the purpose of this Constitutional 
Commission is not only to establish a government that 
shall embody our ideals and aspirations, but also to 
build a just and humane society. It is true that we have 
an existing society, but we long, we yearn and we aspire 
for the building of a just and humane society. So the 
Preamble, using the words of Commissioner Tingson, 
being the soul of the Constitution that announces the 
broad purposes and aims of the Constitution, should 
contain the words “TO BUILD A JUST AND HUMANE 
SOCIETY.” The proposal cannot be covered by the 
“regime of justice, peace, freedom and equality as 
adverted to earlier by Commissioner Tingson. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
Chamber ready to vote on the proposed amendment? 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, say yea. 
SEVERAL MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are against, say nay. 

FEW MEMBERS. Nay. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The yeas 
have it; the amendment is approved. 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. I have a very simple amendment wWch 
was interrupted twice by two anterior amendment^ J he 
amendment consists of inserting the word HIGHE 
between the words “our” and “ideals” appearing on 
line 1 1 of the draft. So the phrase will read: embo y 

our HIGHEST ideals and aspirations.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, with the 
kind indulgence of Commissioner Jamir, yesterday I 
proposed the inclusion of the word HERITAGE before 
“ideals and aspirations,” HERITAGE referring to our 
tradition of struggle for freedom and liberty. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We have 
to consider first Commissioner Jamir’s proposed amend- 
ment: to insert between “our” and “ideals” the word 
HIGHEST. So the phrase will read: “embody our HIGH- 
EST ideals and aspirations.” What does the Committee 
say? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, for the sake of 
clarity, will Commissioner Jamir state again which word 
he wants to insert. 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move to insert 
the word HIGHEST between the words “our” and 
“ideals” on the third line of the draft so that the phrase 
will read: “embody our HIGHEST ideals and aspira- 
tions.” 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
feels that it is not really necessary to insert the word 
“HIGHEST.” Nevertheless, we would rather that the 
body decide on it. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any comment or observation? ( Silence) 

Is the Chamber ready to vote? 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, say yea. 

FEW MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The nays 
have it; the amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yesterday, I proposed that we 
incorporate in the Preamble the word HERITAGE 
before the phrase “ideals and aspirations.” It is my 
humble position that the phrase “ideals and aspirations” 
does not embrace the word HERITAGE — HERITAGE 
referring to our tradition of struggle for liberty, freedom 
and popular democracy. So, may I respectfully request 
that we consider the incorporation of the word HERI- 
TAGE - HERITAGE referring to our tradition of 
struggle for liberty, freedom and popular democracy. 
So may I respectfully request that we consider the 
incorporation of the word HERITAGE before the 
phrase “ideals and aspirations.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento’s proposed amendment is to insert 


132 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 11,1 986 


“HERITAGE” between “our” and “ideals” and a 
comma (,) after it, so the amended phrase will read: 
“that shall embody our HERITAGE, ideals and aspira- 
tions.” What does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, could we ask 
Commissioner NoUedo to please say something? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner NoUedo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

As indicated in the remarks of Commissioner 
Guingona yesterday, quoting the venerable Dean Sinco 
of the University of the Philippines, the term HERI- 
TAGE is included in the word “patrimony” because 
“patrimony” talks not only of human and natural re- 
sources but also of the Filipino culture, HERITAGE, 
the intelligence of the Filipino people and the like. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
would rather that the body decide on it. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
body ready to vote on the proposed amendment? 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, say yea. 

FEW MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The nays 
have it; the amendment is lost. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. On the same line, third line, be- 
tween the words “conserve” and “enhance,” I propose 
to insert the word DEVELOP so that the phrase will 
read: “conserve, DEVELOP and enhance our patri- 
mony.” The words “conserve,” “develop” and “en- 
hance” are three different things. While you conserve 
and you enhance, it is necessary that you develop some- 
thing first before you can enhance it. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. The Committee would partly accept 
the amendment and that is, to use the word “DE- 


VELOP” and we would be ready to eliminate the word 
“enhance” because we feel that “enhance” would 
already be within the purview, the meaning of the word 
“develop.” We would partly accept the amendment. 
Does Commissioner de Castro agree? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will agree. So we will leave 
“conserve and DEVELOP.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Committee proposes to delete the word “enhance” and 
in lieu thereof insert the word “DEVELOP,” so the 
phrase will read: “conserve and DEVELOP our patri- 
mony.” 

MR. TINGSON. That is right. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment by restoring the words “of our nation.” 

MR. TINGSON. What line is the Commissioner 
referring to? 

MR. DAVIDE. After the word “develop” what 
follows is “the patrimony” because the Committee has 
recommended the deletion of the phrase “of our na- 
tion.” I want its restoration so that the phrase will read: 
“the patrimony OF OUR NATION.” 

MR. TINGSON. So that is between “patrimony” and 
the comma (,). 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, we feel that 
“our patrimony” certainly refers to the patrimony of 
our nation. 

MR. DAVIDE. There was a distinction made yester- 
day on the scope of “patrimony of the nation” and just 
“patrimony.” There was a brilliant disquisition on the 
distinction: the patrimony of the nation is all-inclusive, 
not only of natural resources but also of heritage. And 
so, I propose the broader concept of patrimony, 
patrimony of the nation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner NoUedo is recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


133 


MR. NOLLEDO. With the kindest indulgence of the 
proponent, I find no fundamental difference between 
the expression “the patrimony of our nation” and “our 
patrimony.” So I beg to disagree with the contention 
that it is all-embracing. On the other hand, when we say 
“our patrimony,” we are more emphatic and possessive. 
We are jealous of our patrimony when you say our 
patrimony. Amin iyan. 

Thank you. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, we submit to 
the body. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, what 
does the Committee say? (Silence) 

Is the Chamber ready to vote? 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, say yea. 

FEW MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. May I suggest an amendment 
which reads this way: “and secure to ourselves and our 
posterity the blessings of A BALANCED SOCIAL OR- 
DER under a RULE of justice, peace, freedom, 
EQUITY AND DEMOCRATIC PARTICIPATION.” We 
do not want to use the word “participatory.” The 
notion of a “balanced social order” means that we try 
to redress the imbalances and reduce the gaps and 
inequities, which imply the harmonization of all sec- 
tors. In lieu of “participatory democracy,” I suggest 
A BALANCED SOCIAL ORDER; in lieu of “equality,” 
EQUITY; and the inclusion of the phrase DEMOCRA- 
TIC PARTICIPATION after it. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
parliamentary situation is, there is a pending proposed 
amendment by Commissioner de Castro to delete the 
word “participatory.” So, this proposal of Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid would be in the nature of an 
amendment to that amendment. What does Commis- 
sioner de Castro say? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I do not accept the amendment to 
my amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The nays 
have it; the amendment is lost. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. On line 5, I propose to eliminate 
the word “participatory” because when we talk of 
democracy, it is the whole thing, not only participatory ; 
it can be collective, it can be anything. The word “de- 
mocracy” is broad and sufficient enough to describe the 
blessings that we are asking for. By putting “partici- 
patory,” it becomes particular for that particular thing; 
it eliminates collectiveness. So, I move that the word 
“participatory” be eliminated. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, are 
vote on the proposed amendment to delete 
the word “participatory”? 

Those in favor of the amendment, please raise then- 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, raise their hand. ( Few Members raised 
their hand.) 

The results show 27 votes in favor and 4 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Gascon is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. Our Committee discussed this quite 
lengthily this morning, and I think the sense of the 
Committee is, first, we do not want to make our 
Preamble overly long. Second, we do agree with the 
honorable Commissioner de Castro that the word “de- 
mocracy” would be sufficient, so we would gladly 
accept the amendment to eliminate the word “partici- 
patory.” 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR GASCON. I would like to make an amendment 
to the Preamble. Since we have taken out the word 
“oarticipatory,” I would like to place the adjective 
POPULAR before “democracy” so as to differentiate it 
from elite democracy. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, the 
3 posed amendment is on the fifth line between the 


MR. GASCON. Between the words “of’ and “de- 
mocracy,” insert the word POPULAR. 


134 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, it 
will read; “blessings of POPULAR democracy.” What 
does the Committee say? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Would 
the proponent want the Chamber to consider that as 
one amendment instead of two? 


MR. TINGSON. The word “democracy” has been 
honored for so many centuries and has been enshrined 
in the hearts of those who believe in it. It is the real 
meaning of democracy, and we feel that using an adjec- 
tive before it might not even improve its meaning. So, 
we would rather that the body decide on it. 

MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe that 
my amendment does not diminish the honor placed on 
the word “democracy.” In fact, it enhances its real 
meaning. So many regimes in the past which should 
have been called dictatorships claimed to be democra- 
tic, and there are regimes also which seem to practice 
democracy which is of the elite nature. As such, be- 
cause of the people’s power revolution and the learnings 
we have had since the martial law regime, I guess we 
must enshrine it in our Preamble by emphasizing that 
such “democracy” is genuinely of the people. There- 
fore, I would like to push through my amendment. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
proposed amendment is to insert the word “POPULAR” 
between “of’ and “democracy” on line 5, so that it 
will read: “blessings of POPULAR democracy.” 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment, please 
raise their hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 12 votes in favor and 21 against; 
the proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Vice-President is recognized. 


MR. PADILLA. No, I would propose two separate 
amendments. So, the first is, line 5 should read; “and 
our posterity the blessings of democracy, TRUTH, 
peace, freedom AND PROGRESS.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. That sounds acceptable to me. How- 
ever, would this not be redundant in a sense, considering 
the amendment proposed by Commissioner Sarmiento 
which was accepted by this body? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think the inclusion of the words 
‘ PROGRESS” and “EQUITY” will add redundancy to 
the inclusion of “to build a just and humane society.” 
So, I will object to the inclusion of the words “PROG- 
RESS” and “EQUITY.” 


MR. PADILLA. No, I did not mention “equity”; in 
propose to remove it. We are talking of ‘“bless- 
ings in the plural, so the blessings should include not 
only blessings of democracy, but TRUTH - as suggested 
Commissioner de Castro — and “peace freedom 
AND PROGRESS,” as I suggested. 


The idea is we should enjoy the blessings of de- 
mocracy, then TRUTH to avoid a distortion of facts 
that misleads and confuses the people. There is no 
problem regarding “peace” and “freedom,” and I would 
just add the words AND PROGRESS because we are 
aiming not only at the enjoyment of a democratic rule 
but likewise the advancement of our economy towards 
progress and prosperity. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Will the 
Gentleman restate his first amendment so the body can 
vote? 


MR. PADILLA. I propose that after the word “de- 
mocracy,” insert the word TRUTH and a comma (,) 
after it; transpose “peace” and “freedom” after 
TRUTH and add AND PROGRESS after “freedom,” 
so that this will read; “the blessings of democracy, 
TRUTH, peace, freedom AND PROGRESS.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, is the 
Vice-President proposing to delete also the words 
“justice and equality”? 

MR. PADILLA. No; that phrase will follow after 
“under a rule of LAW.” That will be my second amend- 
ment; “under a rule of LAW, justice and EQUITY.” 

But, first, line 5 should read; “and our posterity, the 
blessings of democracy, TRUTH, peace, freedom AND 
PROGRESS.” 


MR. PADILLA. Yes. My first amendment is: After 
the word “democracy,” add TRUTH, then transpose the 
words “peace, freedom” and add AND PROGRESS. So 
line 5 should read: “and our prosperity the blessings of 
democracy, TRUTH, peace, freedom, AND PROG- 
RESS.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. Does that mean we eliminate the 
word “justice”? 

MR. PADILLA. No, that will follow later. 

MR. TINGSON. Then what would follow is what 
appears now. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


135 


MR. PADILLA. After “rule of,” add LAW and 
change “equality” to EQUITY. That is the second 
portion of my amendment. 

MR. TINGSON. The Vice-President is proposing that 
the word “TRUTH” follow immediately after the word 
“democracy”? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. 

MR. TINGSON. Would it not be better to place the 
word “TRUTH” after “rule of” instead of placing it 
after “democracy,” so that line should read; “under the 
rule of TRUTH, peace, freedom,” etc., as the Vice- 
President has proposed? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. But as it appears in both the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions, the word “blessings” is 
plural — “blessings of democracy” — so I feel that these 
should include “TRUTH, peace, freedom, AND PROG- 
RESS.” 

MR. TINGSON. If the Committee on Style could 
look into this and arrange it in such a way that we 
would not mangle the beauty of the Preamble, perhaps 
we would accept this proposal; but I am just wondering 
whether the other members of the Committee would 
like to express themselves, too. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Tingson be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 


MR. TINGSON. I think we are at the end of the pro- 
posed amendments, so we would be very happy indeed 
if we could read the entire Preamble as amended by this 
august body before we leave this hall. 

The Committee would accept the proposal of the 
Vice-President, subject to revision by the Committee on 
Style. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Will the 
Vice-President restate the amendment? 

There will be two amendments, or is the Gentleman 
consolidating the two now? 


MR. PADILLA. My proposed amendment on lines 5 
to 8 would read: “and our posterity blessings of 
democracy, TRUTH, peace, freedom AND PROGRESS 
under a rule of LAW, justice and EQUITY, do ordam 
and promulgate this Constitution. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I agree with Vice-President 
Padilla to the insertion of the concept “truth,” but I 
believe that progress is a result of the presence of all 
these transcendental goals of peace, freedom and truth. 
So that instead of the word “progress” or “prosperity,” 
I would prefer to put the concept of COOPERATION 
or HARMONY, or some other word that approximates 
that cultural tradition of the Filipino which is bayani- 
han, “bayanicracy.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I comment on that, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 6:12 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:16 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
ioner Gascon is recognized. 

MR GASCON. I would like to inquire about the 
imendment to the amendment proposed by Commis- 
ioner Rosario Braid, that instead of progress, the 
vord “HARMONY” be used. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). During 
he recess, there was a conversation on the matter. 

MR. GASCON. So, is Commissioner Rosario Braid 
withdrawing the amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. I regret I cannot 
fient because while “harmony’ and cooperation are 
lecessary I think they are already understood even in 
he wS; “truth" and “peace.” What I was adding ts 
he concept of “progress” which is an ideal, an aspira 
ion of the Filipino people. 

These are the blessings that our people should 
emocracy, truth, peace, freedom 
re the blessings, the effects, we might say> ^ 
overnment and the cooperation of our peop e 
roductivity and the creation of more wealth. 

With regard to the other portion, the former text said 
under a regime of,” which the Committee has changed 


136 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 11 , 1 986 


to “under a RULE of.” So, I propose to add LAW and 
retain “justice,” then change the word “equality” to 
EQUITY. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will the Vice-President accept an 
amendment to his amendment, such that instead of 
saying just simply: “a regime of law, justice and equity,” 
we say “. . . law, justice, LOVE and equity.” 

I will explain the reason. I would really like to insert 
a very important factor in the people’s revolution, and it 
is the element of “pakikipagkapwa-tao” — love. I was 
touched seeing and reading the report of how people 
acted in a nonviolent way, and these are the words in 
one film that was actually taken: “Pilipino din naman 
kayo.” And then, in saving one of the loyalists, one of 
those who besieged Malacanang Palace said: “Hu wag 
ninyong sasaktan, Pilipino din naman siyang tulad 
natin.” I think we should be aiming at the civilization of 
love, because a rule simply of justice and law, and even 
of equity will not be able to bring peace. At least, here I 
wish to bring the thought of the popes who had in- 
sisted that a rule of justice alone is not sufficient to 
bring about peace in the world. And so, I want to add 
the word LOVE even though it may not be very legal- 
istic to hear. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have no 
objection to the insertion of the word “LOVE,” so that 
the line would read: “under a rule of LAW, justice, 
EQUITY and LOVE.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say of the amendment, as 
amended? 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may the Com- 
mittee hear fiom Commissioner Sarmiento? 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I make an amendment to the 
amendment. 

I suggest that we delete the word “peace” because the 
fruit of truth, freedom and justice is peace.” 

I also propose the deletion of the word “progress” 
because, to me, progress is included in the promotion of 
the common good, in the building of a just and humane 
society. 

I also propose the deletion of the word “equity” be- 
cause if there is law, there is justice; so there is equity. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the proponent of the amendment say? 

MR. PADILLA. I do not accept the proposed amend- 
ments to my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I propose that the phrase “to 
enjoy the blessings of democracy,” be followed by 
“under the rule of law and a regime of truth, justice, 
freedom or liberty.” That is how I will put it, because 
we cannot enjoy the blessings of democracy without a 
regime that seeks to establish truth, without which 
there can be no justice. Truth and justice are essential to 
enjoy freedom. If we have truth, justice and freedom, 
we will have peace. That is how I look at it. I submit 
this for the consideration of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). That is a 
proposed amendment to the amendment. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think the 
Committee would be very interested in the proposal of 
Commissioner Concepcion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). That is 
in the nature of an amendment to the amendment. So I 
would like to ask for the reaction of the proponent of 
the amendment, the Vice-President. 

MR. PADILLA. May we hear the proposed amend- 
ment again? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I propose that this part read: 
“and secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings 
of democracy under the rule of law a regime ...” There 
is no rule of truth but there is a regime of truth which is 
essential to justice and both are essential to the enjoy- 
ment of freedom. And with freedom, justice and truth, 
we can enjoy peace. 

I assume that justice includes equity which actually 
means fairness, but fairness cannot be established with- 
out justice. So I think the essentials are “the rule of law 
and a regime. . .” not a rule of justice nor rule of truth, 
but a regime of truth, justice, freedom and peace. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). This is 
a sort of an amendment by substitution. 

The Chair declares a suspension of the session for a 
few minutes. 

It was 6:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:34 p.m., the session was resumed. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


137 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, Commissioner 
Concepcion has proposed an amendment to my amend- 
ment. May I, therefore, request him to restate his 
amendment. 


MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Gascon is recognized. 

MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
make an additional amendment. I propose to add AND 
EQUALITY after “love.” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The amendment to the amend- 
ment refers to the last part of the proposed Preamble, 
and it reads: “and secure to ourselves and our posterity 
the blessings of democracy under the rule of law and a 
regime of truth, justice, freedom (or liberty), and peace 
do ordain and promulgate this Constitution.” 

MR. PADILLA. I accept the amendment. 

MR. TINGSON. The Committee is very happy to 
accept that amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection to the amendment? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may the Com- 
mittee be allowed to read the entire Preamble, as 
amended. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, could I still 
propose a short amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the proponent say? I think we should take this 
one by one. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Would 
Commissioner Maambong like to comment on the pro- 
posed amendment to insert the word ‘ LOVE ? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think that 
matter should be taken up first. Mine is only a minor 
point of clarification, so it can wait. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, the 
proposed amendment is to insert the word 
between “freedom” and “peace. 

Is there any objection? 

MR. GASCON. How about the word EQUALITY? I 
wonder if the proponent would accept my amen men 
right now. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We will 
take that up later. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. 


BISHOP BACANI. I would still like to insert the 
word LOVE before “peace” to make our Constitution, 
as Commissioner Romulo said, unique and to express 
our own experience in the Philippines. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
amendment to the amendment proposed by Commis- 
sioner Concepcion has been approved. Now, between 
what words does Commissioner Bacani want to insert 
his amendment? 

BISHOP BACANI. Just prior to the word “peace” 
such that the phrase should read: “freedom, LOVE, 
and peace.” 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
support the proposed amendment, looking to the dis- 
tinction of this Constitution as probably the first in the 
world that will embody the principle of love which, I 
think, translates into the fraternity, the brotherhood of 
all men, but especially those who are united into a single 
nation. 

Thank you. 


MR. GASCON. I think the proponent is willing to 
accept the addition of EQUALITY. 

BISHOP BACANI. It should read “freedom, EQUAL 
ITY, LOVE, and peace.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
Chamber ready to vote? 


R. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, 
we take the amendments one after^th^ 

e some people may want to “FOUAL- 

VE” but others may feel that the wor 
’’ is already embodied in the concept of J«stice^ 
isely, that was one of my questions ear ler^ 
word “equality” eliminated in the origin d^^ 

it was explained to me by equal- 

1 “justice” already embodies the concept q 

that is why I kept quiet. 

Lit if Commissioner Gascon would l^e 
imendment after that explanation, we could brea 

amendment. 


138 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 11,1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair would like to ask Commissioners Gascon and 
Bacani. 

MR. GASCON. I would agree with Commissioner 
Bengzon if, for purposes of facilitating, he would wish 
to decide on each word one by one. That is all right 
with me. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). First, on 
the insertion of the word “LOVE.” 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

On the proposed amendment to insert the word 
EQUALITY? 

MR. GASCON. Yes, between “love” and “peace.” 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think the 
term “equality” is included in Commissioner Sarmien- 
to’s concept of a humane society. We cannot have a 
humane society if it does not adhere to the principles 
of equality. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. In addition to that, I was changing 
the word “equality” to EQUITY, but the Committee 
said that EQUITY is also included in “law and justice”; 
so I did not insist on that anymore. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, is the 
body ready to vote? 

MR. AZCUNA. Just one last word, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, I do agree that the word “justice” implies equal- 
ity. However, I am afraid that taking out “equality” 
where it was already in the 1973 Constitution might be 
construed as a trend towards inequality in our society. 
After all, although it is redundant, emblazoned on the 
US Supreme Court building are the words “Equal 
Justice under Law.” It is a redundancy, but we want to 
emphasize equality. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I am unable to accept that “equality” is 
redundant when it is added to other noble principles 
like justice and freedom. I think there is a general 
hesitation to commit to the principle of equality which 
has its historical meaning fully developed through the 
centuries of human struggle for equality. It can merely 
be a civil equality so that all men are equal before the 


law. It can be a political equality in the sense that the 
richest and the poorest may cast only one vote each. 

It can, however, go beyond that according to the 
evolution of humane society — to comprehend newer 
forms of equality, especially in the economic or social 
sense. 

And, therefore, I share Commissioner Azcima’s 
concern that because this already appears in the 
Preamble of the 1973 Constitution, it should stay. Com- 
missioner Bernas, on one occasion, told us that the 
Preamble of the 1973 Constitution, in some respects, 
improves upon the Preamble of the 1935 Constitution 
precisely because of the introduction of the word 

equality.” It is no longer a revolutionary idea. I think, 
by and large, all of mankind, including those debaters in 
the United Nations, have accepted equality as an or- 
thodoxy in our own time. It used to be radical and 
revolutionary; but it is already an orthodox principle in 
the community of nations. 

And so, I feel that the Preamble of the 1986 Consti- 
tution certainly cannot be seen as having reduced the 
rights to equality already earned by our people in the 
1973 Constitution. And it is in that sense that I wish to 
support the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Gascon to the word “EQUALITY” to be added to a 
string of similarly noble words in this concluding clause 
of the Preamble of the Constitution. 

Thank you. 

MR. BROCKA. May I be recognized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes, 
Commissioner Broeka. 

MR. BROCKA. This has nothing to do with the con- 
cept. I just want to make a comment on the structure 
that is coming out now. As Commissioner Ople said, it is 
a ‘ string of noble words.” 

So, if we read the amendments to the amendments to 
the amendments, the clause will be: “a regime of truth, 
justice, freedom, love, peace and EQUALITY.” H 
sounds as though we are trying to put all the noble 
words there. And in the words of Commissioner Ople, it 
does look like “a string of noble words.” 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. The Committee would be glad to 
accept the addition of the word “EQUALITY.” 

MR. GASCON. I thank Commissioner Tingson. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE n, 1986 


139 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes, 
Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As I stated earlier, this is just a 
very minor point of clarification. There was an ap- 
proved amendment introduced by Commissioner 
Sarmiento. I did not get it very well, but was there a 
comma after the words “humane society”? 

MR. SARMIENTO. There is no comma, but a con- 
junction “and” followed by “establish a Government...” 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, it would read: “to build a just 
and humane society.” 

Thank you, that clarifies everything. 


MR. TINGSON. Gladly so, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
After two days of delibeiations by this Committee and 
the active participation of the Members of this august 
body, the following is the proposed Preamble to our 
Charter: 

We, the sovereign Filipino people, imploring the aid of 
ALMIGHTY GOD, TO BUILD A JUST AND HUMANE 
SOCIETY AND to establish a Government that shall 
embody our ideals AND ASPIRATIONS, promote the 
COMMON GOOD, conserve and DEVELOP our patrimony 
and secure to ourselves and our posterity tire blessings of 
democracy under THE RULE OF LAW and a regime of 
TRUTH, justice, freedom, LOVE, EQUALITY and peace 
do HEREBY ordain and promulgate this Constitution. 
(Applause) 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment to insert the 
word “EQUALITY.” 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, it seems to me 
that the Preamble, as amended, is now ready to be read. 

MR. DAVIDE. One final amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we close the period of 
amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
period of amendments is closed. 

approval of PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 72 
ON SECOND READING 
(Adopting a Preamble to the Constitution) 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes, 
Commissioner Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. In view of the deletion of the words 
“in order,” I propose that we insert the word HEREBY 
before “ordain” to make it really very emphatic. 

MR. TINGSON. We already eliminated the words 
“in order.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely, because of the elimination 
of those words, I would like to insert HEREBY before 
“ordain” to make it more emphatic, so that it reads: 
“do HEREBY ordain and promulgate this Constitution.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. TINGSON. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendment to insert 
between the words “do” and “ordain” the word 
“HEREBY”? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

If there are no more amendments, may I request the 
Committee Chairman to read now the whole proposed 
Preamble, as amended. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I 
e approve the proposed Preamble on Second Reading. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. R°drigo)_ There is 
move to approve Proposed Resolution o. 
roposed Preamble, as amended. 

Those in favor, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
^rs raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise hand. (Two Members 
ised their hand.) 

The results show 27 votes in favor and 2 against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 72 
-eamble, as amended, is approved on econ 

ipplause) 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer 
urn, there is a suggestion to be made by ^ .jQ,.,igs 
ascon regarding the Independence ay 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Gascon is recognized. 

MR. GASCON. I believe that everyone 
mission knows that tomorrow is Independence ay oi 


140 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 1986 


which we have all received invitations to three different 
activities. I would like to inquire as to what the idea of 
the body is regarding the participation of the Commis- 
sion as a group in the three activities, namely: the flag- 
raising ceremony at the Luneta Grandstand at seven 
o’clock in the morning, the Vin d’Honor at 10:00 a.m. 
at Malacahang, and the one o’clock celebration also at 
the Luneta Grandstand. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Garcia suggests that we 
should group together as one body so that our pre- 
sence will be seen and felt by the people, since the 
Commission is quite an important office. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Where 
do we congregate? 

MR. RAMA. We can group during the flag-raising 
ceremony at the Luneta. We have to go together and 
stick together. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). But we 
do not go there together. We just congregate. When we 
are there, we should form one group. 

MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer, the flag raising 
is at seven thirty, so can we meet by seven o’clock at the 
Rizal Monument or in front of the Army and Navy 
Club? 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, in our invita- 
tions, there is a small card which says that everybody 
should be at the Luneta at seven. So if we want to meet 
at the Army and Navy Club, it has to be earlier. Why do 
we not meet at the Luneta at seven, so we do not have 
to transport ourselves from one place to the other? 

MR. GASCON. With regard to the one o’clock 
ceremony, the proposal is that we meet at Manila Hotel 
prior to one o’clock and then march with other groups 
to the grandstand. 


MR. BENGZON. That will include our spouses, be- 
cause our ticket says “Mr. and Mrs.” 

MR. GASCON. I think that will be difficult. Maybe, 
they may go ahead and we will just join them at the 
grandstand. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). How 
about this Vin d’Honor? 

MR. BENGZON. The Vin d’Honor is at ten o’clock 
in Malacanang. I do not know if we can group together 
because it is very hard to move in. There we have our 
gate passes, and we have to pass through so much 
security. We can just meet at the hall itself. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, with all due 
respect to the desires of some of the Commissioners to 
go together and move as a unit, I would like to suggest 
that perhaps those who wish to go can go their own 
way. There are some of us who may not want to go to 
the Vin d’Honor. There are some of us who will be 
marching with our own groups in the parade. I appre- 
ciate the sentiment here, but we have other com- 
mitments and perhaps we have other preferences. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, 
kanya-kanyang lakad. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for the 
adjournment of the session until Friday at nine o’clock 
in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until Friday at nine o’clock in the 
morning. 

It was 6:55 p.m. 


FRIDAY, JUNE 13, 1986 


141 


R.C.C. NO. 9 
Friday, June 13, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

.At 9:30 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Lino O. Brocka. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. BROCKA. Panginoon, Ikaw ang nagsabing: 
“Ano man ang gawin ninyo para sa pinakaaba sa Aking 
mga kapatid ay ginagawa ninyo para sa Akin.” 

Ituro Mo po sa amin ang tamang landas upang 
matulungan ang pinakaaba sa lyong mga kapatid dito sa 
aming bayan. Kay tagal nilang nagdusa sa ilalim ng isang 
diktadura; kay tagal nilang tiniis ang tanikala ng 
pang-aapi at pagsasamantala. 

Panginoon, bigyan Mo po kami ng ugat upang hindi 
kami malayo sa tunay na kalagayan ng sambayanang 
Pilipino. Higit sa lahat, bigyan Mo po Kami ng bagwis 
upang matapos namin sa lalong madaling panahon ang 
tungkuling iniatas sa amin - ang tungkuling bigyang 
lunas ang paghihirap ng aming sambayanan di lamang sa 
langit kundi lalo’t higit dito sa lupa. Siya nawa. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Present* Azcuna Present** 

Alonto Absent Bacani Absent 

Aquino Present Bengzon Present 


Bennagen . . . . 

, . Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Bemas 

, . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

, . Present 

Quesada . . . . . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Regalado 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . . 

, . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rigos 

, . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Rodrigo . . . . . 

. Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Romulo 

. Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Rosales 

. Absent 

Garcia 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . . 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present* 

Suarez 

. Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . . 

. Present 

Jamir 

. Absent 

Tadeo 

. Present* 

T aiirpl 

Present 

Tan 

. I*resent 

Lerum 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . , 

. . Present 

Maambong . . . 

, . Present* 

Treflas 

. Present 

Monsod 

, . Present 

Uka 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

, . Present* 

Villacorta . . . . 

. . Present 

Nieva 

, . Present 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 37 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move to dispense with the reading of 
the Journal of the last session and to approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the Ref- 
erence of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


’^Appeared after the roll call 


142 


FRIDAY, JUNE 13, 1986 


The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 

Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 

Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 

President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 92, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION WHICH PROHIBITS CONGRESS 
TO DEFINE, PRESCRIBE AND APPORTION THE JURIS- 
DICTION OF INFERIOR COURTS WITHOUT THE 
PRIOR RECOMMENDATION OF THE SUPREME 
COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 93, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO LIMIT THE AREA OF 
PRIVATE AGRICULTURAL LAND THAT MAY BE 
ACQUIRED BY NATURALIZED FILIPINO CITIZENS 
AND PROVIDING FOR THE ESCHEAT OF ANY HELD 
IN EXCESS OF THE LIMITATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 

Proposed Resolution No. 94, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROVIDING COMPENSATION 
FOR LOSS OF TIME AND INCOME TO AN ACCUSED 
WHO IS DETAINED DURING THE PENDENCY OF A 
CASE EITHER BECAUSE OF THE UNBAILABILITY OF 
THE OFFENSE CHARGED OR FOR FAILURE TO PUT 
UP BAIL BY REASON OF POVERTY BUT IS ACQUIT- 
TED AFTER TRIAL OR RELEASED BY THE DIS- 
MISSAL OF THE CASE FOR CAUSES NOT ATTRIBUT- 
ABI£ TO HIM. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 95, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION EXPANDING THE SCOPE OF 
THE PROHIBITION ON DOUBLE COMPENSATION 
SUCH AS ALLOWANCES, PER DIEMS AND REP- 
RESENTATION EXPENSES AS WELL AS COMPENSA- 
TION FOR ANOTHER BUT COMPATIBLE OFFICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 96, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION WHICH SEEKS TO HASTEN 
THE INTEGRATION OF THE CULTURAL COMMUNI- 
TIES OF THE COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 97, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ADD A NINTH RAY TO THE SUN OF 
THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL FLAG. 

Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 98, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION LIMITING THE SUSPENSION 
OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS BY THE PRESI- 
DENT TO THIRTY (30) DAYS ONLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights.’ 

Proposed Resolution No. 99, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE ENTIRE ARTICLE VI OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights’ 

Proposed Resolution No. 100, entitled; 

RESOLUTION URGING THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSION TO LOOK INTO THE ISSUES AFFECTING 
THE URBAN POOR. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon and Garcia. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Amado S. Tolentino, Jr. of the National 
Environmental Protection Council attaching a draft 
resolution proposing a constitutional provision on 
environmental protection. 

(Communication No. 8 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Mr. Nicolas Balioza of Tagum, 
Davao del Norte, proposing a federal presidential form 
of government. 


FRIDAY, JUNE 13, 1986 


143 


(Communication No. 9 — Constitutional Commission of 
1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Augusto A. Abadesco of 4012-E Dangal 
St., Sta. Mesa, Manila, proposing the incorporation in 
the constitution of provisions on government service, 
expenditures and enterprises; election of government 
officials; the armed forces; socio-economic democratiza- 
tion, and land reform. 

(Communication No. 10 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Mr. Conrado A. Estuart, City 
Secretary of Davao City, transmitting the proposals of 
Mr. Jose T. Rafael of Mandaue City on electoral 
reforms. 

(Communication No. 1 1 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move for the adjournment of the 
session until Monday at three o’clock in the afternoon 
so that we can take up the agenda prepared by the ad 
hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. Part of the 
agenda is the approval of the proposed major issues to 
be taken up in the public hearings, the approval of the 
proposed program of public hearings, the approval of 
the proposed sites for public hearings, and the submis- 
sion of preferences by individual Members regarding 
these public hearings, and other matters which should 
be taken up in the South Caucus Room immediately 
after our adjournment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Chair understand that 
this Proposed Resolution No. 72 is being postponed to 
some other date? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President, because under 
the Rules there has to be a one-day notice after dis- 
tribution of this resolution before it is taken up on 
Third Reading. So we will have to postpone and defer 
the Third Reading of said resolution proposing to adopt 
the Preamble of the Constitution. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
MR. RAMA. I ask for a suspension of session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 9:40 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 9:47 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to postpone on Third Reading Proposed Resolu- 
tion No 72? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 


motion is approved. 

The motion to adjourn until Monday at three o clock 
in the afternoon is also approved in order that the body 
can assemble for a workshop and a caucus on public 
hearings and other issues. 


It was 9:49 a.m. 



i 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


145 


R.C.C. NO. 10 
Monday, June 16, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:18 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jose D. Calderon. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. CALDERON. Almighty God: On this, the tenth 
day of the deliberations of this Constitutional Commis- 
sion, we beseech You once again to guide our minds and 
our hearts, so that the thoughts and the feelings that 
emanate from each of us will be most sincere and noble, 
and reflect not only our individual personal will but the 
will as well of the Filipino people, in whose behalf we 
seek to fashion a fundamental law that will embody our 
collective ideals and aspirations. 

Enlighten us. Almighty God, open our eyes and 
minds so that we may see and understand, if it is not 
possible to appreciate and accept, those ideas and pro- 
posals that may differ from our own. Let the light of 
reason shine on our discussions and debates, so that we 
may exchange ideas, thoughts and arguments without 
heat and without passion but only with clarity and 
sincerity. 

Teach each of us, O Lord, that we are here for a 
Good, higher than our own personal beliefs; that we are 
here for a Purpose, higher than our personal ambitions, 
that we are here for an End, higher than our personal 
destinies because, we are all here for a Good, a Purpose 
and an End that encompass the collective beliefs, the. 
collective ambitions and the collective destinies of the 
Filipino people. 

Grant us, 0 Lord, the wisdom to select from alterna- 
tive proposals those that will be right for and acceptable 


to our people. Grant us the courage to espouse our 
beliefs with all the logic that talent can muster. 


But, Almighty God, grant us also the grace to accept 
that some of our proposals may not be acceptable to all; 
that the greater good of the greater number of people 
may require the adoption of proposals other than our 
own, however well-intentioned, well-meaning and sin- 
cere these unchosen proposed alternatives may be. 


Bless, 0 Lord, each and every Member of this Consti- 
jtional Commission. Bless our officers. Bless President 
iquino, whom You made Your instrument for the 
beration of the Filipino people from the bonds of 
granny; who, in turn, in behalf of the Filipino peop e 
as called this Constitutional Commission m order that 
he Filipino nation may once again enshrine the nationa 
urpose in a Charter that will safeguard their freedoms 

nd their future. 

Bless us, join us, be with us today. Almighty o . 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Lerum Present* 


Maambong 


Present 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present 

Alonto 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Azeuna 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Garcia 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Janiir 

. Present 

Laurel 

, . Present 


Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 

NoUedo Present 

Ople Present 

Padilla Present 

Quesada Present 

Rama Present 

Regalado Present 

Reyes de los . . . Present 

Rigos Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 

Rosales Present 

Sarmiento Present 

Suarez Present* 

Sumulong Present 

Tadeo Present 

Tan Present 


* Appeared after the roll call 


146 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


Tingson Present Villacorta Present 

Trenas Present Villegas Present 

Uka Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 46 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of the last session and that we ap- 
prove the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Report, the President making the cor- 
responding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 101, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A POLICY GOVERNING THE DETERMINA- 
TION OF JUST COMPENSATION IN THE EXPROPRIA- 
TION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY WHEN IT IS DONE BY 
THE GOVERNMENT AND WHEN IT IS DONE BY 
AUTHORIZED CORPORATIONS, FIRM OR ASSOCIA- 
TIONS AND TO PROVIDE THAT IF IN THE LATTER 
CASE A WRIT OF POSSESSION IS SECURED, RENTALS, 
EXCLUSIVE OF THE COMPENSATION, SHALL BE 
PAID UP TO THE TIME THE CASE IS SUBMITTED FOR 
DECISION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 102, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION MAKING IT A POLICY OF THE 


STATE TO PROVIDE FREE AND COMPULSORY 
PRIMARY, INTERMEDIATE AND HIGH SCHOOL 
EDUCATION AND TO ESTABLISH IN EVERY BARRIO 
OR AGGRUPATION OF BARRIOS WITH A POPULA- 
TION OF AT LEAST THREE THOUSAND A COMPLETE 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL AND A HIGH SCHOOL. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 103, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT NO TEMPORARY DE- 
TENTION SHALL BE ALLOWED IN CASES WHERE 
THE OFFENSE CHARGED DOES NOT CARRY WITH IT 
THE PENALTY OF IMPRISONMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 104, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ENCOURAGE PARENTS TO SEND 
THEIR CHILDREN TO SCHOOL AND THE ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF PRIVATE SCHOLARSHIP GRANTS TO POOR 
BUT DESERVING STUDENTS BY ALLOWING AS DE- 
DUCTIBLE EXPENSES FOR INCOME TAX PURPOSES 
ALL EXPENSES INCURRED FOR EDUCATION OR 
GIVEN AS SCHOLARSHIP GRANTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 105, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT IN THE EVENT THAT A 
PORTION OF THE PHILIPPINE TERRITORY FALLS 
UNDER THE MILITARY OCCUPATION OF ANOTHER 
STATE, SAID TERRITORY IS NOT CONSIDERED 
WITHDRAWN FROM THE JURISDICTION OF THE 
CONSTITUTION AND DOMESTIC LAWS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES DURING THE OCCUPATION AND 
NEITHER IS ITS SOVEREIGNTY OVER IT SUSPENDED. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 106, entitled: 

RESOLUTION URGING THE COMMISSION TO ADD AN 
ARTICLE TO THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION TO BE 
ENTITLED “HUMAN RESOURCES.” 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 107, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE THAT IN A STATE OF MAR- 
TIAL LAW, THE CIVILIAN AUTHORITY SHALL CON- 
TINUE TO BE SUPREME OVER THE MILITARY, THE 
BASIC RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE SHALL REMAIN IN- 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


147 


VIOLABLE, AND THE CIVILIAN COURTS SHALL CON- 
TINUE TO FUNCTION AND EXERCISE THEIR JURIS- 
DICTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 108, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT NO ELECTIVE OFFI- 
CIAL SHALL BE ELIGIBLE FOR APPOINTMENT TO 
ANY OFFICE OR POSITION DURING HIS TERM OF 
OFFICE, AND THAT NO CANDIDATE WHO HAS LOST 
IN AN ELECTION SHALL, WITHIN TWO YEARS FOD 
LOWING SUCH ELECTION, BE APPOINTED OR REAP- 
POINTED TO ANY OFFICE IN THE GOVERNMENT, 
OR IN ANY GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED 
CORPORATION, OR IN ANY OF ITS SUBSIDIARIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 109, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR INITIATIVE AND 
REFERENDUM TO THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo, Monsod, Nieva, Beng- 
zon, Jr. and Bernas. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 10, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AMENDING SECTION 1 (1) AND (2), ARTI- 
CLE XII (C) OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION BY RE- 
DUCING THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF THE COM- 
MISSION ON ELECTIONS FROM NINE TO SEVEN, AND 
PROVIDING THAT AT THE TIME OF THEIR APPOINT- 
MENT THEY SHALL BE AT LEAST FORTY YEARS OT 
AGE AND A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS, INCLW- 
ING THE CHAIRMAN, SHALL BE MEMBERS OF TIffi 
PHILIPPINE BAR WITH AT LEAST TEN YEARS OF 
PRACTICE AND THAT IN CASE AN INCUMBENT COM- 
MISSIONER IS APPOINTED CHAIRMAN, HIS AGGRE- 
GATE TENURE SHALL NOT EXCEED SEVEN YEARS. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz and Monsod. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. Ill, entitled: 

RESOLUTION SUBMITTING TO THE PEOPLE IN A PLEBI- 
SCITE THE QUESTION ON WHETHER TO HOLD AN 
ELECTION FOR PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT 
WITHIN A FIXED PERIOD AFTER THE RATIFICATION 
OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 1 12, entitled: 

RESOLUTION REMOVING FROM THE SUPREME COURT 
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION OVER ALL COURTS 
AND PERSONNEL THEREOF AND VESTING THE 
SAME IN A JUDICIAL COMMISSION AND FOR OTHER 
PURPOSES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 113, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ACCORDING TO FILIPINO 
CITIZENS THE RIGHT TO STANDARDS OF LIVING 
NECESSARY TO MAINTAIN THEIR WELL-BEING; AND 
THE PROVISION BY THE STATE OF ESSENTIAL 
SERVICES PERTINENT THERETO. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada and Bennagen. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 

Proposed Resolution No. 114, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION OF THE EDUCATIONAL AIMS 
OF EDUCATIONAL INSTHUTIONS IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES WHICH SHALL INCLUDE, AMONG OTHERS, 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH CONSCIOUSNESS 

and the broad perspectives of a LIBERAL 

EDUCATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Honorable Christian S. Monsod as 
National Chairman of the National Movement for Free 
Elections, informing the Constitutional Commission 
that Namfrel would like to participate in the constitu- 
tion-making process and has designated Atty. Edgardo J. 
Angara and Atty. Eduardo F. Hernandez to act in 
Namfrel’s behalf, and that its Executive Council has 
approved a resolution to mobilize its chapters nation- 
wide for the public hearings of the Commission. 
(Communication No. 12 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 

Communication from the Movement f(^ a Filipino 
Federal Republic signed by Mr. Sammy C. Occena of 
Tionko Avenue, Davao City and 186 other members 
proposing a federal republic. 

(Communication No. 13 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Jorge C. Salonga of Angeles City, pro- 
posing the following: preservation of the definition of 


148 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


the territory of the Philippines as found in the 1935 
Constitution; declaring command responsibility in the 
exercise of government functions as a national policy; 
and that decisions of the Supreme Court and the 
generally accepted principles of international law shall 
not form part of the law of the land. 

(Communication No. 14 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from the Council for the Welfare of Children 
signed by Dr. Fe del Mundo and Judge Regina G. 
Ordonez-Benitez, transmitting proposals on principles 
and policies protecting children and youth. 

(Communication No. 15 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 2 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 123, prepared by the Committee on the National 
Economy and Patrimony, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE CERTAIN 
PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE XIV OF THE 1973 CONSTI- 
TUTION ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY 
OF THE NATION IN THE 1986 CONSTITUTION, 

recommending that the same be approved, pending 
further consideration of other proposed resolutions on 
the other provisions of Article XIV of the 1973 Consti- 
tution. 

Sponsored by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Tingson be 
recognized to make a minor correction on the proposed 
Preamble which will be ready for Third Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, before we go 
through the process of approving our Preamble on Third 
Reading, may I, on behalf of the Committee, point out 
the fact that on the third line, the word “to” should not 
be included. The Preamble should, therefore, read in 
part: “We, the sovereign Filipino people, imploring the 
aid of Almighty God to build a just and humane society 
and establish a government that shall embody our ideals 
and aspirations.” 


When we eliminate the word “to,” we will have 
exactly 72 words. Also, having talked to our colleagues 
here in the Constitutional Commission, there is a una- 
nimous feeling that there is a favorable reaction from 
the public with regard to our approved Preamble. One 
reason, perhaps, is the use of the phrase “Almighty 
God” since our countrymen are incurably religious. And 
so, we have expressed ourselves along that line. 

Also, Madam President, the word “love” in this 
Preamble has also met a very favorable reaction. If I 
may be allowed to say so, as somebody said: 

“A bell is not a bell until it is rung. 

A song is not a song until it is sung; 

Love is not placed in our hearts to stay 

Love is never love until it is shared and given away.” 

That is what we desire to do in this new Constitution 
through this Preamble. So, Madam President, our Com- 
mittee is very happy about all of these, especially the 
approval of our Preamble. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us go back to Commissioner 
Tingson’s original statement about the correction of the 
printed copy, the deletion of the word “to.” Is this just 
a typographical error? 

MR. TINGSON. We maintain that that is a mere typo- 
graphical errror. We checked the record of the proceed- 
ings of that particular day with the Secretariat and there 
was no word “to” before “establish.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Tingson deleting 
on line 3 the word “to” before “establish” since it is a 
mere typographical error? 

MR. TINGSON . Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will put this to a vote since no 
further amendments should be made on Third Reading. 

Is there any objection to the motion of Commissioner 
Tingson to delete on line 3 the word “to” before the 
word “establish” on the ground that it is a typographic- 
al error? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I was wondering whether this 
body could reconsider the approval of the Preamble on 
Second Reading to enable the Committee to make the 
change it proposes and also to consider one other pur- 
pose which I will explain, if I am permitted now or after 
the body has reconsidered the approval of the Preamble 
on Second Reading. 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


149 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 3:40 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. It is the understanding of the 
Chair. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 


At 3:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. BROCKA. I do not know if this is the right par- 
liamentary procedure, but I just want to make a com- 
ment on what Commissioner Tingson has said earlier 
about Resolution No. 72. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Concepcion be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 

Madam President, I withdraw my motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion is withdrawn. 

So, the Chair is left with the original motion of Com- 
missioner Tingson to delete the word “to” before “esta- 
blish.” 

Is there any objection that the word “to” be de- 
leted? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment 
is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we vote on Third Reading 
on Resolution No. 72, the proposed Preamble to the 
Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Before we approve the motion, I 
would like to pose a parliamentary inquiry. 

As announced and as stated in the Calendar of Busi- 
ness, we will vote on Third Reading on Resolution o. 
72. Would it mean that everything in this resolution, 
including the “Whereases,” is contained in the Constitu- 
tion? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair understands that only 
the Preamble is contained in the Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. Just for the subsequent acts of the 
Commission, when voting on Third Reading, only the 
text of the resolution should be mimeographed or 
printed. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. BROCKA. We have discussed this proposed 
Preamble for the last two days. And I think some of us 
have been traumatized by the discussions that went on, 
wondering what words to use, whether it is Almighty 
God” or “Divine Providence.” We went on for two days 
and I personally felt very uncomfortable with the result. 

I iust want to put on record my feelings about this pro- 
posed resolution. Precisely because we have gone 
through the very unique experience of a peaceful revolu- 
tinn I felt that we should have come up with something 
Lre original. I felt that the proposed Preamble is just 
Z additfon or subtraction of a word or two and is 
basically the same Preamble embodied in the 1973 
Constitution. When Commissioner Tingson said that the 
reaction of the public was very favorable, I had a dif- 
ferent reaction. My friends called me up and o her 
people chided me that ours is the only Preamble that 
wntains the word “love” and that there is really 

nothing new in it. 

In other words, it sounds so noble with all those 
words like truth, justice, freedom, love, equality, and 
neace And I think if there were another word that 
Siould have been included here, it should have been 
“independent” or “independence. I think we have 
been L overwhelmed with the 

Srfstia^oTl do not believe in these religious terms, but 
fSk we have been so overwhelmed with the people s 
1 fVm that I feel — pardon the language — the word 

L”ugr«°w«riainSl^ovI^ 

tnougu o particular case, 1 

f „d r[erribricky ^as hoping that precisely 

say. 1 am suuy u “invp” was nut to a vote. 

When the amendment to insert love P .. 

I raised my hand, together with some other colleagues, 

against it. 


150 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


My point is; Could we not come up with something 
substantive, with all that is essential, spiritual, physical, 
social, economic, political, and probably, give this to a 
writer who could put it prayerfully so that it would 
sound joyous, harmonious and glorious? I have nothing 
against the nobleness of the wordings of the Preamble, 
but when we stop and think about it objectively, the 
rhetorics and the way it is structured, I just find it icky. 
When we say: “And a regime of truth, justice, freedom, 
love, equality and peace,” it seems we are looking for 
some other noble word so that we could put everything 
in it, and yet, we missed out the word “independence.” 
That we are an independent nation is not in that par- 
ticular Constitution. 

I am just voicing out my opinion and I just want to 
say that the people I have come in contact with are not 
in agreement with the proposed Preamble. They felt 
that we should come up with something more original 
and less icky. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka can express 
his doubts or misgivings during the explanation of his 
vote on Third Reading. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, I am sorry, I do 
not know the parliamentary procedure. If this Preamble 
is put to a vote, my comment would be my explanation 
to my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is all right. Commissioner 
Brocka. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I support the contention and even 
the lengthy explanation of Commissioner Brocka on the 
word “love.” We must elevate and dignify not only the 
Constitution, but also its phraseology, especially the 
Preamble which will be memorized by our children and 
grandchildren. We all believe in love. We are a peace- 
loving people, but the connotation of love varies and the 
ramification and its interpretation may be as one sees it. 
So, in the Constitution, let us elevate the Preamble to a 
dignified level so that every word carries weight, con- 
notation and strength. I do not mean that I do not 
possess love or that I have no love towards my fellow- 
men. What I mean is, let us elevate the Constitution and 
place in it only words that carry dignity and strength, 
something which we can recite without anyone inter- 
preting every word in the Constitution. So, let us 
dignify the Preamble, whether in the American Consti- 
tution or in our Constitution, that carries this word 
“love.” 

I agree with Commissioner Brocka that if we exclude 
the word “love,” the Preamble would be more lofty. 


more serious and more dignified and one which we and 
our children could recite and memorize without any 
injury to other people. 

THE PRESIDENT. We now proceed to the voting on 
Third Reading. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I have the floor first? Could 
this suggestion not be referred to the body for a recon- 
sideration? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:01 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:09 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, dear colleagues, 
1 am dropping my suggestion for a reconsideration. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body, therefore, can now 
proceed to vote on Third Reading. As stated earlier, any 
manifestation can be made to explain your affirmative 
or negative vote or your abstention. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

I was personally surprised to read a copy of proposed 
Resolution No. 72 calling for a voting on Third Reading. 
I was made to understand that we are going to rule with 
definiteness on the constitutional provisions regarding 
the Preamble portion after we shall have read the senti- 
ments of the people as reflected in the public hearings 
scheduled to be conducted all over the country. 

Madam President, I was under the impression— please 
correct me if I am wrong — that the final voting on 
Third Reading of the Preamble would be scheduled only 
after we shall have received pertinent feedbacks from 
our people during our dialogue with them. I have heard 
the exposition eloquently made by Commissioner 
Brocka, and I share his sentiments regarding a certain 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


151 


degree of dissonance in the way the Preamble of our 
Constitution has been formulated. 

Be that as it may, we would like to raise a parlia- 
mentary situation. We respectfully move to defer the 
voting on Third Reading of this Preamble until after we 
shall have made our consultations with the people. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just for the record, the Chair 
would like to be clarified on the Commissioner’s state- 
ment that there has been a commitment on the part of 
the body or of the Chair to postpone the Third Reading 
on the Preamble. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, I did not say there 
was a commitment but I was under that impression — I 
made that very clear. 

THE PRESIDENT. We can refer to the transcript of 
the proceedings. 


might go over the required three calendar days, which 
would be a violation of this rule. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
know - since the motion does not specify - up to when 
we can “defer.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Point of clarification. Madam Presi- 
dent. I did say the period; that is, after we shall have 
consulted our people regarding their sentiments on this 
Preamble. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can there be a specific date? 

MR. SUAREZ. What about July 7? 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, the transcript will 
not yield the fact that immediately after the Second 
Reading we can move on to the Third Reading; I hope 
the records will bear me out in this regard. In other 
words. Madam President, the voting on Third Reading 
could very well be deferred without violating whatever 
understanding may have been reached among the Com- 
missioners in connection with the final approval of the 
Preamble. 

So at this juncture. Madam President, we are respect- 
fully submitting a formal motion to defer final voting 
on Third Reading on the Preamble. After all, in princi- 
ple, the Preamble has already been voted upon on 
Second Reading by a vote of 27 against two; so it stands 
3s having been approved. My only fear. Madam Presi- 
t^ent, is that there could be dramatic changes which 
might change the minds of the Commissioners in the 
final voting. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Is there anyone seconding the 
motion? 

Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, Section 28 of our 
Rules reads: 

No such resolution shall be voted on Third Reading 
unless mimeographed copies thereof shall have been dis- 
tributed to the Members of the Constitutional Commis- 
sion at least one day but not more than three calendar days 
before final action thereon is taken. 

Copies of the resolution were distributed last Friday. 

THE PRESIDENT. That was June 13. 

MR. RODRIGO. So today is the third calendar day 
and if we postpone voting on it until tomorrow, we 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of Commis- 
ioner Suarez to the statement of Commissioner Rod- 
igo calling our attention to Section 28 of our Rules. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, I was listening to 
he reading of that particular provision by Commissioner 
lodrigo and, personally, I feel that it is supportive of 
ny motion to defer. In other words, the consideration 
his afternoon is not even sanctioned by our Rules be- 
•ause we were not given that reasonable opportunity to 
inalvze the provision that is sought to be voted upon 
hfs afternoon because of the one-day, but not more 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


AR DE CASTRO. If we go back to the records, 

nmissioner Garcia had moved for the defermen of 
final voting on the Preamble because he would like 
hold public hearings on this. Cominissioner Garcia 
Uon was put to a vote - if I remember right - and it 

; put down by the body. 

f we were to defer the Third Reading on the Pream- 
and wait for the public hearings to b® 
there would be further amendments or changes, 
uld we go back to the period of amendments whic 
have already terminated in accordance with our 


THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments on 
this? The motion to defer will be put to a vote . . . 


MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 


152 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, even if we approve 
the Preamble on Third Reading, I personally believe that 
we can still change the wordings in the Committee on 
Style, precisely because the Preamble is not technically 
part of the Constitution. If the Preamble should con- 
flict with the substantive portions which we will have 
agreed upon later on, we will have to change the word- 
ings in the Committee on Style. 

Therefore, if during the public hearings we will en- 
counter certain responses of the people to make changes 
in the Preamble, I think we will still be free to do it in 
the Committee on Style. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, considering that 
the motion is to defer final voting on the Preamble until 
July 7, then, clearly this is in violation of Section 28 of 
the Rules which states; 

No such resolution shall be voted on Third Reading 
unless mimeographed copies thereof shall have been dis- 
tributed to the Members of the Constitutional Commission 
at least one day but not more than three calendar days 
before final action thereon is taken. 

So, unless we suspend that Rule, I do not think it is 
in order for us to vote on the motion. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session. 

It was 4:20 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 4:25 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we respectfully request that the 
final voting on the Preamble be deferred until tomor- 
row. That is an amendment to my motion for deferment 
of its consideration to July 7 because after going over 
the Rules with Commissioner Rodrigo, we were con- 
vinced that he is correct in his reading of that particular 
provision. So, may we formally move that the final or 
Third Reading and final voting on the Preamble be 
deferred until tomorrow. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Oplc is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Before we act on the motion, may we 
know exactly the reason it is being deferred for tomor- 
row because we were given the reason for the original 
motion to postpone until July. In other words, this is 
insufficient until we can add to it the grace of public 
hearings until July. But why defer until tomorrow? We 
have not been given the reason yet. It is a good habit 
generally to understand what we are voting upon. 

MR. SUAREZ. I originally moved for the deferment 
of the voting on Third Reading of this Preamble to July 
7, but when my attention was called by Commissioner 
Rodrigo to the provisions of Section 28 of our Rules, I 
acknowledged the fact that my motion could be viola- 
tive of our Rules. On the other hand, we also feel that 
we need a little more time to consider this Preamble as 
proposed to be voted upon by the Committee on 
Preamble. 

MR. OPLE. If the reason is so we can sleep over it, I 
would like to support the motion of Commissioner 
Suarez. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to defer the voting on Third Reading of Resolu- 
tion No. 72 for tomorrow in order for the Members to 
prepare for whatever vote they may want to cast on this 
particular resolution and also to prepare the explunation 
of their votes which will be in order? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog" 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, some of the 
drafts submitted by the various entities — UP Law Cen- 
ter, PHILCONSA, etc. — were referred to the Steering 
Committee. Technically, the Steering Committee would 
have to endorse these and break them up into various 
sections to be referred to the proper committees. To 
save time, I would like to propose an omnibus motion 
to be approved by this body to the effect that the 
various drafts proposed by the various entities such as 
UP, PHILCONSA and the others, be automatically 
referred from the Steering Committee to the various 
committees so that the Steering Committee will just 
write an interoffice memo to these committees. That is 
the motion. Madam President. So, I will not be coming 
to the plenary hall every time there is such a situation. 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


153 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to make a comment 
on the motion before it is voted upon? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the Rules, the Steering Com- 
mittee has, among others, the duty to coordinate with 
the other organic committees. Would the motion, there- 
fore, be necessary when it is within its jurisdiction to 
coordinate with the other committees, to refer, through 
the exercise of its own functions, these drafts to the 
different committees with proper instructions without 
the necessity of consent of the Commission? 

MR. BENGZON. If that is the ruling of the Chair, 
then there is no need for the motion. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that it would 
be more in accordance with our Rules if the motion of 
the Chairman of the Steering Committee be acted upon 
here in plenary session so as to avoid any regrets or dif- 
ficulties about it. So, the motion is in order and the 
motion will be acted upon and submitted to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the motion of the Chair- 
man of the Steering Committee, please sd.y yea. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are against, please say 
nay. (Silence) 

The yeas have it; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized again? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. The Steering Committee has noticed 
that there have been a lot of overlapping committee 
meetings so that a lot of the Commissioners are unable 
to attend the committee meetings that they wish to 
attend. So, I would like to move: First, that the daily 
plenary sessions be limited to half an hour to one hour, 

just to dispose of the Reference of Business after which 

the plenary session shall be suspended and the rest of 
the afternoon be devoted to committee or public hear- 
ings. Second, apropos of this, the whole Commission 
would go into a caucus so that the Steering Committee, 
upon the suggestion of Commissioner Monsod, could 
discuss a formula which, if implemented, would result 
in a minimum of overlapping of committee meetings. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I make some 
suggestions apropos of the difficulty we had with respect 
to approval on Third Reading because I anticipate this 
to come up again and again. I think the various commit- 
tees are beginning to submit their committee reports 
little by little, and as soon as these committee reports 
are submitted, they will be calendared for discussion 
and we will be having plenary sessions. And yet, we do 
have a commitment to hold public hearings and it would 
seem to me that we should honor this commitment of 
holding public hearings. We should make it possible for 
us to honor this commitment to hold public hearings 
before we discuss all the reports. So, I recommend the 
consideration of the possibility of suspending our 
plenary sessions and devoting a whole week just to 
public hearings instead of waiting for the weekends. Let 
us farm out during the week and get as many pubhc 
hearings out of the way as possible so that when we do 
consider the committee reports, we can say that we 
considered the committee reports against the back- 
ground of what we heard from the people. Otherwise, 
te will again run the risk of approving something before 
any public hearing is held as we did with the report on 

the Preamble. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, we appreciate the 
observations of Commissioner Bernas. However, organiz- 
ing 45 provincial public hearings is not an easy task and 
he Ad Hoc Committee on Public Hearings, therefore, 
wanted a lot of lead time in order to make these cori- 
Stations really meaningful. That is why the first offi- 
puWic heLings in the provinces will be on the 
28th*^and on two other consecutive Saturdays aftM 
that I think if the intent is to facUitate the hearings so 
hat' we can get on with the plenary sessions, there will 
be a very big logistical problem since we will not be able 
fo hold thL tarings in one week. That is why we 
have proposed that they should be held on weekends. 
However, we do have a proposal which we hope, will be 
faLn up in the caucus - that the plenary sessions be 
onN for purposes of First Reading and that all of the 
work for the next three weeks be committee work, 
either in discussions or in interviewmg 
source persons. In that way we can do all the Prepajato 
ry work in the committee plus the public hearings 
weekends so that we can adhere to our schedule of 
July 7 for submission of committee reports. 

FR BERNAS. Madam President, I have no problem 
with that, but I think this will involve an amendment o, 
our Rules. We have to amend the Rules to make it 


154 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


possible for us to slow down the consideration of THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is recog- 
committee reports. nized. 


MR. ROMULO. May I say something about that, 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. That is why, apropos of the com- 
ment of Commissioner Bernas, the intention of the 
Rules Committee was really not to submit individual 
resolutions approved by the committee but for the com- 
mittee to submit a complete report on July 7. Thus, 
that will permit us to go ahead with the public hearings. 
We should also mention that each standing committee is 
starting to have public hearings throughout this period 
plus the outreach program of weekend public hearings. 
It is our belief that, if we stick to that schedule and we 
submit complete committee reports on July 7, we will 
be able to meet the timetable. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words. Commissioner 
Romulo, does the Chair understand that after July 7, 
these committee reports will be in order for debates 
and interpellations? 


MR. SUMULONG. Commissioner Regalado is perfect- 
ly right. There was an oversight. Section 22 was one of 
the provisional rules that should have been deleted after 
we had approved the timetable which was prepared by 
the Committee on Rules. Under the timetable, all the 
committees should finish their work, the hearings and 
the preparation and submission of committee reports 
within four weeks; that is, until July 7. So when we ap- 
proved the timetable, that provision in the provisional 
rules should have been deemed correspondingly repealed 
because it is in conflict with what we approved as the 
timetable of the Commission. Therefore, Madam Presi- 
dent, I ask for unanimous consent to have the first 
sentence in Section 22 of the Rules which says: 

Section 22. Committee Report. — Each committee shall 
submit a report on each resolution read at least within ten 
days after the resolution has been referred to it. 

— correspondingly repealed by the timetable which we 
approved under Section 9 of the Rules. 

MR. OPLE. If that is a motion, I would like to second 
It, Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President, that is the 
intention of our timetable, but whether we can meet it 
or not is another question. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, in connection 
with the observations of Commissioner Bernas and 
Commissioner Romulo, this morning I brought to the 
attention of Commissioner Romulo, who was a Member 
of the Ad Hoc Committee on Rules, a seeming oversight 
here which should be clarified. Under Rule 6, Section 
22 on Committee Reports, it is provided that each com- 
mittee shall submit a report on each resolution read at 
least within 10 days after the resolution had been 
referred to it. I think it could have been an oversight 
because subsequent thereto we agreed on a timetable. It 
was my understanding that this 10-day period within 
which the committee report would be submitted would 
be at the end of the public hearing in accordance with 
our timetable. Otherwise, the committee would be 
forced to submit its committee report while the hearings 
would still be going on because of the 10-day stricture. 
So, I think there should be some clarification on the 
meaning of Section 22 which, if literally taken, limits 
us to 10 days after referral of the resolution to the 
committee. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Is there any objection? 

Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. I have no objection. Madam Presi- 


nu ' u 1 Sumulong? I 

Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President 
iterate my motion? ’ 


may 


I now re- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENGZON. First is that henceforth, beginning 
tomorrow, we shall limit our plenary session to, say, 
between half an hour to one hour just for the purpose 
of going through the First Reading of the various resolu- 
tions and their referral to various committees in order to 
comply with our Rules. And, second, that we go into a 
caucus in order to be able to discuss the formula to 
avoid or at least minimize the overlapping of committee 
meetings. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. I would like to ask a few questions, if 
I may. Would that imply, therefore, that committee 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


155 


reports for Second Reading be done or dispensed with MR. BENGZON. Accepted, Madam President, 
after July 7 or beginning July 7 after the committees 

will have submitted their final reports? MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. The calendaring of committee 
reports will be after July 7. But, of course, after a public 
hearing, if a committee finishes its reports before 
July 7, please submit them to the Secretariat and Steer- 
ing Committee so that as we receive the reports, we can 
decide which ones to calendar first. On the debates on 
Second Reading, subinission of these committee reports 
will have to be after July 7. 

MR. GASCON. I would like to second the motion 
then. 

THE PRESIDENT. Actually, there are two subjects in 
the motion. First, whether or not we shall approve that 
the sessions be held only for half an hour or an hour. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, for half an hour to an hour just 
for the purpose of complying with the Rules on First 
Reading, referring the proposed resolutions to the 
respective committees. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we act on that first motion? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Do I understand that in the light of the 
motion approved a few minutes ago, the exception, at 
least in the case of tomorrow, is the action of this Com- 
mission on the vote on Third Reading on the proposed 
Preamble? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, and the continuation of the 
proposal. Madam President, instead of starting the 
session at three o’clock, we start it at two o’clock so 
that we will have more time for committee meetings. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I would like to 
propose an amendment to the motion; that is, to add 
UNLESS THE PRESIDENT DEEMS IT WISE TO PRO- 
LONG THE SESSION, because there may be exception- 
al cases when we might have to prolong the session. 


THE PRESIDENT. Vice-President Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I have no objec- 
tion to what has been said about public hearings which 
should be considered by the different committees so 
that we can consult with and appraise the sentiments of 
our people. But in this motion, from June 16, today, up 
to July 7, the session hall will just be a formality in 
having the many resolutions calendared for First Read- 
ing. After that, it is intended to have the Assembly 
adjourned. 


Madam President, considering the time constraints 
nd considering that the people also want to hear our 
iews - it is very good for us to hear the views of the 
,eople but the people also, I think, expect to hear our 
lews because we have been appointed or designated as 
;ommissioners to draft a Constitution- I feel that as 
ve have had a freewheeling discussion on Article 1, the 
•reamble we should, for example, this afternoon or 
omorrow, continue the freewheeling discussion on 
article II and perhaps on Article III so that the di - 
erent Commissioners may express their views on these 
"sual and necessary portions of the Constitution. Other- 
^se the people m^t say, “Well, from June 2 to June 
6 you have passed on Second Readmg only the 
, reamble. Then on June 16 up to July 7, you have not 
anything in the session hall, and the Commission- 
rs have mT ^pressed their views on the different 
articles that follow the Preamble.” 

So I am not in favor. Madam President, of making 
his Assembly, from June 16 to July 7, a mere formal 
uimbly where we will just listen to so many resolu- 
Shat are being calendared on Fust Reading. 

T U wnhiv <5iibmit that we should express our views 
■ttout disregarding the views of the people on all these 
rre ^nt Artfcles that follow because, while we must 
.fferent ^ eople want to listen to 

'’^\d the ^orf taUrtant thing is that we crystaUize 
omelws on these essential parts of the Constitution. 

c T obiecting to the motion to make the As- 
emWy meetings only a formality to hear th® 

esolutions filed. There are so many o^ 




MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 
MR. PADILLA. I respectfully submit. 


MR. BENGZON. Yes, that is accepted. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that amendment acceptable? 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


156 


MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. I would like to call for a vote now. 
But before I do, may I just state that the points raised 
by Commissioner Padilla could be achieved when the 
body discusses the resolutions on Second Reading, when 
the committee reports are reported out and the people 
can hear our respective views on these matters. May 1 
now call for a vote on the motion. Madam President? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 4:51 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:55 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. I would like to withdraw my 
original motion and substitute it with a motion that we 
adjourn now and that the committee chairmen then go 
into a caucus to discuss precisely: (1) the matters that 
were raised in my original motion and the comments of 
Commissioner Padilla; (2) the formula to avoid or, 
at least, minimize the overlapping of committee meet- 
ings; and (3) such other matters as may still come up 
during the caucus. Thereafter, tomorrow, during the 
plenary session, the results of this caucus will be re- 
ported to the body at two or three o’clock. 

What is the pleasure of the Chair? 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us have it first at three 
o’clock. 

MR. BENGZON. All right. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection now to the 
motion that we adjourn and go into a caucus? 

The caucus will include the Vice-Chairmen, if they 
desire to attend and any Member would be welcome 
also but essentially the Chairmen and the Vice- 
Chairmen. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Excuse me. Madam President, but 
maybe it should be a caucus of everybody because there 
are some matters we want to raise on the public hearings 
in which we need the attendance of all the Commis- 
sioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that for this afternoon? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about that? 

MR. BENGZON. Accepted, Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the motion is to adjourn and 
to go into a caucus for all the Members of the Commis- 
sion to thresh out all these problems that have been 
presented before us by Commissioner Bengzon, Vice- 
President Padilla and the others. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Where is the venue. Madam Presi- 
dent? 

THE PRESIDENT. It is in the South Caucus Room. 

^ The session is adjourned until tomorrow at three 
o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 5:58 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


157 


R.C.C. NO. 11 
Tuesday, June 17, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:30 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Crispino M. de Castro. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 


Laurel Present 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 

NoUedo Present 

Ople Present* 

Padilla Present 

Quesada Present 

Rama Present 

Regalado Present 

Reyes de los ... Present 

Rigos Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 46 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . Present 

Rosales 

, . . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

, . . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . . Present 

Tadeo 

. . . Present 

Tan 

, . . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

, . . Present 

Trenas 

, . . Present 

Uka 

, . . Present 

Villacorta . . 

. . . Present 

Villegas .... 

. . . Present 


MR. DE CASTRO. Panginoon, kami po ay naririto 
ngayon upang bumalangkas ng isang Saligang Batas na 
nararapat at minimithi ng sambayanang Pilipino. Bigyan 
Mo po kami ng lakas, masusing pagpupunyagi at sapat 
na karunungan upang matamo namin ang layunin at 
pangarap ng aming bayan. Huwag Mo pong bayaang 
malihis ang aming landas sa aming gawain upang ito ay 
matapos namin sa lalong madaling panahon, sapagkat ito 
po ang inaasahan sa amin ng buong bayang Pilipino. 
Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 
Brocka Present 


Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 


MR CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of yesterday’s session and that we 
approve the same. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any *° 'j*® 

,tion of the Assistant Floor Leader? (Silence) The 
air hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we proceed to the 
ference of Business. 

rHE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
e Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Fhe Secretary-General will read the Reference of 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communication, the 
President making the corresponding references: 


* Appeared after the roll call 


158 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 15, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING A GENERAL 
REVAMP OF THE JUDICIARY BY LEGISLATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 16, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE SUBMISSION 
TO THE SUPREME COURT WITHIN TEN DAYS FOL- 
LOWING ITS APPROVAL ORGANIC LAWS WHICH 
AFFECT THE RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE TO UFE, 
LIBERTY AND PROPERTY AND PROVIDING THAT 
THE SAME SHALL TAKE EFFECT ONLY AFTER SAID 
COURT SUSTAINS ITS CONSTITUTIONALITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 17, entitled: 

RESOLUTION CALLING FOR THE INCORPORATION IN 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF A PROVISION WHICH 
WOULD INDUCE AN ELECTIVE OFFICIAL TO AS- 
SUME HIS POSITION WITHOUT DELAY BY SETTING 
ASIDE HIS ELECTION AND DISQUALIFYING HIM TO 
HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE IF HE FAILS TO ASSUME 
OFFICE WITHIN THIRTY DAYS FOLLOWING THE 
DATE FKED BY LAW FOR HIM TO DO SO. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 18, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE APPROVAL 
OR CONSENT OF THE LEGISLATURE FOR THE EF- 
FECTIVITY AND VALIDITY OF TREATIES, EXE- 
CUTIVE AGREEMENTS AND RECOGNITION OF 
STATES OR GOVERNMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 19, entitled: 

RESOLUTION REDUCING THE RETIREMENT AGE OF 
MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT AND JUDGES 
OF INFERIOR COURTS FROM SEVENTY TO SDCTY- 
FIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 120, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROCLAIMING THE INCUMBENT PRESI- 
DENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT AS THE DULY ELECTED 


PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUB- 
LIC OF THE PHILIPPINES DURING THE ELECTIONS 
OF FEBRUARY 7, 1986. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 121, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO TAKE POSITIVE AND STRICT MEAS- 
URES AGAINST GRAFT AND CORRUPTION IN ALL 
LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT AND SOCIETY. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Offi- 
cers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 122, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION STATING THE FORM OF THE 
NATIONAL ECONOMY MOST CONDUCIVE TO THE 
ATTAINMENT OF A JUST AND HUMANE SOCIETY. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 124, entitled: 

RESOLUTION REQUIRING CONCURRENCE OF THE 
CENTRAL MONETARY AUTHORITY AND DUE NO- 
TICE TO THE LEGISLATURE BEFORE GOVERN- 
MENT GUARANTEES ARE EXTENDED TO FOREIGN 
BORROWINGS. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Jr. and 
Maambong. 

To the Committee on the Executive, 

Proposed Resolution No. 125, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE ACCOUNTABILITY 
OF PUBLIC OFFICERS A PROVISION THAT THE 
ARBITRARY REMOVAL AND/OR REPLACEMENT OF 
ELECTIVE PUBLIC OFFICIALS IS A CULPABLE VIOLA- 
TION OF THE CONSTITUTION AS A GROUND FOR 
IMPEACHMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Maambong, Natividad and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public 
Officers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 126, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE GENERAL PRO- 
VISION OR DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES A PRO- 
VISION TO AID AND ASSIST THE DISABLED, HANDI- 
CAPPED, ORPHANS, AGED AND OTHER DISAD- 
VANTAGED CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr., Maambong and 
Natividad. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


759 


To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Ser- 
vices. 

Proposed Resolution No. 127, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE GENERAL PRO- 
VISION OR DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES A PRO- 
VISION TO PREVENT THOUGHTLESS EXTRA- 
VAGANCE AND CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION, PRO- 
HIBIT AND DISCOURAGE ACTIVITIES WHICH PRO- 
MOTE INDOLENCE AND ARE NONPRODUCTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 128, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING THE PRESIDENT, VICE- 
PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE CABINET AND 
THEIR DEPUTIES FROM HOLDING ANY OTHER OF- 
FICE AND FROM ENGAGING IN ACTIVITIES WHICH 
MAY GIVE RISE DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY TO CON- 
FLICT OF INTEREST IN THE CONDUCT OF THEIR 
OFFICE, AND TO PROHIBIT THE PRACTICE OF NEPO- 
TISM BY SAID OFFICIALS. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Jr. and 
Maambong. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 129, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE TRANSITORY PRO- 
VISIONS AN ARTICLE REVERTING TO THE COURTS 
THE POWER OF SEQUESTRATION PRESENTLY 
VESTED IN ANY GOVERNMENT ENTITY UPON THE 
RATIFICATION OF THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Natividad, de los Reyes, Jr. 
and Maambong. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 130, entitled: 

resolution to incorporate in the new consti- 
tution AN ARTICLE WHICH WOULD PROVIDE AS- 
SISTANCE TO PRIVATE EDUCATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 131, entitled. 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE WHICH WOULD ENSHRINE 
THEREIN THE EXERCISE OF PEOPLE’S POWER. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 132, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXEMPTION OF EDU- 


CATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FROM REAL ESTATE 
TAXATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 133, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ARTICLES FOR THE EFFECTIVE PROFES- 
SIONALIZATION OF THE ARMED FORCES. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 134, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT THE STATE SHALL 
ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN AN EDUCATIONAL SYS- 
TEM RELEVANT TO THE NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE 
AND THE GOALS OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 135, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON 
THE CIVIL SERVICE TO ENSURE ITS INDEPENDENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 136, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE AN AMENDED PROVISION 
ON NATIONAL TERRITORY IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 137, entitled: 

resolution to provide in the TRANSITORY PRO- 
VISIONS THAT THE COMMISSIONS ON GOOD 

government and human rights be given a 

PERIOD OF ONE YEAR FROM THE DATE OF RATI- 
FICATION OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION TO FINISH 
THEIR ASSIGNED TASKS AND TO RATIFY ALL THE 
ACTS AND DECISIONS OF THEIR COMMISSIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 138, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INSERT IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
PROVISIONS ON MEANINGFUL AND AUTHENTIC 
DECENTRALIZATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BY 
ADOPTING WITH MODIFICATIONS THE PROPOSED 


160 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


PROVISIONS BY THE UP LAW CONSTITUTION PROJ- 
ECT. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 139, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE SECURITY OF 
TENURE OF CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES WHOSE 
QUALIFICATIONS MEET THE STANDARD OF GOOD 
GOVERNMENT AND WHO HAVE BEEN FOUND EFFI- 
CIENT, DESERVING AND HONEST. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Jamir and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 140, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE SECURITY OF 
TENURE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Jamir and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 141, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

COMMUNICATION 

Letter from Mr. Eliseo F. Ocampo, President of Con- 
cerned Citizens of San Juan, Metro Manila, Inc., trans- 
mitting a resolution of its board of directors proposing 
guidelines in the drafting of the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 16 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986). 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I request that Commissioner 
Villegas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, I would like to 
inform the body that yesterday, our Committee decided 
to postpone the consideration of ail the sections within 
Article XIV until all the sections are presented in one so 
that we can see how each section fits into the total 
Article. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I request that 
Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I rise on a ques- 
tion of collective privilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner state his 
question of collective privilege? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, in today’s issue of 
the Pahayagang Malaya, there appears on its headline 
the statement that the United States has interfered or 
seeks to interfere in the Constitutional Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair understands that ac- 
cording to the Rules, questions of privilege may be 
availed of only on Fridays. Does the Commissioner 
believe that his privilege speech is of paramount im- 
portance that it must be taken up today? 

MR. BENGZON. I believe this is an urgent matter. 
Madam President, so, instead of waiting until Friday, 
I now request for the unanimous consent of the body 
to allow me to rise on this question of collective pri- 
vilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; Commissioner Bengzon is given 
five minutes for his question of collective privilege. 

WiU five minutes be sufficient. Commissioner 
Bengzon? 

MR. BENGZON. It will be more than sufficient. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER BENGZON 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, in today’s issue 
of the Pahayagang Malaya, there appears on its headline, 
in bold letters, a statement which I quote: US INTER- 
FERENCE IN CON COM BARED. And it goes on to 
state that allegedly a $ 20-million aid for research was 
offered by the United States government to the 1986 
Constitutional Commission. 

Madam President, information coming from the 
Office of the Secretary-General and the Office of the 
President reveal that there was no such offer, whether 
official or unofficial, made by the United States to the 
Constitutional Commission. So, on behalf of the Com- 
mission and my colleagues, may I put on record the 
fact that there has not been and there is no offer of any 
aid made by the United States or any of its agencies to 
the Constitutional Commission. Moreover, on behalf of 
this body, 1 feel certain and I am sure that, even if there 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


161 


was such an offer, this body does not need it. We in this 
Commission have been appointed on the basis of our 
nationalism, probity, and independence of mind, and I 
am sure that each one of us here possesses those at- 
tributes. We do not intend to and will not succumb to 
nor will accept any offer of any aid, especially 
monetary aid, from any foreign government. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I rise also on a 
question of individual as well as collective privilege. 


be deplored and that the offer of research fund could be 
interpreted as indirect bribery. I have no personal knowl- 
edge of the offer. Mr. Ople said that he read about the 
offer, because it was really pubUshed in Business Day and in 
another newspaper, but he did not confirm its truth. 

I did not say that the various drafts of the Constitution 
submitted to the Con-Com were financed by the U.S. 
Goveriunent. I said that the Phihppines has sufficient 
facilities and the Con-Com Members have the mental 
capacities to formulate a new Constitution, and that we do 
not need a foreign research fund. Moreover, I said that 
personally, I can speak on behalf of my colleagues that if 
there should really be such kind of a fund, I know that we 
would reject it. I carmot blame reporters who misinterpret 
my remarks wittingly or unwittingly, which I emphasized 
should be off the record. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 


QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I rise also on a question of personal and collective 
privilege because I was quoted by the Pahayagang 
Malaya as allegedly the source of the news. And so, 
jokingly, some of my colleagues are now asking me to 
account for the $20 million that must have been paid to 
me, and they are looking at me with quizzical eyes as if 
I got that money from the United States government, I 
will resign from the Commission and join Mr. Marcos in 
Hawaii. 

But before I proceed. Madam President, I would like 
this Commission to know that three weeks before the 
Constitutional Commission was inaugurated, the Busi- 
ness Day, as may be confirmed by Mr. Tara Singh, 
carried a news item that the United States government, 
through the Ford Foundation, offered a $2-million, not 
$ 20-million, research aid. One of the readers criticized 
that offer. So, unofficially, there must have been an 
offer, and I was asked by the writer of this news item. 
Believing in a gentlemen’s agreement and being a former 
newsman in courtesy to another newsman, I said I 
would make a comment on condition that there will be 
no press release about it whatsoever, considering that it 
involves a very delicate matter and that it may cause 
embarassment to our venerable Vice-President who is 
now abroad. Madam President, I would like to read my 
press statement before this body, and I deeply regret 
that the gentlemen’s agreement was breached. 

To my dear colleagues: 

I was terribly shocked by today’s headline of Malaya 
which implied that I was the one who bared the alleged 
$20-million U.S. research fund. 

I only reacted to the newspaper reports published 
before the opening of the CON-COM that the U.S. Govern- 
ment offered through the Ford Foundation a research fund 
to aid the CON-COM. I said that foreign interference is to 


Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Like our colleagues, I feel a collective indignation 
over the publication attributed to Malaya. I, mys 
have not read it but I wonder if 
order at this point. Madam President, • j. 

the absence of the man referred to by 
Nolledo himself, the Honorable Bias c- Mpm 

should be in parenthesis - hold no brief for any Mem- 
ber in this Commission who is guilty o any ^ . 

the matter of agreement, as pointed out y 
sioner Nolledo. 

Considering that the Madam President has granted 
Commissioner Bengzon a period of five 
deliver his privilege speech, I was wondering w 
within that five-minute period we could accomm 
Commissioner Ople so that he can clarify this ma 

THE PRESIDENT. We will reserve that for Commis- 
sioner Ople should he desire to take advantage of it. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. The comments and statements that 
were delivered after my remarks refer to something 
personal. Whatever were said about or in reference o 
comments or statements of our colleagues in t le news 
papers are of no moment to my point. Madam Presi- 
dent, the fact remains - and J would like ^ emp asize 
this - that nothing in our records in the Commission, 
from the Office of the Secretary-General nor from the 
Office of the President, officially or unofficially, written 


162 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


or verbal, directly or indirectly, shows that any offer of 
any aid has been made by the United States Govern- 
ment. That is what I would like to emphasize for the 
record. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. For the information of my honor- 
able colleagues here, yesterday afternoon, just before we 
started the session, a lady correspondent approached me 
at my desk and asked if it was true that there was such 
an offer of $20 million for research by the United 
States. I told her, “Do not believe that, because if the 
United States will spend one cent of their money, it 
must have some strings attached to it.” And then she 
asked me, “What will you do about this information? ” 

I said in a blunt manner that if the man who made the 
offer would see me, I would throw him out. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that sufficient 
discussion has been made on this particular subject, and, 
therefore, the Chair closes this particular issue. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we proceed with the 
voting of Resolution No. 72 on Third Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, may I request 
that Commissioner Brocka be given the floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you very much. Madam Presi- 
dent. 

I would like to move for a reconsideration of the ap- 
proval on Second Reading of the proposed Preamble of 
the Constitution. I know that this is adding to the delay, 
but I would like to move for reconsideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there anybody seconding the 
motion? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I comment 
on that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. Section 42 of our Rules provides, 
and I quote: 

When a motion, report or resolution is adopted or lost, it 
shall be in order for a Member who voted with the majority 
to move for the reconsideration thereof on the same or 
succeeding session day. 

We voted on Resolution No. 72 on Second Reading 
last Friday and the “succeeding session day” was yester- 
day; so it is too late now. It could be a violation of this 
Rule. But may I suggest this: The only thing that our 
colleague can do now is to explain his vote. To seek 
reconsideration at this stage would call for the sus- 
pension of this Rule and I do not think we can have 
unanimous consent. 

MR. BROCKA. In that case then, may I move for the 
suspension of the Rules. 

THE PRESIDENT. Of the Rules? 

MR. BROCKA. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would object to that, Madam Presi- 
dent. It will waste our time and we might be criticized 
because after having voted on this, we are seeking re- 
consideration which will reopen the whole thing to 
debate and to amendments. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session. 

It was 4: 03 p. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 4:08 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. In the spirit of parliamentarism, I 
would like to withdraw my motion to suspend the 
Rules. 

NOMINAL VOTING ON PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 72 ON THIRD READING 
(Adopting a Preamble to the Constitution) 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion has been withdrawn 
and, therefore, the voting on Proposed Resolution 
No. 72 on Third Reading is in order. 

Printed copies of Resolution No. 72 were distributed 
on June 13, 1986 pursuant to Section 28, Rule VI of 
the Rules of the Constitutional Commission of 1986. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


163 


The Secretary-General will read the title of the 
resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 72, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT A PREAMBLE TO 
THE CONSTITUTION. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
resolution, and the Secretary-General will call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Aquino 

Alonto 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, parliamentary in- 
quiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, but once the voting 
has started, the voting cannot be interrupted. We will 
have to proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Aquino? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I would like to ex- 
plain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino has three 
minutes to explain her vote. 

COMMISSIONER AQUINO EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. AQUINO. I am constrained to vote against the 
approval of proposed Resolution No. 72. It is very 
unfortunate that I have to take exception to the posi- 
tion of my Committee which is sponsoring this pro- 
posal. I had to muster a lot of raw courage to do this 
because I know I am running against the tide and against 
the decision of my Committee. Delicadeza and the spird 
of parliamentarism would have dictated and prevailed 
upon me but since this is a vote of conscience, it is 
imperative for me to explain my vote. 

I have always believed that the Preamble is something 
more than just florid verbiage. The Preamble should be 
something more than just rhetorical cadence that is all 
sound and fury but empty. I have always thought that 
in the context of a very unique historical experience 
that we have undergone, we can do no less than do jus- 
tice to the courage and the determination of the Filipi- 
no people by embodying in the Preamble, possibly in 
words, the most eloquent celebration of how it was 
and how we did it. 

What is a preamble as it should be? A preamble is an 
explanation of the intent and the purpose of the law. It 


sets the origin, the scope and the purpose which provide 
an aid in explaining some ambiguous provisions of the 
Constitution. Therefore, the Preamble sets the context 
within which we appreciate the Constitution. And pre- 
cisely, this context, as we have experienced, is very 
unique. 

I had hoped that in this Constitution we could devise 
something that is original, something that will embody 
the essence of this unique historical experience, not just 
a celebration of words. 

My second observation is on the process we had 
undergone, the deliberation on Proposed Resolution 
No. 72. I was given the impression, under no unmistaka- 
ble terms, that the reason why we have pushed for the 
approval of Proposed Resolution No. 72 on Second 
Reading is that we wanted to impress upon the public 
that we are aware of the urgency of our task. This is 
very noble, but then I believe that if we lose sight of the 
proper perspective of our task, we might precisely fall 
into the trap of maybe rushing up a Constitution that 
does not really echo what the people want. 

My fear is that there might be a collective mind-set 
in this Commission for us to immediately package a 
Constitution in response to the requirements of political 
expediency. This may be the requirement of imme- 
diately vesting the constitutional mandate in the present 
leadership and government. 

I believe that that is not our task. Our task is to chart 
a new course in history, to draft a Constitution for t e 
future and for our children, unfettered by the require- 
ments of political expediency, even as we are very 
conscious of the requirements of urgency in the work. 

It is on these grounds that I have to vote against the 
resolution. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Azeuna Bernas . . . • 

Bacani Rosario Braid 

Bengzon Brocka .... 


Bennagen 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Brocka? 

MR. BROCKA. My vote is no. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner explain his 
vote? 

MR. BROCKA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER BROCKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you. Madam President. 


164 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


I already spoke yesterday and expressed my reserva- 
tions about the proposed resolution. 

This afternoon I have distributed my alternative 
formulations of the Preamble for reconsideration. I 
must beg the indulgence of the very distinguished body 
here, and I must admit that I am not a parliamentarian. 

I did not want to be in the Constitutional Commission 
precisely because I am not a parliamentarian and I do 
not know the rules. I am not a constitutionalist like 
some of the distinguished people here — but that is 
belaboring the point already. 

When we were drafting the Preamble, I felt that it was 
going to be just a string of noble words and, as men- 
tioned by Commissioner Aquino, precisely because of 
the very unique experience that we as a people have 
undergone, I felt that we should come up with a pream- 
ble which would not sound like that of the 1973 or 
1935 Constitution. I think Commissioner Aquino has 
already expressed very brilliantly what I feel about this. 

So, with the indulgence of the Members that are here, 

I would like to read my alternative formulations of the 
Preamble. I have no illusion that any of these will be 
accepted, but I just want to put on record my objec- 
tions and these alternative formulations. 

The first alternative reads: “We, the sovereign Filipi- 
no people, guided by the principle that the voice of the 
people is the voice of God, striving to build a just and 
humane society, desiring to establish a government that 
shall work to realize our aspirations for peace, de- 
mocracy and independence, adopt and promulgate this 
Constitution.” 

The first version has 50 words in it. The second 
version states: “We, the sovereign Filipino people, from 
whom all government authority emanates, striving to 
build a humane society based on truth, peace, democracy 
and independence, adopt and promulgate this Constitu- 
tion.” 

There are certain points to consider. I think the word 
“ordained” in the original, except in the context of 
Holy Order, sounds rather archaic. “Adopt” or “enact” 
is the more modern term. What happened to “common 
good,” “equality” and “freedom” in the original? 
These are, I think, included in the concept of democra- 
cy. What about “conserve and develop our patrimony”? 
These are included in the more all-encompassing con- 
cept of “independence” or “national independence” 
which would enshrine the principle of nationalism, the 
people’s nationalist aspirations, in the Preamble. 

I know that the formulation of this Preamble has 
caused much delay, but precisely because the Preamble 
appears right at the very beginning and is so important, 
we should not sacrifice the substance and originality of 
this Preamble to speed up or to hasten its promulgation. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Calderon 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Calderon? 

MR. CALDERON. I abstain. My vote is neither yes 
nor no. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman want to explain 
his vote of abstention? 

MR. CALDERON. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

COMMISSIONER CALDERON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. CALDERON. I believe that no other Constitu- 
tion in the world has “love” in its Preamble except our 
Constitution. Second, the message of the Bible is love. It 
is not necessary to enshrine it in our Constitution so 
that our people will be conscious of love. So, it pains 
me that I cannot vote for the Preamble as it is now. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Castro de Yes Davide Vcs 

Colayco Poz Yes 

Concepcion Yes Garcia 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Garcia? 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I would like to ex- 
plain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia has three 
minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER GARCIA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GARCIA. With all due respect to my com- 
panions in this body, especially to the members of the 
Committee on Preamble, I would like to register a 
negative vote. 

I vote negatively on two counts: first, on process; 
second, on substance. 

I think what we have tried to do here is to put the 
cart before the horse. It is like writing the beginning of 
a story without knowing its end; or it is like playing 
music without knowing the tune. I am afraid that for 
the sake of brevity and speed, we have tried to come up 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


165 


with something to show the public. But I believe that 
the Preamble is such an important thing that it is only 
after thorough debates on substantial issues that we can 
perhaps capture the spirit and essence of what we wish 
to express in this Preamble. 

Secondly, regarding substance. The Preamble has a 
historical context, and the Filipino people have a 
historical experience. The Filipino people put an end to 
dictatorial rule after 20 years of authoritarian rule, 
foreign intervention, lack of justice and equity. This 
experience is unparalleled; it is unedited; it is also 
unfinished. 


As such, primarily because of its process and because 
we did not give enough participation to the people inso- 
far as contributing to its substance is concerned, I vote 
no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Guingona Yes Jamir 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Jamir? 


I had hoped that in this Constitution, we could have 
captured precisely this experience and the whole effort 
of our people to bring about a whole new direction, 
specifically one that is self-determined and independent. 
I believe what my colleagues, who registered a negative 
vote, said. We have been a people held in bondage for 
many years and many decades. One of the deepest de- 
sires of our people right now is for us to draft our own 
future. Because of our struggle and our victory we have 
earned the right to commit our own mistakes; we have 
earned the right to sing our own songs, to drink from 
our own wells, and to walk a self-determined path to 
chart our unique future that is truly Filipino, indepen- 
dent regardless of the powers of the world. This, I 
believe, should be expressed in the Preamble of the 
Constitution. 

Thank you very much. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Gascon 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is given 
three minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER GASCON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GASCON. My vote is also in the negative be- 
cause of its process. 

As I participated in the discussions and deliberations 
when the proposed resolution was presented, I was of 
the understanding that after we give our suggestions, it 
will not go through Third Reading until after we will 
have gone into consultation and discussion with the 
people. I was also given the understanding that we could 
make substantial changes if, in fact, after discussing with 
the people, there Were substantial additions, concepts 
or ideas which the people wanted to express in the 
Preamble. 

As the Members of the Commission had explained, 
the Preamble is the totality of the spirit of the Constitu- 
tion, and it imbibes a prayerful appeal to the Lord to 
help us in our continued struggle for independence. 


MR. JAMIR. I abstain for the same reasons given by 
Commissioner Gascon. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Laurel 

MR. LAUREL. I abstain. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Lerum Yes Maambong 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I be allowed to explain my 
vote of abstention. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is given 
three minutes to explain his vote. 


OMMISSIONER MAAMBONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I have nothing 
;ainst the substance of the ® ^ 

jting on in its present the 

oner Garcia, I also feel that we should wait for the 
implete substance of the Constitution so Jhat we will 
ally know, if the Constitution that we shall ha^ pro- 
ulgated will truly reflect what we are saying in the 

-eamble. 

Besides, Madam President, when we 
tarings we have created the impression in the minds ot 
:eTeople that we are not going to take a vote on any 
ibstance of the Constitution or th^e 
atter, until we shall have held these publ^ hearing 
therwise, it may create the impression hat we ^e 
irrying up the formulation of the Constitution, 
ay have been a bit hasty on the Preamble. 






THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Monsod 

MR. MONSOD. May I explain my vote, Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is given 
three minutes to explain his vote. 


166 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


COMMISSIONER MONSOD EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. MONSOD. I vote yes. However, I want to make 
two observations: One is that I agree that the events of 
February should find some expression in the Preamble. 

However, I also would like to caution ourselves 
against focusing too much on the four days of February. 
After all, one may look at it as an “end game,” that 
what has been happening through all the years, through 
all the struggles that many people had gone through, are 
all part of that process. I would like to think that the 
people who deserve more commendation are those who 
struggled even when there were no miracles to see. 

My second observation is one of hindsight. I agree 
with some of my colleagues that perhaps it would have 
been better had we deferred action on the vote on 
Second Reading, in order for us to reflect as much as 
possible, if there are any differences between our 
thoughts and those of the people whom we will consult. 

However, I vote because in my opinion the sub- 
stance adequately meets the criterion of reflecting the 
sentiments of the people. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Natividad Ople . 

Nieva Padilla 

NoUedo Yes 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I vote in favor of the resolution. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is given three 
minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, I wish to state that I suggested 
the insertion of the word PROGRESS after “peace.” 
And I also suggested the change of the word “equality” 
to EQUITY. But, in substance, I vote in the affirmative. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Quesada 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Quesada? 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is given 
three minutes to explain her vote. 


COMMISSIONER QUESADA EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. QUESADA. I share the feelings of my comember 
in the Committee on Preamble, Honorable Aquino, and 
that is, we really have to go through the process that we 
promised to the people: to really consult with them 
before we finalize the provisions that we will enshrine in 
the Constitution. 

We are already hearing comments that if we have this 
Preamble approved prior to the consultations starting 
on Friday, we might be negating the principle or 
rationale behind these public hearings. We were sup- 
posed to withhold our decisions until after we have 
culled or synthesized the thoughts and feelings of the 
people we will be consulting here in Metro Manila and 
in the different parts of the Philippines. 

Personally, I believe that as we go through the com- 
mittee meetings, I would like to see that the spirit in 
which we have expressed ourselves in the Preamble are 
to be found in the various provisions that we will be 
discussing or approving in our different committees. In a 
sense, I would like the substance first to be deliberated 
upon not only by the people in the forums that we will 
be holding but also within the different committees so 
that we can really see that what we have expressed in 
the Preamble in a prayerful way, are really the things 
that we also have expressed in the provisions that we 
approved in our various committee meetings. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rama 

MR. RAMA. I abstain. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading; 

Regalado Yes 

Reyes de los 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I 
explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner de los Reyes 
want to explain his vote? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner is given three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER DE LOS REYES 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I respectfully submit that the 
Preamble which we have adopted is an improvement of 
the 1973 Preamble, particularly in view of the addition 
of the phrase “to build a just and humane society. 

I was one of those who felt that perhaps the word 
“love” should not be placed in the Preamble, but after a 
mature reflection, I think there is nothing wrong in 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


167 


enshrining love in our Preamble. Even the Bible says this THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner is given three 
on love: minutes. 


I may be able to speak the languages of men and even of 
angels, but if I have not love, my speech is no more than a 
noisy gong or a clanging bell. I may have the gift of inspired 
preaching; I may have all knowledge and understand all 
secrets; I may have all the faith needed to move moun- 
tains — but if I have not love, I am nothing. I may give 
away everytliing 1 have, and even give up my body to be 
burned — but if I have not love, it does me no good, xxx 
love does not keep a record of wrongs; xxx. 

So, I think the insertion of the word “love” is good 
for our future leaders who will henceforth have in then- 
minds that they may possess all the qualities of a leader 
but if they have no love they are still nothing. With the 
inclusion of the word “love,” it is hoped that there will 
be no more indiscriminate sequestration of properties 
which practically condemns an individual before a trial 
which is in violation of the Bill of Rights; that there will 
be no more arbitrary dismissal and ouster of duly 
elected officials and civil service eligibles who are enti- 
tled to security of tenure; that there will be no more 
sword of Damocles hanging over the heads of members 
of the Judiciary who were compelled to tender their 
resignations and who do not know whether they will be 
retained or not; that there will be no more violent dis- 
persal of peacef^ul rallies and demonstrations of people 
who are exercising their democratic rights to peacefully 
assemble and express their grievances; that there will be 
no more vindictiveness and that there will be total 
forgiveness, genuine peace and reconciliation; and that 
there will be no more vulgar utterances and denuncia- 
tions against anybody which exacerbates political 
passions. In other words, the love contemplated in the 
Preamble, as I perceive it, is a brotherly love under the 
fatherhood of God. 

Regarding the consultation with our constituencies. 
Madam President, I consulted my constituents in Laguna 
and within my limited constituency the reactions are 
varied. Some hailed our Preamble as a literary master- 
piece; others think it is long and redundant; others say 
after explaining to them the nuances of the words in- 
serted in the Preamble that it is pregnant with meaning 
but generally they found it acceptable. 

Madam President, when I told them. that it took us 
two sessions to finish the Preamble and that we were 
paid P500 a day, which means PI, 000 for two days 
work, they said, “V^^ell, you were overpaid.” Nonetheless, 
I vote yes, Madam President. 


COMMISSIONER ROMULO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. ROMULO. I vote affirmatively. I only wish to 
say that while these words and phrases are important, in 
the end the Constitution will be what our people make 
of it. And as has been said by a Justice of the U.S. 
Supreme Court, “The life of the law does not lie in logic 
but in experience.” 

Finally, I do not think there is anything undignified 
about the word “love.” It embodies the principle of 
charity in our Constitution, and in a way, it makes it 
unique, I think. Without seeming to be disrespectful, let 
me repeat a remark I made to Commissioner Brocka 
after his comments. I said that a camel is defined as an 
animal designed by a committee, and so I am afraid that 
in a deliberative body such as ours, it is not possible to 
get literary brilliance and poetic expressions because m 
the end, we are really more concerned with the substance 

rather than the form. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rosales Sarmiento 

MR. SARMIENTO. I would like to explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is given 
three minutes. 

COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO EXPLAINS 
HIS VOTE 

MR. SARMIENTO. I abstain purely on o"" f 

is not on the substance but on believe ^hat 

participation and democratic ^onsultatiom I believe tn 

in writing the Preamble - being the^ reflection of our 

national vision, the soul of our ka^^ ang 

tive experiences and sufferings g p|oyee, 

magbubukid, the newspaperman the lo V ^ ^ 

the mothers, the fathers, the 

other human rights violations, ppjg will be very 

urban poor should be consulte . P pf t^eir 

happy if deep in their ^ fgei they were 

humble abode they would know and formula- 

active participants, not only spectators, m the tormu 

tion of this Preamble. 

So I abstain. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rigos Romulo . 

Rodrigo 

MR. ROMULO. May I explain my vote? 


Suarez 

MR. SUAREZ. May I explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is given 
three minutes. 


168 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


COMMISSIONER SUAREZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUAREZ. In connection with the voting on 
Second Reading, I abstain. I do not find any substantial 
development that would change our minds in this 
regard. I view the matter with mixed feelings because it 
is very difficult for a Member like me to refrain from 
voting in favor of a Preamble that contains a solid 
phrase like “establishment of a just and humane so- 
ciety” and the expression “for the common good.” 
However, Madam President, I feel that the Preamble, as 
worded, does not express truly the highest ideals and 
aspirations of the Filipino people devoid of romanticism. 

I abstain, Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Sumulong 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President, my vote is an 
abstention. And I would like to say a few words to 
explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is given 
three minutes. 

\ 

COMMISSIONER SUMULONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUMULONG. Thank you. 

The Preamble to a Constitution is an epitome; it is a 
condensation; it is a synthesis of all that is contained in 
the entire Constitution. At this moment, we do not 
know yet how the final consolidated draft of the new 
Constitution will come out from our works. We do not 
know whether the final and consolidated draft will 
faithfully reflect what is stated in the Preamble now 
being submitted to us for a vote. I hope that this 
Preamble will harmonize with what will be contained 
in the final and consolidated draft of the new Consti- 
tution. But if it does not, then I think it will be our 
duty to submit the necessary amendments so that the 
Preamble will harmonize fully and adequately with 
everything that will be included in the new Constitu- 
tion. It is for this reason. Madam President, that I am 
constrained to abstain on this matter. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tadeo 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Tadeo? 

MR. TADEO. Nais ko pong ipaliwanag ang aking boto 
na no. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is given 
three minutes. 

COMMISSIONER TADEO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. TADEO. Kagalanggalang kong kasamang Com- 
missioners: 

Hindi tayo inihalal ng bayan. Tayo ay pinili lamang ni 
Presidente Cory Aquino. Paano natin mapalalakas ang 
kahinaang iyon? Mapalalakas lamang natin ang kahina- 
ang ito, ang hindi paghalal sa atin ng bayan, kung bago 
tayo gumawa ng Preamble o Panimula ay sumangguni 
muna tayo sa mamamayan, makinig at matuto sa kanila, 
sapagkat bago naman tayo nagsimula ay sumangguni, 
nakinig at natuto tayo sa kanila. 

Tama po iyong sinasabi ni Kasamang Ed at Kasamang 
Fely Aquino na inuna natin ang kariton kaysa kalabaw. 
Una, sinabi ni Commissioner Bias Ople noon, at iyon 
ang napakahalagang tanong noong araw na iyon na tina- 
talakay natin ang Preamble: Ano ang pagkakaiba ng 
Preamble ngayon, sa Preamble noong 1899, 1935 at 
1973? Tama ang katanungan. Ano ba ang Panimula na 
gagawin natin na tutugon sa pangangailangan ng kasalu- 
kuyang panahon? At tumugon ang magbubukid; sinabi 
niyang iyong Divine Providence o Almighty God ay 
gawin nating Diyos ng Kasaysayan o Lord of History. 
Gusto namin ang isang Diyos na kasama namin sa kana- 
yunan hanggang sa EDSA, kung saan pinabagsak namin 
ang diktadura, isang Diyos na buhay na buhay na 
kasama namin. Ayaw namin ang isang Diyos na separate 
sa amin. Gusto namin ang isang Diyos na buhay. The 
God of History was, is, and will always be a living God, 
one who relates to and identifies with the poor, strug- 
gles for an abundant life, the Filipino masses, peasants, 
workers, urban poor. As Jesus Christ said. He came not 
for the rich, nor for those who are in good health, but 
for the poor and with the promise to give them lif^ 
material condition so that the people will live life 
abundantly. 

Pangalawa, kung iyon lamang Diyos ng Kasaysayan ay 
ating nailagay, nagsimula tayo sa tamang Simula. Gaya 
ng sinabi ko na noong tumindig ako noon. Iyong de- 
mocracy’ kasi na nakalagay dito, mula pa noong 1935 
hanggang 1973, ang laging sumusulpot ay elite democra- 
cy dahilan dito sa two-party system. Kung ang nailagay 
lamang natin dito ay popular democracy, na siyang 
magwawasak ng elite democracy, tutugon ang ating 
Panimula sa hinihingi ng panahon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tan 

SR. TAN. Madam President, may I explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is given three 
minutes to explain her vote. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


169 


COMMISSIONER TAN EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

SR. TAN. With all due respect, I register a negative 
vote. I feel the Preamble does not convey in word or 
sense the soul of a people that has gone through decades 
of tyranny, protest, suffering and courage. Perhaps were 
this Preamble written after the public hearings and after 
the main body of the Constitution had been written, 
there would have been greater possibility to bear this 
imprint and specificity. There was no substantial reason 
for such haste, at what price. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tingson 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I explain my 
vote? 


because the recent revolution was a demonstration of 
love. Of the words faith, hope and love, the greatest is 
love. We could say that truth, justice, freedom, equality, 
and peace are also the word “love.” So, it is beautiful 
that we have placed it there. 

Madam President, again, my vote is yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Trefias Uka 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Uka? 

MR. UKA. May I explain my vote for a few minutes? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is given three 
minutes to explain his vote. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is given 
three minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER TINGSON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. TINGSON. I vote yes because I begin with the 
premise that we in this august body are supposed to 
compose at least a collective prayer on behalf of our 
suffering people. Next, 1 begin with the premise that we 
are mandated to give leadership and articulate the goals, 
the aims and the purposes for which we should draft 
this new Constitution. We are going out for public hear- 
ings, therefore, the Preamble that we have composed 
will give the people an idea of what the ideals, purposes, 
and goals of the Constitutional provisions will be that 
they will be discussing with us. That is why we are going 
to the provinces after we approve this Preamble. We will 
tell the people that we all want to build a just and 
humane society. We have articulated that matter for 
them — that we want to establish a government that 
shall embody our ideals and aspirations. We will further 
articulate that and bring the matter to them these 
coming weekends. 

Likewise, this august body would like to help pro- 
mote the common good through this Constitution and 
secure to ourselves the blessings of democracy, the rule 
of law, truth, justice, freedom, love, equality and peace. 

Madam President, I am voting because with this 
Preamble which I hope we will approve, we are helping 
the people write provisions into our Constitution in an 
intelligent manner. I vote because there is the word 
“God” in this Preamble. There are many people today 
who no longer know how to spell “God.” They do not 
spell “God” as G-o-d but G-o-l-d. That is why I like 
the inclusion of the word “God” in this Preamble. 

We are reminded by the Scriptures that man does not 
live on bread alone. I am voting because of the 
indescribable lovely word “love.” There is nothing 
wrong in incorporating that word into our Constitution 


COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. UKA. I would like to insert the word BROTHER- 
OOD between “freedom” and “love.” I retain the 
ord “love” because love is very appropriate 
ecessarv It was preached by the greatest men of God 
ad love is a many-splendored thing^ This is the second 
eek we are working on the Preamble We are abou^^ o 
pprove the beautiful and meaningful Preamb . 
le kind permission of the body, I would read it: 

We the sovereign Filipino people, imploring the aid of 
Almighty God, to build a just and humane society and 
establish a Government that shall embody our ideals an 
aspirations, promote the -common good, conserve a 
develop our patrimony, and secure to ourselves and ou^ 
posterity the blessings of democracy 
and a regime of truth, justice, freedom, ’ 

love, equality and peace, do hereby ordain and promulgate 

this Constitution. • 

I vote yes provided the word BROTHERHOOD js 
.eluded; Chemise. I abstain. But on second thought, 

vote yes now. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading. 

ViUacorta 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I explain 
my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner ViUacorta is given 
three minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR VILLACORTA. The proposed Preamble has 
some laudable and unprecedented features. Lor the fust 


170 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


time, we are unabashed in acknowledging the Almighty 
God. We also now speak of a just and humane society. 
However, I am voting against the proposed Preamble for 
the following reasons: 

First, we are passing a constitutional provision with- 
out the benefit of a single public hearing in the name of 
expeditious deliberations and contrary to the stipulation 
of Proclamation No. 9 and the unmistakable mandate 
that was handed down to us: that not a single word in 
this new Constitution will be adopted without consult- 
ing the people. 

Second, even among ourselves, we have not fully 
exhausted our discussions on fundamental concepts 
such as justice and democracy. Many of us who had mis- 
givings about this constitutional proposal failed to air 
these, either because we were novices in parliamentary 
technicality, or because we were not quick or loud- 
voiced enough to catch the attention of the Chair, or 
because we were preempted from talking by esoteric 
rules of order or untimely motions for adjournment. 

Third, the Preamble contains the concept of love, 
which though laudable and idealistic, simply has no 
place in a human Constitution. For while we can speak 
of “a regime of truth, justice, freedom, equality and 
peace,” since a constitution can provide for the realiza- 
tion of all these desiderata, we cannot legislate or consti- 
tutionalize “love.” Love is spontaneous, a personal 
feeling and no instrument of the state can encourage, 
much less engineer it. To speak of a regime of love is, to 
my mind, presumptuousness of the highest order. 

Fourth, the Preamble should not only embody the 
spirit of the Constitution. It should also provide the 
ideological as well as historical context in which the 
fundamental law was framed. The reason why we are all 
here in this hall is the People’s Revolution of 1986. If 
only for this fact, there should have been at the very 
least, some reference to the people’s struggle for free- 
dom and its timeless significance. No mention is there in 
the Preamble of this monumental chapter of our nation- 
al history which later generations of Filipinos could 
cherish, take pride in and draw inspiration from. The 
enshrining of the People’s Revolution in the Preamble 
could have been a lasting symbol and effective reminder 
that never again will despotism reign in our country. 

For these reasons. Madam President, I protestingly 
vote in the negative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas Yes 

SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 
conduct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Alonto Ople 

Colayco 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 72 
ON THIRD READING 
(Adopting a Preamble to the Constitution) 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 26 votes in 
favor, 9 against and 8 abstentions. 

Resolution No. 72, as amended, is approved on Third 
Reading.* 

REV. RIGOS. Parliamentary inquiry. Madam Presi- 
dent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. I would like to inquire whether we 
approved Resolution No. 72 or Committee Report 
No. 1 or are they one and the same thing? 

THE PRESIDENT. Resolution No. 72 is the one that 
was voted upon, the same as Committee Report No. 1 . 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other business? 

Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I just inform the body that the 
Steering Committee has already finished the schedules 
for committee hearings. So, each one will receive his 
copy of the schedules from the Office of the Secretary- 
General. We now have the printout from the computer. 
We have the schedules of committee meetings and hear- 
ings from June 16 to July 3. There is a schedule on 
July 4, just in case some committees would want to 
meet despite that day being a holiday. 

By the way, the copies of the schedules are here 
already for distribution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Steering Committee 
entertain any amendments or corrections? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, we, together 
with the Secretariat, found it difficult to adjust our 
schedules. At any rate, we were able to accommodate 
about 95 percent of the preferences. It is only the Com- 
mittee on Human Resources and the Committee on 
Constitutional Commissions that have some changes. We 
are sorry we had to schedule Commissioner Foz at eight 
o’clock in the morning. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:59 p.m. 


*Sec Appendix 


TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986 


171 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:04 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

I would like to summarize the voting again. There is a 
slight correction. The results show 27 votes in favor, 9 
against, and 8 abstentions. This makes a total of 44 
votes. The President did not vote. There are three Com- 
missioners who are absent. That makes 48 all in all. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I request that 
Commissioner Maambong be given the floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


proper corrections, the Office of the Secretary-General 
would have a hard time in editing the Record. I under- 
stand that the Secretary-General’s office is really 
burdened with so much work. In order that our Record 
will be complete, I suggest that this be complied with. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will take 
note of that. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other business? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I rise on a 
point of parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, what is the parliamentary 
inquiry? 

MR. MAAMBONG. According to Section 58 of our 
Rules, which I understand would now be Section 59 due 
to the insertion of Section 27, the Rodrigo amendment, 
copies of the speeches or interpellations made by Mem- 
bers of the Commission will be given by the Secretary- 
General back to the Commissioners who made them for 
revision within three days. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would like to know if this has 
been complied with, because if we cannot make the 


MR. BENGZON. There is a little oversight here. The 
Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political 
Rights and Obligations and Human Rights has informed 
Tie that the members have finished their work and that 
they are just waiting for the public hearings in the event 
that there may be some changes. So, I would Itke to 
state that the meeting time for this Committee be from 


aL 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we adjourn until 
tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 5:08 p.m. 


m r»!v 


N ■ :* 






' f. 

•* • ■■ -^ •**•,: W- ' j' , 

^ tii . • '• 5 . 

. . - Vn'T 

i>/iljll#!j|\w» isMi *i\- f4' tr ti ■ 

i{» T Ljo • 

>‘».r /' • 


• 

i " '■ 

■ iciT 


5 

< 

J 


jf*X ii»il 'rf'*yt’s ,^r •. . .•.,; 

f* .^.J liji' . .i^^i •■ 

•f mvAti" .•''•'. ft* w 

' Hf o;‘ I i>*'H I '*5 • 

'• < V,»- '<’ *(,’ . j i 

I '■ i T , • J , ^ ^ f J 

• AO" t 'l l - ^ j* .»• » ♦ • « 




* 



tL 



WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18, 1986 


173 


R.C.C. NO. 12 
Wednesday, June 18, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:09 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Roberto C. Concepcion. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 5:14 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:15 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Francisco A. Rodrigo presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

roll CALL 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Secretary-General will please call the roll. 


PRAYER 

MR. CONCEPCION. God Almighty and Fountain of 
all blessings, we thank Thee for the honor of being 
Members of this Constitutional Commission. 

Help us capture the spirit of the fateful days of 
February 22 to 25 when we found our national identity. 
We are filled with pride at being Filipinos and have 
developed a renewed faith in our capacity to govern 
ourselves. 

Infuse in us the essence of a truly representative 
democracy, which is founded upon a recognition of the 
extraordinary potentialities of the ordinary man, relies 
upon the majority rule, and upholds the rights of 
minorities. 

Guide us in the awesome task of fashioning our basic 
political structure, with a government deriving its 
powers from the governed, always responsive to the will 
of the people and subject, at all times, to their authority 
as sole repositories of state sovereignty. 

Give us the light to ensure full protection of human 
rights without any limitations or restrictions except 
only those clearly demanded by the defense or survival 
of those very human rights. 

This we humbly beseech Thee. 

In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit. Amen. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Absent 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present* 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present* 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 
Davide Present 



Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present* 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present* 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present* 
Monsod Present 


Natividad ... 

. Present 

Nieva 

Absent 

NoUedo . . . • 

Present 

Ople 

Present 

Padilla 

Present 

Quesada . . . • 

Present 

Rama 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

Present 

Rodrigo .... 

Present 

Romulo .... 

Present 

Rosales 

Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan . 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Trehas 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. Present 

Villegas 

. . Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 39 Members responded to the call. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


174 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
we dispense with the reading of the Journal of the 
previous session and that we approve the same. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
we proceed to the Reference of Business. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
Presiding Officer making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 
Proposed Resolution No. 142, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AND 
SECURITY AND THE POLICE FORCE TO ENSURE 
THAT THE OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE ARMED 
FORCES SHALL OWE LOYALTY TO NO ONE EXCEPT 
TO THE PEOPLE AND THE CONSTITUTION AND TO 
ENHANCE THEIR HIGH MORAL STANDARDS, AND 
TO SEPARATE THE POLICE FORCES FROM THE 
MILITARY AND RETURN ITS CONTROL AND AD- 
MINISTRATION TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 143, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING COURTS FROM ISSUING 
MINUTE RESOLUTIONS, AMENDING FOR THE PUR- 
POSE SECTION NINE OF ARTICLE TEN OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 144, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION INCREASING THE QUALIFICA- 


TIONS FOR APPOINTMENTS TO THE JUDICIARY, 
AMENDING FOR THAT PURPOSE SECTION 3 OF 
ARTICLE X OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 145, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCREASING THE SALARIES OF JUS- 
TICES AND JUDGES AND PROVIDING THAT THE 
SAME CANNOT BE DIMINISHED IN ANY MANNER. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 146, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ON THE SPECIFICITY AND REQUISITES 
FOR THE EXERCISE OF THE POWER OF THE 
SUPREME COURT TO DECLARE THE UNCONSTITU- 
TIONALITY OR INVALIDITY OF TREATIES, EXECU- 
TIVE AGREEMENTS AND LAWS. 

Introduced by Hon. Regalado. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 147, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE REQUISITES FOR 
THE IMPOSITION OF THE DEATH PENALTY IN 
CRIMINAL CASES BY THE SUPREME COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Regalado. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 148, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR ITS 
AMENDMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Jamir. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 149, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SECTION IN THE TRANSITORY PROVI- 
SION FIXING THE TERM OF THE INCUMBENT PRESI- 
DENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 150, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FIXING THE TERM OF OFFICE 
OF THE MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE CONGRESS/ 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18, 1986 


175 


Proposed Resolution No. 151, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO LIMIT THE POWER OF THE PRESI- 
DENT TO DECLARE MARTIAL LAW OR SUSPEND THE 
WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS TO THIRTY DAYS ONLY 
UNLESS AUTHORIZED BY CONGRESS/NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY FOR A LONGER PERIOD. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 152, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE LIMITS TO THE EXERCISE 
OF MARTIAL LAW POWERS BY THE EXECUTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 153, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE CREATION OF A JUDI- 
CIAL COUNCIL. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 154, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO LIMIT THE POWER TO ISSUE SEARCH 
AND ARREST WARRANTS TO JUDGES. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 155, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING PRESIDENTIAL POWER TO 
DISSOLVE THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY UNDER CER- 
TAIN CONDITIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 156, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A SIX-YEAR TERM OF THE 
PRESIDENT, PROHIBITING IMMEDIATE RE-ELEC- 
TION, AND PROVIDING FOR A POSSIBLE MID-TERM 
ELECTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Pj.QpQg 0 (j Resolution No. 157, entitled. 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE POWER OF THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY TO CALL SPECIAL MID-TERM 
PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL ELEC- 
TIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 158, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING RESTRICTIONS ON THE 
POWER OF THE PRESIDENT TO SUSPEND THE PRIVI- 


LEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS OR TO DE- 
CLARE MARTIAL LAW BY PROVIDING FOR THE 
CONCURRENCE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, RE- 
VIEW BY THE SUPREME COURT UPON A WRIT OF 
AMPARO, AND OTHER LIMITS. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 


Proposed Resolution No. 159, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO CONFER ON THE SU- 
PREME COURT JURISDICTION TO REVIEW VIOLA- 
TIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION BY THE PETITION 
FOR A WRIT OF AMPARO. 

Introduced by Hon. Azcuna. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


Proposed Resolution No. 160, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE BELL OF RIGHTS 
CERTAIN RIGHTS IN BEHALF OF VICTIMS OF 
CRIMES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


roposed Resolution No. 161, entitled: 
resolution PROVIDING FOR A SEPARATE ARTICIi 
ON SUFFRAGE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM, 
and RECALL. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizen^ 


jposed Resolution No. 162, entitled: 

EDUCATION IN THE COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

oposed Resolution No. 163, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ENSURING ^ENS 

pnnTiTMTTY TO EDUCATION TO ALL 
THRoS SCHOLARSHIPS, GRANTS AND OTHER 

SUPPORT SYSTEMS. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 


oposed Resolution No. 164, entitled. 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT MEDIA OF 

CATION SHALL PROMOTE, STRENGTHEN AN^R 
TECT OUR NATIONAL CULTURAL IDEN , 
FOSTER CONSTRUCTIVE VALUES, CUSTOMS AW 
TRADITIONS AND AFFORD RESPECT TO THE CUU 
TURE OF NATIONAL MINORITIES. 


176 


WEDNESDAY, J UNE 1 8, 1 986 


Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 165, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RECOGNITION OF 
THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE TO HAVE ACCESS TO 
INFORMATION OF PUBLIC CONCERN AS WELL AS 
TO UNFETTERED PARTICIPATION IN THE DISSEM- 
INATION OF INFORMATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 166, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A DECENTRALIZED 
SYSTEM OF FORMULATING EDUCATIONAL POLI- 
CIES AND PROGRAMS WITH THE BROADEST PAR- 
TICIPATION OF ALL SECTORS OF THE COMMUNITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 167, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DECLARE RURAL DEVELOPMENT AS 
A PRIMARY OBLIGATION OF THE STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 

Proposed Resolution No. 168, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE STATE TO 
INSURE THAT THE MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY AND 
THE STUDENT BODY OF AN INSTITUTION OF HIGH- 
ER LEARNING SHALL ENJOY FULL AUTONOMY 
FREEDOM FROM ALL POLICE AND MILITARY SUR- 
VEILLANCE AND HARASSMENT, FULL ACCESS TO 
INFORMATION ABOUT INSTITUTIONAL AND PUB- 
LIC AFFAIRS, AND THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN 
THE MAKING OF POLICY AND IN THE MANAGEMENT 
OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING TO WHICH 
THEY ARE A PART. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Gascon. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 169, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS 
TO THE CIVIL RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS VERSUS 
THE GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo and Tan. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Maternal and Child Health Association 

ot the Philippines (MCHAP) signed by Dr. Fe del Mundo 


and Dr. Aquilino B. Esguerra, transmitting proposals for 
the protection of Filipino mothers and children. 

(Communication No. 17 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Honorable Celerina G. Gotladera, Officer- 
in-Charge, Civil Service Commission, transmitting pro- 
posals bearing on the Civil Service. 

(Communication No. 18 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from the PLUM Federation signed by Messrs. 
Jesus P. Robleza and Salvador A. Purisima, proposing 
provisions on free choice of employment; just and fair 
conditions of work; a unicameral legislature; creation 
of a People’s Tribune to nominate judicial and executive 
officers; limiting to Filipinos the exploitation of natural 
resources and operation of public utilities; use of govern- 
ment funds for social services; and the inclusion of labor 
and industrial relations courses in all levels of education. 

(Communication No. 19 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. May I request that Commissioner 
Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, on the desk of 
everyone of the honorable Commissioners is a copy of a 
personalized Good News Bible which is a loving gift 
from the Philippine Bible Society which has existed in 
our country since the year 1899. On behalf of my 
colleagues in this Commission, I would like to express 
our gratitude for this beautiful gift which is indeed a 
commendable gift to receive today as expressed by 
Commissioner Tan to me a while ago. 

The present Chairman of the Philippine Bible Society 
is Ambassador Emmanuel Pelaez, who is also our Am- 
bassador to Washington, D.C.; the Vice-Chairman, who 
is present in our hall today, is Bishop George Castro; 
the Corporate Secretary is Justice Jose Feria; and the 
members of the board are Dr. Saturnino P. Garcia and 
Mr. Johnny K. Sy. The head or the Chairman of the 
Translation Committee is none other than Monsignor 
Moises Andrade, Jr. 

May I also mention that aside from these officers, 
present in our midst today are the following manage- 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18, 1986 


177 


ment officers: Mr. Medarlo Rivera, General Secretary; 
Mr. Querubin Canlas, Jr., head of the Communications 
and Development Section; and Messrs. Dominador 
Lorente and Gaylord Massido, staff representatives. Our 
own Commissioner Cirilo Rigos was President of the 
Philippine Bible Society for two consecutive terms 
immediately preceding the presidency of Ambassador 
Emmanuel Pelaez. 

This particular copy, Mr. Presiding Officer, has the 
imprimatur of His Eminence, Jaime Cardinal Sin. 

The Bible, according to the Gideons, contains the 
mind of God, the state of man, the way of salvation, the 
doom of sinners, and the happiness of believers. Its 
doctrines are holy; its precepts are binding; its histories 
are true; and its decisions are immutable. Read it to be 
wise; believe it to be safe; and practise it to be holy. 
It contains light to direct you, food to support you, and 
comfort to cheer you. 

It is the traveller’s map, the pilgrim’s staff, the 
pilot’s compass, the soldier’s sword, and the Christian’s 
charter. Here, paradise is restored, heaven opened, and 
the gates of hell disclosed. 

Christ is its grand subject, our good its design and the 
glory of God its end. It should fill the memory, rule the 
heart and guide the feet. We should read it slowly, 
frequently and prayerfully. It is a mine of wealth, a 
paradise of glory and a river of pleasure. It is given us in 
life, will be opened at the judgment and be remembered 
forever. 

It involves the highest responsibility, for it will 
reward the greatest labor and will condemn all who 
trifle with its sacred contents. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. There is no business at hand, so I 
think we better suspend the session or adjourn. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the Assistant Floor Leader say? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we suspend the 
session for five minutes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended for five minutes. 

It was 5:32 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:35 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I request that Commissioner 
Tingson be recognized. 


May I then say and repeat, on behalf of everybody 
here, a big thank you, maraming salamat po to the 
Philippine Bible Society. 

Thank you. (Applause) 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I request that Commissioner 
Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Romulo is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding 

e small request, and that is, regarding my 

). 70 that was referred to the Committee 

Dvisions By their advice and at my request, I move 

^rlTy reSiution be referred to the Committee on 

;amble. National Territory, and Declaration 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 


MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
the Members of the Constitutional Commission approve 
a resolution, appropriately worded by the Committee 
on Style, extending our condolence and sympathy to 
our Vice-President and colleague Ambrosio Padilla on 
the recent loss of his distinguished brother, the late 
Justice Sabino Padilla. 

MR. ALONTO. I second the motion. 


MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. CALDERON. To afford the Members a chance 
to attend the committee meetings, I move that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 


178 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at five o’clock in 


the afternoon. 


It was 5:36 p.m. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


179 


R.C.C. IMO. 13 
Thursday, June 19, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:10 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Every Dody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jose C. Colayco. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


PRAYER 

MR. COLAYCO. Let me begin our invocation with a 
quotation from Matthew, Chapter 18:20: “For where 
two or three are gathered in My name, I am there in the 
midst of them.” 

Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, Source of all 
goodness and wisdom, come, we beseech Thee, join us 
who are gathered here this afternoon, and guide our 
deliberations towards the framing of the new Constitu- 
tion of our people. 

Enlighten our minds and strengthen our will so that 
we may overcome our shortcomings and transcend our 
personal differences. 

Make us Your instruments in writing a constitution 
that will reflect our aspirations and promote the com- 
mon good of our country and our people. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 


Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 


Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Absent 

Lerum Present* 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Absent 

Nolledo Present 

Ople Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 45 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:23 p.m. 

resumption of SESSION 

At 5:38 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Hilario G. Davide, Jr. presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The 
session is resumed. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 


Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. Present 

Uka 

. Present 

ViUacorta . . . 

Present 

Villegas 

Present 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 
MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding 

e reading of the Journal of the previous session be 
spensed with and that the same be approve 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
y objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
urnal of the previous session is approved. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


180 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


MR. CALDERON. Mr. President, before we go to the 
Reference of Business, I move that we defer considera- 
tion of Committee Report No. 3 on page 8 until after 
July 7 and that the Committee on Preamble, National 
Territory, and Declaration of Principles submit an 
amended and supplemental report later. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). So, this 
particular item will appear in the Order of Business 
after July 7. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. President, I move that we now 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
Presiding Officer making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 170, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE UNDER THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A PROVISION AUTHORIZING THE 
SUPREME COURT TO LOOK INTO THE FACTUAL 
BASIS IN THE DECLARATION OF MARTIAL LAW OR 
SUSPENSION OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS BY 
THE PRESIDENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 171, entitled: 

RESOLUTION THAT A BROAD WORKING DEFINITION 
OF “SOCIAL JUSTICE” BE ADOPTED. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas, Sarmiento and Rosario 
Braid. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Ser- 
vices. 

Proposed Resolution No. 172, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES PROVISIONS 
UPHOLDING THE TIME-HONORED PRINCIPLES OF 
THE SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 173, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION PROVIDING FOR THE RIGHTS OF 
CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 


Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 174, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ESTABLISHING A PURELY 
CIVILIAN PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE WHICH 
SHALL BE ADMINISTERED BY THE NATIONAL 
POLICE COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, Ople, Maambong and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 175, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE INTO THE BILL OF 
RIGHTS A PROVISION RECOGNIZING AND DEFEND- 
ING THE RIGHT TO LIFE OF THE UNBORN HUMAN 
EMBRYO. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Romulo, Sarmiento, 
Villegas, Colay co and Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 176, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE STATE TO 
establish a genuine AUTONOMOUS GOVERN- 
MENT IN THE CORDILLERA REGION WITHIN A 
DEMOCRATIC AND SOVEREIGN FILIPINO NATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen and Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 177, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVEDING THAT THE STATE SHALL 
PROMOTE THE PROPER ACQUISITION OF APPRO- 
PRIATE TECHNOLOGY, ITS EFFECTIVE MANAGE- 
MENT, UTILIZATION AND CONTROL. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 178, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THE AUTONOMY OF RE- 
GIONAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AS THE 
BASIC FRAMEWORK OF THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE 
OF THE STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 179, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES THE STATE’S COMMITMENT TO PRO- 
MOTE AND PROTECT THE WELFARE, RIGHTS AND 
INTERESTS OF WOMEN AND THE YOUTH. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


181 


Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 180, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MANDATING COOPERATIVISM AS A 
BASIC PRINCIPLE OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT, 
COOPERATIVES AS ITS VEHICLE, THE ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF THE NECESSARY CONDITIONS THEREFOR, 
AND CREATION OF A NATIONAL COOPERATIVE 
AND LAND REFORM AUTHORITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 


Proposed Resolution No. 181, entitled: 

resolution to ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION AS A 

barrier to work opportunities. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services. 

Proposed Resolution No. 182, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL 
PROVISION ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


Proposed Resolution No. 183, entitled: 

resolution to provide in the new constitution 
THAT THE SPOUSE OF THE PRESIDENT OR ANY PER- 
SON RELATED TO THE PRESIDENT WITHIN THE 
THIRD DEGREE OF CONSANGUINITY OR AFFINITY 
SHALL NOT BE APPOINTED TO THE CABINET. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 184, entitled: 

resolution to PROVIDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS 
THAT A FOREIGNER WHO IS PERSECUTED BY HIS 
COUNTRY BECAUSE OF HIS POLITICAL BELIEFS 
SHOULD BE GIVEN ASYLUM IN THE PHILIPPINES 
and that extradition of FOREIGNERS FOR 
POLITICAL OFFENSES SHALL NOT BE GRANTED. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 185, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES THAT IN THE GRANT OF RIGHTS, PRIVI- 
LEGES OR CONCESSIONS, THE STATE SHALL ADOPT 
THE FILIPINO-FIRST POLICY. 


Proposed Resolution No. 186, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES A PROVISION THAT THE STATE RECOG- 
NIZES THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSONALITY 
AND GUARANTEES FULL RESPECT FOR HUMAN 
RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 187, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES THAT THE STATE SHALL ESTABLISH, 
MAINTAIN AND ENSURE ADEQUATE SOCIAL SER- 
VICES IN THE FIELDS OF EDUCATION, HEALTH, 
HOUSING, UNEMPLOYMENT, WELFARE AND SOCIAL 
SECURITY DM ORDER TO ATTAIN A DECENT STAN- 
DARD OF LIVING FOR OUR PEOPLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 188, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ENSHRINE IN THE ARTICLE ON JUDI- 
CIARY OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION ETHICAL RULES 
ON QUALIFICATIONS AND CONDUCT OF MEMBERS 
OF THE JUDICIARY. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


roposed Resolution No. 189, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
THAT DISCRETIONARY PUBLIC FUNDS SHALL BE 
UNDER SUCH GUIDELINES AND RESTRICTIONS AS 
MAY BE FIXED BY LAW TO AVOID ^USE OF DI^ 
CRETION AND THAT ALL DISBURSEMENTS OF DIS- 
CMTIONARY FUNDS SHALL BE SUBJECT TO STRICT 






Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


iposed Resolution No. 190, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A 

DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES ™ 

PINES IS A REPUBLICAN AND 

AND THAT SOVEREIGNTY RESIDES IN ° 

PEOPLE AND ALL GOVERNMENT AUTHORIT 


Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


182 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 191, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION THAT NO PERSON SHALL 
BE DETAINED BECAUSE OF HIS POLITICAL BELIEFS 
AND ASPIRATIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 192, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES THE PROVISION THAT THE STATE 
RECOGNIZES THE VITAL ROLE OF THE YOUTH IN 
NATION BUILDING AND SHALL FULLY PROMOTE 
THEIR PHYSICAL, INTELLECTUAL AND SOCIAL 
WELL-BEING. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 193, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION PROVISIONS REQUIRING THAT AP- 
POINTMENTS THERETO SHALL BE MADE FROM A 
LIST OF NOMINEES SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS SEC- 
TORS AND INCREASING THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR 
APPOINTMENT AS COMMISSIONER. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 194, entitled: 

RESOLUTION GRANTING AUTHORITY TO THE 
SUPREME COURT TO ORGANIZE A JUDICIAL COM- 
MISSION TO EXERCISE ADMINISTRAIWE SUPER- 
VISION OF COURTS SUBJECT TO ITS CONTROL. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 195, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO GUARANTEE THE RIGHT OF CIVIC 
ORGANIZATIONS TO BE ACCREDITED AS CITIZEN 
ARM OF THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS AND TO 
BE AFFORDED PROTECTION BY MAKING ITS MEM- 
BERS WHILE IN THE PERFORMANCE OF DUTY AS 
AGENTS OF PERSONS IN AUTHORITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 196, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR THE PROTECTION OF 


CHILDREN AGAINST ALL FORMS OF NEGLECT, 
CRUELTY AND EXPLOITATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 197, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE CONCUR- 
RENCE OF AN INDEPENDENT COMMISSION ON AP- 
POINTMENTS TO HIGH RANKING POSITIONS IN THE 
GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 198, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT THE CANVASSING OF 
VOTES IN A PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION BY THE 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IS PURELY A MINISTERIAL 
DUTY. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, Ople, Maambong and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Resolution No. 42, Series of 1986, of the Sangguniang 
Bayan of Unisan, Quezon, requesting the Constitutional 
Commission to include the teaching of the Holy Bible in 
the curricula of elementary and high school education. 

(Communication No. 20 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Eliseo M. Blancaflor of Teresa Village, 
Quezon City, proposing provisions on the promotion 
and development of livelihood cooperatives and the 
right of homeowners to bear arms. 

(Communication No. 21 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Delfin T. Tapang, Jr., Chairman of 
National People’s Forum, transmitting a draft constitu- 
tion and offering participation and assistance in the 
holding of public hearings. 

(Communication No. 22 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 

Communication from Mr. Dionisio C. Araza of Bago 
Bantay, Quezon City, proposing provisions on the pres- 
idency, and the judiciary, among others. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


183 


(Communication No. 23 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The As- 
sistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIPS 

MR. CALDERON. In view of her election to two new 
committees; namely, the Committee on Social Justice 
and Social Services and the Ad Hoc Committee on 
Public Hearings, Commissioner Teresa F. Nieva is giving 
up her membership in the Committee on General Provi- 
sions and the Committee on Constitutional Commis- 
sions and Agencies. 

To fill these vacancies, I move that we elect Commis- 
sioner Vicente B. Foz to the Committee on General 
Provisions and Commissioner Decoroso R. Rosales to 
the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The As- 
sistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Commissioner Romulo is giving up 
his membership in the Committee on Social Justice and 
Social Services in favor of Commissioner Rodrigo. I 
move that we elect Commissioner Rodrigo to the Com- 
mittee on Social Justice and Social Services. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is elected to the Committee on Social 
Justice and Social Services. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The As- 
sistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that Commissioner 
Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) Chair hears none; the 
withdrawal of Commissioner Nieva from the two com- 
mittees mentioned is approved and the election of Com- 
missioner Foz to the Committee on General Provisions 
and Commissioner Rosales to the Committee on Consti- 
tutional Commissions and Agencies is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, a vacancy 
exists in the Committee on the Judiciary. I move that 
we elect Commissioner Ambrosio B. Padilla to fill said 
vacancy. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection to the election of Commissioner Padilla to 
the vacant position in the Committee on the Judiciary? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, Commis- 
sioners Ople and Uka have agreed to swap membership 
in the Committee on Style and the Committee on Social 
Justice and Social Services, respectively. To implement 
the said arrangement, I move that we elect Commis- 
sioner Ople to the Committee on Social Justice and 
Social Services and Commissioner Uka to the Commit- 
tee on Style. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; Com- 
missioner Uka is deemed elected to the Committee on 
Style and Commissioner Ople is deemed elected to the 
Committee on Social Justice and Social Services. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER TINGSON 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer and my beloved 
Ileagues of this Assembly: 

A Quarter and one centuries ago, on June 19, 1861, 
be^orecise an infant boy was born m Calan^a, Lagu- 
^He^was to live only 35 years because on Decemb^ 
i' 1896 the Spanish rulers of this country had him 

Dt in Bagumbayan. 

Jose Rizal did not live to a ripe old age; hence, our 
dless wonder at how a man could compress in so brief 
Hfetime such a nationalistic and intellectuail careen 
f R?zal was a novelist, a doctor of medicine, a 
inter, historian, sculptor, architect, surveyor engineer, 
/entor, ethnologist, naturalist and philologist. 

Rizal could speak 22 languages, native and 

^ '^ntritf “Not on?y is Rizal the most famous man 
owrpe.^pi^. buMhe grea.es. man .he Malay race 

s produced.” ^ 

T certain that when we and our American fnenos 

■re TsseSng .he iden.i.y of .he fulure Repubhc of 

e Philippines, everyone was s.ruck by the sincerity 

® olitter of licnius to be found in Dr. Jose 

‘^^tL^here was no doubt of his being the national 
,,al that there wa n 

rhad lo^ wC !of,y purposes the Filipino can 


pal defined our identity and, in the end, he haa 
fd to what extent the Filipino /v^ling t^ 
prove the things that he believed in. It is be 
a read what he wrote in Hongkong Pnor to his 
n to the Philippines then, in a letter that he 


184 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


with Dr. Marques to be opened after his death. He said 
in that letter: 

Always have I loved our unhappy land, and I am sure 
that I shall continue loving it till my last moment in case 
men prove unjust to me. My career, my life, my happiness- 
all I have sacrificed for love of it. Whatever my fate, I shall 
die blessing it and longing for the dawn of its redemption. 

Rizal had personified the very best in the Filipino. 
How else can we say it? By the time he was 35 years 
old, he was dead. He himself had premonitions of his 
untimely demise and yet he did not despair, but had 
worked and studied relentlessly and accomplished so 
much. 

Rizal, were he alive today, would not be out of a job 
because his knowledge and skills were truly universal. 
Certainly, he will not be like some politicians who 
would howl and whimper when relieved of their posi- 
tions in government because their prospects for employ- 
ment had dimmed. And not only that Jose Rizal would 
not be out of a job; he would have a lot to say to his 
countrymen besides, especially to the Members of this 
august Constitutional Commission. 

A Constitution is sometimes called a document of a 
people embodying their highest ideals and deepest 
aspirations. Indeed, how else can it be when it esta- 
blishes the government and claims the overall control of 
society. 

In preparing these brief remarks, I have scoured for 
an appropriate passage in the works of our greatest hero 
that might serve as a fitting advice to us here. There is a 
multitude of them, to be sure. But I was looking for one 
that will make us remember who we are and what truly 
we should become. After all, what I am is God’s gift to 
me and what I become is my gift to God. For in my 
humble understanding, it would be the greatest blunder 
to fail this test in writing a Constitution. Therefore, 
these are the words of Simon, a character in the novel of 
Jose Rizal, entitled El Filibusterismo, and I quote: 

You ask for the hispanization of our country, and you 
do not see that what you are begging for is suicide, the 
destruction of your nationality, the annihilation of your 
fatherland and the consecration of tyranny. 

The Spanish conquistadores brought with them arms 
to subjugate and rule us. It would seem historically 
logical that the only way to overthrow that rule was to 
resort to arms. And yet Jose Rizal, the historian and 
student of great human affairs, did not teach his people 
to bear arms for their liberation. In an age of great 
political ferment, he cautioned against the use of arms, 
against a revolution, and advised his own people, tyran- 
nized for centuries, to work instead for a peaceful 
political transformation. The father of Asian national- 
ism, Dr. Jose Rizal, was an early believer in nonviolence. 

This is supposed to be the great defect in that great 
man; the reason why to some of us he is not the greatest 
national hero. To these dissenters, a revolution without 
blood is not a revolution, as if the spilling of blood 


alone can wash away so much shame, so much abomina- 
tion. But I should say this nonviolent attitude in 
Dr. Jose Rizal is an added value instead of a defect. 

Christianity itself was a peaceful revolution, a spiritual 
upheaval that had transformed society and individuals, 
perhaps more deeply than any political ideology in his- 
tory. Mahatma Gandhi led a civilian disobedience move- 
ment that gained for India its independence. Martin 
Luther King won Negro rights through nonviolent 
means. And only lately, the Filipino people had suc- 
ceeded in frustrating the governing will of a power that 
the people had perceived to be illegitimate, also through 
a revolution that did not call for arms. May I say that 
this is a legacy from that greatest of Filipinos, Dr. Jose 
Rizal, our own “kababayan.” 

I should like to believe that to struggle with arms for 
our liberation is to be hispanized. I should like to be- 
lieve that Dr. Jose Rizal would rather that his people, 
the Filipinos, struggle to free themselves by means that 
are peaceful, dignified and do not do violence to man 
himself. I believe that this is a great legacy. And, finally, 

I believe that this legacy should find expression in the 
Constitution that we are writing for the Filipino people. 

Thank you, beloved colleagues, and thank you, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The As- 
sistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

DISCUSSION ON CITIZENSHIP 

MR. CALDERON. I move that this Commission take 
up in a freewheeling discussion, without amendments, 
matters connected with citizenship, and I request that 
Commissioner Bernas be recognized to start the free- 
wheeling discussion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection to a freewheeling discussion on citizen- 
ship? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

Commissioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Before we start with the discussion, 
I would like to make doubly clear the purpose of this 
discussion for the sake of my own bodily integrity. We 
will not proceed to the amendments. This is purely a 
freewheeling discussion. 

Actually, the Committee on Citizenship is already 
prepared to make a report on the Article on Citizenship, 
but this will not be a report. Rather, this will be a narra- 
tion of the present state of thinking of the members of 
the Committee as far as citizenship is concerned, and 
hopefully, what we bear here will also be helpful for the 
public hearings. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


185 


One advantage we have is that there is only one 
resolution on citizenship, and if we did not have our 
champion resolution-producer, Commissioner Davide, 
we would not have any resolution on citizenship. 

(Laughter) 

So, the basis of our discussion will be Resolution 
No. 7, and I am looking for my copy. For the purpose 
of our discussion, it would be useful if the Commission- 
ers will pull out their copies of Resolution No. 7. If one 
does not have a copy of Resolution No. 7, that is a 
major obstacle. 

Let me just say that basically. Resolution No. 7 of 
Commissioner Davide incorporates the Article on 
Citizenship found in the 1973 Constitution with some 
amendments. We have taken up the amendments. 

Section 1 answers the question: Who are citizens of 
the Philippines? Section 2 answers the question: What 
happens to your citizenship if you get married? Section 
3 speaks of acquisition or loss of citizenship. And Sec- 
tion 4 deals with a definition of natural-born citizens. 

Section 1 state^and I quote: 

Section 1. The following are citizens of the Philippines: 

1 . Those who are citizens of the Philippines at the time 

of the ratification of this Constitution. 

This is bodily lifted from the 1973 Constitution which 
was also bodily lifted by the 1973 Constitution from 
the 1935 Constitution. Whoever are citizens of the 
Philippines now are recognized by this Constitution as 
citizens of the Philippines. 

Paragraph 2 states: “Those whose fathers or mothers 
are citizens of the Philippines.” Again, this is bodily 
lifted from the provision of the 1973 Constitution 
which was a departure from the 1935 Constitution. 

Under the 1935 Constitution, to be a natural-born 
citizen, both your father and your mother should have 
been Filipino citizens. Under this provision, if at the 
time of an infant’s birth, either the father or the mother 
is a Filipino citizen, that infant will also be deemed a 
Filipino citizen. Paragraph 3 states: 

. . . Those who elect Philippine citizenship pursuant to the 

provisions of the Constitution of nineteen hundred and 

thirty -five. 

This paragraph is in the nature of a transitory provi- 
sion. 

We will recall that under the 1935 Constitution, if a 
child was born of a Filipino mother married to an alien, 
the child was given a right to elect Philippine citizenship 
upon reaching the age of majority. So, when the 1973 
Constitution was approved, there were children who had 
not yet reached the age of majority and had not yet had 
the opportunity to elect Philippine citizenship. This 
provision is intended to take care of them anytime up to 
the time they reach the age of majority andj thus, elect 
Philippine citizenship. So, this is applicable only to 
children of Filipino mothers and alien fathers born prior 


to January 17, 1973. Upon the effectivity of the new 
Constitution of 1973, every child born of a Filipino 
mother automatically becomes a Filipino. 

Paragraph 4 partly states: “Those who are naturalized 
in accordance with law,” which is lifted from the 1973 
provision. In Resolution No. 7 of Commissioner Davide, 
there is an addition which reads exactly this way: 

Provided, however, that the naturalization of aliens 
under a decree of the previous regime shall be subject to 
judicial confirmation. Admission to Phihppine citizenship 
is a privilege which can be revoked anytime in the marmer 
and for causes provided by law. 

The thinking of the Committee on the subject is that 
we should drop this suggested amendment for the fol- 
lowing reasons: First, this could be divisive. Second, 
there are provisions in the Naturalization Law for strip- 
ping a naturalized person of citizenship, if certain condi- 
tions are not satisfied. Third, we are afraid that this 
could unduly burden the courts. So, the thinking of the 
Committee, as far as the suggestion of Commi^ioner 
Davide is concerned, is to drop this amendment. 
that answers the question: Who are citizens ot the 
Philippines? Perhaps we can pause here and go mto 
some discussions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. I have some questions on paragraph 
1 of Section 1. Would Commissioner Bernas answer 
some questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The Com- 
missioner may do so, if he so desires. 


FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 

MR. BENGZON. The word “adoption” 
under the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutwns_ Did the 
Committee change this to aj-g 

1935 and the 1973 Constitutions state: Those w_^^ 

citizens of the Philippines at the time o e 

this Constitution" are Filipino citizens. But jhen we 

read Section 1, the word g^ange*^ 

“ratifinatinn.” Did the Committee make this cha g - 


FR. BERNAS. Ratification is 
Resolution No. 7. I would also say 
is adopted upon its ratification. 


the exact word in 
that a constitution 


MR. BENGZON. So actually, the preference of the 
Committee is to use the word “ratification 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


MR. BENGZON. As regards Section 1, ’ 

I understand that those who have become na 
according to a decree that was promulgated by tne past 
dispensation are now Filipino citizens. The ommi ee 


186 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


senses that it will no longer burden them with a judicial 
affirmation. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. After the ratification of this Consti- 
tution that we are making, what then would happen to 
the decree issued by the former President that simplified 
the naturalization process? Would that be automatically 
null and void? Do we need to go back to the old consti- 
tutional provision on naturalization or will that decree 
still subsist? 

FR. BERNAS. That decree had a limited life span. It 
is no longer in effect. 

MR. BENGZON. But that decree is contained in a 
small clause in Section 1 , paragraph 4. So, under certain 
circumstances, that decree could still be in effect. Or is 
that decree totally no longer in existence? 

FR. BERNAS. I am hesitant to say that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is wrong. My impression is that it is no 
longer in effect. 

MR. BENGZON. I see. Therefore, the process of 
naturalization that existed before that decree was en- 
acted is the one that will be in effect in this Section 1. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, but I should say something about 
that decree which facilitated naturalization. It merely 
created a special administrative process for selecting 
those who would be naturalized. So, it is different from 
the Naturalization Law which created a process resulting 
in a decree of naturalization. Under the decree of Pres- 
ident Marcos, what made one a citizen was a subsequent 
process of selection, calling it “citizenship.” 

MR. BENGZON. So, there is really no conflict there. 

FR. BERNAS. As far as I know, there is no conflict 
there. 

MR. BENGZON. Paragraph 3 states that those who 
are born of Filipino mothers and alien fathers after the 
adoption of this Constitution will also be deemed as 
Filipino citizens, provided they elect Philippine citizen- 
ship upon reaching the age of majority. 

FR. BERNAS. Paragraph 3 applies only to children 
born before January 17, 1973. Anybody born after 
January 17, 1973 of a Filipino mother, no matter what 
the citizenship of the husband is, is already a Filipino 
citizen at birth and therefore does not have to elect 
Filipino citizenship. 

MR. BENGZON. That is what I want to clarify. 

Thank you very much. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Suarez? 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Will Commissioner Bernas yield to a few clarificatory 
questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner’s statement that 
Section 3 of the 1973 Constitution is somewhat transi- 
tory in character disturbs me, because I interpret this 
section together with Section 1, Article IV of the 1935 
Constitution. We will make this operative only to those 
who were born of a Filipino mother and an alien father 
before the year 1973. Is my understanding correct? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, because those born on or after 
January 17, 1973 are governed by paragraph 2. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is, those whose fathers or 
mothers are citizens of the Philippines? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. So, if the mother is a Filipino, 
there is no need for election because the child is already 
a Filipino citizen at birth. 

MR. SUAREZ. So with respect to those born on or 
after 1973, there is no need for them to elect Philippine 
citizenship upon reaching the age of majority? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is that the Commissioner’s interpreta- 
tion of this particular provision? 

FR. BERNAS. That is my understanding. 

MR. SUAREZ. For that reason, would the Commis- 
sioner consider that transitory in character? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. In other words, by that time the 
last child born prior to January 17, 1973 has made the 
election or has failed to make the election after reaching 
the age of majority, then that paragraph 3 is no longer 
applied to anybody. 

MR. SUAREZ. This really disturbs me because para- 
graph 3 of Section 1 of the 1973 Constitution must 
have been placed there for a specific purpose. 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely. The purpose was to make 
sure that children born of Filipino parents, but had not 
yet elected Philippine citizenship since they had not yet 
reached the age of majority, could still elect. 

MR. SUAREZ. But why do they have to do that if 
their citizenship is already guaranteed under paragraph 
2 ? 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


187 


FR. BERNAS. No, if they were born on or before 
January 17, 1973 they should not come under para- 
graph 2. 

MR. SUAREZ. The way paragraph 2 is worded is not 
prospective in application. It says here: “Those whose 
fathers or mothers are citizens of the Philippines.” 
There is no required qualification. So, should we limit 
the application and operation of that particular para- 
graph only to those who were born after 1973? Is my 
understanding correct? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. That is my understanding on the 
basis of the debates in the 1971 Constitutional Conven- 
tion, and because of that, its delegates thought that 
paragraph 3 was necessary. 

If paragraph 2 is retrospective, then paragraph 3 
would not be necessary. 

MR. SUAREZ. In view of the Commissioner’s inter- 
pretation, would he suggest the deletion of paragraph 3 
of Section 1 of the Article on Citizenship? 


MR. SUAREZ. That mixed me up a little bit. The 
Commissioner has to pardon me, but I am only con- 
centrating on the automatic elevation of a child born 
of a Filipino mother to the level of a natural-born child. 
I would venture the opinion that that is only possible, if 
the mother herself is a natural-bom citizen of our coun- 
try. But if she acquires naturalization by law, and after 
that she gives birth to this minor child, or at that time 
that minor child is legally carried by the naturalization 
of the mother, does not the Commissioner think of the 
problem that will arise in considering the child as a 
natural-born child? 

FR. BERNAS. Under paragraph 2, if the mother 
acquires Philippine citizenship before she gives birth, the 
child will automatically become a natural-born citizen. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under paragraph 2? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. It does not say so, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 


FR. BERNAS. No, the Committee has a different 
suggestion in the definition of natural-born citizen. If 
we will jump to Section 4 of the 1973 Constitution, it 
says here that a natural-born citizen is one who is a 
citizen of the Philippines from birth without having to 
perform any act to acquire or perfect his citizenship. 
The Committee added this proviso: PROVIDED THAT 
THOSE WHO ELECT PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP IN ACCORD- 
ANCE WITH SECTION 1. PARAGRAPH 3, SHALL ALSO BE 
DEEMED NATURAUBORN CITIZENS. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I point out the danger of that 
proposal. It is theoretically possible that the mother 
herself is not a natural-born citizen, and she may have 
acquired her citizenship by naturalization after the birth 
of that minor child. The child, being a minor, would 
follow constitutionally the citizenship of the unnatural- 
born mother. Would the Commissioner go to the extent 
of recommending that a child born under these circum- 
stances be considered a natural-born citizen and, there- 
fore, qualified to run for President of our country? Is 
that the meaning? 

FR. BERNAS. No, I would not, because as the 
Commissioner described the situation of the child, he 
would not satisfy the definition of paragraph 3 of 
Section 1. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, but that additional proposal 
referring to the elevation of that child, born of a Fili- 
pino mother, to the category of a natural-born child is 
fraught with difficulties. 

FR. BERNAS. The reason behind that is just to 
equalize them with children born under the provision 
of paragraph 2. 


FR. BERNAS. It says a child born of a Filipmo 
mother. It does not say a child bom of a naturalize 
Filipino mother. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is true, Mr. Presiding Officer, but 
Section 2 does not say that the citizenship carries with 
it the stamp of being a natural-born citizen. a i 
under paragraph 3, Section 1, as proposed by the 
Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. No, not under Section 1, paragraph 3 
but under Section 4. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Section 4, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Section 4. The 
sidered, as in fact he is, a child born o 
mother. In other words, the J of 

What was the citizenship of the Filipino 

the birth of the child? If the mother a 

whether by naturalization or by birth a citizen 

birth of the child, the progeny is a natural-born citizen. 

MR. SUAREZ. Excuse me bun^ 

missioner to paragraph 2, Section , . 

ficer. It says “Those whose fathers or r^^enrof the 
zens of the Philippines.” It does not say crtBens ol the 

Philippines at the time of the birth ^ \ ^ 

theoretically possible, Mr. Presiding ^ i, ’ a child is 
graph 2 would even apply to a situation w e 
born of a naturalized father or mother. 

FR. BERNAS. Corre^\“4^ 
it does not apply to a situation where a riiffprpnt 

then the mother gets naturalized. Tha is a 


188 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. That is why that would fall either 
under paragraph 3 or, as proposed to be amended, 
paragraph 4. 

FR. BERNAS. No, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am still con- 
fused, but thank you anyway. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Concepcion? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have two 
points on which I would appreciate a clarification. The 
draft prepared by the Committee seems to liberalize 
naturalization proceedings. Is that impression correct? 

FR. BERNAS. With reference to children born of 
Filipino mother and alien father prior to the liberaliza- 
tion of the old law in 1971. That is the only liberaliza- 
tion added by the Committee. 

MR. CONCEPCION. In principle, would the Com- 
missioner favor the idea that we adopt the policy of 
being more strict insofar as naturalization is concerned? 

FR. BERNAS. Insofar as naturalization is concerned, 
yes. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I will not discuss now the ques- 
tion of liberalization insofar as children born of a Fili- 
pino mother and an alien father are concerned. 

FR. BERNAS. That is the only one which has been 
liberalized by the Committee. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I will not go deep into that 
question as yet. My next question is on paragraph 4 
which provides that those who are naturalized in ac- 
cordance with law are Filipino citizens. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Would the Commissioner favor 
the insertion of the word JUDICIALLY before 
“naturalized” so it would read; “JUDICIALLY natural- 
ized in accordance with law”? I ask this question 
because during the Marcos regime, the President issued 
a decree permitting administrative naturalization. And 
even in cases of judicial naturalization, I know for a fact 
that there have been many, many irregularities made 
possible by the cooperation of the prosecuting force and 
court personnel. I have been made to understand that 
under the decree permitting administrative naturaliza- 
tion, there have been far more irregularities. 

FR. BERNAS. First of all, perhaps I would disagree 
with the statement by the Gentleman that naturaliza- 
tion under former President Marcos was administrative 


naturalization. I think it was legislative naturalization. 
The administrative process was simply for the purpose 
of screening. It was legislative naturalization because the 
operative act which naturalized these people was the 
decree with the force of law specifically naturalizing 
these individuals. So I would say that I would perhaps 
oppose the idea of naturalization solely by judicial 
process because I also accept the possibility of natural- 
ization by legislative process. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I brought out the idea of judicial 
naturalization precisely to avoid naturalization either by 
legislation or by decree. I think a good many of the 
Members of the Commission are lawyers, and I am sure 
many of them have had experience in the matter of 
judicial naturalization by even the court personnel. I 
have heard stories about officials of the prosecutory 
force and practicing lawyers who have made fortunes in 
naturalization proceedings. Insofar as that is concerned, 
what would be the difference if naturalization takes 
place by legislation? Would this not offer the tempta- 
tion which, we are told very often, politicians find 
irresistible additional income through legislative natural- 
ization, since it is something that though affecting 
national interest apparently is not controversial, though 
not actually a matter of attitude or policy? But there 
seems to be a general feeling that the process of legisla- 
tion is often dominated by the policy: “You scratch my 
back and I will scratch yours.” That is why I was hoping 
that the Committee would find it advisable to adopt a 
restrictive policy by authorizing naturalization solely by 
judicial proceedings. 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, the Committee will enter- 
tain such amendments during the period of amend- 
ments. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I touch on this question because 
we have the problem of becoming overpopulated. We 
are trying to persuade the people, the natural-born 
Filipinos to slow down our population growth. I hope 
we would not impose upon them the duty to limit the 
number of their children, although we still adopt 
measures encouraging foreigners to reside in the Philip- 
pines and become Filipinos. This seems to be rather 
incongruous. 

So, I would prefer and suggest that naturalization be 
possible only through judicial proceedings, without 
prejudice to legislative grants of honorary citizenship, 
without the rights of a naturalized citizen. The number 
of cases for naturalization has grown considerably since 
the adoption of the 1935 Constitution which limits the 
enjoyment of natural resources and the participation in 
the operation of public utilities to citizens of the 
Philippines. A liberalization through legislative action 
would enhance the problem of reserving the enjoyment 
of our resources to Filipinos and not only in terms of 
physical or tangible possessions but also insofar as 
human resources are concerned. Many Filipinos had to 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


189 


go abroad for employment opportunities. So I would 
earnestly welcome and suggest the adoption of the prin- 
ciple that naturalization may be effected only through 
judicial proceedings, without prejudice to the authority 
of the Assembly to confer honorary citizenship devoid 
of all the right to enjoy natural resources and participate 
in the operation of public utilities. 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, our Committee will enter- 
tain such an amendment at the proper time. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Trenas? 

MR. TRENAS. Will Commissioner Bernas answer a 
few questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). He may 
yield, if he so desires. 

FR. BERNAS. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. TRENAS. I see. Just one more question: Did the 
Committee not think of preventing in the future any 
situation of indiscriminate grants of Filipino citizenship 
by decree or presidential action and of safeguarding 
that? 

FR. BERNAS. I guess the Committee was of the 
belief that there is nothing in the Constitution which 
would stop indiscriminate actions in the future. But we 
do say “those who are naturalized in accordance with 
law,” which decision, I guess, is to leave to future legis- 
lation the formulation of wise naturalization. 

MR. TRENAS. Thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, will Reverend 
Father Bernas yield to interpellations? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Commis- 
sioner Nolledo is recognized, then Commissioner 
Romulo. 


MR. TRENAS. The Committee on Citizenship, Bill 
of Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights has more or less decided to extend the inter- 
pretation of who is a natural-born Filipino citizen as 
provided in Section 4 of the 1973 Constitution, by 
adding that persons who have elected Philippine citizen- 
ship under the 1935 Constitution shall be considered 
naturaFborn. Am I right, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. TRENAS. And does the Commissioner think 
that this addition to Section 4 of the 1973 Constitution 
would be contrary to the spirit of that section? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, we are quite aware that it is con- 
trary to the letter really. But whether it is contrary to 
the spirit is something that has been debated before and 
is being debated even now. We will recall that during the 
1971 Constitutional Convention, the status of natural- 
born citizenship of one of the delegates, Mr. Ang, was 
challenged precisely because he was a citizen by elec- 
tion. Finally, the 1971 Constitutional Convention 
considered him a natural-born citizen, one of the 
requirements to be a Member of the 1971 Constitution- 
al Convention. The reason behind that decision was that 
a person under his circumstances already had the 
inchoate right to be a citizen by the fact that the 
mother was a Filipino. And as a matter of fact, the 1971 
Constitutional Convention formalized that recogniUon 
by adopting paragraph 2 of Section 1 of the 1971 
Constitution. So, the entire purpose of this proviso is 
simply to perhaps remedy whatever injustice there may 
be so that these people born before January 17, 197 
who are not naturalized and people who are not natural- 
born but who are in the same situation as we are con- 
sidered natural-born citizens. So, the intention of the 
Committee in proposing this is to equalize their status. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Reverend Father Bernas — I add “Reverend for we 
call him only Father Bernas. I think the right address 
should be Reverend. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I think Reverend Father Bernas 
will remember that I was the one who wrote me e- 
cision in the 1971 Constitutional Convention m the case 
of Moreno vs. Ernesto Ang. 


FR. BERNAS. I do not remember but I am glad the 
Gentleman reminded me. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And I remember very well 
Reverend Father Bernas’ well-written book, he sai ^ 
the decision was designed merely to 
former Delegate Ernesto Ang, and that the de mi ^ 
natural-born citizen has no retroactive ef 
only prospective effect. I was nervous ^l^n . 

Pacificador questioned the citizenship of i^ f^ued 
Teehankee because had Mr. Pacificador read 
the Reverend’s book, the status of Chief Jus ice 
kee would have been prejudiced. I praye a 
Mr. Pacificador would not read it, anyway e . 

know how to read good books. My prayer was ^ . |- 

because I successfully defended the citizens ip 
Justice Teehankee. 

Now it seems to me that Reverend 
going against his contention by supporting e 


FR. BERNAS. As the Commissioner can see, there 
has been an evolution in my thinking. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, it seems to me because Rew 
erend Father Bernas has a very progressive min . at 
happy I am now vindicated. 


190 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


Mr. Presiding Officer, in connection with that, I know 
that the proposed provision of Reverend Father Bernas 
that those who have elected Philippine citizenship upon 
reaching the age of majority are also considered natural- 
born, is consistent with the provision of Section 1, para- 
graph 2 that those whose fathers or mothers are citizens 
of the Philippines are considered natural-born citizens of 
the Philippines. That is an egalitarian provision designed 
to recognize the principle that men and women are 
equal before the law. 

But I have a problem, Mr. Presiding Officer, and I 
think Reverend Father Bernas could help me solve it. 
This is in relation to Section 2 which states: 

A female citizen of the Philippines who marries an alien 

shall retain her Philippine citizenship, unless by acts or 

omission as defined and determined by law she is deemed 

to have renounced her PhUippine citizenship. 

Under the Civil Code of the Philippines both the 
father and the mother exercise joint parental authority 
over their minor children. If a child was born of Filipino 
mother and alien father, according to Section 1, 
paragraph 2, the child is a citizen of the Philippines, 
regardless of the citizenship of the father. 

That is what I understand. Am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. That is also my understanding. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Suppose the mother, through her 
omission, becomes an alien while the child is still a 
minor, what is now the citizenship of that child whose 
parents are both aliens? Kindly help me solve this 
problem. 

Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. If I recall, that matter i? not governed 
by constitutional law but by the Revised Naturalization 
Law which says that the citizenship of children follows 
the citizenship of the parents. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, in that case, the child during his 
minority was formerly a Filipino because he was born of 
a Filipino mother, but when the mother became an 
alien, the child also became an alien. 

FR. BERNAS. As I understand the present state of 
the law, that would seem to be the case. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree. 

Thank you. Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask a few questions. I want to 
determine whether or not a child, whose circumstances I 
will describe later, may have a dual citizenship even 
upon reaching the age of majority. A child is born in the 


United States of both Filipino parents, therefore, as I 
understand American laws, he is a natural-born Ame- 
rican. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. And as I understand these provisions, 
he is also a natural-born Filipino. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. He did not elect citizenship, neitlier 
under American law nor under Philippine law. Am 1 
then correct in saying that he has dual citizenship for 
the rest of his life? 

FR. BERNAS. I am not sure, if there is now a law in 
the Philippines requiring him to choose. I am not sure; 
but certainly he is born with dual citizenship. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. How long he is allowed to keep that, 
I am not sure. 

MR. ROMULO. That is my question, and should that 
not be settled by the Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. We will entertain the wisdom of others 
on that. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, just in rela- 
tion to what is in the discussion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). May we 
recognize Commissioner Ople first and then have Com- 
missioner Bengzon later. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Will Commissioner Bernas yield to a few questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Gladly. 

MR. OPLE. These questions will be focused on citi- 
zenship and national security. If I recall right, this 
presidential decree that simplified and liberalized the 
naturalization process was promulgated sometime in 
1975. 

FR. BERNAS. Possibly earlier than that. 

MR. OPLE. In 1974 or 1975, I wanted to contribute 
my own recollection of the circumstances under which 
that decree was promulgated on the recommendation of 
the Cabinet at that time. We were on the eve of a 
momentous decision to establish diplomatic relations 
with the People’s Republic of China, and I remember 
that the question of the presence in the Philippines of a 
very considerable number of the Chinese community 
could have an impact on the national security unless 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


191 


they were helped to become Filipino citizens, the alter- 
native being that most of these Chinese would actually 
fall under the citizenship of the new legitimate govern- 
ment based in Peking and to be recognized by the 
Philippines. 

I do not know if Commissioner Bernas recalls the 
data at the time. There were 600,000 Chinese in the 
Philippines according to the Philippine Constabulary, 
but only 174,000 were recorded in the Bureau of 
Immigration. At that time this was a major cause of 
concern and the decision was that it would be helpful 
to the national security, if the laws were changed so 
that there would be greater simplification and liberaliza- 
tion of the naturalization law. 

But I am glad to be reassured by Commissioner 
Bernas that this law was self-destructive and that it is no 
longer in force and in effect. Therefore, we may shift 
our concern to reports that we hear about those Chinese 
naturalized since 1974 under that simplified procedure 
but who still retained their citizenship under the Repub- 
lic of China and the Republic of Taiwan. 

Has Commissioner Bernas heard this report? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, I have heard the report. 

MR. OPLE. And I think every October 10 or there- 
abouts, a good number of Filipino-Chinese go to Taiwan 
in order to participate in that great event commemorat- 
ing the Sun Yat Sen Republic. Commissioner Bernas is 
undoubtedly aware of that. 

FR. BERNAS. It is valuable information. 

MR. OPLE. Therefore, I would like to revert to the 
point earlier raised by Commissioner Romulo on 
whether or not it might be time for his Committee to 
consider a more categorical policy on double citizen- 
ship, not only for the sake of national security but also 
for a greater clarity about our policy, it having been 
admitted earlier that it is actually possible for a Filipino- 
Chinese to be born and be reared under a double citizen- 
ship, if he is born in the United States of Filipino 
parents, and, therefore, his political status can be very 
ambivalent until he reaches a point where he is forced to 
make a choice between two citizenships. 

Does Commissioner Bernas’ Committee contemplate 
the possibility of addressing this concern now about 
double citizenship? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee in its discussion did 
not consider that, partly becilUSe the Committee 
thought that this is a matter better left to ordinary legis- 
lation because we already have in Section 3 a provision 
which says: “Philippine citizenship may be lost or re- 
acquired in the manner provided by law.’’ 

So, the option we have really is, do we treat the 
matter of double citizenship - dual citizenship - in the 
Constitution or do we relegate that to ordinary legisla- 
tion? It is something which we can discuss. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I hope that the Committee, in due 
course, will welcome an amendment on the question of 
double citizenship which we can jointly present to 
Commissioner Romulo. 

My last question has to do with hundreds of thou- 
sands of our countrymen abroad now — about a million 
of them in the United States; about 150,000 in Canada; 
and at least 30,000 in Australia - who are permanent 
residents and of whom a good number chose the citizen- 
ship of their respective new countries of residence but 
who later on might become contrite about this early 
decision and would like to reacquire their Filipino 
citizenship and maybe choose to retire and die in their 
own native land. 

For purposes of regaining citizenship — I am not 
knowledgeable about the existing law, if any is there 
any procedure that makes it easier for these Filipinos 
who have become repentant about an earlier choice of 
foreign citizenship to reacquire their former natural 
birthright? 


FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, under the Revised 
Naturalization Law, the process of reacquisition of citi- 
zenship called repatriation, not naturalization, is rather 
simple. As I recall, it is just a matter of taking a new 
oath of allegiance. 


MR OPLE. That is very reassuring and, of course, we 
ill appreciate it if the Committee on Citizenship might 
!Cognize later on the advent of a new ^ 

aratively recent in our history where hundreds of 
lousands of Filipinos have gone abroad to ^we 
ork there. It is true that in the early 20s ^d the 30s 

substantial number of Ilocanos went to Hawaii and 
lat just about summed up the Filipino exodus at th 
me ^ But today there is what looks like a Filipmo dm- 
Z'Zre hundreds of thousands have left and hun- 
reds of thousands are going to leave in the next fe 

ears. , . 

I would like to solicit the Committee s attention to 
he ri y that many of our countrymen later on 
hie possiDiiuy ^Uniit their having embraced a 

,ill genuinely they are riady to come 

oreign ^jopt their citizenship, it will be 

Sv^sIniP^er A and there will he no hassle 

oing this. 


the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The As- 
sistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. All good things must come to an 
end . . . 


MR. DE CASTRO. Just one question, please. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for 
the adjournment of the session. 


192 


THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, for my 
peace of mind, I would like to ask this question of the 
honorable Committee member. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). With the 
permission of the Floor Leader, may we allow Com- 
missioner de Castro to have the floor? 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I withdraw 
my motion for adjournment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May Commissioner Bernas yield to a few questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Very willingly, yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. A while ago, I heard the Honor- 
able Bernas state that there is no possibility of a double 
citizenship under his proposal. 

FR. BERNAS. I said there is a possibility. 

MR. DE CASTRO. It is not a possibility, it is true 
right now. My daughter married a Swiss; therefore, she 
became a Swiss citizen. Then under the decree on re- 
patriation, I had her repatriated sometime in 1982 and 
she became a Filipino, but she is carrying a Swiss pass- 
port because she is still a Swiss. As of now, she has a 
double citizenship. Will you agree to that situation? 

FR. BERNAS. As I said, there are people enjoying 
dual citizenship. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. I would like the question 
resolved for my peace of mind. 

My daughter married a Swiss in 1970 and she auto- 
matically became a Swiss. As she was a vice consul in 
the Philippine Embassy in Paris, she had to quit, or she 
had to be eased out of office because she was already a 
Swiss. Then a baby was born in 1974 when she was still 
a Swiss. Sometime in 1982, I had her repatriated and 
she became a Filipino. Now, can we say that her child is 
a Filipino considering that Section 1 , paragraph 2 states 


that “Those whose fathers or mothers are citizens of the 
Philippines” are therefore considered citizens of the 
Philippines? 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding of subparagraph 2 
of Section 1 is that it applies to children born of Fili- 
pino parents at the time of birth. 

MR. DE CASTRO. But nothing in this provision 
states that it is at the time of birth. It simply says: 
“Those whose fathers or mothers are citizens of the 
Philippines.” And since my daughter is now a citizen of 
the Philippines, having been repatriated sometime in 
1981 or 1982 . . . 

FR. BERNAS. As I said, the letter of the law is 
subject to your interpretation. As a matter of fact, a 
careful reading of the debates of the 1971 Constitu- 
tional Convention clearly reveals the intention that this 
applies only to children born of parents who are 
Filipino citizens at the time of birth. 

MR. DE CASTRO. This will be subject to interpreta- 
tion by the . . . 

FR. BERNAS. I am not aware of any definitive 
decision of the Supreme Court on this matter. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). The As- 
sistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
we adjourn until nine o’clock tomorrow morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Davide). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine o’clock m 
the morning. 

It was 7:01 p.m. 


FRIDAY, JUNE 20, 1986 


193 


R.C.C. NO. 14 
Friday, June 20, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:26 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. DAVIDE. Almighty and eternal God and Lord 
of Lords, 

We know that You are here in our midst, 

Never have You left this Hall, 

Even if at times we have neglected Your call. 

In the past, our people may have forgotten You, 

But You kept them always in Your loving care. 

You delivered them from the bondage of slavery. 
And ransomed them from captivity by an oppressive 
regime. 

We are now at the dawn of a new day, 

At the threshold of a new order. 

Repentant of our past indifference and apathy, 

We now pledge .to build 
a just and humane society, 
a government that shall embody our ideals and 
aspirations 

under the rule of law, and 
a regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, peace 
and equality. 

We are commissioned to write a new Constitution 
to achieve these ends. 

Our people expect much from us. 

We can give no more to them than what You give to 
us. 


Without You, we are nothing, 

Without You, we can give nothing, 

For everything comes from You. 

A good Constitution can come only from You. 
For You are the Supreme Lawgiver. 


As we then work together 

To draft the fundamental law for our Republic, 
Grant us the grace to forget ourselves. 

Illumine our minds with Your Wisdom, 

Inflame our hearts with Your Love. 

Let our minds think and our hearts love only tor 
You, the Philippines and the Filipinos; 

Let our hands write and our tongues speak on y or 
You, the Philippines and the Filipinos. 


So that unceasing in our work 
And measuring our lives only in 


terms of loss and not 


of gain — ALL FOR YOU 
We shall merit reward by the approval 
by the people. 


of our work 


Help us, O God, we pray. 
Amen. 


roll call 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading. 


Rosario Braid 


Concepcion 


Present* 

Jamir . • • • 

Present 

Laurel. • • ■ 

Present 

Lerum . . • 

Present 

Maambong 

Present* 

Monsod . • 

Present* 

Natividad . 

Present* 

Nieva . . . • 

Present 

NoUedo . . 

Present 

Ople 

Present 

Padilla . . • 

Present 

Quesada . • 

Present 

Rama . . . • 

Present 

Regalado . . 

Present 

Reyes de los 

Present 

Rigos .... 

Present 

Rodrigo . . 

Present* 

Romulo . . 

Present 

Rosales . . . 

Present 

Sarmiento . 


Present 

Absent 

Present* 

Present 

Present 

Present* 

Present* 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 


* Appeared after the roll call 


194 


FRIDAY, JUNE 20, 1986 


Suarez .... 


Sumulong . . . 

. . . Present 

Tadeo 


Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 


Trefias Present 

Uka Present 

Villacorta Present 

Villegas Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 39 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session be dis- 
pensed with and that the same be approved. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communication, the 
President making the corresponding references: 


Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 202, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT UNBORN CHILDREN 
SHALL BE POSSESSORS OF HUMAN RIGHTS FROM 
THE FIRST MOMENT OF CONCEPTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 203, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION SECURING AND RESPECTING 
THE NATURAL RIGHT AND DUTY OF PARENTS TO 
DETERMINE THE NUMBER OF THEIR OFFSPRINGS. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 204, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF 
THE MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT, THE 
INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE COURT, AND OF THE 
OTHER COURTS ESTABLISHED BY LAW INCLUDING 
THE SANDIGANBAYAN. 

Introduced by Hon. Colayco. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 199, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DISQUALIFY THOSE WHO CANNOT 
READ AND WRITE FROM VOTING. 

Introduced by Hon. Rama. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights! 

Proposed Resolution No. 200, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT A SECTION IN THE 
GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE INCORPORATE 
COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION TECHNO- 
LOGY AS VITAL NATIONAL RESOURCES; FOR THE 
DIVERSIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP OF MEDIA; AND 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL BODY TO 
PROMOTE GROWTH, PROVIDE DIRECTIONS AND 
EVOLVE COMMUNICATION POLICIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 201, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE UNDER THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION PROVISIONS STRENGTHENING 
CIVILIAN SUPREMACY OVER THE MILITARY. 


Proposed Resolution No. 205, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES A PROVISION 
RECOGNIZING THE RIGHT TO A HEALTHY EN- 
VIRONMENT AND PROVIDING FOR THE PRESERVA- 
TION AND PROTECTION OF THE COUNTRY’S 
NATURAL RESOURCES. 

Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 206, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ENUMERATING THE AIMS OF 
ALL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES, TO INCLUDE AMONG OTHERS THE ENCOUR- 
AGEMENT OF CRITICAL AND CREATIVE THINKING 
AND RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 207, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT THE REGIONAL PUB- 
LIC HEARINGS ON THE DRAFT CONSTITUTION BE 


FRIDAY, JUNE 20, 1986 


195 


GIVEN THE WIDEST ADVANCED PUBLICITY, AND 
THAT THERE BE A NATIONWIDE RADIO AND TELE- 
CONFERENCE WITH COMMISSIONERS AND THE 
CITIZENS PARTICIPATING. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hear- 
ings. 

Proposed Resolution No. 208, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE CREATION OF AN IN- 
DEPENDENT CONSTITUTIONAL BODY TO BE KNOWN 
AS THE COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 209, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION RECOGNIZING AND SECUR- 
ING THE RIGHT OF A PERSON ARRESTED OR SUB- 
JECT TO CUSTODIAL OR TACTICAL INVESTIGATION 
OR INTERROGATION TO BE ADVISED OF HIS 
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 

Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 214, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT IN A CONSTITU- 
TIONAL PROVISION THE POPULARLY ACCLAIMED 
RESULTS OF THE PRESIDENTIAL “SNAP” ELECTION 
HELD ON FEBRUARY 7TH NINETEEN HUNDRED 
AND EIGHTY-SIX. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson, Alonto and Abubakar. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 215, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDE^G FOR THE FILIPINIZATION OF 
THE MEDIA AND COMMUNICATION INDUSTRY, 
LIMITING THE NUMBER OF MEDIA ESTABLISH- 
MENTS TO BE OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY INDI- 
VIDUALS OR COMPANIES, AND PREVENTING CROSS- 
OWNERSHIP OF MEDIA IN A SINGLE MARKET, AND 
GRANTING THEIR EMPLOYEES THE RIGHT TO BE 
PART-OWNERS THEREOF OR TO PURCHASE SHARES 
OF STOCK THEREIN. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz, Villacorta and Brocka. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

COMMUNICATION 


Proposed Resolution No. 210, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONS^ 
TUTION A PROVISION LIMITING THE AUTHORITY 
TO ISSUE WARRANTS OF ARREST, SEARCHES AND 
SEIZURE TO JUDGES. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of RjghJs, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 211, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CON^|‘ 
TUTION A PROVISION TO INSURE THAT OUR NAT - 
RAL RESOURCES ARE USED, AND THE EXERCISER 
THE RIGHT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY IS REGULATED, 
FOR THE COMMON GOOD. 


Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Letter from Mr. Francisco Y. Arcellana, Jr., President 
of the National Organization Against Nuclear Power and 
Weapons, proposing provisions that will liberate our 
country from the dangers of defective nuclear techno- 
logy and nuclear weaponry. 

(Communication No. 24 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. The Chairman of the Committee 
on General Provisions, Commissioner Rosario > 

wants to inform the Chair and the Constitutional Com- 
mission that Commissioners Brocka and Bennagen have 
withdrawn from the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 213, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DEFINE PATRIMONY AS THE TOTAL- 
ITY OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES, OF THE HIS- 
TORICAL AND CULTURAL TRADITIONS, AND OF 
THE COLLECTIVE TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL 
CAPABILITIES OF THE FILIPINO NATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo, Suarez, Aquino, Brocka, 
Villacorta, Gascon and Tan. 


THE PRESIDENT. Let the same be noted. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, inasmuch as 
there are several committee meetings scheduled for is 
morning, I would like to move for the adjournment o 
the session until Monday at five o’clock in the afternoon 


196 


FRIDAY, JUNE 20, 1986 


so that everybody could attend his respective commit- 
tee meetings. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 


The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned until 
Monday at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 9:40 a.m. 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


197 


R.C.C. NO. 15 
Monday, June 23, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:07 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 


NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Vicente B. Foz. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


PRAYER 

MR. FOZ. Almighty God, give us the strength to 
work harder than ever before. Teach us to share further 
the little that we know and have, so that we. Your 
servants, may achieve our common goal. 

Make us forget our self-interests, prejudices, sus- 
picions, intolerance and hatred, and listen to our people 
who are far wiser than us. Persuade those of our people 
who still revere on a pedestal a fallen and false idol, to 
go the way of peace. Help us. Lord, to meet our self- 
imposed deadline for the sake of our nation and for 
Your greater glory. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present 

Alonto 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 


Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 


Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Absent 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 

Nolledo Present 

Ople Present* 

Padilla Present 

Quesada Present 

Rama Present 

Regalado Present 

Reyes de los . . . Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 45 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I move to dispense 
with the reading of the Journal of the previous session 
and to approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR ALONTO. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 

Business. 


Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

, . . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

, . . Present 

Tadeo 

. . . Present 

Tan 

. . . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . . Present 

Trefias 

. . . Present 

Uka 

. . . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . . Present 

Villegas 

, . . Present 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
’.solutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
esident making the corresponding references. 

TTTinMC ON FIRST READING 


Proposed Resolution No. 216, entitled; 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THE 
NUCLEAR FREE COUNTRY AND 


PHILIPPINES A 
SHALL NOT BE 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


198 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


USED FOR STORING OR STOCKPILING NUCLEAR 
WEAPONS OR DEVICES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 217, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A CATEGORICAL COM- 
MITMENT TO SECURE A BETTER MORAL ENVIRON- 
MENT FOR OUR COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Bennagen and Villa- 
corta. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 223, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING ELECTIVE AND 
APPOINTIVE OFFICIALS FROM OBTAINING LOANS 
FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES FROM GOVERNMENT- 
OWNED BANKS OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 


Proposed Resolution No. 218, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCLUDING BETRAYAL OF PUBLIC 
TRUST AS ADDITIONAL GROUND FOR IMPEACH- 
MENT. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Offi- 
cers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 219, entitled; 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THAT THE EXPLOITATION, 
DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF FISHING 
GROUNDS AND MARINE PRODUCTS BE RESERVED 
TO FILIPINO CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 220, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR CREATING A MULTISECTORAL COM- 
MITTEE IN EVERY PRIVATE SCHOOL TO OVERSEE 
FINANCIAL MATTERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta and Gascon. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 221, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI 
TUTION A PROVISION DECLARING THAT ENVIRON- 
MENTAL PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION SHALL 
BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE AND THE 
CITIZENS OF THE COUNTRY. 


Proposed Resolution No. 224, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO FURTHER STRENGTHEN THE INDE- 
PENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY BY GRANTING THE 
SUPREME COURT AUTOMATIC AUTHORITY TO 
AUGMENT ANY ITEM OF THE GENERAL APPRO- 
PRIATIONS FOR THE JUDICIARY FROM SAVINGS IN 
OTHER ITEMS OF SUCH APPROPRIATIONS. 
Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


iNo. //o, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN FURTHER 

MISSION ON ELECTIONS BY GRANTING IT EXC - 
SIVE AUTHORITY TO DEPUTIZE LAW ^NFO 
ment agencies and instrumentalities 
THE ARMED FORCES, IF NECESSARY, FOR 
POSE OF ENSURING FREE, ORDERLY, HONEST, A 
CLEAN ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 


Proposed Resolution No. 226, entitled: 

resolution to arrange the PROVISIONS IN THE 
BILL OF RIGHTS IN LOGICAL SEQUENCE TO FACIL - 
TATE COMPREHENSION BY THE PEOPLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights- 


Introduced by Hon. Quesada and Bennagen. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 222, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ADOPTING PROVISIONS ON SCIENCE 
AND TECHNOLOGY FOR INCLUSION IN THE PRO- 
POSED NEW CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE PHILIPPINES. 


Proposed Resolution No. 227, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INTRODUCE A SEPARATE ARTICLE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND TO SET CRITERIA FOR 
DISTINGUISHING ITS* PROVISIONS FROM THOSE 
PROPER TO THE BILL OF RIGHTS AND OTHER 
ARTICLES. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Ser- 
vices. 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


199 


Proposed Resolution No. 228, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE AS SECTION ON THE AR- 
TICLE STATING OUR DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 
A COLLECTIVE VISION OF THE FILIPINO PEOPLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I wish to inform 
this body that Commissioner Tan has withdrawn from 
the Committee on Citizenship due to pressure of work. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let the statement of the Assistant 
Floor Leader be duly noted. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from the Deputy Executive Secretary, 
transmitting a draft constitution submitted by Mr. Floro 
S. Caritan, national nominee for the Constitutional 
Commission. 

(Communication No. 25 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from the Executive Secretary, transmit- 
ting a letter from Mr. Bernardo S. Ugsalan of Talakag, 
Bukidnon, requesting prerogatives for tribal chieftains in 
their respective localities and the preservation of an- 
cestral lands of national cultural communities. 

(Communication No. 26 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the Honorable Froilan M. Bacungan, Com- 
mission on Elections, transmitting proposals focusing on 
civil, political and human rights. 

(Communication No. 27 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Cirilo A. 
Rigos, enclosing a resolution of the National Movement 
for Dual Filipino-American Citizenship Status. 

(Communication No. 28 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP 

MR. ALONTO. Due to the withdrawal from the Com- 
mittee on General Provisions of two distinguished Com- 
missioners, I move that Commissioners Nolledo and 
Aquino be elected members to this Committee. 


MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I rise on a 
parliamentary inquiry. 

To the best of my recollection, the Commission 
agreed in principle on the matter of franking privilege. 
Commissioner Nolledo, the father of the idea of con- 
ducting public hearings, and this humble Representation 
were in Naga City yesterday. In that beautiful place of 
Bicolandia, the people, the ordinary citizens, asked us 
about sending their mails, manifestos and position 
papers to this Constitutional Commission free of charge. 

May I know from the Chair the status of this frank- 
ing privilege? 


THE PRESIDENT. For the information of the Com- 
lission that particular resolution and corresponding 
jmmunication were sent to of the Pre^^^^^^ 

St week, but since then no action has been t^J^en 
»t Aside from that, a letter was also sent to the^ 
onorable Gonzales, the Minister of Justice. 

The Secretary-General is, therefore, requested to 
,llow up our communication and to seek immediate 


MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

the president. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
MR. ALONTO. I move for the suspension of the 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:21 p.tn. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:36 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


200 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


MR. ALONTO. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, some of our 
fellow Commissioners said that they do not have enough 
committee memberships and that they would want to 
become members of other committees. Madam Pres- 
ident, the records show that there are three committees 
with only seven members; namely, the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Prin- 
ciples, the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions, and the Committee on Local Governments. 

In view of this, I would like to move, with the con- 
sent of the body, that the membership in these three 
committees be increased from seven to eleven. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Chairman of the Steering Committee, 
Commissioner Bengzon? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

The membership in the Committees on Preamble, 
National Territory, and Declaration of Principles; Local 
Governments; and Amendments and Transitory Pro- 
visions is hereby increased from seven to eleven. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. Madam President. 

Those who are interested may submit their names to 
the Office of the President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Mr. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ALONTO. I ask that we continue the freewheel- 
ing discussion on the citizenship proposals. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion that the Commission continue the freewheeling 
discussion on the subject of citizenship and such other 
matters as may be the pleasure of the body? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, before we act 
on the motion, I rise on a point of parliamentary in- 
quiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I was listening to Commissioner 
Sarmiento, and I understand that the request to grant 


franking privilege is supposed to be airected to the 
people who will send us mails. Is that the request we 
made to the Office of the President, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. That is right, in accordance with 
the resolution of Commissioners Tingson and Tan. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, considering 
that I myself find it incongruous that the people who 
will send us mails will be granted franking privilege 
whereas the Members of the Constitutional Commission 
will not be granted the same privilege, in the sense that 
we cannot send communications to the people for free, 
I wonder, by way of parliamentary inquiry, if the Chair 
would entertain a motion to the effect that we also grant 
franking privilege to the Members of the Constitutional 
Commission. I feel that it looks a bit awkward that we 
should not be given that privilege. 

I understand that in previous constitutional conven- 
tions that worked on our Constitutions, the delegates 
were granted this franking privilege. I would like to put 
this request to a motion. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. As an amendment to whatever 
request has already been relayed to Malacanang. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

I now move. Madam President, that the request for 
franking privilege which has been sent to the Office of 
the President of the Philippines be amended by also 
extending franking privilege to the Members of tbe 
Constitutional Commission. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I second the motion. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I make a comment on the 
motion at this point? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. Commissioner 
Bacani. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I think we have 
our allowances to cover our mail expenses. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am not par- 
ticularly interested in the fact that we are given allow- 
ance for this. I am thinking of the principle where 
Members of the Constitutional Commission are not 
granted franking privilege, whereas delegates to the 
previous constitutional conventions were granted this 
privilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair understands that Com- 
missioner Bacani is objecting to the motion, so we have 
to put it to a vote. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


MONDAY, JUNE 23. 1986 


201 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I make some remarks on this 
point? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed, Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 


Those against the motion, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 9 votes in favor and 26 against, the 
motion is lost. 

Now, I think there was a motion to continue the 
freewheeling discussion on citizenship. That was the 
subject of our last meeting. 


MR. RODRIGO. A constitution is a fundamental law 
directly enacted by the people. So, there is more reason 
for us to listen to the people than for us to communi- 
cate to them. 

I really do not think that there is anything awkward 
in giving the people a chance to communicate to us, 
postage-free, without giving that same privilege to our- 
selves. As a matter of fact, I think our people will 
appreciate this. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is customary and normal that 
when we receive communications, even though we could 
not really reply in such a manner that would satisfy the 
sender, we make a reply. And I think all of us are agreed 
that we receive mails and they are increasing everyday, 
Madam President. It is inconvenient for us to go to the 
Post Office, buy stamps and mail our letters. I do not 
think the Post Office will lose much money, if we are 
granted franking privilege. 

I submit. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commission now ready to 
vote? 

SOME MEMBERS. Yes. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
motion of Commissioner Maambong, please say yea. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Which is which now? 

We really cannot distinguish the yeas and the nays. 
We will just go by the raising of hands. 

Those in favor of the motion of Commissioner 
Maambong to also grant franking privilege to the Com- 
missioners, please raise i\\eivhax\A.(Few Members raised 
their hand.) 


DISCUSSION ON CITIZENSHIP 
Continuation 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Concepcion be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 

In more ways than one, the matter of citizenship is 
very important in the Philippines. From the point of 
view of policy, there is the question of whether or not 
we should liberalize the acquisition of Philippine citizen- 
ship The second point is whether or not we favor 
double nationality. Both bring with .H"' 

portant problems. Firstly, who are citizens of the Philip- 
pines? They are those provided for in Article IV of the 
1 973 Constitution. 

The 1935 and 1973 Constitutions provide that 
ritizens of the Philippines are, firstly, those who were 
citizens of the Philippines at the time of t^op^ 
said constitutions. Secondly, under the 1935 Constitu- 
tion “those born in the Philippine Islands of foreign 
parents who, before the adoption of this Constitu- 
Son, had been elected to public office in <he Phdippine 
Islands ” This provision has no counterpart in the 1973 
Constitution. The reason is obvious. In those born 

fn the PhUippines of foreign parents who had been 
dected to public office in the Philippines before the 
A firm nf the 1935 Constitution were already part of 
?hTwho wS: Ss a. the time of the adoption of 

the 1973 Constitution. 

Thirdly under paragraph (3) of Section 1 of Art. II 
of the 1935 Constitution “those whose fathers were 
citizens of the Philippine^’ 

tenet has been maintained in the 1973 Constitution, 
which however, has liberalized it in two respects; Pur- 
ruant to sX; 1, Art. Ill of the 1973 Contitution, a 
female citizen who marries an alien retains her Philip- 
pine citizenship unless, by her act or ^ 

deemed to have renounced her citizenship. 
morT he children, by an alien father, became citizens 
rihe Philippines ^pon birth. These children^ puj^uant 

iattalhy, but may elect Philippine citeensh.p upon 
reaching the age of majority. Accord ng^^^^ hey are 
natural-born citizens of the Philippines «^er the 9 3 
Constitution, although they were not so under the 1935 
Constitution. 


202 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


Pursuant thereto, citizens of the Philippines are not 
only those who are so at the time of the adoption of the 
said Constitution, and, inter alia, those whose fathers 
are citizens of the Philippines regardless of the mother’s 
nationality. As regards those bom of Filipino mothers, 
the 1935 Constitution merely gave them the option to 
choose Philippine citizenship upon reaching the age of 
majority, even, apparently, if the father were an alien or 
unknown. Upon the other hand, under the 1973 Consti- 
tution, children of mixed marriages involving an alien 
father and a Filipino mother are Filipino citizens, thus 
liberalizing the counterpart provision in the 1935 
Constitution by dispensing with the need to make a 
declaration of intention upon reaching the age of 
majority. I understand that the committee would fur- 
ther liberalize this provision of the 1935 Constitution. 
The Committee seemingly proposes to further liberalize 
the policy of the 1935 Constitution by making those 
who became citizens of the Philippines through a de- 
claration of intention to choose their mother’s citizen- 
ship upon reaching the majority age by declaring that 
such children are natural-born citizens of the Philippines. 

The nationality of the child of a Filipino father 
follows his nationality not that of the alien mother. 
Thus, we favor the father’s nationality. This rule is 
reversed when the father is an alien and the mother a 
Filipina. We then favor the mother’s nationality. 

The first question is: Why does the draft resolution 
adopt the provision of the 1973 Constitution and not 
that of the 1935? 

It may be said that our policy is Filipino first and 
always. But this is not so under the policy of the 1973 
Constitution. Rather, its result is the opposite. Why? 

Prior to the adoption of the 1935 Constitution, there 
had been very few petitions for naturalization. The 
1935 Constitution provided that the exploitation, 
development and utilization of our natural resources 
was limited to citizens of the Philippines and to corpora- 
tions or associations at least 60 percent of the stocks or 
shares thereof were owned by citizens of the Philippines. 
Soon thereafter there came an avalanche of petitions for 
naturalization in our courts of justice. These petitions 
had significant features: 

(a) over 95 percent of the petitioners were nationals 
of the same country; 

(b) practically all of them were engaged in business 
in the Philippines; and 

(c) almost all of them had been residents of the 
Philippines for many years. 

It was thus obvious that the main goal of then- 
petitions for naturalization was to qualify for the 
enjoyment and utilization of our natural resources. It 
did not take long for us to feel the effects of the sudden 
increase in the number of these naturalized citizens. For 
a number of years now, there is hardly any field of 
endeavor in the Philippines which is not dominated by 
such naturalized Filipinos. 


Upon the other hand, who would profit by the 
retention of the Philippine citizenship by the Filipina 
wife of an alien and the Philippine citizenship of their 
child? It is neither the child nor the child’s Filipino 
mother, but her alien husband and father of the child. 
This alien can, and has generally availed of the privileges 
of his Filipino wife and that of their common child. 

Then, again, conferment of Philippine nationality 
upon this child does not merely put him on the same 
level as the child whose father and mother are both 
citizens of the Philippines. Indeed, the alien father mar- 
ried to a Filipina belongs to a group which is well or- 
ganized and provided with financial means and other 
resources available to Filipinas in general. Hence, the 
grant of Philippine citizenship to the child of an alien 
father and a Filipino mother entails an unfair dis- 
crimination against the full-blooded Filipino. And this 
is amply attested to by the predominance of aliens in 
our economy. 

I would prefer, therefore, to submit an amendment, a 
proposal for amendment to revert to the provisions of 
the 1935 Constitution. How would Father Bernas react 
to this idea? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I do not intend to debate the 
able Commissioner Concepcion on the proposition tha 
he has advanced, although I am constrained to note the 
very unfortunate implications of his proposition. It 
dangerously and implicitly stated in his exposition tha 
the principle of jus sanguinis is capable of being dicho 
tomized between the male and the female parentage. 
This does not speak well of our protestations of com- 
mitment to the equality of rights of sexes. It is only on 
that point that I would like to register my observation. 
Madam President. 

If, as it holds, the formulations of the Article on 
Citizenship already recognize three basic principles. 
1) the continuation of citizenship at the time of the 
adoption of the 1986 Constitution; 2) the recognition 
of naturalization as a legal procedure for acquisition o 
citizenship; and 3) the principle of jus sanguinis, why uo 
we have to unduly distinguish between the male and the 
female parentage? 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


203 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, let me just com- 
ment. The first comment is a follow-up on what Com- 
missioner Aquino has said. Precisely, the reason behind 
the modification of the 1935 rule on citizenship was a 
recognition of the fact that it reflected a certain male 
chauvinism, and it was for the purpose of remedying 
that this proposed provision was put in. The idea was 
that we should not penalize the mother of a child 
simply because she fell in love with a foreigner. Now, 
the question on what citizenship the child would prefer 
arises. We really have no way of guessing the preference 
of the infant. But if we recognize the right of the child 
to choose, then let him choose when he reaches the age 
of majority. I think dual citizenship is just a reality 
imposed on us because we have no control of the laws 
on citizenship of other countries. We recognize a child 
of a Filipino mother. But whether or not she is con- 
sidered a citizen of another country is something com- 
pletely beyond our control. But certainly it is within 
the jurisdiction of the Philippine government to require 
that at a certain point, a child be made to choose. But I 
do not think we should penalize the child before he is 
even able to choose. I would, therefore, support the 
retention of the modification made in 1973 of the male 
chauvinistic rule of the 1935 Constitution. 


FR. BERNAS. For purposes of this provision, the in- 
tendment is, I think, 21. 

MR. RODRIGO. It says, “upon reaching the age of 
majority.” Is there a time limit within which the option 
to choose citizenship may be availed of? 

FR. BERNAS. The established jurisprudence on the 
subject is that it must be within a reasonable time upon 
reaching the age of majority and this reasonable time 
has been extended up to three years after reaching the 
age of majority. 

MR. RODRIGO. After three years? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Beyond that would not be a reason- 
able time anymore? 

FR BERNAS. Although there have been extraor- 
dinary cases, three or four years was considered reason- 
able time in the case of an individual who was under the 
impression all along that he was a natural-bom citizen. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, will Commis- 
sioner Bernas yield to a few questions? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized, afterwards Commissioners Padilla and Guingona 
will follow. 

MR. RODRIGO. According to the 1935 Constitution, 
the following are citizens of the Philippines: 

Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines and, 

upon reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine citizen- 
ship. 

We have incorporated this in the draft and, more, we 
consider them natural-born citizens. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. My question is; When this provision 
in the 1935 Constitution was enacted, the voting age, 
as well as the age of majority, was 21. What is the age of 
majority now that the voting age has been reduced to 
18? 

FR. BERNAS. The age of majority really depends on 
the purpose for which it is being determined. For pur- 
poses of the Election Law, the age of majority is 18. For 
purposes of marriage, it is something else. For purposes 
of entering into other contracts, it is something else 
also, as I recall. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, for purposes of 
this provision, what is the age of majority? 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I concur with the 
lews of Commissioner Concepcion. In the 1935 Consti- 
ition the provisions on citizenship were separated into 
those’ whose fathers” and “those whose mothers. In 
le 1973 Constitution, they were joined without choice 
r election provided in Commonwealth Act 625. How- 
/er, paragraph 3 of the 1973 Constitution reads: 

Those who elect Philippine citizenship pursuant to the 
provisions of the Constitution of nineteen hundred and 
thirty-five. 

It appears incongruous that in the 1 973 Constitution, 
othing is mentioned about election, and yet it makes 
Terence to the right of election pursuant to or in ac- 
idance with the 1935 Constitution. That is why Com- 
issioner Bernas had to explain this paragraph 3 which, 
xording to him, is only transitory. It applies only to a 
irtain date, January 17, 1986. 

Madam President, although I was not a Delegate of 
le 1971 Constitutional Convention - for I was an in- 
imbent Senator - I feel that the 1973 Constitution 
hich joined or placed in the same level paragraphs 3 
id 4, about fathers and mothers, was at the instance 
^ the feminist movement for equal rights of women 
ith men. I know of many prominent female lawyers 

le of them is our distinguished Secretary-General-who 

ive been fighting for equal rights, because they ee 
at there are provisions in the Civil Code which do not 
larantee or provide for equal rights and are in a way 


204 


MONDAY. JUNE 23, 1986 


discriminatory in favor of the father or the male as 
against the mother or the female. 

But the fact is that when a Filipino male marries a 
female foreigner, the father has the choice of residence, 
being the head of the family under the Civil Code. Thus, 
they usually reside in the Philippines. And most of the 
time, if not always, their children are born in the Philip- 
pines. On the other hand, a Filipina citizen who marries 
a foreigner usually follows the residence of her husband 
and they reside abroad. Moreover, the child carries the 
surname of the father. This is also true in the case of a 
child born of a Filipino father and an alien wife, the 
child carries the surname of the Filipino father. 

So, if a Filipina marries an American, the couple 
usually resides in the United States. Thus, their child is 
born in the United States. Under the accepted principle 
of jus soli, which is commonly followed in other coun- 
tries — although we do not give precedence to jus soli 
because we rather adhere to the rule of jus sanguinis — 
that child is an American citizen. Yet the 1973 Consti- 
tution provides that said child whose mother is a Filipina 
is a Filipino citizen. That gives rise to what Commis- 
sioner Romulo raised about dual citizenship. If that 
happens, for example, in Australia or in Canada, I 
suppose it is the same situation. 

Let us take the case of a Filipina who marries a 
German national who is neither working, doing business, 
nor residing in the Philippines. Usually, the couple lives 
in Germany and their child is born in Germany. So, the 
question is complicated by that situation. The fact is 
that the child whose mother is a Filipina and married to 
a foreigner and residing abroad gives rise to complica- 
tions. 

Madam President, I believe that while we must 
respect the equality of rights of both male and female, 
especially before the law, we cannot ignore the fact that 
it is only the female, in this instance a Filipino mother, 
who gave birth to the child. So, I suggest that this Com- 
mission restore paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 1935 Consti- 
tution with this amendment, so that paragraph 4 would 
read: “Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philip- 
pines and ARE BORN IN THE PHILIPPINES, or upon 
reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine citizen- 
ship.” 

With the retention of paragraph 4 and with that 
suggestion that they must be born here, their right of 
citizenship as a Filipino citizen is recognized as natural- 
born. 

Now, paragraph 3 of the 1973 Constitution may have 
some meaning because it expressly mentions those who 
elect Philippine citizenship. We do not even have to say, 
“pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of nine- 
teen hundred and thirty-five.” What I am driving at is 
that for a student of law, he can say: “those who elect 
Philippine citizenship.” The 1973 Constitution does not 
mention any such right or election. It still makes refer- 
ence to the 1935 Constitution. So, we might as well 
retain the two separate provisions of the 1935 Constitu- 


tion — fathers first, then mothers — so as to grant the 
children practically the same rights of citizenship. If the 
child of a Filipino mother married to a foreigner is born 
in the Philippines, I agree that the child is a Filipino 
citizen. After all, there will be no problem for dual citi- 
zenship. At any rate, we would give the child the option 
or the right to elect upon reaching the age of majority. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will Com- 
missioner Padilla yield to a few questions? 

MR. PADILLA. Willingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. In the 1935 Constitution, 
when the child is illegitimate — the Filipino mother is 
not married to the alien — the child follows the citizen- 
ship of his mother. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Therefore, if we allow that 
situation to continue, an illegitimate child practically 
enjoys better rights than a child whose Filipino mother 
has the decency to marry the alien father. Moreover, if 
we revert to the previous concept in the 1935 Consti- 
tution, it will encourage alien fathers to continue their 
illegitimate relations with the Filipino mothers so that 
their children can have Filipino citizenship. That is one 
of the reasons why we adopted the provisions in the 
1973 Constitution. 

MR. PADILLA. I agree with Commissioner de los 
Reyes that the relationships should be legitimate; tha 
is, with marriage. But if the couple is not 
Civil Code provides that the citizenship of the ch 
follows that of the mother. It is not because we want o 
encourage illegitimate or nonmarital relationship be- 
tween a Filipina and a foreigner, but the fact rernains 
that in such a case, we cannot establish paternity of the 
child. We know the fact of birth by a mother, the fac 
of maternity is a ground for recognition. But birth m 
itself is not a ground for paternity. There is really no 
clear relation between the child and the father unless 
there are grounds for voluntary recognition or compul- 
sory acknowledgment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. But we know for a fact 
that because of this provision, alien fathers were en- 
couraged to marry their Filipina live-in partners because 
they had no more fear that if they marry, their children 
will follow the citizenship of their fathers. 

That is all. Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. PADILLA. It does not follow that a foreign 
husband marries a Filipina simply because the former 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


205 


wants the child to be a Filipino. That is non sequitur, 
because the foreigner marries the Filipina perhaps be- 
cause he wants his child to follow his citizenship. That 
is the usual way — the child follows the citizenship of 
his father. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona wants to 
be recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

There are some observations I would like to make 
which are not related to the point at issue. But in con- 
nection with the discussion we have just heard, at the 
risk of being branded a male chauvinist, I would like to 
say that the citizenship laws really distinguish between 
the father and the mother. For example, under many 
citizenship laws, the wife follows the citizenship of the 
husband. I am not aware of any law which provides that 
the husband follows the citizenship of the wife. 

Anyway, my observations are: First, with regard to 
Section 1, paragraph 2 of Resolution No. 7 which says: 
“Those whose fathers or mothers are citizens of the 
Philippines,” I am wondering if we could use the ex- 
pression “Those born of a Filipino father or mother.” I 
suggest this in order to avoid some questions that may 
arise because of the nonuse of the word “born.” For 
example, a child is born of a Filipino father and during 
his minority, the father becomes a naturalized citizen 
of another country. During the minority of the child, 
his citizenship is challenged because his father is no 
longer a Filipino. Therefore, the problem of determining 
whether that child under this provision is Filipino or not 
will now come out. Also, this is clear as far as lawyers 
are concerned: That adoption is a civil act and does not 
have an effect on citizenship because citizenship is a 
political status. But I would like to seek clarification 
from Honorable Bernas whether his Committee has con- 
sidered this matter of legal adoption. A child who is 
legally adopted by a Filipino father would automatically 
be the child of that Filipino father. 

Finally, I would like to mention that one of the 
matters discussed very heatedly in the 1971 UP Law 
Center Constitution Project was the issue of dual citi- 
zenship which I think should be discussed at length, if 
we have the time. 

Thank you. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will the 
Gentleman yield to one more question? 

MR. GUINGONA. Willingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Did Commissioner Guingona 
say that the danger lies in the fact that when a Filipino 
woman marries an alien, she follows the citizenship of 
her husband? 


MR. GUINGONA. No, I did not talk about danger. I 
was just comparing. I just said that there were distinc- 
tions found in citizenship laws — even in our laws — 
such that the woman follows the citizenship of her hus- 
band. Nowhere do we find a provision which says that 
the husband follows the citizenship of the wife. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I thought the Commissioner 
expressed that fear. Nevertheless, this point on the 
Filipino woman following the citizenship of her hus- 
band is taken care of by Section 2, which states: 

A female citizen of the Philippines who marries an alien 
shall retain her Philippine citizenship, unless by acts or 
omission as defined and determined by law she is deemed 
to have renounced her citizenship. 


MR. GUINGONA. I was not expressing any fe^ but 
since the Commissioner mentioned it, I would like to 
express the fear in connection with this because here we 
will have a case of dual citizenship. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Bemas answer 
le query of Commissioner Guingona? 

FR. BERNAS. As far as the effect of adoption on 
he citizenship of the individual is concerned, the Com- 
ifttee just assumed that we are following the old ru e. 
he ru/e on adoption is a civil rule, not a political rule. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
ized. 

MR RFGALADO. Since Commissioner Bemas is 
I “ady on the podium, may I be permitted to ask a few 


FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado may 
)ceed. 

MR RFGALADO. In the discussion we had the last 
MR. REGALA Committee was liberalizing 

'r„„“o“Art"cle III which states that a natural-bom 
;tion 4 ot Article 1 Philippines from 

t^ without having to perform any act to acquire or 
fecr ^ Philippine citizenship. There was an amend- 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. That is quite 

der our Constitution, there are P 

,t can be held only by natural-born citizens. 


206 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Let us draw some parallelism with 
some situations and see if there is a common deno- 
minator. Let us say that a Filipino male, natural-born 
Filipino citizen, happened to lose his citizenship while 
abroad by naturalization. After a few years, he came 
back to the Philippines and, through the process of 
repatriation by simply taking his oath of allegiance to 
the Philippine Republic, he reacquired his Philippine 
citizenship. Would the Committee consider that within 
the context of the liberalized amendment adopted by 
the Committee, he be considered a natural-born citizen 
which he actually was at the time of birth? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee did not consider that. 
My own personal thinking on this is that the status of 
being a natural-born citizen is like a balloon — once it 
is pricked, it is gone forever. 

MR. REGALADO. With respect to a child who 
became a Filipino citizen by election, which the Com- 
mittee is now planning to consider a natural-born citi- 
zen, he will be so the moment he opts for Philippine 
citizenship. Did the Committee take into account the 
fact that at the time of birth, all he had was just an 
inchoate right to choose Philippine citizenship, and yet, 
by subsequently choosing Philippine citizenship, it 
would appear that his choice retroacted to the date of 
his birth so much so that under the Gentleman’s pro- 
posed amendment, he would be a natural-born citizen? 

FR. BERNAS. But the difference between him and 
the natural-born citizen who lost his status is that the 
natural-born who lost his status, lost it voluntarily; 
whereas, this individual in the situation contemplated in 
Section 1 , paragraph 3 never had the chance to choose. 

MR. REGALADO. Let me move to another situation. 

A natural-born Filipino citizen is overtaken by a 
world war in a foreign country. He joins the armed 
forces of that foreign country which is an ally of the 
Philippines, and, as a consequence, he had to take an 
oath of allegiance to that foreign country. If I remember 
my Revised Naturalization Law, one of the ways of 
losing Philippine citizenship is by serving in the armed 
forces of a foreign country - let us say, a friendly 
foreign country. A case in point took place during the 
Second World War when the son of one of our former 
Senators who enlisted in the British Air Force had to 
take an oath of allegiance thereby losing his Philippine 
citizenship by reason of such foreign military service. 
Let us assume that he came back to the Philippines after 
the war, took his oath of allegiance to the Philippine 
Republic, and was repatriated as a Filipino citizen. 
Would he be extended the liberalized policy of being 
deemed a natural-born Filipino citizen under Section 4? 

FR. BERNAS. First of all, my recollection of the 
Naturalization Law on this subject is that, if an indi- 


vidual serves in the armed forces of a nation with which 
the Philippines has a mutual defense pact, he is not 
stripped of his Philippine citizenship. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the Gentleman 
would distinguish it from the case of a natural-born 
Filipino who takes foreign citizenship by naturalization. 
If he takes an oath of allegiance to a friendly foreign 
country as in this case, he would not lose his Philippine 
citizenship. 

FR. BERNAS. That is my recollection of our Natural- 
ization Law — that if the Philippines has a mutual 
defense treaty with a nation, a Filipino who serves in 
the army of that nation does not lose his citizenship. 
But if he takes his oath of allegiance there, that is 
another question. 

MR. REGALADO. Let me turn to another point. 

There has been some concern expressed about citizen- 
ship by naturalization through legislative process which 
was allowed in the previous regime. One of the reasons, 
I understand, advanced for the argument against their 
having to go through judicial confirmation of their 
citizenship, even in a summary proceeding, is that such 
judicial confirmation process would affect the workload 
of our courts of justice. The other reason given was that 
they had already acquired the rights of citizenship and, 
therefore, this proposed requirement should not be 
retroactive, since there is still the remedy of denatural- 
ization in the event they turn out to have been un- 
worthy of being Filipino citizens through that legislative 
process. 

Has the Gentleman’s Committee ascertained the 
number of foreigners who were so naturalized by legis- 
lative process under the previous regime? 

FR. BERNAS. No, the Committee did not make any 
official effort to ascertain but the Committee did make 
an effort to recollect. 

MR. REGALADO. I remember having read some 
decrees conferring Philippine citizenship on particular 
persons and then, later, there was the simplified method 
— administrative in initiation but legislative in con- 
ferment of Philippine citizenship — through pres- 
idential decrees on quite a number of them. I was just 
thinking that perhaps the number of those citizens who 
acquired citizenship by such legislative process under 
the previous regime could be considered and yield some 
help on the matter. If there were just a few of them, I 
suppose judicial confirmation would not be such an 
unwieldy imposition on the judiciary. But if they were 
by the thousands, it might affect, of course, the work- 
load of the judiciary. We should also consider the point 
raised by Commissioner Concepcion about the fact that 
even in judicial naturalization, there were some irregula- 
rities and much more so in this legislative process, the 
number of people so conferred such citizenship by 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


207 


legislative fiat could also pose a danger to the security 
of our country. 

Is there any way for the Gentleman’s Committee to 
possibly determine the number of naturalized citizens 
as a consequence of that legislative process? 

FR. BERNAS. I think that is a matter which can 
easily be answered by the Ministry of Justice. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion seeks 
to be recognized. He may proceed. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 

Prior to 1935 nobody paid attention to the matter of 
citizenship. There were very, very few cases of petitions 
for naturalization and yet we had a sizeable population 
of foreigners who had resided in the Philippines for 20, 
30 or 40 years, but the framers of our 1935 Constitu- 
tion realized — when the Constitutional Convention of 
1934-35 met to draft the Constitution — they realized 
then that foreigners were getting an increasing control 
of practically everything in the Philippines. And so, they 
felt they should do something to see to it that some- 
thing was left for the Filipinos. The 1935 Constitution 
adopted a policy of partial Filipinization in the enjoy- 
ment of natural resources and in the operation of public 
utilities. Hence, the restrictive provisions in the Consti- 
tution of 1935. But the fact that citizenship was a major 
factor of our development in this country, was made 
manifest by the fact that, as soon as the 1935 Constitu- 
tion was ratified, thousands of these foreigners — who 
had resided in the Philippines for many years and did 
not care to apply for naturalization - started filing 
hundreds, then thousands of cases for naturalization. I 
do not think that the members of the 1935 Constitu- 
tional Convention were then more sympathetic to the 
Filipinos or to the Philippines than they were before. 
The only explanation for the provisions on citizenship 
in the 1935 Constitution is that citizenship is the back- 
door to the enjoyment of our natural resources and the 
operation of public utilities. The liberalization of the 
provisions on citizenship in the 1973 Constitution has 
led to a very marked increase in our applicants for 
naturalization and what the Constitutional Convention 
of 1935 was afraid of became a reality. In the movies, 
clubs, in finances and banking, practically in every 
branch of endeavor, from prostitution to production 
of goods in business and trade, we are dominated now 
by naturalized citizens. This condition was considerably 
worsened by the 1973 Constitution and certain decrees 
issued during the martial law regime. It is important to 
control the door to the enjoyment of natural resources 
and operation of our public utilities, if we wish to main- 
tain the policy of Filipinization in relation thereto. I am 
sure that the distinction between children born of a 
foreign father and children born of a Filipino mother 
was not motivated by any idea of inequality. I maintain 


that by giving these to children of Filipino mothers 
whose fathers are foreigners will give these children rights 
which are more effective than those possessed by othei 
Filipinos. We have an illustration in the so-called Parity 
Amendment to the Constitution of 1935. Theoretically, 
the Americans were given the same rights as the Fili- 
pinos, but, in fact, the Americans got better rights than 
those of Filipinos. Reason: In the competition between 
the Filipinos and Americans, the Filipinos were always 
at a disadvantage because the Americans had better and 
greater financial facilities. And this is also true as regards 
naturalization. First, aliens who are poor do not apply 
for naturalization. If they do, they would not qualify 
for naturalization. They could validly claim to have a 
lucrative occupation. There was a time when it was held 
that “lucrative” meant enough to keep body and soul 
together or, not a burden on society. But subsequent 
decisions construed “lucrative” as meaning that the ap- 
plicant would be an asset to the community. Then 
again, applicants for naturalization were mostly busi- 
nessmen who generally have better financial backing 
than that of the average Filipinos. Even banks are now 
under the overriding influence of aliens or naturalized 
citizens. If our citizenship and naturalization laws 
maintain this present policy, I am afraid that aliens 
or naturalized citizens will dominate not only our 
economy but, also, our policy-making organs. 

The present and the proposed constitutional pro- 
visions on citizenship are inimical to national interest 
and conducive to serious problems of double nationality 
and conflict of laws. It undermines family unity, for the 
alien husband’s national law may be inconsistent with 
the Philippine law on the rights and prerogatives of the 
Filipina wife, particularly on the parental authority over 
the children and the administration and disposition ot 
the conjugal property. No less serious are the effects of 
conflicts of allegiance arising from double nationality. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner OpIe is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Concepcion kindly 
yield to a question or two? 


MR. CONCEPCION. Gladly. 

MR. OPLE. I think the Commissioner’s remarks 
inched on a subject of great strategic importance for 
ational development and this has to do with citizen- 
lip as the key to economic opportunities in the coun- 
y. If I got the Commissioner’s bearings right, he wouia 
5 much as possible tighten up this access to economic 
pportunities in the Philippines by more astringent 

r» Fi 1 f o 1 1 rr o n 1 q\X/C*7 


MR. CONCEPCION. Correct. 

MR. OPLE. Does not the Commissioner think that 
this insight into our situation is a little bit late because 


208 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


most of the overseas communities in the Philippines that 
presumably the Commissioner referred to, according to 
my impression, are already naturalized, leaving just a 
few perhaps of the older generation who have remained 
obdurate in their attachment to, let us mention the 
word, China, and therefore would like to die as Chinese 
rather than take the daring act in their old age of chang- 
ing their citizenship? So, there are a few left who are 
subject to naturalization. 

I think what has happened is, an assimilation policy, 
whether intended or not, has been put into effect since 
the 1935 Constitution. As a result, you have your 
national community now considerably enriched by fresh 
infusions from another race. Today some columnists 
speak of the resurgence of the celestial Filipinos and 
their new prominence in the halls of power. 

I do not know about the exact correlation between a 
policy of assimilation through naturalization and the 
distribution of economic opportunities. I think some of 
us will recall that in the earliest decades of the Spanish 
colonization, the Chinese in the Philippines were 
prevented from engaging in agriculture. The Commis- 
sioner must recall that in the 16th and 17th centuries, 
until just about the era which Rizal wrote of in the 
Noli Me Tangere and El Filibusterismo, they were 
denied access to agriculture and, therefore, they decided 
to go massively into commerce and trade. And, of 
course, the Filipinos remained the peasants, while the 
Chinese emerged as the new class in business and 
industry. 

And more recently, I would like to ask Commissioner 
Concepcion if he remembers the Filipino retail trade, 
the act nationalizing the retail trade, because of the 
profound concern that the Commissioner is now re- 
iterating - that even down to the last hamlet in the 
country it was these, I call them celestial Filipinos or 
our celestial guests, who were running the sari-sari 
stores. I think the effect was a massive displacement. 
And today, most of the sari-sari stores are, in fact, run 
by Filipinos. In the meantime, the celestial peddlers and 
small storekeepers have graduated into banking — I 
think the Commissioner also referred to that — to a 
degree that they seem now to hold the levers of power 
through the control of banking. So that whenever by 
law or by policy one sought to displace them in one 
area, by some special gift that they seem to possess and 
which we seem to lack, they just graduate into a higher 
rank of control and prominence in our economic life. 
And, therefore, perhaps, in the first place, it might be 
too late because most of them ' have now become 
naturalized Filipinos; in the second place, the assimila- 
tion policy seems to be not a total failure. 

I remember a book out of the University of Chicago 
three or four years ago wholly devoted to the thesis of 
how to make the most of the overseas Chinese minori- 
ties in the economies of Southeast Asia, which means 
one can regard them as an asset or a blessing rather than 
a bane, and I do not know whether this is supported by 


the experience of Commissioner Concepcion. But, 
certainly, I know many Filipino-Chinese who seemed to 
have grown a deep attachment to this country and who 
now seem to share the deepest values that we have as 
Filipinos. There might be exceptions. 

But I do not know if the experience of the Members 
of the Constitutional Commission supports the ob- 
servation that, in fact, the assimilation policy has 
worked well and the Filipino-Chinese among us, espe- 
cially the younger generation, seem now to strongly 
identify with our own national values and aspirations. 

But, of course, I have no quarrel with the thesis put 
forward by Commissioner Concepcion. I just thought 
we could put some of his remarks in a longer historical 
perspective. And as far as I am concerned, I will not 
quarrel with his proposal for raising the standards for 
the naturalization of future Filipinos. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. May I react to the words of 
Commissioner Ople? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I will say only two 
do we want still to maintain the policy o ^ 
Filipinization of the enjoyment of natural reso • 
the operation of public utilities? If we want to m 
the same, we must see to it that the matter o ^ 
tion of citizenship by naturalization is made as s 
possible. 

And the second point that I would want to 
to is that although we seemingly are more -u 

now, yet I feel that the Filipino people are poorer, inuc 
poorer than before, and that aliens or natura 
citizens are much richer than before. It is for the na 
or the Filipino people to decide what policy to adopt. 

I feel that by adopting a policy leading 
citizenship of a child of alien father and 
mother, that child has better opportunities than os 
now available to children whose parents are both natura 
born citizens of the Philippines. Then too, double na^ 
tionality is conducive to the complex problems o 
conflict of laws, of private international law. 

Suffice it to say that these problems are among the 
hardest, the solutions to which are the least develope 
in the entire field of law. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Villacorta 
seek to be recognized? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much. Madam 
President. 


MONDAY. lUNE 23, 1986 


209 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


they sought Philippine citizenship to avoid being under 
a communist or socialist rule. 


MR. VILLACORTA. May I address some questions to 
Commissioners Concepcion and Bernas? 

I am glad that the discussions on citizenship are on 
the less legalistic subject of assimilation. I would like to 
ask the Commissioners about the advisability of requir- 
ing naturalized citizens to genuinely integrate them- 
selves in the national mainstream. A psychologist has 
said that one becomes a Filipino when he thinks he is a 
Filipino. 

As Commissioner Concepcion has suggested, too 
many of our naturalized citizens are Filipinos only in 
name and for convenience. Would it be all right to re- 
quire them to adopt a Filipino name, learn the national 
language and send their children to Filipino schools? 
Moreover, would it be advisable to oblige them to 
respect Filipino customs and traditions and never to 
exercise discrimination in commerce and employment 
against natural-bom Filipinos? Our naturahzation 
laws are inadequate in meeting these requirements. 

This proposal of mine is twofold; it carries with it an 
incentive. In order to motivate naturalized citizens to 
assimilate themselves and also to reduce a two-way 
discrimination, would it be all right to propose that 
naturalized citizens who have proven themselves to be 
worthy of being called Filipinos for over a period of 
time be considered natural-born citizens? In other 
words, the stigma of being a second-class citizen which 
breeds mutual discrimination and invites corruption and 
unpatriotic acts will phase itself out after a probation 
period. Those who refuse to be assimilated and become 
guilty of unpatriotic activities will be denaturalized. 

This proposal could be true to our ideal of building 
a just and humane society because discrimination in any 
form, particularly racial discrhnination, will now be 
absent in our country. 

MR- CONCEPCION. Madam President. 

the president. Commissioner Concepcion is 

recognized. 


MR CONCEPCION. Rather than emphasize the dis- 
position of the naturalized citizen - to be integrated 
into our community - what I believe to be of more 
importance is proot of the fact that the one seeking 
naturalization after so many years of residence in this 
country really do feel like a Filipino citizen. 

I suppose the Members of the Commission are aware 
of the fact that, when we were induced by the Ameri- 
cans to withdraw recognition of the Chinese govern- 
ment in Taiwan and to recognize the People’s Republic 
in mainland China, practically all members of the 
nationalist group in the Philippines applied for citizen- 
ship. I do not think that this is a manifestation of their 
identification with the Philippines. It was obvious that 


In the same manner, with regard to those who did not 
apply for naturalization from 1935 to 1973, despite 
many years of residence in the Philippines, were they 
merely motivated to do so in view of the provision con- 
cerning conservation of our natural resources and the 
operation of pubhc utihties? 

We welcome people who really feel like Filipinos 
when applying for naturalization. Of course, there may 
be individual exceptions, but, as a matter of general 
trend, that is not a fact. 

Since one of the requirements for naturalization is a 
reasonable command of the language, most of these 
applicants for naturalization take lessons in Filipino- 
Tagalog. The applicants’ manifest eagerness to comply 
with this requirement unfolded a number of very 
interesting situations. 


Sometimes, applicants for naturalization answer a 
ew simple questions from the fiscal, and the applicant 
vould say “O, wala nang tanong? About sa Constitu- 
:ion, tanungin mo ako, how about so and so or sue an 
such.” In other words, they had been rehearsed by 
somebody, hoping that the questions would address 

themselves to those who are asked to ^ native 

they studied and reasonably possessed our native 

language. 






THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I would like to state, 
ent, that our Revised Naturalization 
ealth Act No. 473, provides for those who are qua 
id those who are disqualified ° g^e 

le purpose mentioned by Commissioner 
)od but these are already provided for m the N^tura 
ition Law. In other words, in addition jome req^e- 
ents regarding residence and so forth, e a 
lat the applicant for naturalization shou * j 

aalifications and none of the disqualifications, 
lose provisions, one requirement is that e app 
lould be able to speak English or Spanish or a native 
ialect. It also requires that he send his cii ^ 
ilipino schools where Philippine history, • ’ 

taught and that they mingle socially wi 
ith the intention of imbibing our cus o 
aditions. 

So, if the foreigner has applied for and was 
itizenship judicially under the naturalization a , 
re enough safeguards for the applican o e 
ilipino citizen. The problem is that 
Dreigners, especially of Chinese descent resi i 
hilippines, who have obtained Fi^pino citizen h p not 
irough judicial procedure but through exec 
dministrative proceedings, through liberaliza ion o e 


210 


MONDAY, JUNE 23, 1986 


naturalization law by letters of instruction of the former 
Chief Executive. But the problem is that many of these 
naturalized citizens have already acquired their rights as 
citizens and it may not be possible to divest them of 
their citizenship unless they fall under the provisions of 
the naturalization law which also provide for the can- 
cellation of their certificates of citizenship. 

During the time when I was a member of Congress for 
three terms, there was no naturalization by legislation 
except in very few exceptions — like in the cases of 
those priests and educators who had spent practically 
their entire lives in the Philippines and had rendered 
valuable services to the education of our youth. So, 
when they mentioned the legislative process, I sort of 
reacted adversely because Congress had not granted 
naturalization by legislation. What had been granted 
were naturalizations through LOIs, which were adminis- 
trative in nature through the Solicitor General’s Office. 
In the past, as former solicitor generals, we were very 
strict with regard to applications for naturalization. And 
even when the trial court had granted them their peti- 
tions for naturalization, we usually appealed to the 
Supreme Court for a review if we felt that there had 
been no complete compliance with the qualifications 
and the disqualifications under the Naturalization Law. 


One more comment about Commissioner Guingona’s 
remark that instead of saying “those whose fatliers or 
mothers are citizens of the Philippines,” it should be 
“children born of Filipino fathers or mothers”: the 
problem with that suggestion, Madam President, is that 
we may be recognizing the principle of jus soli when our 
jurisprudence and legislation have been adhering to the 
principle of jus sanguinis. 

Thank you. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ALONTO. There being no more matters in the 
agenda, I move that we adjourn until five o’clock 
tomorrow afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 7:07 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


211 


R.C.C. NO. 16 
Tuesday, June 24, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:17 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 


Lord of our history, Father of our people, be with us 
as we march towards a new day and help us realize in 
these halls that brother helped by brother is like a 
strong city built on the rock of faith in our people and 
hope that one day we shall all be free. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 


NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Edmundo G. Garcia. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. GARCIA. A reading from the Gospel according 
to Luke, Chapter 4, verses 16-19; 

Then Jesus went to Nazareth, where he had been brought 
up, and on the Sabbath he went as usual to the synagogue. 

He stood up to read the Scriptures and was handed the 
book of the prophet Isaiah. He unrolled the scroll and 
found the place where it is written. 

‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He has 
chosen me to bring good news to the poor. He has sent me 
to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovery of sight to 
the blind, to set free the oppressed and announce that the 
time has come when the Lord will save His people.’ 

Dear God, our Father, You, who so loved the world 
that You pitched Your tent among us, be with us today 
as we work together in drafting the law of the land that 
will help set our people free: free from poverty and 
hunger, free from injustice and oppression, free to break 
down the barriers which prevent us from truly becoming 
brothers and sisters to one another. 

Lord, Father of us all, forgive us for our shortcomings 
Help us to listen and learn, to respect the word of 
another and to understand the concern of those who are 
poor and powerless. 

We are a rich country, but our people are poor. We 
are an independent Republic, but we are still struggling 
to be sovereign. We want to be a nation, proud to walk 
our own path, before the concert of nations. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Absent 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Poz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Absent 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present 
Monsod Present 


Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 

Nolledo Present 

Ople Present 

PadUla Present* 

Quesada Present* 

Rama Present 

Regalado Present 

Reyes de los ... Present 

Rigos Present 

Rodrigo Present 

Romulo Present 

Rosales Present 

Sarmiento Present 

Suarez Present 

Sumulong Present 

Tadeo Absent 

Xan Present 

Tingson Present 

Trenas Present 

Uka Present 

Villacorta Present 

Villegas Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 43 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


^Appeared after the roll call 


212 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. ALONTO. I move that we approve the Journal 
of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 229, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON ACCOUNTABILITY OF PUB- 
LIC OFFICERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 


Proposed Resolution No. 230, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONST! 
TUTION STATE POLICIES CONCERNING THE ARMEI 
FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 231, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION STATE POLICIES TO PREVENT THE SAD 
EXPERIENCES OF THE FILIPINO PEOPLE DURING 
THE TWENTY-YEAR RULE OF THE DEPOSED REGIME. 
Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 232, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION SIX OF ARTICLE X OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Trefias. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


Proposed Resolution No. 233, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION SEVEN OF ARTICLE X OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION. 


Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 234, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE INCLUSION IN THE 
ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT A SPE- 
CIFIC PROVISION REDEFINING THE POWER OF THE 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OVER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Regalado. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 235, entitled. 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE DISQUALIFICA- 
TION OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATURE FROM 
PARTICIPATING AS COUNSEL IN JUDICIAL, QUASI- 
JUDICIAL, OR ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS AND 
PROHIBITIONS AGAINST THEIR HAVING FINANCIAL 
INTERESTS IN CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Regalado. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 236, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A PROVISION IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION AUTHORIZING THE CHIEF JUSTICE 
TO ADDRESS THE LEGISLATURE. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 237, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ESTABLISH FREEDOM PARKS IN ALL 
TOWNS, CITIES AND PROVINCES IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 238, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN THE CIVIL SERVICE 
COMMISSION BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION PROVISIONS REQUIRING THAT AP- 
POINTMENTS THERETO SHALL BE MADE FROM A 
LIST OF NOMINEES SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS SEC- 
TORS AND INCREASING THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR 
appointment as COMMISSIONER. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 239, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ENCOURAGE ENTRY INTO THE CIVIL 
SERVICE BY QUALIFIED AND COMPETENT MEN BY 
incorporating in THE NEW CONSTITUTION A 
PROVISION MANDATING COMPARABILITY OF PAY 
TO CIVIL SERVANTS WITH THAT IN THE PRIVATE 
SECTOR. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


213 


Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 240, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ENSURE THE DEVELOPMENT OF A 
STRONG CIVIL SERVICE BY CONSTITUTIONALLY 
MANDATING THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION TO 
UNDERTAKE REFORMS IN VARIOUS AREAS OF 
CONCERN AND INCORPORATING IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A PROVISION GRANTING BROADER 
POWERS TO THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 241, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THAT THE FIRST ELECTION 
OF MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL LEGISLATURE 
AND ALL LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IN- 
CLUDING THOSE OF THE BARANGAY BE HELD ON 
MARCH 25, 1987 AFTER THE RATIFICATION OF THIS 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Jr., Maam- 
bong and Natividad. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 242, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THE DEATH PENALTY AS 
CRUEL AND UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT EXPRESSLY 
BANNED BY THE 1986 CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Maambong, de los Reyes, 
Jr. and Natividad. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 243, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INTEGRATING THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTABULARY AND THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL 
POLICE INTO THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, de los Reyes, Jr., 
Maambong and Ople. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 244, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ESTABLISHING THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS, 
TEMPORARILY OUT OF THE COUNTRY, TO VOTE. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, Ople, de los Reyes, Jr. 
and Maambong. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 245, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ON THE INDIVIDUAL CITIZEN’S RIGHT 
TO GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT. 


Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Jr., Maam- 
bong and Natividad. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 246, entitled: 

RESOLUTION REDEFINING THE CITIZEN’S RIGHT TO 
VOTE AND BE VOTED UPON. 

Introduced by Hon. Maambong, Ople, de los Reyes, 
Jr. and Natividad. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 247, entitled: 

RESOLUTION GRANTING FULL AUTONOMY TO LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Maambong, Natividad, de los 
Reyes, Jr. and Ople. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 248, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT THE STATE SHALL 
ADOPT AND IMPLEMENT AN INTEGRATED AND CO- 
ORDINATED APPROACH TO DEVELOPMENTAL 
PLANNING COMPATIBLE WITH THE PROTECTION 
AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 249, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT .THE STATE SHALL 
PROVIDE SPECIAL PROTECTION AND CARE TO 
MOTHERS DURING PREGNANCY AND MATERNITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 250, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THE ABOLITION OF THE DEATH PENALTY. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 

Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


)posed Resolution No. 251, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE 

PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES A ^TATE^N 
THAT NO OFFENDERS AND OFFENSES SHALL BE 


Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


214 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 252, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ENDORSING THE INCORPORATION TO 
THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ON EDUCATION THE 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FREE 
PUBLIC EDUCATION UP TO THE SECONDARY LEVEL. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 253, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO IMPLEMENT THE STATE’S 
POLICY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona and Villegas. 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Ser- 
vices. 

Proposed Resolution No. 254, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR AN ORDINANCE AP- 
PENDED TO THE CONSTITUTION DECLARING THAT 
ALL FILIPINOS WHO VOTE FOR THE APPROVAL OF 
THE CONSTITUTION, WHO SO DESIRE, SHALL BE 
CONSIDERED AS SIGNATORIES OF SAID CONSTITU- 
TION WITH THE SAME HONOR AND ' DISTINCTION 
AS THE MEMBERS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSION THAT FRAMED IT, IF, AFTER VOTING FOR 
ITS APPROVAL, THEY AFFIX THEIR SIGNATURE(S) 
ON SPECIAL SIGNATURE SHEETS PROVIDED FOR 
THE PURPOSE. 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 255, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE PRESIDENTIAL SYSTEM 
OF GOVERNMENT AND FOR THIS PURPOSE IN- 
CORPORATING IN THE DRAFT OF THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION, THE PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE 
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT AS CONTAINED IN THE 
DRAFT CONSTITUTION APPROVED BY THE RE- 
CONVENED 1971 CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 
WHICH WERE NOMENCLATURED THEREIN AS AR- 
TICLE VIII WITH THE TITLE EXECUTIVE DEPART- 
MENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Family Planning Organization of the Philip- 
pines, Bulacan Provincial Chapter, signed by Rev. Evan- 
gelista Siodora, transmitting Board Resolution No. 4, 
1986, requesting a policy statement on population 
program. 

(Communication No. 29 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Letter from the Court Personnel Organization of Baguio 
City and Benguet Province, signed by Mr. Herminio 
Alamar, suggesting a six-year term of the President and 
Vice-President. 

(Communication No. 30 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Letter from the Movement for a Philippine Federation 
of States, signed by Mr. J.E. Arcebuche, Secretary- 
General, proposing a federal form of government. 

(Communication No. 31 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from the Luzon Convention of Southern Baptist 
Churches, Inc., signed by Rev. Jose Buluan, Rev. Felicia- 
no Montenegro, Pastor Bernie Bernardo and 43 other 
leaders and pastors, supporting the retention of the 
provision stating the policy of separation of church and 
state. 

(Communication No. 32 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, nnd 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Geronimo R. Cruz of 34 Lilac, SSS 
Village, Marikina, Metro Manila, suggesting a National 
Assembly of Citizens, its composition and powers. 

(Communication No. 33 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from the Filipino Life Insurance Companies 
Association, Inc., signed by Mr. Daniel M. Mercado, Jr-, 
proposing the revival of the “Filipino First” policy 
through a constitutional mandate that will correlate 
with this nationalistic policy. 

(Communication No. 34 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Benito C. Jalandoni, Sr. of Bacolod 
City, proposing, among others, a presidential form of 
government; voiding of the decree that led to mass 
naturalization of aliens; and the raising of voting age to 
21 and the disenfranchisement of the blind and those 
who cannot read and write. 

(Communication No. 35 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Teodoro Panopio of 14 Poland Street, 
Better Living Subdivision, Parafiaque, Metro Manila, 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


215 


proposing a bicameral legislature with reduced mem- 
bership and realistic salaries for the President, Vice- 
President and members of the legislative body instead 
of big allowances. 

(Communication No. 36 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from the Financial Executive Institute of the 
Philippines signed by Mr. Ricardo G. Librea, submitting 
a position paper on the restructuring and rebuilding of 
the economy. 

(Communication No. 37 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Pedro C. Lomugdang of Sebaste, 
Antique, suggesting, among others, the redistribution 
of agricultural lands to the landless and deserving citi- 
zens, and providmg more social services to the poor. 

(Communication No. 38 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Services. 

Letter from Mr. Tocod D. Macaraya of Marawi City, 
informing the Constitutional Commission that in a 
consultation meeting conducted by the Honorable 
Commissioner Ahmad D. Alonto with representatives 
of various organizations of Lanao del Sur, Lanao del 
Norte, Marawi City and Iligan City, the consensus was 
to invite the Commission to hold at least one public 
hearing at Marawi City and that committees were 
created to assist in the public hearings. 

(Communication No. 39 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 

Letter from Bagong Alyansang Makabayan, signed by 
Mr. Lorenzo M. Tafiada, submitting proposals on na- 
tional security and international relations; civil, political 
and human rights; and rights for the protection and 
welfare of workers. 

(Communication No. 40 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Bagong Alyansang Makabayan, signed by 
Mr. Lean L. Alejandro, making corrections with regard 
to the errata in the proposals earlier submitted by 
Sen. Lorenzo M. Tafiada in behalf of BAY AN. 
(Communication No. 41 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Luis Quibranza of Cebu City, proposing 
a National Covenant to be written into the Constitution. 


(Communication No. 42 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Jose W. Diokno as Secretary of the 
Regional Council on Human Rights in Asia, enclosing a 
copy of the Declaration of the Basic Duties of the 
ASEAN Peoples and Government. 

(Communication No. 43 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Consultative Assembly of Minority 
Peoples of the Philippines, signed by Mr. Ryan Aquino, 
requesting a special public hearing focusing on the 
national minority peoples’ problems and aspirations. 
(Communication No. 44 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP 

MR ALONTO. In view of a resolution approved the 
•evious day, I move that the following be elected mem- 
>rs of the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
id Declaration of Principles: Commissioners Garcia, de 
istro, Foz and Azcuna. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
he Chair hears none; therefore, the following are 
iilared members of the Committee on Preamble Na- 
onal Territory, and Declaration of Principles: Com- 
issioners Garcia, de Castro. Foz and Azcuna. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

the president. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
cognized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I further move 
lat the following Commissioners be elected members 
r the Committee on Local Governments: Commis- 
oners Regalado, Rigos, Jamir and Ople. 

THE president. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
hIcL;\ears none; the 

;1":Sn:rs Regalado, Rigos. Jamh and Opie. 

MR ALONTO. Madam President, I further move that 
le following Commissioners be elected to the Commit- 


216 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


tee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions: Com- 
missioners Sarmiento, Tan, Lerum and Tingson. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the following Commissioners are 
elected members of the Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions: Commissioners Sarmiento, Tan, 
Lerum and Tingson. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, in the Committee 
on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, Commis- 
sioner Guingona requested to be relieved, and so in his 
place, I move that Commissioner Rodrigo be made 
instead a member of this Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, in view of the 
increase in membership of this Committee, I move that 
Commissioner de los Reyes be elected as member of the 
Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Chair first be enlightened. 
Does the Assistant Floor Leader mean that the member- 
ship of the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
has been increased to twelve? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 5:42 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:50 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I withdraw my 
last motion on the additional member of the Commit- 
tee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, and 
instead I move to recognize Commissioner Foz. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I move to increase the 
membership of the Committee on Constitutional Com- 
missions from 11 to 13, if there is no objection from 
our members, our present members being superstitious 
about the number 13. It is my lucky number, though. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I just 
clarify. I actually have not withdrawn from the Commit- 


tee on Human Resources. That is why I was a little sur- 
prised when I heard that I had withdrawn because I 
have not been a member of that Committee since its 
inception. 

Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. I think that was a mistake. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople wants to be 
recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, just a point of inquiry. 
There must be a principle to be followed by the Pres- 
ident and the officers of the conference with respect to 
the equitable distribution of committee seats. If there is 
such a principle, may we know about it. Is it a principle 
of equity in the sense that those with fewer committees 
are being given more seats in the interest of a fairer dis- 
tribution? Is that correct. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, for the information of Com- 
missioner Ople, preference is given to those Members 
who have less than five committee memberships. In 
other words, they can still participate in more activities 
of the committees. 

MR. OPLE. That explains why I now have four. I 
very honored to be recommended to another committee 
in spite of the fact that I was not consulted about it. 
But I do welcome my election to the Committee on 
Local Governments. So I now have four committees and 
it might be interesting to know what portion of the 
Commission already has five full committees. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair will distribute a listing 
of all the committees and their respective members so 
that the Commission will have an idea as to the number 
of committees and the members assigned to them. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. I would like to restate my motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us go back to the motion of 
Commissioner Foz. 

MR. FOZ. I move that the membership in the Com- 
mittee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies be 
increased from 11 to 13 and to authorize the President 
to appoint the additional members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of Commissioner Foz? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


217 


THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. ALONTO. Since there is a more compulsive 
reason for us to adjourn at this moment, I move that the 
freewheeling discussion on the citizenship proposals, 
which is supposed to take place now, be postponed for 
tomorrow. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, I would like to be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recognized. 

MS. NIEVA. I move that the name of our committee, 
which is the Committee on Social Justice and Social 
Services, be changed to Committee on Social Justice 
only and to eliminate Social Services. This is at the in- 
stance of the members of the Committee who feel that 
social justice is already all-embracing and that social 
services is only an aspect or a part of social justice. 

And in connection with our membership, I would like 
to report some changes: Commissioner Ople is taking 
the place of Commissioner Uka and Commissioner 
Rodrigo is taking the place of Commissioner Romulo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of Commissioner Nieva that the name of the 
Committee on Social Justice and Social Services be 
changed to the Committee on Social Justice? 

MR. OPLE. I second the motion. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just so the record will not be 
confused, may I know, if the previous motion of the As- 
sistant Floor Leader has been withdrawn in the mean- 
time, because there are two interlapping motions. 
Madam President. I would just like to know if the 
motion for adjournment, which has been filed by the 
Assistant Floor Leader, has been withdrawn in the 
meantime. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Assistant Floor Leader 
withdrawing his motion? 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I think the com- 
ment is well-taken, so I withdraw my last motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion of Commissioner 
Nieva has been seconded by Commissioner Ople. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. With all due respect, I object to the 
motion to change the name. Actually, the concept of 
social justice is entirely distinct and separate from the 
concept of social services. It is precisely for that reason 
that under the Declaration of Principles and State 
Policies of the 1973 Constitution, I mean the original 
which is Article II thereof, we have two separate sec- 
tions: Section 6 which is on social justice and Section 7 
which is on social services. The principal distinction of 
the two being that social justice is not limited to social 
services. It may include economic justice because it is 
actually to insure the dignity, weltoe and security of all 
the people; and towards that particular end, the State 
shall regulate the acquisition, ownership, use, enjoyment 
and disposition of private property and equitably dif- 
fuse property ownership and profits. But the concept of 
social services would be limited to the field of educa- 
tion health, housing, employment, welfare and social 
security to guarantee the enjoyment of the people of a 
decent standard of living. So the two concepts are 
distinct and separate. 

I hope the Committee would reconsider the changing 
of the name of the Committee itself. 

MR ALONTO. Madam President, since there are 
some Comments. I move that the matter be transferred 
to tomorrow’s Order of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT We still have this motion of Com- 
missioner Nieva to which there has been an objection. Is 
Commissioner Nieva agreeable to postpone action on 
her motion tomorrow? 

MS NIEVA. My attention was called to the fact that 
we are supposed to adjourn at six o’clock and that, 
therefore, we could discuss this tomorrow. So I am open 

to that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner agreeable to 
that? 

MS. NIEVA. I am agreeable to that. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, 
row’s agenda of the plenary session. I think the As 
S7ant Floor Leader has said that to— 

continue the freewheeling discussion on c t^ 

have consulted with some Members who believe tha 
Object of citizenship is now fully covered and ex- 
hausted for purposes of a freewhee mg debate, and I am 
informed that Commissioner Nolledo is Pre^ed to 
sponsor a committee report dealing with the ationa 


218 


TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1986 


Territory. May I, therefore, suggest, if the Assistant 
Floor Leader agrees, that today we terminate the free- 
wheeling debate on citizenship and tomorrow devote 
our attention to the committee report of the Rosales 
Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. I understand that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo will help sponsor this report and that he 
is in a position to do so tomorrow. 

I so move. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I object to that motion because 
it would actually be a motion to reconsider an earlier 
decision of the Commission. The committee report on 
National Territory was directed to be deferred until 
after July 7. What could probably be done tomorrow 
will only be a freewheeling discussion on National 
Territory, but not on the report itself. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 6:02 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:04 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I rephrase my 
motion in agreement with the Assistant Floor Leader? I 
propose that we allow a brief extension of the free- 
wheeling debate on citizenship at the plenary session 
tomorrow, in deference to the reservation already made 
by Commissioner Guingona, and, thereafter, com- 
mence a freewheeling debate on the National Territory 
provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Davide 
say? Does he have some observations? Does he not 
have an objection now to the freewheeling discussion on 
the National Territory? 

MR. DAVIDE. On that motion, I would have no 
objection. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I move for the 
adjournment of the session until tomorrow at five 
o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 6:05 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


219 


R.C.C. NO. 17 
Wednesday, June 25, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:14 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Eveiybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by Reverend Cirilo A. 
Rigos. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

REV. RIGOS. Most loving and gracious God by 
Whose goodness we are gathered here today, we pause 
to invoke Thy blessings upon us. 

Grant us the courage to change what can be changed, 
the humility to accept what cannot be changed and the 
wisdom to distinguish one from the other. 

In Jesus’ name, we pray. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary -General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 


Concepcion . . 

. . Present 

Alonto 


Davide 

. . Present 

Aquino 


Foz 

. . Present 

Azcuna 


Garcia 

. . Present 

Bacani 


Gascon 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 


Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 


Jamir 

. . Present 

Bernas 


Laurel ..... 

. . Absent 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Lerum 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Colayco 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 


NoUedo 

Ople 

Padilla 

Quesada 

Rama 

Regalado 

Reyes de los . . . 

Rigos 

Rodrigo 

Romulo 

Rosales 


Present Sarmiento Present 

Present* Suarez Present 

Present Sumulong Present 

Present Tadeo Present 

Present Tan Present 

Present Tingson Present 

Present Trenas Present 

Present Uka Present 

Present Villacorta Present 

Present Villegas Present 

Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 43 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


approval of journal 

MR CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

the president. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

reference of business 


he Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Mons on First Reading and Communications, 
President making the corresponding references. 

^oposed resolutions on first reading 

)Osed Resolution No. 256, entitled. 

ESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION INSTITUTIONALIZING THE 


^Appeared after the roll call 


220 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


PRINCIPLE OF PEOPLE POWER IN THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL PROCESS THROUGH THE METHOD OF 
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia and Gascon. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 257, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
FOR A PRESIDENTIAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
SPECIFYING THEREIN THE TERM, QUALIFICATIONS 
AND MANNER OF ELECTION OF THE CHIEF EXECU- 
TIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 258, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION TWENTY, ARTICLE FOUR, OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFICATION TO MAKE 
THE PROTECTION EFFECTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 259, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING APPROVAL BY 
THE SUPREME COURT OF RULES CONCERNING 
PLEADING, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE PROMUL- 
GATED BY QUASI- JUDICIAL BQDIES BEFORE THESE 
RULES CAN BECOME EFFECTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 260, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROHIBITION AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS 
HOLDING TWO OR MORE PUBLIC OFFICES AT THE 
SAME TIME. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 261, entitled; 

RESOLUTION STRENGTHENING THE LIBERTY OF 
ABODE AND TRAVEL PROVISION OF THE BILL OF 
RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, de los Reyes, Jr., 
Maambong and Ople. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 262, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUOUS 
VALIDITY OF ALL EXISTING LAWS, PROCLAMA- 


TIONS, DECREES, ORDERS OR INSTRUCTIONS AND 
PROVIDING FOR THE EXERCISE AND TERMINATION 
OF THE LAW-MAKING POWERS OF THE INCUMBENT 
PRESIDENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Maambong, de los Reyes, Jr., 
Natividad and Ople. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 265, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE THE 
STUDY OF THE LIFE AND WORKS OF OUR NATION- 
AL HERO, JOSE RIZAL, IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 266, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE THE 
STUDY OF THE CONSTITUTION IN THE NEW 
CHARTER. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 267, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A PROVISION IN THE CON- 
STITUTION CREATING THE COUNCIL OF RELIGIOUS 
LEADERS TO BE APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT IN 
AN ADVISORY CAPACITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 268, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE RETENTION OF THE U.S. 
MILITARY BASES ON PHILIPPINE TERRITORY AS 
PART OF THE NATIONAL DEFENSE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 269, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCLUDE IN THE DE- 
CLARATION OF PRINCIPLES OF THE CONSTITUTION 
A PROVISION ON MORAL COMMITMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 270, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE INCLUSION OF OPTION- 
AL RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


221 


Proposed Resolution No. 271, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION CALLING FOR THE DISMAN- 
TLING OF PRIVATE ARMIES AND THE CIVILIAN 
HOME DEFENSE FORCES (CHDF). 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Nolledo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 272, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON THE PROTEC- 
TION AND PROMOTION OF THE RIGHTS OF THE 
FAMILY. 

Introduced by Hon. Nieva, Bacani, Munoz Palma, 
Rigos, Gascon and Guingona. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from the Honorable Neptali A. Gonza- 
les, Minister of Justice, referring a letter of Mr. O.L. dela 
Cuesta of Vancouver, B.C., Canada, requesting a dual 
citizenship provision in the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 45 — Constitutional Commis- 
sion of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Financial Executives Institute of the 
Philippines signed by Mr. Ricardo G. Librea, submitting 
a paper proposing that the Central Bank be made a 
constitutional body. 

(Communication No. 46 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication from Mr. Pablo B. David of Betis, 
Guagua, Pampanga, suggesting a form of government, 
the separation of church and state and social services 
provisions, among others. 

(Communication No. 47 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Mr. Jose V. Macavinta of 2321-A 
Kusang Loob, Sta. Cruz, Manila, submitting proposals 
on the preamble, the national identity, the national flag 
and the national seal. 

(Communication No. 48 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Communication from Mr. Fulgencio S. Factoran, Jr., 
Deputy Executive Secretary, transmitting proposals of 
Mr. Virgilio S. Omamalin of Dipolog City, nominee to 
the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 49 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Communication from Mr. Fulgencio S. Factoran, Jr., 
Deputy Executive Secretary, transmitting a letter of 
Mr. Hipolito Montebon of Tuburan, Cebu, suggesting a 
presidential form of government, among others. 
(Communication No. 50 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 


Letter from Mr. Mariano Melendres, Jr., of 370 S. 
Antonio Avenue, Pasig, Metro Manila, submitting sug- 
gestions on the national territory and the declaration of 
principles, among others. 

(Communication No. 51 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


.etter from Mr. Delfin R. Manlapaz of 1707 E. Rodn 
uez, Sr. Avenue, Cubao, Quezon City, suggesting a 
.rovision creating an entity to serve as the mam credit 
ource for the people. 










of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice and Social Services. 


COMMITTEE REPORT 

>mmittee Report No. 4 on Ptoposed 
3 7 as reported out by the Committee on Citizenship, 
?i of rSmT Political Rights and Obligattons and 

aman Rights, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE CONSTI 

TUTION AN ARTICLE ON CITIZENSHIP, 
commending its approval with amendments. 

•onsored by Hon. Laurel, Jr. and Davide, Jr. 

) the Steering Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 




It was 5:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:28 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Regalado E. Maambong presi mg. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 


222 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, in addition 
to Commissioners Rama, Rodrigo and Jamir, may I re- 
quest that the following Members of the Commission 
be made coauthors of Proposed Resolution No. 255 
which was read on First Reading yesterday: (1 ) Ahmad 
Domocao Alonto; (2) Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr.; 
(3 ) Jose N. Nolledo; (4 ) Florenz D. Regalado; (5 ) Ciri- 
lo A. Rigos; (6 ) Ricardo J. Romulo; (7 ) Decoroso R. 
Rosales; (8 ) Gregorio J. Tingson; (9 ) Efrain B. Trenas; 
and (10) Lugum L. Uka. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I request 
that the Chair recognize Commissioner Nieva concerning 
her pending motion yesterday to change the name of 
her Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Nieva is recognized. 

MS. NIEVA. Yesterday, there was an objection raiseo 
to the changing of the name of the Committee on Social 
Justice and Social Services to COMMITTEE ON SO- 
CIAL JUSTICE. The motion was made at the request of 
all the members of the Committee who felt that the 
phrase “social justice” necessarily encompasses “social 
services” and thatr therefore, specifying social services 
would, in a way, restrict the scope of social justice. 

The rationale behind the decision of the Committee 
on Social Justice and Social Services to change its name 
prirnarily lies in the perception and an'alysis of social 
justice as a general and broad concept which encom- 
passes virtually every facet of life of the individual and 
of society. So, the Committee took as a working defini- 
tion of “social justice” the definition of the Chairman 
of the Philippine Commission on Human Rights which 
says that: 

Social Justice, for us Filipinos, means a coherent intel- 
ligible system of law, made known to us, enacted by a legi- 
timate government freely chosen by us, and enforced fairly 
and equitably by a courageous, honest, impartial and com- 
petent police force, legal profession and judiciary that: 

(1 ) respects our rights and our freedoms, both as indi- 
viduals and as a people; (1) seeks to repair the injustices 
that society has inflicted on the poor by eliminating 
poverty as far as our resources and our ingenuity permit; 

(3 ) develops a ^If-directed and self-sustaining economy 
that distributes its benefits to meet, at first, the basic 
material needs for all, then to provide an improving stand- 
ard of living for all, but particularly for the lower income 
groups, with time enough and space enough to allow them 
to take part in and to enjoy our cultures; (4 ) changes our 
institutions and structures, our way of doing things and 


relating to each other, so that whatever inequalities remain 
are not caused by these institutions or structures, unless 
inequality is needed temporarily to favor the least favored; 

(5 ) adopts means and processes that are capable of attain- 
ing these objectives. 

And so, the Committee has agreed to work for a 
separate article on social justice which would necessarily 
encompass social services. With this broad and expanded 
notion of social justice, our Committee believes that as a 
bare minimum, social services are necessarily included. 
Therefore, our Committee has decided to concentrate 
on several areas of concern such as: agrarian reform, 
urban land reform, rural and urban community de- 
velopment, housing and shelter, labor, health, educa- 
tion and roles and rights of peoples’ organizations. 

We think that if we add the area of social services to 
social justice, we would then have to include also other 
areas that we are concerned with, like agrarian and 
urban land reform, or perhaps peoples’ organizations. 
The Committee believes that the nomenclature “Com- 
mittee on Social Justice” would be more expressive of 
its tasks and concerns. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I was the one who objected to the 
motion yesterday. After listening to the explanation 
given and in the light of the fact that it was the unani- 
mous consensus of the members of the Committee to 
formulate a separate Article on Social Justice, including 
therein social services, I am withdrawing my objection. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair would like to thank Commissioner Davide. 

Now, we would like to clarify the parliamentary 
situation. Since there is a withdrawal of the objection, 
may we request the movant to restate her motion so 
that we can act on it. 

MS. NIEVA. I move that the name of our Committee 
be changed to the COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). There 
is a motion to rename the “Committee on Social 
Justice and Social Services” to COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. In connection with our freewheel- 
ing discussions on citizensliip, I request the Chair to 
recognize Commissioner Guingona. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


223 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

With the permission of the Presiding Officer and the 
Members of this Commission, before I go into the ex- 
planation of my position, may I be allowed to make 
reference to an article which appeared in the June 21, 
1 986 issue of Midday Malaya. 

For the information of the honorable Members of 
this Commission, a media representative approached me 
last Friday and requested a summary of the proposed 
budget for the Commission. Since I did not want to be 
misquoted, I wrote down the summary of the proposed 
budget with the corresponding tentative amounts. After- 
wards, I showed the summary to our President who 
went over it and later gave me the approval to give the 
summary to the media representative. 

Commissioner Foz was present and he also went over 
the summary. I would like to say that the media rep- 
resentative accurately gave the substance of what we 
gave her except for some typographical errors which I 
or the public relations office of this Commission would 
try to explain or correct. 

An example is the reference to the per diems of the 
Commissioners in the amount of P2,250,000 for 90 
days at the rate of P500 a day per Commissioner for 
actual attendance in sessions, committee meetings and 
public hearings. I took pains to put these figures down 
in writing, and I also gave an illustration. I said that if a 
Commissioiner attended four or three committee meet- 
ings plus a session in one single day, that Commissioner 
would be entitled to P500 only and no more. 

As a matter of fact, this amount of P2,250,000 is 
now reduced because during the first weekend, we had 
no sessions, committee meetings and public hearings. 
Thus, no Commissioner received any per diem. So, this 
is effectively reduced by P48,000. 

But this news article, perhaps, due to a typographical 
error, states that the Commissioners’ per diems would 
amount to P2, 250,000 for 90 days work, not counting 
the P500, when, iri fact, this P2,250,000 is precisely the 
total of what the Commissioners will receive at the rate 
of P500 a day for actual attendance. 

The other error is the statement that the Filipino 
people may end up paying at least PI, 3 56, 145 a day. If 
we multiply this amount with 90 days, that means we 
would need a total appropriation of more than PI 00 
million for three months, when, in fact, we only have 
P20 million. I also told the media representative that 
we still expected to save P3 to P4 million from the P20 
million. In my computation, our total expense for 90 
days would be PI 4, 143,1 10 based on the proposed 
budget which, if we divide by 90, would come out to 
about PI 57,000 a day and not PI, 356,145 as reported. 
The third typographical error is the phrase “losing opera- 
tions” which connotes that we are a profit-making 


organization, when it should have been “Lounge Opera- 
tions.” 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

With the Chair’s permission, I would like to give my 
remarks on the matter of citizenship. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Before Commissioner Guingona makes his remark, the 
Chair takes note of his explanation and suggests that the 
Committee on Public Information should draft the 
proper communication to the paper referred to by Com- 
missioner Guingona so that the date will be properly 
corrected. 

DISCUSSION ON CITIZENSHIP 
Continuation 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

With the permission of the Chair, may I suggest that 
we secure the cooperation of our two liaison officers 
with media; namely. Commissioners Rama and Foz. 

By way of clarification, I would hke to assure our 
distiLuished Vice-President that when I proposed the 
Change of the Ph®e ‘Tho^ whose 

?aTHEr“ whatsoever to pro- 

appSion of the principle of /ns so// u, thts 

jurisdiction. 

As a matter of fact, the use of the words of 

As a mane pxoressed my mtention 

course, if the child is thereof through the ap- 

States, he may become a application 

ours. 

The provision 

Commissioner Davide^ 

are citizens of the Phil pp ritizenship of the 

ship of the child S of cit^^^^^^^^ raised 

father at any time *he QuesU pointed out in 

and not at the moment of his birth as we p^ 

confusion as to the question of his citizens ip. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I would '“tV” !H*‘’m’thTp‘)!!^ 
poL^STj»ln«on illlroS' by Commissioner Davide, 
which reads, and I quote: 

those who are naturalized in accordance with law; 

rrdea«o)Xp«“ 

confirmation. 


224 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


May I say that I find the use of the words “judicial 
confirmation” instead of “judicial review” to be for- 
tunate. I recall that the expression “judicial review” was 
used during the interpellations, because “judicial re- 
view,” in its strict sense, is the power of the court to 
pass upon the constitutionality of the acts of other de- 
partments of government and to declare null and void 
such of them as are in contravention of the constitution. 
Since the 1973 Constitution provides for naturalization 
in accordance with law and since Mr. Marcos exercised 
lawmaking powers, there might have been some dif- 
ficulty in challenging the naturalization of aliens then 
by the Executive as being unconstitutional. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not speaking against the 
process of naturalization. I am aware that this process 
is widely accepted and presumably in force in most, if 
not all, the countries of the world. This process is not a 
novel concept — the Roman Law also provides for 
naturalization. But I would like to share the opinion of 
those who would caution us against liberalizing our 
naturalization process because such liberalization could 
have an adverse impact, not only on the welfare of our 
people, but also on the security of our country. The 
venerable former Chief Justice Roberto Concepcion, in 
a previous session, called the attention to what he says 
were the many irregularities attendant to the grant of 
Filipino citizenship by the Executive during the Marcos 
rule. If I recall correctly, there was no dissent or objec- 
tion from the floor with regard to the assertion made by 
Commissioner Concepcion. Justice Concepcion also 
expressed the fear that if we open the door too widely 
to the entry of aliens into our body politic through 
naturalization, then there might come a day when there 
would be more naturalized than natural-born Filipinos. 

I believe that the statement of Dean Regalaao in the 
course of his interpolation that if there were many cases 
of grants of naturalization by the Executive during the 
time of Marcos, that such would result in the clogging of 
the courts’ dockets is valid. I believe that one possible 
remedy to this problem is to create some sort of a de 
facto court, not unlike the People’s Court created after 
liberation, the sole jurisdiction of which would be to 
adjudicate cases of naturalization of aliens under a 
decree of the previous regime. 

May I respectfully invite the attention of the Mem- 
bers of this honorable body to the fact that citizenship 
is membership in a political community with full, I 
repeat, full, civil and political privileges. Except in 
very rare instances, such as the election to the presiden- 
cy or vice-presidency of the Philippines, a naturalized 
citizen would enjoy the same rights and privileges as a 
natural-born one. It may be asserted that they would 
have the right to acquire land of the public domain, to 
exploit natural resources and to operate public utilities. 

May I underscore the fact that a foreigner who 
becomes a citizen through the process of naturalization 
becomes one of the sovereign people of this country. 
As Justice Marshall said in the case of Osburn vs. U.S., 


a naturalized citizen becomes a member of the society 
possessing all the rights of a natural-born citizen and 
standing, in the view of the Constitution, on the same 
footing as a native. This is why, Mr. Presiding Officer, 

I am not in favor of liberalizing the naturalization of 
foreigners and this is also why I am in favor of Commis- 
sioner Davide’s proviso which I had previously cited. 
This is why I favor another proviso, also contained in 
Commissioner Davide’s proposed resolution, that ad- 
mission to Filipino citizenship is a privilege which can 
be revoked any time in the manner and for cause 
provided by law. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, there are two questions I would 
like to ask. The first is directed to Commissioner 
Davide; If the naturalization of aliens under the decree 
of the previous regime shall be established to be ir- 
regular because of fraud, bribery, or other illegal acts, 
would the nonconfirmation of such irregular naturaliza- 
tion have a retroactive effect? If so, what would be the 
effect on the citizenship of the minor child born after 
the irregular naturalization of the alien? 

The second question is directed to both the Honor- 
able Davide and the honorable Chairman of the 
Committee on Citizenship; Would the nonprohibition 
of Congress or the National Assembly to delegate or 
authorize the President to fix or lay down rules concern- 
ing the qualifications of aliens wishing to acquire 
Filipino citizenship and rules concerning proceedings for 
the acquisition thereof mean that the Congress or the 
National Assembly would have the power to delegate 
or authorize? 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR, REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, before the 
answers are given by those from whom Commissioner 
Guingona sought clarifications, I would like to 
his observation on the questions I raised when Com- 
missioner Bernas was on the floor. 

I did not say that if there would be judicial confirma- 
tion of those citizens naturalized under the decrees 
issued under the previous regime, there would be a clog- 
ging of dockets in the court. What I expressed on the 
floor was the concern of some Members that if the pro- 
posed judicial confirmation should be required, there 
would be (1) the possible clogging of the dockets of the 
courts, and (2) without the benefit of such judicial 
confirmation, there might be a problem of security. 

I was referring to the statements of other Commis- 
sioners who made these observations. On that basis, I 
asked Commissioner Bernas whether or not his commit- 
tee had ascertained the number of aliens granted Philip- 
pine citizenship under the liberalized procedure of the 
previous regime, for the obvious reason that the greater 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


225 


the number of those who were so naturalized, the graver 
is our concern. But if there were only a few, then it 
would be of less concern for us. Let us say that there 
were only about fifty or sixty who were granted citizen- 
ship through legislative naturalization, then it would not 
pose a serious concern regarding the crowding of the 
court dockets or the threat to national security as when 
the total number were about 100,000. 

Personally, I have made a statement elsewhere that I 
am in favor of the proposed judicial confirmation 
through a summary proceeding as may be authorized 
under conditions laid down by the legislature, instead of 
the process of denaturalization, so that in such pro- 
ceeding, we can weed out those who were really not 
qualified but were granted Philippine citizenship 
through that liberalized legislative procedure. I recall 
that Commissioner Bernas said that from the records, 
I tlrink, of the Office of either the Solicitor General or 
the Ministry of Justice, the number could be ascertained. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. We now start discussion on the 
National Territory provision, and the first speaker 
whom I would like to call upon and whom I would like 
the Chair to recognize is Commissioner Nolledo. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6: 11 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I with- 
draw my previous manifestation that we proceed to the 
discussions on the National Territory. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
manifestation is withdrawn. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
Commissioner Davide to be given the floor. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I wonder if it would be appropriate at this time 
to answer the queries presented by Commissioner 
Guingona. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide may proceed. 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, parliamentary 
inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner Guingona posed two 
questions: one, to this Representation and the second, 
to both Commissioners Bernas and this Representation. 
Would it be proper to answer now or could the answer 
be deferred until we shall have discussed the report on 

citizenship? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Mr Assistant Floor Leader, the Chair heard distinctly 
Commissioner Guingona mention the name of Commis- 
ioner Davide. So, the Chair feels that it would be 
nroper for Commissioner Davide to make the answer. 
But to keep everything in order, would it be possible for 
the Assistant Floor Leader to defer action on his motion 
to go to another topic? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, the answer to 
the first question is that if the f 

confirmation or nonconfirmation, shall ° . 

latter - that is, nonconformation of the citizenship 
granted pursuant to a decree — then ^ jt 

nonconfirmation would have a retroactive e . 
relates back to the moment of the grant of the cit ze" 
ship by decree. Necessarily, children of said "^tura izea 
Filipino citizen who may have obtained Filipino citizen 

ship by virtue of the decreed naturalization will, m 

effect, lose that citizenship. Properties acquired by t le 
so-called naturalized citizen will have to be eschea e 
in favor of the state. That is a settled doctrine m de- 
naturalization. As a matter of fact, in one case, in e 
3o Bon Lee case, the Solicitor General had already 
began reacquiring the properties acquired by Mr. o 
Bon Lee although his citizenship had not yet been 
ivithdrflwn bv denaturalization. 


As to the second question, the answer is yes, because 
naturalization must be in accordance with law an , 
therefore, prescribed by law. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move Fiat 
we suspend the session for three minutes while this is 
being ironed out. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 5:5 7 p. m. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Thank 
you. Commissioner Davide. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
the Chair recognize Commissioner Bengzon. 


226 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer and honorable 
Chairman of the Steering Committee: 

It has been my observation that we have had more 
than enough freewheeling discussions on the Article on 
Citizenship and, therefore, I would like to move for a 
special order from this body that we take up Commit- 
tee Report No. 4, the report of the Committee on Citi- 
zenship, and move to its Second Reading, have it 
sponsored on the floor, subject to interpellations only 
without proceeding to the consideration of amend- 
ments. The amendments will come after July 7 as agreed 
upon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is that 
the motion. Commissioner Bengzon? 

MR. BENGZON. That is my motion, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Before we act on the motion, I would 
like to ask some clarifications. Are we through with the 
Unfinished Business for today? 

MR. BENGZON. The Unfinished Business is the 
freewheeling discussion on citizenship. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. But I did not hear any motion to 
terminate the Unfinished Business. I do not think we 
can proceed to resolving the motion on a special order 
because under the Rules, paragraph (a) of Section 1 8, it 
is stated: 

Unfinished Business — Business being considered by the 
Commission at the time of adjournment of its preceding 
session. Its consideration shall be resumed until such Un- 
finished Business is disposed of. Thereafter, the President 
shall caU for the Business for the Day. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). With 
the indulgence of the two Gentlemen on the floor, the 
Chair declares a suspension of session. 

It was 6:17 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6:20 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 


Before the Chair suspended the session, there were 
two Gentlemen on the floor — Commissioner Bengzon, 
Chairman of the Steering Committee and Commis- 
sioner Davide. 

What is the pleasure of Commissioner Bengzon? 

MR. BENGZON. In order to avoid any problems on 
technicality, may I, therefore, move that we first ter- 
minate the freewheeling discussion on Committee Re- 
port No. 4 on citizenship. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). There 
is a motion to terminate the Unfinished Business, which 
is the freewheeling discussion on citizenship. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 7 
(Article on Citizenship) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move that we 
consider Committee Report No. 4 on Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 7, as reported out by the Committee on Citizen- 
ship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and 
Human Rights. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 7 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read only the title of the resolution 
without prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole 
text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Resolution No. 7, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON CITIZENSHIP. 


(The following is the whole text of the resolution with amend- 
ments per C.R. No. 4.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 4 

The Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights 
and Obligations and Human Rights, to which was referred 
Proposed Resolution No. 7, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON CITIZENSHIP, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report it back to 
the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recommenda- 
tion that the resolution be approved with the following amend- 
ments: On page 2 of the Proposed Resolution, 

1 . Line 7, put a period after the word “law.” 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


227 


2. Delete the rest of paragraph 4 starting from the semicolon 
(;) on line 7 up to and including line 15. 

3. lines 16 to 20, delete Section 2 and in lieu thereof insert 
the following section: SEC. 2. CITIZENS OF THE PHILIP- 
PINES WHO MARRY ALIENS SHALL RETAIN THEIR 
CITIZENSHIP, UNLESS BY THEIR ACT OR OMISSION 
THEY ARE DEEMED, UNDER THE LAW, TO HAVE 
RENOUNCED THEIR CITIZENSHIP. 

4. line 23, delete “A” and capitalize tlie first letter of the 
word “natural.” 

5. On the same line, add the Ietter_S to the word “citizen” and 
change the words “is one” to ARE THOSE. 

6. Line 24, change the words “is a” to ARE and add the letter 
S to the word “citizen.” 

7. Line 26, change the word “his” to THEIR. 

8. On the same line, change the period (.) after the word 
citizenship to a semicolon (;) and insert the following: 
PROVIDED, THAT THOSE WHO ELECT PHILIPPINE 
CITIZENSHIP IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 1, 
PARAGRAPH 3 ABOVE SHALL ALSO BE DEEMED 
NATURAL-BORN CITIZENS, 

with Honorable Davide, Jr. as author thereof. 

(Sgd.) Jose B. Laurel, Jr. 

Chairman 

Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations 
and Human Rights 

(Sgd.) Christine A. Tan 
Member 

(Sgd.) Jose C. Colayco 
Member 

(Sgd.) Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
Member 

(Sgd.) Bernardo M. Villegas 
Member 

(Sgd.) Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Member 

(Sgd.) Teodoro C. Bacani 
Member 

(Sgd.) Teodulo C. Natividad 
Member 


(Sgd.) Joaquin G. Bernas 
Vice-Chairman 

(Sgd.) Yusup R. Abubakar 
Member 

(Sgd.) Rene V. Sarmiento 
Member 

(Sgd.) Edmundo G. Garcia 
Member 

(Sgd.) Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Member 

(Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum 
Member 

(Sgd.) Ambrosio B. Padilla 


decree; many unqualified aliens became Filipino citizens under 
said decree; there is a need to purge the ranks of such unqualified 
aliens who now claim themselves as Filipinos; 

WHEREAS, there is likewise a need to clarify the citizenship 
of a Fihpino woman who marries an alien. The provision of the 
1973 Constitution in this respect needs revision. Now, therefore, 
be it 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional Com- 
mission in session assembled, To incorporate in the new Consti- 
tution the following article on Qtizenship: 

ARTICLE 

CITIZENSHIP 

SECTION 1. The following are citizens of the Philippines: 

(1) Those who are citizens of the Philippines at the time of 
the ratification of this Constitution; 

(2) Those whose fathers or mothers are citizens of the 
Philippines; 

(3) Those who elect Philippine citizenship pursuant to the 
provisions of the Constitution of nineteen hundred and thirty- 
five; 

(4) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law. 

SEC. 2. Citizens of the Philippines who marry aliens shall 
retain their citizenship, unless by their act or omission they are 
deemed, under the law, to have renounced their citizenship. 

SEC. 3. Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired in the 
manner provided by law. 

SEC. 4. Natural-born citizens are those who are citizens of the 
Philippines from birth without having to perform any act to ac- 
quire or perfect their Philippine citizenship ;jRrov/c?e<i, That those 
who elect Philippine citizenship in accordance with Section 1, 
Paragraph 3 above shall also be deemed natural-bom citizens. 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I now request that Commis- 
sioner Bernas be recognized to sponsor the committee 
report, which will thereafter be subject to interpella- 
tions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized to sponsor Committee 
Report No. 4. 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 7 SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 

(As amended by the Committee) Qp COMMISSIONER BERNAS 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON CITIZENSHIP. 

WHEREAS, an article on Citizenship is mandatory in a Consti- 
tution; 

WHEREAS, the new Constitution must have an article on 
Citizenship ; 

WHEREAS, under the unlamented Marcos regime, Filipino 
citizenship could be acquired administratively pursuant to a 


FR. BERNAS. The honorable Members of the Com- 
ssion: 

Let me say that the greater part of my sponsorship 
s already been done. So, I would like 
jvious remarks as part of my sponsors ip. a 
mid like to do today is just to touch on matters which 
lad not touched on yet in my past appearances. I did 
t touch on Section 2 and I did not touch on Section 


228 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


3. Section 2 is simply a slight modification of the 1973 
provision and the modification simply consists in desex- 
ing the provision. 

The 1973 provision states that a female citizen of the 
Philippines who marries an alien shall retain her Philip- 
pine citizenship unless by act or omission, as defined 
and determined by law, she is deemed to have re- 
nounced her Philippine citizenship. 

In our report, we have omitted any mention of sex, 
and we just say; 

Citizens of the Philippines who marry aliens shall retain 

their citizenship unless by their act or omission, they are 

deemed under the law to have renounced their citizenship. 

With respect to Section 3, there is no change made 
from the 1935 and 1973 provisions. 

With respect to Section 4, the difference is in the 
number of the nouns and, therefore, also of the cor- 
responding verbs. In the 1973 provision, a natural-born 
citizen is one who is a citizen of the Philippines from 
birth without having to perform any act to acquire or 
perfect his Philippine citizenship. 

In our proposal, natural-born citizens are those who 
are citizens of the Philippines from birth without having 
to perform any act to acquire or perfect their Philippine 
citizenship. We have also added a proviso which I 
already explained in my previous appearance. With these 
remarks, I am ready to answer whatever questions may 
be raised. 

MR. AZCUNA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Azcuna is recognized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Will the sponsor yield to a few clari- 
ficatory questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). He 
may yield, if he so desires. 

FR. BERNAS. Willingly, yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. With respect to the proviso in Section 
4, would this refer only to those who elect Philippine 
citizenship after the effectivity of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion or .would it also cover those who elected it under 
the 1935 Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. It would apply to anybody who 
elected Philippine citizenship by virtue of the provision 
of the 1935 Constitution, whether the election was 
done before or after January 17, 1973. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Will the sponsor yield to a ques- 
tion with respect to the change in Section 2? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
distinguished sponsor may yield, if he so desires. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. The provisions of the 1973 Con- 
stitution under consideration were specifically with 
respect to a Philippine female citizen who married an 
alien, and as a consequence, lost her Philippine citizen- 
ship, subject to the conditions therein. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Whereas, under the proposed 
amendment to Section 2, however, there is no distinc- 
tion between male or female citizens of the Philippines 
who marry aliens. What would be the situation or con- 
tingency envisioned here then since said Section 2 under 
the 1973 Constitution was with respect to a female 
citizen marrying an alien? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. This provision was placed here to 
cover any possibility that there might be a country by 
whose laws anybody who marries its citizen acquires 
that country’s citizenship. I am not aware of any coun- 
try which has that law, but, just in case • • • 
to protect the males. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I was reading the Gentleman’s proposal on citizen 
ship. May I call his attention to paragraph 1. I notice 
he employed the term “ratification” rather than the 
term “adoption” as used in both the 1935 and the 1973 
Constitutions. Is there any substantial difference be- 
tween “ratification” and “adoption”? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. The same question was asked the 
first time I stood up on this topic and my answer was 
that the Constitution, at any rate, is adopted upon 
ratification, so there is no change in meaning. But I 
would not be willing to die for the word “ratification” 
if the Gentleman insists on changing it. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, would the Gentleman not feel 
more comfortable if none of us would die for one point 
just for the sake of changing? Going back to the word 
employed under the 1973 Constitution . . . 

FR. BERNAS. For me it could be either way. 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


229 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Either way, but since the Committee 
left it this way, I would not tamper with it now, but we 
can change it later, if necessary. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I will go back to my question regarding the implica- 
tions of paragraph 3, Section 1 on those who elect 
Philippine citizenship pursuant to the provisions of the 
1935 Constitution. This would specifically refer to 
those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines, 
and upon reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine 
citizenship. Is my understanding correct? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Gentleman limit the ap- 
plicability of this paragraph 3 to those born before the 
adoption of the 1973 Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would not the Gentleman extend the 
operation of this provision to those born after 1973? 

FR. BERNAS. No, I would not because as I said, 
those born after the ratification of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion could come under paragraph 2. 

MR. SUAREZ. I notice that in the case of paragraph 
4 of Section 1, Article IV on Citizenship under the 1935 
Constitution, there is no such circumscribing period. 

FR. BERNAS. I am not sure I get the question. 

MR. SUAREZ. The provision is very simple and it 
says: 

Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines 

and, upon reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine 

citizenship. 

There is no specific period stating that this ought to 
be applicable only to those born before the adoption 
of the 1935 Constitution, in the same manner that para- 
graph 3, Section 1 of Article III on Citizenship under 
the 1973 Constitution does not contain that period 
limitation. 


FR. BERNAS. Those born under the 1973 Constitu- 
tion, whose mother is a Filipino, even if the father is an 
alien, the child is a Filipino at birth and, therefore, does 
not have to elect Philippine citizenship. It is for that 
reason that I say paragraph 3 has applicability only to 
those who were born prior to January 17, 1973 because 
they are the only ones who would need to elect. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under the theory that those born 
after 1973 would fall under the category specified in 
paragraph 2. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is to say, those whose fathers 
or mothers are citizens of the Philippines. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. If that is the intention of the Com- 
mittee, should it not be clearly stated in the proposed 
paragraph 2 that this should apply only to those born 
before 1973? 


FR. BERNAS. I do not follow. 

MR. SUAREZ. Excuse me. The Gentleman is saying 
:hat under paragraph 3, those who elect Philippine 
dtizenship pursuant to the provisions of the 1935 
:onstitution ought to be limited only to those born 
jrior to 1 973. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. It was only prior to 1973 that the 
1935 Constitution was in effect. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, what I am suggesting is: Should 
we not spell that out in black and white to reflect the 
thinking of the Committee members so there will be no 
further doubt as to the restrictive application of para- 
graph 3, Section 1? 

FR BERNAS. I do not have any doubt but if the 
body insists on the need for further clarificafon. I 
certainly would entertain that. 

MR SUAREZ. The next question has something 
tn do with Section 2 because this was a derivation or 
SrMal Privation from Sect, on 2 of the 1973 Const, tu- 
Uon which specified categorically that it is applicable 


FR. BERNAS. The period is necessarily implied. It I 
understand the Gentleman’s question right, the situa- 
tion, as I see it, is something like this: Under the 1935 
Constitution, if the mother is a Filipino and the father 
is an alien, the child is not born a Filipino. But upon 
reaching the age of majority, the child may elect Philip- 
pine citizenship. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 


R. BERNAS. Yes. 

IR SUAREZ Is the Gentleman aware of any m- 
'x. wl,cm a male ci.izen of any foreign counny who 
ries a Filipino loses his citizenship? 

■R BERNAS. I am not aware of any now. We put 
1 as a cautionary clause to protect the males, as 


230 


WEDNESDAY, jUNE 25, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Before the Chair recognizes Commissioner Nolledo, 
please be informed that Commissioners Guingona and 
Rodrigo have already registered their desire to speak. 
Commissioner Nolledo will, therefore, be recognized 
after them. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I will yield to them. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Guingona? 

MR. GUINGONA. I will yield. 

MR. RODRIGO. I will yield. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Nolledo is recognized because the other Com- 
missioners who made reservations to interpellate have 
yielded the floor. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
is the pleasure of Commissioner Nolledo? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Will Commissioner Bernas yield to interpellations? 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly. 

THE PRESmiNG OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
sponsor may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Bernas, under Sec- 
tion 2 it is stated: 

A temale citizen of the PhUippines who marries an alien 

shall retain her Philippine citizenship, unless by her act or 

omission as defined and determined by law, she is deemed 

to have renounced her Philippine citizenship. 

I think the Gentleman will agree with me that this is a 
new provision which supersedes the previous rule as far 
as the 1973 Constitution is concerned - that a Filipino 
woman who marries an alien followed the citizenship of 
the latter, if by the law of her husband she acquired by 
marriage his citizenship. That was the old rule in mar- 
riage citizenship. 

FR. BERNAS. That was the old rule until January 17 
1973. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Then the present rule which the 
Gentleman has adopted is that a Filipina who marries an 
alien remains a Filipina irrespective of what the law of 
the husband’s country provides. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, that was adopted by the 1973 
Constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And this is consistent? 

FR. BERNAS. But we did not put that in. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. This is also consistent with the 
provision of paragraph 2, Section 1 that children born 
of Filipino mothers are citizens of the Philippines, an 
adherence to the jus sanguinis rule and one of the 
egalitarian principles now enshrined in the Freedom 
Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. It is an adherence to jus sangui- 
nis. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The law and the Committee’s 
recommendation state that — and I read only a portion 
of Section 2 — unless by her act or omission she is 
deemed, under the law, to have renounced her citizen- 
ship, with special emphasis on the words “under the 
law.” 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In other words, is it correct to say 
that the expression, “unless by her act or omission she 
IS deemed . . is not self-executing; meaning, there 
must be an implementing statute? Am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. If her citizenship is questioned in any 
proceeding, then the implicit or explicit renunciation 
can be cited. In other words, this does not automatically 
take place but it is a question of fact whether in truth 
she did make a renunciation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Bernas, since the 
1973 Constitution was adopted, I am not aware of any 
implementing statute or any law that implements 
Section 2. 

FR. BERNAS. I am not aware of anything explicit, 
ut I think it has been understood that if a person per- 
torms a pledge of allegiance to another country, that is 
imp icit renunciation of her citizenship here. 

Mr. nolledo. Therefore, there is no need of any 
law before we may apply Section 2. 

FR. bernas. There is no need. 

Mr. nolledo. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Under Section 2, if a Filipino citizen 
marries an alien, he or she retains Philippine citizenship. 
If, according to the law of the husband, the wife auto- 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


231 


inatically becomes a citizen of the country of the 
husband, we will have a case of dual citizenship. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. And we will allow this as long as the 
Filipino or the Filipina does not commit any act or 
omission which would make her lose his or her citizen- 
ship. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. or unless our naturalization law 
prescribes that at a certain point the Filipino who has 
dual citizenship must make an election. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then I come back to that question 
of mine. The age of majority in making an election is, 
as the Gentleman said, 21 years. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. This was taken from the 1935 
Constitution; and under that Constitution the age of 
majority for this purpose was 21 years. 


the election earlier. If all along he knew that he had to 
make an election and he did not, then three years would 
be considered unreasonable. As I said, in the case which 
I cited, the Supreme Court considered three years 
reasonable because the person thought he did not have 
to elect and, second, the person thought he was a Filipino 
all along and under that belief he served in the Armed 
Forces. 

As with everything in law, the word “reasonable” is 
something that is rather flexible. We have to examine 
the factual circumstances of every case to determine 
whether indeed in this particular case three years would 
be reasonable or unreasonable. In some instances, one 
year may be reasonable or already unreasonable, 
depending on the circumstances. 

MR. RODRIGO. But this provision becomes very, 
very important because his election of Philippine citi- 
zenship makes him not only a Filipino citizen but a 
natural-born Filipino citizen, entitling him to run for 
Congress, to be a Justice of the Supreme Court . . . 


MR. RODRIGO. The Gentleman said that according 
to jurisprudence this must be exercised within three 
years . . . 


FR. BERNAS. Correct. We are quite aware of that, 
and for that reason we will leave to the body whether to 
approve that proviso on Section 4. 


FR. BERNAS. Within a reasonable time upon reach- 
ing the age of majority. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Gentleman mentioned three 
years. 

FR. BERNAS. I am aware of one occasion where a 
person under this situation was allowed to make an 
election three years after he reached the age of 
majority. And the condition was this: He was a person 
who all the time believed that he was a citizen of the 
Philippines and because of that even served in the 
Armed Forces. In recognition of this, the Supreme 
Court ruled that three years was not unreasonable. 


MR. RODRIGO. I think there is a good basis for the 
-oviso, because it strikes me as unfair that the Filipino 
ho was born a day before January 17, 1973 cannot be 
Filipino citizen or a natural-born Filipino citizen, 
hile another one born the day after is a natural-born 


FR. BERNAS. It could only be an hour later. 

MR. RODRIGO. An hour later, yes. For example, 
one born at 1 1 :30 p.m. of the previous day, and another 
at 12: 10 a.m. of the succeeding day. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


MR. RODRIGO. Let us say that somebody was born 
before 1973, so he is covered by the provision that he 
must elect Philippine citizenship upon reaching the age 
of 2 1 . 


no. "hin. we ^ouM be 




FR. BERNAS. Born under the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. under the 1935 Constitution. 
Let us say that this man has not elected Philippine 
citizenship but all of a sudden he wants to be a candi- 
date for Congress. The law says he must be at least 25 
years of age. So, six months before reaching the age ot 
25 he decides to elect Philippine citizenship; that is. 
three-and-a-half years after he reached the age of 
majority. Would he still be allowed to elect Philippine 
citizenship? 

FR. BERNAS. It would depend on the circumstances; 
it would depend on the reasons why he did not make 


FR. BERNAS. I am sure the Committee will entertain 
concrete proposals along that line. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Vice-President, Commissioner Padilla, is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Ofticer. 

I notice that we are referring to Proposed Resolution 
No. 7, as modified by Committee Report No. 4. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


232 


V/EDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


MR. PADILLA. It is quite difficult to be going from 
one page to another. For example, the resolution says; 
“Delete Section 2,” and the report says, “Insert this 
section.” 

For immediate reference, why can we not place these 
different sections under “Citizenship” on a more or less 
final form, as recommended by the Committee7The in- 
sertion recommended by the Committee should be 
incorporated in capital letters and the old provision that 
is intended to be deleted may be enclosed in parenthes- 
es. That was a practice in the Senate and in the Con- 
gress. That would make it easier, I think, for all the 
Members of this Commission. 

FR. BERNAS. I recognize that it could have been 
done better that way, but I think the provision is suffi- 
ciently short so that it is possible to make references. 

MR. PADILLA. In Commonwealth Act No. 63 — 
How Citizenship May be Lost — Section 1 provides for 
seven causes, and the last one, before subsequent 
amendments, reads: 

In the case of a woman, upon her marriage to a foreigner 
if, by virtue of the law in force in her husband’s country, 
she acquires his nationality. 

So, a Filipino citizen who marries a foreigner whose 
country’s law provides that she acquire her husband’s 
nationality, loses her Filipino citizenship and acquires 
the citizenship of her husband. 

197:f That was the law prior to January 17, 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Commonwealth Act No. 63 is 
an old law. The same CA No. 63 provides for reacquisi- 
tion of Philippine citizenship - it may be lost or re- 
acquired in the manner provided by law. I suppose that 
said law has reference to Commonwealth Act No. 63. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, but that Commonwealth Act was 
repealed on January 17, 1973 by Section 2. 

MR. PADILLA. I will go to that later on. The pro- 
posed replacement of Section 2 reads: “CITIZENS OF 
THE PHILIPPINES WHO MARRY ALIENS SHALL 
RETAIN THEIR CITIZENSHIP, UNLESS BY THEIR 
ACT OR OMISSION THEY ARE DEEMED, UNDER 
THE LAW, TO HAVE RENOUNCED THEIR CITIZEN- 
SHIP.” 

It again makes reference to the law. According to 
Commonwealth Act No. 63, one of the grounds for 
losing a citizenship is by express renunciation of citizen- 
ship. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. Of course, it also provides for other 
acts, like subscribing to the oath of allegiance to support 
a foreign government, rendering service or accepting 


commission from a foreign country, etc. There are 
seven causes, including a cancellation of certificate of 
naturalization or having been declared a deserter in the 
Philippine Armed Forces. 

There is no other law that I know that mentions 
renunciation except this provision “by express renun- 
ciation of citizenship” in paragraph 2, Section 1 of 
Commonwealth Act No. 63. So that when the law 
mentions “express renunciation” and at the same time 
“renounced” is mentioned “by their act of omission,” 
they are not very clear, if not confusing. Does not the 
Gentleman feel that we should clarify this? We do not 
know exactly what law it is referring to except Com- 
monwealth Act No. 63. 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding of this provision as 
it has existed since 1973 is that the use of the word “re- 
nounced” in Section 2 is not qualified by the adjective 
“express.” In other words, what this means is that the 
word “renounced” under Section 2 could either be 
“express” or “implied.” 

Paragraph 1 of the section cited by the Vice-President 
from Commonwealth Act No. 63 speaks of “express 
renunciation.” But I think the other sections can be 
interpreted as “implied renunciation.” And that is 
covered by the word “renounced” in Section 2, which is 
not qualified by the adjective “express.” 

MR. PADILLA. Why do we not make it clearer by just 
saying “express” or “implied” renunciation under the 
law? 

FR. BERNAS. I would be willing to entertain such an 
amendment at the proper time. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. Commissioner Bernas. 

The last portion of the committee report says: 

. . . That those who elect Philippine citizenship in 

accordance with Section 1, Paragraph 3 above shall also 

be deemed natural-born citizens. 

I agree to consider as natural-born citizens children 
whose fathers and mothers are citizens. But when the 
word “elect” in paragraph 3, Section 1, is repeated in the 
proviso of the last section, that election is provided in 
Commonwealth Act No. 625. Now, as I mentioned in 
my remark before, it would be a little strange if we 
place in paragraph 3 of Section 1 , the word “elect” and 
again repeat it in the last paragraph or last proviso of 
Section 4. The 1973 Constitution does not provide for 
election because the 1971 Constitutional Convention 
merged Sections 2 and 3 of the 1935 Constitution into 
one provision; “Those whose fathers or mothers are 
citizens of the Philippines.” 

I expressed the view before that I was subscribing to 
the view of Commissioner Concepcion, that probably it 
would be better to retain the two classifications in the 
1935 Constitution. Would the Gentleman have serious 
or underlying objections? 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


233 


FR. BERNAS. Precisely, the Committee subscribes to 
the change made by the 1973 Constitution that in order 
for a child to be a Filipino, it is not necessary that both 
the father and the mother be Filipino. It is enough that 
the mother be a Filipino. And this report reflects our 
subscription to the change made in 1973. 

MR. PADILLA. With due respect, we feel that there 
is a real distinction between a child born of a Filipino 
father married to an alien and a child born of a Filipino 
mother with a foreigner husband. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee will entertain an 
amendment which seeks to revert to the 1935 rule. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you very much. 

I was going to suggest, if I may, just for the sake of 
further consideration, to add the phrase AND ARE 
BORN IN THE PHILIPPINES immediately after the 
phrase “citizens of the Philippines” in paragraph 4, 
Section 1 of the 1935 Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. That matter can also be taken up in 
the period of amendments. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you very much. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you very much. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that the Chair recognize 
Commissioner Guingona, and after Commissioner 
Guingona, Commissioner Ople; and with your kind 
indulgence, I would like to move for adjournment after 
Commissioner Concepcion is recognized. So, it will be 
Commissioners Guingona, Ople, Concepcion, after 
which it is my intention to make a motion for adjourn- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Thank 
you, Mr. Assistant Floor Leader. 

Commissioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I just have one question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
intention is also noted. 

MR. GUINGONA. As pointed out by Commissioner 
Rodrigo, a citizen of the Philippines who marries an 
alien and who, therefore, retains his or her citizenship, 
may acquire the citizenship of the alien’s spouse, if, 
according to the laws of the country of that spouse he 


or she acquires such citizenship. I am not aware of the 
consensus in the Gentleman’s Committee about the 
matter of dual citizenship. 

FR. BERNAS. The feeling of the Committee, if I may 
attempt to reflect it, is that the question of dual citizen- 
ship can be dealt with in ordinary legislation. 

MR. GUINGONA. I see. I felt that perhaps even in 
the Constitution itself, there could be some attempts to 
discourage dual citizenship. My question is: Has the 
Committee considered the possibility of requiring this 
Filipino citizen who has now a dual citizenship on ac- 
count of marriage to renounce the citizenship of the 
spouse within a specified period? 

FR. BERNAS. We did not because we feel that is 
better left to ordinary legislation. 


MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I request 
that Commissioner Ople be given the floor. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the sponsor 
yield to a few questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). He 
may yield, if he so desires. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

I find myself in a position of having to echo my 
istinguished predecessor on the floor concerni g 
latter that preoccupied this Commission during the 
eewLel ng debate on citizenship. A significant num- 
of Commissioners expressed their concern about 

ual citizenship in the sense that it 
lleeiance under a double sovereignty which some of 
ho ?hen in a freewheeling debate thought would 

e repugnant to the sovereignty pervades the 

:onstitution and to citizenship ,|Ji^Jion is 

niqueness and "se^ 

ha;"cfti«nship including, of course, the ob|i8at>°^ 
c to thP defense of the State when it is threateneo, 
nd back of this. Commissioner Bernas, is, of course, the 
oncern for naiional security. In the course of those 
lebates I think some noted the fact that as a result of 
e wave of naturalizations since the decision to esta- 
;'h diplomatic relations whh • «;Pj;.“rse^ 

laturalized Filipinos still /gf'lhein do 

r:"he'i°^o“h ^f :nesP .o,a^fo.igJi^*-rnthe": 

r anrersa“ry“o7 thfsun Ya” Sen Republic is com- 
^emoraled. aL so. I have detected a ienume and d 
oncern about double citizenship, with its attendant risk 


234 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


of double allegiance which is repugnant to our sover- 
eignty and national security. I appreciate what the 
Committee said that this could be left to the determina- 
tion of a future legislature. But considering the scale of 
the problem, the real impact on the security of this 
country, arising from, let us say, potentially great 
numbers of double citizens professing double allegiance, 
will the Committee entertain a proposed amendment at 
the proper time that will prohibit, in effect, or regulate 
double citizenship? 

FR. BERNAS. While the Committee prefers to leave 
this matter to ordinary legislation, should the body pre- 
fer to settle the question on dual citizenship in the 
Constitution itself, I am sure the Committee will not 
be unduly dismayed by that. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that Commissioner 
Concepcion be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Commissioner Bernas, has the 
Committee, in adopting its report, considered the 
question of whether or not the Constitutional Com- 
mission is likely to adopt the nationalistic spirit of the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions in connection with the 
conservation and utilization of our natural resources 
and the operation of public utilities? On the surface, 
there might seem to be no connection between citizen- 
ship and the conservation of natural resources and the 
operation of public utilities. However, the delegates to 
the Constitutional Convention of 1935 felt that aliens 
have consistently expanded their influence over our 
finances. Many of these aliens were old residents of the 
Philippines but they did not feel inclined to apply for 
naturalization. 

It is significant that among those who favor reversion 
to the policy of the 1935 Constitution are two Commis- 
sioners in this Assembly, Commissioner Padilla, as 
former Solicitor General and myself, who as former 
members of the Bureau of Justice, have handled hun- 
dreds of naturalization cases. Beyond doubt, the only 
motive of the applicants for naturalization is the oppor- 
tunity to participate in the utilization of our natural 
resources and the operation of public utilities. 

I repeat, my question boils down to whether the 
sponsoring Committee has considered the probability 
that the Constitutional Commission might maintain that 


policy of protection of our natural resources and the 
operation of public utilities. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee did not explicitly 
discuss this. It may be true that, in fact, there were 
aliens who acquired citizenship shnply for purposes of 
exploitation of the natural resources, but as pointed out 
the other day, perhaps at this stage, as far as they are 
concerned, it would be trying to close the barn after the 
horses have left. At any rate, the Constitution does have 
a provision which says that “Philippine citizenship may 
be lost or reacquired in the manner provided by law.” 
And the Constitution also authorizes the legislature to 
pass naturalization laws. A lot of these problems, I 
think, can be dealt with in ordinary legislation. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But would the Gentleman 
consider that the liberalization of naturalization pro- 
ceedings would affect considerably the efficacy of the 
constitutional policy on conservation and utilization of 
natural resources and the operation of public utilities? 

FR. BERNAS. Definitely, liberalization of the 
naturalization law would have that effect but there is 
nothing in this proposal which liberalizes the naturaliza- 
tion law. It leaves the matter of naturalization law to 
the legislature. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I spoke of liberalization because 
the point of reference of the Committee seems to be the 
1973 Constitution. But the 1973 Constitution liberal- 
ized naturalization in contrast to the provisions of the 
1935 Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. I would disagree that the 1973 Consti- 
tution liberalized the naturalization law. The 1973 
Constitution did not touch the naturalization law 
except on that point of the woman who loses her 
citizenship upon marriage to an alien. There is nothing 
here which liberalizes the naturalization law. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But that is not the point. Many 
Chinese retailers, for instance, have married Filipino® 
apparently to avoid the limitations to the operation of 
retail stores. And there is a most glaring example; the 
thousands of naturalization cases when the Philippirics 
was going to withdraw its recognition of the government 
of Taiwan and extend recognition to the People’s Repub- 
lic of China. 

Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. I quite agree, but again, if there was 
liberalization there, it was not effected by the Constitu- 
tion. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But just the same, liberalization 
effects the conservation of natural resources. 

FR. BERNAS. I have no disagreement with that. The 
only thing I am disagreeing with is that the liberalization 


WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, 1986 


235 


was affected by the Constitution. It was not. It was af- 
fected by the liberal policies of Marcos in the naturaliza- 
tion law but not by the Constitution. 


Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. I think that each 
Member of the Commission should consult his con- 
science on this point. 


MR. CONCEPCION. I beg the Gentleman’s attention 
to the fact that the 1973 Constitution was made by 
Marcos. Even in 1971, it had been said that there was a 
strong lobby for the liberalization of the provisions of 
the Constitution relative to citizenship. I would suggest 
consideration of the fact that there is a great likelihood 
that the Commission may wish to adopt the policy, the 
restrictive policy, in the exploitation and utilization of 
natural resources as well as in the operation of public 
utilities. 

The effect of the different constitutions, particularly 
the 1973 Constitution, is to allow more people to 
become or to claim Philippine citizenship without filing 
applications for naturalization. Even the procedure for 
the acquisition of citizenship by naturalization had been 
amplified, I mean, liberalized. I would suggest the im- 
portance of our constitution stating something to in- 
dicate our policy on the matter of citizenship and that 
we now adopt a more restrictive policy. It is bad enough 
that our old policy thereon had adverse effects. It would 
be worse to continue adhering to that policy. 

On paper we may have appeared to be nationalistic. 
In actual practice, however, we really are not. The as- 
sembly may have had the excuse that the Constitution 
had imposed no explicit restrictions, so we should leave 
no doubts that hereafter we are opposed to any form of 
liberalization. Of course the members of the assembly 
know the reason better than I do, but on that basis, I 
would suggest consideration of the effect of the pro- 
posal of the Committee upon the provisions on the 
enjoyment of our natural resources and the operation of 
public utilities. We should maintain the present safe- 
guards regarding said resources and public utilities. 
Moreover, we must control the immigration of foreign- 
ers, considering our big population, which admittedly 
demands control. 

Those who advocate the proposed constitutional 
amendment argue that the same has no adverse effects 
upon us. The fact is that those who were naturalized by 
election, upon reaching the age of majority, shall be 
considered as natural-born citizens. This is one form of 
liberalization of the pertinent provision. If we adopt the 
amendments proposed by the Committee, a child bom 
an alien can eventually become President of the Philip- 
pines or Speaker of the House of Representatives, or 


From the viewpoint of law, logic and experience, 
when a Filipina marries a foreigner, she expresses her 
willingness to be of one flesh with the foreigner for life. 
Why should we then assume that she married the 
foreigner without the intention of following his citizen- 
ship? I am more inclined to assume that she is willing 
to lollow the citizenship of her husband. Instead of 
requiring her to declare that she does not wish to remain 
a Filipino, she should, perhaps, be required to state, at 
the time of the wedding, that she prefers to retain her 
Filipino citizenship. 

Although the honorable Commissioner has already 
expressed his views on the matter of the citizenship of a 
child born of a Filipino mother and an alien father, my 
thinking, from the viewpoint of logic and experience, 
is that the child generally looks up to the father, par- 
ticularly during infancy. In short, the assumption should 
be that, if the child could express his choice, he would 
prefer to follow the citizenship of the father, although 
upon reaching the age of majority, he may elect to 
follow the citizenship of the Filipino mother. 

Thank you. Father Bernas, for your patience. 


SUSPENSION OF CONSIDERATION 
OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 7 
(Article on Citizenship) 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
we continue the sponsorship and debate on Proposed 
Resolution No. 7 tomorrow afternoon. 


THE PRESIDING 
there any objection? 


OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; 


the motion is approved. 


adjournment of session 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we adjourn the session 
ntil tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
rssion is adjourned until tomorrow at five o clock in 
le afternoon. 

It was 7:22 p. m. 


i 


I 


i 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


237 


R.C.C. NO. 18 
Thursday, June 26, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:19 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. GASCON. Isang Pagbasa mula sa Ebanghelyo ni 
San Lukas: 

At sinabi ni Maria: 

Ang puso ko’y nagpupuri sa Panginoon at nagagalak ang 
aking espiritu dahil sa Diyos na aMng tagapagUgtas sapagkat 
nilingap Niya ang Kaniyang abang alipin, at mula ngayon, 
ako ay tatawaging mapalad ng lahat ng saling lahi. Dahil sa 
mga dakilang bagay na ginawa sa akin ng Maykapangyari- 
han, banal ang Kaniyang pangalan. Kinahahabagan Niya ang 
mga may takot sa Kaniya sa lahat ng saling lahi. Ipinakita 
Niya ang lakas ng Kaniyang mga bisig; ipinangalat Niya ang 
mga palalo ang isipan; ibinagsak Niya ang mga hari mula sa 
kanilang trono at itinaas ang mga nasa abang kalagayan; 
binusog Niya ang mabubuting bagay, ang mga nagugutom at 
pinalayas Niya nang wala ni anuman ang mayayaman; tinu- 
lungan Niya ang Kaniyang bayang Israel bilang pagtupad sa 
pangako Niya sa ating mga magulang, kay Abraham at sa 
Kaniyang saling lahi magpakailan man, 

Amang mapagmahal at mapagpalaya, sa araw na ito 
ay iniaalay namin ang aming sarili, ang aming kahinaan 
at kalakasan. Gabayan Mo kami sa aming pagkukulang 
at tulungan Mo kami upang patuloy naming isulong ang 
sandigan at mithiin ng aming sambayanan — ang isang 
malayang lipunan, upang makayanan naming ialay ang 
aming sarili sa pagbuo ng tunay * na maka-Pilipino at 
maka-Diyos na pamayanan -na nakatimo sa kalayaan, 
katarungan, katotohanan at pag-ibig. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion . . . • Present 

Davide Present 

Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Absent 

Lerum Present 

Maambong . • • • Present 
Monsod Present 


Natividad . . . 

. . Present^ 

Nieva 

. . Present 

NoUedo .... 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

ViUegas 

. . Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 46 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 


CALDERON. I move that we dispense with t^he 
ig of the Journal of the previous session and that 


the PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approve 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


238 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 

The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 

Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 

Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 

President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 274, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTIONS THREE AND FOUR, ARTICLE 
FOUR, OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFI- 
CATION TO MAKE THE PROTECTION MORE EFFEC- 
TIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the' Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 275, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION ELEVEN, PARAGRAPH (1), ARTI- 
CLE X OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFICA- 
TIONS AND WITH AN ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH 
TO FURTHER STRENGTHEN THE COMPULSORY 
CHARACTER OF SAID PROVISION. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas, Colayco, Romulo and 
Suarez. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 276, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR A NATIONALIST, SCIEN- 
TIFIC AND PEOPLE-ORIENTED EDUCATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 277, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON A NATIONAL HEALTH 
POLICY FOR A COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE 
DELIVERY SYSTEM FOR THE ENTIRE COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Suarez and Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 278, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE GENERAL PROVI- 
SIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION THAT THE STATE 
SHALL NOT INTERFERE WITH THE RIGHT OF 
EVERY CITIZEN TO SELECT HIS PROFESSION OR 
COURSES OF STUDY. 


Introduced by Hon. Nolledo and Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 279, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE STATE SHALL FOSTER AND PROMOTE 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COOPERATIVES AND SUP- 
PORTING SERVICES ALL OVER THE COUNTRY 
ESPECIALLY IN THE RURAL AREAS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 280, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN, INVIGORATE AND 
CONSTITUTIONALIZE THE OMBUDSMAN KNOWN 
AS THE TANODBAYAN. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 281, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FIXING THE PERIOD WITHIN WHICH THE 
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION SHALL DECIDE CASES 
BROUGHT BEFORE IT AND PROVIDING FOR AP- 
PEALS THEREFROM TO THE SUPREME COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 282, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING APPEALS ON QUESTIONS 
OF FACT FROM DECISIONS, ORDERS OR RULINGS 
OF THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 283, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO FURTHER STRENGTHEN THE CONSTI- 
TUTIONAL COMMISSIONS BY EXPANDING THE 
SCOPE OF THE PROHIBITION ON MEMBERS THERE- 
OF TO BE FINANCIALLY INTERESTED DIRECTLY OR 
INDIRECTLY IN ANY CONTRACT WITH, OR IN ANY 
FRANCHISE OR PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 284, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING APPEALS ON QUESTIONS 
OF FACT FROM DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


239 


To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 


Proposed Resolution No. 285, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROHIBIT CERTAIN PUBUC OFFI- 
CIALS FROM RUNNING IN THE FIRST NATIONAL 
AND LOCAL ELECTIONS AFTER THE RATIFICATION 
OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Jamir. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 286, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE CONSTITUTION OF 
1986 FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND FORMAL ADOP- 
TION OF A COMMON NATIONAL LANGUAGE TO BE 
KNOWN AS FILIPINO; THE CREATION OF AN 11- 
MEMBER COMMISSION ON NATIONAL LANGUAGE 
AND INTERNATIONAL LANGUAGE; AND PRESCRIB- 
ING THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES. 

Introduced by Hon. Uka, Alonto and Abubakar. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 287, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE CITIZENS’ RIGHTS 
AND DUTIES TO HEALTH. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada and Suarez. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 288, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE STATE SHALL RECOGNIZE THE PRIMACY 
OF LABOR OVER CAPITAL IN THE REGULATION OF 
THE ECONOMY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Proposed Resolution No. 289, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THE TEACHING OF RELIGION IN PUBUC ELEMENTA- 
RY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS UNDER CERTAIN 
CONDITIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 290, entitled: 

RESOLUTION LIMITING THE PROHIBITION FOR LEGIS- 
LATORS TO APPEAR AS COUNSEL TO COURTS IN- 
FERIOR TO COLLEGIATE COURTS OF APPELLATE 
JURISDICTION AND MAKING SUCH PROmBITION AP- 
PLICABLE TO THEIR FIRM PARTNERS OR ASSO- 


CIATES BUT ALLOWING THEM AND SUCH PARTNERS 
OR ASSOCIATES TO APPEAR AS COUNSEL BEFORE 
THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS; OR, IN THE 
ALTERNATIVE, ALLOWING THEM, AS THEY WERE 
ALLOWED IN THE 1935 CONSTITUTION, TO APPEAR 
IN ANY COURT EXCEPT IN CERTAIN CASES WHERE- 
IN THE GOVERNMENT OR AN OFFICER OR EM- 
PLOYEE THEREOF IS INVOLVED. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


Proposed Resolution No. 291, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THAT JUDICIAL REVIEW OF 
DECISIONS, ORDERS, AND RULINGS OF THE CIVIL 
SERVICE COMMISSION BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 292, entitled. 

resolution PROVIDING FOR APPEAL FROM JUDG- 
MENT OF acquittal WHEN IT IS MANIFESTLY 
AGAINST THE EVIDENCE AND IS CONTRARY TO 
LAW. 

Introduced by Hon. Padilla. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 293, entitled: 

resolution to INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF 
VICTIMS OF CRIMES. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 294, entitled: 

rfsOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
DISQUAUFICATIONS TO RUN FOR ELECTIVE POSI- 
TION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Jamir. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


;d Resolution No. 295, entitled: 
ctrfssTNG that the 


ELEMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Suarez and Bennagen. 
To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


COMMUNICATIONS 


ter from Nichol’s Airmen’s Village Residents Asso- 
Zn, Inc. signed by Ms. Rosario B. Martizano pro- 


240 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


posing, among others, a bicameral legislature. 

(Communication No. 53 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from Messrs. Oscar Musni, Mariano Carrasco, and 
Ike Macias, all of Cagayan de Oro City, requesting that a 
public hearing be held in Cagayan de Oro City. 

(Communication No. 54 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 

Letter from the People’s Organization Working for Ef- 
fective Reforms, Inc., Intramuros, Manila, signed by 
Mr. Armando P. Francisco, expressing their desire to 
attend the scheduled public hearings and submitting 
their proposals on social justice. 

(Communication No. 55 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Ahmad 
Domocao Alonto submitting a copy of the lecture of 
the late Senator Benigno Aquino, Jr., at the King Abdul 
Aziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on May 12, 1981 
and requesting that the same be made part of the 
records of the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 56 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Marino M. Mena, College of Engineering, 
University of the Philippines, proposing provisions on 
science and technology, education, and environment. 

(Communication No. 57 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from the Honorable Neptali A. Gonza- 
lez, referring a paper of Mr. Nicolas A. Gerochi, Jr., 
Regional Trial Court Judge, Makati, Metro Manila, with 
a specific recommendation for a bicameral legislature. 

(Communication No. 58 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from the Samahan sa Kultura at Sining signed by 
Ms. Julie Borromeo, transmitting a proposal for a 
Ministry of Culture. 

(Communication No. 59 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Vicente Bengzon, Jr., c/o Supreme 
Court, Padre Faura, Manila, proposing that judicial 


funds be placed under the supervision and control of the 
Supreme Court to ensure the independence of the 
Judiciary. 

(Communication No. 60 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Letter from Mr. Felino C.T. Leon of Potrero, Malabon, 
Metro Manila, submitting a paper on a proposed form of 
government, its structure and process. 

(Communication No. 61 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Napoleon B. Sayson of 2428 Dapdap 
St., Paranaque, Metro Manila, suggesting, among others, 
a speedy judicial process and a vice-president each for 
Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 

(Communication No. 62 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that Assistant Floor 
Leader Ahmad Domocao Alonto be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Assistant Floor Leader Alonto is 
recognized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, thank you for the 
recognition. I stand here not as Assistant Floor Leader 
but I am here, Madam President, to reiterate my re- 
quest, dated June 24, 1986, addressed to the President 
of the Commission. 

This is regarding the lecture of the late martyr 
Senator Benigno Aquino, Jr. delivered on May 12, 1981 
at the King Abdul Aziz University Science Auditorium, 
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, entitled: “The 
Historical Background of the Moro Problem in the 
Southern Philippines.” 

I believe. Madam President, that this lecture of 
former Senator Aquino is not only an important his- 
torical document, but also a pronouncement which 
embodies an essential formula for the solution of one of 
the most persistent problems in this country. I beg to 
request that the same be made part of the record of this 
Constitutional Commission.* Also, I move that this be 
immediately reproduced and distributed to the Members 
of this Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. For the information of Com- 
missioner Alonto, his communication denominated as 
Communication No. 56 in our Order of Business today 


*See Appendix 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


241 


has been referred to the Committee on Human Re- 
sources. 

Thank you. 

MR. ALONTO. Yes, Madam President, I am very 
grateful for referring it to this Committee, but my pur- 
pose in requesting that the lecture be reproduced and 
distributed to the Members of the Commission is that it 
would serve us in getting a formula to be embodied in 
the Constitution which could solve the problem persist- 
ing in our country. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is moving 
that the lecture be reproduced and distributed to the 
Members. 

Is there any objection to the motion of Commissioner 
Alonto? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

MR. ALONTO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I ask that Commissioner Sarmien- 
to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I rise on a 
question of collective privilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the subject of the Gentle- 
man’s question of collective privilege? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, it is about an 
item published by one of the dailies on June 25, which I 
think affects the integrity and dignity of the Constitu- 
tional Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Commissioner believe 
that it is of such urgency that we have to take it up 
now? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President, I believe 
in the urgency of this item. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento may 
proceed. 


“cause-oriented” and other political pressure groups. 
“Feedbacks” from urban centers like Dagupan, Tarlac and 
Naga claim that “leftwing” National Democratic Front 
(NDF) affiliates virtually monopolized proceedings called 
by a committee of the Constitutional Commission (Con- 
Com). Conservative elements of these cities were reported 
unable to put in a word edgewise. 


Indicative of the weakness and lack of popular accept- 
ance of the Con-Com committees was the fiasco in Baguio 
City where a public hearing was turned into a gripe session 
just to accommodate the wishes of leaders of the so-called 
Cordillera People’s Assembly (CPA), a federation of or- 
ganizations in the five provinces in the Cordillera highlands 
of Northern Luzon clamoring for self-rule. 

Another item, Madam President, appeared in the 
papers several days ago which stated that a walkout in 
one of the public hearings was averted because the 
format was waived by the Commissioners. 

Madam President, Commissioner Nolledo and I were 
in Naga City last weekend. We can, in all honesty, say 
that no group, no organization, no party virtually mono- 
polized the proceedings called by the Constitutional 
Commission. Almost all participated in the workshops 
and plenary sessions held. In the radio dialogue that was 
conducted in the evening, calls were received star mg a 
eight o’clock in the evening. The telephone receiver ha 
to^ be lifted at 10:00 p.m. because of the numerous 

public calls. 

Madam President, I asked the Commissioners con- 
cerned about the averted walkout in . 

hearing and they replied it was not true, 
have not asked the Commissioners who came 
field, those who have not checked the veracity of these 
reports, and even fellow Commissioners wil m 
provincial public hearings are dominated y ony one 
group or organization, or that formats are formu a e in 
utter disregard of the local people s needs. 

Madam President, these reports affect public con- 
fidence in the Constitutional Commission. Even the 
Commissioners are at a loss as to what really happened 
in the provinces. 

May I humbly suggest an urgent motion. Madam Pres- 
ident: That each team of Commissioners, through i s 
team leader, be allotted at least three to five minutes 
every Monday to give its report, subject to questions by 
Commissioners about its trip in the provinces. In this 
way, we could get first hand information from our 
fellow Commissioners who came from the field. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, on June 25, 
1986, there appeared a news item which reads, and I 
quote: 

Initial “public hearings” on the proposed Constitution 
confirm earlier predictions that they will be dominated by 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Will Commissioner Sarmiento put his suggestion to a 
motion so that it can be formally acted upon. 


iR SARMIENTO. I respectfully move. Madam 
ident, that each team, through its team leader, be 
:ted three to five minutes every Monday of our 


242 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


plenary sessions to give its report of the public hearings 
in the provinces, subject to questions by their fellow 
Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. I second the motion. 

However, will Commissioner Sarmiento entertain a 
minor amendment without prejudice to the written 
reports of the team. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople, the motion 
has already been approved. Is there any reconsideration 
then of the approval so that this amendment can come 
in? 

MR. OPLE. This is not such a critical amendment, 
but if it is understood that this is embraced within the 
meaning of the motion of Commissioner Sarmiento, I 
will not disturb the prior approval. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that there is still 
five minutes left from Commissioner Sarmiento’s time, 

I wonder if he would be willing to yield to a few ques- 
tions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly, Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong may 
proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Commissioner Sarmiento men- 
tioned a situation wherein the integrity of the Consti- 
tutional Commission has been slandered or assailed. 
Would the Commissioner give some recommendations 
as to how we can counter this kind of slanderous 
reports? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I suggest that the Committee on 
Public Relations make representations with the authors 
of these newspaper items. We were given a list of news- 
papermen just this afternoon. So, I think that Commit- 
tee should make representations with those newsmen 
about the reports that should be published in the 
papers. 


MR. MAAMBONG. This is just for the record. Will 
the Commissioner put in the record the names of the 
newspapers which published the subject matter of the 
Commissioner’s speech? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I refer to the Manila Bulletin, 
dated June 23, 1986 and June 25, 1986. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is that the only paper? 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is the only paper I referred 
to in my speech this afternoon. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Actually, I do not want to dig- 
nify that report which I have also read. But considering 
that the Commissioner has already opened up the sub- 
ject, I just want to inform the body that I have also in 
my news file a report stating that what we are doing 
here is just a “palabas” and that a draft of the Constitu- 
tution has actually been prepared. I consider that a very 
serious accusation, and I also feel that if it were not for 
the time limitation, I would also speak on a matter of 
collective and personal privilege. Does the Commissioner 
have any further recommendations aside from calling 
the attention of our Committee on Public Relations? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Or maybe we can ask the reporter 
to make a public apology for his kind of reporting. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That would be all. Madam Pres- 
ident; thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I think we are overly 
sensitive to the reports we read every now and then. It is 
not uncommon anymore to read news items about the 
Con-Com that are simply not true and we are spending 
a lot of time trying to get the entire Commission to 
correct whatever misinformation has been written about 
us. Probably, it will be better to just call the attention 
of our Committee that has something to do with this to 
make the necessary correction instead of us bringing the 
matter before the entire body everytime there is an 
inaccurate news article. This is just a suggestion. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. May I request the Chair to recog- 
nize Commissioner Guingona. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


243 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to invite the attention of the honorable 
Members of this body to the observations made, which I 
think would affect the sufficiency and integrity of our 
proceedings. I refer to the observations made in the 
column of Mr. Miguel Genovea that appeared in the 
Philippine Daily Express yesterday. With the President’s 
pennission, I shall read portions thereof: 

... As appointive Members, they suffer from the disad- 
vantage of having less contact with the people for whom 
they are writing a new charter. Elective delegates, on the 
other hand, ensure that they have a feel of the public pulse. 


ends, which we have to do because we work here from 
Mondays to Fridays. They need not hold their sessions 
the whole day. They can hold these in the evenings. 
There will be no expenses as far as the Commission is 
concerned. The participants who are in the locality 
could perhaps even walk to the site of the session, and 
the people need not talk to some Commissioners who 
may not even understand their dialects. 

And so, Madam President, I would like to reiterate 
the motion that I had earlier presented, but which I 
have to withdraw because, as correctly pointed out at 
that time, the motion was untimely presented. There 
was an untimely presentation because we had not yet 
started our deliberations on public hearings. 

May I now present my motion. Madam President. 


To make up for such disadvantage, the Con-Com mem- 
bers should similarly gauge the public pulse by sponsoring 
opinion surveys or encouraging civic groups, like the 
Rotary, Jaycees and Lions Clubs to conduct mini-referenda 
on constitutional issues. True, the Con-Com is conducting 
weekend public hearings, but these are hardly sufficient to 
determine mass sentiment. 

With the time constraints, there is no guarantee now that 
the Con-Com, unless it really determines the feelings of the 
governed, runs the risk of putting out a half-baked Consti- 
tution. 

Madam President, the honorable Members of this 
Commission will recall that I had expressed the same 
view when I tried to present a motion during the early 
days of our proceedings for us to seek the cooperation 
and assistance of prestigious and responsible organiza- 
tions which have nationwide clubs or units to conduct 
minireferenda with the people in their respective locali- 
ties regarding constitutional proposals and to subse- 
quently provide us with summarized reports of such 
proposals. Mr. Genovea and I share the same concern 
that if we limit our exposure to the inputs that we will 
receive from the public hearings, we will not be able to 
gather sufficient materials to determine mass sentiment 
and we will run the risk of putting out what Mr. Geno- 
vea refers to as a “half-baked constitution,” an eventual- 
ity which would reflect adversely on the integrity of our 
proceedings. 

Going over the final schedules of the public hearings 
outside of Metro Manila for the periods June 21 to July 
13, we note the very apparent inadequacy of such 
public hearings relative to our collective desire to 
adequately feel the public pulse. In saying this, I do not 
intend to lay any blame on the planners of the public 
hearings. I believe they have done an excellent work, 
considering the time and other constraints. However, 
the schedules show that we have only allowed one site 
for one province. Examples are Malolos for Bulacan, 
Lipa City for Batangas, and so forth, and that only two- 
thirds of all the provinces have been covered. The ad- 
vantages of the so-called minireferenda would be, 
among others: The organizers need not wait for week- 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. I move that the Commission, thru 
the honorable President, solicit the assistance and 
cooperation of prestigious civic, professional, religious 
and responsible organizations with nationwide network 
such as the Rotary, the Jaycees, the Lions, the National 
Press Club, either by itself or thru its provincial con- 
tacts, the Integrated Bar of the Philippines and other 
professional organizations like labor, students, faculty, 
religious groups and others to appeal to their clubs and 
local units to conduct minireferenda, particularly out- 
side of Metro Manila, within two weeks and to submit to 
this Commission summarized reports on constitutional 
proposals gathered during such minireferenda on or 
before July 12, 1986; and that a special ad hoc commit- 
tee composed of Members of this Commission be 
created by the honorable President with the task ot 
classifying, collating, and summarizing the reports 
received and to present its report either in plenary 
session or in writing on July 21 . 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Chair understand that 
Commissioner Guingona’s motion will again 
delay the timetable of this Commission/ In otner 
words, we have already delayed our calendar ° 
the results of the public hearings. Does the Chair 
stand that we will have to wait again for the results o 
the referenda that will be taken over by these civic 
organizations? In other words, we will not be able to 
discuss the reports until we receive them? 

MR. GUINGONA. No, Madam President, these 
reports will be supplementary and the way we envision 
them, they will be coming in from the J«ne tha 
minireferenda will be held and that is on u y 
means that we can receive reports even as early as 
week from now or before July 13, the date set for our 
last out-of-town public hearing. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee reports are sup- 
posed to be submitted by July 7. 


244 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any comment? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I wish to object to the resolution 
proposed by Commissioner Guingona due to the follow- 
ing reasons: First, the Commissioners who want to en- 
gage in such minireferenda can do that on their own 
private initiative. Second, it would only be duplicating 
the work of the public hearings to which these people 
who were supposed to be invited can come anyway. 
Hence, I object to the resolution. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments? 
Are we ready to vote on the motion of Commissioner 
Guingona? 

As many as are in favor of the motion, say yea. 

FEW MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 

THE PRESIDENT. The nays have it; the motion is 
lost. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move to terminate the freewheel- 
ing debate on citizenship because this has been suffi- 
ciently debated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion to terminate the period of sponsorship and 
debate? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I just remind the Assistant 
Floor Leader that Committee Report No. 4 on Citizen- 
ship is already in the period of sponsorship and debate. 
It is no longer on freewheeling discussion. So, with the 
permission of the Assistant Floor Leader, I would like 
to propose that the motion be to terminate the period 
of sponsorship and debate on Committee Report No. 4 
on Citizenship to pave the way for another motion for 
the discussion of the committee report on national 
territory. 

MR. CALDERON. Yes, I am agreeable to what the 
Chairman of the Steering Committee has proposed. 


THE PRESIDENT. So the motion now before the 
body is that the period of sponsorship and debate on 
Committee Report No. 4 be terminated. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. I have only one question addressed 
to Commissioner Bengzon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. SUAREZ. Commissioner Bengzon is proposing 
to terminate the period of sponsorship and debate. Is the 
Commissioner precluding the period for filing, for 
voicing out opposition to the sponsorship? 

MR. BENGZON. We agreed last that we would go 
into the period of sponsorship and debate without 
amendments. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, but we did not deny the Mem- 
bers the right to file or object to the proposed resolu- 
tion. 

MR. BENGZON. Therefore, if there are Commis- 
sioners who want to speak against the committee report, 
then I am certainly going to suspend my motion. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

We just want to be sure that those who want to speak 
against the resolution are free to do so. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 6:02 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:11 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, no one has 
registered today for the turno en contra with respect to 
Committee No. 4 submitted by the Committee on 
Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights and Obliga- 
tions and Human Rights. On this basis, we assume that 
nobody wants to go into that period. Hence, I would 
like to find out now if there is anyone who wants to 
take advantage of this particular period of turno en 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


245 


contra. If there is none, then I would like to move that 
the period of sponsorship, interpellations, and period of 
turno en contra with respect to Committee Report 
No. 4 be terminated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there anyone who would like to 
avail of the turno en contra with respect to Committee 
Report No. 4? 

Is there any objection then to the motion of Commis- 
sioner Bengzon to terminate the period of sponsorship 
and debate on Committee Report No. 4? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION 

NO. 263 

(Article on the National Territory) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 3 on Proposed Resolution No. 263 as 
reported out by the Committee on Preamble, National 
Territory and Declaration of Principles. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 263 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read only the title of the proposed 
resolution without prejudice to inserting in the Record 
the whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 263, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY. 


(The following is the whole text of the substitute resolution 
per C.R. No. 3.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 3 

The Committee on Preamble, National Territory and Declara- 
tion of Principles to which was referred Proposed Resolution 
No. 6, introduced by Hon. Davide Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY TO 
ENSURE THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE REPUBLIC 
OVER SEAS RECOGNIZED BY THE 1982 UNITED 
NATION’S CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA, 

Proposed Resolution No. 27, introduced by Hon. NoUedo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RESOLUTION OF 
THE SABAH ISSUE IN THE TRANSITORY PROVI- 
SIONS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 136, introduced by Hon. NoUedo, 
entitled: 


RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE AN AMENDED PROVISION 
ON NATIONAL TERRITORY IN THE CONSTITUTION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 141, introduced by Hon. Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recom- 
mendation that attached Proposed Resolution No. 263, prepared 
by the Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 6, 27, 
136 and 141 with Honorable Davide, Jr., NoUedo, Tingson, 
Rosales, Aquino, Rosario Braid, Quesada and VUlegas as authors. 

(Sgd.) Hon. Decoroso R. Rosales 
Chairman 

Committee on Preamble, National Territory 
and Declaration of Principles 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Substitute Resolution) 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional Com- 
mission in session assembled: 

To incorporate in the new Constitution the foUowing provision: 

ARTICLE I 

THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 

SECTION 1 . The national territory comprises the PhUippine 
archipelago, with aU the islands and waters embraced therein, and 
aU other territories belonging to the PhUippines by historic right 
or legal title, including the territorial sea, the air space, the sub- 
soU, the sea-bed, the insular shelves, and the other submarine 
areas over which the Philippines has sovereignty or jurisdiction. 
The waters around, between and connecting the islands of the 
archipelago, irrespective of their breadth and dimensions, form 
part of the internal waters of the Philippines. Sovereignty or 
jurisdiction of the PhUippines shaU also extend to straits connect- 
ing these waters with the economic zone provided for in the 
Convention on the Law of the Sea. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Before we go to the discussion on 
the Proposed Resolution on National Territory, may I 
request the Chair to recognize Commissioner Tingson. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingzon is recog- 
nized. 


246 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, this is a small 
matter but it is very important to me. I rise with the in- 
tention of making an amendment to the resolution I 
have filed respecting the presence of United States 
military bases in the country. While I was discussing this 
Resolution No. 268 with my staff, there were several 
options available to this humble Representation. We had 
ranged these options between two extremes with my 
intention of choosing one more closely akin to the an- 
nounced position of our present government but not 
any one of the extreme positions. 

With the permission of the Chair and due to an inad- 
vertence, I should want to correct a portion of this 
resolution. I move that page 2, lines 2, 3 and 4 of Reso- 
lution No. 268 should read: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, 
THAT THE LEASE ON THOSE BASES EXTENDA- 
BLE FROM ONE PERIOD TO ANOTHER UPON THE 
CONCURRENCE OF THE PARTIES SHALL BE 
BASED ON JUSTICE, THE HISTORICAL AMITY OF 
THE PEOPLES OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE 
UNITED STATES AND THEIR COMMON DEFENSE 
INTEREST. 

This is just to make it very clear. Madam President, 
because some are making snide remarks against this 
humble Representation. I want the following words to 
be deleted because this was not my intention: “Re- 
solved further that the lease for these military bases be 
extended for another one hundred years from the date 
of the adoption of the new Constitution.” 

Madam President, that is far from my thinking. I am 
not naive on this issue. May I repeat then that in lieu of 
that it should be: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT THE 
LEASE ON THOSE BASES EXTENDABLE FROM 
ONE PERIOD TO ANOTHER UPON THE CONCUR- 
RENCE OF THE PARTIES SHALL BE BASED ON 
JUSTICE, THE HISTORICAL AMITY OF THE PEO- 
PLES OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE UNITED 
STATES AND THEIR COMMON DEFENSE IN- 
TEREST. 

I will appreciate it very much if the President will 
help me correct this. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of Commissioner Tingson? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; let the proper correction be made. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. May I call on Commissioner 
Nolledo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized to sponsor the committee report. 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I stand to sponsor Committee Report No. 3 on the 
definition of the national territory which was the 
product of an extensive discussion among the members 
of the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles chaired by Commissioner 
Decoroso Rosales. The Committee had the honor of 
listening to the enlightening remarks of Ambassador 
Juan Arreglado and the officials of the Bureau of Coast 
and Geodetic Survey. 

Your committee report is a consolidation of the 
resolutions of Commissioners Davide, Tingson and 
Nolledo. This Committee decided to adopt the defini- 
tion of the national territory as set forth in the 1973 
Constitution with slight modification, taking into 
account the economic zone now recognized by the Law 
of the Sea of 1982. The recommended definition reads 
as follows: 

ARTICLE I 

THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 

SECTION 1 . The national territory comprises the Phihp- 
pine archipelago, with aU the islands and waters embraced 
therein, and aU other territories belonging to the Philippines 
by historic right or legal title, including the territorial sea, 
the air space, the subsoil, the sea-bed, the insular shelves, and 
the other submarine areas over which the Philippines has 
sovereignty or jurisdiction. The waters around, between 
and connecting the islands of the archipelago, irrespective 
of their breadth and dimensions, form part of the internal 
waters of the Philippines. 

Then I continue; this is the addition: 

SOVEREIGNTY OR JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIP- 
PINES SHALL ALSO EXTEND TO STRAITS CONNECT- 
ING THESE WATERS WITH THE ECONOMIC ZONE 
PROVIDED FOR IN THE CONVENTION ON THE LAW 
OF THE SEA. 

The definition ends there. The above definition. 
Madam President and my beloved colleagues in this 
Commission, was actually an amended provision on 
national territory as found in the 1935 Constitution. In 
this old definition, our national territory comprised the 
following: 1) all territories ceded to the United States 
by the Treaty of Paris concluded between the United 
States and Spain on December 10, 1898; 2) all islands 
embraced in the treaty concluded in Washington be- 
tween the United States and Spain on December 7, 
1900, and these were: Cagayan, Sulu and the Sibutu 
groups which were omitted in the Treaty of Paris; 3) all 
islands embraced in the treaty concluded between the 
United States and Great Britain on January 2, 1930, and 
these were: the Turtle Islands and the Mangsee Islands; 
and 4) all other territories over which the present govern- 
ment of the Philippines exercises jurisdiction. 

The 1973 definition of our national territory. Madam 
President, adopted in toto by the Committee with 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


247 


addition, contains the following: 1) reference of the 
Philippine archipelago as comprising the national territo- 
ry, and the word “archipelago” was used to project the 
archipelagic principle; 2) reference to specific areas 
suggestive of the air and undersea world within the juris- 
diction and sovereignty of the Philippines. Thus, the use 
of the words “territorial sea, air space, subsoil, seabed, 
insular shelves, and other submarine areas”; and 3) the 
statement that all the other territories belonging to the 
Philippines by historic right or legal title. So, we did not 
refer anymore to the Treaty of Paris, the Treaty in 
Washington, etc., in the 1973 or 1986 definition. 

The Philippines, Madam President, is justifiably 
jealous of its waters. We have fought for the adoption 
of the archipelagic principle in various conferences on 
the Law of the Sea, and for many years this principle 
has met serious resistance from the world powers par- 
ticularly Japan and even the United States. The previous 
conferences resulted in a stalemate. Our fight for this 
principle culminated in the Convention on the Law of 
the Sea signed at Jamaica on December 10, 1982. 

With the permission of my beloved colleagues, I 
would like to underscore the importance of the sea to 
mankind. I quote the observations of former Foreign 
Minister of Singapore, Sinnathamby Rajaratnam. He 
said: 


Undoubtedly, the sea may be tomorrow’s economic 
frontier and a possible source for as many conflicts as the 
up of the earth’s surface generated since mankind’s history. 
Hitherto, the ocean has remained for the most part a no- 
man’s-land; and, therefore, all-men’s-land simply because 
mankind had not the means to effectively seize and occupy 
the sea. Today, many nations have the means or think they 
have. Mankind is turning towards the sea again to possibly 
reproduce all the foolishness and madness entailed in curb- 
ing up the land. The trade routes that link nations are still 
primarily by sea. Marine transport accounts for 78 percent 
of the physical volume of foreign trade and 68 percent of 
the freight in terms of cost. Sea transport is still the cheap- 
est form of transport and is likely to remain so with the 
development of supertankers and containerization. 

With the kindest indulgence of my beloved colleagues, 
I would like to recall what I said in my speech in the 
1971 Constitutional Convention to oppose the motion 
of the late Voltaire Garcia to delete the definition of the 
national territory in the Constitution. I said that if we, 
as we said in our Preamble, are concerned with the pre- 
servation and development of our national patrimony, 
we must, by constitutional mandate, define that patri- 
mony. We do not talk only of our natural resources on 
land; we have to protect as well our vast resources in the 
sea, for the wealth of the sea is enormous. The sea yields 
the great variety of fish that forms part of our diet. The 
sea is a source of minerals, like petroleum. It is a source 
of pearls that may win human hearts. It is a source of 
cobalt that gives power. It gives forth seaweeds that 
bring forth iodine. It produces salt that makes our food 
tasty. It provides us with ever continuous supply of 


silica used in the manufacture of our glasses. It is 
precisely the richness of the sea that makes the eyes 
of selfish powers bulge with condemnable envy and 
engulf them with the desire for territorial aggrandize- 
ment. 

According to Reverend Father Bernas, Philippine 
territory may be roughly divided into three groups: 
1) the Philippine archipelago; 2) other territories be- 
longing to the Philippines; 3) Philippine waters, air space 
and submarine areas. According to him, our territory 
has a horizontal reach consisting of land and water, an 
upward reach consisting of air space over the land and 
waters and a downward reach consisting of submarine 
areas. 

Madam President, the definition of our territory 
symbolizes our national unity and asserts the territorial 
integrity of the Republic of the Philippines. 

Thank you. 

I am ready to entertain questions. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. May I request that Commissioner 
Ople be given the floor? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Dple is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the distinguished sponsor yield to a few ques- 
tions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Certainly, with pleasure. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

I have noted the historical presentation which is 
ther thorough, of the evolution of the definition of 
e national territory in the Constitution since 1935. 
oe. he sponL confirm that in the 1935 Const.tufion 
e territorial jurisdiction of the Philippmes comprised 
ily those areas that were ceded to the United States by 
>a^n in the Treaty of Paris and those that subsequently 
jre incorporated in the Philippine territory as a resul 
the treaty between the United States and rea 
itain, but without the Batanes archipelago? Is that 

rrect? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 

» .hafaiy ktd of lingering ambiguity 
oit the Batanes Islands as part of the Philipp.nes was 
ereby conclusively resolved. 


248 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Commissioner proceed? 

Even under the 1935 Constitution, Batanes, which 
was excluded in the Treaty of Paris, in the Treaty of 
Washington and the treaty between the United States 
and Great Britain, could fall under the category of all 
other territories over which the present government of 
the Philippines exercises jurisdiction. 

Under the 1973 Constitution, it could fall under 
either historic right or legal title — historic right because 
from time immemorial, the Philippine government has 
been exercising jurisdiction over the Batanes Islands; 
and legal title because for a considerable length of time 
or for a long period of time, the Philippine government 
had acquired by occupation the right over the Batanes 
Islands. 

MR. OPLE. I have no doubt in my own mind that the 
Batanes Islands, even in Spanish times, had formed part 
of the territory of the Philippines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 

MR. OPLE. But this merely shows that, if we rely on 
foreign treaties to define the limits of our territory, this 
kind of dependence can be very risky, having had these 
two treaties concerning the Philippine territory and a 
third one concerning the small islands, known as the 
Turtle Islands which were reverted to the Philippines 
during the Macapagal administration. It took the Philip- 
pine Constitution framers to eliminate any iota of 
doubt that, indeed, the Batanes Islands belonged to 
Philippine territory. 

We are talking of the evolution of the historical defi- 
nition of national territory. I dispute what was uttered 
here yesterday that only one man wrote the 1973 
Constitution, because I knew that the distinguished 
Commissioner now at the podium helped write many 
provisions in that Constitution, together with 10 other 
colleagues that we now have in the Constitutional 
Commission. 

At any rate, what is new in the definition of national 
territory in the 1973 Constitution is the phrase “by 
historic right or legal title.” Presumably, this included 
not only the territories over which the Republic of the 
Philippines exercised jurisdiction. It could pertain to 
other territories over which the Philippines exercises no 
jurisdiction. Does the Commissioner confirm that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Presumably. 

MR. OPLE. According to the Commissioner’s best 
recollection when the 1971 Constitutional Convention 
was deliberating on this definition —one might say the 
enhanced definition of our national territory especially 
with the introduction of the new phrase “by historic 
right or legal title” — was it the intention of the framers 
then to include within the purview of this definition 
territories over which the Philippines may have filed a 


claim and over which there was some contemplation 
that in the future a claim could be filed? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I answer the question of 
Commissionei Ople, I would like to make some com- 
ments on his previous statements. In fairness to the late 
Delegate Eduardo Quintero and the many witnesses who 
appeared before our committee, particularly Ambas- 
sador Arreglado and Dr. Domingo Abella, I think there 
was no interference by any outside power in the for- 
mulation of the definition of national territory. I was 
not a member of the committee, but I can say with all 
candidness that I attended all the meetings of the 
committee, except during the time when I was incar- 
cerated in Camp Crame. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to proceed because I 
have not answered the Commissioner’s question yet. I 
would like the Commissioner to know that when we 
included the words “by historic right or legal title,” we 
opened the avenue towards the pursuit of the Philippir*® 
claim over Sabah and Freedomland, including, possibly, 
Marianas Islands. 

MR. OPLE. Marianas Islands in the Pacific? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to say that these were 
the three territories mentioned by Delegate Quintero in 
our committee hearings. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. And since 1973, the situation with 
respect to our territory and our claims has been dyna- 
mically developing. The Commissioner is undoubtedly 
aware of what happened in 1977 in Kuala Lumpur 
during the summit of the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Bangkok and London. 

MR. OPLE. I am referring to the 1977 ASEAN Sum- 
mit Meeting. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. At that time, if my memory does not fail 
me, the distinguished colleague of ours now present in 
this Commission was the Ambassador to Malaysia. And 
by nodding his head ever so slightly, Commissioner 
Abubakar has confirmed that. And in that summit of 
the ASEAN, the Philippine government, speaking thru 
the incumbent President then, formally announced to 
the other heads of state then assembled in Kuala 
Lumpur and to the world the relinquishment of the 
Sabah claim. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am aware of that. 

MR. OPLE. And is the Commissioner aware that the 
reason for that action taken by the then President of the 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


249 


Philippines was based on the attainment of a consensus 
in that government over time? I said “over time” 
because three Ministers of Foreign Affairs had recom- 
mended this — General Carlos P. Romulo, the most 
recent . . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. The most notable. 

MR. OPLE. The sponsor is probably right although 
Ambassador Pelaez may dispute that. A whole series of 
foreign ministers of the Philippines from Pelaez to 
Tolentino to Romulo — or is that the wrong sequence — 
had recommended that the Philippine government re- 
nounce the Sabah claim because it had become self- 
defeating in terms of our national objectives. I have 
dared to rephrase the arguments I heard from them 
more recently by saying that the claim has turned into a 
paradox in the sense that if we wanted to benefit from 
a close association with Sabah and with Malaysia, if that 
is a goal because there are great complementarities in 
labor and trade between the Philippines and that coun- 
try, then, only the claim stands in the way to having 
that objective realized. 

Of course, I will not rehash the legal arguments. We 
subscribed to self-determination as an important leader 
in the formation of the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights. And, of course, in 1963, the United Nations 
conducted a referendum in Sabah at the behest of the 
Philippines and Indonesia, who were then teamed up 
together in MAPHILINDO and whose relations with 
Malaysia had become adversary for some reasons we 
need not delve into. That referendum was conducted 
and the people of Sabah overwhelmingly voted to be- 
come part of the Federation of Malaysia that was being 
formed that year. The Philippines and Indonesia sent 
observers. They made some feeble protests about the 
way the referendum was conducted by the United 
Nations which made notes on the consciousness of 
mankind at that time. 

The Commissioner is aware that there are 140,000 
Filipino refugees in Sabah. They all come from Minda- 
nao, many of them from Cagayan de Sulu and from 
Sulu. 

The Commissioner is undoubtedly aware that these 
people hardly know the grace of concern of the Philip- 
pine government and that they have to function in an 
atmosphere that is less than friendly, sometimes in- 
hibitingly cold because of the Sabah claim. 

May I report to the sponsor, if he will not begrudge me 
a little time. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, please. 

MR. OPLE. When I was a Special Assistant to the 
President during the time of Magsaysay, I was person- 
ally involved in negotiating an agreement with the 
British North Borneo government which wanted an as- 
sured supply of 10,000 Filipino immigrant workers a 


year in what was then known as British North Borneo 
or Sabah. Of course, they specified that they should be 
Ilocanos. At that time, the Ilocanos were not pre- 
dominant in government. I thought they just wanted 
10,000 Ilocanos a year. Later on, that agreement, even 
before it could be implemented, was abrogated uni- 
laterally by the British North Borneo side because they 
started to hear reports that the Philippine government 
would file a claim on Sabah. 

Does the sponsor realize that had that agreement 
materialized, 10,000 Filipino immigrant workers a 
year, not including their progeny, would have gone 
there, and we should by now be the majority in Sabah? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I do realize. 


MR. OPLE. Does the Commissioner realize that the 
whole of Borneo Island comprising Sabah, Indonesia, 
Sarawak and Indonesian Calimantan has a population of 
only 7,000,000 against Mindanao’s present population 
of 10,000,000 plus? Sabah is almost as large as Minda- 
nao, with a population of less than 1,000,000, Sarawak 
less’than a million; and the bigger part of Borneo, Indo- 
nesian Calimantan, has only 5,000,000. The whole 
population of Borneo in relation to Mindanao alone is 
less than the people of Mindanao, Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, 
Basilan and Palawan. 


Therefore, speaking of demographic complementarT 
es, does the Commissioner agree that Mindanao is 
Iready getting overpopulated and that the whole o 
orneo plus the surrounding islands, including Celebes 
nd Moluccas belonging to Indonesia, now constitute 
le last major frontier of Southeast Asia but are rapidly 
eveloping and offering major opportunities for ex- 
hanges in labor and trade with the Philippines, espe- 
ially with Mindanao? Is this not a very impressive 
rospect for the Filipino people, especially for our 
luslim brothers who will stand to benefi 
le synergy of labor and trade that will undoubtedly 
ring about closer association between the Philippines 
nd Malaysia? 

And, finally, having in mind this background and the 
,ents that have developed since 1973 ^nd 1935 m y 

know from the sponsor whether the 
reamble. National Territory, and Declaration of Pn 
Ses, b; retaining the words “historic right or legal 
tie” in the territorial provision, refers specifically 


MR NOLLEDO. By retaining the words “historic 
ht or legal title,” we did not specifically refer to 
3 ah but the words can cover our claim over Sabah. 

I would like to further explain, 
it when President Marcos relinquished our claim ove 
3 ah, the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu raised vigorous 
iection to the relinquishment, because as I under- 
nd it - correct me if I am wrong -there are two 
:ories or doctrines involved in our claim over Sabah. 


250 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


the doctrine of imperium under which the state may 
claim on behalf of the heirs, and the doctrine of 
dominion, referring to the claim of the heirs of the 
Sultan of Sulu themselves. 

So I think in the resolution of our claim over Sabah, 
while the Philippine government may relinquish or 
might have relinquished its claim over Sabah, we cannot 
deny that there must be some basis for monetary claim 
on the part of the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu. 

MR. OPLE. I strongly support the position just taken 
by the Committee through the sponsor. In my mind, of 
course, I am trying to segregate the private claims from 
the official government claim, and I also take the posi- 
tion that under no circumstances should the private 
rights accruing to the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu be set 
aside or emasculated. 

And, happily, based on published reports, the author- 
itative spokesmen of the Federation of Malaysia have 
already said that they will be glad to honor the private 
rights, although the magnitudes will, of course, be 
subject to negotiation. So the rights of the heirs of the 
Sultan of Sulu should never be compromised. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If Commissioner Ople does not 
mind, I filed a resolution authorizing the President of 
the Philippines, being the officer-in-charge of the con- 
duct of foreign relations, to resolve the Sabah issue, and 
that whatever resolution the President may arrive at 
should be given full respect. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but this is in relation to the inter- 
pretation and determination of the intent of the framer, 
beginning with the intent of the Committee, concerning 
the scope of the words “historic right or legal title” in 
the territorial provision. If this arises from the Commis- 
sion’s interpretation of the meaning of the phrase, then 
I will be wholeheartedly in support of it, leaving the 
determination of the steps to be taken in this regard to 
the hands of the Executive Department — the President 
of the Philippines, in particular, who is responsible for 
foreign policy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And if Commissioner Ople has read 
the Explanatory Note to my resolution, he will be 
happy to note that the words indicate a suggestion to 
the President to drop the Sabah claim. 

MR. OPLE. I was not aware of that, but I certainly 
look forward with relish to being able to see it after this 
interpellation. 

I said that was going to be my last question, but I am 
sorry I have to refer to another territory which we now 
consider an organic part of the Philippine territory — I 
refer to the Kalayaan Islands. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Freedomland. 


MR. OPLE. Technically speaking — and I think the 
Bureau of Geodetic Survey must have informed the 
Committee — the present official name of this chain of 
islands belonging to the Republic of the Philippines is 
the Kalayaan Islands. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 

MR. OPLE. This is, of course, still misrepresented in 
some international maps as part of the Spratley Archi- 
pelago, which, of course, is very hotly disputed by 
several powers, including . . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. South Vietnam. 

MR. OPLE. There is no longer a South Vietnam. 
Vietnam . . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, the former South Vietnam. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Vietnam, China in Peking, and the 
Republic of China in Taiwan. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Kampuchea also? 

MR. OPLE. Of course, the Commissioner is aware 
that right there in the Kalayaan Islands we are cheek to 
jowl with an island garrisoned by Vietnamese troops and 
another island called Itu Abba, a bigger island, garri- 
soned by troops of the Republic of China in Taiwan. 

The Commissioner undoubtedly read a newspaper 
report about a year ago, when a Philippine Air Force 
plane — must have been a Gung Ho pilot — flew very 
low and buzzed the Vietnamese garrison. It was re- 
ported that the garrison fired a few shots at the Philip- 
pine Air Force plane, just to indicate the tensions exist- 
ing in that part of the South China Sea where we have a 
group of five islands called Kalayaan, but which are sti 
contested as part of the Spratley s by China, Taiwan and 
Vietnam. 

The Commissioner undoubtedly is aware that we have 
barangay governments already existing in the Kalayaan 
Islands. 

MR. NOLLEDO. lam aware. 

MR. OPLE. That they fall under the jurisdiction of 
the provincial government of Palawan. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am aware. In fact, the Honorable 
Mitra won there with the soldiers as voters. 

MR. OPLE. It is important to establish that the 
Philippine government now exercises effective jurisdic- 
tion over these islands, in the sense that we have mili- 
tary garrisons, as well as a local civil government in these 
places. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree that we have effective juris- 
diction, and that Kalayaan Islands should be considered 
part and parcel of the Republic of the Philippines. 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


251 


MR. OPLE. Thank you for that clarification, Com- 
missioner Nolledo. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Since this involves the discussion 
on territorial definition of the Philippines, our defini- 
tion, as it is, does not include the Sabah territory. The 
Sabah territory was turned over to a British commercial 
company whose right over the territory was, in turn, 
transferred to the British government. 

There was for a while a certain misunderstanding as 
to the true nature of this transfer, as well as the claim 
of the Philippines, not of its own right bpt of the right 
of the Sultan of Sulu to lease the territory of Sabah to 
two British merchants. As a result of this lease, the 
British acquired the right to develop the territory and 
lorded over it. But the Sultan of Sulu signed the Lease 
Contract which was a perpetual lease — in the inter- 
pretation of both the British and the Sultan of Sulu was 
practically a secession of the territory to the British 
North Borneo government from which the British 
Government acquired the right. As a result of these 
negotiations and claim of the Philippines, friction 
arose between the government of Sabah and the Philip- 
pine government. Even the people of Sabah — a portion 
of which are Filipinos — did not favor the issue of the 
Philippines claiming the territory. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like Commissioner Abuba- 
kar to know that a perpetual lease was entered into 
through the intercession of two British, Gustavus Baron 
de Overbeck and Alfred Dent, and there would have 
been no problem if the rental had been paid contin- 
uously. 

When Sabah was transferred to the U.S. government, 
the perpetual lease was questioned by the heirs of the 
Sultan of Sulu because the British government stopped 
paying the rent. That is why they felt aggrieved and con- 
sidered the stoppage of payment of rent a violation of 
the contract, because of which they felt that the con- 
tract was rescinded. 

I would like the Commissioner also to know that the 
Philippine government laid their claim upon Sabah 
under the doctrine of imperium — the theory derived 
from the principle of sovereignty. The Philippine 
government has no property rights over Sabah, and 
because the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu are Filipino 
citizens, the government protects their rights, specifically 
their property rights or claims over Sabah. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I understand that very clearly. It 
is not only a question of property right, but sovereignty 
over Sabah as well. 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. But in the treaty by which this 
transfer was effected, sovereignty, as well as the physical 
right to the territory of Sabah, was transferred by the 
Sultan of Sulu to the British government. That position 
rather weakened the claim of the Philippines over the 
territory. And when the claim was pushed through, we 
realized then that our position was not as strong as we 
had conceived it. 


In return, the heirs to the Sultanate of Sulu recog- 
nized that what has been transferred was not only the 
physical possession over Sabah but also the right of 
sovereignty over it. Because of that concept, we feel 
that our right to push the claim and acquire sovereignty 
over Sabah is weak and, therefore, we allow the heirs of 
the Sultan of Sulu to continue the negotiation with 
respect to property rights so as to enable them to ask 
for an increase in the yearly rental for which Sabah was 
acquired with the agreement of Overbeck and the Sultan 
of Sulu. 

That is settled. That is why we have not pursued our 
claim. I was one of those involved in the acquisition of 
Sabah. Angking and Sangkalang were my great pand- 
fathers. They were the ones who acquired Sabah, not 
the Sultanate of Sulu. 


MR NOLLEDO. When Macapagal filed a claim of the 
•hilippines over Sabah, the 1973 Constitution of 
ourse, was not yet existing. During the Bangkok Con- 
erence and the London Conference, the Philippine 
overnment was embarrassed because they said there 
/as no indication whatsoever to support such claim. 

The definition of the territory as appearing in the 
935 Constitution will support the Commissioners 
laim and that was the reason why we ® 

:ommittee on National Territory the 1971 Cons^^^^^^^ 
ional Convention’s need to put the words h tone 
ight or legal title” in order to constitute a basis for 
egotiation over the Sabah claim. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes. Even if 
.{ historic right will lead to "egotiatiom 
osition of the Philippine government h“^"8ed. 
.rder to maintain the cordial relation 
nd Southern Philippines and for other reasons we have 
heady agreed, I think by our silence and by our ac 
eptance, that we are not pursuing ^ 

aLh is, as embodied in the Constrt^ 

lalaysia, a part of Malaysia and not the Philippines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I find very good friends of Malaysia 
n this Commission. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I regret that the 

owards this end has not only ^ 7 the heirs of 
hilippine claim but affected the right h®';" ° 

he Sultan of Sulu towards claiming possessio 
erritory. 


252 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Commissioner. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Tingson be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I rise to address a 
question which, to some Filipinos, has touched then- 
national pride, if not indeed their national right. This is 
the question of Sabah - whether or not it should rightly 
belong to the Philippines as part of its national territory, 
and to the Filipino people as a parcel of their national 
patrimony. Would I be allowed to proceed? 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Commissioner desire to 
interpellate the sponsor, or would he want to make his 
own sponsorship speech? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I am a member of 
this Committee and I specifically requested that I make 
a little exception to our report. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I transfer my 
right to speak on this report to Commissioner Tingson. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you, Madam President. 

I have often wondered if all the people who have 
anything to say on this question, for or against it, have 
gotten hold of the sense that our so-called Sabah claim 
is nothing more than the private claim of the Sultan 
of Sulu over Sabah itself. But by the action of the 1971 
Constitutional Convention of which I was a humble 
Member, the provisions of the 1935 Constitution were 
revised by expanding their application to accommodate 
the private legal claim of the Sultan of Sulu. While we 
did not specifically claim Sabah right there and then to 
be a part of our national territory, we made our inten- 
tions clear in the 1973 Constitution to pursue the claim, 
or at the very least, leave open the door to its pursuance. 

Now it has become a vexing question: Were we wise 
and prudent to have put behind the claim of the Sultan 
of Sulu a national policy enshrined in the Constitution 
no less? Did it serve our national interest to tinker with 
our Constitution to accommodate the private legal claim 
of a Filipino citizen over a piece of real estate lying out- 
side the territorial limits of this nation and state when it 
became independent on July 4, 1946? 


Madam President, I leave it to this body to pass 
judgment on the action of the 1971 Constitutional Con- 
vention on this question. But no matter how that judg- 
ment might turn out to be, one thing is certain — our 
reluctance to drop the Sabah claim altogether is the big- 
gest single obstacle to the achievement of a harmonious 
and mutually beneficial relationship between the people 
of Malaysia and ours. The trade between our Filipino 
brothers in the South and the people of Borneo, once a 
voluminous, brisk and profitable undertaking, has 
slumped over the years by reason of this continuing and 
festering irritant. By a constitutional act, we have placed 
those regions on a shaky footing and destabilized its 
once sanguine prospects of regional prosperity. By 
undermining that trade route, so traditional and basic to 
the economic and social stability of our southern 
provinces, we have likewise put in question our ability 
in the future to hold those provinces together under our 
government. 

Madam President, it has become distinctly clear that 
\y 0 are being drawn by our instincts to survive and to 
prosper into regional cooperation and into the world 
of nations. Whereas in the past our world revolved 
merely around the special relationship that we had 
enjoyed with the United States of America, the impera- 
tives now should compel us not only to look farther, 
but also nearer. Our future is bound irrevocably with 
the collective prospects of the nations in Southeast Asia. 
These existing relationships, however, demand of us a 
greater sensitivity to the rights and feelings of neighbor- 
ing countries. 

When we became a part of the larger community of 
nations, the inevitable result had to be that our rights 
must be bent to conform with the “generally accepted 
principles of international law.” 

Thus we say in Section 3, Article II of our 1973 
Constitution: 

The Philippines . . . adopts the generally accepted prin- 
ciples of international law as part of the law of the land, 
and adheres to the policy of peace, equality, justice, free- 
dom, cooperation, and amity with all nations. 

Madam President and colleagues, I submit that the 
right to self-determination by a people is an honored 
principle of international law. Upon this principle we 
have based our own sovereign will to establish a new 
government. Based on this same principle, the 64-dollar 
question, however, is this: Do the people of Sabah have 
the right to self-determination? Granting the Sultan of 
Sulu has a valid legal claim to that territory, do the 
people of Sabah by living in that territory since time out 
of mind acquire a right to that territory superior even to 
the claims of the Sulu Sultan? 

Madam President, I submit that the land itself cannot 
supersede the right of any people to self-determination. 
For, indeed, if the right to the ownership of land is 
supreme over people’s rights to self-government, then I 
should say that even land reform in the Philippines 
would be impossible to implement. But the moral be- 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


253 


hind land reform precisely is the belief that the people 
are more important than the land. In biblical terms, we 
say that the sabbath was made for man, and not man for 
the sabbath. Land was created for man and not the 
reverse. The people of Sabah have lived and died in 
Sabah since time immemorial antedating by a long and 
undeterminable period the claims of the Sultan of Sulu. 
It seems but commonsensical that where their destiny 
was concerned, they should have the right to determine 
it for themselves, and determine it they did. In 1963 
when the British were proposing to launch the Federa- 
tion of Malaysia, a United Nations Mission visited Sabah 
to determine the people’s opinion there. Over the mild 
protest of the Filipino observers, the mission deter- 
mined that the people of Sabah wanted to form part of 
the presumptive federation. 

Madam President, how can this nation in conscience 
claim ownership over a piece of land that it has never 
effectively occupied and governed at any time in his- 
tory, from the time it was ceded by the Sultan of Brunei 
to the Sultan of Sulu some 280 years ago? 

My colleagues, our own quest for independence span- 
ning centuries in time was never based on any legal right 
or title over the islands of our beloved country. This we 
did not have. Rather, our quest was based upon what we 
have long perceived to be our national identity, a 
nationhood that we held to be superior to the claims of 
foreigners. We were willing to fight for this right, and we 
did fight against three waves of imperial powers. 

There is absolutely no reason for us to believe that 
the people of Sabah do not feel a nationalistic senti- 
ment. For us to override their sentiment is to compel 
our people to commit a wrong against which they have 
struggled. Must this nation, first in Asia to revolt against 
colonialism, perpetuate a colonial policy against an 
unwilling neighbor? 

Our heroes in the past did not spill their blood for 
Sabah. The sad muses did not visit our cantors of libera- 
tion to sing the plaintive song for the freedom of Sabah. 
Sabah is alien to our national consciousness, a land 
beyond the compass of our national soul. By giving up 
Sabah, we do not lose so much of a legal claim as we 
gain a friend; the good people of Malaysia. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I am through with my sponsorship 
speech. I think the period of interpellation is still going 
on. 

MS. QUESADA. Does Commissioner Nolledo adopt 
the position just expressed by Commissioner Tingson? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I said to Commissioner Ople that I 
filed a resolution authorizing the President of the Philip- 
pines to resolve the Sabah issue. I am not in favor of the 
immediate dropping of the Sabah claim. Let us rely on 
the President because her office is in charge of the con- 
duct of foreign relations. So I do not necessarily adopt 
the views of Commissioner Tingson. 


MS. QUESADA. Yes, because the position of the 
Committee of which I am a member — as I recall — was 
that we were not going to give up the Sabah claim, and 
that we were going to retain just the historic and legal 
right to it. We did not discuss at all this particular 
position of Commissioner Tingson in our Committee 
deliberations. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Tingson may react to 
that observation. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the records of our 
Committee meetings would show that I specifica y 
asked to be given a chance to voice a contrary opmion 
on this particular question of the claim over Saba . o 
thought the Committee allowed me to do that. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to clarify 
the situation because we do not want to be confused. 
We just wanted to be sure that we got the position ot 
the Committee correctly in this report that i 
posing the adoption of the same Provision in the ly /^ 
Cnnstitiition in this new Constitution. Is that correct. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President, with a Wtle 
addition - the last sentence of the proposed provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. The statement of Commissioner 
Tingson is a dissenting vote or opinion on t e repor 
the Committee. Is that right? 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Parliamentary inquiry, Madam Pres- 
ident. I would like to ask Commissioner Tingson if that 
was another sponsorship speech and we are now through 
with the sponsorship speech of our Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Nolledo 
answer that particular question? 


MR. NQLLEDQ. No, Commissioner Tingson made a 
reservation to speak on the Sabah issue, so ere 
no objection, the Committee took note ot that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Did Commissioner Tingson not 
/ote against this committee report? 


MR. NOLLEDO. No, he did not vote against it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a moment, f ’ 
sioner de los Reyes desire to be recognize 
Gentleman going to interpellate? 


254 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. I would 
like to ask the distinguished sponsor a few clarificatory 
questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo may yield, 
if he so desires. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I recall very vividly that during 
the 1971 Constitutional Convention, upon motion of 
then Delegate Azcuna, now Commissioner Azcuna, the 
phrase used in the Article on National Territory was 
“continental shelves” and not “insular shelves.” But 
after going through the process of styling, I suddenly 
noticed that instead of “continental shelves,” we are 
proposing “insular shelves.” Now, being a distinguished 
law professor and author of law books, I think Commis- 
sioner Nolledo might be able to give us a free lecture on 
what could be the difference between continental shelf 
and insular shelf. I really do not know. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a technical question but I 
will attempt to explain. Is Commissioner de los Reyes 
referring to submarine areas? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, I am referring to this 
provision that among those included within our territo- 
ry are the “insular shelves.” But as I said, as I recall it - 
and I think Commissioner Azcuna will bear me out -the 
original phrase used was “continental shelves.” I am just 
wondering whether there is a difference between the 
two terms. 

44 . NOLLEDO. I would say so, because the term 
insular shelves” necessarily covers continental shelves. 

A continental shelf is only one of the manifestations of 
insular shelves. I think the simplest explanation is: a 
continental shelf is a certain area or zone coming from 
or adjacent to an island, going downward with marked 
increased slope to greater depth zone and whose elonga- 
tion is unaltered like the doctrine of proximate cause, 
where economic exploitation will be permitted on the 
part of the state, from where the continental shelf 
begins. Continental shelf is a submerged portion of an 
island. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. How about insular shelves? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The term “insular shelf” necessarily 
covers “continental shelf.” Insular shelves are not 
elongated and there are some irregular areas not similar 
to those of continental shelves. That is what I under- 
stand. 

The Commissioner’s question, however, does noi, in 
any way, affect the substance of the definition. As he 
said, I should give this body a free lecture, but this 
matter is beyond my competence. So, I am stating the 
concept as a layman. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Suppose we exclude the words 
“including the territorial sea, the air space, the subsoil, 
the sea-bed, the insular shelves,” would that, in any 
way, diminish the territory of our country? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think so, because when we say 
“insular shelves” . . . 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, I am referring to the terri- 
torial sea, the air space, the subsoil and the sea-bed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What would the Commissioner like 
to eliminate? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, I am not asking that we 
eliminate anything; I was just thinking, suppose we were 
to delete the words “territorial sea, the air space, the 
subsoil, the sea-bed,” would that diminish the area of 
our territory? Or is it not a part of international law 
that the air space, the subsoil and the sea-bed are really 
parts of the territory of a country? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would think so. I would still insist 
on my original answer in view of certain questionable 
provisions of the Law of the Sea. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. What would these be? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I cannot specify now. But Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes was a Member of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa when that body ratified the Law of the Sea m 
1982. Then MP Tolentino enumerated several reserva- 
tions or understandings authorized by a certain section 
of the Law of the Sea, which included the definition of 
“national territory” as set forth in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. Even the meaning of “internal waters became 
nebulous because the Convention on the Law of the 
Sea mentioned the term “archipelagic waters. That is 
the reason why Ambassador Arreglado, appearing before 
our Committee, asked us not to refer at all to the 1982 
Law of the Sea because it has manj provisions that may 
prejudice in some way our Philippine territory. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I took no part in the ratifica- 
tion of that Law of the Sea when I was a Member of the 
Batasan. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It was ratified by the Batasang Pam- 
bansa. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Did Ambassador Arreglado say 
that there should be no mention anymore of the Law of 
the Sea? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. And did the Commissioner 
agree with the ambassador? 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


255 


MR. NOLLEDO. We did not fully agree because of 
the representations made by Commissioner Davide. That 
is why we added the last sentence. 


necting these waters with the economic zone provided 
for in the Convention on the Law of the Sea. Is that not 
superfluous? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. And I am going to that 
because I really am not knowledgeable about the mean- 
ing of sovereignty or jurisdiction of the Philippines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner can always 
consult the dictionary. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But it says “SOVEREIGNTY 
OR JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINES SHALL 
also extend to STRAITS CONNECTING THESE 
WATERS WITH THE ECONOMIC ZONE xxx.” What is 
this economic zone referred to? We want to learn, 
Madam President, because we have to explain this to the 
people. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is a pertinent question. 

I would like the Commissioner to know the sub- 
stantial provisions of the Law of the Sea which run like 
this: “The exclusive economic zone is an area beyond 
and adjacent to the territorial sea” and “shall not ex- 
tend beyond 200 nautical miles from the base lines 
xxx.” A portion of Article 56 states that the coastal 
State has sovereign rights in the exclusive economic 
zone to explore, manage and exploit all the natural 
resources, living and nonliving, of the waters, the sea- 
bed and its subsoil. According to Commissioner Davide, 
this will expand our territory. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So the purpose of including 
the last sentence referring to “STRAITS CONNECTING 

THESE WATERS WITH THE ECONOMIC ZONE” is to 
expand our territorial jurisdiction? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I see. What will be the effect 
of this expansion on the innocent passage of foreign 
vessels through our waters? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think innocent passage is guaran- 
teed even before the Law of the Sea was formulated 
because it does not infringe on any provision of inter- 
national law or, perhaps, because of extreme and im- 
perative necessity to save human lives brought about by 
un caso fortuito or fortuitous event. It does not affect. 
Innocent passage does not cover internal waters. It is 
permitted over the territorial sea. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My point is: This refers to the 
Law of the Sea. Is that not already covered in the 
Declaration of Principles? Expectedly, we will adopt 
international law as part of the law of our country and, 
therefore, there is no more need to state that our 
sovereignty or jurisdiction shall extend to straits con- 


MR. NOLLEDO. No, it is not superfluous. Let me 
explain. If the Commissioner would read carefully the 
technical words of the Law of the Sea, there are 
questionable matters; such as, for example, the meaning 
of internal waters. According to former Senator Tolen- 
tino — if the Commissioner does not mind, I would like 
to read this to be sure: 

Under our Constitution, the waters between and around 
the islands are called internal waters. The constitutional in- 
ternal waters include both the archipelagic waters and the 
internal waters under the Convention. 

That is why Ambassador Arreglado said that the term 
“archipelagic waters” was recommended very strongly 
by Indonesia. The archipelagic appearance of Indonesia 
is different from that of the Philippines. If we adopt the 
pertinent provisions of the Law of the Sea, there is a 
possibility that innocent passage may be exercised 
across our national internal waters because they can be 
called archipelagic waters under the Convention. That 
was the reason Senator Tolentino had made several 
reservations, called “Understandings,” before the Con- 
vention before he signed the Law of the Sea. In fact, 
there were eight understandings, and one of them is, and 
I quote: 

Such signing shall not, in any manner, affect the sover- 
eign right of the Republic of the Phihppines as successor of 
the United States of America under and arising out of the 
Treaty of Paris between Spain and the United States of 
America of December 10, 1898, and the Treaty of Washing- 
ton between the United States of America and Great 
Britain of January 2. 1930. Such signing shall not, in any 
manner, impair or prejudice the sovereignty of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines over any territory over which it 
exercises sovereign authority, including the Kalayaan 
Islands and the waters appurtenant thereto. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I really do not know anything 
about this Law of the Sea which Commissioner o e o 
is mentioning. I never participated in the 
the Law of the Sea for it was never discussed during 
our time. Frankly, I am more confused now a er e 
ing the Commissioner’s explanation. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner’s questions 
ought about the confusion. That is why the 
i followed partially the recommendation o rn 
lor Arreglado that we should not make any express re- 
rence to the Law of the Sea because there wi re 
nfusion. Thus, in reading the Law of the 
ve to read also the understandings ^ ^ These 

)lentino before he signed the Law of t e ® • 
iderstandings were considered when the a 
a of 1982 was ratified by the Batasang ^ 
e ratification was dependent upon the o se 
other states of these understandings. 


256 


THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. We will leave it at that. The 
definition starts with: “The national territory comprises 
the Philippine archipelago.” According to Commissioner 
Nolledo, we use the word “archipelago” in order to 
emphasize the archipelagic theory. Do I get him right? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. That was mentioned in the 
proceedings of the 1971 Constitutional Convention, if 
the Commissioner remembers. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, that is correct. I remem- 
ber that Commissioner Nolledo was also a Member of 
the 1971 Constitutional Convention. 

In the draft Constitution which was sent by former 
President Macapagal, the definition of the national 
territory starts something like this; 

The Philippines comprises the ancestral home of the Filipi- 
no people, composed of aU the islands and waters, and all 

the other territories, xxx 

What is the Commissioner’s reaction to that sug- 
gestion from President Macapagal? Would that, in any 
way, affect the archipelagic theory as mentioned? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily, because the reac- 
tion there was given by Voltaire Garcia. If the Com- 
missioner will remember, he said that by using the 
term “ancestral home,” he is including everything, 
every island covered by the Madjapahit Empire, and, 
therefore, may cover possibly Borneo — that includes 
Sabah — and perhaps a greater portion of Indonesia. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. All right. I thank Commis- 
sioner Nolledo for his free lecture, although I must 
confess that I am really confused. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move for the adjournment of the 
session until tomorrow at nine o’clock in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine o’clock in the morning. 

It was 7:25 p.m. 


FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986 


257 


R.C.C. IMO. 19 
Friday, June 27, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:14 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Serafin V.C. Guingona. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. GUINGONA. Almighty Father, we humbly pray 
for Your divine guidance so that we may be able to cor- 
rectly perceive and discern the sentiments and desires of 
our people as to what should be contained in the pro- 
posed Constitution and so that we may conformably 
and accurately crystallize and express these sentiments 
and desires. 

Grant us the wisdom so that in our efforts, truth and 
justice may prevail, the humility to accept the ideas of 
others which may conflict with ours, bearing in mind 
that we are here to serve the interests of our people, and 
the physical endurance to accomplish the many and 
varied tasks before us. 

Help us never to forget to be concerned with the 
common good, for the welfare of our people, particular- 
ly the poor and the deprived, in this our work of draft- 
ing our people’s constitution, one which would seek to 
establish in this fair land a community characterized by 
moral regeneration, social progress for all, political 
stability, economic prosperity, love and concern for one 
another. 

Grant us to use the responsibility that You have given 
us to the fullest advantage of our people and our coun- 
try. Make us realize fully and well that our acts and 
omissions in this momentous endeavour would in- 
evitably be judged by our people now and by those of 
future generations and by You. 


We give You thanks for this great opportunity to 
serve our people and we pray that with Your divine 
assistance, we shall not fail them. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

, . Absent 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 


Nieva 

. Present 

Aquino 


Nolledo .... 

. . Absent 

Azcuna 


Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 


Padilla 

Present 

Bengzon 


Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 


Regalado .... 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Brocka .... 

Present 

Rigos 

Present 

Calderon 


Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco . 

Present 


. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

Absent 


. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong ... 

. . Absent 

Garcia 

Present 

Tadeo 

Present 

Gascon 

• X 1 wawiit 

Abcpnt 


Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. -rlUowlL 

. Present 

Tingson .... 

Present 

Jamir 

Prpcpnt 


Present 

Laurel 

• X 1 CdWll t 

PrPCPTvf ^ 

Uka 

Present 

Lerum 

. jriCdCiiL 

. Present 

Villacorta ... 

Present* 

Maambong . . . 

. Present 

Villegas 

Present*^ 

Monsod 

. Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 34 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the red- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session and la 
approve the same. 


*Appeared after the roll call 


258 


FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 296, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION ONE OF ARTICLE III OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFICATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas and Suarez. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 297, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT IN THE CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE FOR THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 298, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING FOR THE CREATION OF A 
SEPARATE MINISTRY ON CULTURAL COMMUNITIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 299, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT 
OF A SEPARATE MINISTRY OF CULTURE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 301, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A STATE POLICY ON TOURISM 
RESPECTING THE CUSTOMS, TRADITIONS, AND 
BELIEFS OF NATIONAL CULTURAL COMMUNITIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 302, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO DELETE THE PROVISION UNDER 
DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES IN BOTH THE 1935 
AND 1973 CONSTITUTIONS POSTULATING THAT 
“THE DEFENSE OF THE STATE IS THE PRIME DUTY 
OF THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE” AND TO THIS 
END TO COMPEL EVERY CITIZEN TO RENDER 
MILITARY SERVICE - A DANGEROUS ANACHRON- 
ISM THAT SHOULD YIELD TO THE SOUNDER AND 
MORE RELEVANT PRIORITY THAT THE GOVERN- 
MENT’S PRIMARY DUTY IS TO LIFT THE LIVING 
LEVEL OF OUR IMPOVERISHED PEOPLE AND TO 
DEFEND THEIR BASIC FREEDOMS. 

Introduced by Hon. Rama. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


oposed Resolution No. 303, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN N^ CO^T^ 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR ™ COAffUI^ 
TEACHING OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
EDUCATION AS WELL AS IN CONFORMAL TR^J^ 

TO PERSONS AND INSTITUTIONS TASKED TO ^ 
FORCE AND GUARANTEE THE OBSERVANCE OF 


Introduced by Hon. Quesada and Bennagen. 
To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 304, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION MANDATING JUDICIAL CON- 
FIRMATION OF ADMISSIONS TO PHILIPPINE CITI- 
ZENSHIP UNDER OR PURSUANT TO A DECREE PRO- 
MULGATED BY THE PAST REGIME. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 300, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CHARTER A PROVISION ON THE COMPULSORY 
STUDY OF ETHNIC FILIPINO CULTURES IN ALL 
SCHOOLS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 305, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING THE REGISTRATION OF 
POLITICAL PARTIES UNLESS THEY PUBLISH AND 
SUBMIT THEIR PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT OR 
PLATFORMS AND THEIR CONSTITUTION AND BY- 
LAWS AND PROCLAIM THEIR ADHERENCE TO AND 
SUPPORT OF THE CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 


FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986 


259 


To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 306, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION EXCLUDING FROM THE RULE 
ON DOUBLE COMPENSATION, PENSIONS OR GRATUI- 
TIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 307, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THAT ONLY CITI- 
ZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES OR CORPORATIONS 
WHOLLY OWNED BY SUCH CITIZENS CAN ENGAGE 
IN COMMERCIAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND 
THAT MEMBERS OF BOTH THE GOVERNING AND 
MANAGING BODIES THEREOF SHALL BE FILIPINO 
CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 308, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING ANY RELI- 
GIOUS SECT AND ANY PARTY, AGGROUPMENT, AS- 
SOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION WHICH SEEKS 
DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY TO ACHIEVE ITS GOAL 
THROUGH VIOLENCE OR ARMED STRUGGLE FROM 
BEING REGISTERED OR ACCREDITED AS A POLIT- 
ICAL PARTY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 


Proposed Resolution No. 309, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL PATRIMONY 
AND ECONOMY. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 310, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR INITIATIVE AND 
REFERENDUM ON THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL 
LEVEL IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 311, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISION FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND 


MAINTENANCE OF A COMPLETE, ADEQUATE, INTE- 
GRATED AND NATIONALISTIC SYSTEM OF EDUCA- 
TION RELEVANT TO THE GOALS OF NATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 312, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A PROVISION IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION THAT ALL CANDIDATES FOR ELEC- 
TION OR REELECTION SHALL AUTOMATICALLY 
VACATE THEIR POSITIONS UPON THE FILING OF 
THEIR CERTIFICATES OF CANDIDACY. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Jamir. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 313, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR AN ANNUAL BUDGET 
FOR THE JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT TO ENSURE ITS 
INDEPENDENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo, Colayco, Jamir 
and Trenas. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


Proposed Resolution No. 314, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING THE STATE OR ANY OF ITS 
SUBDIVISION OR INSTRUMENTALITIES FROM RE- 
QUIRING A PERMIT FOR THE HOLDING OF RALLIES, 
DEMONSTRATIONS OR OTHER FORMS OF MASS OR 
CONCERTED ACTION IN THE EXERCISE OF THE 
RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE PEACEABLY TO ASSEMBLE 
AND PETITION THE GOVERNMENT FOR REDRESS 
OF GRIEVANCES. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Protestant Lawyers League of the 
Philippines signed by Messrs. Glenn Palumbon and 
Samuel Matunog, expressing their desire to sponsor a 
public hearing on the declaration of principles, bill of 
rights and/or national patrimony and economy, preter- 
ably on July 3, 1986. 

(Communication No. 63 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 


olution No. 56 of the Sangguniang Bayan of Mon- 
0 , Davao, requesting the inclusion in the Constitu- 
1 of provisions for forest lands reform program, 
mmunication No. 64 - Constitutional Commission 
986) 


260 


FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986 


To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letters from the Honorable Roberto R. Concepcion and 
the Honorable Ambrosio B. Padilla, referring the letter 
of Mr. Jose F. Francisco of Sanyo, Novaliches, Quezon 
City, submitting proposed provisions on the judiciary. 

(Communication No. 65 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Letter of Mr. R. Leonidas of 55 Chestnut St., Fairview 
Park, Quezon City, submitting proposals on the appoint- 
ment of the Members of the Judiciary. 

(Communication No. 66 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CQNSIDERATIQN OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Article on National Territory) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. We are still in the period of sponsorship 
and debate on Proposed Resolution No. 263 on the 
provision on National Territory. 

I ask that Commissioner Azcuna be recognized to 
interpellate the sponsor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

May we ask the sponsor. Commissioner Nolledo, to 
please come forward. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 9:29 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 9:41 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized to discuss this provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 


Actually, my purpose in seeking recognition ai Iasi 
night’s session was to seek clarification from the sponsor 
on the matter of the phrases and terminologies used in 
this Proposed Resolution No. 263 which I notice, with 
the exception of the last sentence thereof, is a virtual 
reproduction of the same provision in the 1973 Consti- 
tution. What I wanted to clarify here was the meaning, 
among others, of the phrase “all the other territories 
belonging to the Philippines by historic right or legal 
title.” My readings, as admitted by the sponsor last 
night, were to the effect that this phrase was used for 
the purpose, inter alia, not of foreclosing a possible 
claim to Sabah and to the Kalayaan group of islands. 
Since that was the purpose for that phrase in the 1973 
Constitution, what I wanted was a specific clarification 
on whether the phrase in the proposed resolution carries 
the same intendment as that in the 1973 Constitution, 
meaning, that by reproducing exactly the same phrase 
we are not foreclosing any future claim over Sabah to 
which Commissioner Tingson dissented. 


My other purpose was to make the meaning 

liar shelves” clear because the ^.VwL “c^ 

ations Convention on the Law of 
nental shelf,” whereas we are using the term jnsular 
lelves.” I wanted to clarify whether the term i^^^u ^r 
lelves” has the same concept as ‘ continental shelf 
though irregular in form. In other words, the term 
continental shelf” refers to those countries which are 
arts of a continent. I wanted to know - since the 
hUippines is an archipelago - whether ® 

own of the different islands thereof into the se , 
lereby producing an irregular contour 
ispective insular shelves, would be under e ^am^ 
Dncept and purpose for which continen a s e 
'as considered in the United Nations Convention on le 


I also wanted a clarification on the distinc ion 
between the internal waters and the territorial waters o 
the Philippines, which under the Convention are up o a 
limit not exceeding 12 nautical miles measured from the 
baselines. Is the same concept used now in the pro- 
posed resolution in contradistinction, meaning, are we 
still maintaining the same distinction between territorial 
waters of the Philippines not exceeding 1 2 nautical 
miles and the baselines and internal waters which are 
those enclosed within the baselines, regardless of the 
breadth or dimension thereof? 


Another matter which I wanted clarified is the 
incorporation in the present proposed resolution of the 
last sentence which says that sovereignty or jurisdiction 
of the Philippines shall also extend to straits connecting 
these waters with the economic zone provided for in the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. 


In the Journal of last night’s session, the sponsor 
stated that it was necessary to refer to the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea because, 
after all, there were reservations on the part of former 
Senator Tolentino, among others, insofar as the right of 


FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986 


261 


innocent passage was concerned. So, it was on that 
understanding that the Convention was ratified. 

I would beg to differ from that statement because 
under Article 309 of the United Nations Convention on 
the Law of the Sea, no such reservations are allowed 
when the Treaty or the Convention is ratified. For that 
reason, it was even necessary for former Senator Tolen- 
tino to submit a declaration of the Philippine govern- 
ment upon the signing of the United Nations Conven- 
tion on the Law of the Sea on December 10, 1982, 
wherein he, in effect, made the same reservations taking 
advantage of the provision of Article 3 10 of the Conven- 
tion which, however, requires the harmonization of our 
national laws with the Convention. 

Also, the sponsor stated that it was necessary to 
incorporate herein the economic zone provided for in 
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 
although he admitted that Ambassador Arreglado had 
repeatedly told them not to advert to the Law of the 
Sea in their discussions. We have studies to the effect 
that the economic zone we seek to protect as part of the 
territory of the Philippines and the right to exploit the 
same need not necessarily make reference to the Law of 
the Sea. In a study on this matter, it was pointed out 
that without ratifying the Convention, the Philippines 
could avail not only of the 12-mile territorial sea and 
the 200-mile exclusive economic zone, but also the 
definition of the continental shelf as binding rules of 
international law to which we, after all, had expressly 
adhered. 

As a matter of fact, under Proclamation No. 370 of 
March 20, 1968, the Philippines asserted sovereignty 
over the mineral resources of the continental shelf, as 
defined in Article 3 of the Petroleum Act, in accordance 
with the Geneva Convention of 1958. Presidential De- 
cree No. 1599 proclaimed a 200-mile exclusive econo- 
mic zone for the Philippines on June 1 1, 1978, declaring 
that such a zone is now a recognized principle of inter- 
national law. As a matter of fact. Presidential Decree 
No. 1 599 followed exactly the provisions of the concept 
of an exclusive economic zone under the international 
convention now in question. The United States likewise 
proclaimed a 200-mile economic zone without signing 
the Convention. 

So, if the purpose here was to protect Philippine 
jurisdiction over the waters coextensive with the eco- 
nomic zone, there would be no need for providing in the 
Constitution that this refers to the same as understood 
in the Convention on the Law of the Sea because this is 
already an accepted principle of international law. 

The matter of the “territorial sea” also bothers me 
because in the 1973 Constitution, as well as in the pro- 
posed resolution, the Philippines asserts sovereignty by 
historic right or legal title not only over the land area 
involved therein but also over the territorial sea. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I seek 
recognition? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I really hate to interrupt Com- 
missioner Regalado at this point, considering that he 
is giving us so much elucidatory information. But I 
must raise. Madam President, a point of parliamentary 
inquiry, considering that we are at present in the fourth 
period of sponsorship and interpellation. I do not really 
mind Commissioner Regalado taking the floor, con- 
sidering the absence of the sponsor, but I wonder if 
Commissioner Regalado is a member of the Committee. 

MR. REGALADO. No, I am not. Madam President, 
this procedure was precisely suggested by the Floor 
Leader in the absence of the sponsor whom I intended 
to interpellate with clarificatory questions. I wanted to 
bring these matters to his attention and to elicit a 
response — negative or otherwise as to whether or not 
these things I am revealing now were considered by his 
Committee. 

MR MAAMBONG. Yes, but the Commissioner is not 
an author of any of the resolutions indicated in the 
committee report, is he? 

MR REGALADO. There is no elucidation in the 
committee report. Precisely, I intended this to be in the 
form of questions. 

MR MAAMBONG. I am just asking a point, a very 
basic point - whether the Commissioner is an author of 
a resolution which was indicated in the committee 
report. 

MR. REGALADO. No, these observations were origi- 
nally intended to be questions addressed to the sponsor. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 9:52 a.m. 


resumption of SESSION 
At 9:57 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. During the suspension, the Flow 
Leader and Commissioner Regalado clarified tha Corn 
missioner Regalado was not actually s a ® ^ . 

resentation of the Committee m the absence of the 


262 


FRIDAY, JUNE 27, 1986 


sponsor. Commissioner Regalado is actually presenting 
questions for the sponsor to answer when he is avail- 
able. 

In that case, Madam President, I think it is entirely 
proper but subject to the answer of the sponsor, con- 
sidering that we are still in the period of interpellations. 
I was a little bit confused because I thought Commis- 
sioner Regalado was standing in representation of the 
sponsor or the Committee, or as an author. But since 
he is neither a member of the Committee nor an author, 
I thought it was a violation of the Rules. Since it is now 
clear to me that he was actually interpellating, that is 
entirely proper; therefore, I withdraw my point of 
clarification, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Commissioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Regalado 
have further questions? 

MR. REGALADO. I will just wind up, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. That clarifies the parliamentary 
situation because my observations, instead of being in 


the declarative form, would have been in the inter- 
rogative form had Commissioner Nolledo been present. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. I have also intended to ask further 
questions on the effect on the Philippines of the Con- 
vention on Territorial Seas, but I will reserve that for 
another session when the sponsor is present. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Is there anything else, Mr. Floor Leader? 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. There are some committee meetings 
being held at ten o’clock, and we invite the public and 
the young people to go and attend the committee hear- 
ings. One of the resource persons, I understand, is the 
Defense Minister. So, in the meantime, to enable us to 
attend our committee hearings, I move for the adjourn- 
ment of the session until Monday at five o cloc in the 
afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; and considering that the sponsor 
of the committee report now on hand is^ abs^t, e 
session is adjourned until Monday at five o clock in e 
afternoon. 

It was 10:00 a.m. 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


263 


R.C.C. IMO. 20 
Monday, June 30, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:21 pjn., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Alberto M. K. Jamir. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 


Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Absent 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 

NoUedo Present 

Ople Present 


Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Absent 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

ViUegas 

. . Present 


MR. JAMIR. Almighty God, we meet in Thy presence 
seeking divine guidance that we may fashion a Constitu- 
tion which will prevent a repetition of the shameless 
rape of our country by another Marcos; assure our 
people’s freedom from fear of oppression; and vouch- 
safe for them equal opportunity in their pursuit of a 
better tomorrow to lighten the burden of their unceas- 
ing daily toil. 

For this awesome task, O Lord, we pray Thee to keep 
our minds clear, our hearts pure, and our hands clean 
and steady, that the product of our labor may endure 
for all time and bring to fruition our country’s driving 
dream of a higher horizon. Only then may we be truly 
worthy of Thy benediction: “Well done, good and faith- 
ful servants, enter Thou into the Kingdom of Thy 
Lord.’’ Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 


Bacani .... 

. . . Present 

Bengzon . . . 


Bennagen . . 

. . . Present 

Bernas .... 



The President is present. 

The roll call shows 46 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR RAMA. Madam President, I move that we dis- 
nse with the reading of the Journal of the last session 




THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 


264 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


Committee Reports, the President making the cor- 
responding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 315, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A NEW ARTICLE ENTITLED “NATIONAL 
DEFENSE AND SECURITY.” 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 316, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT IN THE CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION DECLARING LAND REFORM A 
CORNERSTONE IN THE ECONOMIC REFORM OF THE 
COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 317, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCLUDE IN THE TRANSI- 
TORY PROVISIONS THE IMPOSITION OF A TWENTY- 
YEAR LOGGING BAN ON ENDANGERED FOREST 
LANDS ALL OVER THE COUNTRY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 318, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
new CONSTITUTION A PROVISION RENOUNCING 
WAR AS AN INSTRUMENT OF NATIONAL POLICY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 319, entitled: 

resolution proposing to INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION EXCLUSIVELY 
EMPOWERING THE LEGISLATURE TO DECLARE THE 
EXISTENCE OF A STATE OF WAR. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 320, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE ESI THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION ON THE PRO- 
TECTION AND WELFARE OF WORKERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Proposed Resolution No. 321, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING FOR THE ADOPTION OF A 
BICAMERAL SYSTEM OF LEGISLATURE E'J THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Bienvenido A. Castillo of Pulilan, 
Bulacan, suggesting provisions on the bill of rights and 
suffrage, among others. 

(Communication No. 67 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Economic Emancipation Association 
of the Philippines, Inc., signed by Mr. Vicente D. 
Gabriel, submitting a proposal on managed currency. 
(Communication No. 68 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 

Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Martin R. Reyes of Vasra Village, 
Quezon City, submitting recommendations pertaining to 
forest resources. 

(Communication No. 69 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 

Patrimony. 

Letter from the Third World Movement Against the 
Exploitation of Women signed by Sister Mary Soledad 
Perpinan, proposing “Women and men shall have equal 
rights,” as a separate section in the Bill of Rights. 

(Communication No. 70 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 

Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Rafael B. Hidalgo, Regional Trial Court 
Judge, Legaspi City, enclosing a draft article on the 
judiciary proposing a five-member board of judicial 
administrators. 

(Communication No. 71 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Resolution No. 3 of the Family Planning Organization 
of the Philippines, Quezon Provincial Chapter, pro- 
posing the inclusion in the Constitution of a national 
policy on family planning and population control. 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


265 


(Communication No. 72 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


(Communication No. 78 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


Communication from Mr. SeKvyn Clyde M. Alojipan of 
Capitol Green Village, Tandang Sora, Quezon City, pro- 
posing, among others, the election of the vice-president 
of the Philippines, the provincial vice-governor and the 
municipal vice-mayor for six-year terms, who shall auto- 
matically take over as president, governor and mayor, 
respectively, after the first three years in office. 

(Communication No. 73 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Letter from Mrs. Pura Kalaw-Ledesma of Legaspi 
Village, Makati, Metro Manila, enclosing proposed 
constitutional provisions on science, arts and letters 
and on a Commission on Culture. 


Letter from Mr. Francisco O. Javines of 348 Gov. 
Forbes, Sampaloc, Manila, enclosing an article proposing 
provisions on initiative, referendum and recall. 

(Communication No. 79 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Letter from Mr. Ruben A. Ferrer of 2251-C Adonis St., 
Pandacan, Manila, proposing a manner of ratification of 
the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 80 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


(Communication No. 74 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Albino V. Arriero of Provident Village, 
Marikina, Metro Manila, proposing provisions on citizen- 
ship, bill of rights, the legislature and term and tenure 
of elective and appointive officials, among others. 

(Communication No. 75 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Communication from Rev. Fr. Ever Cansancio, Mr. Luis 
S. Hervas and Ms. Noemi Deocampo, all of Tansa, Iloilo 
City, proposing provisions on the preamble, family 
unity, social integrity, poverty and reforms, among 
others. 

(Communication No. 76 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Filipino Crusaders World Army, Inc., signed 
by Cirilo T. Demetria proposing incorporation in the 
Constitution of its Man’s Moral Concept. 

(Communication No. 77 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from the Minister of Local Govern- 
ments referring Resolution No. 1473 of the Sangguniang 
Panlungsod of Cotabato requesting the inclusion of a 
provision for the reappointment of representative dis- 
tricts and the constitution of Cotabato City into a 
separate district. 


Letter from Lingkod-Tao-Kalikasan signed by Sr. Ma. 
Aida Velasquez, OSB, requesting the inclusion of 
provisions that would promote ecological and environ 
mental consciousness and participation. 

(Communication No. 81 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Resolution No. 1 of the Pambansang Konsultasyon ng 
Maralitang Taga-lunsod, with attachments, urging at- 
tention to issues affecting the urban poor. 
(Communication No. 82 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


tter of the Honorable Commissioner Ambrosio 
dilla, expressing heartfelt appreciation for th^^^^^^ 

)us adoption by the Constitutiona 
:solution No. 5, entitled: 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING 

DOLENCE OF THE CONSTHUTIONAL COl^IS^ 

ON THE DEATH OF HONOR>^^ ^ 
FORMER JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE 

PHILIPPINES. 

ommunication No. 83 - Constitutional Commission 

1986) 

I the Archives. 

tter from Mr. Melquiades transmitting 

Iff Director, Malacafsang 26 1986* 

:opy of Executive Order No. 23, dated June 26, 

titled: 

GRANTING THE PUBLIC FRANKING PRM^E ON 
COMMUNICATIONS BEING SENT BY THEM TO IHb 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION. 


266 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


(Communication No. 84 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Archives. 


COMMITTEE REPORTS 

Committee Report No. 5 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 264, prepared by the Committee on the Executive, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION LIMITATIONS ON THE EXERCISE OF THE 
AUTHORITY TO PROCLAIM MARTIAL LAW OR SUS- 
PEND THE PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS 
CORPUS BY LIMITING ITS DURATION AND REQUIR- 
ING CONCURRENCE BY THE LEGISLATURE, EX- 
PRESSLY VESTING UPON THE SUPREME COURT 
JURISDICTION TO INQUIRE INTO THE SUFFICIENCY 
OF THE BASIS OF SUCH PROCLAMATION OR SUS- 
PENSION AND TO SET ASIDE THE SAME IF NO BASIS 
EXISTS, .\ND GRANTING THE LEGISLATURE THE 
AUTHORITY TO REVOKE OR EXTEND A PROCLAMA- 
TION OR SUSPENSION, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 9, 107, 151, 152 and 158. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong, Regalado, Davide, Jr. 
and Foz. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 6 on Proposed Resolution 

No. 273, prepared by the Committee on the Executive 
entitled: ’ 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FURTHER LIMITATIONS ON 
THE POWER OF THE PRESIDENT TO GRANT PAR- 
DONS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 55. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Davide, Jr. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 7 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 322, prepared by the Committee on Amendments 
and Transitory Provisions, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR ITS 
AMENDMENTS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 148, subject to the reservation that 
Section 1 (c) of this substitute resolution shall only be 
incorporated if and when Proposed Resolution No. 161 
is approved by the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 
Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

Sponsored by Hon. Suarez and Jamir. 

To the Steering Committee. 


Committee Report No. 8 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 324, prepared by the Committee on the Executive, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING THE PRESIDENT 
FROM EXTENDING APPOINTMENTS WITHIN TWO 
MONTHS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE COM- 
MENCEMENT OF THE TERM OF THE NEW PRESIDENT, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 56. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Davide, Jr. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 9 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 128, as reported out by the Committee on the 
Executive, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITE4G THE PRESIDENT, VICE- 
PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE CABINET AND 
THEIR DEPUTIES FROM HOLDING ANY OTHER OF- 
FICE AND FROM ENGAGING IN ACTIVITIES WHICH 
MAY GIVE RISE DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY TO 
CONFLICT OF E4TEREST IN THE CONDUCT OF 
THEIR OFFICE, AND TO PROHIBIT THE PRACTICE OF 
NEPOTISM BY SAID OFFICIALS, 
recommending its approval with amendments in con- 
solidation with Proposed Resolution No. 183. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Maambong. 

To the Steering Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 5:36 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:42 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Jose E. Suarez presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, thank you for 
this opportunity. 

You have on your desk a note from the Secretary- 
General inviting you to a presentation of a survey — a 
nationwide public opinion survey — to be made in 
Caucus Rooms “D” and “E” at one o’clock tomorrow. I 
thought I should give a brief explanation for those of 
you who have asked me what this is all about. 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


267 


This is a nationwide survey of 2,000 respondents, 
sponsored by the Ateneo de Manila Public Affairs Cen- 
ter and the Social Weather Stations, Inc. It is a project 
we try to do four times a year. The idea is to try to get 
the pulse of the people on various questions. Let me just 
give you some samples of the questions which were 
asked — there were 70 questions with each question sub- 
divided into various other subquestions. For instance, 
some of the questions asked on the quality of life were: 
Is your life now better than twelve months ago? Do 
you expect your life to be better twelve months later? 
Other questions were on employment, government and 
administration, such as: Is the government as you know 
it, “mapapaniwalaan, medyo mapapaniwalaan, hindi 
mapapaniwalaan,” and so forth. And then on the 
Cabinet, there is a list of the Cabinet members and some 
of the questions asked were: Have you heard of these 
names? (We run through the list of all the Cabinet 
members.) Are you pleased with their appointment? 
Are you displeased with their appointment? The ques- 
tions on the Church and on the Communist Party would 
be something like this: Personnel of any church should 
not get involved with the struggle for the oppressed. Do 
you agree or disagree? The Communist Party should be 
legalized. Do you agree or disagree? With the new 
government now, NPA-Communist activities will es- 
calate. Do you agree or disagree? The rest are on post 
election problems, government, on President Corazon 
Aquino, former President Marcos and others. 

So, these are matters which, while not directly touch- 
ing on the work of the Constitutional Commission, will 
give us a feel of what the people are thinking on matters 
of public concern. The presentation will be made by 
Dr. Mangahas, with graphs and everything, and with 
opportunity for inquiries. 

As I said, this is a presentation of a survey made of 
2,000 randomized from all over the Philippines, and the 
answers are segmented according to different levels: age, 
education, economic level, and so forth. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that the 
Chairman of the Steering Committee be recognized on 
some proposed division of schedule. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

We are now in the period of sponsorship and inter- 
pellation on the committee report on National Territo- 
ry. I would like to propose to the body that after we 
finish the sponsorship and interpellation, the Commis- 
sion resume consideration of Committee Report No. 4 
of the Committee on Citizenship and move on to the 
period of amendments. I would like to present this 
motion so that a decision could be made on this matter, 
and in order to give a chance to those who may have 
amendments to Committee Report No. 4 on citizen- 


ship, that this discussion be held three days from now or 
exactly on July 3. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

Also, as agreed upon, starting July 7, we will spend 
more time in plenary sessions because we will be con- 
sidering committee reports until August 25. For this 
reason, I would like to propose that beginning July 7, 
our sessions start at 2:30 p.m. until we adjourn. The 
reason behind this is that those committees that still 
wish to meet and wind up after the public hearings 
would be able to devote the whole morning to their 
committee meetings until lunch time. Therefore, the 
plenary session will begin at 2:30 in the afternoon of 
July 7, until whatever time the Commissioners would 
wish to continue the discussions. 

I so move, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). There is a 
motion and a proposal submitted by the 
the Steering Committee that beginning July 7, 1986 , the 
sessions start at 2:30 p.m. until such time as may e 
decided by the body. 

Does the Chair hear any objection to the second 
motion submitted by the Chairman of the teering 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the second 
motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Article on National Territory) 
Continuation 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I 

ntinue the consideration of „_^.oj.shiD I 

,. 263. We are still in the period ^ 

.uld like to remind the body ^ ’ 

•ee speakers in favor of the reso u i . _ would 

:ed and only two speakers in tumo 
recognized, each to be given 1 ^ 

ring the interpellations, those who m y . 

;ak for or against can always bring up 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I request that Commissioner 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Nolledo is recognized. 


268 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


MR. RAMA. Those who may wish to interpellate, 
please register with the Floor Leader for a more speedy 
proceeding. 

I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Will Commissioner Nolledo yield 
to a few questions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I had an 
agreement with the Floor Leader that I am going to 
clarify certain issues raised by Commissioners Regalado 
and de los Reyes, because in the last meeting I was not 
here, not because I was ill as rumored, but because Com- 
missioner Gascon and I were on our way to Butuan City 
to conduct consultations. 

During the last session, Commissioner Regalado asked 
what the internal waters of the Philippines were. I 
would like to answer that question by reading the fol- 
lowing definition of our national territory in Article I of 
the 1973 Constitution, the words of which were 
adopted by our Committee on Preamble, National 
Territory, and Declaration of Principles: 

The waters around, between, and connecting the islands 

of the archipelago, irrespective of their breadth and dimen- 
sions, form part of the internal waters of the Philippines. 

In this connection, I would like to put on record the 
observations of Ambassador Juan Arreglado in relation 
to the internal waters of the Philippines. He said that 
the physical formation of the island territory of the 
Philippine Archipelago constitutes a compact and 
closely knit group of islands spread out in the form of 
a triangle. He continued by saying that inside this 
triangle are several areas, the largest of which is the Sulu 
Sea; passages and straits lying between and connecting 
together the 7,100 islands; and islets and shores of dif- 
ferent sizes and formations. Underneath the waters 
around the perimeter of the Philippine Islands group lies 
the submarine platform connecting together the consti- 
tuent islands of Luzon, the Visayan group, Mindanao, 
the Sulu Archipelago, the Turtle Islands, the Cagayan- 
Sulu groups, the Balabac group, Palawan and Mindoro, 
thus showing the original unity of all these island forma- 
tions. 

Commissioner Regalado, in relation to the questions 
posed by Commissioner de los Reyes, questioned the 
inclusion of the last sentence in our proposed definition 
of the national territory by saying that the 200-mile 
economic zone now provided for in the Convention on 
the Law of the Sea of 1982 should not appear anymore 
in the definition on the ground that that is already 
governed by international law, specifically the Geneva 
Convention of 1958, as well as existing decrees issued 
by the former and deposed President. Mr. Presiding 
Officer, I think this is very important for purposes of 
posterity. I beg the kind indulgence of the Members of 


this Constitutional Commission and Ambassador Juan 
Arreglado who testified before our Committee that he 
did not like any reference to the Law of the Sea in our 
definition on the ground that there are many provisions 
therein that may adversely affect the definition or 
description of our national territory as found in various 
existing treaties, among which is the Treaty of Paris of 
1898. In this connection, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would 
like to quote again the ambassador who was instru- 
mental in bringing about this definition in the Quintero 
Committee of the 1971 Constitutional Convention 
when he said, and I think this is very important: 


As regards the nature and purpose of the straight base- 
lines which have been drawn around the coastlines of the 
Philippine Island territory, and embodied in Republic Act 
No. 3046, as amended by Republic Act No. 5446, it should 
be noted that they were designed primarily to establish and 
indicate the outer limits of “all waters around, between, 
and connecting” the constituent islands, islets and other 
land formations of the Philippine Archipelago, which, 
under Article I of the 1973 Constitution, have the juridical 
status of “inland waters.” But they were not mtended to 
provide baselines for measuring the so-called ‘terri on 
seas” outwards, as this term is defined m of the 

Sea Convention, for the simple reason that all the sea areas 
lying inside the “international treaty limits are national 
waters forming an integral part of the national territory of 
the Philippines. 

I know the Gentleman cannot see from that area. At 
least, he can try to see the map of the Philippmes 
accordance with the boundaries set forth in the rea 
of Paris. 


According to Ambassador Arreglado, from the 
lines, we have 320 miles on the east coast of Luzon an 
1 50 miles on the west coast of Luzon. Ordinarily, 3n 
I think even technically, under the Law of the Sea, we 
have only the 1 2-mile limit which is known as the erri 
torial sea. Also, according to him that territorial 
should not be equated with the territorial waters, e 
have the territorial waters set forth in the Treaty o 
Paris going much beyond the 12-mile limit. And, there- 
fore, that should be respected because, according to 
him, the Treaty of Paris is an old treaty adhered to by 
other nations under the principle of quieta non moveve 
and, therefore, should be binding upon all nations of the 
world. 


I would like to quote the noteworthy observations of 
Ambassador Arreglado for purposes of posterity because 
there may be international cases that may be brought to 
the International Court of Justice later. In conclusion, 
he said : 


In view of all the considerations — legal, historical, geo- 
graphical and geological — expounded above, it appears 
clearly that the international validity of the Philippine 
instrument of Ratification of the Law of the Sea Conven- 
tion with the understandings embodied in the Philippine 
Declaration attached thereto, is fully justified by the 
following established facts, to wit: 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


269 


First, that the Law of the Sea Convention is designed 
solely to establish, with due regard for the sovereignty of all 
States, a new treaty regime or legal order for the seas and 
oceans which are beyond the territorial limits of national 
jurisdiction of States and which are thus considered as 
res communes: 

Second, that it is not witliin the contemplation of the 
Law of the Sea Convention to prescribe rules for the 
regulation or limitation of the sovereign authority vested in, 
and exercised by, a State over the sea areas forming an 
integral part of its national territory for to do so would run 
counter to the fundamental rules of international law 
underlying the principles of consent, independence, sover- 
eignty and equality of States, which are in the nature of 
Jus Cogens and beyond the competence of States to modify 
or abrogate by treaty; 

Third, that the Philippine Archipelago — our ancestral 
homeland — is not just a group of islands, but an “island- 
studded sea,” whose territorial boundaries were delineated 
by parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude along 
specified degrees set forth in Article III of the Peace Treaty 
of Paris of 10 December 1898, between Spain and the 
United States of America, and the Treaty of Washington 
between the United States of America and Great Britain of 
January 2, 1930, and Article I of the 1935 and 1973 
Constitutions of the Philippines; 

Fourth, that under international customary law and the 
juridical principles enunciated in various decisions of 
arbitral tribunals and international courts of justice, such 
international treaties involving changes and transfers of 
State territories and defining their frontiers are of general 
interest and concern, not only to the parties directly in- 
volved, but also to all Third States, and in case of silence 
on their part, such silence will be construed as a form of 
tacit consent or recognition of the existing situation; and 
that following the established international law principle of 
quieta non movere, said treaties have now become an 
integral part of the Law of Nations and thus binding upon 
all Members of the international Community of States, 
insofar as the delimitation of the national frontiers of the 
Philippine Archipelago is concerned; and 

Fifth, that the series of Understandings embodied in the 
Philippine Declaration are simply statements of the inter- 
pretation placed by the Philippine Government upon 
certain provisions of the Law of the Sea Convention which 
are deemed to be per se not applicable to the internal and 
territorial waters enclosed within the “international treaty 
limits” defining the territorial boundaries of the Philippine 
Archipelago, and cannot, therefore, in any manner “impair 
and prejudice” the sovereign rights exercised by the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines over all the sea areas forming an 
integral part of its national territory as defined and de- 
limited in the Philippine Constitution. 

Lastly, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to mention 
in passing that Article 310 of the United Nations Con- 
vention on the Law of the Sea permits the setting forth 
of understandings or reservations before the Treaty is 


signed by any representative of a party-nation to that 
Convention. 

So, that is the reason Mr. 'Tolentino made certain 
understandings or reservations, which I referred to in 
the last two sessions. These reservations were taken into 
account when the Law of the Sea was ratified by our 
Batasang Pambansa. 

I am now ready to entertain further questions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think honorable Commissioner 
Nolledo will agree with me that one of the purposes of 
including a provision on National Territory in the new 
Constitution is to give our people an opportunity to 
know their territorial home, is that correct? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I agree. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Of course, there are other 
reasons, such as, to make it difficult for some provinces 
to secede from our country and to facilitate pinpom mg 
national boundaries in questions arising before m er 
national bodies, are there not, honorable ommis 
sioner? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, and, therefore, we assert that 
the Treaty of Paris and other related treaties are vahd 
and, therefore, binding upon third-party states. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But the sponsor will agree with 
me that the silence of a constitution ^ 

national territory does not deprive such sover g y 
any portion of territory it is entitled to under inter 

national law, will he not? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, yes, 
still invoke the Treaty of Paris ^e^ety’ ^ 
do not have any provision in the bounda- 

national territory setting forth, for bind- 

ries recognized by the Treaty of Pans e states of 

ing not only upon our country but upon other states 

the world. 

MR. SARMIENTO. For the 
Gentleman, we made a survey on e ^bem have 

81 countries, and we seems to be 

no provision on National Territoiy, , United 
the national trend. These countr.es mcludethe^Unded 

States, Japan, Italy, France, Sovie international 

Angola, Bulgaria, etc. Cons.denng 
trend of not including a provision think it 

in the Constitution, does not the spon , 

advisable if we do not include a provision on Nat. 

Territory? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not agree with 
because that was the very reason presen e 


270 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


Voltaire Garcia when he moved before the Constitu- 
tional Convention of 1971 to delete the provision on 
National Territory. I was one of those who vigorously 
objected to that motion, and I was upheld by the Con- 
vention. For the information of the Gentleman, if we 
do not define our national territory, it may cause some 
embarrassment in future conferences. In the Bangkok 
and London Conferences when President Macapagal 
was pursuing our claim over Sabah, a Great Britain 
delegate asked: “Under what provision of your Consti- 
tution are you claiming Sabah? ” President Macapagal 
and the members of his Cabinet could not pinpoint and 
they were embarrassed. That is why in the 1971 Consti- 
tutional Convention, we decided to put the words “by 
historic or legal title” in order to open the avenues to 
the pursuit of our claim over Sabah in Freedomland. 

I believe that the Philippines is a peculiar archipela- 
go; we should define the National Territory in the 
Constitution to show to the entire world our territory. 
And when in future conferences there would be ques- 
tions on the extent of our national territory, we could 
cite our Constitution, the fundamental law of the land. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Aside from that international 
trend, may I invite the sponsor’s attention to a question 
raised by the honorable Commissioner Bernas in his 
hook Philippine Constitutional Law, 1984 edition: 

What then does the new provision gain for the Philip- 
pines? A mere security blanket, a rhetorical assertion of 
historic identity, decolonialization on paper, and an em- 
barrassing muddling of Philippine position towards the 
Treaty of Paris. 

Will the sponsor comment on that question? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Father Bernas is entitled to his own 
opinion. Besides, his statements are too general and do 
not consider possibilities of specific cases that may arise 
in the future. I still restate my previous statements 
supporting my stand, opposing the motion of the late 
Voltaire Garcia to delete the provision on National 
Territory in the 1973 Constitution. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I proceed, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer? In the sponsor’s speech he said that by historic 
right or legal title our territory possibly includes Maria- 
nas Islands — he emphasized the word “possibly.” In- 
stead of using “possibly,” can we say “definitely in- 
cludes Marianas Islands”? I ask this question because in 
one of Mabini’s books, in his memoirs, he said that 
Marianas Islands is a province of the Philippines. Agui- 
naldo also said that Marianas Islands constitutes a 
province of the Philippines. A bishop during the Spanish 
time was assigned in that place; and one French book 
stated that Marianas Islands is a part of the Philippines. 
As a matter of fact, the first school established in that 
island was named San Juan de Letran. So, I reiterate 
that instead of “possibly includes Marianas Islands” we 
use “definitely includes Marianas Islands” by historic 
right or legal title. 


MR. NOLLEDO. If the Gentleman wants me to 
delete “possibly,” I will agree with him. But does he not 
think our claim has already become stale? I do not 
know of any President of the Philippines pursuing any 
claim over Marianas Islands. However, I know that 
President Macapagal pursued his claim over Sabah but 
not over Marianas Islands. So, I think it has already 
become passe'; we have no more right over Marianas 
Islands. But I agree with the Gentleman that histori- 
cally, not legally, Marianas Islands is a part of the 
Philippines. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I also know if Spratley or 
Freedomland is included in the phrase “by historic right 
or legal title”? I ask this question because Atty. Cloma 
occupied the place and, in fact, formulated a constitu- 
tion governing that Spratley Island. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Who formulated a constitution? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Atty. Cloma. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. After occupying that territory, he 
initiated the formulation of a constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. Kalayaan Island or Freedom- 
land is under the effective control of the Republic of 
the Philippines. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, the sponsor agrees with me, 
therefore? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the Gentleman. 

MR. SARMIENTO. One last question, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

During the Commissioner’s sponsorship speech^ he 
said that he was one of those active members of th^ 
Committee on National Territory of the 1971 Consti- 
tutional Convention. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I was not a member of the Commit- 
tee. I said that despite the fact that I was not a member, 

I actively participated in the deliberations of the Com- 
mittee, because I come from the beautiful Island of 
Palawan. 

MR. SARMIENTO. During one of its deliberations^! 
am referring to the 1971 Constitutional Convention — 
the Chair informed the Committee that the Kiram heirs, 
one of the heirs claiming title over Sabah, had extended 
a special power of attorney in favor of several persons 
and one of these was Mr. Ferdinand Marcos. Will the 
sponsor kindly enlighten us on this point? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Based on the actuations of the heii s 
of the Sultan of Sulu, it seems that the power of attor- 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


271 


ney must have been revoked because they are now 
insisting on their claims individually without asking for 
presidential assistance. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, honorable Commis- 
sioner. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Abubakar is recognized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I be allowed to say some- 
thing because this is important in matters of the territo- 
ry of the Philippines as covered in the Constitution? 

In the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions, the territory 
of the Philippines is defined. The question of other 
territory which is not included in the Constitution may 
be embraced within the phrase “by historic right.” So, 
for purposes of definition, I think it is better to leave 
this in a general classification because Sabah or any 
other territory over which the Philippines may have a 
claim or has a right to claim is a delicate matter which 
should not be included in the Constitution for if we do 
so, it would be difficult to amend it and to negotiate 
whatever may be advisable in promoting understanding 
between the contending parties. So, let us limit the 
constitutional definition of territory to what has already 
been included in our Constitution. Let any other claim 
of territory, whether over Sabah or Kalayaan Islands or 
other islands, be decided by negotiation in order to 
promote the cohesive regional understanding between 
the parties or countries involved. As I said, to incor- 
porate this in the Constitution is inadvisable because the 
Constitution is a document which is not only hard to 
amend but hard to withdraw. Regarding this right, 
which all of us would like to protect, let us leave it to 
the judgment of our government and our people to 
pursue whatever is the correct course, but let us not in- 
clude it in the Constitution which will not only be 
misunderstood but will promote certain conflicting 
claims. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I have the floor, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I will wait. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 

So, let us then wait and abide by the previous pro- 
vision “by historic right or legal title” without any 
definition as to what territories are included in this 
historic right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With due respect to the Gentleman, 
I beg to disagree. 


When we use the words “by historic right or legal 
title,” we do not necessarily refer to Sabah alone. There 
may come a time when we might be embarrassed in a 
foreign conference involving claims over certain terri- 
tories. I would like the Gentleman to know that the 
phrase “all territory over which the present Government 
of the Philippine Islands exercises jurisdiction,” as 
found in the 1935 Constitution, was included in the 
definition of the National Territory purposely to in- 
clude Batanes Islands because Batanes was not set forth 
in the Treaty of Paris of 1898 and the Treaty of 
Washington (between the United States and Great 
Britain) of 1930. Because of the Sabah claim and the 
claim over Freedomland and the Marianas Islands, the 
Committee on National Territory of the 1971 Constitu- 
tional Convention headed by Delegate Eduardo Quinte- 
ro — although I was not a member thereof I attended all 
its meetings — used the words “historic right or legal 
title.” So, to eliminate these words would be retro- 
gression of the highest order. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. We have no objection to the 
inclusion of that phraseology “by historic right or legal 
title” because this is broad enough to cover whatever 
claim we may have as a matter of right through istory. 
I refer to the nonspecification of whatever claim over 
any territory. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. Our recom- 
mended provision does not specify any area of territory 
over which we lay our claim. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). What is 
the pleasure of the Gentleman from Bulacan? 


MR OPLE. With the permission of the Gentkmen on 
he floor, I just want to make a jery important dis- 
Islands and Saban. 




MR. NOLLEDO. I have no objection, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I just want to pomt out th 
such a sensitive matter which can ® . ® ^ 
ture conflict with another country. In case of the 
.layaan Islands adverted to by Commissioner 
kaV, there is no claim to speak of We are 
.session of the Kalayaan Islands^ f^Coiern- 
vernments existing there under the royi South- 

mt of Palawan and Region IV compnsmg the 

a Tagalog region. This is 

her territories that may be con P . 

jtoric right or legal title including ^abah 
.rianas Islands. I think it fe, very^j^port ^ 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Maambong be recognized to in erpe 


272 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Maambong is recognized. 


we can even determine whether they are natural-born 
or not. In this way, we can even grant them citizenship. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the dis- MR. NOLLEDO. That is right, 
tinguished sponsor yield to a few questions? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will now proceed to the meat of 
MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, gladly. my question. 


MR. MAAMBONG. The sponsor will probably agree 
with me that this problem or this issue on national 
territory is very closely tied up with the issue on sover- 
eignty. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I agree. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I do not 
claim to know much about public international law but 
what little I know from my former professor, then Chief 
Justice Concepcion, is that when we talk of a territory 
of a country, we have to be specific about it. Will the 
sponsor agree with that, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I should qualify, because if we 
specify all the islands that would form the territory of 
our country, it might happen that we might leave out 
other islands that should also belong to our territory. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. I will, 
therefore, clarify the matter by propounding some more 
questions on the issue. When I talk about the relation- 
ship between territory and sovereignty, I am actually 
talking about the situation that when a state claims 
sovereignty, it claims sovereignty actually on two 
things: one, the territory, and the other, the persons 
and things within the territory. And when we talk about 
sovereignty, we are also talking about effective exercise 
of sovereignty in the sense that if the state, for in- 
stance, the Philippines, claims ownership over Taiwan 
by just saying that Taiwan is hers, that is a hollow claim 
because we really do not have effective control over 
Taiwan and we do not have jurisdiction over the persons 
living in it. Is that clear enough, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, it is very clear. I believe the 
Gentleman is talking of the doctrine of effective control 
as recognized by public international law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, precisely, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

When we say we have sovereignty over persons that 
means that whether these people are citizens or not does 
not really matter. They still owe allegiance to the state 
who owns the territory. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And in that connection, if I may 
refer later to the committee report of Commissioner 
Bernas, when we have effective control of the citizens 


MR. NOLLEDO. On the basis of the premises laid 
down, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, we are now talking of the 
national territory comprising the Philippine Archipe- 
lago. 

Would the sponsor say that the term “Philippine 
Archipelago” is too broad and too general that it defies 
the element of specificity when it comes to the exercise 
of sovereignty of a certain state over a certain part of 
the world? 

Would it not be more proper if we can relate this, 
for example, to the previous definition of territory in 
the 1935 Constitution which talks of the Treaty of Paris 
or something and the metes and bounds are clearly 
identified? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. I think the Com- 
missioner is influenced by the statements of Commis- 
sioner Bernas in his book where he said, “What or 
where is the Philippine Archipelago? ” Then that 
particular article, however, gives no point of reference 
that can delineate the exact location of these islands and 
waters. I give emphasis to the word “exact.” On its facq 
therefore, the article does not serve as a definition of 
national territory. 


I would agree with him if he stops there, but with 
reference to the pertinent provisions of the Treaty of 
Paris, explanations of which I have already read, then 
the observation would instead seem to weaken. 


MR. MAAMBONG. The sponsor is referring to the 
book of Commissioner Bernas. I have wanted very much 
to have a copy of that book, but it is too expensive 
now. And this, of course, is an indication that I need a 
free copy. 

Anyway, let us go to another point. Actually* the 
reason a certain principle of international law indicates 
that we have to be specific about our territory is that it 
can cause confusion in the sense that if we are not speci- 
fic, some other country may also claim jurisdiction over 
that territory. Thus, it could really cause war when two 
countries both claim a certain parcel or portion of an 
island in the world. Does the sponsor agree with me on 
that principle? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The principle of specificity, what- 
ever it means, is already weakened because of the 
existence of different organs of the United Nations, 
particularly the International Court of Justice. Before 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


273 


the United Nations was established, I would have 
agreed with the Commissioner that the principle of 
being specific was important in the light of the doctrine 
of effective control by the state, which means the state 
could only define its territory if it had effective control 
over the territory. But even granting, without admitting, 
that the boundaries set forth in the Treaty of Paris 
which I consider binding upon other states of the world 
should be taken into account, I think that should those 
boundaries be violated by third parties, then we can 
always ask for the intercession of the United Nations — 
first through the Security Council, then, perhaps, we 
can appeal to the General Assembly. Finally, if both 
parties agree, they can submit the question to the 
International Court of Justice. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the Gentleman for the 
explanation. But in order not to prolong my questions, 
I think we should delimit our discussion on the word 
“sovereignty” and the phrase “claim of sovereignty.” 
Are these two different things? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We can exercise sovereignty over 
the boundaries set forth in the Treaty of Paris. If 
that sovereignty could not be effectively exercised, 
sovereignty over these boundaries would not be lost. 

Moreover, if other nations violate one’s territorial 
jurisdiction, then the aggrieved nation has the remedies 
guaranteed and set forth in the United Nations Charter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will go to another point. 

Much has been said about Sabah. Actually, I do not 
even know where Sabah is. Perhaps, the sponsor could 
help me. Is Sabah under our effective control in terms 
of exercising actual sovereignty? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why we did not include the 
word “Sabah” in the definition. I personally believe that 
the observations of the Honorable Ople are very note- 
worthy. In the referendum conducted by the United 
Nations among the people of Sabah, the people of 
Sabah opted to join the Federation of Malaysia. I feel 
that for practical purposes or by being pragmatic, we 
had to settle for the words “historic right or legal title” 
since we cannot exercise sovereignty over Sabah. It 
seems to me that the Honorable Ople has no objection 
to those words appearing in the definition of the 
national territory. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just to leave this issue, we 
should, therefore, agree that we have no effective terri- 
torial control over Sabah, neither do we have effective 
control or sovereignty over its inhabitants. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The sponsor agrees; he can still 
open the avenue for claims but not actually effective 
sovereignty, only a mere claim. 


MR. NOLLEDO. In that connection, I would like to 
quote again the very studious Ambassador Juan Arre- 
glado. He said that the people of Sabah are dissatisfied 
with their administration. Here, I do not mean that we 
foment the dissatisfaction or struggle within the state of 
Sabah. But the Ambassador said: 

Who knows, someday they might sever their connection 

with Malaysia and join the PhiMppines, after all, especially 

if they like the President of the Philippines. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I think we have clarified the 
point that Sabah is not under our effective territorial 
control and the inhabitants thereof are not under our 
control. 

I will just go to another point. Does this phrase “his- 
toric right or legal title” violate the principle which I 
mentioned earlier that the territory of a state should be 
specific under the doctrine of specificity of territory? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Pardon me, I object to that word 
“violate.” First of all, I do not find any legal basis for 
that theory. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am open to correction. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That theory is a mere opinion of 
professors of Constitutional Law like the Honorable 
Roberto R. Concepcion and myself. We invoke theories 
that find no legal support even in international law. So 
that theory, to the Commissioner’s mind, is valid, but 
to my mind it is not. Hence, the Members of this Consti- 
tutional Commission should not be bound by that 
theory because we are working on a framework that is 
consistent with the territorial integrity of the Republic. 
We belong to an archipelago that is unique in many 
ways, as compared to Indonesia which is also an archi- 
pelago. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Considering the insertion of the 
phrase “historic right or legal title,” the sponsor is 
actually saying that when we put into the Cons i u ion 
our national territory we do not really have to be 
fic about it. I think that is the general trend o e 
sponsor’s answer. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, I do not mean that. That is 
already cross-examination. We can be specific in one 
part and at the same time general in others. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Therefore, how does the sponsor 
specify “historic right or legal title”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to give an ex^ample. Our 
claim over the Philippine Archipelago as define 
Treaty of Paris can fall under both i„f+ 

legal title. Our claim over certain islands tha w 
out in the Treaty of Paris as set forth in the treaty con- 
cluded in Washington between the United bta es an 


274 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


Spain on November 7, 1900 can also fall under the 
category of legal title. 

MR. MAAMBONG. So that I will not take much of 
the sponsor’s time, this “historic right or legal title” is 
actually susceptible to interpretation. It can be inter- 
preted to extend to whatever islands, depending upon 
4he person interpreting it using available documents. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would try to qualify the words 
“depending upon the person interpreting.” It should 
depend upon the competent authority who will inter- 
pret the question based on documents that are available, 
like the Treaty of Paris. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This is my last point. 

In this connection, I will have to overlap a little bit 
with the question of Commissioner Sarmiento. I have 
here a quotation which says that it is not practical to 
define the national boundaries of a state because a 
constitution, being a municipal law, would anyway 
have no binding effect on other states for which state- 
ment a country’s territorial limits can only be intended. 

On this statement, I would like to recall that in the 
United States, they have omitted in their Constitution 
the definition of their national territory. I do not know 
whether or not this was intentionally done. My point is: 
Would the sponsor agree with that statement that a 
constitution, being a municipal law, has no binding 
effect on other states? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I vigorously disagree. While it is true 
that the constitution is a municipal law, the constitution 
refers not only to the particular provisions of that 
constitution but also to previous treaties. 

I would like the Commissioner to know that the 
Treaty of Paris is a treaty sanctioned by public inter- 
national law. With the kind indulgence of the Members 
of this Constitutional Commission, may I recall what I 
stated in my opposition remarks on the motion to 
delete the definition of the national territory in the 
1971 Constitutional Convention. I said that the Treaty 
of Paris of 1898, entered into between two maritime 
powers of the world, the United States and Spain, fixed 
the international limits of our waters. Our claim over 
these waters is predicated upon Spain’s title held 
unchallenged across a colonial span of more than three 
centuries, except in sporadic but few instances during 
that period by the other nations of the world. It was 
this title that Spain ceded to the United States in the 
Treaty of Paris — a title recognized by the United 
States’ Congress through pertinent provisions of the 
Hare-Ha wes Cutting Act and the Jones Law. It was this 
title which we set forth in our 1935 Constitution, rati- 
fied by 1,200,000 Filipinos, and it was also this title 
that the United States, admittedly a great world power, 
relinquished in favor of the Republic of the Philippines 
on July 4, 1946. I fervently hope that this Commission 


will likewise set forth this same title in our new Consti- 
tution in the face of unjustified threat to the sovereign- 
ty of our internal and territorial waters posed in these 
modern times by economically self-centered nations of 
the world, including the United States. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the Commissioner for 
that quotation. 

But is he actually saying that the Treaty of Paris is 
now being incorporated in the present Constitution that 
we are forming? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. If we delve into the records of 
the 1971 Constitutional Convention, the words “his- 
toric right and legal title” necessarily referred to the 
Treaty of Paris and other related treaties that I men- 
tioned here. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I am talking of the present 
Constitution we are drafting. 


MR. NOLLEDO. When we adopted the 1973 Consti- 
tution, we necessarily referred to the Treaty of Paris and 
other treaties that recognized our boundaries. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I am referring to the present 
Constitution we are drafting. 


MR. NOLLEDO. We have not adoptedjw fofo the last 
entence — the definition embodied in the ons i- 

ution. I would like this Commission to know that it is 
he intention of the Committee - and I hope it wdl also 
>e the intention of this Commission - that the Treaty 
if Paris and the other treaties related thereto should 






MR. MAAMBONG. This is my last quesUon: I have 
read several books about the 1935 Constitution an 
from my readings, found out that the reason we in- 
dicated a provision on the National Territory was to 
prevent dismemberment of our country by the 
States. All of us will probably recall that our 1935 
Constitution was a very unique document in the sense 
that it had to be approved by the President of the 
United States. And considering that the national terri- 
tory was clearly indicated therein, it actually became a 
contract between the United States and our country. 
According to the book of Sinco, the only purpose for 
inserting that provision on the national territory was no 
really to define our national territory but to bind the 
United States, upon the signature of its President, in 
terms of contract and to prevent dismemberment of 
our country. 

If that is a correct statement, would it not support 
the theory that, if it were not for that consideration, 
this provision on the national territory in the 1935 
Constitution would never have been there? And so in 
our present formulation we are not bound to put a 
similar provision on National Territory because the con- 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


275 


sideration which prevailed in 1935 is no longer existing 
today. That is my last question. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Perhaps, Commissioner Maambong 
would like to add some more to those statements. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There was fear that Mindanao might 
secede from the Philippines and so it was desired that 
Mindanao be included in the definition of the national 
territory. I would say that -the consideration for the 
inclusion of the definition of national territory in the 
1935 Constitution has attained a heightened significance 
during our present time because of the many secessionist 
movements now existing in Mindanao. Hence, there is a 
need to define our national territory to assert the terri- 
torial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines and to 
show to all the nations of the world that we want to be 
maintained as one territory as contemplated in the 1935 
and 1973 Constitutions, and, if possible, to add some 
more to that territory and also to discourage any at- 
tempt to secede Mindanao from our national territory. 
The consideration exists now and it will exist even in 
the near future. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Commissioner 
Nolledo. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). What is 
the pleasure of the Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Concepcion be 
recognized. 

the presiding OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

I do not propose to discuss the merits of the declara- 
tion. However, the observations made by Commissioner 
Sarmiento and the latest observations made by Commis- 
sioner Maambong touch on the question of motivation. 
Why? 

I believe that one of the main considerations for the 
insertion of a National Territory provision in the 1973 
Constitution was to incorporate the archipelagic doc- 
trine. Mr. Presiding Officer, for over 10 years, our 
delegates to the Convention on the Law of the Sea 
fought a battle for the incorporation of this archipelagic 
doctrine. There were other matters that delayed the 
approval of the Law of the Sea, one of which had to do 
with how to organize a body that will supervise the 
implementation of the said law. 

Eventually, the majority of the number of votes 
necessary to approve the Convention were cast. But the 


biggest powers — the United States, Russia and England 
— had a number of reservations. Sometimes they would 
agree on the principle but would try to insert certain 
qualifications which were not acceptable to others. In 
fact, I think England and France — the big sea powers — 
did not vote in favor of the Convention on the Law of 
the Sea. They enacted their own laws but, in effect, 
accepted most of the principles on the Law of the Sea 
with qualifications aimed at protecting their particular 
problems insofar as the provisions of the Law of the Sea 
were concerned. 

Because of this fact, I assumed that the one who 
drafted the 1973 Constitution incorporated the provi- 
sion that is found in the last part, that is: 

The waters around, between, and connecting the islands 
of the archipelago, irrespective of their breadth and dimen- 
sions, form part of the internal waters of the Philippines. 

Prior to this declaration, “internal waters” were 
considered as only those entirely within the territory 
like Laguna de Bay. Thus, we had no sovereignty out- 
side of the territorial waters. We do have certain rights 
with respect to the territorial waters, but that was about 
the end of it. 

Insofar as the archipelagic doctrine is concerned, my 
understanding was that those who favored it presented 
relief maps showing the seabeds around these islands. 
They showed that all these tiny islands surrounding the 
Philippines were part only of one range of mountains. 
That was the basis for their claim that being only part of 
one mountain range, such islands constitute an archipe- 
lago. The problem then was principally to determine 
what an archipelago is. 

But then, in view of the qualified vote of the big 
powers, it is necessary to stress that in line with the 
majority vote of the members of the family of nations, 
we should insert the definition or the substance of the 
archipelagic doctrine as a notice to the whole world, so 
we will be able to say: 

Well, I have this vote of the majority. While you may be 
the most powerful, just the same, we have incorporated the 
definition into the Constitution. 

That is all I can say about this matter. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. Commis- 
sioner Concepcion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Davide is recognized. 


276 


MONDAY, JUNE 30. 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Would the sponsor yield to some questions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. With pleasure. 

MR. DA VIDE. At the start of the sponsorship, read 
into the records of the Constitutional Commission was 
the position paper of Ambassador Arreglado, more 
specifically on the reference on the Convention on the 
Law of the Sea. My question is very specific: Would the 
Committee now accept the theory of Ambassador 
Arreglado insofar as the area under the Convention on 
the Law of the Sea is concerned? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That question seems to be very 
vague in the latter part since Ambassador Arreglado 
does not like any reference to the Law of the Sea in the 
definition of our national territory. 

MR. DA VIDE. Precisely, does the Committee believe 
in that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. If Commissioner Davide reframes 
the question by asking: Does the Committee believe in 
the opinion of Ambassador Arreglado, then I will 
answer that. Is that what the Commissioner means? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be practically the same. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I will answer it this way: I am 
not binding the Committee because it seems to me the 
Committee was not fully influenced by the opinion of 
Ambassador Arreglado because of the inclusion of the 
last sentence of the definition which was taken from the 
Davide resolution. However, without binding the Com- 
mittee, I would personally agree with the observations 
of Ambassador Arreglado. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, in other words, the opinion of 
Ambassador Arreglado would not in any way diminish 
the original import of the resolution as approved by the 
Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It can diminish to a certain extent. 

MR. DAVIDE. To what extent would it diminish the 
meaning of the report of the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Ambassador Arreglado used the 
term “national waters.” He must be referring to the 320 
miles east coast of Luzon and 150 miles west coast of 
Luzon as set forth in the Treaty of Paris since he made a 
distinction between territorial sea and territorial waters. 

The provisions of the Law of the Sea seem to be 
vague because of the reference to territorial sea. When 
we refer to territorial sea, it is mandatory on the part of 
the state or the archipelago concerned to respect the 
right of innocent passage or the right of setting up sea 
lanes. 


With respect to territorial waters which are con- 
sidered national waters, in the opinion of Ambassador 
Arreglado, it seems to be not exactly binding because 
these are waters over which the Philippines had acquired 
title under the Treaty of Paris. 

MR. DAVIDE. The territorial sea is actually the sea 
• beyond 12 nautical miles from the archipelagic base 
line. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. The exclusive economic zone as 
prescribed and defined under the Convention on the 
Law of the Sea is 200 nautical miles computed from the 
archipelagic base line. Would the Commissioner not 
agree? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I agree. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, necessarily, the area within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the Philippines under and by 
virtue of the Convention on the Law of the Sea would 
be tremendously increased? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In some parts of the definition. 

MR. DAVIDE. Not in some parts, but in all parts. 

MR. NOLLEDO. But not with respect to the bounda- 
ries set forth in the Treaty of Paris. If one talks of 320 
miles or 150 miles, and we specifically refer to the east 
coast of Luzon, then the Gentleman’s contention might 
be subject to question. 

MR. DAVIDE. The 320 miles was not actually based 
on the archipelagic doctrine. But if we base it on this 
doctrine, that would be expanded far more because the 
archipelagic doctrine is from the archipelagic base line 
and we have to consider the outermost islands of the 
archipelago. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would agree with Commissioner 
Davide, if he is referring to the understanding of Senator 
Tolentino before the treaty was ratified. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, not that. But that is really the 
concept of the 1971 Constitutional Convention as 
adopted in the 1973 Constitution where we adopted 
the archipelagic doctrine. And so, if we adopt the 
archipelagic doctrine, the 320 miles stated in the Treaty 
of Paris would even be far exceeded. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Where will it be measured? 

MR. DAVIDE. From the archipelagic base line. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What is the specific area of the 
archipelagic base line? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would not really be in a position to 
determine on the basis of the archipelagic doctrine, 
because one has to consider the outermost points. 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


277 


MR. NOLLEDO. We have set forth the base lines. We 
used the straight method as recognized by Republic 
Acts 3046 and 5446. 

According to Senator Tolentino, we measure necessa- 
rily the 200-mile limit from the base lines we have set 
forth in these two Republic Acts. That is the observa- 
tion. If we follow that opinion, then we will be amend- 
ing the 320 miles set forth in the Treaty of Paris. That is 
the observation of Ambassador Arreglado. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Gentleman has presented that 
map. Is that the same map that was shown by the rep- 
resentative of the Bureau of Geodetic Survey? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Did the Gentleman not remember that 
this representative of the bureau admitted that they had 
not prepared the map of the Republic of the Philippines 
on the basis of the 1973 Constitution? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, on the basis of the 1973 
Constitution without mentioning the Treaty of Paris. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, that bureau has not 
yet prepared a map of the Philippines in accordance 
with the definition of national territory as laid down in 
the 1973 Constitution? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would say that should be qualified 
in the sense that perhaps they have not complied with 
Republic Act 3046, as amended by Republic Act 5446. 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely. 

Mr. NOLLEDO. But these Acts are municipal legisla- 
tions. They exist and are considered binding until 
superseded. 

Mr. DAVIDE. Only for purposes of the domestic 
law. But we are now seeking to define what is really the 
length and breadth of the national territory. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As far as domestic law is concerned, 
I will agree with the Gentleman, but as far as inter- 
national law is concerned, we have to refer necessarily 
to the Treaty of Paris. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Treaty of Paris? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, except for the 320-mile limit 
counted from the base line as defined in our municipal 
legislations. 

MR. DAVIDE. Regarding the Treaty of Paris, would 
we, therefore, refer to the definition of Philippine terri- 
tory as defined under the 1935 Constitution? Is that 
the position of the Committee, that we will rewrite the 
1935 Constitution? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I will not speak for the Committee. 
But the Treaty of Paris has never been superseded even 
by the 1973 Constitution. It seems to me that the 
Gentleman is implying that the 1935 Constitution, 
mentioning the Treaty of Paris, has been modified by 
the 1973 Constitution. I would not even say then that 
the Treaty of Paris setting the boundaries of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines had been modified by the Con- 
vention on the Law of the Sea. On the contrary , it 
would be very unfortunate if we state the Law of the 
Sea here by reference to the definition of the national 
territory. 


MR. DAVIDE. We have here the proceedings of the 
interim Batasang Pambansa when the UN Convention on 
the Law of the Sea was presented for ratification. I will 
quote for the record the statement of the sponsor, then 
Assemblyman Arturo Tolentino, just to show that we 
will increase the area of the PhUippines by no less than 
93 million hectares. I hope this will enlighten us in 
treating this national territory. This is found in the 
Record of the interim Batasang Pambansa, volume 4, 
page 708, and I quote: 

The exclusive economic zone is one of the new concepts 
in the Convention on the Law of the Sea, as an additional 
maritime area of states. It is a belt around the archipelago 
of not more than 200 nautical miles wide, measured from 
the archipelagic base lines. Like other states, the Philippmes 
has certain rights in this exclusive economic zone set forth 
in the Convention; namely: 


1) Sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and ex- 
ploiting conserving and managing the natural resources, 
whether’ Uving or nonliving, of the waters and the seabed 
and deep subsoil; 


2) Sovereign rights with regard to other activities for the 
economic exploitation and exploration of the zone, such as 
the production of energy from the water currents and 

winds, and; 

3) Jurisdiction with regard to the establishment and use 
of artificial islands, instaUations and constructions to 
marine and scientific research and the protection and 
preservation of the marine environment. 


The exclusive economic zone of the Philippines measures 
about 395 400 square nautical miles. The area that we have 
clataW as OU, histo™ .erri.om^ ““t' ™ 


nautical miles. 

Now, I would emphasize. It says “territorial sea, 

•t just territorial waters. I will continue: 

And that is extending to the limits of the Treaty of Paris^ 

The exclusive economic zone, therefore, is bigger than the 
territorial sea by 132,100 square nautical miles which is 
equivalent to 45,211,225 hectares. The Philippines will 
entitled to all the resources, Uving and nonhving, m 
vast additional area of the seas around the archipelago. 

Would the Gentleman, therefore, mamtain that we 
ouW not include the area consisting of the exclusive 


278 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


economic zone simply because we are afraid that under 
the Treaty of Paris we might be losing certain areas 
when, on the contrary, we will be increasing that 
particular area? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think I was misunderstood. I 
would like to explain to the Gentleman. As already 
stated by Commissioner Regalado, the things that the 
Commissioner has been talking about are now governed 
by existing laws — municipal legislations. 

MR. DA VIDE. These are not governed by existing 
municipal legislations. 


of the Philippines, because the basis for the measure- 
ment of the 200 nautical miles is from the archipelagic 
base line, and not just the original concept. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why I am asking the Gentle- 
man how he defines an archipelagic base line. 

MR. DA VIDE. Now, my final question, just for clari- 
fying the record; The next generation of Filipinos — our 
grandchildren, great grandchildren, and so on — can still 
claim Sabah. And this Article on National Territory will 
be their constitutional and legal basis for such a claim. 
Am I correct? 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is also governed by the Geneva 
Convention of 1958. Actually, that was a reproduction, 
and it did not add anything to the definition of the 
national territory. 

In connection with that, we can reconcile our views, 
because one will find out that assuming we measure the 
200 miles from these base lines, because actually there is 
a confusion of what territorial waters and territorial seas 
mean, and then we go to the other areas where there are 
no lengths specified in the Treaty of Paris. Then the 
Gentleman would be perfectly right, if we measure from 
the base line in this area, toward the Pacific Ocean and 
the China Sea on the left side. I would agree with him 
because it would really expand the territory of the 
Philippines as I explained in my sponsorship speech. But 
if we count from the base line downward enclosing the 
Sulu Sea, we will be infringing upon the jurisdiction of 
Borneo. One cannot measure anything else beyond 200 
miles as permitted by the Petroleum Act and the Con- 
vention on the Law of the Sea. So, I think, it can be 
reconciled in this way and this is very important. If we 
assume that the 320 miles will be infringed, that would 
not be so because of the reservation of. Assemblyman 
Tolentino when he signed the Convention on the Law 
of the Sea. And it runs like this — if the Gentleman does 
not mind, I would like to read: 

XXX Such signing shall not in any manner affect the sover- 
eign rights of the Republic of the Philippines as successor 
of the United States of America, under and arising out of 
the Treaty of Paris between Spain and the United States of 
America of December 10, 1898, and the Treaty of Washing- 
ton between the United States of America and Great 
Britain of January 2, 1930. 

In other words, Assemblyman Tolentino wanted to 
reserve, as a way of understanding, that he was signing 
the treaty on condition that the treaty limits set forth 
in the Treaty of Paris must be given full respect. And in 
all other cases, as stated in the observations of Assem- 
blyman Tolentino and as read by the Gentleman, the 
national territory would really be expanded. I would 
say that the Gentleman’s view and my view can be 
reconciled. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, if one uses the words “historic 
right or legal title.” 

MR. DA VIDE. That is the meaning there. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). What is 
the pleasure of the Floor Leader? 


MR. RAMA. Commissioner Concepcion would like to 
make one short statement in connection with the 
previous interpellation. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 


I stand here only to say a few words about the well- 
pointed remarks of Commissioner Maambong concern- 
ing specificity. It is really difficult to argue on these 
matters just by using words, but when the delegation of 
the Philippines batted for the archipelagic doctrine, they 
presented maps which I am sure are recorded in the 
proper section of the United Nations organization. I 
have been in that particular section and had the oc- 
casion to see a number of maps of the Philippines and 
its adjoining islands. 


I have in my hands now an article by Justice Coquia, 
who was a member of the Philippine delegation, enti- 
tled, Development of the Archipelagic Doctrine, which 
is a recognized principle of international law. Perhaps, in 
justice to the University of the Philippines, I should say 
that this appears in the June 1983 issue, Volume 58, 
Second Quarter, of the Philippine Law Journal. I think 
if the Members of the Commission are furnished a copy 
of this sketch, much discussion could be avoided. 


Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Thank 
you. 


MR. DA VIDE. The expansion would be to the north, 
to the south, to the east and to the west of the Republic 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Romulo be recognized. 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


279 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
Honorable Romulo is recognized. 


territorial, is essentially the same as Article I on the 
National Territory. 


MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Chair will 
find my question refreshingly brief because the World 
Cup is going to be shown at seven-thirty tonight. The 
first question is: Does the term air space include air- 
waves? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very interesting question. I 
said, it is claimed that airwaves belong to the people. 
And, therefore, naturally, it must necessarily refer to 
the people of the Philippines. Airwaves above us should 
belong to the people of the Philippines and not to the 
State. There is an opinion to that effect, but with 
respect to air space above us, the mle in international 
law and followed apparently by the Law of the Sea, 
will be up to the point where we can have effective 
control — no limits. 

MR. ROMULO. So, the Gentleman is saying that the 
term “airwaves” is not included in the term “air space.” 
Am I correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is highly technical; I am not an 
expert on that. I would not conclude it that way, but 
from a layman’s point of view, it should be included in 
the air space. But because of its peculiar functions, and 
as claimed by technical experts that they belong to the 
people, my conclusion would seem to jibe with the 
conclusion contemplated by the Gentleman’s question. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

Just so I understand this Sabah question, is it the 
position of the Committee, rather than the individual 
Members, that we should retain or drop the Sabah claim 
insofar as the government is concerned as opposed to 
the private rights of parties? 

Mr. NOLLEDO. The members of the Committee are 
divided. That is why we did not include Sabah in the 
definition. We, however, agreed in principle that any 
claim over Sabah or any other territory should fall 
under the words “historic right or legal title.” We have 
not decided on that. 

Mr. romulo. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, as our last inter- 
pellator, I ask that Vice-President Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
honorable Vice-President Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

Article 2 of the Revised Penal Code mentions, “with- 
in the Philippine Archipelago, including its atmosphere, 
its interior waters and maritime zone.” I suppose this 
short statement of our national territory, where the 
Revised Penal Code applies, because it is general and 


MR. NOLLEDO. I would say so. 


MR. PADILLA. The second sentence that was intro- 
duced or adopted by the 1971 Constitutional Conven- 
tion explains the words “internal waters.” But the first 
sentence does not contain the term “internal waters”; 
whereas the Revised Penal Code expressly mentions 
“interior waters.” In other words, while the second 
sentence of the 1973 Constitution explains “internal 
waters,” there is no mention of “internal waters” in the 
first sentence. Does not the Gentleman think that we 
should include “interior or internal waters” or “inland 
waters” in the first sentence so that the second sentence 
would be an explanation of the terms “internal, interior 
or inland waters”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is a very good observation, but 
when we did not mention “internal waters” in the first 
sentence, it was because of the use of the term Philip 
pine Archipelago.” So we put there “with all the islands 
in waters embraced therein.” As I already stated, ac- 
cording to the observations of Ambassador Arreglado, 
our country is considered just as one big basin. So 
because of the use of the word “archipelago,” we did 
not mention the words “internal waters” anymore. 

MR PADILLA. Article 2 of the Revised Penal Code 
also mentions “Philippine Archipelago, including its 
atmosphere, its interior waters and maritime zone. 1 he 
third sentence was recommended by the Committee. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR PADILLA. Why does it start with “Sovereignty 
T Jurisdiction of the Philippines”? Why do we not just 
av THE NATIONAL TERRITORY SHALL ALSO 
'XTEND OR INCLUDE THE STRAITS CONNECT- 
ING THESE WATERS? Why not say ITS TERRI- 
ORIAL WATERS WITH THE ECONOMIC ZONE 
ROVIDED IN THE CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF 




MR NOLLEDO. That is a matter of style. I agree 
with the Vice-President. He may present his amendment 
at the appropriate time. 


MR. PADILLA. I realize that the Article already 
ites “over which the Philippines has sovereignty or 
risdiction.” But then the third sentence stresses sover- 
?nty or jurisdiction when we are talking of the national 




MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. We can amend it at the appro- 
priate time. 

MR. PADILLA. The last point is, it mentions terri- 
torial sea, then the air space, the subsoil, the seabed, the 


280 


MONDAY, JUNE 30, 1986 


insular shelves and other submarine areas. Are not the 
later phrases extensions of the term “territorial sea” 
rather than territorial air space, because if we talk of the 
air space — the atmosphere — then there is no direct 
connection with the seabed, insular shelves, and so 
forth? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think this is also a matter of style. 
The observation is well-taken. 

MR. PADILLA. I was going to suggest that we 
probably say TERRITORIAL AIR SPACE OR ATMOS- 
PHERE. Now, I do not know whether the term “sub- 
soil” refers to land or land below the sea. If it refers to 
land below the sea, then after the phrase AIR SPACE 
OR ATMOSPHERE, we transpose “the sea.” Then all 
these subsequent phrases— seabed, insular shelves, etc.— 
would refer to the sea rather than to air space. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. I agree with the observations. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We are amenable to amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). What is 
the pleasure of the Floor Leader? 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move that we adjourn the session until 
tomorrow at five o’clock in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at five o’clock in 
the afternoon. 

It was 7:09 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


281 


R.C.C. NO. 21 
Tuesday, July 1, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:13 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Regalado E. Maambong. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. First of all, I wish to acknowl- 
edge the kind words and prayers of Reverend Father 
Francisco Silva of Toledo City, Cebu, which provoked 
my thoughts for today’s Prayer. 

PRAYER 

Dear God, as we are about to continue our delibera- 
tions, we pause to reaffirm our faith in Your Divine 
Providence, humbly praying that You intervene with 
Your power and wisdom in the affairs of this Consti- 
tutional Commission. 

We pray that You touch each one of us with Your 
grace so that, individually and as a body, we may be 
made to realize our sacred responsibilities to our con- 
science, our people and our country. For this purpose, 
divest us for a while of our preconceived beliefs so that 
we will have a ready ear for the views of others contrary 
to our own. 

We pray that You gift us with the humility and the 
wisdom to genuinely listen to and discern the basic and 
authentic yearnings of our people, bearing in mind the 
constant reminders that we are selected, not elected, so 
that We may be able to correctly interpret and translate 
them into living articles of the fundamental law of our 
land — a law which guarantees basic freedoms, just and 
fair to the people, allowing all to develop their talents, 
giving a voice to everyone, and especially caring for the 
weak. 


We pray that You imbue each one of us with enough 
patriotism and sense of history to realize the sacredness 
and importance of our present task and mission so that 
we may cast aside personal and partisan interests and 
biases in favor of the long-term welfare of our country 
and people. 


We pray that You give us - more especially the old- 
timers in our midst - the strength and the energy to 
withstand the rigors and the long hours of committee 
deliberations, the lonely nights going over proposed 
resolutions and ever-growing volumes of propolis 
coming our way from all directions all over the land. We 
cannot read them all. Lord, but we are trying very hard. 

We pray that You grant us the patience to go through 
long-winded discussions over seemingly trivial matters 
with the comforting thought that, after all, it is our 
duty to listen and learn. 


We pray that You bless our fellow workers in this 
ommission who labor day and night in assisting us 
laintain a level of efficiency especially those who 


We pray that You guide our floor deliberations so 
at we can accomplish more by talking less, if this is at 
I possible. Guide us, likewise, to find the correct room 
r our committee assignments so that we will not spend 
uch time and effort walking instead of doing. 

We pray that You keep us safe from harm m our 
>eklv sorties all over this land so that m ouf earnest 
irch^ for the true desires of our people, we will directly 

ar from them. 

We pray further that You will prod us to finish our 
,rk on tL scheduled date with our tempers controll^ed 
H our sanity intact; and when our work is over, that 
shall have produced a document worthy of ratifica- 
m by our people, a document we can all be proud of, 
iocument really worth dying for. 

A A we prav that You enlighten our minds 

thVom OMne Light, so that each "jj 

r individual way, will have the courage to do what 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


282 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . 

. . Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. . Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Aquino 

, . Present 

NoUedo . . . . 

. . Present 

Azcuna 


Ople 


Bacani 


Padilla 


Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada .... 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Rigos 


Calderon 

. Absent 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de .... 

. Present 

Romulo .... 


Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 


Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 


Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present 

Tadeo 


Gascon 

. Present 

Tan 


Guingona .... 

. Present 

Tingson 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Trenas 


Laurel 

. Present 

Uka 


Lerum 

. Present 

Villacorta . . . . 


Maambong . . . 
Monsod 

. Present 
. Present 

Villegas 



The President is present. 

The roll call shows 43 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session and that we 
approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 323, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION ADDITIONAL CONSTITU- 
TIONAL RIGHTS OF AN INDIVIDUAL. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 325, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT NATURALIZED CITI- 
ZENS BE REQUIRED TO ASSIMILATE THEMSELVES 
IN THE NATIONAL CULTURAL MAINSTREAM. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta and Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 326, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A PROVISION IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION TO THE EFFECT THAT THE ARMED 
FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES SHOULD NEVER BE 
USED AS AN INSTRUMENT OF OPPRESSION AND 
REPRESSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Sarmiento, Jamir and 
Tadeo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 327, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION MAKING IT A 
POLICY OF THE STATE TO PROVIDE FREE AND COM- 
PULSORY ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY AND TER- 
TIARY EDUCATION TO ALL CITIZENS OF THE PHIL- 
IPPINES. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo, Jamir and Que- 
sada. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 328, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION PROVISIONS INSURING THE 
MUTUAL AUTONOMY OF CHURCH AND STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 329, entitled: 

RESOLUTION GRANTING AUTHORITY TO THE BARAN- 
GAYS TO RETAIN A PORTION OF TAXES AND 
OTHER REVENUES FOR INFRASTRUCTURE PUR- 
POSES. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


^Appeared after the roll call 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


283 


Proposed Resolution No. 330, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR A COMMITTEE ON AP- 
POINTMENTS WHICH SHALL SUBSTITUTE FOR THE 
COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS IN THE 1935 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 331, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES PROVISIONS ON THE RECOGNITION 
OF WORKERS’ RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino, Quesada, Villacorta and 
Bennagen. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 336, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION ELEVEN, ARTICLE VIII, OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION, WITH MODIFICATION, PRO- 
HIBITING MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY 
FROM HAVING FINANCIAL INTERESTS IN CONFUCT 
WITH THOSE CF THE GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 337, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION FOURTEEN, ARTICLE VIII, OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION, WITH MODIFICATION, IN 
ORDER TO ADD THERETO THE TERM “INTERNA- 
TIONAL AGREEMENT.” 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


Proposed Resolution No. 332, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
THE CONSTITUTION A PROVISION EXPLICITLY REC- 
OGNIZING THE. FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE, BEUEF 
AND ASSOCIATION OF FILIPINO CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta and Aquino. 

To the Committee on Citizenhip, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 333, entitled: 
resolution to include in the bill of RIGHTS OF 

THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION A PROVISION ON 
THE CITIZENS’. RIGHT TO INFORMATION TO MAT- 
TERS OF PUBLIC CONCERN WHICH IS IN THE 
POSSESSION OF OR IS WITHIN THE REACH OF 
GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 334, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A SYSTEM OF MULTIPARTY 
AND MULTISECTORAL REPRESENTATION IN THE 
national ASSEMBLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Monsod, Foz and Romulo. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


!*roposed Resolution No. 338, entitled. 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE 1986 CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE STATE TO 
INSURE THAT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS AND 
THEIR MEMBERS SHALL ENJOY FULL AUTONOMY, 
FREEDOM FROM ALL POLICE AND MILITARY SUR- 
VEILLANCE AND HARASSMENT, FULL ACCESS TO 
INFORMATION ABOUT SECTORAL AND PUBUC 
AFFAIRS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tan, Bennagen and Brocka. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 

Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


aposed Resolution No. 339, entitled. 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE 1986 CONSTI- 
TUtS5 A PROVISION REQUIRING THE STATE TO 

Cognize the rights and role of peopi^’s 

ORGANIZATIONS AS A POTENT SOCIAL FORCE, 
INSuS^ FURTHER THAT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZA- 
TOnHm Z.E TO PARTICIPATE GENUINELY m 
POLICY-MAKING/FORMULATION AND ENCOURAG- 
tIeIR IN THE IMPLEMENTA- 

™nJSitoring and evaluation of laws, 

POLICIES, AND GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS. 
Introduced by Hon. Tan, Bennagen and Brocka. 

To the Committee atizen^ 


Proposed Resolution No. 335, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION RESTRICTING THE USE OF 
NONRENEWABLE CULTURAL RESOURCES AND 
LIMITING THEIR OWNERSHIP TO FILIPINO CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Aquino and Uka. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


)Osed Resolution No. 340, entitled. 

ESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPO^TE A SE^ 
RATE SECTION ON AGRARIAN REFORM IN 


Introduced by Hon. Tadeo and Suarez. 
To the Committee on Social Justice. 


284 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 341, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
A PROVISION PROVIDING THAT WHOLLY OWNED 
AND CONTROLLED FILIPINO CORPORATIONS 
SHALL BE GIVEN PRIORITY TO THE ACCESS OF 
DOMESTIC CREDIT FACILITIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 342, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE AFFIRMATION OF AG- 
RARIAN REFORM AS A FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENT 
IN ACHIEVING SOCIAL EQUITY AND JUSTICE AND 
THEREFORE MUST BE ENSHRINED IN THE DECLARA- 
TION OF PRINCIPLES OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo and Quesada. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 343, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR A SEPARATE ARTICLE 
ON AGRARIAN REFORM AS A FUNDAMENTAL ELE- 
MENT IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A JUST, HUMANE 
AND PROGRESSIVE SOCIETY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo, Aquino, Brocka, Villacor- 
ta, Ople, de los Reyes, Quesada, Maambong, Ben- 
nagen, Sarmiento, Garcia, Suarez and Gascon. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 344, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MAKING GOVERNMENT SERVICE A 
CAREER FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 345, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION ON THE COOPERATION OF 
CHURCH AND STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Colayco, Trenas and Villegas. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 346, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION TO RECOGNIZE, RESPECT, 
PRESERVE, PROTECT AND PROMOTE THE INDI- 
GENOUS INSTITUTIONS OF CULTURAL COMMUNI- 
TIES IN THE PHILIPPINE SOCIETY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen, Villacorta and Que- 
sada. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 347, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS FOR 
THE CULTURAL COMMUNITIES. 


Introduced by Hon. Bennagen and Villacorta. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 348, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION REPUDIATING FOREIGN LOANS 
CONTRACTED OR GUARANTEED BY THE PAST 
REGIME WHICH DID NOT BENEFIT PUBLIC INTEREST 
OR THE GENERAL WELFARE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 349, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION CERTAIN GUARANTEES TO BONA FIDE 
CANDIDATES FOR ANY PUBLIC OFFICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 350, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
A PROVISION THAT ONLY POLITICAL PARTIES, 
GROUPMENT, ORGANIZATION OR MOVEMEOT 
WHICH HAS OBTAINED AT LEAST FIFTEEN PERCENl 
OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF VOTES CAST IN 
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING ELECTION IN THE CON- 
STITUENCY TO WHICH IT SEEKS ACCREDITATION 
SHALL BE ACCREDITED BY THE COMMISSION O 
ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 351, entitled: 

resolution EXEMPTING FIFTY PERCENT OF M 
SALARIES AND OTHER EMOLUMENTS OF GD 
MENT officials AND EMPLOYEES FROM 
PAYMENT OF INCOME TAX. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 352, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE TERM OF OFFICE 
OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 353, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO CREATE THE TANOD- 
BAYAN COMMISSION. 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


285 


Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 354, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE WHICH WOULD MAKE IM- 
PEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS REALISTIC AND IM- 
PLEMENTABLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 

Proposed Resolution No. 355, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE EQUALITY OF 
WOMEN AND THE PROTECTION OF THE RIGHTS OF 
WOMEN, CHILDREN AND THE FAMILY. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Aquino, Nieva, Uka, 
Quesada, Tan, Monsod, Sarmiento, Rosario Braid 
and Gascon. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 356, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR HIGHER SALARIES FOR 
THE CHAIRMEN AND MEMBERS OF CONSTITUTION- 
AL COMMISSIONS AND PROHIBITING THE DE- 
CREASE OR INCREASE THEREOF. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 357, entitled: 

resolution FIXING THE TEMPORARY OR ACTING 
and PERMANENT APPOINTMENTS OF A CHAIRMAN 
OR MEMBER OF A CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 
TO AN AGGREGATE OF NOT MORE THAN SEVEN 
YEARS. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Domingo M. Guevarra, Sr., former 
Constitutional Convention delegate, suggesting measures 
on the dignity of labor and vocational schools, among 
others. 

(Communication No. 85 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Messrs. Ramon C.F. Cuervo III and Ramon 
F. Cuervo, Jr., submitting a position paper on foreign 
investments and property ownership. 


(Communication No. 86 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Letter from the Government Association of Certified 
Public Accountants, Albay Chapter, signed by Ms. Cata- 
lina P. Orendain, submitting a position paper proposing 
provisions pertaining to the Commission on Audit. 

(Communication No. 87 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 


Resolution No. 86-2 of the Government Association of 
Certified Public Accountants, Albay Chapter, proposing 
deletion of accounting powers, functions and responsi- 
bilities from the Commission on Audit and transferring 
same to a separate agency under the Chief Executive. 

(Communication No. 88 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from the Immaculate Conception Prayer Group 
signed by Ms. Emilia G. Yu submitting proposals for 
maximizing the quality of the decision-making procee 

ings. 

(Communication No. 89 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


jtter from the Society of Philippine Sculptors signed 
f Mr. Ramon G. Orlina and eight other members 
questing a constitutional provision for the creation of 
national art institution to guarantee a more humane, 
ee and nationalistic art, among others. 

:ommunication No. 90 - Constitutional Commission 
ri986) 

0 the Committee on Human Resources. 

etter from the Honorable Commissioner Hilario G. 
avide Jr transmitting copies of resolutions submitted 
rihe committee of the Constitutional C^om^ 
hich conducted a public hearing, jointly '^‘^h the U.R 
•ouD in Cagayan de Oro City on June 21, 1986, by the 
ayan-sponsored People’s Consultative Conference on 
le Constitution (Northern Mindanao). 

;ommunication No. 91 - Constitutional Commission 

f 1986) 

0 the Steering Committee. 

etter from Mr. Salvador V. Abular 

orte, proposing that city/municipal councils 
osed of elected barangay captains instead of councilo 
ected at large. 


286 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


(Communication No. 92 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Salvador O. Oco of Moonwalk Subdivi- 
sion, Paranaque, Metro Manila, proposing that Sabah 
and the Kalayaan Group be included in the definition 
of the national territory, among others. 

(Communication No. 93 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:35 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:42 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Ricardo J. Romulo presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Article on National Territory) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take up the Unfinished 
Business, the continuation of the consideration of Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 263 on the national territory. We 
are in the period of sponsorship and debate. 

I ask that the sponsor. Commissioner Nolledo, be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

Commissioner Nolledo is recognized. 


validity of the claim of the Philippines over Sabah, 
further complicated by the unclear position of the Com- 
mittee regarding Sabah. I refer to the phrase “by his- 
toric right or legal title” which is included in the nation- 
al territory proposal. Is the sponsor aware of the legal 
grounds on the validity of our claim over Sabah, Mr. 
Presiding Officer? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I stated the legal general grounds for 
the claim during the first session when I sponsored the 
committee report. Perhaps the Commissioner may give 
additional grounds. 


MR. RAMA. Is the sponsor aware of the chronology 
of events on the legal grounds presented by the Philip- 
pine government? Please permit me to relate: The 
origin of Sabah belonging to the Philippines arose in 
1850 when the Sultan of Brunei had some problem in 
Brunei. There was a rebellion in that country so he 
called on his cousin, the Sultan of Sulu, to aid him. So, 
the Sultan of Sulu sent a flotilla of Suluanos to defend 
and save the Sultan of Brunei. In gratitude, the Sultan 
of Brunei ceded North Borneo to the Sultan of Sulu. 
This was confirmed by the fact that the original carpet- 
baggers in this area, Mr. Gustavus Baron de Overbeck 
and Mr. Alfred Dent, an Austrian and a British, went 
to the Sultan of Brunei to try to lease North Borneo but 
the Sultan told them that North Borneo, now Sabah, no 
longer belonged to him because he had ceded it to the 
Sultan of Sulu. Messrs. Overbeck and Dent tried to 
negotiate with the Sultan of Sulu for the lease oi North 
Borneo. The lease contract was drawn up and in it, it 
was very clear that the word used was not “ceded” but 
“leased,” in Arabic “padjak.” There was a lot of con- 
troversy whether Sabah was ceded or leased because for 
a long time the original document could not be found. 
The Sultan of Sulu contended that in one of his trips to 
Mecca, his copy was stolen in Singapore. 


Fortunately, one of our colleagues in the Constitu- 
tional Convention of 1971 who was then with the 
Foreign Affairs Department made a research on the 
lease contract between the Sultan of Sulu and the North 
Borneo Company which was composed of the suc- 
cessors of Messrs. Overbeck and Dent. He found a copy 
in the library or in the files of the State Department. 
And true enough that copy which was furnished by the 
British government to the State Department of the 
United States confirmed the fact that it was a lease 
contract and the word “padjak” has been confirmed as 
leased. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
interpellate the sponsor. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
Commissioner will please proceed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, it seems that there 
is an unclear understanding of the legal grounds of the 


During the period that it was under lease by these 
two carpetbaggers, Overbeck and Dent, they turned over 
the lease contract and all the rights of the lease contract 
to the North Borneo Company. 

The legal implications here as pointed out by Senator 
Salonga who was the head of a panel on the talks on 
Sabah in representation of the Philippines are: Overbeck 
and Dent were private persons. Therefore, they could 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


287 


not have acquired sovereign powers from the Sultan of 
Sulu. 

Overbeck and Dent turned over the rights to the 
North Borneo Company which was also a private corpo- 
ration as confirmed by the British. It was a private cor- 
poration; it never achieved a public mantle. So there 
could not have been any sovereign rights transferred 
between the Sultan of Sulu to Overbeck and Dent nor 
to the British North Borneo Company. In other words, 
there was no transfer of sovereign rights. 

Among the grounds pointed out is that in law and in 
logic, a person who pays rental on a property cannot 
claim ownership to that property which is very obvious. 

The fact that has been stressed is that North Borneo, 
Sabah and the British government in Sabah had been 
paying rentals to the Sultan of Sulu and his heirs up to 
1950 thereabouts. As a matter of fact, there was a stop- 
page of the payment but not because the British govern- 
ment disputed the authority or the title of the Sultan 
of Sulu, but because there was a dispute as to who were 
the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu. That was the only dis- 
pute. In other words, there was a continuous payment 
of rentals and that is one of the reasons why we 
presented our claim to North Borneo. 

Another thing to be pointed out here is that during 
the talks in London, Jovito Salonga, who is an excellent 
international lawyer, was able to insert in their com- 
munique — which was subsequently approved — “Sul- 
tanate of Sulu.” He used as an argument that, indeed, 
the British government recognized the sovereign powers 
of the Sultan as far as Sabah was concerned because 
they have signed that communique which refers to the 
Sultanate of Sulu. That is why there was an agreement 
that after the talks in London, there would be further 
talks in Manila. But the British government, realizing the 
blunder made by the chief legal officer, avoided any 
further talks in Manila. 

With respect to the so-called referendum under the 
auspices of the United Nations, that referendum had 
been questioned and disputed by the PhUippine govern- 
ment because it was rigged. As a matter of fact, many of 
those people who voted were illiterates who never knew 
what the issue was all about. Is the Gentleman aware of 
these facts? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I am aware. I think the Gentle- 
man faithfully reproduced the facts that led to the 
Sabah claim. 

MR. RAMA. Does the Gentleman agree with me that 
this legal claim and historic title, the legal title that he 
mentioned in the proposal, have some solid bases as far 
as Sabah is concerned? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That was the intention of the Com- 
mittee on National Territory of the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention. 


MR. RAMA. Therefore, that phrase would include 
claims of territories including Sabah? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We can claim under those words the 
Gentleman mentioned. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to call on Commis- 
sioner Guingona who has registered to interpellate. 
Those who would like to speak, please register with me. 

With the indulgence of Commissioner Guingona, here 
is an important information from the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee. 


MR. BENGZON. This is just to comply with the tech- 
nicality, Mr. Presiding Officer. There is a communica- 
tion sent by the Committee on the Executive to the 
Committee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions 
through the Steering Committee. To comply with the 
technicality, I move that this communication be formal- 
ly transferred by the Steering Committee to the Com- 
mittee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions. It 
has something to do with the deletion from the new 
Constitution of the provision granting presidential 

immunity. 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Is there 
,y objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 

otion is approved. 

Commissioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I have been given ten minutes so I will try to go as 
st as possible. 

I offer no objection to the inclusion of a on 

itional territory in the proposed Constitution al 
ough I would underscore the need for us, in drafting 
is provision, to be as flexible as possible so that we 
cuM not ciose the door to any 
.vcrnment may wish to make future e ther 

aims that are foreseen now as well as claims that are 
foreseen The danger with an attempt to describe or 
‘fine a territory is that oftentimes, the description or 
r JInds to limit the subject matter which is 

uS‘ to be defined or described. I subscribe to the 
4 expressed by Commissioners Sarmiento and Maam- 
mg in the last Lsion that this provision ^^tuaUy^is^a 
unicipal law and would have no binding ef 
other states are concerned. Commissioner Maambong 
ting Leo mentioned that there were Member of he 
135 Constitutional Convention ^f^eLse 

elusion of a provision on national ^ . ■[ 

cording to them, being a municipal law and s 
auld have no binding effect on 
asion would have no practical value. May ^ 
at even those who favored the inclusion did not dis 


288 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


pute this assertion. They wanted the inclusion because 
they wanted to have some kind of an agreement be- 
tween the government of the Philippines and the United 
States, excluding other states, because* the President of 
the United States, on behalf of the U.S. Congress, was 
supposed to approve the Constitution after ratification. 
Those who favored the inclusion thought that the ap- 
proval would constitute some sort of a covenant be- 
tween the U.S. and the Philippines as far as the territory 
of the Philippines is concerned. This demand for in- 
clusion was caused by the efforts of some Members of 
the U.S. Congress to keep Mindanao and Sulu under 
the dominion of the United States. And I have a ques- 
tion on this which I will ask just before my 10 minutes 
is due. 

The second item I would like to touch upon is the 
matter of “legal title.” I would assume that the phrase 
“legal title” refers to territories which belong to the 
Philippines at the time of the adoption of this Consti- 
tution, and also the territories that would belong to us 
in the future. But there are those who say that because 
we use “belonging to” and not the words “shall belong,” 
this might be subject to different and conflicting inter- 
pretations or constructions. They suggest that we add at 
the end of the first sentence the words “and such 
territories which the Philippines may hereafter acquire.” 

The last point, Mr. Presiding Officer, is in connection 
with Sabah. I would not favor the inclusion of Sabah in 
the provision on national territory or in any provision in 
the Constitution because I believe that our claim to 
Sabah is quite doubtful. If we include the word “Sabah” 
this would have the effect of taking the law into our 
own hands. However, I would want to make it of record 
that I believe the Sabah claim should not be abandoned; 
and, therefore, this Commission should make it clear 
that our claim to Sabah may still be included under the 
expression “and all other territories belonging to the 
Philippines by historic right or legal title.” 

There are many issues still to be resolved, Mr. Pre- 
siding Officer, and many questions that have to be 
answered. Even the word “sovereignty” is very hard to 
define. As Kaplan and Katzenbach says: 

There is no more confusing concept in international law 
than sovereignty. It has been viewed indiscriminately in a 
number of different meanings by decision makers and 
scholars alike. 

There is the matter of the sovereignty of the Sultan 
of Sulu by virtue of the alleged cession by the Sultan of 
Brunei in 1 704. And in this connection, we have the 
question as to the nature and the period of existence of 
the sovereignty of the Sultan of Sulu. May I, however, 
quote a statement which shows that the sovereignty of 
the Sultan of Sulu is recognized. This is found in Philip- 
pine Claims to North Borneo, Volume 1, page 23. In 
answer to the Spanish and the Dutch protests to the 
awarding of the royal charter in 1888, Lord Granville, 
the then British Foreign Minister, disclaimed any in- 
tention on the part of the British Crown to assume 


either dominion or sovereignty over North Borneo and 
categorically stated that sovereignty remains vested in 
the Sultan. 

There is also the matter of the alleged sovereignty of 
the British North Borneo Company based on an agree- 
ment which some claim to be cession and otliers claim 
to be lease (padjak). This was brought about by the 
agreement entered into between the Sultan of Sulu and 
Lord Overbeck, then the Consul General in Hongkong. 
Overbeck, by the way, was not a British national; he was 
an Austrian but he later transferred his rights to a 
British merchant named Alfred Dent who subsequently 
formed a private company, as pointed out by our Floor 
Leader, called the British North Borneo Company. The 
question that our Floor Leader raised is; “Can a private 
company acquire sovereignty over a territory under 
international law? ” This is a question that has to be 
studied and answered with regard to the matter of 
sovereignty. 

The third alleged sovereignty is the sovereignty of 
Great Britain, and the question that may be asked is: 
Does it arise or does it come about because of the 
alleged cession of the so-called State of North Borneo 
which was unilaterally formed in 1888 under British 
protection, after which cession was effected. North 
Borneo fell into Japanese hands and, therefore, control 
over North Borneo was lost by the British North Borneo 
Company? Or does it refer to the annexation effected 
by Great Britain on July 10, 1946? 

There are some questions, there are many questions; 
as a matter of fact, that may be asked, but I will just ask 
three of them. 

Did the Sultan lose his sovereignty de facto and/or 
de jure over Sabah after the January 1878 Agreement? 
What is the legal nature of the agreement between the 
Sultan of Sulu and Overbeck? And what is the extent 
of autonomy of Sabah within the Federation of 
Malaysia? 

The last point, Mr. Presiding Officer, is the matter of 
selt-determination. I had the opportunity to write on 
this when I was a member of the Inter-University Com- 
mittee to study our claim on Sabah, and I said that the 
general practice of the principle of self-determination is 
a course of action which has been repeatedly followed 
by states in the conduct of their foreign relations. Self- 
determination is not a special rule peculiar only in Asia, 
Africa, America or Europe; it is a principle which is 
universally accepted and followed. In fact, it has been 
followed in bilateral and multilateral treaties and con- 
ventions, including the Potomac Charter, the Atlantic 
Charter, the Pacific Charter, the Bandung Declaration, 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and even 
the United Nations Charter. 

There is no quarrel, Mr. Presiding Officer, about the 
matter of self-determination. Woodrow Wilson said that 
self-determination is not a mere phrase; it is an im- 
perative principle of action which statesmen will hence- 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


289 


forth ignore at their peril. But may I invite the honor- 
able Members of this Commission to the United Nations 
General Assembly’s Declaration on principles of inter- 
national law concerning friendly relations and coope- 
ration among states in accordance with its Charter on 
the right of peoples to determine their own political, 
economic, social and cultural development. This is 
found in the very first article of this declaration, and I 
shall read, with your permission: 

By virtue of the principle of equal rights and self- 
determination of peoples ensluined in the Charter of 
the United Nations, aU peoples have the right freely to 
determine their development. 

There is, therefore, need for free and consensual deter- 
mination. There have been allegations — and I do not 
say that these allegations are valid or correct; I do not 
know — about the fact that there had been no free and 
consensual determination and these allegations must be 
looked into. You have, for example, the fact that the 
Philippines did not have an observer during the so-called 
self-determination held in Sabah. There was also the fact 
that this exercise of self-determination, which is similar 
to our electoral process, was shortened unilaterally from 
six weeks to ten days. There is the statement contained 
in the Malaysia Official Yearbook of 1969, and I quote: 

Regular police and riot squads were in evidence every- 
where during the U.N. -Malaysia Mission Survey. Buses, 
trucks, and other vehicles were mobilized to bring hundreds 
of villagers from remote areas into the North Borneo capital. 

Finally, and most important of all, at the time of 
the so-called self-determination, North Borneo or Sabah 
was a colony of Great Britain. As we know, Great Britain 
was a strong objector to the Philippine claim to Sabah 
and had openly engineered the inclusion of Sabah into 
the Federation of Malaysia. If these allegations were 
proven to be true — and I would like to emphasize that 
I do not say they are true - then perhaps we cannot 
blame those who have made the allegation that they sus- 
pect, to say the least, that the so-called self-determina- 
tion process was, if I may borrow the words alleged to 
have been used by Marcos, nothing more than a moro- 
moro. What I am asking is that there should be a tho- 
rough, Unbiased and searching evaluation of all the 
issues and all the questions regarding this claim. This 
was not done by the Marcos administration; neither has 
it been done by this administration for obvious reasons 
because this administration has only taken over the reins 
of government for a few months. I say let us give this 
administration and perhaps other administrations time 
to study and evaluate, to make a thorough, unbiased 
and searching evaluation; and if the government finds 
that our claim is not valid, then so be it. But if our 
government is able to find evidence to support our 
claim, then the territory of Sabah belongs to the Philip- 
pines. And I say that neither the government nor this 
Commission has the right to give up any territory which 
belongs to the people of this country. 


Finally, in answer to the statement that Sabah is 
not linked as closely to the Philippines as Malaysia, I 
would like to quote from the Manila Accord, Article 
XIII. The Manila Accord was entered into by the Fede- 
ration of Malaya, the Republic of Indonesia, and the 
Republic of the Philippines, and in Article XIII, they 
took cognizance of, and I quote: 

. . . the close historical ties between the people of the 
Philippines and North Borneo as well as their geographical 
propinquity . . . 

And now may I be allowed to ask the question that 
I wanted to ask the honorable proponent. Speaking of 
Mindanao, what is the reaction of the Gentleman — and 
I am not making this as a proposal but as an explorato- 
ry question — if the first part of the proposed provision 
on the national territory be made to read as follows: 
“The national territory comprises the Philippine Archi- 
pelago with all the islands and waters embraced therein 
including the three main geographical divisions thereof. 
Mindanao, Visayas and Luzon”? 


MR. NOLLEDO. But before I answer that question, 
Vir. Presiding Officer, I would like to reiterate my stand 
igainst the contention that the definition of the nation- 
1 territory as recommended by the Committee on 
•reamble. National Territory, and Declaration of Prin- 
liples is a mere municipal legislation and has no prac- 
ical value. I vigorously disagree with such a statemen . 

In the last session, in answer to the obsemtions of 
:ommissioner Maambong, I stated that the 
;he national territory, as recommended by the Comm 
:ee, should be read and understood m the hgW of the 
nternational treaty limits set forth /^e Trea y of 
i*aris and other limits contemplated the 
1900 and 1930. These treaties have the force of la 
wen from the point of view of interna ion ^ 

[ think that is very important because these 
existed for a considerable length of tme 
period of time - that they are binding upon other 

0S 

So, I will answer the Gentleman’s question. I have no 
objection if Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao he sta ed m 
the definition of the national territory. The Gentleman 
:an present that as an amendment later on and I will 
submit that to the Commission for appropriate action. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR GUINGONA. Just a reaction, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, about the nonbinding effect of the provision. 

The treaty cited by the Gentleman precisely ®hows 
that our legal title is dependent on the trea , 

iway the treaties, the territories that wil e 
Dr included in the provision would be meaning es . 
it is precisely the treaties, not the provision 
Constitution, that give us the title to these tern on 




290 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the Gentleman for his ob- 
servations. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I now ask that Commissioner Ople be 
recognized to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Mr. 
Floor Leader, may I ask a question? 

Mr. Floor Leader, I note that the Gentleman has been 
agreeing to a time limit for each speaker, is that 
correct? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, that is correct, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
Chair would be very happy to act as the timekeeper, if 
the body wishes, to gently remind the speaker when his 
time is up. I may override the microphones below if 
need be. 

So, is the Floor Leader in agreement that I shall 
gently remind him when the 10 minutes is up? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am sure it is a coincidence that this warning from 
the Chair was delivered at the precise time when I was 
going to claim my time. And I absolve the Chair from 
any suspicion that this was a deliberate choice of time. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Thank 
you. I assure the Commissioner that it is purely co- 
incidental. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I have just a few questions requiring an answer of yes 
or no. 

Will the distinguished sponsor yield to some ques- 
tions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. With pleasure. 

MR. OPLE. I gather that the Committee has chosen 
to retain the language of the territorial provision of the 
1973 Constitution except for an amendment by addi- 
tion. 

Referring now to the clause “historic right and legal 
title,” may I know if this the Committee refers specific- 
ally to Sabah? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Because of the word “specifically” 
in the Commissioner’s question, the answer is no. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

The second question is: Is there anything in this pro- 
vision that is incompatible with the decision announced 
by the Philippine government in 1977 on the occasion 
of the Summit Meeting of the heads of government of 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Kuala 
Lumpur renouncing the Sabah claim? 

MR. NOLLEDO. None. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

The third question is: Although the issue of whether 
this is a municipal law or something more than a 
municipal law binding on the international community, 
there is no question in my mind that the definition of 
our national territory is not lightly or frivolously done. 
A territorial provision will have to be backed up by the 
nation that adopts this Constitution now and at certain 
times in the future. The possibility of backing up the 
claim with armed force, which is a kind of sacred com^ 
mitment of the nation to the defense of its own territo- 
ry and the pursuit of what it believes to be a just claim, 
can mean committing the lives of Filipinos, whether of 
this generation or of coming generations to an enter- 
prise which is being sanctioned right now by implica- 
tion and by principle in this territorial provision of the 
1986 Constitution. Does the sponsor subscribe to that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I fully subscribe. 

MR. OPLE. According to the intent of the Commit- 
tee, may I therefore know whether or not there are any 
aggressive intentions against other countries that are 
built into this territorial provision? May I also remind 
the sponsor about the scandal of the Jabidah massacre. 
Thank God, that was aborted. It could have brought this 
country into a state of war with another country on 
claims that were revealed to be less solid, less substan- 
tial, and less sacred than they were originally purported 
to be after the most intensive and careful deliberation 
by competent authorities in our government. If that 
were not aborted, that would have been an utterly 
irresponsible act of adventurism that would have 
menaced the lives of many Filipinos for a cause, the 
clarity and the sanctity of which had never been fully 
estabished. 

That is the reason I put that question. I am sure the 
sponsor will deny and disclaim any implication that we 
have any aggressive intentions towards any neighbor of 
the Philippines under this clause “historic right and legal 
title.” Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, but I think our country is com- 
mitted to the peaceful settlement of disputes as con- 
templated by the UN Charter. 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


291 


MR. OPLE. Yes. We are a signatory to any number 
of international covenants which proscribe the use of 
force. But we also know that the history of the world 
very greatly departs from the assurances of such cove- 
nants. A lot depends on the accident of leadership in a 
given country. 

We can have a person with a Napoleonic complex in 
Malacanang — I am saying that this can happen in the 
future, not necessarily now — who can plunge us into 
war on the basis of innocent statements on the pro- 
vision on national territory which, of course, the 
sponsor now disclaims and I am glad that he does so. 

The next question: Is there anything in this provision 
that reviews, rescinds, revokes or amends the action of 
the Philippine government in the Kuala Lumpur Summit 
of 1977? 


MR. NOLLEDO. None. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

That ends my interpellations with respect to the 
Sabah question but I have one last question for the 
sponsor, if he does not mind. 

When the proper time comes, will the Committee 
consider an amendment enumerating not only the three 
regions recommended by Commissioner Guingona u 
all the major political subdivisions, provinces and cities, 
making up the territory of the Republic of the Phi ip- 
pines, so that if one is from Puerto Princesa, Palawan 
and the proposed Constitution is presented to iim or 
ratification, then he cannot help but identify himse 
with this Constitution because the name ofhisprovmce 
is already enumerated there. The farther ^ person is 
from the seat of government — let us say Tawi- awi, 
Basilan, Sulu and the Batanes Islands - the more closely 
he will identify with this Constitution because the name 
of his province is enumerated here. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Without binding the Committee,^ 
think the Committee will welcome the Commissioner s 
unique suggestion, and the people of Palawan wi 
thrilled to see Palawan included in the enumera 
provinces. 


MR. OPLE. Palawan which includes the Kalayaan 
Islands, of course. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask that 
Commissioner Abubakar be recognized to interpellate. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Abubakar is recognized. 


The Chair commends the distinguished Commissioner 
Ople for keeping well within his time. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer, I nave 
listened to Commissioner Ople’s peroration on the issue 
before us. 

I was the Ambassador to Malaysia when the claim of 
the Philippines over Sabah was presented and the reply 
of the Malaysian government to this claim was transmit- 
ted. It almost erupted into a break of diplomatic rela- 
tions between the Philippines and Malaysia. In my 
inspection trip to Sabah, I found out that a big group of 
Sitangkai people had acquired all the rights pertaining to 
permanent residence, had established their professions 
and livelihood there with the encouragement of the 
Sabah government. 

The Sultan of Sulu with a signed treaty leased this 
property to the North Borneo Company which, in turn, 
acquired and, upon independence of the Philippines in 
1946, transmitted its right to the British government. 
The British government, in turn, acquired jurisdiction 
over what is called British North Borneo Company. 

The referendum to determine whether or not the 
people of Sabah wanted to be independent of Malaysia 
was supervised by the United Nations. There, the people 
of Sabah spoke with affirmative determination that they 
would prefer to become part of Malaysia. 

The late General Romulo, others and I in the foreign 
office thoroughly reviewed our claim that was pre- 
dicated on the right of the Sultan of Sulu over Sabah. 
At that time, the Sultan of Sulu considered Sabah as 
part of his territory because it was awarded to him by 
the Sultan of Brunei who was restored back to power 
with his assistance. Sabah was, in turn, leased to the 
North Borneo Company which, in the usual British 
maneuver, injected into the mind of the Sultan of Sulu 
that he could not defend Sabah in case of an expedition 
of Spain against Sulu and that Spain can easily acquire 
Sabah and wrest it from his control. That is the main 
consideration why the Sultan leased the property. 
Rather than lose it, he retained his sovereignty and got 
a monthly or annual payment for the lease of this 
property. 

Casting the historical background which Mr. Guingo- 
na very well presented to this Commission is the ques- 
tion now of whether or not the Sultan of Sulu still 
retains sovereignty over Sabah. The unfortunate thing is 
that when the Americans came and the sovereignty of 
Spain over the Philippines was passed on to them, the 
Americans stripped the Sultan of Sulu of any right of 
sovereignty, powers and prerogatives. Under the Bates 
Treaty the Sultan became a mere citizen of the Philip- 
pines, but with certain remuneration. 

This is part of our history. Due to the position ^at 
the Sultan of Sulu was still respected and recognized as 
the Sultan of North Borneo and by virtue of his right 
over this territory, he wanted that it be claimed as part 
of our country. The Treaty of Paris, the subsequent 


292 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


treaties and even our Constitution adopted by the Com- 
monwealth government never included Sabah in the 
definition of our territory. It was not part of the aerial 
delineation of the Philippines. It was only when Mr. 
Lopez, through his influence over former President 
Macapagal, aspired to make a name in history that the 
claim over Sabah was filed; they filed the claim. But it 
was never entertained by the other party. At that time, 
Malaysia or even North Borneo never recognized that we 
had sovereignty over the territory. The original treaty 
on which it is based, copies of which are in the books 
and other publications concerning Sabah, was with the 
Sultan of Sulu but he lost it in Singapore. The other 
copy is now with the British government but despite 
many requests from our government, the British govern- 
ment never showed us its copy. 

In the old days, every time we signed a treaty, it is 
one parchment. When we open it, both sides contained 
the same provision, and when we put them together, 
both copies fit well. This shows the authenticity of the 
original document. 

All this aside, we were never able to persuade the 
powers and even other countries belonging to the 
ASEAN that our claim to Sabah still subsists because 
they feel that, if there is anyone to decide the fate of 
Sabah — considering the concept of democracy and 
freedom — it is not the Sultan of Sulu or the Philippines 
but the people of the territory itself. 

I was the Philippine Ambassador to Malaysia at that 
time. Our committee then reviewed the whole develop- 
ment and researched about our Sabah claim in various 
libraries including those in England and in the United 
States. 

Later, as we gathered more evidence, treaties, and 
documents, we found out that our claim, was not only 
weak but it did not have the support of the people of 
Sabah, which is a criterion in any democracy. The voice 
of the people is the voice of God. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
Commissioner has one minute left. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Still, we pursued this and later on, 
we stopped. We are now convinced that the pursuit of 
our claim over Sabah would produce no result. If we are 
brdve enough, the only alternative is to conquer Sabah. 
Are we ready for it? The people of Sulu and Mindanao 
will have no part in such an adventure, and, therefore, I 
feel that as far as the Sabah claim is concerned, we 
should not incorporate this into the Constitution, be- 
cause we are not ready to invade. This is an act of war. 
Malaysia will resist it; Sabah will resist it. We might as 
well reconcile our interests for the sake of unity, region- 
al trade and understanding among the ASEAN nations. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Thank 
you. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to make a statement about the phrase “sovereignty of 
the Sultan of Sulu.” I think the Sultan of Sulu had 
proprietary rights over North Borneo or Sabah as 
claimed by him, including the heirs, but not sovereignty. 
Perhaps when we talk of sovereignty there, we do not 
talk in its technical sense. We may be referring to sover- 
eignty in its ordinary acceptation with respect to the 
jurisdiction of the Sultan of Sulu. Sovereignty, as far as 
the national government is concerned, is indivisible. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Suarez be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Will my good friend from Palawan answer a few clari- 
ficatory questions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. With pleasure. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I consider myself twice blessed because twice in 
my lifetime I have had the honor of listening to the 
sponsor’s brilliant presentation of what constitutes the 
national territory of our country. 

I thank the Commissioner for it. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you for the word “brilliant, 
but I think I do not deserve the praise. (Laughter) 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is very modest. 

At any rate, quite a number of us got a little confused 
about what really constitutes our national territory. So, 
with the sponsor’s permission, may I go over with him 
the various laws, treaties, et cetera, which would ulti- 
mately assist us in determining the national territory 
constituting our Republic. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner may do so. 

MR. SUAREZ. As I understand it, the sponsor wants 
to include in the definition of national territory those 
territories ceded to the United States by virtue of the 
Treaty of Paris concluded between the United States 
and Spain on December 10, 1898. Is my understanding 
correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. If the Commissioner does not 
mind, I have to mention a very important matter: That 
the boundaries referred to in the Treaty of Paris were 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


293 


taken from a map prepared by a Spaniard named Pedro 
Murillo Velarde in 1734. At that time, this map was 
widely used and recognized in admiralty court proceed- 
ings of European countries as the official map of the 
Philippine archipelago. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The limits of which were set forth in Article III of the 
Treaty of Paris. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree. 

MR. SUAREZ. The next treaty was concluded in 
Washington, D.C. between the United States and Spain 
on November 7, 1900. This treaty expressly included 
the Islands of Cagayan, Sulu and Sibuto. 

MR. NOLLEDO. These were omitted in the Treaty of 
Paris. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, these were omitted in Article III 
of the Treaty of Paris of 1898. The next incident had 
something to do with the Commissioner’s statement a 
while ago that he insisted that the islands embraced in 
the Treaty concluded in January 2, 1930 between the 
United States and Great Britain — which includes the 
Turtle and the Mangsee Islands situated between Borneo 
^nd Sulu — be included because these islands were 
recognized by Great Britain as part of the Philippine 
Archipelago. Is my understanding correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Then, we move on to the Island of 
Batanes which was provided under the 1935 Constitu- 
tion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Under a general statement. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. Then we come to certain state- 
ments appearing in the 1973 Constitution which are 
now controversial because of the utilization of t e 
phrase “historic right or legal title.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is also correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Previously, the term “national terri- 
tory” was defined by some legislations. An example is 
R.A. 3046 which was enacted on June 17, 1961 whic 
defined the territorial sea. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. However, on September 8, 1968, 
R.A. 5446 was enacted and this is rather important in- 
sofar as Section 2 thereof is concerned. Section 2 con- 
tains the definition of the base lines and I quote. 

The definition of the baselines of the territorial sea of 

the Philippine Archipelago a.*; provided in this Act is with- 


out prejudice to the delineation of the baselines of the 
territorial sea around the territory of Sabah situated in 
North Borneo over which the Republic of the Philippines 
has acquired dominion and sovereignty. 

During the martial law regime, on June 11, 1978, 
P.D. No. 1596 was promulgated which defined the 
territories belonging to the Philippines by historic right 
or legal title. Is the Commissioner also aware of that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am aware of that presidential 
decree but not necessarily all its contents. 

MR. SUAREZ. The final decree that was issued was 
P.D. No. 1599 which was enacted on June 1 1, 1978 and 
it was captioned: Two-hundred Mile Exclusive Econo- 
mic Zone. Is the sponsor also aware of that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am fully aware of that decree. 

MR. SUAREZ. So my main question is: Are all of 
these interpretative decrees I have enumerated included 
in formulating the definition of what constitutes the 
national territory of the Republic of the Philippines? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner is right. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner if that as- 
surance is perfect. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In connection with that, if the Com- 
mission will give me a little time since that is very im- 
portant, I would like to read one of the understandings 
of former Senator Tolentino when he signed the Law of 
the Sea of 1982. He said: 

The convention shall not be construed as amending in 
any manner any pertinent laws and Presidential Decrees or 
Proclamations of the Republic of the Philippines; the gov- 
ernment of the Republic of the Philippines maintains and 
preserves its right and authority to make any amendments 
to such laws, decrees or proclamations pursuant to the 
provisions of the Philippine Constitution. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Just a final question. The sponsor 
cited former Senator Tolentino as an authority and he 
has a definition of what constitutes the exclusive eco- 
nomic zone which means beyond and adjacent to the 
territorial sea but may not extend more than 200 
nautical miles from the archipelagic base lines. 1 sup- 
pose the Commissioner acknowledges the validity of 
that definition? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR SUAREZ. Is the Commissioner also aware of Jh® 
former Senator’s definition of the “continental shelf ot 
an archipelagic state as the seabed and subsoil ot t le 
submarine areas that extend beyond the territorial sea 
throughout the natural prolongation of the land territo- 


294 


TUESDAY, JULY 1 , 1 986 


ry to the outer edge of the continental margin or to a 
distance of 200 nautical miles from the base lines if the 
edge of the continental margin does not extend to that 
distance? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I am aware. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Com- 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Just to bring rhyme or reason to 
all these arguments, I would like to ask some funda- 
mental questions. 

In the hierarchy of grounds for claiming sovereignty, 
which has priority; historic right, legal title, or right of 
national self-determination? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very good question. I will 
give my opinion without binding the Committee. I think 
the first should be legal right. But in our case this is 
closely associated with the historic title. I remember 
when then President Macapagal claimed Sabah, he said 
that he wanted to know the sentiments of the people of 
Sabah. He also mentioned that we had valid title over 
Sabah and that the government of the Republic of the 
Philippines under his stewardship would be willing to 
submit the question to a plebiscite among the people of 
Sabah after the title thereto is resolved. And should the 
people of Sabah freely determine that they do not like 
to join Malaysia or any other country including the 
Philippines, then the Philippine government will apply 
the principle of self-determination guaranteed by the 
United NationsCharter. And so, I think in this particular 
case, legal title will prevail over self-determination. Once 
legal title is fixed, then self-determination may come in. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Is the Commissioner saying that 
legal title has precedence over people’s rights? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That legal title has precedence? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to be clear on the 
Commissioner’s stand. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Is the Commissioner saying that 
legal title is superior to people’s rights? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In my own opinion, because there 
are contending states in a dispute, one has to determine 
the condition precedent of which state has a right over 
the other state even when there may be two or more 
states involved in a dispute. The question of legal title 


would seem to appear as the condition precedent; and 
once that is fixed, I think it is the duty of the winning 
state or winning party to also apply the principle of 
self-determination. They cannot dictate to a newly 
acquired territory if the people do not like to join that 
state. That precisely was resorted to with respect to 
Sabah by the United Nations in a referendum which the 
Honorable Napoleon Rama referred to as a rigged 
referendum. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see, thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Azeuna be recognized as the last interpellator. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Azeuna is recognized. 

MR. AZeUNA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I was fortunate to have interacted with a group 
of fishermen in Bicol two Saturdays ago, and I was 
impressed by the deep concern they have over their 
fishing rights in the Bay of Albay. More interesting 
to them than forms of government and structures of the 
legislature was the protection of their rights to fish in 
the coastal waters around Albay. It is in this light, there- 
fore, that I would like to ask clarification on the fishing 
rights of Filipino citizens over these waters that are 
included in the definition of our territory. 

With respect to internal waters; that is, all waters 
landward from the archipelagic base lines, does the 
sponsor agree with me that Filipino citizens have ex- 
clusive fishing rights over these internal waters? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I should agree with the Commis- 
sioner. 

MR. AZeUNA. How about with respect to the ex- 
clusive economic zone which extends 200 miles from 
the base lines seaward? What is the right of our fisher- 
men in these waters? Do they have rights, and if so, are 
they exclusive? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am not aware of existing presiden- 
tial decrees, specifically the fishery laws, which were 
abundantly amended by decrees, but I would say that 
Filipino citizens should have the exclusive right. 

MR. AZeUNA. I notice that the Committee will 
retain the wordings of Article I on the Philippine terri- 
tory as described in the 1973 Constitution, but would 
add only a single sentence. Is that correct? And the 
sentence that the Committee would add states: SOVER- 
EIGNTY OR JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 
SHALL ALSO EXTEND TO STRAITS CONNECTING 
THESE WATERS WITH THE ECONOMIC ZONE PRO- 
VIDED FOR IN THE CONVENTION ON THE LAW 
OF THE SEA. 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


295 


The first question with respect to that is: Why not 
state the ’'ight name for that zone, exclusive economic 
zone, to stress that it is a zone over which the coastal 
state has exclusive rights with respect to fisheries and 
other economic exploitation? Would the Committee 
be agreeable to an amendment later on to that effect? 


MR. AZCUNA. In the last sentence, the sponsor 
mentioned straits that he would like to add to our 
territory that would connect our archipelagic waters 
or our territorial waters with the economic zone. And 
all that the sponsor is saying really is that Philippine 
sovereignty or jurisdiction extends over these straits. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I think we will be agreeable. 

MR. AZCUNA. The other point is: The sponsor will 
agree with me that territory is not necessarily coexten- 
sive with jurisdiction, but there is an instance where a 
state has jurisdiction beyond its territory. 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very good observation 
because that is based on the Davide resolution and it 
says “shall also extend to straits connecting these waters 
with the economic zone.” So the straits do not necessa- 
rily mean the economic zone itself, based on the Gentle- 
man’s observation. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. When the Committee added the 
phrase “SOVEREIGNTY OR JURISDICTION OF THE 
PHILIPPINES SHALL ALSO EXTEND TO STRAITS 
CONNECTING THESE WATERS WITH THE ECO- 
NOMIC ZONE . . . ,” what was its stand? Are these 
straits part of the Philippine territory or are they part 
of the high seas over which, however, we can have some 
jurisdiction? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I specifically answer the 
question, the exclusive economic zone, which is beyond 
and adjacent to the territorial sea, may not extend to 
more than 200 nautical miles from the archipelagic 
baselines. The archipelagic state has sovereign rights in 
the exclusive economic zone to explore, manage and 
exploit all the natural resources, living and nonliving, in 
the waters, the seabed and subsoil. Because of the use of 
the words “which is beyond and adjacent to the terri- 
torial sea,” they are seemingly beyond the regular 
jurisdiction or internal waters of the state concerned. 

MR. AZCUNA. I take it that the territorial sea ends 
at 20 or 24 nautical miles from the base lines seawards. 
That is the outer limit of our territorial sea. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would the Commissioner not say 
12 nautical miles? 

MR. AZCUNA. I think under the Convention on the 
Law of the Sea, it has been extended to 24 miles. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We assume that. 

MR. AZCUNA. At apy rate, at the outer limit of our 
territorial sea starts the exclusive economic zone. Is that 
correct, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Commissioner kindly repeat 
the question? 

MR. AZCUNA. Immediately beyond the outer limit 
of the territorial sea will start the exclusive economic 
zone. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. AZCUNA. Yes, but they have to be either in the 
territorial waters or in the economic zone, because there 
is no in-between space. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. AZCUNA. I noticed that one of the reservations 
of Assemblyman Tolentino is that the concept of archi- 
pelagic waters is similar to the concept of internal 
waters under the Constitution of the Philippines and 
removes straits connecting these waters with the eco- 
nomic zone or high seas from the rights of foreign 
vessels to innocent passage for international navigation. 
In other words, as far as we are concerned, these straits 
are part of our territory, part of our internal waters, 
and not subject to the right of innocent passage. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the Gentleman is right. 


MR. AZCUNA. And my last question, Mr. Presiding 
Officer . . . 


MR NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think the 
Commission would like to know that Commissioner 
Azcuna is a recognized authority of public international 
law a professor on the subject at the Ateneo de Manila. 


MR. AZCUNA. I am a humble student of that sub- 
let, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

One final question is: Instead of just referring to the 
eonomic zone by way of identifying the straits, woul 
le Committee consider adding a provision to the ettect 
lat the Philippines as an archipelagic state has sovereign 
ghts and jurisdiction over an exclusive economic zone 
onn miipc from the base line? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I will strongly recommend to the 
Committee. 


MR. AZCUNA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that the very 
last interpellator, Commissioner Rodrigo, be recognize . 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


296 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. I will be very brief. I just want a 
little clarification because I am a bit confused on what 
is the real stand of the sponsor and the Committee in 
pursuing the claim on Sabah. In the beginning, I got the 
impression that the purpose of the Committee in retain- 
ing the phrase “by historic right or legal title” is not to 
foreclose the right of the Philippine government to 
pursue its claim on Sabah. On the other hand, I heard 
the answer of the sponsor to a question by Commis- 
sioner Ople. On the repetition of the phrase “by historic 
right or legal title,” does this mean that we are turning 
our back on the commitment made by President Marcos 
in 1977 at Kuala Lumpur, abandoning our claim to 
Sabah? And the sponsor said “no.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to remind the Gentle- 
man that the words that he reproduced were not the 
words of Commissioner Ople. He said, “Is there any in- 
consistency between the declaration of former President 
Marcos relinquishing the Philippine claim over Sabah 
and the definition of the national territory as we recom- 
mended? ” I said that there is no inconsistency, because 
there is the question of whether the former President 
had the power to relinquish. This is a question that was 
never decided upon. So, it seems to me that that ques- 
tion can be debated separately from the provision on 
the national territory that we are recommending. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think we should make things very, 
very clear. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We are not abandoning the Sabah 
issue as far as I am concerned. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I proceed, step by step? 

President Marcos, I think, said that as President of 
the Philippines, he abandoned the claim to Sabah in 
1977 at Kuala Lumpur. Did he do that? Now, does 
the Commissioner recognize the validity of that move 
by President Marcos? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee did not discuss that 
question. 

MR. RODRIGO. But does it recognize or does it not 
recognize? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I cannot speak for the Committee, 
but as far as I am concerned, I do not recognize it. 

MR. RODRIGO. The sponsor does not recognize it. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a personal statement with- 
out binding the Committee. We did not discuss that 
question. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is why I wanted to clarify that 
because I was really confused when the sponsor said 
that- there is no inconsistency between what President 


Marcos did in 1977 when he abandoned the claim, and 
reiterating the phrase “historic right and legal title,” 
which means we want to pursue the claim. So, let us 
now be very, very specific. Is it then the intention of the 
sponsor or the Committee to keep the way open to the 
Philippine government to pursue the claim, notwith- 
standing the action of President Marcos in 1977 of 
abandoning the claim? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner will remember 
that I answered a similar question propounded by Com- 
missioner Hilario Davide, when he asked if under the 
words “historic right or legal title” we can still pursue 
our claim over Sabah. And my answer was in the 
affirmative. 

MR. RODRIGO. But, is it not inconsistent with the 
act of President Marcos in 1977 when, as President of 
the Philippines, he abandoned the claim? Is there no 
inconsistency? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As far as I am concerned, that can 
be a debatable issue because the President conducts 
foreign relations. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. That is what confuses me. So, 
can he answer yes or no? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman must know that 
that is a legal question. We are both lawyers. That can 
always be subject to debate in the future. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I gave the Commissioner my 
opinion that Marcos had no sole authority. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much, but I am still 
confused. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there are two 
names that are registered here to speak during the de- 
bate and Commissioner Bernas is to speak en contra. 
Since nobody else is going to speak in favor — they have 
already expressed their favorable views during the inter- 
pellation — may I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized to speak en contra? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, before I say 
what I have to say, may I be allowed to ask a number of 
questions, because if they are answered clearly, it may 
not be necessary for me to say anything. The questions 
are along the same line as those of Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 

It is very clear that the provision now reproduces 
word for word the provision of the 1973 Constitution 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


297 


using the phrase “by historic right or legal title” and so 
forth. In the sponsorship speech of Delegate Custodio 
Villalba, when he was sponsoring this in 1972, he said 
that it was put in there precisely to include the claim to 
Sabah. Is tliat correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. And when Delegate Quintero spoke on 
this matter as chairman of the Committee on National 
Territory, he also said that this provision was precisely 
added to include the claim, among other things, on 
Sabah. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. And Committee Report No. 1 of the 
Constitutional Convention of 1971 also said that this 
provision was intended to cover, among other parts of 
the world, Sabah. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. So that it is the intention of the Com- 
mittee, by reproducing this Article, to include Sabah? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That we can pursue our claim over 
Sabah under these words. 

SPEECH EN CONTRA OF COMMISSIONER BERNAS 

FR. BERNAS. I was about to say that in yesterday s 
comic strip “Beetle Bailey”, the soldiers were complain- 
ing that cannons now are not the same as cannons be- 
fore. And they explained that whereas cannons before 
said “boom,” cannons now just say “boomlet.” And 
yesterday, I was quoted by Commissioners Sarmiento 
and Maambong to a certain extent that I think they 
already stole my “boomlet.” But since Father Bernas 
was quoted yesterday, I thought it might be fair if he be 
allowed himself to speak for, even if he may not say it 
as eloquently as the others who quoted him. 

First of all, let me clarify that I am not going to 
speak against the Article in toto. I just want to remove 
from the Article any portion which, while not serving 
the interest of the nation, can do harm to the nation. 
But in order for me to be able to explain fully what I 
have to say, it seems necessary to say that there are 
certain valid reasons for saying that there should be no 
Article on the National Territory in a constitution a 
general principle. I would say, however, that since we 
have done it before, if we can do it in a harmless way, 
by all means, we will do it. But let us not do it in a way 
that will do any harm to our nation. 

I say that it is really not for a constitution to have an 
Article on National Territory because, as has been often 
said in this body, a constitution is a municipal law. As a 
municipal law, it is only binding on the country which 
promulgates it. So, we can assert our claim over any 


territory until we are blue in the face. But if our claim 
is not supported by any other document extraneous to 
the Constitution, then our claim is useless. 


As a matter of fact, in the debates of the Constitu- 
tional Convention in 1971, when the Constitutional 
Convention started to fumigate the 1935 Article of all 
colonial traces, they eliminated any mention of the 
Treaty of Paris; they eliminated any mention of the 
Treaty of Washington, of Great Britain and so forth, and 
they were asked: Why eliminate those? The answer was 
because we do not want to be reminded of our colonial 
past. But then, they put in “archipelago” in the Article. 
Where is the archipelago? The archipelago is the terri- 
tory delineated by the Treaty of Paris as modified by 
the Treaty of Washington and of Great Britain, etc. 

In other words, we did a paint job. We wanted to 
have our cake and eat it too. We did not want to admit; 
we did not want to hear the words “Treaty of Pans,” 
but we have to rely on the Treaty of Pans m itself. 


In other words, if the Constitution has any force at 
11 in binding other nations, it is not because it is a 
onstitution but because it is supported by other inter- 
lational documents or principles which can support it. 

As already said here, this was put here for a very valid 
istnrical reason There was at that time a Bacon Bill in 
he Congress of the United States which intended to dis- 
ipmber the territory of the Philippmes, and since the 
Vdines-McDuffie Law said that, if the Constitution o 
Ke Philippmes had^.0 be 

fonalTonventioII said that we should bind the hands of 
he United States by making them agree to this. And so, 
he United States government agreed. As far as the 
iTilioDines and the United States government were 
^^t^prnpd the 1935 Constitution was not just an ordi- 
° ^^ntiimtion but it was an international agreement 
:S;e?nThenof .hem, and ,ha. .s why i. is there. 

When we started formulating the Constitution in 
oT we were no longer dependent on the United 
972, w reasons which were not 

dates; but just the sain , . -tide on the National 

otally convincing, we P" »e Ar.ickj_^^ 

uoS that we did no. include anything which couid 
larm ourselves. 

Sn^criL^tlo^nd from 
r‘‘.t‘coZ;urt!Cni^w;;e.^ 

issert our claim to Sabah, very ^ Lumpur. So, 

tVrm's “f ril^t^^^S - Sees no. 

lelo us in anyway. 

^ A that President Macapagal was 

Yesterday, it was said ^at 

imbarrassed when he was asked. , . , » He should 
ution does it say that you have a claim. 


298 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


not have beeen embarrassed. The one who asked him 
the question should have been embarrassed because he 
was legally wrong. The Constitution is not the right 
place to look for territorial claim. 

Aside from this, it seems to me there is also a ques- 
tion on due process. Now, we are, in effect, being asked 
to have a valid claim over Sabah. Equivalently, we are 
asked to make a judgment on the Philippine claim over 
Sabah, a judgment which I suppose should be done with 
due process — a process which hears and examines 
evidence before it decides. We are being asked to make 
a decision on a legal claim for which evidence has not 
been sufficiently presented to us. We are in no position 
to make the judgment. We are in no position to make 
the judgment because we do not know what the evi- 
dence is. There may be evidence but we have not seen 
it; it has not been shown to us, and we have not heard 
the other side. For that reason, if we must put an Ar- 
ticle on National Territory, let us excise from it 
anything which may look unfair or ridiculous, and 
which will not help us in any way. 

There is another point. We have included in the 
national territory the Archipelagic Principle. When this 
was included in the 1973 Constitution, it made no 
waves because nobody complained about it. But this 
business of “historic right or legal title” has harmed our 
relationship with our neighbor Malaysia. While it has 
created harm, it does not help us at all legally. So, why 
put it there? It will not weaken our claim, in any way, 
over any territory in the Philippines if we scrap the 
entire Article on National Territory. It will not weaken 
whatever claim we may have over Sabah, if we take 
this out because whatever claim we have will have to 
be supported, not by our assertions, but by evidence 
extraneous to the Constitution. 

Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to inter- 
pellations? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. When this provision was discussed in 
the 1971 Constitutional Convention Committee on 
National Territory, Delegate Quintero said that the 
words “historic right or legal title” did not cover Sabah 
alone, but they had reference also to the Treaty of Paris, 
the Treaty of Washington and the treaty between the 
United States and Great Britain. That is why, we have to 
read the provision this way carefully: “The national 
territory comprises the Philippine Archipelago, with all 
the islands and waters embraced therein,” and one has 
to connect these words with the following words: “and 
ail the other territories belonging to the Philippines by 
historic right or legal title, . . .” In other words, the 
expression “historic right or legal title” may also refer 
to “archipelago” in order to give emphasis to the im- 
portance of such a vital document as the Treaty of Paris 
and other related treaties. 


FR. BERNAS. I am not saying that this phrase covers 
Sabah alone. As a matter of fact, if we study the debates 
in the 1971 Constitutional Convention, the phrase was 
used precisely as a coverall to any claim we may have 
over other territories — Spratley Island, Marianas, 
Sabah, and so forth. I am not saying that it refers to 
Sabah alone. All I am saying is that it refers to Sabah, 
among other places. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Do I understand it right that Com- 
missioner Bernas would like to delete the words “his- 
toric right or legal title” from the definition of our 
national territory? 

FR. BERNAS. I would like to propose something but 
I do not have it ready now. The problem is, historically, 
this phrase was given meaning by the 1971 Constitu- 
tional Convention. I want to use something where it is 
clear that we are not making any unfounded claim, but 
at the same time does not include the possibility for the 
Philippine government to make the claim later on. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would Commissioner Bernas not be 
satisfied with my answer — deplored by Senator Rodri- 
go — to the question of Commissioner Ople on whether 
by retaining these words “historic right or legal title, 
we specifically referred to Sabah? My answer was “no” 
and would that answer suffice? 

FR. BERNAS. It would not suffice because it leaves 
the whole thing hanging. As I said, because of the de- 
bates of the 1971 Constitutional Convention, the phrase 
has acquired a specific meaning. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is one last 
speaker en contra. Commissioner Alonto. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. With the permission of the Floor 
Leader, I seek to ask some questions of Commissioner 
Bernas. 

If we will be silent on a definition of national territo- 
ry, would it foreclose our people’s claim or the govern- 
ment’s claim over Sabah? 

FR. BERNAS. No, it would not. 

MR. DAVIDE. If it will not, therefore, there is no 
harm in also stating categorically a definition of national 
territory, including the phrase “historic right or legal 
title.” 

FR. BERNAS. As I said, I am not saying that it 
should totally exclude the declaration of a national 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


299 


territory. All I am saying is that we should not include 
there any phrase which could already be interpreted as a 
claim over Sabah. While it would neither have a legal 
binding effect on anybody nor help in establishing our 
claim, it could harm our diplomatic relations. 

MR. DAVIDE. The interpretation of the Commis- 
sioner was to the effect that, if we will be silent on a 
definition of national territory, our claim over Sabah 
will not be foreclosed. 

We will be sending, anyway, a message to Sabah or to 
Malaysia that we can still claim Sabah. 

FR. BERNAS. We have no control over that because 
it is established that anybody can claim any other terri- 
tory over which it has evidence for a claim. What I am 
trying to avoid is any explicit suggestion that this is 
particularly directed to that. 

Mr. DAVIDE. But, whether explicit or implicit or 
just being silent, the fact of the matter remains that we 
can still claim Sabah. 

FR. BERNAS. We can, but we are not doing it. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer, does the 
Gentleman not think it would be appropriate to drop 
the phrase “by historic right or title”? 

FR. BERNAS. I do not think we should drop it 
without putting in something else. Let me explain why; 
This phrase was put in the 1973 Constitution as a sub- 
stitute for the phrase “all territory over which the 
present Government of the Philippine Islands exercises 
jurisdiction,” the final phrase in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion and that had a very specific reason for being 
there. 

If the Gentleman looks at the latitudinal and longi- 
tudinal lines specified in the Treaty of Paris, together 
with the corrections made by the Treaty of Washington 
and the Treaty of Great Britain, Batanes is out. That 
particular phrase was precisely put in there to include 
Batanes to Batan Islands, so if he drops “by historic 
right or legal title” without putting anything else, then 
he leaves out Batanes again. 

Mr. ABUBAKAR. Then why not make the definition 
clear enough so as to preclude any doubt or misunder- 
standing even by Malayasia or Indonesia to which we 
belong as a group? We are all of the Malayan race and 
that can promote cohesion. What other suggestion could 
he insert in place of the phrase “by historic right or 
title”? 

FR- BERNAS. I was about to propose the restoration 
of the phrase in the 1935 Constitution; “all territory 
over which the present Government exercises jurisdic- 


tion.” The reason I did not propose it was because of 
the remarks of Commissioner Azcuna. I had to think it 
over a little more carefully because as Commissioner 
Azcuna said, he can have jurisdiction over areas which 
are not included in his territory. And that is the reason 
why I hesitate to put back the 1935 version. We will 
have to think about it a little more. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, but in this particular case, if 
he looks at the map of the Philippines, the sea between 
a series of islands from Siasi to Tawi-Tawi and Sipang- 
kot would not even be wide enough by a few kilometers 
or miles. As a matter of fact, when one is in Sitangkai 
on a clear day, he can even see the port of Borneo. 


FR. BERNAS. I think as far as the South is con- 
cerned the Gentleman really has no problem, but our 
problem is in the North, with respect to Batanes which 
seems not to have been included in any of the treaties — 
Treaty of Paris, Treaty of Washington and so forth - and 
that precisely is the reason why the phrase was inserted. 


MR ABUBAKAR. To avoid any misunderstanding on 
the part of our neighbors, as well as the other Malaysian 
groups - those include Indonesia and Malaysia - it 
would be best to remove any doubt on our intention to 

claim Sabah. 

'Thant vnii. Commissioner Bernas. 


MR RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is just one 
,ore speaker to speak ett contra, after which we shaU 
ose the debate and move over to the period of amend- 
,°ms tomorrow to give time for the Commissioners to 
raw up their amendments. 

I ask that Commissioner Alonto, the last speaker, be 




the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Alonto is recognized. 


:ech en contra of commissioner alonto 

[R alonto. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

registered my turn to speak against the proposal not 
luse I am against it fundamentally, but because, in 
whh what Commissioner Bernas has stated it is go- 
create some harm to this new nation. Unless we 
ready and prepared now to join the imperialist 
itries in the world, let us give more thought to what 
imissioner Bernas had suggested; let us not put m 
Constitution things that will bring us harm, and no 
k r CormlsLiter Ople stated « was provident 
he project which resulted in the Jabidah massacre 
aborfed! otherwise we would have been involved m 
mflict that might have resulted «°t °nly 'U the 
ruction of what we are now trying to ^^Ud as the 
)ino nation, but also in putting us in the light of 
rnational image - especially after the proclamation 


300 


TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1986 


of martial law — as a nation that has not sought to join 
the concert of free nations. 

That is my only purpose, and because most of what I 
am supposed to say here have already been stated by 
Commissioners Bernas and Abubakar, I would like to 
close with the hope that this Commission will use its 
good sense to eliminate from the Constitution, which we 
are going to frame, whatever phrase that will cause harm 
to this nation. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for the 
adjournment of session until tomorrow at five o’clock in 
the afternoon. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, before the 
motion is taken up, I was made to understand that I will 
rise on a parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. A few session days ago, I pre- 
sented a motion on the floor seeking a grant of franking 
privilege to the Members of this Commission. However, 
two of our distinguished colleagues opposed the motion 
and the body, in an amazing display of patriotism and 
in the spirit of self-denial and self-flagellation — to 
borrow the description of the charming lady over 
there - voted against the motion and it was lost. It was 
to my mind, Mr. Presiding Officer, a beautiful display of 
heroism and I am very proud to associate myself with 
the heroes of this Chamber. 

However, I now hasten to note the following news 
report from the newspaper The Tribune, a Manila pub- 
lication, Volume 1, No. 74 issue of Saturday, June 28, 
1986, the pertinent portion of which I quote: 

In Executive Order No. 23 released by Malacanang 
yesterday. President Aquino granted the public franking 
privileges on aU communications being sent to the Con-Com 
to give the masses a voice in the proceedings. 

Mrs. Aquino likewise entitled the Con-Com Members to 
franking privileges in the discharge of their duties. 

The public’s franking privilege on Con-Com communica- 
tions begins immediately and will be effective up to 
August 15, 1986. 

Similarly, in the Sun Star daily of Cebu City, June 28, 
1986, quoting PNA, the same news report was carried 
with this additional information which I likewise quote: 

In Executive Order No. 23, the President also granted 
the same privileges to officers and members of the Con- 


Com. She directed Postmaster General Joselito Banayo to 
issue the guideline in implementing the order. Mrs. Aqui- 
no said, ‘There is a need for an easy and inexpensive way by 
which communication from the public can reach the Con- 
Com as embodied in Commission Resolution No. 3 pro- 
posing for such franking privileges for both the public and 
the Con-Com Members.’ 

The parliamentary inquiry, therefore, is whether or 
not officers and Members of the Constitutional Com- 
mission now enjoy franking privileges on par with the 
rest of the Filipino community who desire to send us 
letters in relation to Executive Order No. 23 released 
by President Aquino. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. This humble Representation authored 
that resolution and, along with Commissioner Tan who 
is my cosponsor, I am very happy to hear that the 
privilege granted to us is more than what we had asked 
for in our original resolution. If it is indeed true, as 
already announced to us by Commissioner Maambong, 
this Representation would be the first one to rejoice. As 
the Bible says, “Exceeding abundantly above all we as 
or think.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). It seems 
that great minds work together and President _ 

seems to have heard the voice of Commissioner 
bong. But in any case, I will ask the Secretariat i 
please reply, if they have had any official notice ot wn 
Commissioner Maambong has just read to us. 

The Secretary-General has an announcement to make. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Mr. Presiding Officer, 
we distributed copies of Executive Order No. 23 to all 
of you. It is in our records and Commissioner Maam- 
bong is right when he said that the franking privilege has 
been extended to all the Members in their communica- 
tions to all the citizens of the Philippines. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Romulo). And so, 
before anyone else can say anything, I declare the 
session adjourned until tomorrow at five o’clock in the 
afternoon. 

It was 7:26 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


301 


R.C.C. NO, 22 
Wednesday, July 2, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:11 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 


NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Christian S. Monsod. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. MONSOD. Almighty Father, four weeks ago, 
You brought us together — Commissioners, staff and 
employees — to participate in the writing of the Consti- 
tution. It was an honor to be chosen. How many are 
asked to be a part of such a historic document? 

Since that time, we have come to realize the enormity 
of our task and our own limitations. But we have also 
come to recognize the talents and the goodness in one 
another. We have realized that, coming as we do from 
different backgrounds and places, with different in- 
terests and even biases, there is one thing we hold in 
common. We all love this country even if we express it 
in different ways. 

As we move ahead, we also know that we can only 
accomplish our work, if we continue to depend on one 
another and learn to trust one another even more than 
we do now. 

Merciful Father, be gentle with us when we fail. Give 
us the grace of an open mind, of compassion, of en- 
thusiasm and the will to prevail. Above all, hold us 
together - Commissioners, staff and employees - in the 
palm of Your hand always. 

This we ask of You through Jesus Christ, Your Son. 
our Lord, who lives and reigns with You, now and 
forever. Amen. 


• ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present 
Monsod Present 


Natividad ... 

. . Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Absent 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Trehas 

. . Absent 

Uka 

. . Present 

ViUacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Villegas 

. . Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 45 Members responded to the call. 

THE president. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


*Appeared after the roll call 


302 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 358, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT NO PARTY OR CAN- 
DIDATE SHALL HAVE MEMBERSHIP IN THE REGIS- 
TRATION BOARDS, BOARD OF ELECTION IN- 
SPECTORS, AND BOARD OF CANVASSERS BUT 
SHALL BE ENTITLED TO APPOINT WATCHERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 359, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION 4 (1) OF ARTICLE IV OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFICATION SO AS TO 
FURTHER STRENGTHEN THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE 
TO PRIVACY OF COMMUNICATION AND CORRE- 
SPONDENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 360, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION SIX OF ARTICLE IV OF THE 1973 
CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFICATIONS SO AS TO 
STRENGTHEN AND MAKE MANDATORY THE RIGHT 
THEREIN GRANTED TO THE PEOPLE TO INFORMA- 
TION ON MATTERS OF PUBLIC CONCERN. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 361, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A NEW PROVISION EMPOWERING LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS TO LEVY AND COLLECT TAXES 
UNIQUE, DISTINCT AND EXCLUSIVE TO THEM AND 
TO SPEND THE REVENUES RAISED THEREFROM IN 
ORDER TO MAKE LOCAL AUTONOMY REALLY 
MEANINGFUL AND EFFECTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 362, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A PROVISION IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION DECLARING THAT IT SHALL SUPER- 
SEDE ALL PREVIOUS CONSTITUTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Jamir. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 363, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE VESTING ADMINISTRATIVE 
SUPERVISION OF INFERIOR COURTS IN THE MINIS- 
TRY/DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona, Abubakar, Bennagei^ 
Rigos, Suarez, Tingson, Uka, Villacorta an 
Villegas. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 364, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSH- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE TERM OF THE MEM- 
BERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 365, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS ON THE NATIONAL POLICE 
COMMISSION, THE NATIONAL POLLUTION CONTROL 
COMMISSION, THE JUDICIAL COMMISSION, THE 
COMMISSION ON GOOD GOVERNMENT, AND THE 
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AS ADDITIONAL 
INDEPENDENT CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia and Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 366, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION THAT ALL KINDS OF IDLE OR ABANDONED 
LANDS NOT PUT TO APPROPRIATE USE AS DEFINED 
BY LAW WITHIN FIVE YEARS FROM RATIFICATION 
OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION SHALL BE FORFEITED 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


303 


IN FAVOR OF THE STATE TO BE DISTRIBUTED TO 
BENEFICIARIES OF LAND REFORM. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 367, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE DEATH PENALTY IMPOSED ON AN AC- 
CUSED MUST BE RESOLVED BY THE SUPREME 
COURT WITHIN TWO YEARS FROM DATE OF JUDG- 
MENT OTHERWISE THE SAME SHALL BE REDUCED 
TO LIFE IMPRISONMENT EXCEPT IF THE ACCUSED 
BY WRITTEN MANIFESTATION INSISTS ON THE 
RESOLUTION OF HIS PLEA OF INNOCENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Proposed Resolution No. 368, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT THE STATE SHALL 
ADOPT A TRADE POLICY THAT WILL GIVE PRIORI- 
TY TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE DOMESTIC 
OVER THE EXPORT SECTOR. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Jamir and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 369, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO GRANT SPECIAL COR- 
PORATIONS THE RIGHT TO ACQUIRE IN OWNERSHIP 
LANDS OF PUBLIC DOMAIN. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Proposed Resolution No. 370, entitled: 

RESOLUTION RECOGNIZING THE RIGHT OF A CITIZEN 
TO BOYCOTT AN ELECTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 371, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MODIFYING THE PROHIBITIONS IN 
SECTION 3, ARTICLE XII A OF THE 1973 CONSTITU- 
TION AGAINST MEMBERS OF CONSTITUTIONAL 
COMMISSIONS BY ALLOWING THEM TO TEACH OUT- 
SIDE OFFICE HOURS AND BY INCLUDING SUBSI- 
DIARIES OF CORPORATIONS AS AMONG THOSE IN 
WHOSE TRANSACTIONS THEY ARE DISQUALIFIED 
TO DEAL WITH OR FINANCIALLY INTERESTED IN. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 


Proposed Resolution No. 372, entitled; 

RESOLUTION STATING THE DECLARATION OF PRIN- 
CIPLES WHICH SHALL GUIDE THE GOVERNMENT 
OF THE PHILIPPINES IN ITS RELATIONS WITH IT- 
SELF, ITS CITIZENS AND OTHER NATIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon, Rigos, Davide, Jr., 
Trenas and Tingson. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 373, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR TAX EXEMPTION TO 
NONPROFIT EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OR 
THOSE WHICH WILL LIMIT DIVIDENDS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Villegas, Trefias and 
Bernas. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter of Mr. Pedro O. Valdez, former Constitutional 
Convention delegate, proposing a parliamentary form of 
government, welfare state provisions, profit-sharing, free 
vocational education and election of the President and 
Vice-President by electoral votes. 

(Communication No. 94 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


etter from Dr. Dulce R. Agcaoili of 20th Avemie, 
luezon City, proposing a provision for religious instruc 
on in schools, public and private. 

Communication No. 95 — Constitutional Commission 
f 1986) 

o the Committee on Human Resources. 

etter from Mr. Ramon Enerio of Pegasus Street, Moom 
alk Village Las Pifias, Metro Manila, submitting tw 

- a Crucial Curative Measure 

tid Toward a Just Society. 

Communication No. 96 - Constitutional Commission 
fl986) 

o the Committee on Social Justice. 

etter from International Civil Liberties 
y Mr. J. S. Beltran, suggesting, among others, pro 

isions on print and broadcast media. 

Communication No. 97 - Constitutional Commission 
fl986) 

o the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
olitical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

etter from Mr. Romeo P. Alejandro of 
oilo City, suggesting a mandatory provision to ensure 
xess to official records, documents and papers per- 
lining to official acts, transactions and decisions. 


304 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


(Communication No. 98 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Vicente P. Molar of Bayaoas, Urdaneta, 
Pangasinan, suggesting a change of name of the Com- 
mission on Audit to Philippine General Accounting 
Office. 

(Communication No. 99 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Fausto C. Marilao of Acacia St., Pinag- 
buhatan, Pasig, Metro Manila, proposing, among others, 
the establishment of well-equipped free technical/voca- 
tional schools. 

(Communication No. 100 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Cecilio R. Mangubat, Sr. of Digos, 
Davao del Sur, proposing, among others, provisions for 
the removal of elective or appointive government offi- 
cials who fail to declare their assets and liabilities and 
those found guilty of immorality; the disqualification 
of gamblers and immoral persons from running for 
public office,' and other electoral reforms. 

(Communication No. 101 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from the Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers, 
Inc., signed by Mr. Aber P. Canlas, proposing the re- 
tention of the Professional Regulation Commission and 
its elevation to a constitutional commission. 

(Communication No. 102 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I request that Commissioner 
Nolledo be given the floor for the continuation of the 
discussion on the National Territory. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. He is requested to come forward. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, we are now in the period of 
amendments, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to manifest that the 
Members who intend to present their amendments 
would like to meet together and possibly consolidate all 
our amendments in order to abbreviate the proceedings. 
Therefore, I move for a suspension of session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 5:28 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:24 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Azcuna be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 263 

(Article on National Territory) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Honorable sponsor, I would like to propose the 
following amendment to the committee report. Arti- 
cle I, Section I on National Territory should read 
as follows: “The national territory comprises the Philip- 
pine archipelago, with all the islands and waters em- 
braced therein, and all the other territories NOW OR 
HEREAFTER belonging to the Philippines by SOVER- 
EIGN right or legal title, CONSISTING OF the TER- 
RESTRIAL, FLUVIAL AND AERIAL DOMAINS, in- 
cluding the territorial sea, the seabed, the subsoil, the 
insular shelves and other submarine areas over which 
the Philippines has sovereignty or jurisdiction. The 
waters around, between and connecting the islands of 
the archipelago, irrespective of their breadth and 
dimensions, form part of the internal waters of the 
Philippines.” 

That is all. We would like to omit the last sentence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I state whether I acept the 
amendment or not, may we ask the Commissioner to 
please explain his amendment? 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


305 


The changes here include, first, the words “NOW OR 
HEREAFTER belonging” so as to cover possible future 
changes in our territory. There might be an island that 
will suddenly sprout from within our waters — that 
should belong to us by accession; or we might purchase 
a small island — that should also belong to us. So this is 
to cover very clearly the possibility of expanding our 
territory although we do not have any intentions. Be- 
sides, a constitution should last for years in order to 
cover the future. Anyway, the national territory should 
belong to us by sovereign right or legal title. 

The other change is, instead of “historic right or legal 
title,” I would like it to read “SOVEREIGN right or 
legal title.” The reason for this is that I believe the more 
proper term is “sovereign right” because “historic right” 
has been interpreted to mean other than what it means 
in international law. Therefore, I would like to substi- 
tute the word SOVEREIGN — which necessarily in- 
cludes the exercise of sovereignty in the past and, at the 
same time, would clearly denote in international law the 
basis for the right; namely, our sovereignty. 

The other changes would put our territory in logical 
sequence. The territories of a state would consist of the 
following: terrestrial domain, its land territory; the 
fluvial domain, its water territory; and the aerial do- 
main, the air territory. 

The terrestrial domain includes all surfaces of land 
above the sea that belong to the Philippines. These are 
the ones included within the base lines of the archipe- 
lago. 

The fluvial domain includes the inland waters: bays 
and rivers, streams, as well as internal waters or the 
waters of the sea, landwards from the base lines. 

The aerial domain of the Philippines includes the air 
directly above its terrestrial and fluvial domains. All the 
air that lies above our land territory and our water 
territory belongs to us, all the way up to outer space 
where there is no more air (because air is a mixture of 
gases, and where there is only one gas — helium — 
there is no air). The aerial domain extends up to where 
outer space begins, directly over our land and water 
territories. 

Then we specify that our national territory includes 
the territorial sea, the seabed, the subsoil — again, we 
rearranged the sequence here. The territorial sea comes 
first — this is the margin or belt of maritime waters 
adjacent to our base lines up to the extent of 1 2 nauti- 
cal miles. It is a belt surrounding our base lines seaward. 
Whether we like it or not, international law imposes a 
territorial sea in every country that has waters. Under 
the territorial sea is the seabed which belongs to us — 
the seabed is the top portion of the submarine area. This 
is followed by the subsoil or the land under the seabed, 
which also belongs to us. And then, the insular shelves 
or the continental shelf, meaning the submarine area 
that is directly under the water beyond the territorial 
sea, up to the edge of the continental margin, regardless 


of the depth of the supeijacent waters. Under interna- 
tional law, the continental shelf ; namely, the seabed and 
subsoil of the submarine area, belongs to us. This in- 
cludes not only the continental shelf of individual 
islands but the archipelagic shelves and the other sub- 
marine areas over which the Philippines has sovereignty 
or jurisdiction — this is true in the old provision. This 
was intended to cover any other areas that also belong 
to us, such as the continental slope or the continental 
margin, over which we have jurisdiction or sovereignty. 
So, my proposal is that we just rearrange the se- 
quence there. With regard to the additional sentence 
on the straits, I would like to remove it because the 
straits connecting the territorial waters with the eco- 
nomic zone are part of our internal waters and, there- 
fore, there is no need to specify that. Our sovereignty or 
jurisdiction extends over them. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the amendment 
proposed by Commissioner Azcuna is a rather com- 
plicated amendment. It could be a minor nightmare 
even for international lawyers. But for us who are not 
international lawyers, it could be a major nightmare an 
a cause of insomnia for several nights. 


So I propose that before we begin to consider 
this — and it is rather a complicated substitution o 
what has been presented by the Commission - I would 
like the body to be supplied with a copy of this so that 
fVio HicrncQion more intellificntly . 




THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would suggest to Com- 
missioner Azcuna to please write it down and then, 
maybe, we can have it reproduced right away. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, we will do that. I 
have it written here, and we can request the Secretariat 
to have it copied and distributed to the Members. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 6:33 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6:39 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized. He is rising on a 
question of parliamentary inquiry. 


306 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

It is the humble submission of this Commissioner 
that before we discuss the amendments, we have to 
settle first a very prejudicial issue. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the prejudicial issue 
referred to by the Commissioner? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The issue is whether or not this 
body will retain or delete or reject that provision on 
National Territory. If we reject or delete that provision, 
then we need not discuss the amendments. We have to 
settle first that matter of deletion or retention of the 
provision on National Territory. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner presenting a 
motion or not? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I am submit- 
ting an amendment by deletion. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This brings me to a point where I 
have to ask the Chair as to the clear parliamentary status 
that we are in. 

Madam President, I would like to know if we are in 
the period of individual amendments. If we are, then we 
are through with the period of committee amendments 
and, therefore, I would take it to mean that there are no 
committee amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we inquire from the sponsor 
if there are any committee amendments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I state. Madam President, that 
there are no committee amendments. The amendment 
presented by Commissioner Azcuna is actually a con- 
solidation of amendments submitted to him by various 
Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. There being no committee amend- 
ments, then we are now open for individual amend- 
ments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, whatever we 
call it, whether consolidation of an amendment or not, 
that is still considered under parliamentary procedure as 
an individual amendment. Therefore, I would like to 
suggest that if the intention of the Honorable Sarmiento 
is to make an amendment by deletion, then I suppose 
that his motion is for an individual amendment by 
deletion. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I proceed. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a pending amendment 
that was submitted by Commissioner Azcuna, and we 
suspended the session to give him time to write down 
the proposed amendments. 

May we know if Commissioner Azcuna is withdraw- 
ing for the time being or deferring consideration of his 
proposed amendment, so that we can give way to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, may I know what 
is the nature of the proposed amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The proposed amendment is an 
anterior or prior amendment; that is, the deletion of 
a provision on National Territory. 

MR. AZCUNA. The whole thing? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. I am willing to withdraw my amend- 
ment for the time being. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Is it not that the amendment 
by deletion which is actually an amendment by sub- 
stitution should come last after we have perfected the 
individual amendments? Therefore, the amendment 
by deletion should come last after we have perfected 
the amendments. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the anterior 
amendment is a prejudicial issue because if we decide 
that we delete the provision on National Territory, then 
we need not discuss the amendments — it is moot and 
academic. I think it should be given first priority before 
discussing all amendments. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. As I understand the Rules, 
Madam President, we first perfect the amendment, be- 
cause after perfecting the amendments, there may be 
no more reason for deleting the provision. It is only 
after perfecting the amendments and with the pro- 
ponent of the deletion not being satisfied with the 
amendments that the amendment by deletion shall 
follow next. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, this Com- 
missioner will not be very happy with any amendment 
to perfect an amendment. I am for the total abolition 
or deletion of that provision. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


307 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair rules that the body 
has to decide first on the motion of Commissioner 
Sarmiento. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Before we vote on the motion of 
Commissioner Sarmiento, may we ask him to kindly 
elaborate so that we may know the reason for his 
motion. 


desh, Botswana, Brunei, Bulgaria, Zambia, Zimbabwe, 
Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, 
Kuwait, Liberia, Libya, Cameroon, Chad, People’s 
Republic of China, Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, 
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen, Denmark, 
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Fiji, Finland, France, 
Gambia, Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran and many 
others. So that it is the position of this humble Com- 
missioner that the provision on National Territory be 
deleted. Father Bernas will make a few additions. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I think the body has first to 
resolve whether my motion for an anterior amendment 
is approved before I discuss or elaborate my reasons for 
making an amendment by abolition. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the body 
is entitled to know why the Gentleman is asking for the 
deletion of the entire provision on National Territory. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, this Com- 
missioner deeply appreciates the painstaking effort of 
Professor Nolledo and the members of the Committee 
on Preamble and National Territory. We have discussed 
the provision on National Territory for a number of 
days, and Professor Nolledo intelligently defended the 
inclusion of a provision on National Territory. However, 
Madam President, with all due respect to Commissioner 
Nolledo and the members of the Committee on Preamble 
and National Territory, I move for an amendment by 
deletion of the provision on National Territory for a 
number of reasons: 

First, the noninclusion of that provision on National 
Territory will not, in any way, diminish, and 

affect our sovereignty on any portion of Philippine 
territory. 

Second, a constitutional definition of territory has no 
effect of legitimizing a territorial claim on anything not 
based on solid evidence or legal right. 

Third, the noninclusion of a provision on National 
Territory will not strain our diplomatic relations with 
other countries in the concert of nations; and 

Fourth, there is a trend in the family of naUons 
today for the noninclusion of a provision on National 
Territory. We made a survey of 81 constitutions, 52 of 
these constitutions have no provision on national 
territory. 

May I mention a few of these countries? These 
include capitalist and noncapitalist countries, big and 
small countries: Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Bangla- 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to comment on this 
suggestions. 

Madam President, we are drafting a proposed consti- 
tution; the ones who will ratify or recheck this proposed 
Constitution are the Filipino people. Maybe some of us 
here understand that a provision on National Territory 
in the Constitution is not binding on other ccmntries; 
that even if we place in our Constitution that Guam is 
a part of the Philippines, it is not binding. However, we 
had a provision on National Territory in our 1935 
Constitution. We had and we have a 
tional Territory in our 1973 Constitution. Our people 
know this. And all of a sudden, we will delete any provi^ 
Sion on National Territory. Will our people understand 
this? We will have to do a lot of explammg to our 
people. Even some lawyers will not understand it 
Maybe some of us understand it, but let us remember it 
is a constitution we are drafting and we are not the ones 
approving this Constitution. We are drafting 
beLlf of more than 25 mUlion voters in the Philip- 
pines - as a matter of fact, all the Fihpmo people rep- 
resented by the voters who will cast their ballots m the 
coming plebiscite. So, this is my comment. I do no 
think our people will understand why we are deleting 
the provision on National Territory which has been m 
the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 


MS AQUINO. To set order in the floor deliberations, 
would like to request the Commissioners who would 
e to introduce aLndments to f-f*' ^®st^ “ 

J to please be conscious of the time limitation of five 

nutes. . . 

We would ask for the recognition of Commissioner 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


308 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you. Madam President. 

Madam President, the problem presented by the Arti- 
cle on National Territory is both a legal problem and 
a diplomatic problem. Therefore, whatever solution we 
may offer for these two sets of problems should answer 
both the legal problem and the diplomatic problem. I 
support the deletion of the entire Article on National 
Territory because the deletion will satisfy both our legal 
needs and our diplomatic needs. Let me explain. 

If we delete this Article on National Territory, will 
we lose any portion of our territory? No, we will not. 
Will it prevent us from claiming any other territory 
which we may wish to claim because we have a right to 
claim it in the future? It will not because we recognize 
the generally accepted principles of international law 
which do recognize various modes of acquisition of 
territory and various modes of establishing a right to 
territory. If we delete this entire thing, that general 
principle of international law remains. 

Diplomatically, if we delete this, then we avoid 
waving before any nation in the world anything which 
may be irritating or offensive to them and which may 
harm our friendship especially with our neighbors. If we 
retain this, we do not gain anything legally but we run 
the danger of losing in the diplomatic struggle. Already 
there are rather negative reactions coming from Malaysia 
because of inevitable implications that we are thinking 
in terms of Sabah. So, I would suggest that the deletion 
of this provision would best serve both our legal heeds 
and our diplomatic needs. Suppose the people ask us 
now: “Why did you do this? ” This is a matter we will 
have to explain. It is a challenge for us. It can be done. I 
think our people are intelligent. They will understand if 
we explain to them. Our Constitution will contain con- 
cepts and structures which will need explanation. All of 
those, we will have to explain. We are also engaged here 
in an education process and I think we have to be con- 
fident that our people, no matter how simple they are, 
can understand even the most complicated concepts, 
if things are properly explained to them. 

So, for these reasons, I think we can simplify things if 
we drop the entire Article on National Territory. 

Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I understand that the basic reason for 
this late motion for the deletion of Article I in National 
Territory was expressed in previous hearings and 
sessions to the effect that the provision on national 
territory is only a municipal law and cannot bind the 
other foreign countries. 

I find that statement rather unusual because every- 
thing, including the Constitution, is municipal law. 
Every sovereign state has a right to enact laws only 


effective within its territorial limits for there is no such 
rule as an extraterritorial law. 

The rules on private international law permit, for the 
sake of the ultimate objective of justice especially in the 
solution of private rights, the recognition and enforce- 
ment of a foreign law and the theory is that it becomes 
temporarily a part of municipal law. Municipal law 
really means the law of the nation, the law of the state. 
And everything we do, including the work of this Com- 
mission in drafting a new constitution, is municipal law. 
It cannot necessarily bind other nations because this is 
our own, we might say, unilateral act. But there is 
always the mutual respect, perhaps courtesy, that is 
accorded by one state to other states. 

It is said that unless we have evidence of “historical 
right or legal title,” said phrase would be useless or 
something to that effect. But even the ordinary or 
rudimentary procedural law requires that before one can 
present evidence, he must first make his allegation, 
alegata et probata. So, we cannot be required to just 
present solid, conclusive evidence through international 
documents before we state or reassert the boundaries 
of our national territory. 

The observation of Commissioner Rodrigo is per- 
tinent. We have this provision in the 1935 Constitution. 
It was rephrased in the 1973 Constitution. We have the 
report of the Committee which has been, hi a way, 
improved by the amendment by substitution. I cannot 
understand why at this late stage we will consider a 
motion for the entire deletion of the whole Article I on 
National Territory. 

The Acting Floor Leader is calling my attention that I 
am exceeding the five minutes, so thank you. Madam 
President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Nolledo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, thank you. 

The arguments of Father Bernas and Commissioner 
Sarmiento echoed the arguments of the late Voltahe 
Garcia when he filed a motion to delete the definition 
of the national territory in the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention. In that Convention, I was the one who 
vigorously objected to the deletion. Now it seems to me 
that based on the statements of Father Bernas that 
international law will take care of everything, that we 
can delete the definition of the national territory, then 
international law may necessarily include the Law of the 
Sea of 1982 which contains provisions which are not 
advantageous to our archipelago, to the Republic of the 
Philippines. That is why if we delete the definition of 
the national territory, then the reservations of Senator 
Tolentino made before signing the Law of the Sea 
would be negated. I think we should be careful about 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


309 


this. Permit me. Madam President, to read some 
portions — only short paragraphs — of my speech when 
I stood up in the Constitutional Convention of 1971, 
vigorously objecting to the deletion of the definition of 
the national territory. I said that: 

I am particularly concerned about the Philippine waters. 

The case of Sulu Sea, Mr. President, may well be the case 
of the Mindanao Sea, the Sibuyan Sea and the Basilan 
Channel. The case of the Palawan waters may well be the 
case of the waters that surround Panay Island, Negros, 
Bohol, Leyte, Samar, and Romblon. I trust that we will, in 
this Convention, reaffirm our sovereign rights over our 
territorial and internal waters to obviate the fearful possi- 
bility of our country, now contemplated as a compact 
territory, being dismembered by varying areas of open seas, 
creating a definite and continuing threat to our national 
and integral security and diminishing, to a great degree, our 
national unity. 

If the boundaries, they ask, are already set forth in 
the Treaty of Paris, why do we need to provide for them 
in the Constitution? I say. Madam President, that if we 
adopt the report of our Committee and make it a part 
of our Constitution, the ratification by our people, the 
Filipino electorate numbering more than 25 million, 
will strengthen our stand on the extent of our jurisdic- 
tion over our internal and territorial waters. It is not 
true that constitutions of other nations of the world do 
not contain the definition of their national territory. 
Constitutions of great nations like Australia, Belgium, 
Federal Republic of Germany, Portugal, Switzerland, 
even Soviet Russia, India and Venezuela contain 
lengthy definitions of their territories. 

I trust that this Commission will seriously take into 
account the arguments presented by the Vice-President 
and Senator Rodrigo. The people of Palawan will not 
ratify this Constitution because when I ran for delegate 
in the Constitutional Convention, they told me: “You 
know the Sulu Sea is being invaded by the Japanese 
vessels. Our navy is powerless.” 

So, I trust this body will seriously consider the 
arguments against the motion to delete. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner de los Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento mentioned several countries which do 
not include in their constitution a provision on National 
Territory. He failed to mention, however, whether in 
the constitution of these countries there was previously 
a provision on National Territory. I suppose, originally, 
those countries never included any provision on Nation- 
al Territory. But in our case, it is different. In 1935, we 
had to include a provision on National Territory be- 


cause according to some authors, our intention was to 
bind the United States President not to claim Mindanao. 
In the 1 97 1 Constitutional Convention, our purpose was 
to enshrine in the Constitution the archipelagic concept 
which should still be enshrined up to the present. Sup- 
pose we have a dispute of sovereignty on insular shelves 
or seabed or subsoil with a superpower or with any 
other country, then the case reaches the International 
Court of Justice. How shall we look before the Inter- 
national Court of Justice? We have no more provision on 
National Territory; whereas before we had a specific 
provision on National Territory enshrining the archipe- 
lagic theory and including within our territory the 
territorial sea, the seabed, the subsoil, the insular 
shelves, etc. We will have no such provision anymore. 
Commissioner Bernas says that it will not affect us 
legally. But we cannot really tell how the International 
Court of Justice will react to it. Perhaps, the Interna- 
tional Court of Justice may decide in favor of the 
adverse party with whom we shall litigate in the future, 
if we remove this provision on National Territory 
because it can be interpreted as a waiver on our part as 
if we are rejecting the concept of the archipelagic 
principle. On the diplomatic level, precisely, I was 
objecting to this prejudicial question because I said the 
objectionable feature which causes irritation with other 
nations has already been eliminated by changing is- 
toric right” to “SOVEREIGN right.” For this reason, I 
maintain that the provision on National Territory in our 
Constitution should remain. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Ople be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

If we were writing a constitution in 1935 or earlier 
still in 1 898, I would immediately support the Sarmien- 
to motion to amend this Articie by substitution or by 
deletion. What Commissioners Rodrigo and de los Keyes 
had pointed out earlier was that in adopting this territo- 
rial provision of the 1935 Constitution, the friers m 
the 1973 Constitution, in effect, had contracted with 
the Filipino people that there is a vested interest in a 
territorial definition. This may be a municipal law and 
need not bind any other country or 
munity But I think an inventory of that otherwise 
abstract notion of a country, all the components of 
that country whether below or above the ground, in the 
seas, the inland waters, or in the air space, constit 
the national territory. This constitutes a km 
ventory in which all Filipinos, rich or poor, s • 
gives them an impression of that notion of a country 
going to war and defending it with their lives if need be 
It has, definitely, educational and inspirational value for 
the schoolchildren when they study the Constitution 
and are told by their teachers that this is the country 


310 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


where they grow up as citizens, where their rights and 
obligations are situated, and where the meaning of their 
lives is actually situated. 

So, I will call the Commissioner’s attention to the 
fact that the other day during the meeting of the Com- 
mittee on the National Economy and Patrimony, many 
fishermen from the Manila Bay and the Laguna Lake 
complained about the poaching in our internal waters 
by Japanese and Taiwanese fishing vessels. I think it will 
help the Philippine government and even the countries 
of these poachers, if they know by this territorial 
definition our national territory. We appreciate Com- 
missioner Sarmiento’s pointing out that about 52 out 
of 82 nations which had been surveyed did not provide 
territorial definitions in their constitutions. Probably, 
they wrote their constitutions before the Law of the 
Sea came up and was approved, because if they were 
writing their constitutions today in the wake of this 
new covenant among nations, I am sure most of them 
would reconsider in favor of defining their national 
territories. 

We will have to negotiate economic zones with our 
neighboring countries, some of which have a history of 
being predatory powers. I think it would be better if our 
territory be very definite, even if only from the stand- 
point of our own perception of what makes up our 
national territory, as when we negotiate with Taiwan. 
There is a portion in the economic zone where we over- 
lap with Japan because Okinawa is not so far from us. 
And then, of course, we have to negotiate with Malaysia 
and Indonesia because our economic zones likewise 
overlap. It would help if there were some bearings that 
could be found in Article I of the Constitution concern- 
ing our own perception of the limits of the metes and 
bounds of our national territory. 

I would have welcomed very much the previous 
Bernas amendment to the same territorial definition — 

I think it influenced the Committee — so that this 
Article be purged of any element that would be con- 
sidered offensive to any of our neighboring countries. 
Therefore, I see no ground to fear this could create 
diplomatic problems in the future. 

It is on these grounds. Madam President, that I wish 
to appeal to Commissioner Sarmiento to withdraw his 
proposed amendment by deletion. 

Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I ask 
Commissioner Azcuna concerning his proposed amend- 
ment? 

THE PRESIDENT. It is Commissioner Sarmiento’s 
amendment which is now before the body. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Laurel be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LAUREL. Madam President, the 1935 Constitu- 
tion included a definition of our national territory to 
forestall the attempt as embodied in the notorious 
Bacon Bill, about which Father Bernas spoke last night. 

In order to segregate Mindanao and Sulu from the 
rest of our archipelago, it was felt that by signing that 
charter. President Roosevelt will commit the United 
States to recognize the integrity of our territory and 
prevent its dismemberment during the American regime. 

I have reason to support the positions of Commissioners 
Sarmiento and Bernas because now that the threat of 
dismemberment is over, there is no more need for the 
definition of our national territory. 

We claim our territorial sea by historic right and it is 
defined by the latitudes and longitudes specified in 
Article III of the Treaty of Paris of December 10, 1898, 
as has been recognized since the 16th century. Under 
this claim, our territorial sea extends at some points in 
our territory as far as 320 miles eastward and 160 miles 
westward. However, under the Jamaica Convention on 
the Law of the Sea, which we have already signed, the 
territorial sea of all states is limited to only 1 2 miles 
from the coast. How does that square with our historic 
right claim under our Constitution? 

I maintain that the definition of our national terri- 
tory serves no practical purpose and has no legal value 
whatsoever, as it will be no more than a unilateral and 
a self-serving declaration. It is not even a standard 
provision in most constitutions, as Commissioner 
armiento has said. I have looked at most of the 165 
onstitutions of member states of the United Nations, 
26 of which are those of developing countries, and 
have not yet come across a constitution which defines 
the national territory except ours. Worse, it will be a 
legal liability because it will hamper us to dispose of 
parts of our territory, as circumstances may warrant. 
For example, we could not waive our claim to Sabah 
later if we so desire without violating or amending the 
Constitution, because although the word “Sabah” is 
not mentioned in our definition of national territory, it 
actually includes Sabah. However, if we do not specify 
the limits of our territory, we will have more leeway in 
dealing with it as our foreign policy may dictate and we 
will not be impeded by any constitutional limitation. 
So, I wish to announce that I vote yes to the Sarmiento 
motion. 

Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


311 


MR. RODRIGO. This is the second time I rose. I am 
not going to deliver a speech but I just want to ask a few 
questions of Commissioner Bernas who spoke after me 
last night on this matter. Commissioner Bernas stated 
that the presence of the phrase “by historic right or 
legal title” in the present provision on National Terri- 
tory would do us more harm than good. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Azcuna requests to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. The Commissioner also stated that 
this could be remedied by an amendment. In fact, last 
night he stated a proposed amendment, subject to im- 
provement. My question is: Does the Commissioner 
have the proposed amendment? 

FR. BERNAS. I did not participate in the formula- 
tion of an amendment. If the entire Article is not 
dropped, I will propose an amendment. But during the 
recess, it seemed to me there was an interminable dis- 
cussion and we were not getting anywhere, so I thought 
the best way to solve the problem was to cut the 
Gordian Knot. 


MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I just would like to indicate that it is not true there is 
no harm, if we delete completely the Article because 
during the Convention on the Law of the Sea, the 
Philippines made reservations on our internal waters as 
defined in the Philippine Constitution in subscribing to 
this treaty. If we do not define our internal waters now, 
we will have signed that treaty with no reservation, and 
as a result, we will be opening up our internal waters to 
foreign fishing. 

Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is true. 


MR. RODRIGO. My question is that if the possible 
harm arising from this provision could be remedied by 
amendment, is it not better that we just amend instead 
of deleting the entire Article? 

FR. BERNAS. The position I have taken is that since 
removing the Article will not do us any harm and retain- 
ing the Article will not do us much good either, it would 
be better to drop the entire thing because it would save 
us the trouble of debating on an amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, but the problem is how to 
explain that to our people. 

FR. BERNAS. It is a problem for which we have to 
find solution. 

MR. RODRIGO. My last question is: Is the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Azcuna which says “NOW 
OR HEREAFTER BELONGING TO THE PHILIP- 
PINES BY SOVEREIGN RIGHT OR LEGAL TITLE” 
different from the original provision? Does that remedy 
the possible harm mentioned by the Commissioner last 
night? 

FR. BERNAS. I would prefer to treat that matter 
when we come to it. At the moment, we have the 
amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento on the floor. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, is it the Commissioner’s opinion 
that it is better to delete than to amend? 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS AQUINO. I would like to register my objectioii 
to the motion to delete the whole Article on National 
Territory. 

The arguments presented by Commissioners Bernas 
and Sarmiento may be academicaUy logical, theoretical- 
ly feasible, but blatantly unhistorical. 

Jurisdiction is understood in the context of authority 
and the sphere of the exercise of authority, such that it 
can only be meaningfully appreciated in the context of 
specific persons and a specific territo^ which is the 
essence of dominium and impenum. I believe the del 
tion of an explicit provision National Territory after 
we have previously enshrined it m the 1935 ^nd t 
1973 Constitutions will be a fatal blow to the assertion 
of our sovereign omnipotence. 

I then move to terminate the deliberations on this 
prejudicial question and I move for a vote. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair finds that the sponsor 
of the committee report does not accept the jmen - 
ment of Commissioner Sarmiento; therefore, we ave 
put that to a vote. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. In other words, to amputate rather 
than to treat the malady? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 
FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


312 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Father Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I just say one line in response to 
what my colleague and classmate Commissioner Azcuna 
has said. 

The contention is that this will invalidate the reserva- 
tion made by former Senator Tolentino in the delibera- 
tions. The speech of former Senator Tolentino was a 
historical speech which made specific reference to a 
document that was in existence then, so that even if we 
delete these words, the reference of former Senator 
Tolentino to that document would still be subsisting. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I restate my motion 
to proceed to the voting on the prejudicial question 
raised by Commissioner Sarmiento. 

VIVA VOCE 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
motion to delete the Article on National Territory pro- 
posed by Commissioner Sarmiento, say yea. 

FEW MEMBERS. Yea. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are against, say nay. 

SEVERAL MEMBERS. Nay. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

VOTING 

MR. DAVIDE. I move for a division of the House. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
motion of Commissioner Sarmiento, please raise then- 
hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against may please do the same. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 8 votes in favor and 25 against; so 
the motion is lost. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that the 
sponsor. Commissioner Nolledo, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I am pleased to 
inform Commissioner Azcuna that on behalf of the 
Committee I am accepting his amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us proceed step by step. Com- 
missioner Azcuna withdrew, so let him restate his pro- 
posed amendment first. 


MR. AZCUNA. May I be recognized. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. I now reiterate my amendment by 
substitution, copies of which have already been dis- 
tributed. This amendment is the result of the labors of 
many Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Azcuna please 
read his amendment. 

MR. AZCUNA. Article I on the National Territory 
reads: 

SECTION I. THE NATIONAL TERRITORY COMPRISES 
THE PHILIPPINE ARCHIPELAGO, WITH ALL THE ISLANDS 
AND WATERS EMBRACED THEREIN, AND ALL THE 
OTHER TERRITORIES NOW OR HEREAFTER BELONGING 
TO THE PHILIPPINES BY SOVEREIGN RIGHTS OR LEGAL 
TITLE, CONSISTING OF THE TERRESTRIAL, FLUVIAL 
AND AERIAL DOMAINS, INCLUDING THE TERRITORIAL 
SEA, THE SEABED, THE SUBSOIL, THE INSULAR SHELVES 
AND THE OTHER SUBMARINE AREAS OVER WHICH THE 
PHILIPPINES HAS SOVEREIGNTY OR JURISDICTION. 
THE WATERS AROUND, BETWEEN AND CONNECTING THE 
ISLANDS OF THE ARCHIPELAGO, IRRESPECTIVE OF 
THEIR BREADTH AND DIMENSIONS, FORM PART OF THE 
INTERNAL WATERS OF THE PHILIPPINES. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Contrary to the opinion of Father 
Bernas, I consider the proposed amendment not com- 
plicated. Therefore, on behalf of the Committee, I 
accept the amendment. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The sponsor has accepted the 
amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we be allowed to introduce 
amendments to the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The first amendment is to delete the 
words “now or hereafter.” 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


313 


MR. AZCUNA. Point of order, Madam President. The 
proposal should not be an amendment to the amend- 
ment, but an amendment to the committee report since 
the Committee has accepted my amendment. 

MR. DA VIDE. Yes, that would be an amendment to 
the Committee amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may now pro- 
ceed. 

MR. DA VIDE. On line 3, 1 propose to delete “now or 
hereafter” between the words “territories” and “belong- 
ing.” May I be allowed to explain? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. As admitted by the sponsor. Commis- 
sioner Azcuna, the word “sovereign” would refer even 
to past sovereignties. If it would refer to past sovereign- 
ties, then that would be inconsistent with the words 
“now or hereafter.” So, we should delete those words to 
give full meaning and significance to the statement of 
the original sponsor that the word “sovereign” would 
refer to the past or present sovereignty. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May Commissioner Azcuna ex- 
plain? 

t 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am a little bit 
confused about the whole proceedings, I rise on a 
point of parliamentary inquiry. Commissioner Azcuna 
said that what we are considering now is the committee 
report. 

Earlier, I raised a point of parliamentary inquiry to 
find out whether we are now in the period of committee 
amendments. It is very clear on record that we are no 
longer in the period of committee amendments; we are 
in the period of individual amendments. However, it 
appears that the sponsor had accepted the amendment 
by substitution of Commissioner Azcuna as a committee 
amendment because it is now considered as part of the 
committee report. I just want this clarified, because this 
amendment by substitution which was accepted by the 
Committee, to my mind, is not really an amendment by 
substitution. When we talk of amendment by substitu- 
tion, we practically overhaul the whole committee 
report. Here, we are only considering very few words to 
be inserted or deleted. 

Between “territories” and “belonging,” the proposal 
is to delete “now or hereafter”; on line 10, to change 
“historic” to SOVEREIGN and to insert TERRES- 
TRIAL, FLUVIAL AND AERIAL DOMAINS. 


To cut this parliamentary inquiry short, I would like 
to find out if we are reaUy considering a committee 
amendment as accepted or are we considering this 
amendment of Commissioner Azcuna as an individual 
amendment which is now being subjected to further 
amendments by the Members of the Commission. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 7:33 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 7:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that the 
sponsor. Commissioner Nolledo, be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to answer the parliamentary inquiry of 
ommissioner Maambong. The amendment presented 
^Commissioner Azcuna is an 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, that is the ruling of the 
Chair. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President, I 
am satisfied. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 




MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 








THE PRESIDENT. Yes, it 


will be taken up tomorrow. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 


314 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1986 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I move to adjourn tomorrow at five o clock in the afternoon, 
the session until tomorrow at five o’clock in the after- 


noon. 


It was 7:44 p.m. 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


315 


R.C.C. NO. 23 
Thursday, July 3, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 5:22 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Wilfrido V. Villacorta. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. VILLACORTA. A reading from the Book of 
Psalms: 

Show Your power, O God, the power that You have 
used on our behalf, from Your temple in Jerusalem where 
kings bring gifts to You. 

Rebuke Egypt — that wild animal in the reeds. Re- 
buke the nations — that herd bulls with their calves — 
until they bow down and offer You their silver. Scatter 
those people who love to make war. 

Ambassadors will come from Egypt; the Sudanese will 
raise their hands in prayer to God. 

Sing to God, kingdoms of the world ; sing praise to the 
Lord, to Him who rise in the ancient sky. Listen to Him 
shout with a mighty roar. Proclaim God’s power; His Majes- 
ty is over Israel; His might is in the skies. 

How awesome is God as He comes from His sanctuary, 
the God of Israel. He gives strength and power to His 
people. Praise God. 

Almighty Lord, You have given us this gift of having 
the historic opportunity to frame the new Constitution 
of our people. Please will it that we may reciprocate 
Your kindness and generosity by giving our people a 
worthy gift: a liberative document that will restore the 
freedom and dignity of which they have been deprived 
for four centuries. 


Please make us worthy of the people’s trust. While in 
the past, we have in our humble ways tried to help the 
less fortunate of our brothers and sisters, we have large- 
ly been concerned with ourselves, our family, our 
interests. 


Please inspire and give us strength, O Lord, to trans- 
cend our selfish needs and aspirations so that we can 
fully offer ourselves to, wards the obliteration of ex- 
ploitation in our land - exploitation commg from 
within as well as from without. 


As we remember tomorrow our special re ations with 
giant power, enlighten us with Your Holy Spirit so 
lat we can reflect thoroughly on the issues concerned 
ad arrive at the best approach that would maximally 
‘rve the paramount national interest of our beloved 
h^Lines so that when we face the judgment of his- 
wTur dercendants will look back to this Const.tu- 
onal Commission with pride and admiration and not 
ah bars derision; and so that we. all in this Com- 
iSton! cL contribute to Your Glo^i and that of our 




ROLL CALL 

the president. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Present Jamir . . . - 

Alonto Present* Laurel 

Aquino Present ' 

Azcuna Present Maambong .. 

Bacani Resent Monsod . 

Bengzon Present Natmdad . . . 

Bennagen Present Nieya • 

Bernas Present NoUedo . . . • 

Rosario Braid . . . Present Ople 

Drocka Present Padilla 

Calderon Present Quesada . . • . 

Castro de Present ' 

Colavco . . • Present Regalado ... 

o ^ • n Present Reyes delos 

Concepcion .... iresem 

Daride Pi»"‘ ' ' ' ' 

Pq 2 Present Rodrigo . . . 

Garcia • • Present Romulo . . • 

Present* Rosales.... 

Gascon rresem 

Guingona Present Sarmient . . 


Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Absent 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Present 

Absent 

Present 


♦Appeared after tlie roll call 


316 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


Suarez . . . . , 

. . . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 


Tingson . . . . 



Trenas Present 

Uka Present 

Viliacorta Present 

Villegas Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 43 Members responded to the call 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session and that we approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 376, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION AFFORDING MORE PRO- 
TECTION TO LABOR AND GUARANTEEING BASIC 
HUMAN AND TRADE UNION RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon and Garcia. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 377, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION THREE, 
ARTICLE THIRTEEN, OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION, 
AS AMENDED, WITH MODIFICATION, PROVIDING 
FOR AUTOMATIC INITIATION OF IMPEACHMENT 
PROCEEDINGS AFTER THE ONE-FIFTH VOTE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Of- 
ficers. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading and Communications, the 
President making the corresponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 374, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCREASE FROM SIXTY 
TO SEVENTY-FIVE PER CENTUM CAPITAL OWNER- 
SHIP OF FILIPINO CITIZENS IN CORPORATIONS AND 
OTHER ENTITIES FOR THESE CORPORATIONS TO 
QUALIFY AS GRANTEES OF FRANCHISES OR CER- 
TIFICATES TO OPERATE PUBLIC UTILITIES AND TO 
DISALLOW FOREIGNERS FROM SITTING IN THE 
GOVERNING BODY OR BOARD OF ANY PUBLIC 
UTILITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon, Alonto, Tingson, 
Maambong, Nolledo and Rama. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 375, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO SET ASIDE LANDS OF 
PUBLIC DOMAIN AS PERMANENT SETTLEMENT 
AREAS FOR CULTURAL MINORITIES. 


Proposed Resolution No. 378, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS AND 
THE DISPOSITION AND UTILIZATION OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES FOUND THEREIN. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 379, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION TO EMPHASIZE AND 
STRENGTHEN THE CONSTITUTIONAL BASE FOR A 
SOCIAL HOUSING PROGRAM. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 380, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION THE FIXING OF THE MINIMUM ELECTION 
PERIOD. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 381, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION MANDATING THE ELIMINA- 
TION IN THE POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND 
CULTURAL LIFE OF THE NATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


317 


To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 382, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION RECOGNIZING HUMAN 
RIGHTS AS INVIOLABLE AND INALIENABLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 383, entitled: 

RESOLUTION RECOGNIZING THE RIGHT OF A CITI- 
ZEN TO REFUSE TO RENDER WAR SERVICE ON 
GROUNDS OF CONSCIENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 384, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AFFIRMING THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE, 
WHETHER EMPLOYED BY THE STATE OR NOT, TO 
FORM ASSOCIATIONS OR UNIONS WHOSE PURPOSE 
IS NOT CONTRARY TO LAW. 

Introduced by Hon. Lerum. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 385, entitled: 

RESOLUTION STRENGTHENING THE FREEDOM OF THE 
PRESS BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION EXPRESSLY PROHIBITING CEN- 
SORSHIP. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 386, entitled: 


Proposed Resolution No. 388, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE ARTICLE ON NA- 
TIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY OF THE NA- 
TION A PROVISION TO INCLUDE AIRWAVES AS 
PART OF THE NATIONAL PATRIMONY. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid and Bacani. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Proposed Resolution No. 389, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A PROVISION ALLOWING 
FOREIGN INVESTORS TO ACQUIRE, HOLD OR OWN 
LOTS WITH LIMITED AREA, REQUIRED FQR THE 
OPERATIQN OF EXPORT-ORIENTED INDUSTRIAL 
ENTERPRISES. 

Introduced by Hon. Padilla. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Proposed Resolution No. 390, entitled. 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE CHURCH AND THE STATE ARE INDE- 
PENDENT OF EACH OTHER BUT MUST WORK TOGE- 
THER HARMONIOUSLY FOR THE COMMON GOOD. 


Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

roposed Resolution No. 391, entitled. 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE ^ 

THE LEGISLATURE PROVISIONS ^EFINWG Tffi 
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE 
EXEMPT FROM TAXATION aP- 

LIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS AND TO PRO™^™ ^ 
PROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY OR P^P^Y 
AND OTHER RESOURCES FOR TIffi USE ° 

SUPPORT OF ANY CHURCH OR SYSTEM 


Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 


RESOLUTION TO IMPRESS WITH IMMEDIATE EFFEC- 
TIVENESS THE RIGHTS GUARANTEED BY THE BILL 
OF RIGHTS BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION THAT SAID RIGHTS BIND 
THE LEGISLATURE, THE EXECUTIVE, AND THE 
JUDICIARY AS DIRECTLY ENFORCEABLE LAW. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 387, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A SECTION ON EDUCATION 
IN THE ARTICLE ON HUMAN RESOURCES. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


osed Resolution No. 392, entitled. 

3SOLUTION TO INCORPORATE ^ 

TUTION A PROVISION ^HAT TIffi CO^ 

VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS BY Irm 

OF ™ 

NATIONAL FAILURE OF JUSTICE AMONG THE 
GROUNDS FOR IMPEACHMENT, 
itroduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

D the Committee on Accountability of Public 
ficers. 

losed Resolution No. 393, entitled. 

ESOLOTION TO INCORPORATE ^ THE CONST^ 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING m 
PROMOTE POLITICAL PLURALISM AND PROHIB 


318 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AND REPRESSION 
BY REASON OF POLITICAL CONVICTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 394, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE RECOGNIZING AND DEFINING 
THE RIGHTS OF POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS TO 
LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 395, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES PROVISIONS ON THE SEPARATION 
OF CHURCH AND STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino and Quesada. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 396, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 397, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION CREATING AN AGENCY FOR 
THE MANAGEMENT OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES’ 
UNIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Tan. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 398, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION GRANTING THE RIGHT TO 
FORM UNIONS AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING TO 
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Tan. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Proposed Resolution No. 399, entitled: 

RESOLUTION EMBODYING SECTION 1, ARTICLE XII, B, 
OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION IN THE PROPOSED 
CONSTITUTION BUT WITH AN AMENDMENT THAT 
THE COLLEGE DEGREE REQUIRED OF MEMBERS OF 
THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION SHALL PREFER- 
ABLY BE IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION BUT THE 
CHAIRMAN AND A COMMISSIONER MUST HAVE 
BEEN MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE BAR FOR AT 
LEAST TEN YEARS AND WITH FURTHER AMEND- 


MENTS REGARDING THE FUNCTIONS OF THE COM- 
MISSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 400, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A BICAMERAL LEGIS- 
LATURE, WHICH SHALL BE KNOWN AS CONGRESS 
OF THE PHILIPPINES, WHOSE UPPER HOUSE SHALL 
BE A SENATE OF TWENTY-FOUR (24) MEMBERS 
ELECTED AT LARGE AND WHOSE LOWER HOUSE 
SHALL BE COMPOSED OF REPRESENTATIVES 
ELECTED BY DISTRICT. 

Introduced by Hon. Calderon, Uka, Alonto, Rodrigo, 
and Tingson. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 401, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ES- 
TABLISHING THE FRAMEWORK FOR A NATIONAL 
1ST, SELF-RELIANT AND PROGRESSIVE ECONOMY 
FOUNDED ON GENUINE INDUSTRIALIZATION 
GUIDED BY THE PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL SELF- 
DETERMINATION AND EQUITABLE SHARING. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo, Suarez, Quesada, Brocka, 
Jamir, Bennagen, Sarmiento, Villacorta, Gascon, 
Garcia, and Aquino. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 402, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES PROVISIONS ON PEACE, NEUTRAL- 
ITY, AND NONALIGNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino, Azcuna, Bennagen, 
Brocka, Garcia, Gascon, Quesada, Sarmiento, 
Suarez, Tadeo, Tan, Villacorta, Rosario Braid, 
Davide, Jr., Uka and Regalado. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 403, entitled: 

RESOLUTION URGING THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSION TO CONSIDER THE ADOPTION OF A PAR- 
LIAMENTARY FORM OF GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Bennagen. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 404, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A PROVISION IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION PROHIBITING GAMBLING AND 
OTHER SIMILAR VICES. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


319 


To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 405, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION ON SUFFRAGE. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 406, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A SECTION OF EDUCA- 
TION IN THE ARTICLE ON THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, Villacorta and 
Gascon. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 407, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLI- 
CIES A PROVISION CONSTITUTING COMMUNICA- 
TION RESOURCES AS A VITAL NATIONAL RE- 
SOURCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 408, entitled. 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT A 

ON MASS MEDIA AND COMMUNICATION 
CLUDED IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, Villacorta, Gas- 
con, Foz and Brocka. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the People’s Panel for a Nationalist and 

Democratic Constitution signed by Mr. . g 
Bautista, submitting politico-legal, sociocultural, and 

economic proposals. 

(Communication No. 103 _ Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from the People’s Panel for a Nationalist and 
Democratic Constitution signed by r. . 

Bautista, requesting information on Hie sc e 
public hearings to enable them to participate. 
(Communication No. 104 — Constitutional Commission 


of 1986) 

To the Ad Hoc Planning Committee on Public Hearings. 


Letter from Concerned Churches for Christian Liberty 
signed by Rev. Luis Reunilla, submitting a position 
paper on Christian Education. 

(Communication No. 105 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Commission on Human Resources. 

Communication from Solidarity, Padre Faura, Manila, 
presenting a program for cultural renewal. 
(Communication No. 106 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Letter from Paralegal Training Services Center, Tribal 
Filipino Desk, signed by Ms. Donna B. Zapa, enclosing 
a resolution for the recognition of national minority 
people’s rights. 

(Communication No. 107 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


etter from the Veterans’ Federation of the Philippines 
toed by Mr. Emmanuel V. de Ocampo, submitting a 
^solution requesting a constitutional provision that the 
t^ate shall provide compensation for services rendered 
y war heroes and freedom fighters. 

:ommunication No. 1 08 - Constitutional Commission 

fl986) 

o the Committee on General Provisions. 

etter from Family » "perfecta a 
S^^questtag th^^^ of a policy statement 

n planned population growth. . • 

Communication No. 109 - Constitutional Commission 

f 1986) 

o the Committee on General Provisions. 

etter from Mr. Juan <<e.la Cruz ^ 
utting proposed provisions regarding 

epartment, among others. r,.n.mission 

:ommunication No. 1 10 - Constitutional Commission 

fl986) 

o the Committee on the Executive. 

etter from Mr. Alfredo J. Quemada of Suerte lights. 
Hapawan. Cotabato, suggesting, among others, a 
iew of the land reform policy. 

:ommunication No. 1 1 1 - Constitutional Commission 

fl986) 

o the Committee on Social Justice. 

etter from Mr. Alvaro P. Villar f 
[etro Manila, suggesting provisions on gr 


320 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


(Communication No. 1 1 2 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers. 

Letter from Concerned Young Filipinos from the South 
signed by Mr. Rogelio V. Paglomutan and six others, 
suggesting proposals on the form of government, nation- 
al economy and local governments, among others. 

(Communication No. 113 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Juanito M. Acanto of Iznart Street, 
Iloilo City, suggesting synchronization of elections, 
among others. 

(Communication No. 1 14 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication from the Nationalist Movement for a 
Progressive Philippines giving answers to questions 
relevant to our heritage in land. 

(Communication No. 115 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

CONSIDERATION OF RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Article on National Territory) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the continuation of consideration on Second 
Reading of Committee Report No. 3 on Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 263. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MS. AQUINO. To set some order in the floor deliber- 
ations, we would like to request the Commissioners to 
please register with us first whenever they seek recogni- 
tion; and also to respect the five-minute time limit. 

Madam President, we are now in the period of amend- 
ments. 

We ask that Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may pro- 
ceed. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

The proposal is an amendment to the individual 
amendment of Commissioner Azcuna on line 3 of the 
draft on the National Territory, and it consists merely 
in the deletion of the words “now or hereafter” be- 
tween the words “territories” and “belonging.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the sponsor say? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. As far as I am concerned, I accept the 
deletion of the said words, but I would like to ask the 
sponsor if he shares the same view. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection to the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Davide? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the proposed amendment to the individual 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I propose to delete 
the phrase “belonging to the Philippines by sovereign 
right or legal title” and in lieu thereof insert OVER 
WHICH THE GOVERNMENT EXERCISES SOVER- 
EIGN JURISDICTION. 

So lines 3 and 4 of the proposed draft will now read: 
“and all other territories OVER WHICH THE GOVERN- 
MENT EXERCISES SOVEREIGN JURISDICTION 
consisting of the terrestrial, fluvial and aerial domains 

XXX .” 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, I regret that I 
cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee likewise regrets that 
it cannot accept the amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. May I say a few words in support of 
this amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas may explain 
his proposed amendment. 


THURSDAY, JULY 3. 1986 


321 


FR. BERN AS. When I spoke three days ago, the pro- 
position I made was that, if we must have an Article on 
National Territory at all, it must be one which does not 
contain any phrase, clause or word which may harm our 
diplomatic relations with other nations. The phrase 
“legal title,” as I pointed out the other day, has ac- 
quired a very definite historical meaning since the 
explanation for it was recorded in the annals of the 
1971 Constitutional Convention. This phrase was put in 
for the purpose of covering the claim to various parts of 
the world like Sabah, the Marianas, et cetera, over which 
the Philippines was not actually exercising jurisdiction. 
But as I said, it was meant to be a coverall provision. 
So, if we keep this together with the meaning it has 
acquired as now known among our neighbors, the irrita- 
tion will continue. For that reason, I would prefer that 
this phrase be deleted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Bernas through? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to ask Commissioner Azcuna why the 
word “history” on line 4 was changed to “sovereign.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Commissioner Bernas is presently 
proposing an amendment to which Commissioner de 
Castro’s point is not yet responsive. May we request 
that Commissioner Guingona be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is he going to speak regarding the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Bernas? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, it is on the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, with due 
respect to the honorable Commissioner Bernas, I strong- 
ly object to his proposed amendment. In my opinion, 
such an amendment might be misconstrued to mean 
that we are dropping our claim over Sabah. I have men- 
tioned in my previous talk that our proposed provision 
on National Territory should be as flexible as possible. 


So, we should not close the door to any future claim, 
whether foreseen or unforeseen, of our government. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Guingona 
through? 

MR. GUINGONA. Not yet. May I please continue. 

I regret that this abandonment might even be sug- 
gested even before a thorough, unbiased and searching 
review or evaluation of our claim is made and com- 
pleted. I also regret that this abandonment would give 
the presumption that this Commission has lost faith in 
our officials; that it believes our officials will act with- 
out integrity and responsibility; that they would, on our 
behalf, present unsupported and illegal claims. I also 
regret that mention has been made of its damage or 
danger to the Philippines. Assuming these were true. 
Madam President, does this mean that anytime in the 
future we may want to claim or study a claim we should 
desist or hide ourselves in fear simply because there is 
danger of irritation or damage or because of the Iws- 
tility of the other party or state concerned? Besides, Ma- 
dam President, I do not believe that the picture presente 
to us is an accurate one, with due respect to those who 
presented it. They presented to us that Malaysians are 
hostile, vengeful and unfriendly. I have been to Malaysia 
several times. Madam President. I had the privuege o 
inviting personally the then Prime Minister “ 

Abdul Rahman to the Philippines which led to his tirst 
visit to our country. I had, have and still have a o 
Malaysian friends. The only Malaysians w o mig 
hostile to us are the overzealous,^ ultrana lona i 
officials of the government, particularly ^t. 

foreign office. I, for one, can affirm even un 
that Malaysians are good, understan mg a ^ 

and, therefore, I very strongly object to the Prosed 

amendment, because of a possible misconstruction 

what we mean in this proposed provision. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I be allowed 
a brief response. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas may pro 
ceed. 

FR. BERNAS. With similar due respect, I [[jj® 

to say that while the amendment does 
Sabah, it does not exclude it either. We adhere to the 
generally accepted principle of Internationa 
enables the nation to acquire territory hV session, p 
chase and so forth. The phrase I pypR- 

territories OVER WHICH THE GOVERNMENT EXER 
CISES SOVEREIGN JURISDICTION . . • because it 
some future time the Philippine government exercises 
jurisdiction over Sabah or Russia, or the Uni e » 

it will be part of our territory. So, this is a very, very 


322 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


flexible concept. We claim as part of our territory any 
territory over which the government exercises sovereign 
jurisdiction. Madam President, it will be noted that I 
do not say: “over which the present government exer- 
cises jurisdiction.” I just say: “ . . . OVER WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT EXERCISES SOVEREIGN JURIS- 
DICTION.” As I said, if at some future time our govern- 
ment exercises jurisdiction over, say, Russia, then it will 
be included in our territory. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are now in the process of ap- 
proving amendments to the proposed amendment on 
the Article on National Territory. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we really should not be 
entering into a prolonged debate on this matter. But in 
order that the Commissioners could vote intelligently on 
the amendment, the Chair is permitting some comments 
on or objections to the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Bernas, subject to limitation. 

Commissioner Bernas proposed an amendment which 
the Committee and Commissioner Azcuna rejected. 
Commissioner Guingona is also against the proposed 
amendment. So, I think we still have one more speaker, 
after which we will vote on the matter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I know that we 
are adopting liberality in the Rules, and I am not raising 
a point of order. Since we are in the period of amend- 
ments, I would just like to state for the record, without 
raising a point of order, the interpretation of the five- 
minute rule when it comes to amendments: Any Mem- 
ber shall be allowed five minutes to explain any amend- 
ment he may offer after which the Member who shall 
first obtain the floor (like Commissioner Guingona) 
shall be allowed five minutes to speak in opposition to it 
and there shall be no further debate thereon. 

Madam President, of course, we can always relax the 
Rules but I am saying that the proponent of an amend- 
ment has five minutes to explain his amendment, and 
the opponent to the amendment has also five minutes to 
speak against it. But if we relax the Rules, that is 
perfectly all right. 

THE PRESIDENT. I do not think Commissioner 
Guingona has consumed the five minutes. According to 


the timekeeper. Commissioner de Castro had only one 
minute to explain. 

Commissioner Maambong is calling our attention to 
the Rules. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. When this Rules was first spon- 
sored and debated upon, there were so many people 
against it. Since yesterday, about five spoke for and 
against the subject in question, in contradiction with 
our Rules. Now, I want to speak on something, but the 
Chair gave me only one minute. Madam President, let 
us be fair in this hall. 

I regret that on line 4, “historic” was changed to 
“sovereign,” because according to those who proposed 
the change, Sabah does not like it. Madam President, 
this is a municipal law. It is effective within our coun- 
try. If I want to befriend a certain person or a certain 
state, and I extend my hand and he extends his also 
only on condition that I take away the word “historic” 
in the provision on National Territory, that is blackmail 
to me. I insist that the word “historic” stay just as the 
framers of the 1973 Constitution did. I understand it is 
already on record that the word “historic” does not 
include Sabah, so I am surprised why we still talk of 
Sabah when we discuss our national territory. 

Madam President, thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, as the sponsor of 
the committee report, may I be given only two minutes 
to make a statement opposing the amendment of Com- 
missioner Bernas? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to give the 
sponsor two minutes? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the sponsor is given two minutes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I made mention 
in the last meetings that the term “legal title” does not 
only refer to our claim to Sabah but also to the bounda- 
ries set forth in the Treaty of Paris and in other related 
treaties. I know there are areas beyond the 12-miIe limit 
which are recognized as national waters under the 
Treaty of Paris over which we really do not exercise 
effective jurisdiction. The term “OVER WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT EXERCISES SOVEREIGN JURISDIC- 
TION” may be susceptible to different interpretations. 
So, I state that to eliminate the term “historic right or 
legal title” will be retrogression of the highest order. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I believe the body is now ready to 
vote on the amendment of Commissioner Bernas. 


THURSDAY, JULY 3 , 1986 


323 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, there being no other 
interpellators on the amendment proposed by Commis- 
sioner Bernas, I move for a vote on the amendment to 
the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will have a voting by the 
raising of hands instead of by viva voce. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may we restate the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 

FR. BERNAS. The amendment is: after the phrase 
“and all other territories” add OVER WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT EXERCISES SOVEREIGN JURIS- 
DICTION. 

VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Abubakar? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. As forrner Philippine Ambassador 
to Malaysia, I have been intimately connected with this 
problem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Commissioner desire to 
explain his vote? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes. My vote is for the withdrawal 
of our claim to Sabah. (Laughter) 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to remind 
Commissioner Abubakar that what is now before the 
body is the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Bernas. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, I now under- 
stand the issue. I vote yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
amendment of Commissioner Bernas, please raise their 
right hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their right hand. 
(Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 21 votes in favor and 14 against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I respectfully 
move for nominal voting. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 6:07 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:16 p.m., the session was resumed. 

NOMINAL VOTING ON BERNAS AMENDMENT 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

When we called a suspension of the session, there was 
a motion of Commissioner Guingona that we proceed to 
a nominal voting on the amendment. 

The Chair rules that the nominal voting can proceed 
under Section 39, Rule VIII of the Rules of the Consti- 
tutional Commission. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll, but I appeal to the Members who want to 
explain their votes to make their explanation as brief as 
possible. 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Abubakar 


THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Abubakar is 
in favor of the amendment. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Alonto 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 


COMMISSIONER ALONTO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. ALONTO. I vote yes to the amendment pro- 
posed by Commissioner Bernas because I am most con- 
cerned with the interest and welfare of this country. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Aquino 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


:OMMISSIONER AQUINO EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

SIS. AQUINO. I vote y£S on the clear and ^nmistak- 
e understanding that the contemplation jjj P 
sed amendment does not exclude the poss 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
AzcunA 


324 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


MR. AZCUNA. I vote no. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bacani 

BISHOP BACANI. I vote no. and may I explain my 
vote, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

COMMISSIONER BACANI EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

BISHOP BACANI. I vote no. first, on the understand- 
ing that the formulation proposed by Commissioner 
Azcuna, while not excluding our claim to Sabah, does 
not say we are claiming Sabah. 

Second, I want to ask, and I doubt whether we can 
always determine, whether or not we exercise sovereign 
jurisdiction over a particular piece of land. Perhaps we 
can determine, but can we always do this at some future 
time? Suppose the country is temporarily unable to 
exercise sovereign jurisdiction over a part of its territo- 
ry, does that mean that that ceases to be part of the 
Philippines? I doubt whether we can always ascertain, 
and for that reason, I vote iio. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bengzon 

COMMISSIONER BENGZON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BENGZON. I vote yes, first, because the amend- 
ment does not only preclude the government from pur- 
suing but also from not pursuing its claim to any territo- 
ry. 

Second, if any part of the Philippines is invaded or 
taken by force by any other foreign nation, that is not 
contemplated as lost under the amendment. These are 
the two reasons I am in favor of the proposed amend- 
ment. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bennagen 

COMMISSIONER BENNAGEN EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BENNAGEN. I vote yes but on the assumption 
that the provision will not preclude some other future 
claims, not necessarily Sabah. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bernas 


exercising whatever right it might have under inter- 
national law. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rosario Braid 

COMMISSIONER ROSARIO BRAID 
EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I vote yes on the assumption 
that the Philippines has an open claim in the future and 
that this amendment does not preclude our possible 
negotiation vis-a-vis Sabah. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Brocka 

COMMISSIONER BROCKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BROCKA. I vote yiw in agreement with the 
perceptions of Commissioners Abubakar and Alonto. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Calderon 

MR. CALDERON. My vote is iiQ. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Castro de 

COMMISSIONER DE CASTRO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE CASTRO. I vote 02 for the reason that the 
amendment seems to state that we exercise sovereign 
jurisdiction at present. 

I also vote ua because according to our caucus, it 
seems to convey that the word “historic” is against 
what Malaysia wants. To them, the word “historic” 
means our claim to Sabah. “Historic” not only to Sabah 
but to what we had in the past and what we can have in 
the future. If our children, grandchildren, and great- 
grandchildren will, in fifty years, find some historic 
documents which would show we have a claim to a 
certain territory, then they may lose it because we are 
taking from them their right to claim it. Also, the word 
“historic” will put to naught the different treaties upon 
which our national territory has been based. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Colayco 

COMMISSIONER COLAYCO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 


COMMISSIONER BERNAS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE COLAYCO. All the good reasons in favor of the 

amendment have been heard, and I wish to add this one. 
FR. BERNAS. I have not changed my mind. I vote Because of this long-pending claim, we have not been 

yes and I just would like to give the assurance that this able to foster a full commercial relationship with 

amendment does not preclude the Philippines from Malaysia. 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


325 


I, therefore, vote for the amendment. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Concepcion 

COMMISSIONER CONCEPCION EXPLAINS 
HIS VOTE 

MR. CONCEPCION. I vote no, the reason being that 
the expression “OVER WHICH THE GOVERNMENT 
EXERCISES SOVEREIGN JURISDICTION” implies a 
waiver to whatever rights we have over Sabah. I am 
positive that at present we are not exercising sovereign 
jurisdiction over Sabah. So, in that belief I feel that the 
amendment is already a renunciation of our claim to 
Sabah. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Davide 


subject to misconstruction. I am afraid that by attempt- 
ing indirectly, impliedly or inadvertently our claim to 
Sabah as some of us believe would be the effect of this 
amendment, we would be outdoing the Malaysians; we 
would be more Malaysians than the Malaysians them- 
selves. 

Madam President, under Article XII of the Manila 
Accord entered into among the Federation of Malaysia, 
the Republic of Indonesia, and the Republic of the 
Philippines, the Ministers said, and I quote: 

The Ministers took note of the Philippine claim and the 
right of the Philippines to continue to pursue it in accord- 
ance with international law and the principle of pacific 
settlement of disputes. They agreed that the inclusion of 
North Borneo, now Sabah, in the Federation of Malaysia 
would not prejudice either the claim or any right there- 
under. 

My vote, therefore. Madam President, is no. 


COMMISSIONER DAVIDE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I vote no and my 
explanation is that the proposal casts a cloud of doubt 
on the validity of our claim to Sabah. It is not for us to 
vote for a waiver. We would be depriving the generations 
to come of a basis for a claim to a territory over which 
we have a historic right. We will have difficulty selling 
our work to our people, if we now waive our claim to 
Sabah. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Foz 

COMMISSIONER FOZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. FOZ. I vote yes, because the amendment has 
nothing to do with Sabah. We should allow the national 
leadership to address the question. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Garcia 

MR. GARCIA. I vote yes . 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Gascon 

Guingona 

COMMISSIONER GUINGONA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I have already 
expressed my views, but with your kind permission I 
would like to add something to explain my vote. 

I said earlier that we should make our provision on 
National Territory as flexible as possible, principally by 
not using ambiguous or unclear terms which may be 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Jamir 


MR. JAMIR. I vote 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Laurel 

COMMISSIONER LAUREL EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. LAUREL. With the assurance of the proponent 
of the amendment. Commissioner Bernas, that this does 
not do away with our future claim to any particular 
territory, including Sabah, I vote yes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Lerum 

MR. LERUM. My vote is 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Maambong 

COMMISSIONER MAAMBONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 


dR. MAAMBONG. I vote y^, Madam President, but 
so doing, in the assumption that this proposed 
jndment will be carried, I would like to suggest to 
honorable sponsor and to the honorable P/oPonent 
the substitute amendment in advance that there 
uld be some realignment of 

1 phrase reads: “OVER XHE GOV^^ 

NT EXERCISES SOVEREIGN JURISDICTION, 

1 in the latter part of the substitute amedment on 
! I Talso reads: "areas over which the Philippmes 
sovereignty or jurisdiction, 
rhank you. Madam President. 


326 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Monsod 

MR. MONSOD. I vote yes . 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Natividad Nieva 

MS. NIEVA. I vote yes . 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Nolledo 

COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. NOLLEDO. I vote against the amendment 
because it, in effect, drops our claim to Sabah, just like 
dropping a hot potato. 

Elimination of the term “legal title” may imperil our 
right to our waters under the Treaty of Paris and other 
treaties. I adhere to the well-taken arguments of Com- 
missioner Roberto Concepcion. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Ople 

COMMISSIONER OPLE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I vote yes . First of all, I do not think the Bernas 
amendment forecloses any just claim of this country on 
any part of the earth, whether in the past, in the present 
or in the future, because all such claims are duly pro- 
tected by international law which, in fact, we have 
agreed to adopt in this Constitution. 

I was very supportive of the Azcuna amendment. I 
think the amendment can stand. But there was another 
amendment which I thought addressed the concern of 
Commissioner Guingona — that there should be as few 
ambiguities in the Constitution as possible, and I think 
the Bernas amendment is definitely more unambiguous 
than the earlier amendments that had been presented. 

Madam President, this may look an innocent provi- 
sion on National Territory. After all, it does not trans- 
cend municipal law. On the other hand, when we define 
our national territory, any part thereof becomes sacred 
to this generation and all other generations of Filipinos, 
and to that, under the American Declaration of In- 
dependence which Filipino children like to quote until 
now, “we pledge our life, our fortune and our sacred 
honor.” 

I do not mind sending my children to the Kalayaan 
Island in order to defend that part of our national 
territory. I do not mind sending my grandchildren to 
Palawan to die there in defense of Palawan. I do not 
mind sending them to Tawi-Tawi to offer their lives in 
defense of Tawi-Tawi. But I certainly will mind if some 


future Napoleon in Malacanang decides to invoke the 
ambiguities in this territorial provision and send an 
army, including my grandchildren, to Sabah. I would 
regret that very much. I would not want them to die for 
strange places, like Sabah or any other territory over 
which we may have a claim or assert future claim, 
which, in any case, is not foreclosed. 

One of the reasons I am voting for this amendment is 
that I do not think any of our rights is unduly threat- 
ened. 

And so. Madam President, in the interest of clarity as 
to what constitutes our national territory which will 
claim, if need be, our lives, our fortunes and our sacred 
honor to be passed on to our posterity, and also in the 
interest of safety and the security of my own mind 
about what I will lay down my life for, I vote yes . 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Padilla 

COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, the Bernas amend- 
ment would change the clause “belonging to the Philip- 
pines by historical sovereign right or legal title” with the 
phrase “over which the Philippines exercises sovereign 
jurisdiction.” 

I notice that what is accepted and what appears in the 
amendment, as in the substitute amendment, as well as 
in the 1973 Constitution, reads: “over which the Philip- 
pines has sovereignty or jurisdiction.” This amendment 
will contradict what is already accepted, and I quote; 
“over which the Philippines has sovereignty or jurisdic- 
tion.” The words “sovereignty” and “jurisdiction” are 
separated by the disjunctive “or,” but they are now 
being joined, and “jurisdiction” is even qualified by the 
adjective “sovereign.” 

Madam President, what is accepted is “sovereignty or 
jurisdiction.” The amendment specifies “sovereign 
jurisdiction.” 

So, I vote against the amendment because it will be 
confusing and even contradictory. Moreover, if this 
amendment does not foreclose any claim — and I would 
not want to specify Sabah — why then change the 
present provision? If there is no purpose for the amend- 
ment, why accept the amendment? I also wish to con- 
cur with the observations of Commissioner Concepcion. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Quesada 

COMMISSIONER QUESADA EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. QUESADA. I vote with the understanding 
and the assurance of the proponent that this amend- 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


327 


ment will not preclude any future claim on Sabah or 
any other territory. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rama 

COMMISSIONER RAMA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RAMA. Despite the assurances of the proponent 
that this does not preclude the Philippines from pursuing 
its claim to Sabah, it seems that even among the Mem- 
bers of the Commission we have differing views and 
interpretations of the amendment. 

I am reminded. Madam President, of the legal prin- 
ciple that the author of an ambiguity in a phrase or a 
provision suffers such ambiguity. In other words, an 
ambiguity shall be resolved against the author which in 
this case will be the Commission, if we adopt the 
amendment. 


“sovereign rights.” But because we were amending the 
Constitution of 1972, and the Sabah issue was a very 
hot issue at that time, we had to put a safety valve 
provision in the Constitution or we might be held in 
estoppel from claiming other territories, not necessarily 
Sabah, which historically and legally belong to us. To 
my mind, therefore, there is no cause for alarm in main- 
taining the present provision changing the term “historic 
right” to “sovereign right.” Also, there is no harm in 
accepting the Bernas amendment in the light of his 
explanation that it will not preclude us later on from 
claiming Sabah. Since I do not attach much significance 
on this issue one way or the other, I, therefore, abstain. 
Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rigos No Rodrigo 

COMMISSIONER RODRIGO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 


Therefore, I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Regalado 

COMMISSIONER REGALADO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I vote not 
because of any so-called assurances of Commissioner 
Bernas, but because of the intendment and the purpose 
such an amendment is intended to subserve, it being 
understood that the word “exercises” is used in its 
durative verb form and the term “sovereign jurisdiction” 
is used in the sense of its present concept under the 
principles of public international law, in accordance 
with the rule of contemporaneous construction. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Reyes de los 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes may 
proceed. 


COMMISSIONER DE LOS REYES 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, when the 
Constitutional Convention of 1971 included the phrase 
“historic right or legal title,” it was not specifically in- 
tended to claim Sabah. As I understood it, the term 
refers to territories like Batanes and/or other territories 
included in the Treaty of Paris and other international 
agreements. 

If we did not have a constitutional amendment in 
1972, there would have been no need to place that 
phrase “historic right or legal title,” now changed to 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, for the reasons 
already given by those who voted yes, I also vote 
But I would like to add something. I want to comment 
3 n the misgivings expressed by some who voted no — 
that if we adopt this amendment, then we lose sovereign 
iurisdiction over a portion of the present Philippme 
territory. This means that if, for example, Batanes is 
temporarily invaded and conquered by a foreign nation, 
then we lose sovereign jurisdiction over Batanes it tms 
amendment is approved. That is not so. Madam Pres- 
ident, because this amendment “over which the govern- 
ment exercises sovereign jurisdiction” does «ot refer to 
any portion of the Philippines which we now have. Let 
me read the first sentence of the Article; 

The national territory comprises the Philippme archi- 
pelago with all the islands and waters embraced therem, 
and all other territories . . . over which the Philippmes has 
sovereignty or jurisdiction. 

“All other territories” refers to territories other than 
the islands presently comprising the ***^^*PP‘"® _ 

peLgo. So, sovereign jurisdiction applies to or modiHes 
onlv other territories and not any land or island 
wmch 'rnow considered part of the Philippine archi- 
pelago. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Romulo 

COMMISSIONER ROMULO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR ROMULO. I vote on the grounds that we 
have enough problems on what is clearly now our e 
torv more so when we claim somebody else s territory. 
S "vote yes on the assumption that the amendment 
does not bar wr claims to some future territory. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rosales Sarmiento 


328 


THURSDAY. JULY 3, 1986 


COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Bernas amendment will not, 
in any way, diminish our sovereignty over any territory. 
As a matter of fact, even without a provision on Nation- 
al Territory or even without the Bernas amendment, our 
sovereignty over any territory will not be affected. The 
Bernas amendment should cause no fear among our 
brethren because it will not prevent now or hereafter 
the Aquino government or future governments to pur- 
sue its claim over any territory. 

I, therefore, vote yes for the Bernas amendment. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Suarez 

COMMISSIONER SUAREZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUAREZ. I might as well start with my vote. 
I vote against the amendment. As a simple citizen of this 
country, I find it presumptuous to waive our nation’s 
historic rights and legal title. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Sumulong 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is 
recognized. 

COMMISSIONER SUMULONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUMULONG. It is a well-established rule of 
international law that a state can claim as its national 
territory only that territory over which it has sovereign- 
ty or jurisdiction. If the Philippines has sovereignty or 
jurisdiction over Sabah, then Sabah is a part of our 
national territory. If we do not exercise sovereignty or 
jurisdiction — and sovereignty or jurisdiction means 
control of internal as well as external affairs — how can 
we claim it as part of our territory? We may put in our 
Constitution that we are claiming Sabah, but we cannot 
say that it is part of our national territory as long as we 
do not exercise sovereignty or jurisdiction. That is why 
our national territory is defined in our 1935 Constitu- 
tion as: 

... all the territory ceded to the United States by the 
Treaty of Paris . . . together with all the islands embraced 
in the treaty concluded at Washington . . . and all territory 
over which the present Government of the Philippine 
Islands exercises jurisdiction. 

The last phrase was added upon the strong suggestion 
of President Recto because he knows that we can only 
claim as part of our national territory only those terri- 
tories over which we exercise control, sovereignty or 
jurisdiction. 

I agree with Commissioner Bernas. This will not stop 
us if someday Sabah should come under our control 


internally and externally or we can claim Sabah to be 
a part of our national territory. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tadeo No Tan 

COMMISSIONER TAN EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

SR. TAN. Madam President, I have no legal reasons 
for voting yes that have not already been stated, but 
I choose to vote in the affirmative because I feel that 
this amendment would hasten peace and harmony 
among our Asian neighbors. And to me this is primary 
to a claim to a foreign land. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tingson Trenas 

COMMISSIONER TRENAS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. TRENAS. I vote ng and I adopt the reasons of 
those who voted in the same manner. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Uka 

COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. UKA. Madam President, I vote because the 
Bernas amendment is very clear. It will not, in any way, 
preclude us from claiming any territory over which we 
have a valid claim. By said amendment, we can even 
claim the moon in the future. I do not think Astronaut 
Armstrong will ever object. I vote yes. 

Thank you very much. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villacorta 

COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I vote jifi in 
the absence of an unmistakable assurance that will be 
universally understood, that the term “sovereign juris- 
diction” is not an oath to limitation that could not 
compel the Philippines in asserting her future terri- 
torial claims to satisfy all the stringent requirements 
of claims to sovereignty; namely, effective occupation, 
historic rights, legal title, and the right of national 
self-determination. I also vote no because twice, last 
night and tonight, my express intention to exercise 
my right to seek clarification duly registered with the 
Floor Leader was stifled by inflexible parliamentary 
rules. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


329 


COMMISSIONER VILLEGAS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLEGAS. I vote no because as far as I can 
gather from my contacts with the Malaysians, their 
objection has been to the word “historic,” and I think 
“sovereign right” and “legal title” will not be objection- 
able to them. 


the Philippine archipelago, with all the islands and 
waters embraced therein, and all other territories 
OVER WHICH THE GOVERNMENT EXERCISES 
SOVEREIGN JURISDICTION. . .” After the word 
“jurisdiction,” I propose to add AS WELL AS THOSE 
UNDER HISTORIC RIGHT OR LEGAL TITLE, then 
continue the rest of the sentence. 


THE PRESIDENT EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

THE PRESIDENT. Before the Secretary-General 
conducts a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes, the President desires to vote. 

I examined the Rules and there is actually no prohibi- 
tion against the President voting. The Rule says: 

The President or the Presiding Officer shall not be 

obliged to vote except to break a tie. 

In other words, I can exercise my option to vote and I 
would like to vote. 

I vote no because if, as stated here by the honorable 
proponent and the other Members of the Commission, 
the amendment would not foreclose any possible claim 
on any territory including Sabah, then I believe there is 
no reason why we should change the phrase that is 
present in the amendment proposed by the sponsor and 
by Commissioner Azcuna. I believe that the phrase “be- 
longing to the Philippines by sovereign right or legal 
title” is more embracing and flexible to include all 
possible situations concerning the national territory of 
the Philippines. So, I vote no. 

SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Gascon Yes Rosales 

Natividad Tingson 


MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, I regret I cannot 
accept the amendment. I would rather throw it to the 
body. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the sponsor say? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee has the same 
decision as Commissioner Azcuna. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment is not accepted? 


MR. RODRIGO. This, in effect, is practically a 
motion for reconsideration. 


THE PRESIDENT. It has not been accepted by the 
sponsor. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I know the reason why? 


MR AZCUNA. It is because we precisely would like 
) avoid the word “historic” because of the particular 
annotation of that word during the hi th^^ 

971 Constitutional Convention. 
on to be free from those connotations; therefore 

lopted the word “sovereign” so tgg in 

e wanted it to mean rather than what th g 
971 wanted “historic” to mean. That is Whe reas 
ant to avoid “historic” although sovereign covers 

le same thing. 

MR DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I a* a 
uestion of the one who objected to the amendment. 




THE PRESIDENT. The results show 27 votes in 
favor, 17 against and 1 abstention; the Bernas amend- 
ment is approved. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. We ask that Commissioner de Castro 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, please allow me 
to read the amendment of the Honorable Bernas. It 
states, and I quote: “The national territory comprises 


AR. DE CASTRO. The Gentleman is 
sav afraid - not in favor of the word histori 

lause it is a word which had 

lerstand by Malaysia. Let us be frank about this^ 
!s a wo^d objected to by Malaysia because h ^ 
nifestation of our claim ^abah. As I said be^ , 

’ is a municipal law which affects us only. y 
'uld some other people, 

ved in our use of the term “historic right ' As i 
1 before, if we want to be friends and we ^ant amhy 
one nations with all other nations, that amity mus 
> be answered with amity. It is 

:o another because he wants some mg ” 

ion is conditional to not using 

dam President, I am not talkmg about its ^ 

isequences on our relations ° nthine to do 

ist that this is a municipal law and it has noth g 


330 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


with any other nation. If the sponsor will not accept my 
amendment, I will request a division of the House on 
this. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. One question occurs to me. A 
substantial number of those who voted said, “I vote 
yes in reliance upon the accuracy of the opinion ex- 
pressed by Mr. So and So that this amendment does not 
affect our claim to Sabah.” The question is: Can that 
answer be considered a yes vote? What kind of a vote 
is it? Can we cast a conditional vote? When ‘'yes” is 
conditional or predicated upon the express assumption 
that the opinion or conclusion expressed by another is 
correct, does not the giver of the answer manifest his 
lack of adequate knowledge to answer without qualifica- 
tion? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

What is the pleasure of the Acting Floor Leader? 

MS. AQUINO. May I be recognized in reply to the 
position made by Justice Concepcion? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader may 
proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. I voted yes and the contemplation of 
my affirmative vote was the clear and unmistakable 
understanding that a vote in favor of the amendment 
does not exclude any claim by way of historic right or 
legal title. If it includes Sabah, that is fine. But it was 
not based on an assurance given by any other pro- 
ponent of the amendment. And I believe I speak on 
behalf of the other colleagues who voted the same. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. What I heard from the many state- 
ments of the distinguished Commissioners who voted 
yes was that their votes were conditional based on the 
understanding or the assurance or whatever is being 
assured that this does not conflict with the previous 
term, and would not preclude the possible claim over 
Sabah. 

I have heard many explanations of the votes, and to 
me, they are conditional. Worse, this is based on the 
assurance of some other Members. I cannot understand 
a vote that is based on assurance and is, therefore, 
conditional. 


I concur with the correct observation of Commis- 
sioner Concepcion. 

MR. QPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. QPLE. In the interest of symmetry, I hope the 
Chair will allow me to say a few words in reply to some 
of the misgivings just expressed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. On the part of those who voted yes 
to the amendment, I, of course, recognize that there is 
no equality of legal perceptions in a disparate body of 
this kind, and there are some who may feel they are 
more gifted about legal issues to the extent of being 
able to divine the authentic intent of those who cast 
a vote in these proceedings. But I think those who make 
up this Commission are entitled to a certain benefit of 
the doubt, that they do not cast their votes without 
having achieved an inner degree of conviction; that, 
in fact, these votes are meaningful to them and are 
expressive of their true intent. 

I just wanted to say that. Madam President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Insofar as the Chair is concerned, 
the votes of the Commissioners who voted yes are 
positive affirmative votes and whatever has been stated 
is an explanation of the vote that has been given and, 
therefore, the votes, as already reported, stand. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me. There is an amend- 
ment of Commissioner de Castro which is before us and 
which has not been accepted by the sponsor. So that we 
will have to vote on this particular amendment of 
Commissioner de Castro. 

Will Commissioner de Castro please repeat his pro- 
posed amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. On line 4, Madam President, insert 
the words AS WELL AS THOSE UNDER HISTORIC 
RIGHT OR LEGAL TITLE. 

On my proposed amendment, the whole sentence 
now reads: “The national territory comprises the Philip- 
pine archipelago, with all the islands and waters em- 
braced therein, and all the other territories over which 
the government exercises sovereign jurisdiction AS 
WELL AS THOSE UNDER HISTORIC RIGHT OR 
LEGAL TITLE.” 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


331 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

There are 9 votes in favor and 24 against; the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner de Castro is lost. 


that in the period of amendments, the one who pro- 
posed the amendment and the one who opposed it 
each had five minutes to speak for or against the pro- 
posal. There is no rule which says that anybody can 
just stand up here and start talking about other matters 
other than the amendment being considered. I am just 
trying to relay that again. Madam President, so that we 
can have some sanity in these proceedings. 

Thank you very much. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, just for clarifi- 
cation. Regarding the assurance given by the honorable 
proponent on his amendment, what effect would it 
have as far as the provision is concerned? Would it have 
a binding and persuasive effect? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the question directed to me or 
to the proponent? 

MR. GUINGONA. It is directed to Commissioner 
Bernas. 

FR. BERNAS. I regret I was not listening. Could the 
Gentleman kindly repeat the question? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I wanted to 
be clarified. Since the Gentleman has made the as- 
surance that his amendment would not affect any claim 
of the Philippines either now or hereafter, including 
presumably our claim to Sabah, what would be the 
effect of such a statement? As far as the provision is 
concerned, not as far as those who voted are concerned, 
would it have a binding and persuasive effect? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, before I answer the 
question, may I just raise a point of order? We have 
voted on the proposition; we have gone beyond the 
interpellation period; we have gone through the amend- 
ment process. Now, we are having interpellation again 
for clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the statement of Commis- 
sioner Guingona is out of order. 

FR. BERNAS. It is my contention that it is out of 
order. If he wants me to answer that, I will answer him 
in private. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the mani- 
festation of Commissioner Guingona is out of order. 

Let us proceed. Is there any other amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I do not want to sound like a 
broken record, Madam President, but I stated earlier 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you very much for lectur- 
ing to us and to the Commissioners. 

Is there any other amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Davide has manifested his intention to introduce ano- 
ther amendment. We ask that he be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

The amendment would be after the Bernas ame^ 
ment, and it reads: OR WHICH BELONG TO IT 
TIMES PAST. 

'XTJT2 T>r> t2CTrkt?xTnr wvi/ar^ ic that to be inserted? 


MR. DAVIDE. After the Bernas amendment, Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 


MR. AZCUNA. We do not accept the amendment, 
Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
explain? 

MR. AZCUNA. We throw it to the floor. Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide please 
explain his amendment? 


MR. DAVIDE. As could easily be determined from 
the votes in favor of the Bernas amendment, i is vety 
clear that these votes were because of the 
by the proponent himself that it will no .• 

claim over Sabah. But that particular in . 

riot borne out by the language. So, P^°P° ^ 

to put on record, to place it in black and w i e, 
interpretation given by the Bernas proposa is re 
to foreclose any claim over Sabah. The m ^ nlead 
clarify the confused situation on the i^ue. o, P 
to those who voted in favor of the Bernas 
because of the interpretation given that we 
make it very clear in the language of the de ini i 


332 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


the national territory that, indeed, we have not fore- 
closed or waived a claim. 

I submit to a vote by the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment ac- 
cepted or not accepted? I did not hear Commissioner 
Azcuna. 

MS. AQUINO. It is not accepted. I move for a vote, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are now ready to vote on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide. Will 
Commissioner Davide kindly read that again. 

MR. DAVIDE. After “sovereign jurisdiction,” add the 
following: OR WHICH BELONG TO IT SINCE TIMES 
PAST and then put a comma (,). 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

There are 12 votes in favor and 18 votes against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President, I was out 
when the votes were counted. I would want to register 
my vote in favor of the amendment of Commissioner 
Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, there will now be 13 votes in 
favor of the amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would now propose an amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. On line 4 of the draft of the sub- 
stitute amendment of Commissioner Azcuna, delete the 
word “the,” and in its place, insert the word ITS. Then, 
on line 7, after the word “areas,” insert the word 
THEREOF, then place a period (.). 

MR. DAVIDE. Anterior amendment. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, if I will not be 
allowed to finish my amendment, it will not be under- 
standable. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please continue. 

MR. MAAMBONG. On line 7, after the insertion I 
just mentioned, delete the words “over which the Philip- 
pines has sovereignty or jurisdiction.” So that the provi- 
sion, as amended, would now read: “Consisting of its 
terrestrial, fluvial, and aerial domains, including the 
territorial sea, the seabed, the subsoil, the insular shelves 
and the other submarine areas THEREOF.” 

MR. AZCUNA. I would accept the amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Anterior amendment of Commis- 
sioner Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have two anterior amendments. The 
first is on line 6, and is just a deletion of the article 
“the” between “and” and “other.” 

THE PRESIDENT. The deletion of the word “the 
between “and” and “other”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. How will it read? 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 7, delete the “s” in “sub- 
marines.” 

MR. AZCUNA. It is just “submarine.” 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it should be “submarine areas. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, that is how it reads now; there is 
no “s” there. 

MR. DAVIDE. My text has an “s” on “submarine. 

MR. AZCUNA. It is a typographical error. Madam 
President. I am sorry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Davide have 
any other amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. So, if the word is “submarine” with- 
out an “s,” I would have no amendment on line 7. 

My only amendment would be the deletion of “the” 
on line 6, between the words “and” and “other” at the 
end of the line. 

MR. AZCUNA. So, how does that part read now? 

MR. DAVIDE. It will read: “and other submarine 
areas.” 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


333 


MR. AZCUNA. I accept that, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us proceed first with the 
amendment of Commissioner Maambong. So, is that 
clear? 

Commissioner Maambong, how will it read now after 
the Bernas amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. After the Bernas amendment, it 
will read: '‘consisting of its terrestrial, fluvial, and aerial 
domains, including the territorial sea, the seabed, the 
subsoil, the insular shelves and other submarine areas 
THEREOF,” then put a period (.). 

THE PRESIDENT. Was this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, we accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Maambong? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

With respect to the amendment of Commissioner 
Davide to delete the word “the” on line 6, between the 
words “and” and “other,” which was also accepted by 
the Committee, is there any objection? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Is there any other amendment? 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Azcuna be recognized to read the Article, as 
amended. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. The Article now, as amended, will 
read as follows; 

Article I 

The National Territory 

Section 1. The national territory comprises the Philip- 
pine archipelago, with all the islands and waters em- 
braced therein, and all THE other territories over which 
the government exercises sovereign jurisdiction, consist- 
ing of its terrestrial, fluvial, and aerial domains, includ- 
ing the territorial sea, the SEABED, the subsoil, the 
insular shelves and other submarine areas thereof. The 
waters around, between and connecting the islands of 
the archipelago, irrespective of their breadth and di- 
mensions, form part of the internal waters of the 
Philippines. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MS AQUINO. Madam President, I move th^ we 
proceed to vote on Second Reading on Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 263. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, if there are no other 
amendments, I move to close the period of amend- 
ments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the voting on Second Reading on Article I 
on the National Territory, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 7:20 p.m. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Acting 

ove that the body proceed to vote on Second Rea g 

1 this provision on National Territory as re 


BISHOP BACANI. May I just ask a 
cting Floor Leader? Does it mean t en a 
iree calendar days, we have to vote on this on T 

eading? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, this voting is only on Second 
^r.A aftPTwards. the copies will be pnnted. 


BISHOP BACANI. When will the copies be dis- 
•ibuted? I myself would like to register an objection 

) the motion. I would like to get the f ^ 

lis also. As it is proposed, we can float this first to the 
ponlp. and see what its implications may e. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


It was 7:26 p.m. 


At 7:23 p.m., the session was resumed. RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. At 7:34 p.m., the session was resumed. 


334 


THURSDAY, JULY 3, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 


At 7:37 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. We ask that Commissioner Azcuna be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, the sponsor and 
this humble Member have no objection to suspend the 
voting on Second Reading on Article I on the National 
Territory until Monday for the reasons stated by Com- 
missioner Bacani. 

MR. DE CASTRO. No, no; we already have the time 
now and I see no reason to postpone it till Monday. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, point of order. 
Since I have previously withdrawn my motion, the 
Rules requires that only the sponsor can move to pro- 
ceed to vote on Second Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the motion of Commissioner 
de Castro is out of order. The motion that we vote on 
Second Reading having been withdrawn, then the 
Second Reading is hereby postponed to Monday, the 
next session. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, please. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. We submit to the ruling of the Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. After the remark of Commissioner 
Bacani to delay the voting by trying to get the reaction 
of the people, I think, as I understand it, he withdrew 
that desire to delay. And so, we might as well vote 
instead of waiting till Monday. 


MR. DE CASTRO. We have a time constraint. We are 
working from eight o’clock in the morning, moving 
from one room to another up to this time; and we are 
trying our best to work that hard because we have a 
time constraint up to September. At this point we still 
have time to work on this, and I see no reason why we 
should delay it because by Monday, we have more work 
to do than vote on Second Reading on this matter. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, earlier, I moved to 
proceed to vote on Second Reading; I am withdrawing 
my motion for the record. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is with- 
drawing her motion. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, then I move 
that we proceed to vote on Second Reading. We still 
have the time and we have many, many things to do on 
Monday. In fact, we will be working on a holiday. We 
want to finish this. In fact, we have to limit the period of 
debate; we have to limit the time of a speaker and I see 
no reason why, so early at night, we cannot proceed to 
vote on Second Reading. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 7:36 p.m. 


MR. RODRIGO. Considering that about 20 Members 
are no longer in the session hall, I think, in fairness to 
them, we should not vote on this very important matter. 
So, I move to adjourn until Monday. 


MS. AQUINO. I object to the motion to adjourn. 
Madam President. First, there is an overwhelming re- 
quest to reset the schedule of plenary session on 
Monday back to five o’clock in the afternoon. That is 
the request of some of the committee chairmen. So I 
move that we reset our schedule of the plenary session 
on Monday back to five o’clock. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at five o’clock in the afternoon during which 
we will vote on Second Reading on the Article on the 
National Territory. 

It was 7:39 p.m. 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


335 


R.C.C. NO. 24 
Monday, July 7, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 


ROLL CALL 


At 5:14 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 


NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Ma. Teresa F. Nieva. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


PRAYER 

MS. NIEVA. O good and loving Father, You created 
men and women as brothers and sisters, and as co- 
creators of the world. You gave the riches of creation 
for each and everyone’s use so that we Your children 
made in Your image and likeness may live lives of 
human dignity. 

Yours is the earth and the fullness thereof; we are 
only Your stewards. We humbly ask You to cleanse us 
from self-centeredness and pride, and empty us of greed 
and intolerance. Fill us with Your Spirit so that we may 
have the collective wisdom and courage to frame a 
Magna Carta that will lay the firm foundations for the 
building of a truly just and humane society. 

Heavenly Father, we praise and thank You that like 
the Israelites of old. You freed us from slavery and 
bondage, and led us to the Promised Land. 

Continue to protect us and guide us so that in the 
crucial days ahead we may be Your faithful instruments 
in securing to our people and our country the blessings of 
democracy under a rule of law and a regime of truth, 
justice, love, equality and peace. 

All these we ask of You in the name of Your Son, 
Jesus Christ, and through the intercession of our Blessed 
Mother Mary. Amen. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present* 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present* 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present* 

Lerum Present* 

Maambong .... Present 
Monsod Present 


Natividad . . 

. . . Present 

Nieva 

. . . Present 

NoUedo . . . 

. . . Present 

Ople 

. . . Present* 

Padilla .... 

. . . Present 

Quesada . . . 

. . . Present 

Rama 

. . . Present 

Regalado . . . 

. . . Present 

Reyes de los 

. . . Present 

Rigos 

. . . Present 

Rodrigo . . . 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . 

. . Present 

Rosales .... 

. . . Absent 

Sarmiento . . 

. . Present 

Suarez .... 

. . . Present 

Sumulong . . 

. . . Present 

Tadeo 

. . . Present 

Tan 

. . . Present 

Tingson . . . 

. . . Present 

Trenas .... 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . . Present 

Villacorta . . 

. . . Present 

VUlegas .... 

. . . Present 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 42 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MR. ALONTO. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the last session. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
ation of the Assistant Floor Leader? (Silence) The 
lair hears none; the motion is approved. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


336 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the last session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Assistant Floor Leader? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I move that we 
now proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Reports, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 409, entitled: 

RESOLUTION CREATING AUTONOMOUS REGIONS FOR 
THE MUSLIMS OF MINDANAO AND THE PEOPLE 
OF THE CORDILLERA HIGHLANDS AND PROVID- 
ING FOR OTHER AREAS OF AUTONOMY WITHIN 
LARGER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 410, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MAKING THE COMMISSION ON ELEC- 
TIONS THE SOLE JUDGE OF ELECTIONS, RETURNS 
AND QUALIFICATIONS OF ALL ELECTIVE LOCAL 
OFFICIALS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 411, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF A 
SEPARATE ARTICLE IN THE CONSTITUTION INSTI- 
TUTIONALIZING THE CONCEPT OF PEOPLE POWER. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on the Legislative. 

Proposed Resolution No. 412, entitled: 

RESOLUTION LIMITING THE PRACTICE IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES OF THE VARIOUS PROFESSIONS TO FILIPINO 
PROFESSIONALS. 


Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 413, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL 
COMMITMENT OF THE STATE TO ASSIST THE DIS- 
ABLED INTO BECOMING PRODUCTIVE AND USEFUL 
MEMBERS OF SOCIETY. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 414, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO RESTORE THE PRE-MARTIAL LAW 
POLICY OF ALLOWING VOTERS IN HIGHLY URBAN- 
IZED CITIES TO VOTE FOR PROVINCIAL OFFICIALS. 

Introduced by Hon. Rama. 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Proposed Resolution No. 415, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE STATE SHALL ENCOURAGE THE ES- 
TABLISHMENT AND GROWTH OF POLITICAL PAR- 
TIES ORGANIZED ALONG SECTORAL LINES AND 
WHICH SHALL STAND FOR WELDDEFINED PRIN- 
CIPLES AND PROGRAMS OF GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Brocka. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 416, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO UPGRADE THE QUALIIY 
OF EDUCATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 417, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT SECTION 4, AR- 
TICLE XV OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION AND INSERTING THE WORDS 
‘RIGHTS AND’ BEFORE THE WORD ‘DUTIES’ AND 
‘FAMILY LIVING AND’ BEFORE ‘CITIZENSHIP.’ 

Introduced by Hon. Tan, Rigos and Villacorta. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 418, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT SECTIONS 4 AND 5, ARTICLE 
II OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION AND ADD THE 
WORDS ‘IN THE NURTURE AND CARE OF CHILDREN 
AND YOUTH FOR THEIR SURVIVAL AND TOTAL 
DEVELOPMENT AND’ AND ‘MORAL, EMOTIONAL,’ 
RESPECTIVELY. 

Introduced by Hon. Tan, Villacorta and Rigos. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


MONDAY, JULY 7. 1986 


337 


Proposed Resolution No. 419, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION GUARANTEEING 
A DECENT SHELTER FOR EVERY FILIPINO, PRO- 
TECTION AGAINST ARBITRARY AND INHUMAN 
DEMOLITION OF DWELLE^GS AND AN ASSURANCE 
FOR PROPER RESETTLEMENT UNDER A COMPRE- 
HENSIVE SHELTER PROGRAM. 

Introduced by Hon. Tan, Villacorta and Rigos. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 420, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE CREATION OF A CITI- 
ZENS’ ARMY THAT SHALL TAKE ON THE PRIMARY 
RESPONSIBILITY OF DEFENDING THE STATE 
AGAINST FOREIGN AGGRESSION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 421, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION TO INSURE THAT THE STATE 
SHALL UNDERTAKE AND IMPLEMENT AN URBAN 
LAND REFORM AND SOCIAL HOUSING PROGRAM. 

Introduced by Hon. Nieva, Monsod, Tan, Bacani and 
Gascon. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Proposed Resolution No. 422, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM OF 
FREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Nieva. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 423, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR CONSUMER PRO- 
TECTION IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Bennagen, Quesada, Tan, 
Rosario Braid, Sarmiento, Aquino and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 424, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR CONSUMER PRO- 
TECTION IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Bennagen, Quesada, Tan, 
Rosario Braid, Sarmiento, Aquino and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 425, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION GUARANTEEING 


INALIENABILHY AND INSURANCE OF A MINIMUM 
PATRIMONY OF EACH FAMILY THAT ENSURE DE- 
CENT FAMILY LIFE. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento, Quesada and Tadeo. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 426, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTHUTION A PROVISION ESTABLISHING 
WORK AS A RIGHT AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, A 
STATE ENDEAVOR TO ACHIEVE FULL PRODUCTIVE 
EMPLOYMENT AND THE CREATION OF A CENTRAL 
IZED MONITORING SYSTEM AND UNEMPLOYMENT 
WELFARE PROGRAM. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento, Quesada, Tadeo and 
Bennagen. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Proposed Resolution No. 427, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS A PROVISION FOR THE 
DEMONETIZATION OF ALL CURRENCY ISSUED 
UNDER THE PREVIOUS REGIME. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro and Suarez. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


oposed Resolution No. 428, entitled. 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE 

SYSTEM OF MULTISECTORAL REPRESENTATION 

IN THE NATIONAL LEGISLATURE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Aquino, 

Sarmiento, Quesada, Tadeo, Garcia, 

Bennagen, Jamir, Nieva, Davide, Jr., Brocka, 
Rosario Braid and Villegas. 


COMMUNICATIONS 


tter from the Honorable Salvador H. Laurel, Vice- 
isident and Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
the restoration of the specific provision in the 1935 
nstitution that the President shall have the power t^^ 
point “Ambassadors, other public Ministers and 

nsuls.” 

smmunication No. 1 16 - Constitutional Commission 

1986) 

the Committee on the Executive. 

tter from Mr. Potenciano M. Alcala. Sr. 
colod City, proposing previsions 
to high school level, land reform, the Sabah issue, 

long others. . . 

Dmmunication No. 1 1 7 - Constitutional Commission 

1986) 

the Steering Committee. 


338 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


Letter from Mr. Gonzalo (Lito) Puyat of Manila, re- 
questing a constitutional mandate on youth and sports 
development. 

(Communication No. 1 1 8 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Commissioner Mario D. Ortiz of the Com- 
mission on Elections, transmitting the draft of proposals 
on election matters discussed by the COMELEC en 
banc. 

(Communication No. 1 19 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Antonio A. Lobitana, proposing the 
elevation of the Bureau of Internal Revenue to a consti- 
tutional body. 

(Communication No. 1 20 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from the Senior Citizens Government Retirees 
Association of Agusan del Norte and Agusan City, 
signed by Ms. Caridad V. Atega, proposing a presidential 
form of government, bicameral legislature, retention of 
the US bases, and limited autonomy of Muslim regions, 
among others. 

(Communication No. 121 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Report of the “mini Con-Com” assigned to Iloilo City 
composed of President Cecilia Munoz Pahna, Commis- 
sioners Ma. Teresa F. Nieva, Efrain B. Trenas and Wil- 
frido V. Villacorta, entitled “Highlights of the Public 
Hearing held at the University of San Agustin Audi- 
torium in Iloilo City on June 28, 1986.” 
(Communication No. 122 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from the Sangguniang Pangwika sa Edukasyon ng 
Pilipinas, with enclosures, signed by Mr. Alfonso O. 
Santiago, requesting that the Constitution be written 
and promulgated in the national language. 

(Communication No. 123 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Style. 

Letter from Mr. Oscar N. Rivera of San Miguel Village, 
Makati, Metro Manila, proposing the adoption of the 
jury system in our courts of law. 


(Communication No. 1 24 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Letter from Mr. Julian Makabayan ng Masa ng Pilipinas, 
urging various political, social and economic reforms. 

(Communication No. 125 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Communication from Mr. Ismael P. Sevilla of Cofradia, 
Malolos, Bulacan, urging that the establishment of a 
cooperative society be made a national policy. 

(Communication No. 126 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 

Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Norberto Canete of Project 4, Quezon 
City, Metro Manila, requesting the inclusion of provi- 
sions on the role of science and technology in the attain- 
ment of national goals, among others. 

(Communication No. 1 27 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Kilusang Mayo Uno signed by Mr. Roberto 
T. Ortaliz, requesting the extension of the period of 
drafting the Constitution and the holding of more pub- 
lic hearings. 

(Communication No. 128 — Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from the Fhipmo Community Board of Sydney 
signed by Mr. Oscar R. Landicho, requesting the lU" 
elusion of a provision on dual citizenship. 

(Communication No. 129 — Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Association of TOWNS Awardees signed 
by Ms. Corazon S. de la Paz, proposing as an additional 
sentence of Section 1, Article IV of the Constitution: 
“Women shall enjoy equal rights with men.” 
(Communication No. 130 — Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights, and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Teodoro Padilla, expressing deep ap- 
preciation to the Commission for adopting Resolution 
No. 5 expressing profound condolence on the death of 
Hon. Sabino Padilla, former Justice of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines. 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


339 


(Communication No. 131 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Archives. 

Letter from Management Trend Company of Tarzana, 
California, with enclosures, signed by Mr. David E. 
Phillippe, stating that the United States Constitution 
falls short of expressing acceptable goals for business 
and social conduct, pointing to inequities in the judicial 
system of the United States and suggesting a rule and 
code of conduct between human beings to avert the 
same problems. 

(Communication No. 132 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Kilusan sa Kapangyarihan at Karapatan ng 
Bayan (KAAKBAY) signed by Mr. Jose Mario C. Bunay 
and Ms. Lynn R. Enriquez, submitting proposals on 
science and technology. 

(Communication No. 133 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Kilusan Sa Kapangyarihan at Karapatan ng 
Bayan (KAAKBAY) signed by Ms. Maria Teresa I. 
Diokno, submitting proposals on national economy and 
patrimony. 

(Communication No. 134 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Mr. Benedicto Aza Gonzales of 
Capitol Bliss, Quezon City, proposing the incorporation 
in the Constitution of a provision on the Filip inization 
of the retail trade industry. 

(Communication No. 135 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

COMMITTEE REPORTS 

Committee Report No. 10 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 118, as reported out by the Committee on the 
Executive, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE APPROVAL 
OR CONSENT OF THE LEGISLATURE FOR THE EF- 
FECTIVITY AND VALIDITY OF TREATIES, EXECU- 
TIVE AGREEMENTS AND RECOGNITION OF STATES 
OR GOVERNMENTS, 

recommending its approval with amendments. 


Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Davide, Jr. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 11 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 234, as reported out by the Committee on the 
Executive, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE INCLUSION IN THE ARTICLE 
ON THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT A SPECIFIC 
PROVISION REDEFINING THE POWER OF THE CHIEF 
EXECUTIVE OVER LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 

recommending its approval with amendments. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Regalado. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 1 2 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 435, prepared by the Committee on the Executive, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION REQUIRING CONCURRENCE OF THE 
MONETARY BOARD TO LOANS CONTRACTED OR 
GUARANTEED AND FOR THE SUBMISSION BY THE 
MONETARY BOARD OF REPORTS TO THE LEGIS- 
LATURE, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 59 and 124. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong, Regalado and Maambong. 
To the Steering Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:33 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:36 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Lorenzo M. Sumulong presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
session is resumed. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Article on National Territory) 

Continuation 

MR. ALONTO. I move that we proceed to the voting 
on Second Reading of Proposed Resolution No. 263, 
the Article on National Territory. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, parlia- 
mentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes is recognized. 


340 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Suppose the no vote prevails, 
what happens? We shall have no more provision on 
National Teijitory, or will the provision of the 1973 
Constitution be deemed reinstated? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Will 
the Gentleman please repeat his point of inquiry? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. If the no vote prevails, in other 
words, the proposal is rejected, does it mean that we 
will have no provision on National Territory as earlier 
proposed or is the provision of the 1973 Constitution 
on National Territory deemed reinstated since it was 
made the draft model? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). I 
suppose that if the voting on Resolution No. 263 re- 
sults in more negative votes, then the resolution is 
disapproved. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Then we will have no provi- 
sion on National Territory? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). No, 
because the 1935 or the 1973 Constitution has to be 
presented for incorporation in the new Constitution 
in order to be considered. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I submit, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 263 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on National Territory) 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). There 
was a previous motion to proceed to the voting on 
Second Reading of Proposed Resolution No. 263. 

As many as are in favor of the resolution, please raise 
their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 27 votes in favor and 8 against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 263, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Second Reading. 

MR. ALONTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ALONTO. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized on a parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


Per our knowledge and information, the last public 
hearing will be on July 12 and 13. However, some of the 
Commissioners have been receiving requests from other 
provinces such as Baler, Aurora, Zambales, Daet, Cama- 
rines Norte and Masbate for the holding of public hear- 
ings in those areas. May I know from the Chair if we are 
going to accommodate these requests? Secondly, who 
will handle the transportation expenses of the Commis- 
sioners in the event that we accommodate this request? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). I think 
we have to accommodate this request. I would rather 
refer this matter to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Com- 
mittee on Public Hearings, Commissioner Garcia. 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to suggest that if there 
are Commissioners who are willing to undertake the task 
of going to those respective provinces, we would like to 
receive those willing volunteers. Secondly, we would 
also like to request the Budget Committee of the Corn- 
mission if it is possible to ask for additional funds, or in 
the absence of such funds, we would like to request that 
those Commissioners who are going take the amount 
or the funds from their allowance. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Is 
the Commissioner satisfied? 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Insofar as the query raised by 
Commissioner Garcia is concerned, there is nothing m 
the budget that provides for these extra public hearings. 
However, the Committee could look into this and we 
could try to provide for these extra hearings. But we 
would have to know how much would be the amoun 
requested. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 7 
(Article on Citizenship) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. ALONTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
continue the period of amendments on Committed 
Report No. 4 on Proposed Resolution No. 7, the Article 
on Citizenship. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


341 


MR. ALONTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bernas be recognized to sponsor the amend- 
ments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, ladies and 
gentlemen of the Commission: 

The sponsor is prepared to entertain amendments. 
May I request all those who desire to present amend- 
ments to register their turn with the Floor Leader. And 
I am asked to remind everyone that the proponent of an 
amendment has a maximum of five minutes to fight for 
his amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Ac- 
cording to the Rules, we have to begin with the commit- 
tee amendments. 

FR. BERNAS. The committee amendments have 
already been put in the committee report. Proposed 
Resolution No. 7, as amended by the Committee, is on 
the third page of Committee Report No. 4. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
first committee amendment is on line 7: Put a period (.) 
after the word “law.” 

FR. BERNAS. What is the amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Yes, 
the sponsor will submit the committee amendments. 

FR. BERNAS. On line 7 of Proposed Resolution 
No. 7, page 2, put a period (.) after the word “law. 
Therefore, the sentence will read: “Those who are 
naturalized in accordance with law.” Delete the rest 
of the paragraph starting with the semicolon (;). 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 


Davide which has been considered and reported out by 
the Committee with some portions deleted, and so, we 
are now in possesssion of the Article on Citizenship. I 
do not see any need, therefore, to go back to the pro- 
posed resolution of Commissioner Davide. To save time, 
what we should do is to consider the proposed resolu- 
tion as submitted by the Committee, not the proposed 
resolution as submitted by the author. Commissioner 
Davide. 

FR. BERNAS. I completely agree with the Gentle- 
man, and I submit to the ruling of the Presiding Officer. 
I was going to start with the committee report but I was 
told to go back by the Presiding Officer. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Then, in that case, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, may I suggest now to the sponsor to consider 
the Article on Citizenship as reported out by the Com- 
mittee and not the original proposed resolution as filed 
by the author; otherwise, we will be going back to the 
deliberations of the Committee. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). So, we 
will take up the resolution as amended. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. So, we begin with Section 1. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Yes. 
le will consider all the committee a^i^endments as 
[ready approved by the Committee. 

'hat is now before the Commission is the resolution as 




FR BERNAS Yes. Mr. Presiding Officer, after this 
report was formulated and after having 
:tened to the Members of the Commission, t 
ittee is prepared to accept the recommendation that 

1 line 9 of the first page of Resolution No. 7 as 
nended by the Committee, the word ratification 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Is 
there any objection? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to raise a point of 
parliamentary inquiry. 

Considering that I have here a copy of Committee 
Report No. 4, and attached to it is Proposed Resolution 
No. 7, the provisions are already very clear. For exam- 
ple, the provision indicated by the honorable sponsor 
on paragraph 4 is very clear in Committee Report No. 4. 
The provision reads: “Those who are naturalized in ac- 
cordance with law.” I think the sponsor is reading the 
original copy of the proposed resolution of Honorable 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 


R DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I wish to be 
ihtened on what could be the difference between 


L BERNAS. There is no J?®. °"se 

that was expressed by those 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes 
cause in the previous 


I have to ask that question be- 
amendments to the Constitution 


342 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


we really had two sets of facts: One, the COMELEC an- 
nouncing the result that the Constitution is ratified, 
and then a proclamation by the President that the 
Constitution which was ratified be deemed adopted. 

FR. BERNAS. I think that was because in that 
exercise, the decree calling for the plebiscite said that 
these amendments be effective upon the announcement 
of the ratification. 

MR. DAVIDE. That may be proper if the Article on 
Amendments, for instance, on the new Constitution, 
will merely state that any amendment or revision of the 
Constitution shall be deemed ratified upon the votes of 
so many of the electorate as determined by the COM- 
ELEC after a plebiscite. But if it is not, I think “rati- 
fication” is the proper word. 

FR. BERNAS. I submit that to the vote of the body. 
For the Committee, it is either way. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
amendment is on line 9. The word “ratification” shall 
be changed to ADOPTION. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 16 votes in favor and 1 1 against. So, 
the amendment to change “ratification” to ADOPTION 
is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee has no further changes 
to make on the committee report. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de los Reyes be 
recognized for an amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I propose that on page 2, 
line 2, after the word “law,” the following be added: 
NATURALIZATION OBTAINED BY EXECUTIVE 
DECREES SHALL BE SUBJECT TO JUDICIAL CON- 
FIRMATION IN THE MANNER AND WITHIN THE 
TIME PRESCRIBED BY LAW. FAILURE TO OBTAIN 
SAID CONFIRMATION SHALL BE A GROUND FOR 
REVOCATION OF SAID CITIZENSHIP. In other 
words, I am for the restoration of the Davide amend- 
ment. 


FR. BERNAS. The Committee took this into con- 
sideration and the Committee does not accept the 
amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I explain my amendment, 
Mr. Presiding Officer? 

Many aliens succeeded in securing Filipino citizenship 
under liberalized naturalization laws created by pres- 
idential decrees. The basic rationale for the liberaliza- 
tion of the laws on naturalization was to absorb, among 
others, Chinese aliens who have resided in the Philip- 
pines for many years and preferred being Filipinos to 
being considered citizens or subjects gf the People’s 
Republic of China. 

It should be remembered that the liberalized natural- 
ization laws came about because of presidential decrees 
after our country severed its diplomatic ties with the 
Republic of China in Taiwan and established diplomatic 
ties with the People’s Republic of China. Thus, the 
process of naturalization under presidential decrees was 
less demanding; we might even say accommodating. 
There were no searching inquiries on the motives of the 
applicants and their past activities to show their sincere 
desire to become Filipinos. 

This amendment would only provide that future 
laws may be enacted in order to subject to judicial 
confirmation the naturalization of this class of Filipino 
citizens. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, under the naturalization law, 
after an alien is naturalized, he is required to stay in 
the country, and when it is found that he transfers to 
another country and establishes his residence there, 
his certificate of naturalization may be cancelled. 

In case of a woman, upon her marriage to a foreigner 
and by virtue of the laws in force in her husband s 
country, she acquires her husband’s nationality. 

In other words, this amendment would serve to 
purify. We will go on some sort of a purifying process 
for those citizens who obtain citizenship through a 
liberalized method of naturalization by presidential 
decrees. 

The reason given by the sponsor is that this will 
clutter our court dockets. I do not believe that this will 
unnecessarily clutter the dockets of our courts because 
future laws may simply provide for summary proceed- 
ings just to see to it that this class of citizens who 
obtained citizenship by naturalization through pres- 
idential decrees are really sincere in becoming Filipino 
citizens and are not out to take advantage only of the 
privileges of a Filipino. 

That is all, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. May I be allowed to say a few words? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Yes, 
the sponsor has the floor. 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


343 


FR. BERNAS. In opposing the amendment, we have 
several reasons. We begin with the presumption of 
regularity of official action. I do not think that it is the 
purpose of anybody to junk this principle that official 
action is presumed to be regular. Therefore, we begin 
with the presumption that those 29,722 adults who 
were naturalized through this process are validly citizens 
of the Philippines. And I do not believe in the proposed 
amendment if the intention of the proponent is to deny 
the validity of their citizenship. 

Second, we do not make a distinction between 
natural-born citizens and naturalized citizens except in 
those instances when the Constitution itself makes a 
distinction. In this particular amendment, the intention 
is to refer to the Constitution to make a distinction 
between two classes of naturalized citizens — those 
judicially naturalized and those naturalized by decree, 
specifically, during what we might call the “open flood- 
gate years.” Should we make this distinction? I believe 
we should not; I say this principally for those who truly 
deserve Philippine citizenship. I ask the proponent not 
to compel them to go through a demeaning process of 
begging for citizenship again. One will probably say that 
the process will be summary, but what will be the 
nature of this summary procedure? We do not yet 
know. We do not know yet what future legislatures will 
consider summary procedure and whether or not it is 
the type that we envision. And even if indeed the 
provision is summary, we do not know how those who 
will implement it will actually behave. 

Admittedly, there may be some who indeed are 
unworthy, but we have laws for them, and if they are 
not adequate, then they can be improved. After all, it is 
also a principle embodied in our jurisprudence that the 
grant of citizenship is never res judicata. It can always 
be reopened for valid reasons. But let us not reopen 
them en masse. Let us reopen only those cases where 
there is perceived evidence or grounds for reopening 
the case. For these reasons, I oppose the proposed 
amendment and that remedial measures be left to 
ordinary legislation within the limits of the Constitution. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, one last 
word. Precisely, that is the amendment: SUBJECT TO 
JUDICIAL CONFIRMATION IN THE MANNER AND 
WITHIN THE TIME PRESCRIBED BY THE LAW. In 
other words, we agree that it should be left to future 
legislation. 

FR. BERNAS. But the basic opposition we have is to 
the reopening of all the cases en masse. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, no, we are not reopening. 
Future legislation shall decide whether we shall reopen 
or not. There is nothing in the amendment which says 
that those who obtain naturalization by decrees shall 
have their naturalization reopened. 


FR. BERNAS. In which case, the amendment is 
unnecessary because the legislature can do it anyway, 
even without that amendment. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. No, but the purpose of this 
amendment is to express the intent of this Commission 
that future legislation should do that. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. In the opinion of the Committee, 
the matter is covered by Section 3 — “Philippine citizen- 
ship may be lost or reacquired in the manner provided 
by law.” 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I respectfully submit that we 
put this to a vote. 

FR. BERNAS. I would agree with the proponent of 
the amendment. 


MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I add 
something? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Are 
there any further remarks? 


MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I say 
Dmething before we vote? The use of the wor c^ 
irmation” means that the naturalization is not com- 
lete and, as the sponsor says, this applies jll ^hese 
aturahzation cases by presidential decrees It ni^ 
hat we will declare all of them now as not yet corn 
lete, and that is why judicial ^onfimation is needed^ 
■he added phrase “provided by aw only m^a 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I am intending to a 

ated amendment and in order not o go ^ , 

rth, considering that this is related o f wonder 
lendment of Comrnissioner de los ey , ^ 

the sponsor could just clarify 

not have to propose an amendment to this particu 
:tion. 

FR. BERNAS. The sponsor will make every effort to 
rify. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The wording here f 
! naturalized in accordance with law. ^ 
propose an amendment to the wor > muld 

viate that possibility, probably the ^P°” 

)ly to some questions. I am referring ^ primer 

msor’s Philippine Constitution, A Reviewer - 

[ich is the only book I can afford. The sp 
ok is rather expensive. 


344 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


Does the term “law” cover the Mass Naturalization 
Law provided in the Philippine Bill of 1902? 

FR. BERNAS. Those naturalized under the Mass Na- 
turalization Law of 1902 are covered not by paragraph 
4 but by Section 1, paragraph 1 of the 1935 Constitu- 
tion. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is clear enough. Does the 
term “law” cover the general law of naturalization 
through judicial process under the Revised Naturaliza- 
tion Law, Commonwealth Act No. 473, which was 
approved on June 17, 1939? 

FR. BERNAS. It includes that but it also includes 
any other law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am going to that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

Does the term “law” apply to special naturalization 
law enacted by the old Congress or through a decree; 
for example, as the sponsor has stated clearly in his 
book, the republic act which made Father James 
Moran a citizen or a presidential decree which made 
Mr. Ronnie Nathanielz a citizen? 

FR. BERNAS. That is included. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The last point, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. Does this term “law” cover a general law on 
naturalization which was applied in a summary manner 
through LOI No. 270, dated April 11, 1975, pro- 
mulgated on July 9, 1975, and LOI No. 491, pro- 
mulgated on December 29, 1976, by which a good 
number of aliens were naturalized not through the LOIs 
but through a decree? 

FR. BERNAS. “By law,” we mean here the decrees, 
not the LOIs referred to. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, I 
wanted that clarified because I seem to recall that there 
was a statement made here that there were aliens who 
were naturalized by letters of instructions, and that is 
not really a correct statement. The letters of instruc- 
tions which I mentioned only created a special commit- 
tee on naturalization which processed the applications 
and on the basis of its recommendation, decrees were 
issued by the President later on. 

FR. BERNAS. I am in agreement. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Finally, I have here the June 23, 
1986 issue of ihQ Malaya which says; 

President Aquino has directed the justice ministry and 

the solicitor general’s office to look into pending applica- 
tions for naturalization by decree which were left unacted 

upon by the ousted Marcos administration. 


The President’s order was issued to Justice Minister 
Neptali Gonzales and Solicitor General Sedfrey Ordonez. 

The President told newsmen that depending on the 
results of the joint study, meritorious cases may be given 
due course and the rest mothballed until the Constitutional 
Commission drafting the new charter has laid down new 
policies and guidelines on naturalization of deserving aliens. 

The June 30, 1986 issue of the Philippine Tribune 
practically contains the same thing. The question is that 
when one says “those who are naturalized in accordance 
with law,” does this include those applicants who filed 
application for naturalization through the LOIs men- 
tioned — LOI Nos. 270, 292 and 491? Probably, in a 
few days’ time. President Aquino might act on the 
applications of previous applicants and when she issues a 
decree to this effect, will they be covered by the provi- 
sion “Those who are naturalized in accordance with 
law,” considering that the applications were filed during 
the time of President Marcos under a letter of instruc- 
tions issued by the President, but this time, the decree 
would be issued by President Aquino based on those 
previous applications? Would they be covered by the 
term “law”? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, I have no amend- 
ment to propose. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Incidentally, there are still 9,131 
pending cases. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Are 
there any further remarks? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I just insert in the re- 
cord the definition of naturalization. 

Naturalization is the judicial act of adopting a foreigner 
and clothing him with the privileges of a native-born citi- 
zen. It implies the renunciation of a former nationality and 
the fact of entrance into a similar relation towards a new 
body politic. (Volume 2, Am. Jur., p. 561, par. 188) 

FR. BERNAS. May I just say that that is a definition 
of one type of naturalization. There is also direct 
naturalization by legislation. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Will 
Commissioner de los Reyes kindly repeat the amend- 
ment he proposes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My proposed amendment is 
to add; NATURALIZATION BY EXECUTIVE DE- 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


345 


CREES SHALL BE SUBJECT TO JUDICIAL CON- 
FIRMATION IN THE MANNER AND WITHIN THE 
TIME PRESCRIBED BY LAW. FAILURE TO OBTAIN 
SAID CONFIRMATION SHALL BE A GROUND FOR 
REVOCATION OF SUCH CITIZENSHIP. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). What 
does the sponsor say? 

FR. BERNAS. We do not accept the proposed 
amendment and we submit it to a vote. 

VOTING 


MR. RODRIGO. May I ask the proponent a few ques- 
tions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Gentleman from Bulacan, Commissioner Rodrigo, is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. In the 1935 Constitution, the provi- 
sion is “Those who are naturalized in accordance with 
law.” In the 1973 Constitution, the provision is exactly 
the same: “Those who are naturalized in accordance 
with law.” Now, what is the reason for adding the word 
“JUDICIALLY” in the present Constitution? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Those 
in favor of the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
de los Reyes, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 30 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized for an anterior amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The proposed amendment is on line 1 , page 2 of the 
amended resolution which consists in the insertion of 
the word JUDICIALLY between the words “are” 
and “naturalized,” so that the entire paragraph would 
read: “Those who are JUDICIALLY naturalized in 
accordance with law.” 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would rather leave 
that to the body. 

MR. DAVIDE. Before it is left to the body for 
determination, may I be allowed to explain, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer? 

In the course of the interpellation by Commissioner 
Concepcion when we took up this proposal under a 
freewheeling discussion, and as stated earlier by Com- 
missioner de los Reyes, naturalization is a judicial act 
because admission to Philippine citizenship is a matter 
of privilege. And the determination then of who should 
be considered or admitted as a Filipino citizen must be 
the prerogative of the court; hence, this proposal. We 
should prevent any other person from admitting an alien 
as a Filipino citizen to preempt a judicial function or 
authority. I submit, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Are 
there any further remarks? Are we now ready to vote? 


MR. DAVIDE. I will answer that, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. The issue of naturalization by decree affected so 
many and, of course, it resulted in the admission of 
aliens as Filipino citizens without undergoing the 
rigorous process of presenting their qualifications for 
admission and providing them before a court. 

We now would seek to prevent any further action by 
any other agency of the government to admit aliens by a 
mere decree or a letter of instructions. This propose 
amendment is the only way we can prevent future 
actions of such kind as was done in the past regime. 


MR. RODRIGO. If the amendment is approved, does 
this mean that those who were naturalized ^y the 
presidential decree of President Marcos will ose 
citizenship? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, Mr. Presiding Officer, because this 
is to be construed to operate prospectively. 


MR. RODRIGO. Prospectively. So, this is not aimed 
at a particular group of persons? 


^R. DAVIDE. No, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
govern future action. Henceforth, no na ura 


MR. RODRIGO. With that clarification, thank you 
very much. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I say a few 
words? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
sponsor is recognized. 


■R. BERNAS. I would although not ve^ 

irously, the amendment for this reason. ^ 

und of the proposed amendment is e s 
Marcos regime when legislation was in ® 
man. The reason we had this mass f tura^^^^^ 
ree was because one man possessed legis 
ve insure that legislative power will no e 
one person, then the abuses which resulted from he 


346 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


possession of this legislative power by decree will not 
crop up in the future. 

For that reason, I prefer to leave the provision as it is 
and allow the legislature to naturalize directly. 

I ask for a vote, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Those 
in favor of the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Davide, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand. ) 

Those against the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 19 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Vice- 
President Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Section 3 states: “Philippine citizenship may be lost 
or reacquired in the manner provided by law.” Will the 
sponsor agree to change the words “in the manner” to 
FOR ANY CAUSE? The reason is, the phrase “in the 
manner” speaks more of the procedural aspect, whereas 
“FOR ANY CAUSE provided by law” will consider the 
substantial reason for either loss or reacquisition. 

FR. BERNAS. In my understanding of this proposal, 
the word “manner” includes both substance and pro- 
cedure. So, I would not accept the amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. After that line “provided by law,” 
will the sponsor consider this addition: CERTIFICATES 
OF NATURALIZATION MAY BE CANCELLED FOR 
ANY OF THE CAUSES PROVIDED BY LAW AS 
GROUNDS FOR DISQUALIFICATION OF APPLI- 
CANTS FOR NATURALIZATION. 

I will explain briefly. Section 18 of the Revised 
Naturalization Law, otherwise known as Common- 
wealth Act No. 473, provides for grounds for cancella- 
tion of a certificate of naturalization, but most of these 
refer to naturalization certificates obtained illegally or 
irregularly or for some other causes existing at the time 
of the application or during the proceedings for natural- 
ization. Moreover, the Revised Naturalization Law pro- 
vides grounds for qualification (Section 2) and for dis- 
qualification (Section 4). An applicant for a naturaliza- 
tion certificate must have all the qualifications and none 
of the disqualifications. 

It may happen, Mr. Presiding Officer, that after an 
alien obtained a certificate of naturalization, assuming 
the regular procedure under the Revised Naturalization 


Law, he may, however, return to his old customs as an 
alien, such that he will not mingle socially with Filipinos 
or he will not send his children to our schools where 
Philippine history and other subjects are taught. 

In other words, he might not have had the disqualifi- 
cation at the time of the application, but may acquire or 
go back to some cause for disqualification after he had 
secured the certificate of naturalization. So that in 
addition to the grounds under Commonwealth Act 
No. 63, we should recognize not only those under 
Section 18 of Commonwealth Act No. 473, but also the 
disqualifications for naturalization under Section 4. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, on general 
principle, I hold the proposition not to make a distinc- 
tion except on those cases where the Constitution speci- 
fically makes a distinction between natural-born citizens 
and naturalized citizens. 

The proposal to my mind, in effect, allows the legisla- 
ture to create laws prejudicial to validly naturalized 
citizens, but not applicable to natural-born citizens. 

I am opposed to that, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. PADILLA. No, I am referring to the grounds 
presently provided for by the Revised Naturalization 
Law on disqualifications. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, but if the 
applicant passed the test with all regularity, then he 
enjoys that citizenship as firmly as a natural-born citizen 
does. 

MR. PADILLA. Even if, subsequently, he returns to 
his old ways, would that have constituted disqualifica- 
tion? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, because those old ways could 
also be the ways of natural-born citizens, and yet we do 
not disqualify them. 

MR. PADILLA. It is hardly possible that a natural- 
born citizen would have any of those disqualifications 
for naturalization. 

FR. BERNAS. Some of the disqualifications are 
moral disqualifications; it is quite possible for natural- 
born citizens to be immoral. 

MR. PADILLA. No, the disqualifications are not 
exactly on moral standards; they are more on social 
behavior. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, one of the quali- 
fications is they must be of good moral character. 

MR. PADILLA. That is a qualification, but the 
opposite is not mentioned among the disqualifications. 
I am now referring to disqualifications. 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


347 


FR. BERNAS. I submit the matter to a vote, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 


Constitution, instead of Section 2 of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. 


MR. RODRIGO. Was there a proposed amendment? 

I think the Vice-President was only asking if the sponsor 
would be amenable to such an amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. No, I am not amenable. 

MR. RODRIGO. I do not think the Vice-President 
has already proposed his amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. Commissioner Rodrigo is correct. 

MR. PADILLA. My questions are proposals for an 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Will 
Vice-President Padilla please repeat his proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. PADILLA. The amendment is, after “by law” 
on Section 3, add: CERTIFICATES OF NATURAL- 
IZATION MAY BE CANCELLED FOR ANY OF THE 
CAUSES PROVIDED BY LAW AS GROUNDS FOR 
DISQUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS FOR NATU- 
RALIZATION. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). What 
does the sponsor say? 

FR. BERNAS. The sponsor does not accept the 
amendment, and he asks for a vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Those 
in favor of the amendment proposed by the Vice- 
President, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand.) 

Those against the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 19 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I propose 
a more basic amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. The 1935 Constitution has Section 1 
(3) and (4) — the third paragraph refers to fathers 
and the fourth, to mothers. The 1973 Constitution 
joined them together. We have previously discussed 
that the situation of a Filipino man who marries an alien 
is somewhat different from that of a Filipino woman 
who marries an alien. I would propose that we return 
to the provisions of Section 1 (3) and (4) of the 1935 


FR. BERNAS. Does the Vice-President mean Section 
1, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 1935 Constitution? 


MR. PADILLA. Yes, Section 1, paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
the 1935 Constitution. 

I would not argue against the demand for equality 
of sexes, but the situation of a Filipino man who 
marries an alien is sometimes quite different from the 
situation of a Filipino woman who marries an alien. As 
we stated during the period of interpellations, a Filipino 
wife usually accompanies her alien husband and they 
reside abroad. The child is bom usually abroad and 
takes the surname of the alien father. On the other 
hand, a Filipino man who marries an alien usually re- 
sides in the Philippines. The child bears the surname of 
the Filipino father and is like any other Filipino born in 
the Philippines. Because of the merger of the provisions 
on the citizenship of the father and the mother in the 
1973 Constitution, there is no provision for election by 
the child upon his reaching the age of majority. And 
that has given rise to many problems of dual citizenship, 
and it is quite strange that under the 1 973 Constitution, 
paragraph 3 thereof, we make reference to; 

Those who elect Philippine citizenship pursuant to the 
provisions of the Constitution of nineteen hundred and 
thirty-five. 

I believe we have discussed this on several instances 
before, and I would not repeat further. 


MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be recog- 
nized for one question to the proponent? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I share the concern t^e 

situation which would develop in the event the 
Sion approves the proposed resolution. because 

pens to those born after January 17, 1 , 

according to the proponent, the Honora e ’ 

would limit the application of Section 3 on y 
born on or before January 17, 1973? How would we 
consider their status, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. PADILLA. I suppose that Pc^od mention^ 
which does not appear in the law or in 
tion has reference to the effectivity of the 
tution. If the children were born after the a i 
the 1973 Constitution and before the ® . 

1986 Constitution, their status would be determ V 

the laws and the Constitution then r’p.nqti. 

words, even if we retroact or return to the ponld 

tution, there would be no situation where w 
disturb the status already acquired under e 
Constitution. 


348 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. In other words, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
even those born after January 17, 1973 and before the 
adoption of this Constitution could opt to elect Philip- 
pine citizenship under appropriate circumstances? 

MR. PADILLA. No, because they were born after the 
effectivity of the 1973 Constitution, so the 1973 
Constitution applies. 

MR. SUAREZ. Meaning, if their fathers or mothers 
are citizens of the Philippines, automatically they also 
become Filipino citizens, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, because we cannot change that 
status anymore by any subsequent provision, even if it 
were included in the Constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The proponent is suggesting that 
we revert to the provision of the 1935 Constitution, his 
reason being that the situation of a Filipino woman who 
marries an alien is different from that of a Filipino man 
who marries an alien. He stated that normally the Filipi- 
no woman resides in the country of her alien husband, 
unlike a Filipino man who marries an alien who resides 
in the Philippines together with his alien wife. However, 
I know of an instance where a Filipino husband resides 
in the country of his alien wife. One example is that of 
my relative who, together with his alien wife, resides in 
his wife’s country. May I ask the Vice-President’s 
comment on this. 

MR. PADILLA. There is always such a situation. 
If the husband is “under the saya,” then he follows the 
wife. But it is the husband — especially a Filipino hus- 
band — who is the head of the family under the Civil 
Code, and who chooses the residence or domicile after 
marriage. 

MR. SARMIENTO. What if the husband is not 
“under the saya”? They both love each other and they 
both decide to stay in that foreign place because of 
“greener pasture.” 

MR. PADILLA. That is all right. It will be covered 
even by the 1935 Constitution, that a child whose 
father is a citizen of the Philippines is a Filipino. Of 
course, under the American law on citizenship, the 
principle of jus soli is recognized, such that even if both 
parents are Filipinos, if the child is born in the United 
States, that child has a right to American citizenship. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the 
Gentleman yield to a few questions? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. These provisions both of the 1935 
and the 1973 Constitutions are based on jus sanguinis, 
is that right? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. We want to follow this principle of 
jus sanguinis. There is a saying, which is a little naughty, 
that maternity is a certainty, paternity is an act of faith. 
So, it is surer that the blood of the mother is in the 
child than the other way around. So, is it not surer if we 
are to follow jus sanguinis, that is, giving the child of a 
Filipino mother Philippine citizenship? 

MR. PADILLA. The fact of birth, definitely, is even a 
ground for recognition because the relation of maternity 
between mother and child is clear and even conclusive. 
As regards the father, the relation of paternity and filia- 
tion may not, as the Gentleman says, be very clear. But 
if they are married, that is not only disputable or prima 
facie but also conclusive. I recall Commissioner de los 
Reyes asked me before if this would discourage mar- 
riage because a child born of a Filipino mother not mar- 
ried to the father may not have legal paternity and 
filiation, so that the child adopts the citizenship of the 
mother. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I interpose a 
vigorous objection to the proposal of the distinguished 
proponent. Despite the blandishments of purism in 
citizenship, there is read into that proposal a very 
distinctive trend towards discrimination against wo- 
men. It is bad enough that the Constitution is replete in 
language and formulations with sexual connotations, 
and it is doubly tragic for us to constitutionalize this 
bias by way of a proposal after we have practically en- 
shrined in unmistakable formulations the principle of 
jus sanguinis in the 1973 Constitution. This is, in fact, a 
recognition that women have made relative successes 
in terms of having recognition of their equal rights with 
men. For us to delete this provision would be retro- 
gression, nothing less. I believe that we have the oppor- 
tunity now to expunge the Constitution of all vestiges 
of sexual discrimination and of sexism. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I was warned 
that in proposing the 1935 Constitution, I would be 
misunderstood by the feminist movement for equal 
rights. But I am convinced that when the learned and 
illustrious delegates who framed the 1935 Constitu- 
tion had that distinction made between fathers and 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


349 


mothers, they were not discriminating against the fairer 
sex. I do not believe that we can accuse them of dis- 
crimination, of inequality and other unfair criticisms. 

I admit that the 1973 Constitution had changed or, 
rather, combined together “fathers and mothers.” But I 
do not believe that such a change was an improvement 
over the 1935 Constitution, especially when we consider 
that there are some relevant differences in the case of a 
father marrying an alien and a mother marrying a 
foreigner. I believe in equal rights, especially before the 
law, but not necessarily in equality. But by the very 
nature of man and woman, there are certain differences 
that cannot be denied. One important virtue or attribute 
of a woman, we might say, is that she is the only one 
who can become pregnant and give birth to a child, not 
a man. Therefore, we must give our mothers, our wives, 
our sisters and our daughters due recognition, and even 
preferential respect. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be al- 
lowed to say something in defense of the Committee’s 
proposal? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). What 
does the sponsor say? 

FR. BERNAS. We do not accept the proposed 
amendment. 

The purpose of the committee report is to elevate the 
Filipino mother to a level of equality with the Filipino 
father. First, we do not wish to punish the Filipino 
mother and her child simply because she married an 
alien, in the same way that we do not punish the Filipi- 
no father and his child when he marries an alien. 
Second, the child has two options. In many cases, he 
will have dual citizenship — he may either choose the 
citizenship of his mother or the citizenship of the 
father. He should be allowed to choose. The choice 
must not be imposed on him. True, this can give rise to 
dual citizenship but the naturalization law can provide 
that the child with dual citizenship must make a choice 
within a certain period of time. 

Finally, I think the principal argument against the 
existing provision is that these mestizos, if we may 
call them, may occupy positions reserved for natural- 
born citizens. But let us remember that a mestizo can 
be such because he is either the child of a Filipino 
father and an alien mother or the child of a Filipino 
mother and an alien father. Both of them are mestizos. 
If we want to exclude mestizos, then let us exclude all 
mestizos, including the children of Filipino fathers, and 
let us treat this in the appropriate article. For instance, 
if the Gentlemen really wants to be a purist about this, 
he can say in the Article on the President that the Pres- 
ident must be a child of a Filipino mother and father. 
But let us not handle that here. 

Therefore, I request a vote on this, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 


MS. AQUINO. For all of the protestations of the pro- 
ponent of his belief in the ideals of sexual equality even 
as he would say that we should deny the status of citi- 
zenship to the children of Filipino mothers married to 
aliens, I would have to take exception to this monu- 
mental hypocrisy. 

The issue here is, why do we have to discriminate 
against children of Filipino mothers who are married to 
aliens? It does not fit weU with the idea of equality. 

When the 1 973 Constitution incorporated the phrase 
“or mothers,” it was already a bonanza in terms of the 
manifold successes of women in their struggle for equal- 
ity, and to deny the children of Filipino mothers this 
right now would be nothing less than oppression. 


MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, in connection 
with the remark of the honorable sponsor that his pro- 
posed amendment does not seek to distinguish between 
the natural-born and otherwise, as far as I am con- 
cerned, a chUd born of a Filipino mother is a natural- 
born citizen, in the same way that a ° ^ 

Filipino father is a natural-born citizen^ The distinc- 
tion is not intended to deny or deprive the c 
Filipino mothers their status as natural-born. 

In other words, the objection seems to give thi^nter- 
pretation to my proposed amendmen w p 

restores the wisdom of the Members of 1935 

stitutional Convention — that a child ° rhild born 
father is a natural-born citizen whereas . That 
of a Filipino mother is not a natural-born citizen, 
is not the intention of the amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. May we know what the amendment of 
the Gentleman is? 

MR. PADILLA. As stated, instead Section 1 of 
the 1973 Constitution, we revert to Section ( ) 

(4) of the 1935 Constitution. 

FR BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
that we start with Section 1 (2) because 

necessary to move to Section 1 ^ the oronosed 

1 (2). Therefore, as I understand it, 
amendment is, Section 1 (2) ^houl rea ' 

WHOSE FATHERS AND MOTHERS ARE CITI 
HF THF PHTT TPPINES. Is that correct? 


MR. PADILLA. No, no; it is not correct. 

FR. BERNAS. What is the Gentleman s amend 
ment? 

MR, PADILLA. Section 1 (2) of the 
stitution should be amended to rea 


350 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


Section 1 (3) and (4) of the 1935 Constitution, and I 
quote: “Section 1 (3). Those whose fathers are citizens 
of the Philippines. (4) Those whose mothers are citizens 
of the Philippines and, upon reaching the age of major- 
ity, elect Philippine citizenship.” 

FR. BERNAS. We do not accept the Gentleman’s 
amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). What 
is the pleasure of the Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Concepcion would like to 
speak in favor of the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, my re- 
marks are not based on gender but I start from the 
assumption that we still want to protect our natural 
resources and the operation of our public utilities by 
reserving a big portion thereof to Filipino citizens. 
Contrary to the allegation that the amendment will 
result in inequality, perhaps it will result in equality, but 
adversely for the children whose fathers and mothers 
are citizens of the Philippines. Why? It is because the 
child whose mother is a Filipino but whose father is a 
foreigner has two choices, and may avail of them at 
different times for different purposes; whereas the 
Filipino will be left bereft of such choice. 

Secondly, I think I can describe this better by refer- 
ring to parity rights. We granted parity rights to the 
Americans but did they really have the same rights as 
the Filipinos? The Americans apparently have better 
rights than the Filipinos since they have the capital 
which the Filipinos do not have. The Americans are 
well-organized; we do not have that organization — 
wherever you go, the Filipinos always split. It is not 
perhaps the Americans but some other nationalities 
who are better organized or are better financed than 
the Filipinos. If the woman should follow the national- 
ity of the husband, the husband cannot avail of the 
nationality of the woman in order to exploit our natural 
resources and operate public utilities. But if we maintain 
the citizenship of the woman — presumed from the very 
beginning to have retained her citizenship — then she is 
most likely to be exploited by the husband. 

And that is true with respect to the child. The child 
will have two choices. When it suits him, he could in- 
voke the nationality of his mother; but if it suits him in 
some other respect, he can invoke the nationality of the 
father. It is precisely against this inequality that I stand 
before this body tonight. Of course, I should like to 
point the Commission’s attention to the need of cor- 
relating these provisions on Citizenship with the provi- 
sions on Natural Resources. Are we still requiring pre- 
ferential rights for Filipinos in connection with the 


exploitation of our natural resources and the operation 
of public utilities? 

If this Constitutional Commission will eliminate the 
preference for Filipinos, I would have no objection to 
the report of the Committee. But as long as we give 
some preference for the Filipinos to the aliens, I would 
prefer the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Padilla. Why? I think it is no secret that before 1935, 
there was barely any petition for naturalization. As soon 
as the 1935 Constitution was approved, petitions for 
naturalization swarmed the courts of justice because of 
the provision that Filipinos shall have preference over 
the utilization and exploitation of natural resources. 
And that is still so now. Their petitions did not only 
swarm our dockets but they found themselves desirous 
to become Filipinos or else they would not have en- 
joyed the right of preference for Filipinos over the 
conservation and utilization of natural resources, and 
the operation of public utilities. However, since that 
policy was abandoned by the 1973 Constitution, how 
many of our former foreigners have sought naturaliza- 
tion either by judicial or some other process which has 
increased their predominance over the Filipinos? So 
that now, the list of the presidents of the Rotary club 
or the Lions club shows that the names are foreign 
names. The overwhelming majority of those who go to 
the movies, to the golf clubs and other clubs are of 
foreign parentage or foreign nationality, before at 
least. 

So, it is precisely to prevent the Filipinos from being 
discriminated against that I favor the idea that only in 
case the father is a Filipino citizen should the child be 
considered a citizen of the Philippines. When the mother 
is a Filipino but she wants to follow the citizenship of 
her husband, let her say so. Let us not presume that he 
would want to do so. But remember, he is not likely to 
do that. In many cases, foreigners marry Filipino 
women precisely to enjoy the benefits of the national 
law. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I request a 
vote on the proposal. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we 
take a vote, may I request clarification from the dis- 
tinguished Vice-President? 

Would his proposal requiring election upon reaching 
the age of majority make the newly born child a Filipi- 
no citizen or not? And would he be considered a citizen 
between the time of birth and the time of election of 
citizenship? 

MR. PADILLA. What I would say is, after election 
that retroacts. 

MR. GUINGONA. I see. Would the Vice-President 
propose a corresponding provision similar to the one 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


351 


found in the proposal of the Committee which says that 
those who elect Philippine citizenship shall also be 
deemed natural-born citizens? 

MR. PADILLA. I can agree to that. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. I just would like to say something 
in connection with what Commissioner Concepcion said 
with respect to the intention of some foreigners who 
marry Filipino women with the sole purpose of ex- 
ploiting our natural resources, which inevitably affects 
the children. 

I think we should remember that there are a lot of 
Filipino children born of Filipino mothers and foreign 
fathers who do not know any other country but the 
Philippines. They have no other friends but Filipinos 
and they have not known any other education but 
Filipino education. 

It may be true in some instances, although not in all, 
that perhaps the intention of a foreigner in marrying a 
Filipino woman is to be able to pursue activities re- 
served for Filipinos by putting the business in the name 
of his wife. But we should also remember that in the 
pursuit of these activities, not only did that particular 
foreigner improve the economic situation in the Philip- 
pines, but also improved the lot of his Filipino wife and 
his children to a point that in the end such an alien 
becomes a Filipino and has become more of a Filipino 
than some other Filipinos. 

So in that respect, it may not be fair to say, and it 
may not be fair to punish and discriminate against the 
children of a Filipino woman married to a foreigner, 
because those children are truly Filipinos, educated in 
the Philippines and who know no other country but the 
Philippines. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Is the 
Commission ready to vote? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Concepcion has the floor. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just 
say a word in reply to the remarks of Commissioner 
Bengzon that we are not trying to punish anybody. Mar- 
riage has its own effects and we have to accept its ef- 
fects. But the question is: Are we willing to give up the 
preference for Filipinos over our natural resources? 

That is the point I would want to stress. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Chair now puts the amendment proposed by the Vice- 
President to a vote. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please do the same. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor of the amendment 
and 29 against; the amendment is lost. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Trenas be 
recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Gentleman is recognized. 

MR. TRENAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I propose 
an amendment to subsection (3) of Article 1 which 
reads: 

Those who elect Philippine citizenship pursuant to the 

provisions of the Constitution of nineteen hundred and 

thirty-five . . . 

I understand that the purpose of inserting this provi 
sion is to give a chance to those born of Filipino mo- 
thers on or before January 17, 1973. Am I right? 

FR. BERNAS. Before January 17. 

MR. TRENAS. Yes, and this is merely a transitory 
provision. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. TRENAS. Those who may not be lawyers or 
ho may not really understand the purpose o incor 
jrating this section in our new Constitution, y 

erely reading this where it makes reference to e 

jnstitution of 1935, will, therefore, refer to paragrap 
) which says: 

Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines and, 
upon reaching the age of majority elect Philippine citizen 
ship. 

The proposed amendment is to make 
lear by going directly to the P'^'TOse of t ' p’ 

id shall read as follows: THOSE ^ ^itt 

»iNUARY 17, 1973 WHOSE MOTHERS ARE Cl 11- 


352 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


ZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES, AND UPON REACHING 
THE AGE OF MAJORITY, ELECT PHILIPPINE CITI- 
ZENSHIP. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request 
that we defer consideration of this amendment until we 
settle the proviso in Section 4. If that is understood as 
retroactive, paragraph (3) of Section 1 will even become 
unnecessary. 

MR. TRENAS. It is all right. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I have two amendments to offer. One concerns 
naturalization, and the other is on the matter of dual 
citizenship. With regard to the first, I would like to add 
the following clause to lines 1 and 2, page 2 of the com- 
mittee report. My proposed amendment shall read: 
THE EXECUTIVE SHALL HAVE NO POWER TO 
GRANT NATURALIZATION UNDER ANY CIRCUM- 
STANCE EVEN THROUGH DELEGATION BY THE 
LEGISLATURE. 

In other words, Mr. Presiding Officer, I am removing 
any possibility of the executive granting citizenship by 
naturalization, and the reason is that we are framing 
a Constitution which is not only good for this genera- 
tion but for many generations to come. It might be 
possible that in the future the legislature might delegate 
to the executive the power to grant citizenship, subject 
to restrictions. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee does not accept the 
amendment and would prefer to leave the matter of 
naturalization to ordinary legislation. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I suggest to the honorable 
proponent that he throw it to the floor and put it to a 
vote. 

FR. BERNAS. If the Gentleman insists, we have to 
throw it to the floor. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. We have no choice. May I ask for a 
vote on the amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Those 
in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise their 
hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please do the same. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 3 votes in favor and 26 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

The second amendment refers to the matter of dual 
citizenship and this is found in Section 2, starting with 
line 3, page 2. My proposed amendment would be: “Citi- 
zens of the Philippines who marry aliens BY REASON 
OF WHICH THEY ACQUIRED THE CITIZENSHIP 
OF THE SPOUSE shall retain their citizenship, PRO- 
VIDED THAT AT ANY TIME WITHIN ONE YEAR 
FROM THE CELEBRATION OF THEIR MARRIAGE, 
THEY RENOUNCE THE CITIZENSHIP OF THEIR 
SPOUSES, OTHERWISE, THEY WOULD LOSE THEIR 
PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP.” 

I would like to mention that this provision is almost a 
verbatim copy from the second alternative proposal of 
the UP Law Revision Project of 1970. 

With the Commissioner’s permission, may I just read 
some of the reasons I have advanced in connection with 
this particular amendment: 

1. Citizens of the Philippines, including those of dual 
citizenship, would be entitled to all rights and privileges of a 
citizen, including the right to be elected to the highest 
positions in the government. 

2. FUipinos of dual citizenship would be subject to the 
jurisdiction of other states of which he or she is also a citi- 
zen and to which he or she would owe allegiance and would 
have the duty to serve and the duty to pay taxes . . . 

3. It would be advisable for us to provide in the Consti- 
tution even indirectly that we uphold the theory of only 
one citizenship as proposed by the late Dr. Salvador 
Araneta, a 1971 Constitutional Convention delegate. Fili- 
pinos of dual citizenship could at best be suspected of 
divided loyalty as far as the countries of which they are 
citizens are concerned. At times even these countries may, 
in the future, come into conflict with one another. 

Finally, the renunciation of one’s citizenship under a 
foreign country, although the same may have no effect 
therein, would serve as an evident declaration of loyalty 
to our country. 

FR. BERNAS. The matter of dual citizenship has 
relevance not just to Section 2 but also to paragraph 2 
of Section 1 because the latter can also give rise to dual 
citizenship. But it is the position of the sponsor that 
the matter of dual citizenship be handled by ordinary 
legislation. It is perfectly within the competence of the 
legislative body to pass a law saying that those possess- 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


353 


ing dual citizenship must make a choice within a certain 
period. 

Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a piece 
of information. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Sarmiento? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Guingona men- 
tioned the 1970 UP Law Revision Project. However, a 
look at the 1970 UP Law Constitution Project would 
show that its proposal was not repeated in this 1 986 UP 
Law Project. The proposal of the 1 986 UP Law Constitu- 
tion Project is a verbatim repetition of Section 2 as pro- 
posed by the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Is the 
body ready to vote? 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I understand 
that the amendment has not been formally proposed, so 
there is no need for a vote yet. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Villacorta be 
recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORtA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would 
like to know if the Committee would consider the addi- 
tion of a section that will give due recognition to the 
social dimension of naturalization. It is well-known that 
many aliens aspire for naturalization for reasons of con- 
venience. The naturalization law of the country, unfor- 
tunately, does not provide for genuine cultural assimila- 
tion of naturalized citizens after they pass the probation 
test. I am not calling for a disqualification of these 
naturalized citizens who do not assimilate themselves. 
What I am proposing is a general principle that will 
reinforce cultural, economic and social assimilation as 
an ideal and which could be a basis for future legisla- 
tion and serve as a behavioral norm that naturalized 
citizens and their families will always be conscious of. 
I would like the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 
Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights to consider the incorporation of the following 
provision based on the resolution that Commissioner 

Sarmiento and I have cosponsored: SECTION 

NATURALIZED CITIZENS SHALL STRIVE TO AS- 


SIMILATE THEMSELVES INTO FILIPINO ECONO- 
MIC, CULTURAL AND SOCIAL LIFE AND RESPECT 
FILIPINO VALUES AND TRADITIONS. 

I respectfully submit this proposal so that this mutual 
discrimination based on racial or ethnic ancestry, as well 
as its ugly consequences, could be reduced significantly 
in our society. 

FR. BERNAS. If I read the Committee’s mind right, 
the Committee would not accept that provision for the 
reason that the process of assimilation should precede 
naturalization rather than follow naturalization. The 
steps towards naturalization should be strengthened in 
such a way that before naturalization judgment is given, 
there should be an assurance that there has already been 
assimilation. As I understand the Commissioner’s pro- 
posal, the assimilation will be after naturalization, which 
is quite late. Assimilation before naturalization can very 
well be provided by ordinary legislation, and I believe 
we are capable of creating a legislature which would be 
equally as concerned as we are with economic, social 
and cultural factors. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just 
reply? Our proposal would like to reinforce the assimi- 
lation process that precedes the conferment of naturali- 
zation. We know for a fact that even if a candidate for 
naturalization assimilates himself into the nationa cu 
tural mainstream, what usually happens is that he 
forgets to follow through the assimUation process alter 
being naturalized. 

May I, therefore, request the proponent to ask for a 
vote on our proposal. 

FR. BERNAS. I propose a vote on the subject. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Those 
in favor of the amendment, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. ( Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 9 votes in favor and 23 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Maambong be recognized to present a short 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am now referring to Section 3 found on page 
2, lines 7 and 8, which reads “Philippine citizenship 


354 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


may be lost or reacquired in the manner provided by 
law.” 

I intend to propose an amendment on the word 
“law.” However, if the honorable sponsor could satisfy 
some of my questions on this point, then I will not 
proceed with my proposal. 

First of all, I would like to know if, in the inter- 
pretation of the word “law,” the Commissioner is 
referring to the denaturalization procedure under 
Section 18 of Commonwealth Act No. 473, which is the 
Revised Naturalization Law. 

FR. BERNAS. I am referring to any denaturalization 
procedure which may be provided by law. This is not 
intended to canonize any existing law but rather to give 
authority to the legislature to pass future laws on this 
matter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Without prejudice to future legis- 
lation, may I just indicate some of the laws which may 
be covered by the term “law” under Section 3? 

FR. BERNAS. Perhaps I could just make a general 
answer. If there are laws which are not yet repealed and 
are in existence, then they are covered by this term. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then, let us start with Section 18 
of Commonwealth Act No. 473 which provides for de- 
naturalization procedure. Could that apply in the 
present setting? 

FR. BERNAS. If that has not yet been repealed, it 
still applies. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It does not seem to have been 
repealed because it is still in the Commissioner’s book. 
(Laughter) 

FR. BERNAS. We can never tell what President 
Marcos repealed by decrees. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am referring to the 1983 edition 
of the Commissioner’s book. 

I will proceed further. 

Commissioner Bernas’ book also mentions Common- 
wealth Act No. 63 which was actually approved on 
October 21, 1936. The title of this Act reads: AN ACT 
PROVIDING FOR THE WAYS IN WHICH PHILIPPINE CITI- 
ZENSHIP MAY BE LOST OR REACQUIRED. 

Would this be covered by the term “law” under 
Section 3 as far as loss or reacquisition of citizenship is 
concerned? 

FR. BERNAS. As I say, if that Act has not yet been 
repealed either by the legislature or by decree during the 
years when it could be repealed by decree, then it is 
covered. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I ask this question in reference 
to Section I (7) of Commonwealth Act No. 63, as 
amended. I am now referring to the book Citizenship, 
Naturalization, Immigration, and Alien Registration 
Laws, Annotated, published by the Central Law Book 
Publishing Company Incorporated, 1977, Third Edition. 

Portion of the said Commonwealth Act provides for 
the loss of citizenship which states: 

In the case of a woman, upon her marriage to a foreigner, 

if by virtue of the laws enforced in her husband’s country, 

she acquires his nationality. 

Will this formulation of Section 1 (7) of Common- 
wealth Act No. 63 not be applicable anymore if we 
approve this provision on Citizenship under Section 2? 

FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, I would say that 
that particular provision was already repealed by the 
1973 Constitution. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that. 

May I proceed to another law again mentioned in the 
Commissioner’s book. It is RA 965, approved on June 
20, 1953 which is entitled: AN ACT PROVIDING FOR RE- 
ACQUISITION OF PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP BY PERSONS 
WHO LOST SUCH CITIZENSHIP BY RENDERING SERVICE 
TO, OR ACCEPTING COMMISSION IN THE ARMED FORCES 
OF AN ALLIED FOREIGN COUNTRY AND TAKING AN 
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE INCIDENT THERETO. 

Offhand, would the Commissioner say that in the 
present setting this proposal will be covered by the term 
“law” under Section 3? 

FR. BERNAS. Offhand, yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. We will now proceed 
to RA 2630, which unfortunately is indicated in the 
Commissioner’s book as RA 2639, approved on June 
18, 1960. 

FR. BERNAS. I will have to tell my printer to correct 
the typographical error. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The title of this RA 2630 is: AN 

ACT PROVIDING FOR REACQUISITION OF PHILIPPINE 
CITIZENSHIP BY PERSONS WHO LOST SUCH CITIZENSHIP 
BY RENDERING SERVICE TO, OR ACCEPTING COMMIS- 
SION IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES. 
Offhand, would this Act still be applicable in the inter- 
pretation of the word “law” in Section 3 under the 
present setting? 

FR. BERNAS. As I said, the general principle I am 
going under is that the word “law” in that provision 
has reference only to laws which are still in effect. We 
can check later on which laws are still in effect. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And all of these, without pre- 
judice to future laws, are on loss or reacquisition of 
citizenship? 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


355 


FR. BERNAS. Correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This is my last question: It is not 
indicated anymore in the Commissioner’s book but I 
have here P.D. No. 725, issued on June 5, 1975, which 
says: PROVIDING FOR REPATRIATION OF FILIPINO 
WOMEN WHO HAD LOST THEIR PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP 
BY MARRIAGE TO ALIENS AND OF NATURAL-BORN 
FILIPINOS. 

Would this provision be considered again in the inter- 
pretation of the word “law” under Section 3 of the 
proposed Article on Citizenship? 

FR. BERNAS. Again, we would consider it a law 
provided it has not yet been repealed. 


Japan. We may have a Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court whose father may be named Miguel Gorbachev, 
a member of the KGB in Moscow. We may have a Chair- 
man of the Commission on Elections whose father may 
be called Jose Deng Xiaoping who is based in Peking. 

This matter involves national interest and security. 
We should not allow possibilities as frightening as these 
to be perpetrated in our Constitution. Our sentiment in 
this regard is rather very strong and so we are respect- 
fully moving for the deletion of this particular proviso 
appearing in Section 4 of the Proposed Resolution on 
Citizenship. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. MAAMBONG, In view of that reply, I will not 
proceed with my proposed amendment. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Suarez be 
recognized to present an amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

My amendment is very simple; it is the deletion of 
the proviso in Section 4, lines 12 to 13, which reads: 
“Provided, That those who elect Philippine citizenship 
in accordance with Section 1, paragraph 3 above shall 
also be deemed natural-born citizens.” 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee prefers to retain 
this proviso just to even things out in view of our ap- 
proval of Section 1, paragraph 2. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May I be allowed to discuss this matter? 

I must confess that I had some agonizing moments 
before moving to delete this particular proviso because 
I do not want to be accused of discriminating against 
fellow citizens. I might be committing a disservice to 
them. However, I feel rather strongly that my personal 
sentiments should not prevail over the interests of the 
nation. 

Let me cite an example. Under our Constitution, the 
President, Vice-President, Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court, and members of the Commission on Elections are 
required to be natural-born citizens. So, if this provision 
would be approved, there will be frightening possibili- 
ties. We may have a President whose father is named 
Jack Reagan who is based in Washington, D.C. and is a 
member of the CIA. We may have a Vice-President 
whose name may be Naburo Nakasone, based in Tokyo, 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). What 
does the sponsor say? 

FR. BERNAS. May I say a few words. I have already 
adverted to that problem earlier saying that certain 
offices should be occupied only by these very pure citi- 
zens. We can attSnd to that when we come to the proper 
provisions. For instance, when we are dealing with the 
qualifications of the President, we could have a provi- 
sion stating that the President must be born of a Fili- 
pino father and mother. That is the appropriate place 
to put it in because that is where the problem is. That 
can be taken care of in those specific portions of the 
Constitution. 

MR SUAREZ. So, is the Commissioner su^esting 
that we defer consideration of my motion to delete. 


FR. BERNAS. I am not suggesting that. I am sug- 
ssting that even if we approve this proviso, it can stil 
e attended to when we take up the pertinent provi- 
ons on the Executive, the Legislative, the Judiciary 
ad the Commission on Elections especially wh^en we 
art talking about the qualifications of those who will 
ccupy those offices. 

In other words, when we reach those Articles we will 
ot just say “natural-born citizen,” but we will specify 


MR SUAREZ. That might pose complications, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. So, I would not accept the suggestion 
of the proponent. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I submit this 
matter to a vote. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, may I have a few 
minutes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


356 


MONDAY, JULY 7, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. The purpose of that proviso is to 
remedy an inequitable situation. Between 1935 and 
1973, when we were under the 1935 Constitution, 
those born of Filipino fathers but alien mothers were 
natural-born Filipinos. However, those born of Fili- 
pino mothers but alien fathers would have to elect 
Philippine citizenship upon reaching the age of major- 
ity; and, if they do elect, they become Filipino citizens, 
yes, but not natural-born Filipino citizens. 

The 1973 Constitution equalized the status of those 
born of Filipino mothers and those born of Filipino 
fathers. So that from January 17, 1973 when the 
1973 Constitution took effect, those born of Filipino 
mothers but of alien fathers are natural-born Filipino 
citizens. Also, those who are born of Filipino fathers 
and alien mothers are natural-born Filipino citizens. 

If the 1973 Constitution equalized the status of a 
child born of a Filipino mother and that born of a 
Filipino father, why do we not give a chance to a child 
born before January 17, 1973, if and when he elects 
Philippine citizenship, to be in the same status as one 
born of a Filipino father - namely, natural-born citizen. 

Another thing I stated is equalizing the status of a 
father and a mother vis-a-vis the child. I would like to 
state also that we should equalize the status of a child 
born of a Filipino mother the day before January 17, 
1973 and a child born also of a Filipino mother on 
January 17 or 24 hours later. A child born of a Filipino 
mother but an alien father one day before January 17, 
1973 is a Filipino citizen, if he elects Philippine citizen- 
ship, but he is not a natural-born Filipino citizen. 
However, the other child who luckily was born 24 


hours later — maybe because of parto laborioso — is a 
natural-born Filipino citizen. 

I think we should equalize their status, so this proviso 
should be inserted. I think it is a very just proviso. 

Thank you very much. 

FR. BERNAS. The amendment of Commissioner 
Suarez is for the deletion of the proviso on page 2, line 
12 . 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). All 
those in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. (Few members raise their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 7 votes in favor and 23 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move that we adjourn until tomorrow 
at two-thirty in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sumulong). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at two-thirty in the 
afternoon. 

It was 7:46 p.m. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


357 


R.C.C. IMO. 25 
Tuesday, July 8, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 2:50 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Teodulo C. Natividad. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Amang Makapangyarihan sa lahat, 
itunghay Mo ang lyong liwanag at ilagak ang lyong mabi- 
yayang tangkilik sa bulwagang ito na pinagtitipunan ng 
lyong mga anak na inatangan ng mabigat at maselang 
tungkuling ang nakataya ay bukas, buhay at kapalaran 
ng aming lahi; 

Pagningasin Mo, Ama, ang mga diwa at isip ng bawa’t 
isa sa amin at nang sa gayon, ang talsik ng talino mula 
sa lyong paglingap ay maging kasangkapan sa pagbuo ng 
Saligang Batas ng aming lahi, isang Saligang Batas na 
maka-Diyos at tunay na maka-tao; 

Ilingap Mo, Ama, ang lyong basbas sa kapulungang 
ito upang maging sulo namin sa pusikit na karimlan 
ng aming pakikipagtunggali sa masalimuot at mapa- 
nganib na kalagayan, hindi lamang ng aming bayan, 
kundi ng buong daigdig at ituro Mo sa amin ang tumpak 
na landas na aming daraanan upang makasapit sa dalam- 
pasigan ng tagumpay; 

Itulot Mo rin, Mahal na Bathala, na ang mabalangkas 
namin ay ang Saligang Batas na tunay na tutugon sa 
adhikain, pangarap at simulain ng aming lahi; 

Panginoon, wala kaming magagawa kung sa aming 
sarili lamang, nguni’t sa patnubay Mo, Bathalang Maka- 
pangyarihan, wala kaming pagkabigo; 

Panginoon, sa panahong ito na marami pang kagulu- 
han, kagalitan at himagsikan, tiklop tuhod naming 


hinihiling sa lyo na nawa aming matugunan ang hamong 
nasa aming harap at maging tunay kaming kasangkapan 
ng pagkakaisa at pagkakasundo ng sambayanang Pili- 
pino; 

Isinasamo namin, Panginoon, na itulot Mong mawaksi 
ang imbot at sariling kapakanan sa puso ng bawaY isa 
sa amin at nang sa gayon ang mapag-ukulan lamang 
namin ng pansin ay ang tunay na kapakanan ng aming 
bayan. Marapatin Mo po sana na matapos namin ang 
Saligang Batas sa takdang panahon; 

At kung matapos na naming sulatin ang bagong 
Saligang Batas, marapatin Mo po sana na ito ay pag- 
tibayin ng sambayanang Pilipino at nang sa gayon ay 
maghari ang kapayapaan, kaisahan, kasaganaan at ma- 
ihatid namin ang aming bansa sa lalong higit na ma- 
gandang kinabukasan. Siya Nawa. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present* 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present* 

Davide Present 

Poz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present 

Lerum Present* 

Maambong .... Present 
Monsod Present 


Natividad . . . 

. . Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

Present* 

Rama 

. . Present* 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Absent 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Absent 

Trefias 

Present 

Uka 

. Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. Present 

Villega,s 

. Present 


* Appeared after the roll call 


358 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 40 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I move to dispense 
with the reading of the Journal of the previous session 
and that we approve the same. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Reports, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 429, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS A PROVISION FOR THE 
EXPROPRIATION OF ALL AGRICULTURAL AND 
NONAGRICULTURAL LANDS FRAUDULENTLY AC- 
QUIRED BY GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND THEIR 
CRONIES AND IMMEDIATE SUBJECTION OF THE 
SAME TO URBAN AND RURAL LAND REFORM. 

Introduced by Hon. Suarez, Tadeo and Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 430, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TERMINATING THE MILITARY BASES 
AGREEMENT BY 1991. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Maambong, Natividad, 
de los Reyes, Jr., Bengzon, Jr., Romulo, Calderon, 
Rigos, Trenas, Uka, Jamir and Lerum. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 431, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION IN THE NEW ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
THAT AS A RESTITUTION, THE VICTIMS OF CRIMES 
BE GIVEN A SHARE OF FINES PAID IN COURT BY 
CONVICTED CRIMINALS. 


Introduced by Hon. Natividad, Ople, Maambong 
and de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 432, entitled: 

RESOLUTION LIMITING THE PRACTICE OF ANY PRO- 
FESSION TO FILIPINO CITIZENS SAVE IN CASES OF 
RECIPROCITY TO ALIENS OF ANOTHER COUNTRY 
UNDER CONDITIONS PRESCRIBED BY LAW. 

Introduced by Hon. Maambong, Ople, Natividad and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 433, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO LIMIT THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENT 
TO SIX (6) YEARS WITHOUT REELECTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rama. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 434, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE A PROVISION PROVIDING BASIC 
CONSUMER RIGHTS TO ALL CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Rigos. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 436, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE NATIONAL NAME, 
ANTHEM AND SEAL. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid, Maambong, Uka 
and Rigos. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 437, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING FOR THE INCLUSION OF A 
PROVISION ON THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 
AND STATE POLICIES IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 438, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE CONSTITUTION 
PROVISIONS ENSURING REMEDIES FOR VIO- 
LATIONS OF RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Aquino. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


359 


Proposed Resolution No. 439, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO FURTHER STRENGTHEN THE BILL 
OF RIGHTS BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING THE 
INFLICTION OF TORTURE AND THE IMPOSITION OF 
OTHER CRUEL OR INHUMAN TREATMENT ON CON- 
VICTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 442, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ENTITLED “EDUCATION, 
ARTS AND CULTURE, COMMUNICATION, SCIENCE 
AND TECHNOLOGY.” 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Letter from Concerned Churches for Christian Liberty 
signed by Bro. Joseph L. Genato, submitting a reso- 
lution proposing a provision recognizing the funda- 
mental right, responsibility and authority of the home 
and the church in the education of our children. 

(Communication No. 138 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Paterno D. Menzon of Labor Advisory 
Consultative Council (LAAC), submitting a resolution 
proposing to make the teaching of work ethic, philo- 
sophy and labor unionism compulsory in all levels of 
the educational system. 

(Communication No. 139 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


Proposed Resolution No. 443, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ALLOWING FOR THE RE- 
ELECTION OF THE INCUMBENT PRESIDENT AND 
VICE-PRESIDENT BUT DISALLOWING THEM TO 
SERVE FOR MORE THAN EIGHT CONSECUTIVE 
YEARS. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 444, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS THAT WOULD DISALLOW 
DUAL CITIZENSHIP IN CERTAIN CASES. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Consumers Groups signed by Ms. Ze- 
naida S. Reyes, forwarding two resolutions providing for 
consumer protection. 

(Communication No. 136 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1 986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Resolution No. ECVII-86-12 of the Executive Commit- 
tee of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, proposing 
the creation of an independent Commission of Justice. 

(Communication No. 137 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Letter from Investments and Management Corporation 
signed by Mr. Luis F. Sison, submitting a proposed 
provision in the Bill of Rights of the Constitution on 
the right of self-defense. 

(Communication No. 140 — Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Letter from Mr. N.B. Imperial of the Department of 
Comparative and International Education, University 
of London, enclosing proposed provisions on local 
governments and education, among others. 
(Communication No. 141 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Concerned Parishioners 
Parish Quezon City, signed by Mrs. Ester V. Sal 
and twenty-seven others, proposing the inclusion of 
provisions on the stabUity of the Filipino famdy. 
(Communication No. 142 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


imunication from f f a '7 propping 

rjr^P— ,Te Batasan Members 
ted in 1984 and on local elections. 

mmunication No. 143 - Constitutional Commission 

986) 

the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
nsions. 


360 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


Letter from the National Secretariat of Social Action, 
Justice and Peace of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference 
of the Philippines signed by Monsignor Antonio T. 
Fortich presenting its position on the US military bases 
in the Philippines, land reform and rights of indigenous 
peoples. 

(Communication No. 144 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Abolais Batauas Deca of the Society of 
Educators for Educational Development, Marawi City, 
requesting the consideration of the Muslims’ demand 
for local autonomy. 

(Communication No. 145 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

COMMITTEE REPORTS 

Committee Report No. 13 on Proposed Resolution No. 

440, prepared by the Committee on the Executive, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE ELECTION OF THE 
PRESIDENT HIS TERM OF OFFICE, THE CANVASSING 
OF VOTES BY THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE 
PROCLAMATION OF THE ELECTED WINNER, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 198. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Maambong. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 14 on Proposed Resolution No. 

441, prepared by the Committee on the Executive, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING INTO THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE CONCUR- 
RENCE OF A COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS TO 
HIGH RANKING POSITIONS IN THE GOVERNMENT, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 197. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong and Sarmiento. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 15 on Proposed Resolution No. 
445, prepared by the Committee on General Provisions, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO RETAIN IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
ARTICLE XV, SECTION 1 OF THE 1973 CONSTITU- 
TION, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 97. 

Sponsored by Hon. Rosario Braid, Rigos and Maam- 
bong. 

To the Steering Committee. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:06 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:08 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
The session is resumed. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 7 
(Article on Citizenship) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the parlia- 
mentary situation is that we are in the consideration 
of Committee Report No. 4 on Second Reading. I move 
that we continue the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor of Committee Report No. 4 will please proceed 
to the podium for the continuation of the period of 
amendments. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we ask that 
Commissioner Ople be recognized to introduce an 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will the sponsor kindly yield? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). He 
may, if he so desires. 

FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. 

MR. OPLE. Will the Committee entertain an amend- 
ment to Committee Report No. 4 in the form of a new 
section which will read as follows: DUAL ALLE- 
GIANCE IS INIMICAL TO CITIZENSHIP AND SHALL 
BE DEALT WITH ACCORDING TO LAW. 

May I explain, Mr. Presiding Officer, the reason for 
this proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. In the course of the freewheeling debate, 
I put the question of whether or not the amendment 
on dual allegiance could be in time received or wel- 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


361 


corned by the Committee on Citizenship. The candid 
answer then was that this would not exactly dismay 
the Committee. 

I am aware, Mr. Presiding Officer, that the Commit- 
tee’s attitude towards amendments concerning double 
citizenship, in particular, has not been very hospitable 
during the past couple of days. I want to draw attention 
to the fact that dual allegiance is not dual citizenship. 

I have circulated a memorandum to the Bernas Com- 
mittee according to which a dual allegiance — and I 
reiterate a dual allegiance — is larger and more threaten- 
ing than that of mere double citizenship which is seldom 
intentional and, perhaps, never insidious. That is often 
a function of the accident of mixed marriages or of 
birth on foreign soU. And so, I do not question double 
citizenship at all. 

What we would like the Committee to consider is to 
take constitutional cognizance of the problem of dual 
allegiance. For example, we all know what happens 
in the triennial elections of the Federation of Filipino- 
Chinese Chambers of Commerce which consists of 
about 600 chapters all over the country. There is a 
Peking ticket, as well as a Taipei ticket. Not widely 
known is the fact that the Filipino-Chinese community 
is represented in the Legislative Yuan of the Republic 
of China in Taiwan. And until recently, the sponsor 
might recall, in Mainland China in the People’s Republic 
of China, they have the Associated Legislative Council 
for overseas Chinese wherein all of Southeast Asia 
including some European and Latin countries were 
represented, which they dissolved after several years 
because of diplomatic frictions. At that time, the Fili- 
pino-Chinese were also represented in that Overseas 
Council. 

When I speak of double allegiance, therefore, I speak 
of this unsettled kind of allegiance of Filipinos, of 
citizens who are already Filipinos but who, by their 
acts, may be said to be bound by a second allegiance, 
either to Peking or Taiwan. I also took close note of the 
concern expressed by some Commissioners yesterday, 
including Commissioner Villacorta, who were concerned 
about the lack of guarantees of thorough assimilation, 
and especially Commissioner Concepcion who has 
always been worried about minority claims on our 
natural resources. 

Dual allegiance can actually siphon scarce national 
capital to Taiwan, Singapore, China or Malaysia, and 
this is already happening. Some of the great commercial 
places in downtown Taipei are Filipino-owned, owned 
by Filipino-Chinese — it is of common knowledge in 
Manila. It can mean a tragic capital outflow when we 
have to endure a capital famine which also means eco- 
nomic stagnation, worsening unemployment and social 
unrest. 

And so, this is exactly what we ask — that the Com- 
mittee kindly consider incorporating a new section, 
probably Section 5, in the Article on Citizenship which 
will read as follows: DUAL ALLEGIANCE IS INI- 


MICAL TO CITIZENSHIP AND SHALL BE DEALT 
WITH ACCORDING TO LAW. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What, is the reaction of the sponsor? 


FR. BERNAS. May I preface my reply with certain 
remarks, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

FR. BERNAS. I quite agree that dual allegiance is a 
concept distinct from dual citizenship. I do not think 
that there is any debate about that. I am also in agree- 
ment with the patriotic and nationalistic spirit in which 
the amendment is being proposed. So, basically the 
problem we have here is whether this provision should 
be explicitly incorporated in the Constitution or not. 
The Committee has not had the opportunity to dis- 
cuss this matter, so, whatever I say here will be spoken 
in my name. I would prefer the position I have constant- 
ly maintained here, that matters like these can be dealt 
with by ordinary legislation. And when I say this, I 
say it as a vote of confidence in the Committee on me 
Legislative, trusting that the Committee will be a e 
to formulate a provision which will create a legislative 
body as patriotic and as nationalistic as this 
Commission, if not more so, and therefore quite capable 
of dealing with these problems. 

On these premises, I would prefer 
be relegated to ordinary legislation. I would submit the 
mattpr to a vote bv the body. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Does the proponent of the amendment have anythmg 
else to say? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Nolledo is recognized. 


MR NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I wouM like 
ask Commissioner Ople if he will yield to interpel- 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


NOLLEDO. Commissioner Ople’s 
ment may cover the situation conteniplate^ 
issioner Villacorta on 

s into the mainstream of Filipmo culture. Am 


362 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Yes, because this mandate of the Consti- 
tution, which will be binding on a future legislature, will 
help arrest what they call a centrifugal pull of a second 
allegiance for, let us say, overseas Chinese already en- 
joying Filipino citizenship, and to that extent, there- 
fore, they can be better directed to measures that will 
assimilate them as real citizens quite apart from the 
formality of citizenship of the Philippines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And the Gentleman said that dual 
citizenship is different and apart from dual allegiance? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, could the Gentleman make a 
distinction between citizenship and allegiance? 

MR. OPLE. Double citizenship does not reflect on 
the motives of citizens enjoying double citizenship. As 
I said, this is largely a function of accident of mixed 
marriages or of birth on foreign soil. But in the case of 
dual allegiance, we presume a situation where the 
Chinese have already been naturalized over the objec- 
tion of Chief Justice Concepcion and yet they con- 
tinued to manifest, let us say, an extra allegiance either 
to Peking or Taipei. 

I have cited some examples which I can augment, 
if time is available, showing how dual allegiance has 
been exercised. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to be clarified on the 
words “shall be dealt with by law.” Is the Gentleman 
talking of or contemplating prohibitions or regulation? 

MR. OPLE. Dual allegiance, I think, has been a rela- 
tively unexplored problem up to now. I do not think 
researchers, whether legal or sociological, have paid real 
attention to this problem of dual allegiance. But at the 
level of the common people the perception is already 
very keen. This has emerged as a problem of very 
great implication for our country, our dignity, sove- 
reignty and security, and that is the reason I have asked 
the Committee — as an exception to their repugnance 
to amendments of this nature — to receive this amend- 
ment because then it cannot be said that we turned our 
backs on a problem that the common people of this 
generation of Filipinos have already perceived to be a 
major problem requiring the attention of the Constitu- 
tional Commission. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Without attempting to amend the 
Gentleman’s amendment, would he agree if I suggest 
that the amendment should read as follows: THE 
LEGISLATURE SHALL BY LAW PROHIBIT OR RE- 
GULATE DUAL ALLEGIANCE. 

MR. OPLE. The substance is there, but I am sorry 
to say that my original formulation might be a little 
bit more startling, but which is the effect that 


the proponents want to convey in proportion to the 
seriousness of this problem as perceived by many peo- 
ple today. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I address a few questions to 
Commissioner Ople. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Ople, I believe 
that this proposal was animated by a desire to protect 
our national interest. Is that correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I think that is the sole reason for 
this amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. As a matter of fact, the Gentle- 
man stated all the reasons in this memorandum for the 
Bernas Committee. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I did. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, the Gentleman will agree with 
me that dual allegiance is inconsistent with or repug- 
nant to the national interest. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, yes, it is repugnant to the national 
interest. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Will Commissioner Ople agree with 
me that instead of using the words “obnoxious to citi- 
zenship,” we use the words “obnoxious to NATIONAL 
INTEREST.” 

MR. OPLE. I will have no objection to that, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Does 
the sponsor have anything else to add to what the 
Commissioner said before? 

FR. BERNAS. We will just reiterate our position that 
we prefer to leave this matter to ordinary legislation 
under Section 3 and under a general police power of the 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


363 


legislature which governs not only citizenship but also 
matters of allegiance quite apart from citizenship. So, 
we will just throw the matter to the body for decision. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, as amended by 
previous speakers including Commissioners Sarmiento 
and Nolledo, this proposed amendment would now 
read: DUAL ALLEGIANCE IS OBNOXIOUS TO THE 
NATIONAL INTEREST AND SHALL BE DEALT 
WITH ACCORDING TO LAW. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Point of parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the assumption that the 
proposed amendment will be put to a vote, does it mean 
the sponsor is prepared to abide by the result of the 
vote, considering his prefatory statement that he has not 
consulted the Committee on this matter? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What does the sponsor say? 

FR. BERNAS. If this is voted upon and accepted 
by the body, then I take that as binding on the Com- 
mittee. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
I thank the sponsor. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Yes, 
Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. May I be allowed to interpellate 
Commissioner Ople? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. OPLE. I gladly yield to the Lady. 

MS. AQUINO. Commissioner Ople seems to impress 
upon us that dual allegiance is a sinister problem. 

May we ask what the specific operative acts are that 
would amount to dual allegiance which may merit the 
Commission’s attention for them to be placed in the 
draft? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I believe that on this occasion we can 
take cognizance of what is common knowledge that 


every October on the occasion of the Double Ten, very 
considerable delegations of Filip ino-Chinese go to 
Taipei. According to some witnesses who had been 
there — and this is also a matter of common know- 
ledge — when the oath of allegiance was administered, 
a good number of these Filipino-Chinese, maybe in 
the hope that they would not be found out, also raised 
their hands. I already spoke of this very remarkable 
phenomenon where the Filipino-Chinese in the Philip- 
pines were represented in the Legislative Yuan in 
Taiwan. I have also referred to the fact that until re- 
cently the Overseas Chinese Council, an associate 
legislative body, functioned in Peking and the Filipino- 
Chinese were also represented there, together with the 
other Chinese overseas communities in Southeast Asia. 
These common-knowledge practices raised a question 
of dual allegiance. I am not speaking of dual citizen- 
ship, but of a situation where Chinese naturalized as 
Filipinos seem to continue to subscribe to another 
allegiance than that required by their Filipino citizen- 
ship. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the proponent 
of the amendment seems to classify dual allegiance as 
a mala in se. It is an act that is by itself prohibited 
without requiring a law. Is that the intention of the 
proponent? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it is that, plus my submission that 

as a political and sociological problem, the problem o 
dual allegiance has not been sufficiently explore an 
investigated, maybe because it is not socially com 
fortable and convenient to look into this ^ 

That the problem exists is, however, acknowledged by 
many people, and I really see no reason why t e om 
mittee on Citizenship should not make an excep ion 
of this proposed amendment and consider 

elusion as a separate section in the Article on iizen 
ship since it does address what many people think is a 
fundamental problem with implications for our sove 
reignty and security at this time. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, if it is the 
intention of the proponent to classify dual a egiance 
almost like a crime, as it is apparently the inten m^ o 
his proposal, would it not belong, as a proper su jec , 
to the domain of the legislature? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, actually, it is a mandate on future 
legislatures to deal with this problem as they see i 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Villacorta is recognized. 


364 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would 
like to ask the proponent. Commissioner Ople, a ques- 
tion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, very gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to know whether 
this amendment is also addressed to natural-born Fili- 
pinos with dual allegiance. There are Filipinos who 
espouse statehood. Would they be included in the 
intention of the Commissioner’s amendment? 

MR. OPLE. It does not really extend the definition 
to its farthest limits, Mr. Presiding Officer, but if these 
are natural-born Filipinos who espouse statehood, I 
think there should be a presumption in favor of good 
faith, which means that if one enters another domain 
of values which is a plurality of beliefs and, perhaps, 
freedom of speech and freedom of expression but where 
dual allegiance is detected by a future legislature to be 
embraced in a future definition of what constitutes dual 
allegiance, then I will not say that these natural-born 
Filipinos will be entirely excluded from the ambit of 
dual allegiance. But as I said, it will be taking the 
definition to its farthest limits. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see. In that case, I fully sup- 
port this amendment. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Regalado is recognized, after which Com- 
missioners Guingona, Rodrigo and Monsod will follow. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the 
proponent of the amendment clarify a few questions. 

MR. OPLE. Very willingly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. The Commissioner has stated 
that insofar as the concept of dual citizenship is con- 
cerned, that seems to be settled because it is a matter 
of political law and cognizance, but the matter of dual 
allegiance, as the Commissioner said, has not even been 
carefully considered either from the legal, sociological, 
psychological or psychiatric aspect. Did I get him 
correctly? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, not to the farthest extent that the 
importance of the problem deserves, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. And did I get the Commissioner 
correctly that this is also to mean that when we speak 


of dual allegiance, there are operative acts, as Commis- 
sioner Aquino has stated, which have to be studied to 
determine whether these acts are, in effect, a mani- 
festation of loyalty or preference for a particular 
country? 

MR. OPLE. That is the reason we are calling on a 
future legislature to study this problem further and to 
deal with it in accordance with law and with the na- 
tional interest in mind. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are 
asked to consider a constitutional provision which 
involves the phrase “dual allegiance,” the particular 
facts, causative effects and motivation of which I 
assume the Members of the Commission are not yet in 
a position to consider for lack of any legislative criteria 
or empirical data. 

MR. OPLE. I have given some examples, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. Commissioner Ople has men- 
tioned the Chinese naturalized as Filipino citizens who 
go to Taipei on the occasion of the Double Ten, which 
to them is a major political event. We also have Filipinos 
abroad who are naturalized American citizens but who 
are also extremely concerned with certain major poli- 
tical events in the Philippines. If they should come here 
regularly for that purpose, for instance on June 12, 
and because the Filipino blood still runs in their veins, 
would that also be, in effect, or in pari materia, the 
same consideration that we would call dual allegiance? 

MR. OPLE. I do not know how American law would 
construe that. But I think if we reverse the example 
where Filipino-Chinese join in the mass oath-taking 
and pledge of allegiance in Taipei on the occasion of 
the Double Ten, which is equivalent to Filipinos natural- 
ized as American citizens who swear allegiance to the 
United States, then that would be one of the acts, I 
suppose, that could be encompassed by the phrase 
“dual allegiance.” But I have been very candid from 
the beginning that this proposed amendment was 
inspired by a now general perception in our country 
that some of the Chinese we have naturalized continue 
to show an unsettled kind of sentiment about this 
country that they continue to manifest in several 
ways what appears to be a second allegiance to another 
country close to them by history and by consanguinity. 
This is exactly what we hope is a very real problem this 
proposed amendment seeks to address through a consti- 
tutional provision. 

MR. REGALADO. Would the Commissioner, there- 
fore, be more prone to underscore the concept of dual 
allegiance from the standpoint of a manifestation of 
political rather than of economic allegiance to another 
country? 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


365 


MR. OPLE. Political allegiance is broad enough to 
accommodate the economic aspect. I speak in this 
memorandum to the Bernas Committee of the fact that 
some of the commercial places in Taipei, including the 
world’s biggest hotel, are already owned by Filipinos of 
previous Chinese citizenship. If a future assembly in- 
vestigate this phenomenon, then, I would discover 
interesting facts about dual allegiance which is exactly 
what we hope to put under constitutional and legislative 
control through this proposed amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
The honorable Members of this Commission know that 
I have expressed a strong stand against dual citizenship. 
I would just like to make one comment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Guingona may please proceed. 


MR. REGALADO. Since the sponsor of this resolu- 
tion opts to have this the subject of ordinary legislation 
instead of to take official cognizance of this matter 
and try to vote for a conclusion on the basis of un- 
known premises, would it not be better instead — and 
I am sure the members of our future legislature will have 
by themselves taken cognizance of our concern ex- 
pressed here on this floor — if we trust in their sagacity 
to take it upon themselves to make a legislative study 
on the matter because then they have more facilities, 
more time and more data they could collate? 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are not pre- 
empting the future legislature; we are merely giving 
them a mandate. It is the task of a constitution to 
send mandates for the future and I think this issue is 
important enough to be a subject of one of those man- 
dates. 

MR. REGALADO. Will the Commissioner recom- 
mend that if the future legislative body eventually 
comes up with what it conceives as the proper con- 
ception of dual allegiance, that fact would also be a 
sufficient ground to divest that naturalized Filipino 
citizen of his citizenship? 

MR. OPLE. I do not want to preempt the wisdom 
of future legislatures. In effect, what we merely see is 
not to settle this problem now because we are humble 
and realistic enough to admit that this is a great pro- 
blem, and our knowledge about it is fairly limited and 
circumscribed. So, we are content to see constitutional 
cognizance of the problem and would like future law- 
makers to address the implementation. 

MR. REGALADO. I will rephrase my question. 
The Commissioner said this matter of dual allegiance 
is one of extreme gravity. Will he agree to the propo- 
sition that a recommendation be made to the future 
legislature that an act of dual allegiance by a naturalized 
Filipino citizen will be a ground for his denaturaliza- 
tion? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, that would probably make this 
citizenship provision more meaningful, but I am afraid 
it will increase the jeopardy for this amendment in the 
hands of the Bernas Committee. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. GUINGONA. The primary concern this time is 
the ill effects that might be brought about by dual 
allegiance, therefore, I strongly support the proposed 
amendment of Honorable Bias Ople. This is a minor 
point but I wonder if the Commissioner is willing to 
change the word “obnoxious” to INCONSISTENT 
WITH. 


MR. OPLE. So, it would read: “DUAL ALLE- 
GIANCE IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE NATIONAL 
INTEREST.” The Commissioner’s original proposal 
was to change it to “INIMICAL.”- 


MR. GUINGONA. I hear a lot of my fellow Com- 
missioners use the word “inimical,” so, I would change 
my amendment to INIMICAL. 


MR. OPLE. So, it will now read: “DUAL ALLE- 
JIANCE IS INIMICAL TO THE N^TION^^ IN- 
:'EREST AND SHALL BE DEALT WITH ACCORD- 


T A \XT 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to ask a few questions. I observe that the issue between 
the sponsor and the proponent is not clear-cut. It seems 
that both the sponsor and the proponent consider dual 
allegiance undesirable. May I ask the sponsor i sue is 
his stand? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, I said that. 

MR. RODRIGO. And, of course, I do not have to 
c the proponent that he also considers t is un 
sirable. The sponsor wants this matter left to ordinary 
'islation. And the proponent also wants it de 
th by law”; so, it is also by ordinary legislation. 

at correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, what is the 
3 stand of the sponsor and the proponen . 
last my vote, I would like to know just w a 
ence is. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes), 
ly we know to whom the question is addresse . 


366 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MR. OPLE. I think the sponsor wants to be fair to 
all those he turned down yesterday by also turning 
down this amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. The only difference is this: The spon- 
sor feels that it is unnecessary to state this that with or 
without this there is a mandate for the legislature to 
attend to it, and also he would like to make a vote of 
confidence in favor of the legislative committee, trusting 
that it will be able to structure a legislature as na- 
tionalistic and as patriotic, if not more so, as this body 
that will attend to this. 

There is also another point: The proponent of the 
amendment does not seem to link allegiance with citi- 
zenship, because he says that if he links it with citizen- 
ship the jeopardy in the Bernas Committee increases. 
Actually, it is the Laurel Committee, not the Bernas 
Committee. Allegiance is either linked with citizenship 
or it is not. If it is linked with dual citizenship, then it 
is already attended to by our position that dual citizen- 
ship be attended to by ordinary legislation. If it is not 
linked with citizenship, then it has no place in the 
Article on Citizenship. 

MR. RODRIGO. What does the proponent say to 
that? Before I vote, I want to know: Ano ba ang pag- 
kakaiba? 

MR. OPLE. This is linked to citizenship in the ori- 
ginal version before I accepted the Sarmiento amend- 
ment. Actually, it reads: “DUAL ALLEGIANCE IS 
OBNOXIOUS TO CITIZENSHIP,” until it was re- 
placed by “NATIONAL INTEREST.” We speak of a 
problem that in order to understand its importance, 
we really should locate it in the area of citizenship, 
because we generally speak of newly naturalized Fili- 
pinos who continue to manifest dual allegiance. Al- 
though we cannot be too detailed in a constitutional 
provision, that is in the immediate as well as in the 
distant background of this proposed amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. So it is linked to citizenship. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. I am still a little con- 
fused. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Will the honorable Commissioner 
yield to a few questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. OPLE. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. I assume that when we say “dual 
allegiance is obnoxious to citizenship,” any act that 


promotes, cultivates or manifests dual allegiance is 
obnoxious. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, obnoxious, pernicious, repugnant, 
inimical, offensive. 

MR. MONSOD. Will the presence of such a provision 
in our Constitution be an inhibiting provision, or will 
it prohibit us from trying to attract our balikbayans 
back who have acquired American citizenship to re- 
invest and reestablish their linkages with their former 
country? 

MR. OPLE. No, Mr. Presiding Officer. As a matter 
of fact, I recall that during the freewheeling debates 
under the auspices of the Committee on Citizenship, 
I had stressed that very point — that we should make 
it as easy as possible for Filipinos, who out of necessity 
had adopted foreign citizenship but who have shown 
contrition in later years, to repossess their birthright 
of Filipino citizenship. I had the assurance of the 
sponsor then that that is not a problem because all that 
that citizen has to do is to take his oath. But that is not 
one of those contingencies foreseen here. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Mr. Presiding Officer, I was not 
referring to any act that would attract them back to re- 
acquire or choose Filipino citizenship. I am referring to 
our own programs of attracting them to invest or to 
visit, to renew their ties with their former country by 
which acts would show, in effect, allegiance to the 
Philippines. My clarificatory question really is: Will 
this provision now prohibit us, as a matter of principle, 
from instituting programs such as these? 

MR. OPLE. No, dual allegiance is involved in that 
case, according to the concept of the proposed amend- 
ment, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will Commissioner Ople yield 
to two questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, does citi- 
zenship always include allegiance? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


367 


BISHOP BACANI. Therefore, if we have dual citizen- 
ship, we have dual allegiance. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask that 
Commissioner Villacorta be recognized? 


MR. OPLE. Allegiance at the formal level. There is 
another allegiance at an inner and deeper level — for- 
mality versus the authentic sentiment of the citizen. 

I said that dual citizenship is a formality; I am not 
disturbed by it. It is often a function of an accident, 
say, a mixed marriage, or birth in a foreign soil. There 
is nothing insidious in it; there is nothing in it that 
threatens national security or sovereignty. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but if every citizenship in- 
cludes allegiance, if we deny dual allegiance, we also 
deny dual citizenship. Is this not yet foreclosed by the 
interpretation of Section 2? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
address a question to Commissioner Bernas first and 
to Commissioner Ople later? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Yes, please proceed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. In the 1973 Constitution, there 
is an Article on Duties and Obligations of Citizens. Is 
that within the purview of the Committee as well? 


MR. OPLE. Actually, I think the future legislature 
that will deal with this problem of dual allegiance will 
address many specific borderline cases, and all I am 
saying is there is no necessary correlation between 
dual allegiance and dual citizenship. 

In dual allegiance, there can be malice, or an insidious 
threat to our sovereignty and security. But in dual 
citizenship, especially for those Filipinos born in Ame- 
rican soil and have become American citizens as a con- 
sequence thereof, I will not read any embarrassment of 
a dual allegiance in that situation. I think dual al- 
legiance, as interpreted in this amendment, refers to 
more insidious acts than merely the accident — whether 
welcome or unwelcome — of a dual citizenship occur- 
ring out of mixed marriages or birth in a foreign soil. 

BISHOP BACANI. At any rate, if it is formal al- 
legiance, I wonder whether or not we could really 
regulate that by law because we are making that dis- 
tinction. 

MR. OPLE. I think that part of it will have to be 
treated as an exceptional case, where Filipino children 
born in the United States, for example, because of the 
jus soli doctrine there, have to grow up having, in ef- 
fect, dual citizenship, although upon the attainment 
of maturity, that dilemma, if dual allegiance exists, 
can actually be overcome by election by this particular 
person as to whether to become a Filipino or an Ame- 
rican citizen. 

BISHOP BACANI. Just one last question. When the 
Gentleman speaks of dual allegiance, does he mean 
two contradictory allegiances or two complimentary 
allegiances? 

MR. OPLE. I speak of dual allegiance in a way that 
it is offensive to the national interest. Therefore, very 
largely it probably would encompass what one may 
call conflicting allegiances and occasionally sympa- 
thetic allegiance also. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 


FR. BERNAS. It is within the purview of the Com- 
mittee. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see, thank you. 

May I address my question to Commissioner Ople? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 


MR. VILLACORTA. As I said while I fully support 
the amendment, does not the sponsor think th^ this 
amendment properly belongs to the Article on Duties 
and Obligations of Citizens? May I read the relevant 
section: 

It shall be the duty of the citizen to be loyal to the 
Republic and to honor the Philippine Hag, to defend the 
State and contribute to its development and welfare, to 
uphold the Constitution and obey the laws, and to co- 
operate with the duly constituted authorities in the attain- 
ment and preservation of a just and orderly society. 

Cannot the Gentleman’s amendment be incorporated 
in this section? 


MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I appreciate that there is indeed a linkage to the 
)bligations and duties of citizenship, but wou 
lot to decouple it right now from the Article on.^iU- 
;enship and the jurisdiction of the Bernas Committee. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just 
vould like to express my frustration in having to spen ^ 
o much time arguing the importance of ^ ® 

iiance to a country. I wonder if similar constituti - 
naking bodies of other countries would have o spen 
o much time. Why do we have to convince our co- 
eagues that singular allegiance to the Repu ic o 
‘hilippines is as fundamental as the civil rights oi cm- 
ens? It is part of the obligation of every citizen 
ender allegiance to only one country. I do not Know 
vhy we have to argue on this. 

Thank you. 


368 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Since the sponsor did not accept the 
proposed amendment, and on the observation that there 
are no other discussants on the proposed amendment, 
I move that we proceed to vote on the amendment of 
Commissioner Ople. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I still have an amendment to the 
proposed amendment, if the proponent will accept. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Will the Gentleman please state his amendment to the 
proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment is, after 
“ALLEGIANCE,” insert the words OF CITIZENS, 
then delete “OBNOXIOUS TO CITIZENSHIP,” and in 
lieu thereof insert the word PROHIBITED; between 
“WITH” and “BY” on the third line, insert the word 
SEVERELY, so that the entire proposed new section 
would read: “DUAL ALLEGIANCE OF CITIZENS IS 
PROHIBITED AND SHALL BE DEALT WITH 
SEVERELY BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What does the proponent of the amendment say? 

MR. OPLE. I accept the first part of the amendment 
and decline the rest. 

With the permission of those who have submitted 
their previous amendments and were accepted, the 
following is a partial satisfaction of Commissioner 
Davide’s proposed amendment; “DUAL ALLEGIANCE 
OF CITIZENS IS PROHIBITED AND SHALL BE 
DEALT WITH BY LAW.” 

MR. DAVIDE. As modified by the proponent him- 
self, I will accept. But it is understood very clearly 
that after “ALLEGIANCE” we have to insert the words 
OF CITIZENS. 

MR. OPLE. There are some objections from other 
Members who have a vested right on amendments 
already approved. They asked why “national interest” 
has disappeared from the text. And, therefore, especial- 
ly upon the prompting of Commissioner Nolledo 
and following what they consider as the trend of general 
advice among kibitzers around me, I am now compelled 
to decline the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Davide and will adhere to the original amendment, as 
amended. 


MR. DAVIDE. Then may I be allowed to explain? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
The Chair is suspending the session to give the pro- 
ponent of the amendment and all those who want to 
introduce amendments to the amendment time to talk 
these things over. 

It was 4:01 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:02 p.m, the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. With the permission of the sponsor, 
may I read the final text of this proposed amendment, 
as amended, and it reads as follows: “DUAL ALLE- 
GIANCE OF CITIZENS IS INIMICAL TO THE NA- 
TIONAL INTEREST AND SHALL BE DEALT WITH 
BY LAW.” 

I move for a vote. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Now 
that the amendment has been amended, is the pro- 
ponent still insisting on his stand? 

FR. BERNAS. The position of the proponent is that 
this should be a matter for ordinary legislation and need 
not be provided for in the Constitution. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). So 
we put this to a vote. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Those in favor of the Ople amendment, as amended, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand. ) 

Those against the amendment, please raise their hand. 
(Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 23 votes in favor and 12 against; 
the Ople amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we ask if 
there are other proponents of amendments to Com- 
mittee Report No. 4. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


369 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Who 
are the other proponents of amendments? Are there 
any more? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized to introduce 
amendments. Commissioner Trenas will follow. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask the proponent if he 
would agree with an amendment which would say at 
the end: BOTH NATURALIZED AND NATURAL- 
BORN CITIZENS SHALL HAVE EQUAL RIGHTS 
BEFORE THE LAW. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What is the reaction of the sponsor? 

FR. BERNAS. This is a matter that was taken up by 
the Committee. As a matter of fact, there was a specific 
proposal to this effect. The position of the Committee 
is that this is unnecessary because it is established in 
existing jurisprudence that natural-born citizens and 
naturalized citizens are to be treated equally except in 
those cases where the Constitution itself makes a dis- 
tinction. The position of the Committee is that this is 
unnecessary; it is adequately covered by the equal 
protection clause of the Bill of Rights. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but the intention of the 
amendment is that even in those cases which are men- 
tioned by the Constitution, the distinctions would be 
eliminated. The Constitution would not place such 
distinctions because they would seem to be classify- 
ing citizens into first-class and second-class citizens. 

FR. BERNAS. In such a case, therefore, the position 
would be that this matter should be taken up when a 
distinction is made in a specific provision. For instance, 
when we come to the Article on the Executive, if the 
proponents on the Executive say that a President must 
be a natural-born citizen, then that is the time to pro- 
pose the amendment. 

BISHOP BACANI. Is it not possible to decide that 
matter in advance in this Article? 

FR. BERNAS. I would prefer not to preempt the 
other committees. 


FR. BERNAS. After a good night’s rest, I am pre- 
pared to entertain the Gentleman’s original amend- 
ment. 

MR. TRENAS. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What is the amendment? Will the Gentleman please 
state his amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I know the proposed amend- 
ment, please? 

MR. TRENAS. The proposed amendment on Section 
3 should read: THOSE BORN BEFORE JANUARY 17, 
1973 WHOSE MOTHERS ARE CITIZENS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES AND UPON REACHING THE AGE OF 
MAJORITY ELECT PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to know the status of 
children who were bom before January 17, 1973 but 
because they have not yet reached the age of majority, 
they have not elected Philippine citizenship. Are they 
covered? 

MR. TRENAS. They are covered. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, they are covered. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, they will be considered natural- 
bom citizens. 

MR. TRENAS. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. So, my position is, unless some- 
body in my Committee objects to that amendment, 

I would accept the amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MS AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, if there are no 
other amendments, I move to terminate the period of 
amendments. 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
there any other amendment? 

Commissioner Trenas is recognized. 

MR. TRENAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, the sponsor 
will recall that yesterday I presented an amendment to 
subsection 3 of Section 1 which he asked to be deferred 
pending consideration of Section 4. May I now know 
the status of my proposed amendment? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 

the motion is approved. 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 7 ON SECOND READING 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
proceed to vote on Committee Report No. 4, as 
amended, on Second Reading. 


370 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 

We shall now vote on the Article on Citizenship. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we request 
the sponsor to read the entire Article, as amended. 

FR. BERNAS. The Article will now read: 

Article 

CITIZENSHIP 

Section 1. — The following are citizens of the Philippines: 

1) Those who are citizens of the Philippines at the time of 
the adoption of this Constitution; 

2) Those whose fathers or mothers are citizens of the 
Philippines; 

3) Those bom before January 17, 1973 of Filipino mo- 
thers, who upon reaching the age of majority elect Philippine 
citizenship ; and 

4) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law. 

Section 2. — Citizens of the Philippines who marry aliens 
shall retain their citizenship, unless by their act or omission 
they are deemed, under the law, to have renounced their citizen- 
ship. 

Section 3. — Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired 
in the manner provided by law. 

Section 4. — Natural-born citizens are those who are citizens 
of the Philippines from birth without having to perform any 
act to acquire or perfect their Philippine citizenship: Provided 
That those who elect Philippine citizenship in accordance with 
Section 1, paragraph 3 above shall also be deemed natural-born 
citizen. 

Section 5. — Dual allegiance of citizens is inimical to the 
national interest and shall be dealt with by law. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
the body now ready to vote? 

Those in favor of the Article on Citizenship, as 
amended, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 35 votes in favor and 3 against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 7, the Article on Citizen- 
ship, as amended, is hereby approved. (Applause) 

May we know from the Acting Floor Leader what is 
next? 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 322 
(Article on Amendment or Revision) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MS. AQUINO. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 7 on Proposed Resolution No. 322 as 


reported out by the Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 322 is 
now in order. With the permission of the body, the 
Secretary-General will read only the title of the pro- 
posed resolution without prejudice to inserting in the 
Record the whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 322, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR ITS 
AMENDMENTS. 


(The following is the whole text of the substitute resolution 
per C.R. No.7.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 7 

The Committee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions, 
to which was referred Proposed Resolution No. 148, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR ITS 
AMENDMENTS, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report it back to 
the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recom- 
mendation that Proposed Resolution No. 322 prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR ITS 
AMENDMENTS, 

be approved in substitution for Proposed Resolution No. 148, 
subject to the reservation that Section 1 (c) of this substitute 
resolution shall only be incorporated if and when Proposed Re- 
solution No. 161 is approved by the Committee on Citizenship, 
Bill of Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights, with the Honorable Suarez, Honorable Jamir, and the 
members of the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions as authors thereof. 

(Sgd.) Jose E. Suarez 
Chairman 

Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
(Substitute Resolution) 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE 
FOR ITS AMENDMENTS. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


371 


Be it resolved by the Constitutional Commission in plenary 
session assembled^ To incorporate and provide in the new Con- 
stitution the following article: 

ARTICLE 

AMENDMENT OR REVISION 

Section 1. Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitu- 
tion may be proposed: 

(a) by the National Assembly upon a vote of three-fourths 
of all its members; or 

(b) by a constitutional convention; or 

(c) directly by the people themselves thru initiative as pro- 
vided for in Article Section of the Constitution. 

Section 2. The National Assembly may, by a vote of two- 
thirds of all its Members, call a constitutional convention, or by 
a majority vote of all its Members, submit the question of calling 
such a convention to the electorate. 

Section 3. Any amendment to, or revision of this Constitution 
shall be valid when ratified by a majority of the votes cast in a 
plebiscite which shall be held not earlier than sixty days and not 
later than ninety days after the approval of such amendment 
or revision. 


MS. AQUINO. May I request the recognition of the 
sponsor, Commissioner Suarez. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
The Chair declares a suspension of the session. 

It was 4:14 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:31 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that the sponsor. Commissioner 
Suarez, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor, Commissioner Suarez, is recognized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER SUAREZ 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Ladies and gentlemen of the Constitutional Commis- 
sion, in behalf of the Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions, I would like to ask for the con- 


sideration by the Commission of Committee Report 
No. 7 concerning the matter of amendment or revision 
to the Constitution. It is proposed that said Article on 
Amendment or Revision will read as follows: 

Section 1. Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitu- 
tion may be proposed: 

(a) by the National Assembly upon a vote of three-fourths 
of all its members; or 

(b) by a constitutional convention; or 

(c) directly by the people themselves thru initiative as 

provided for in Article Section of the Constitu- 

tion. 

Section 2. The National Assembly may, by a vote of two- 
thirds of all its Members, call a constitutional convention, or by 
a majority vote of all its Members, submit the question of calling 
such a convention to the electorate. 

Section 3. Any amendment to, or revision of this Constitution 
shall be valid when ratified by a mgority of the votes cast in a 
plebiscite which shall be held not earlier than sixty days and not 
later than ninety days after the approval of such amendment 
or revision. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, the proposal is substantially 
adopted from the provisions on Amendments appearing 
under the 1973 Constitution, and we took into account 
also the draft submitted by the scholars of the Univer- 
sity of the Philippines, but we introduced one innova- 
tive method of amendment and this was sponsored by 
the Honorable Ople. We are referring to the third 
method of amendment by a direct action of the people 
themselves through the system of initiative. 

We would like to call the attention of the Commis- 
sion to Proposed Resolution No. 161 authored by the 
Presiding Officer this evening, governing the system of 
recall, initiative and referendum. This has been submit- 
ted to the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. So, 
our innovative method of proposing amendments to the 
Constitution by way of initiative necessarily must have 
to depend upon the results of the discussions and deli- 
berations on this Proposed Resolution No. 161. 

One of the problems met by the Committee is the 
frequency in the adoption of proposals for the amend- 
ment of the Constitution as related to the happenings 
during the martial law regime. The Members will recall 
that insofar as the 1935 Constitution is concerned, 
there were only three substantial amendments that were 
introduced up to the year 1971. The first one was ef- 
fected sometime in 1937, and that placed the women 
on equal terms with the macho population when the 
right of suffrage was extended to women for the first 
time. And then in 1940, another amendment was in- 
troduced extending the terms of the President and 
Vice-President. In other words, from the original six- 
year term without reelection, an amendment was 
introduced, initiated by President Quezon, giving t e 
President a tenure of four years subject to one 
election, without further reelection after that. At the 


372 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


same time, a bicameral system of legislature was in- 
troduced and the independent Commission on Elections 
was organized and established. 

The third amendment of the 1935 Constitution was 
effected sometime in 1946 and it was known as the 
parity rights amendment. However, during the Marcos 
administration, by virtue of Proclamation No. 1102, 
the 1973 Constitution was formally adopted as the 
Constitution of the country after it was ratified through 
the citizens assemblies conducted in the early part of 
January. 

Several amendments, a series of amendments, as 
a matter of fact, were introduced and ratified by the 
people in the form of citizens assemblies, referenda 
and plebiscites. I think about nine amendments alto- 
gether, if not more, were introduced during the period 
from 1973 up to 1984. So, the difficulty in preventing 
the frequency in proposing amendments to the Consti- 
tution was resolved by the Committee in the following 
manner: by introducing and/or reintroducing the re- 
quirement that the National Assembly can propose an 
amendment to the Constitution by constituting itself 
as a constituent assembly but with a required vote of 
three-fourths of all its members. The matter of calling a 
constitutional convention necessitates a vote of two- 
thirds of all its members, or alternatively, by a majority 
vote of all its members, it may submit the question of 
calling a constitutional convention to the electorate. 
We wanted to make the amendment process more dif- 
ficult. Thus, we came up with the proposal, in the case 
of the method of amendment thru the people’s initiative, 
a five-year prohibitory period. 

The other problem that was before the Committee 
was relative to the use of the terms “election,” “plebis- 
cite” or “referendum.” The word “election” was used 
under the 1935 Constitution. The word “referendum” 
was very much abused during the Marcos regime. It ac- 
quired some unsavory connotations. The Committee 
finally agreed on the use of the term “plebiscite” which 
we feel is more appropriate under the circumstances. 
And so, the Members wOl notice that under Section 3, 
it is proposed that any amendment or revision to this 
Constitution shall be valid when ratified by a majority 
of the votes cast in a plebiscite. 

The other issue resolved was the matter of deter- 
mining when the plebiscite should be conducted or 
held. Again, we go back to the incidents which hap- 
pened during ’the Marcos regime wherein many pro- 
posals to amend such a vital and supreme document 
as the Constitution were submitted to the people 
without giving them adequate opportunity to study 
thoroughly and at length said proposals. So, it was pro- 
posed that a period be established as to when the 
plebiscite should be held. We came up with the proposal 
that such a plebiscite should be held not earlier than 
60 days and not later than 90 days after the approval 
of such amendment or revision. The obvious purpose 
is to enable the voting population to study and analyze 


the proposals submitted for the amendment of our 
Constitution. 

The other matter that was taken up before the Com- 
mittee was the distinction between the word “revision” 
and “amendment.” Proposals were submitted that 
only the word “amendment” should be used just like 
in the 1 973 Constitution. In our proposal, this Article 
has been captioned “AMENDMENT OR REVISION.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. I am sorry 
to interrupt. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I ask a question? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. In the report of the Committee, 
there are two proposed resolutions: Proposed Reso- 
lution Nos. 322 and 148. 

The sponsor mentioned “initiative” as one of the 
proposed methods of amending, is that right? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is in Proposed Resolution No. 
322? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. But that is not in Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 148? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. On the other hand, the sponsor is 
now talking about the time when the plebiscite should 
be called. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. And that is in Proposed Resolution 
No. 148, but not in Proposed Resolution No. 322. Does 
not the sponsor have a consolidated report of the 
Committee? 

MR. SUAREZ. It is consolidated under Proposed 
Resolution No. 322. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would like to raise a point of 
parliamentary inquiry. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


373 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is the sponsorship speech termi- 
nated already? Are we now in the period of interpella- 
tions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor agreed to be interpellated in the course of his 
speech, but he is not yet through with his sponsorship. 

MR. SUAREZ. Not yet. I have one more point. 

MR. MAAMBONG. For purposes of orderliness, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, may I suggest that the sponsor be 
allowed to finish his sponsorship speech and that the 
period of interpellations proceed afterwards. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think anybody can interrupt the 
sponsor, if he agrees. The reason I interrupted is that I 
got lost while following the sponsorship speech. I can- 
not wait until the sponsor is finished because right now 
I am at a loss. This is the time to find myself. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Does 
Commissioner Suarez want to finish his sponsorship 
speech or does he agree to be interpellated in the course 
of his speech? 

MR. SUAREZ. May I now lead Commissioner Ro- 
drigo to the right direction? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, please. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am using Proposed Resolution No. 
322 as my guide in discussing the matter. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor may proceed with his sponsorship speech on 
Proposed Resolution No. 322. 

MR. SUAREZ. One more point, and we will 
be through. 

We mentioned the possible use of only one term and 
that is, “amendment.” However, the Committee finally 
agreed to use the terms — “amendment” or “revision 
when our attention was called by the honorable Vice- 
President, to the substantial difference in the connota- 
tion and significance between the said terms. As a result 
of our research, we came up with the observations made 
in the famous — or notorious — Javellana doctrine, 
particularly the decision rendered by Honorable Justice 


Makasiar, wherein he made the following distinction 
between “amendment” and “revision” of an existing 
Constitution: “Revision” may involve a rewriting of 
the whole Constitution. On the other hand, the act of 
amending a constitution envisages a change of specific 
provisions only. The intention of an act to amend is 
not the change of the entire Constitution, but only the 
improvement of specific parts or the addition of pro- 
visions deemed essential as a consequence of new condi- 
tions or the elimination of ‘parts already considered 
obsolete or unresponsive to the needs of the times. 

The 1973 Constitution is not a mere amendment to 
the 1935 Constitution. It is a completely new funda- 
mental Chapter embodying new political, social and 
economic concepts. 

So, the Committee finally came up with the proposal 
that these two terms should be employed in the formu- 
lation of the Article governing amendments or revisions 
to the new Constitution. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman yield to some 
questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. SUAREZ. With pleasure. 

MR. RODRIGO. The innovation sought here is to 
give the people directly, through “initiative;’ the power 
to propose amendments to the Constitution. Section 1, 

paragraph (c) states: “as provided for in Article , 

Section of the Constitution.” 

If I remember right, we took up this matter in the 
Committee on the Legislative this afternoon, but the 
proposal was confined to “initiative” regarding ordinary 
statutes, and not constitutional amendments. So, if 
that is the provision being referred to here, then Section 
1 refers only to initiative to enact ordinary laws but not 
to amend the Constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am sorry; we were not aware of that 
situation because all along, we were under the impres- 
sion that the system of initiative covered the entire 
spectrum of the Constitution. So, we labored under that 
thinking in coming up with this proposal. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am just saying that this is what we 
took up in the Committee on the Legislative. I do not 
know if there are other provisions regarding “initiative 
being considered in other.,committees. 


374 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. We thank Commissioner Rodrigo for 
the information and we will take it upon ourselves to 
make the necessary representations with the Committee 
on the Legislative to take up this system of initiative. 

MR. RODRIGO. If I remember right, that proposed 
provision on “initiative” stated that the people — by 
signatures of at least 10 percent of the registered voters 
in the last election — may directly initiate the passage 
of a piece of legislation. So, for ordinary legislation, 
the needed number of signatures is at least 10 percent. 

In an amendment to the Constitution, does not the 
sponsor believe that the number must be more than 
1 0 percent? 

MR. SUAREZ. I can settle for 10 percent. Assuming 
that we have 25 million electors, that would mean a 
minimum of 2.5 million electors. That is no easy task. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. It is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Section 1 of this proposed reso- 
lution states that the National Assembly needs only a 
plurality vote to enact a statute but needs a vote of 
three-fourths of all its Members to propose an amend- 
ment to the. Constitution. So, the philosophy is very 
clear — that a bigger number of votes is needed to 
propose an amendment to the Constitution than to 
pass an ordinary statute. 

MR. SUAREZ. We join the Commissioner in that 
regard. 

MR. RODRIGO. If that is the case, should we not 
insist on a higher percentage of signatures for “initia- 
tive” in amendments to the Constitution than a mere 
1 0 percent which is needed in a simple legislation? 

MR. SUAREZ. We spelled out the general rule that 
as much as possible, we should make the system of 
amendment rather difficult. So, if the Commissioner 
feels that 10 percent is inadequate, we would certain- 
ly be amenable to a higher percentage, provided that the 
right is not effectively suppressed. 

MR. RODRIGO. But the sponsor said that even just 
10 percent, which means 2.5 million votes, is very dif- 
ficult to secure. What more if we increase this to 20 
percent? Does not the sponsor think that since this is 
such an important provision, we should first know what 
article and section are referred to, before we can discuss 
this proposed amendment intelligently? Does not the 
sponsor think we should defer consideration of this 
provision until we know the article and section alluded 
to? 

MR. SUAREZ. That point can be properly deferred. 
I pointed out in my sponsorship speech that this system 


of recall, initiative or referendum has been covered by 
Proposed Resolution No. 161, which we understand has 
been referred to the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 
Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights chaired by Honorable Bemas. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have no objection to the rest of 
the resolution, which is practically a reiteration of the 
present provisions of the 1 973 Constitution. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
following Commissioners have registered to interpellate: 
Commissioners Joaquin G. Bernas, Florenz D. Regalado 
and Felicitas S. Aquino. They will be recognized in that 
order. 

Commissioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Will the sponsor yield to just a few 
simple questions? 

MR. SUAREZ. With pleasure. 

FR. BERNAS. Do I understand the proponent as 
saying that the only thing substantially different in this 
proposal from the article and amendments in the 1973 
Constitution is paragraph (c) of Section 1? 

MR. SUAREZ. Substantially, yes. 

FR. BERNAS. And in the light of the manifestations 
and interpellations made by Commissioner Rodrigo, is 
it our understanding then that we shall postpone inter- 
pellations on paragraph (c) of Section 1 until a proper 
formula is presented to the body? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is absolutely cor- 
rect. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Will the sponsor yield to a few clarificatory ques- 
tions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. In the mode of amendment or 
revision under Section 1, paragraph (a), does this mean 
that the National Assembly meets as a constituent body 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


375 


and proposes the amendments or revisions by itself? 
Am I correct? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct, as stated in Section 1, 
paragraph (a). 

MR. REGALADO. With respect to calling a constitu- 
tional convention under paragraph (b), this would be 
possible only by a law enacted by the legislature upon a 
vote of two-thirds of its Members. Am I correct? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is the one covered under Section 

2 . 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, but that was mentioned in 
Section 2 with reference to Section 1, paragraph (b). 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

MR. REGALADO. With respect to this clause which 
says: 

... or by a majority vote of aU its Members, submit the 

question of calling such a convention to the electorate, 
would this be in the nature of a referendum? 

MR. SUAREZ. It could partake of the character of a 
referendum, except that the word “electorate” would 
point to the system of election. 

MR. REGALADO. I also notice that both Sections 1 
and 2 are premised on the anticipation that the Commis- 
sion, not only the Committee, will opt for a unicameral 
body. In the event that a bicameral legislative body will 
carry the day, has the Committee prepared contingency 
proposals or resolutions? 

Mr. SUAREZ. Yes, in that situation, we would pro- 
pose to include the words IN JOINT SESSION AS- 
SEMBLED. 

MR. REGALADO. But still maintaining the same 
number of votes? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is right. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Am I correct in understanding that the premise of the 
Commissioner’s recommendation in subparagraph (c). 
Section 1, is the same resolution on referendum and 
initative petitions that was discussed by the Committee 
on the Legislative? 

MR. SUAREZ. I am referring specifically to the Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 161, but I do not know whether 


it is the same resolution referred to the Committee on 
the Legislative. 

MS. AQUINO. Do I understand it correctly that sub- 

paragraph (c) of Article——, Section , of Section I, 

refers to the initiative and referendum petitions that 
we have previously referred to? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, I mean the legislative power. 

MS. AQUINO. Has the sponsor been previously 
advised by Commissioner Rodrigo that the Committee 
on the Legislative has decided on vesting legislative 
power also in the people by way of referendum and 
initiative petitions? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. And that is confined to matters of 
ordinary legislation? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Do I understand it correctly that even 
if the body favorably considers the recommendatory 
conclusions of the Committee on the Legislative that 
referendum and initiative petitions refer only to legis- 
lation, the Committee would still insist on empowering 
the people as a constituent assembly to propose amend- 
ments to the Constitution? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, and I also thank the 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Davide is the next interpellator, followed 
by Commissioner Bengzon. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Will the distinguished sponsor yield to some clarifica- 
tory questions. 

the presiding officer (Mr. de los Reyes). The 

sponsor may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. SUAREZ. With pleasure. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

I will proceed directly to Section 3, on the holding 
of plebiscite, which states: 

which shall be held not earlier than sixty days and 

not later than ninety days after the approval of such 

amendment or revision. 

Whose approval is needed here? 


376 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Approval by the National Assembly 
or by the constitutional convention. 

MR. DA VIDE. In other "words, the sponsor now 
wants that the entire wording of the proposed Section 
3 of the original Resolution No. 148 be incorporated 
here because it specifically provides for the National 
Assembly or the constitutional convention. But in 
the substitute resolution, the words “by the national 
assembly or the constitutional convention” have been 
deleted. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, because it was felt that it was 
already understood — that the approval of such amend- 
ment or revision could only emanate from either the 
National Assembly or the constitutional convention. 

MR. DAVIDE. But does not the sponsor believe that 
we should restore the phrase “by the national assembly 
or the constitutional convention” to make it really 
very clear and specific for purposes of computing the 
period? 

MR. SUAREZ. We certainly would have no objec- 
tion to that because we were the proponents of that 
resolution. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. We now go to Section 2. 

The last clause provides: “submit the question of 
calling such a convention to the electorate.” In his 
answer, the sponsor adverted to the possibility of a 
referendum or a plebiscite. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, depending upon the National 
Assembly. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. But as worded in the 1973 
Constitution, it is very clear that the submission of the 
question calling such a convention to the electorate 
must be done in an election. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, but right now, because of the 
initiation of the system of initiative, recall and referen- 
dum, we are amenable to entertaining the possibility 
that it would assume the form of a referendum. 

MR. DAVIDE. I see, but on the assumption that 
we will not allow the constitutional amendment or 
revision to be initiated by the people, it is necessary 
that we also restore the words “in an election.” 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee agrees. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the National Assembly is authorized 
by a vote of two-thirds of all its Members to call a 
constitutional convention, would it not be proper to 
make it mandatory that the National Assembly be pro- 
vided with appropriations for that convention? 


MR. SUAREZ. It may not be necessary at all because 
that is supposed to be already built-in when the Na- 
tional Assembly calls the constitutional convention. 
Normally, it should already provide for the appropria- 
tions for such purpose. 

MR. DAVIDE. But it may not. The law may only 
provide for the calling of a constitutional convention 
and later another law may provide for the appropria- 
tions for the convention. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will entertain amendments re- 
flecting the Commissioner’s idea on the matter. 

MR. DAVIDE. Again on Section 2, on the sub- 
mission of the question of calling a constitutional 
convention to the electorate, would this certainly be 
by a vote of a majority of all the votes cast in either 
election, referendum or plebiscite? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. But necessarily it cannot be imple- 
mented unless the National Assembly must also be 
mandated to provide for the appropriations for that 
convention whose calling was voted upon favorably 
by the people. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to inform the Commit- 
tee and the sponsor that the initiative provided for in 
the proposed Article on National Assembly, as correct- 
ly stated by Commissioners Rodrigo and Aquino, is 
limited to initiation of legislations. And the National 
Assembly is mandated to provide, by ordinary legis- 
lation, the execution of the concept so that it could 
be carried out with certain limitations. The basic reso- 
lutions providing for initiative and referendum, more 
particularly the resolutions of Commissioner Romulo, 
et al and Commissioner Garcia, et al, limit the scope 
of initiative and referendum. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will the Gentleman entertain a 
reverse interpellation? 

MR. DAVIDE. If the Rules provides, I am willing 
to yield. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Gentleman consider in 
this committee deliberations the inclusion of this parti- 
cular idea as a committee resolution? 

MR. DAVIDE. If the Committee on Transitory 
Provisions would insist on amendments by or through 
initiative, a proposal in this respect really properly be- 
longs to the Committee on Transitory Provisions or as 
an exception to what is provided for in the Article on 
the Legislative. 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


377 


MR. SUAREZ. So we take it that the Gentleman 
would rather leave the matter of “percentaging” to the 
Comrmttee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions? 


heed the people’s desire and clamor. So, this is a third 
avenue that we are providing for the implementation 
of what is now popularly known as the people’s power. 


MR. DA VIDE. And the Commission. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the distinguished Commis- 
sioner. 


MR. BENGZON. In view of the awakening of the 
people of the Philippines, does the Gentleman agree 
that the events that took place in the past few years 
are very unlikely to be repeated in the future? 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. For the record. Section 2, lines 17 
and 18 states: “ . . .submit the question of calling such 
a convention to the electorate.” The interpretation or 
the Gentleman’s contemplation here is that such a 
question, if it is decided to be submitted to the elec- 
torate, will have to wait for the next election. Am I 
correct? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. The provision practi- 
cally considers the possibility of avoiding expensive 
referendums or plebiscites. So, that is the general sense 
meant to be conveyed by the employment of this phrase 
“in an election” which does not now appear here. 

MR. BENGZON. Regarding Section 1 , paragraph (c), 
does the Gentleman agree that this mode of amending 
or revising a constitution is very complicated and 
very difficult to follow, particularly because it should 
require, perhaps, a greater number of percentage than 
the ordinary mode of initiative by legislation? 

MR. SUAREZ. We agree to the difficulty in imple- 
menting this particular provision, but we are providing 
a channel for the expression of the sovereign will of 
the people through this initiative system. 

MR. BENGZON. Is Section 1, paragraphs (a) and (b), 
not sufficient channel for expression of the will of the 
people, particularly in the amendment or revision of 
the Constitution? 

MR. SUAREZ. Under normal circumstances, yes. 
But we know what happened during the 20 years under 
the Marcos administration. So, if the National Assem- 
bly, in a manner of speaking, is operating under the 
thumb of the Prime Minister or the President as the 
case may be, and the required number of votes could not 
be obtained, we would have to provide for a safety valve 
in order that the people could ventilate in a very peace- 
ful way their desire for amendment to the Constitu- 
tion. 

It is very possible that although the people may 
be pressuring the National Assembly to constitute 
itself as a constituent assembly or to call a constitu- 
tional convention, the members thereof would not 


MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman may be right, but 
it is also likely that these could again happen in the 
near future. 

MR. BENGZON. Because we seem to be laboring 
under that particular syndrome of the traumatic ex- 
periences we had in the last 20 years. Perhaps, our 
minds and our eyes are just focused on those events 
and we forget that there are other circumstances that 
will take place. 

I was about to suggest that if, indeed. Section 1, 
paragraphs (a) and (b) are sufficient avenues and chan- 
nels for the people of the Philippines to amend the 
Constitution - as they have been historically tested 
without regard to the events of the recent past - per- 
haps the Committee might reconsider its decision m 
just confining itself to proposing Section 1, paragrphs 
(a) and (b), and doing away with paragraph (c). Is 
there a possibility that the mode of legislation by ini- 
tiative will just be confined to the Article on the Legis- 
lative? 

MR. SUAREZ. We would rather leave that to the 
Commission. 

MR. BENGZON. So, at the proper time, perhaps 
during the period of amendments, this could be intro- 
duced. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. I thank the distinguished Commis- 
sioner. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
:ommissioner Azcuna is recognized, to be followed 
.V rommissioner Ople and Commissioner Guingona. 


MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 

Is the power to propose amendments or revisions 
to the Constitution legislative or constituent power. 


MR. SUAREZ. I beg the Gentleman’s pardon. 

MR. AZCUNA. Is the power to propose amend- 
ments or revisions to the Constitution ^ 
power or is it a different kind of power called a con- 

5tituent power? 


378 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. I would say it is a constituent power. 

MR. AZCUNA. Therefore, a system of initiative or 
referendum provided for under the Article on the 
Legislative will not be the proper place to provide for 
the type of initiative the Gentleman has in mind since 
this is initiative as an exercise of a constituent power. 
Instead of referring to the legislative power provision 
which provides for initiative in making ordinary laws, 
I believe we should provide under this provision the 
exercise of constituent power. Perhaps, the Gentleman 
can already define here a manner in which this type of 
initiative as an exercise of constituent power can be 
made. 

MR. SUAREZ. I take it that it is suggested even 
without depending upon the action that may be taken 
up in the Committee on the Legislative. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe 
it is just proper because this is a constituent power 
and it belongs here. 

MR. SUAREZ. In fact. Proposed Resolution No. 161 
covers constitutional amendments to initiative. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will consider that. 

MR. AZCUNA. I thank the honorable Commissioner. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the sponsor 
yield to a question? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
sponsor may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, with pleasure to a member of 
our Committee. 

MR. OPLE. Providentially, the previous remarks of 
Commissioner Azcuna and Commissioner Davide en- 
couraged me to refer once again to this question on 
initiative as a new mode for proposing amendments 
to the Constitution. The sponsor was very kind to 
refer earlier to the fact that I sponsored this additional 
mode of proposing amendments to the Constitution 
in the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

It looks like the Committee on Amendments and 
Transitory Provisions had been very courteous to the 
Committee on the Legislative and had hoped that this 
mode of proposing amendments through initiative, in 
addition to the older and traditional modes provided 


in the 1973 Constitution, could be dependent on the 
approval of a resolution in that body pertaining to 
the use of initiative, referendum and recall, with res- 
pect to legislation. 

Will the Chairman of the Committee now consider 
the imminently reasonable proposals of Commissioners 
Azcuna and Davide to keep this an independent pro- 
vision of the Article on Amendment so that this will 
not wait upon the action of the Legislative Committee? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, we will entertain that. As a mat- 
ter of fact, by way of information, the Committee 
on Amendments and Transitory Provisions is scheduled 
to meet tomorrow morning between nine o’clock and 
twelve o’clock and we will take that matter up. 

MR. OPLE. Moreover, Mr. Presiding Officer, 1 think 
Commissioner Bengzon had earlier raised the question 
of whether this new mode to proposing constitutional 
amendments which is untested could be deleted from 
the Article on Amendment on the ground that we may 
be experimenting with a mode of amendment that has 
no support in the past and which may be in the form 
of exaggerated reaction to what happened in the past. 
In response to Commissioner Bengzon’s doubts, I think 
this is just the correct time in history when we should 
introduce an innovative mode of proposing amendments 
to the Constitution, vesting in the people and their 
organizations the right to formulate and propose their 
own amendments and revisions of the Constitution 
in a manner that will be binding upon the government. 
It is not that I believe this kind of direct action by the 
people for amending a constitution will be needed 
frequently in the future, but it is good to know that 
the ultimate reserves of sovereign power still rest upon 
the people and that in the exercise of that poAver, they 
can propose amendments or revisions to the Constitu- 
tion. 

I think this is the proper point to share Commis- 
sioner Padilla’s learned insights on the difference be- 
tween an amendment and a revision. We were the bene- 
ficiaries of the Committee’s insights, according to which 
an amendment deals with only a piecemeal change in 
the Constitution; a revision, on the other hand, may 
entail a number of amendments and may even entail 
the revision of the entire Constitution. And the power 
to propose amendments as well as revisions, we now 
vest under paragraph (c), Section 1 of the Article on 
Amendment in the people and their organizations 
which they need not avail of, unless there is a very 
strong sentiment or undercurrent of sentiment in the 
future that will impel them to gather signatures, let us 
say, several million signatures to meet the standard that 
will be set forth in this Article on Amendment so 
that if they want to revise the Constitution according 
to the requirements of new conditions in the future, 
then they may do so. Of course, the traditional pre- 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


379 


rogative to introduce amendments or revisions will 
still be vested on the National Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I would like to ask the honorable proponent a ques- 
tion. In answer to the interpellations of Commissioner 
Bengzon, the sponsor said that paragraph (c) of Section 
1 contemplates a situation where the National Assem- 
bly or the legislature would refuse to heed the people’s 
will. My question is: As worded by the Committee, 
would not the National Assembly be able to frustrate 
the people’s will by simply not appropriating the 
amount needed for the exercise or referendum that 
should be held? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman is referring to the 
exercise by the people of the right vested under para- 
graph (c), Section 1. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, because my understanding 
as a member of the Legislative Committee is that there 
are some restrictions with respect to the exercise of the 
power of initiative and referendum and I think one of 
the restrictions is in the appropriation of a sum of 
money. The power to appropriate would still be vested 
in the National Assembly. In the situation that the 
sponsor contemplates where the National Assembly 
ignores the people’s will, is there not a possibility that 
this will be a paper provision because then they would 
not be able to exercise the right vested in them by 
Section 1 , paragraph (c)? 

Mr. SUAREZ. The mechanisms were not discussed 
in the manner the Gentleman brought out this evening 
although that is a very valid point. We hasten to add, 
however, that the methods provided under paragraphs 
(s)> (b) and (c) may be availed of one after the other. 
In other words, one does not preclude the exercise of 
the other. They could even be availed of simultaneously, 
if necessary, but the matter of appropriation is indeed 
essential. 


the presiding officer (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

Mr, maambong. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the 
distinguished sponsor yield to a few questions? 

Mr. SUAREZ. With pleasure, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Mr. maambong. I hope the sponsor does not mind 
my interpellating him at this point, considering that I am 
a member of his Committee. But the other statements 
of the Commissioners before me provoked my thoughts. 


I will advert to the point in the Article referring to 
the ratification process by the majority votes of the 
electorate. 

The sponsor mentioned earlier that the Committee 
used the word “plebiscite” in Section 3 in contra- 
distinction with the word used in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion which was “election.” I suppose the sponsor fol- 
lowed the 1973 Constitution in the use of the word 
“plebiscite” and not the 1935 Constitution in the 
use of the word “election” because election connotes 
a process whereby a body of qualified voters in the 
country - whether it be nationwide, by district, by 
province, by municipality or barangay - choose public 
officials. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman is right, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The sponsor also appropriately 
used the word “plebiscite” because the book I am 
using here - which is incidentally my own - defines 
plebiscite as a direct voting by the qualified electors 
in regard to an important public question, usually to 
ratify a proposed constitution. Would that be a correct 
statement? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Section 2 reads: 

by a majority vote of aU its Members, submit the 
question of calling such a convention to the electorate. 

In Section 2, the word “election” or “plebiscite” was 
lot used. The question here is: What is the intendment 
if the Committee? Under Section 2 when the National 
Assembly submits the question to the electorate of 
whether to call a convention, would this be through 
nr nlebiscite? 


MR. SUAREZ. It is supposed to coincide with the 
election, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


/IR MAAMBONG. In other words, in Section 2, if 
re is no election, the question of calling a constitu- 


MR SUAREZ. That is the meaning sought to be 
conveyed in connection with this particular section. 


[R. MAAMBONG. We have a difficulty here, be- 
;e the submission of the question of whether or 
to call a convention might coincide with a new 
1 of office of elective public officials. In other 
ds if there is an election, for example, for public 
lials in 1990, and in 1991 there is a need to present 
:he people the issue of whether we should call a 
stitutional convention or not, assuming tha e 
1 of office of the elective public officials will end in 
6, we will have to wait five or six years before we 


380 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


can submit the issue of calling a constitutional conven- 
tion. Is that the intendment, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman’s statement and 
conclusion under this section are correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Therefore, in the period of 
amendments, would the Committee be open to a sug- 
gestion to amend Section 2 to accommodate either 
election or plebiscite in the matter of calling a constitu- 
tional convention? 

MR. SUAREZ. Without waiting for an election? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Without waiting for an election 
which may take five years. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will entertain such an amended 
proposal, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

We will now go to Section 3. In Section 3, the word 
“plebiscite” is again used. Does it also mean that 
under Section 3, if there is an incoming election we 
cannot submit the amendment or revision of the Consti- 
tution to the electorate together with that election? 
Under Section 3, the wording is very specific; it speci- 
fically refers to a plebiscite and not an election as we 
have already defined earlier. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under the situation envisioned by 
the Gentleman, he would preclude a plebiscite in the 
calling of the election. In other words, there will be 
a separate election and a separate plebiscite. Is that the 
question? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is not the drift of my ques- 
tion. What I am trying to say is that under Section 3, 
as worded, there is a limiting factor wherein we cannot 
submit the ratification of any amendment to or revision 
of the Constitution together with an election because 
Section 3 specifically mentions plebiscite. 

MR. SUAREZ. It will not preclude the holding of a 
plebiscite together with the election because it could 
very well be signified that this is an election and a 
plebiscite at the same time. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, if an election 
is forthcoming for the purpose of ratifying the Constitu- 
tion, the issues in the plebiscite can be inserted in the 
same ballot and we can hold an election and a plebiscite 
at the same time. 

MR. SUAREZ. I remember that happened in the 
January 30, 1980 elections wherein the plebiscite was 
tucked to the election, the plebiscite on whether or not 
the term of the Justices of the Supreme Court would 
be extended from 65 to 70 years old, anticipating the 
retirement of some friendly justices. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

Just one more point. We have been using here words 
like “election” and “plebiscite.” In this amendatory 
or revision process of the Constitution, we never use 
the term “referendum.” We either use “election” or 
“plebiscite” because, as the dictionary defines it, re- 
ferendum is the principle or procedure of submitting 
measures already approved by the legislative body to the 
vote of the electorate for approval or disapproval. That 
is the reason we do not use “referendum” in matters 
of amendment or revision of the Constitution. Is that a 
correct statement? 

MR. SUAREZ. Among others, yes, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Lastly — this is just food for 
thought considering that the Committee will meet 
tomorrow to consider all the submission of other 
Commissioners — I notice that the bottom line in the 
ratification of an amendment or a revision to a consti- 
tution is always a majority of the votes cast by the 
electorate. On the other hand, if it is the National 
Assembly which constitutes itself as a constituent 
assembly to propose amendments to a constitution, 
it is by the vote of three-fourths of all its Members. 
All these things are submitted to the people for rati- 
fication. I am trying to connect this with the proce- 
dure for initiative for future consideration because 
the members of the National Assembly are representa- 
tives of the people in their individu^ constituencies 
and, therefore, would it not be appropriate mathema- 
tically to require a vote of three-fourths of the Na- 
tional Assembly in order to amend or revise the Con- 
stitution? Would it not be appropriate also to require 
a vote of three-fourths of the electorate in order to 
institute the process known as initiative? If the present 
trend of initiative is only 10 percent of the electorate, 
it would run counter to the required votes of the re- 
presentatives of the people which are three-fourths or 75 
percent. This is just food for thought and a question. 
Probably, we can take this up when the Committee on 
Amendments and Transitory Provisions meets. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
Commissioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, allow me 
to make some comments on the system of initiative 
which is a reserve power of the sovereign people. My 
colleagues pointed out that the system of initiative is 
limited and should be limited only to initiating legis- 
lation and not to proposing amendments. I will humbly 


TUESDAY, JULY 8, 1986 


381 


disagree with my colleagues’ observations. I wish to 
invite my colleagues’ attention to the 1986 UP Law 
Constitution Project draft proposal. In one of its pages, 
it is stated, and I quote: 

The devices of recall, initiative and referendum are 
well-established methods for asserting people sovereignty 
by way of shortening the terms of officials, elective or 
appointive, and of initiating legislation or constitutional 
amendments. . . 

I wish to emphasize the words “of initiating legislation 
or constitutional amendments.” The text continues: 

... or subjecting the acts of the legislature to the approval 
or disapproval of the people. In some jurisdiction, while 
the three processes are adopted in the constitution, the 
details for their implementation are left to the enactment 
of legislation by the regular assemblies of the state. . . 

Because of this pronouncement in the draft proposal 
of the 1986 UP Law Constitution Project, I will sup- 
port Commissioner Ople’s-jproposal that the mode of 
initiative be retained in the Article on Amendment or 
Revision. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What is the pleasure of the Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there are no more 
interpellators and there are no more speakers for and 
against the resolution, so I move that we close the 
period of sponsorship and debate. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). 
What is the pleasure of Commissioner Rodrigo? 

MR. RODRIGO. Have we not deferred the consi- 
deration of Section 1 , paragraph (c)? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
Chair declares a suspension of the session. 

It was 5:41 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:49 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


SUSPENSION OF CONSIDERATION 
OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
(Article on Amendment or Revision) 


MR. RAMA. I would like to amend my motion to 
a motion for deferment of the consideration of Com- 
mittee Report No. 7 on Proposed Resolution No. 322 
until tomorrow at 2:30 p.m. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). Is 
there any objection to the motion for 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move to adjourn 
the session untU tomorrow at 2:30 p.m. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. de los Reyes). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at 2:30 p.m. 

It was 5:50 p.m. 


’mi 


jMi.it 



_:^.V -;■ fj,.,-. 

n*fkniwi^5- 

ly^. ' »'* 

, -i-l^ilii IHM .' . . . 

..vr>iiMfO^>|Nft^ ‘>w -/i1»5y H »lH‘ 

»r'‘ "*mV'. i«. . ' 

^4|(P>^4W *>K^«*ia5Ili'^ jlH 

\<f ■■ i*^.tj | |»tii|i|| i ’*hi!h» wJiiiy,! 




'‘'tv -''l^i ^ 


irirtcifc.iw- lt "l |i|i K»n ii ^ I '*. p. .^3» >. ,'I fl 

.A.i.’.lt>fffi.r- .(•y. / 

•ni ;AM i»K>iPt^li> v#KT 

rt$ <!♦»«*<♦»** ^|. i , t*< » 

K «^»WcMn ripMt r.»l * 'W%n^,. 

- .■ • ‘'♦•'■j' Vi --v • 


iV ■^•hl^^ ,4*fe 

» ’ « f *;f..I ff WW|t>in^ ijirm fiwiAv ^ 




'> 


yiil 


'I.- 


' r> <• •• . 


A«. <** *^ . 


• lf<!tH(,<|jK' •:' t#r. -> , I 
?^v ^ ■♦' •-■ 
i 'rN* fff 4^ »''iv .♦* 


It ’ ^ * • 

■ .;.s •* 


« . 1i.' 

:■»< ' I'; ' 

,Hi(f :* ■‘•• 

“■ 

«• :'• • • 


h 


.J. 


»3 


f ' ' 

**W^' '-H' 

./Jl. .^ ■ • ■ It 



Jv ,-'t^».’*.» *’i' . •f’''* 


.V i 
i ' M . 
i.-'ii' 




’4 


U.^Sl4| r» 

.»<* * 




' ^.'-i 

I r iMl^i 


I 




« ' 




M 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


383 


R.C.C. NO. 26 
Wednesday, July 9, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 2:55 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable Jose 
N. Nolledo. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. NOLLEDO. O Dakilang Diyos, hinihingi po 
namin ang Inyong awa, pagmamahal at pagkalinga sa 
aming makasaysayang pagbalangkas at pagbuo ng isang 
Saligang Batas na tunay na maka-Pilipino at maka-tao, 
isang Saligang Batas na tumatangkilik sa mga karapa- 
tang pambayan at hahango sa kahirapan ng marami 
naming mamamayan, isang Saligang Batas na magbibi- 
gay ng tunay na pag-asa sa aming mga kababayan at 
magpapatibay ng kanilang loob sa kanilang pagtahak sa 
daang puno ng tinik at kapighatian tungo sa masagana 
at maligayang kinabukasan at nawa’y makintal sa isipan 
ng buong sambayanang Pilipino sa lalong madaling pana- 
hon ang paniniwalang may langit din pala sa daigdig. 
Hinihingi po namin ang mga ito sa ngalan ng Inyong 
Bugtong na Anak na si Hesus na naghahari kasama po 
Ninyo at ng banal na Espiritu Santo, iisang Diyos, 
magpakailan man. Siya nawa. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Present Azcuna Present 

Alonto Present Bacani Present 

Aquino Present Bengzon Present 


Bennagen Present 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present* 

Davide Present* 

Foz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present* 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Present 

Monsod Present 

Natividad Present 

Nieva Present 

Nolledo Present 


The President is present 


Ople 

. . Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Absent 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Villegas 

. . Present 


The roll call shows 42 Members responded to the call 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


approval of JOURNAL 


MR CALDERON. I move that we dispense with tte 
fading of the Journal of the previous session and that 


jmnrnve the same. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


Appeared after the toll call 


384 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 

Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 

Committee Reports, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 446, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ESTABLISHING A MULTIPARTY POLI- 
TICAL SYSTEM. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Natividad, Maambong and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 447, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCLUDE IN THE CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING HAMLETTING, 
ZONING, FOOD BLOCKADE, AND SIMILAR CRUEL 
AND INHUMAN MILITARY MEASURES AGAINST 
CIVILIAN COMMUNITIES. 

Introduced by Hon. Tan, Tadeo, Colayco, Sarmiento, 
Bennagen, Aquino, Suarez and Bacani. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 448, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING THE USE OF 
TORTURE FOR ANY PURPOSE. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 449, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS FOR THE CREATION OF THE 
PEOPLE’S POLICE COUNCIL COMPOSED OF THE 
MAJOR SECTORS IN THE LOCALITY THAT WILL 
MONITOR AND PROVIDE SANCTIONS AGAINST ANY 
SYSTEMATIC POLICE ABUSES. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 450, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR THE USE OF THE IN- 
DIGENOUS WRITTEN LANGUAGE AND ALPHABET 
OF THE ETHNIC MINORITIES WHEN VOTING IN ANY 
NATIONAL OR LOCAL ELECTIONS, PLEBISCITE OR 
REFERENDUM. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 451, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO THE PROBLEM 
OF ENGLISH, SPANISH, AND FILIPINO, OUR MOTHER 
TONGUES, NATIVE LANGUAGES AND DIALECTS, 
AND OTHER RELATED SUBJECTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr., Maambong, Jamir, 
Uka, Abubakar and Rama. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 452, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND PRO- 
MOTION OF PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 453, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF OUR EN- 
VIRONMENT AND THE PRESERVATION OF OUR 
NATURAL RESOURCES. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Proposed Resolution No. 454, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE THE RIGHT TO EDU- 
CATION OF EVERY CITIZEN IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS 
OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon, Villacorta, Guingona, 
Trenas and Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 457, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE 
TO ELIMINATE TYRANNY AND TO REPLACE IT WITH 
A DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Maambong, de los Reyes, 
Jr. and Natividad. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Manuel A. Argel of Vigan, 
Ilocos Sur, proposing, among others, a parliamentary 
form of government patterned after that of France, the 
synchronization of elections, a bicameral legislature, and 
abandonment of the Sabah claim. 

(Communication No. 146 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


385 


Unnumbered resolution of the Association of Disabled 
Persons of Rinconada and Iriga City (ADPRIC),request- 
ing the inclusion of provisions which would grant dis- 
abled Filipinos priority of employment in government 
and private entities. 

(Communication No. 147 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Rolando R. Abad of San Isidro, Pili, 
Camarines Sur, requesting the inclusion of provisions on 
land reform, education and language. 

(Communication No. 148 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Lakas ng Manggagawa signed by Mr. Daniel 
Edralin, submitting general proposals on basic constitu- 
tional issues and a particular resolution affording more 
protection to labor and guaranteeing human and trade 
union rights. 

(Communication No. 149 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Telegram from Ms. Maria Luisa Lorenzo of Manila, 
expressing opposition to any provision imposing a na- 
tional language. 

(Communication No. 1 50 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Romulo P. Sandejas III of Legaspi City, 
proposing free education and health service, among 
others. 

(Communication No. 151 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from GABRIELA signed by Sr. Mary John 
Mananzan, OSB, enclosing its manifesto calling for the 
full emancipation of women, and for justice, freedom, 
democracy and prosperity for the people. 

(Communication No. 152 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Philippine Institute of Environmental 
Planners signed by Mr. Cesar H. Concio, enclosing a 
position paper prepared by Mr. Rene S. Santiago and 
endorsing particularly the proposals on autonomous 
regional governments. 

(Communication No. 153 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


To the Committee on Local Governments. 


Letter from Mr. Pedro M. Espina of the Knights of 
Columbus, Virgen Sa Barangay Council No. 8362, City 
of Tagbilaran, suggesting, among others, a bill of duties, 
and obligations of citizens enumerated explicitly to 
counterbalance the Bill of Rights. 

(Communication No. 1 54 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Letter from Mr. Prisco P. Orcullo, Jr. of Salvacion, San 
Agustin, Surigao del Sur, proposing the translation of 
the Constitution into different Philippine dialects and 
requiring every head of the family to secure a copy free 
or in exchange for sales receipts. 

(Communication No. 155 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Fidel R. Milan and eleven others of Sta. 
Catalina, Zamboanga City, requesting provisions on 
urban land reform, free hospitalization, creation of 
Urban Poor Ministry, and handicraft skills training. 
(Communication No. 156 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Letter from Mr. Edward M. Kelly of Assumption Sapang 
Palay College, Inc., submitting proposals on the equality 
of man and woman, protection of the environment, 
housing and education, among others. 

(Communication No. 157 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Letter from Mr. Orlando F. Caliolio of Southern City 
Colleges, Zamboanga City, requesting inclusion in the 
Bill of Rights of a provision granting the right to keep 
and bear arms for self-defense. 

(Communication No. 158 - Constitutional Commission 


1986) 

the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
litical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

mmunication from Anchor Foundation, Inc. and 
chor Broadcast Council, Sta. Mesa, Manila, requesting 
lusion of a provision that will promote and protect 
; people’s right to the use of the airwaves for broad- 

;t media. 








of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


386 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


Letter from the People’s Secretariat for the Constitu- 
tional Commission signed by Mr. Rizal Ruiz Amon, 
forwarding the position paper of the Filipino Inventors 
Society proposing provisions for invention, science and 
technology. 

(Communication No. 1 60 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

COMMITTEE REPORTS 

Committee Report No. 16 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 455, prepared by the Committee on Accountability 
of Public Officers, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE 1986 CONSTITU- 
TION CERTAIN SECTIONS TO IMPLEMENT THE PRO- 
POSED ARTICLE ON ACCOUNTABILITY OF PUBLIC 
OFFICERS, 

recommending its approval. 

Sponsored by Hon. Monsod, Colayco and members of 
the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 17 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 456, prepared by the Committee on Accountability 
of Public Officers, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
1986 CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON ACCOUNTA- 
BILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 61, 66, 74, 76, 121, 125, 218, 223, 
229, 280, 344, 353 and 354. 

Sponsored by Hon. Monsod, Colayco and members of 
the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to inform the body of some 
changes on the referral of certain resolutions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 277, proposing for a nation- 
al health policy, has been referred to the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of Prin- 
ciples from the Committee on Justice; and Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 265, 266, 270, 96, 164 and 347 which 
were previously referred to the Committee on General 
Provisions, to the Committee on Human Resources. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; let the corresponding matters be 
recorded. 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 322 
(Article on Amendment or Revision ) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of Committee Report No. 7 on Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 322 on Second Reading. We are still in the 
period of sponsorship and debate. 

I ask that the sponsor be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The sponsor. Commissioner Suarez, is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

May we respectfully call the attention of the Mem- 
bers of the Commission that pursuant to the mandate 
given to us last night, we submitted this afternoon a 
complete Committee Report No. 7 which embodies the 
proposed provision governing the matter of initiative. 
This is now covered by Section 2 of the complete com- 
mittee report. With the permission of the Members, may 
I quote Section 2: 

The people may, after five years from the date of the 

last plebiscite held, directly propose amendments to this 

Constitution thru initiative upon petition of at least ten per- 
cent of the registered voters. 

This completes the blanks appearing in the original 
Committee Report No. 7. This proposal was suggested 
on the theory that this matter of initiative, which came 
about because of the extraordinary developments this 
year, has to be separated from the traditional modes of 
amending the Contitution as embodied in Section 1. 
The committee members felt that this system of ini- 
tiative should be limited to amendments to the Consti- 
tution and should not extend to the revision of the 
entire Constitution, so we removed it from the opera- 
tion of Section 1 of the proposed Article on Amend- 
ment or Revision. Also this power could be susceptible 
to abuse to such an extent that it could very well 
happen that the initiative method of amendment could 
be exercised, say, twice or thrice in a matter of one 
year; thus, a necessity for putting limitations to its 
exercise. The committee members also felt that putting 
a limitation within a five-year period after the date of 
the last plebiscite held is reasonable, as well as the 
percentage arrived at — meaning, ten percent of the 
registered voters. On the basis of the information given, 
we have about 26 or 27 million registered voters, which 
would necessitate getting the affirmative vote of at least 
2.5, 2.6 or 2.7 million thereof. This, of course, is not 
an impossible task although it would pose some dif- 
ficulties. The general idea as agreed upon is for us to try 
to make the process of amendment a little more diffi- 
cult in order that we can have an enduring and lasting 
Constitution. After all, there are two other methods 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


387 


of amendment, the traditional ones, which we have 
provided under subsections (a) and (b) of Section 1. So, 
our Committee decided to propose this particular 
Section 2 as it is now embodied in the complete com- 
mittee report. 

We would like to clear up one other point, lest we be 
misunderstood in the interpretation of the provisions 
which now appear as Section 3 of the complete Com- 
mittee Report No. 7. When we were asked by Commis- 
sioner Maambong last night about the applicability of 
Section 3 in connection with the employment of the 
words “election or plebiscite,” we did not get the full 
significance of his questioning and we came up with an 
affirmative answer. We ventured the observation that in 
the application of Section 3, the calling of a constitu- 
tional convention could not be submitted to the people 
in a special plebiscite on the theory that this Section 3, 
formerly Section 2, operates only simultaneously with 
the calling of an election. The members of the Commit- 
tee — and this was borne out by. the proposal of Com- 
missioner de Castro — agreed to delete after the word 
“electorate” the phrase appearing in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. In other words, the idea is clear that this Section 3 
could operate with or without an election and a plebi- 
scite for the purpose could be called independently of 
the election. So this is for the purpose of clearing up 
any possible misunderstanding of the provision which is 
now Section 3 of the completed Committee Report 
No. 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would just like to 
clarify this point from the honorable sponsor. 

We adjourned yesterday while we were in the process 
of closing the debate on the original resolution submit- 
ted by the Committee. Does the Chair understand that 
we will debate on this substitute resolution again, or is 
this one of the amendments? 

MR. SUAREZ. We are not yet in the period of 
amendments. Madam President. I think we can accom- 
modate interpellations regarding this proposed Section 2 
of the completed Committee Report No. 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to know 
whether or not we will close the debate on Committee 
Report No. 7. 

MR. RAMA. Not yet. Madam President, because 
some Members would like to debate on certain por- 
tions of the Article on Amendment. As a matter of fact. 
Commissioner Rodrigo has reserved his turn to speak on 
the matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to know 
whether we are now in the period of amendments. 

MR. RAMA. We are still in the period of sponsorship 
and debate. 

Madam President, I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo 
be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Madam President, last night I said the Committee on 
the Legislative drafted a provision for initiative or 
referendum on ordinary legislation, and I said that in 
that Article, the Committee on the Legislative provides 
that initiative or referendum shall be initiated by at least 
ten percent of the registered voters in the immediately 
preceding election. I am now reading from the final 
draft which will be considered this evening for final ap- 
proval by the Committee. In the committee report, the 
committee also suggests 1 0 percent of the electorate to 
propose a constitutional amendment, so that the pro- 
portion of the people who can initiate an ordinary legis- 
lation is the same as that who can propose a constitu- 
tional amendment. In the resolution itself it is very 
evident that the intention of the Constitution is to make 
the process of proposing a constitutional amendment 
more difficult than that of an ordinary legislation. 
Section 1 states: 

Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitution may 

be proposed: 

(a) by the National Assembly upon a vote of three- 

fourths of all its Members; or 

(b) by a constitutional convention. 

A constitutional convention may be called by the 
National Assembly by a vote of two-thirds of all its 
Members. So, the norm is to have a biggervote for pro- 
posals for constitutional amendments than for ordinary 
legislations. So, does not the sponsor think that instead 
of the same proportion of 1 0 percent of the electorate 
to propose constitutional amendments and to initiate 
ordinary legislations, the percentage to propose consti- 
tutional amendments should be much bigger? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee will be glad to enter- 
tain proposals to amend this particular subject matter 
at the proper time. 

MR. RODRIGO. Section 2 of the complete commit- 
tee report provides: “upon petition of at least 10 per- 
cent of the registered voters.” How wilt we determine 
that 1 0 percent has been achieved? How will the voters 
manifest their desire, is it by signature? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, by signatures. 

MR RODRIGO. Let us look at the mechanics. Let us 
say some voters want to propose a constitutiona 
amendment. Is the draft of the proposed constitutional 
amendment ready to be shown to the people when they 
are asked to sign? 

MR. SUAREZ. That can be reasonably assumed. 
Madam President. 


388 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. What does the sponsor mean? The 
draft is ready and shown to them before they sign. Now, 
who prepares the draft? 

MR. SUAREZ. The people themselves, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, because before they sign there is 
already a draft shown to them and they are asked 
whether or not they want to propose this constitutional 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. As it is envisioned, any Filipino can 
prepare that proposal and pass it around for signature. 

MR. RODRIGO. Pass it around? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So it is possible it be by one man. 

MR. SUAREZ. One man or a group of men. 

MR. RODRIGO. A group of men or ordinary citizens 
can prepare the draft and pass it around for signature. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. And once they sign the draft, it is 
final. They cannot amend it anymore. 

MR. SUAREZ. Probably, they could. 

MR. RODRIGO. It is our experience right in this hall 
that in proposing amendments we are very careful about 
every word, even the comma. So, how can these 2.5 
million signatories participate in the drafting of the 
amendment? 

MR. SUAREZ. The mechanical details could be 
ironed out later, but substantially the democratic pro- 
cess will have to be followed; meaning, if a person has a 
proposal for amendment, he has to market its accepta- 
bility among ten percent of the electorate. 

That is the general idea behind the introduction of 
this particular section. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, this proposed 
amendment will be distributed throughout the Philip- 
pines, in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. This may be prepared by one man 
or a group of men who will gather signatures. The 
sponsor said that amendments may be proposed. How 
can these be proposed? By 10 percent or 20 percent 
of the electorate. Suppose somebody wants to change a 
word before signing the proposal, say, “obnoxious” to 


“inconsistent,” who will decide whether or not to 
change it? 

MR. SUAREZ. What probably would be the ultimate 
test of any particular proposal for the amendment of the 
Constitution under this system is its final presentation 
to the Commission on Elections for submission in the 
plebiscite called for the purpose. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, but who will draft that pro- 
posal? 

Will the 2.5 million signatories have a hand in the 
drafting of that proposal? 

MR. SUAREZ. Not necessarily, because this con- 
templates a situation where the proposal will be ac- 
cepted by the required percentage. It does not require 
that the signatories would be coauthors of that pro- 
posal. They only signify their conformity to it and this 
ultimately will have to be submitted to the people for 
ratification in a plebiscite called for the purpose. Madam 
President. 

The process of submitting the proposal for accept- 
ance by the required percentage of voters is different 
from submitting the accepted proposal for ratification 
by the people in a plebiscite. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is correct. But if the National 
Assembly (by a vote of three-fourths of its Members) or 
a constitutional convention or constitutional commis- 
sion like ours makes the proposal, all the members 
participate. In other words, the ones who propose 
would study, debate, participate and vote on this. 

What if the ten percent of the electorate will propose 
the amendment? Does the sponsor mean it is possible 
that only one man or a group of men will draft the pro- 
posal and have it signed by the people without their 
right to amend, revise or change it or participate in 
drafting it? 

MR. SUAREZ. If 10 percent of the electorate signi- 
fies its acceptance and conformity to the proposal sub- 
mitted by one man, that is just beautiful. Madam Pres- 
ident. That means that the proposal of that single in- 
dividual has been marketed for acceptability to the 
required percentage of the electorate. 

MR. RODRIGO. So in the final analysis, we can say 
that this is a proposal not studied, neither drafted nor 
participated in by the people through initiative because 
initiative means the people act directly. 

MR. SUAREZ. One might accept that situation. 
Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Now, Section 4 states: 

Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitution 

shall be valid when ratified by a majority of the votes cast 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


389 


in a plebiscite which shall be held not earlier than sixty 
days and not later than ninety days after the approval of 
such amendment or revision. 

In the case of a proposal made by the National As- 
sembly or by a convention, we know the date of its 
approval. How about that of the 10 percent of the 
electorate? When is the date of approval? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is a very relevant question which 
was taken up during the committee meeting this mor- 
ning. The idea, Madam President, although we did not 
include it in the draft proposal, is that in the case of 
proposals submitted through initiative, the operative 
period would be after the Commission on Elections has 
certified that the required number of registered voters 
has been obtained. This was the suggestion, but we 
thought it was wiser to throw this matter to the body at 
the appropriate time. 


MR. RODRIGO. Let me go back to a previous ques- 
tion. The Committee is not happy with, let us say, 1 0 
percent of the votes coming from only one region like 
Metro Manila. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. But the way Section 2 is worded 
now, that is possible and admissible. 

MR. SUAREZ. That situation is theoretically possi- 
ble - that all of the 2.6 or 2.7 million registered voters 
would come from one area, say, from Luzon or from 
Metro Manila. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. If it is the National Assembly 
that proposes the amendment, the whole Philippines 
is represented, is it not? 


MR. RODRIGO. I have another question. A consti- 
tution is supposed to be the act of the sovereign people 
of the Philippines. The only requirement in this com- 
mittee report is at least 10 percent of the electorate 
must petition. Let us say 10 percent of the electorate 
of the whole Philippines petitioned but this 10 per- 
cent came only from Metro Manila, would that be 
sufficient? 

MR. SUAREZ. As it is envisioned, yes. Madam Pres- 
ident, although again in the committee meeting this 
morning, that situation was precisely explored and 
ideas were given to the effect that at least a certain 
percentage of the electorate from the provinces should 
sign the proposal. There were suggestions that this per- 
centage could amount to something like five percent 
from each province. Again, we leave this to the body to 
determine later on. 

MR. RODRIGO. Which body? 


MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. And if it is a constitutional con- 
vention which proposes the amendment, the whole 
Philippines is also presented. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Whereas, if the people want to act 
directly Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao might nofbe 
represented at all in the 10-percent electorate who 
proposes to amend the Constitution, is that correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento be recognized. 


MR. SUAREZ. The Commission, Madam President, jhe PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
by way of amendment. nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. During the period of amendments. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, there will be a provision to that 
effect in Section 2 of the proposed resolution? 

MR. SUAREZ. If that is the sense of the Commission, 
yes. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. But if nobody presents that amend- 
ment, does not the Committee think that that amend- 
ment should be incorporated in this section? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee could very well 
submit that as a committee amendment for considera- 
tion by the Commission. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I am happy 
lat the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
-ovisions decided to retain the system of initiative as a 
ode of amending the Constitution. I made a survey of 
merican constitutions and I discovered that 13 states 
ovide for a system of initiative as a mode of amending 
,e Constitution - Arizona, Arkansas, California, 
olorado, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, N^raska, 
evada. North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma and Oregon, 
he initiative for ordinary laws only is used in Idaho, 
aine, Montana and South Dakota. So, I am happy that 
lis was accepted or retained by the Committee. 

About the matter of drafting, questions were raised 
; to who will draft the proposals of the people. I hope 
,is information will be of help to the Committee and 
» the Commission. 


390 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


In Alaska, the initiative petition is prepared by the 
lieutenant governor through a ballot title and proposi- 
tion which summarizes the proposed law and he shall 
place this on the ballot for their first statewide election 
held more than 1 20 days after adjournment of the legis- 
lative session following the filing of the proposal. If 
before the election substantially the same measure has 
been enacted, the petition is void. 

In the State of Colorado, the original draft or text 
of the proposed initiated constitutional amendments 
and initiated laws is submitted to the legislative research 
and drafting offices of the general assembly for review 
and comment. Not later than two weeks after sub- 
mission of the original draft unless withdrawn by the 
proponents, the legislative research and drafting offices 
of the general assembly shall render their comments to 
the proponents of the proposed measure at a meeting 
open to the public, which shall be held only after full 
and timely notice to the public. 

Madam President, a book entitled: The American 
Federal Government’s Suffrage, Nominations and 
Elections has this paragraph on initiative and on the 
matter of drafting a proposal: 

The initiative is an electoral device through which an 
individual or a group may propose statutory legislation or 
constitutional amendments by securing the signatures of 
the requisite number of voters and may place the measure 
before the electorate for adoption or rejection. The draft- 
ing of such measures normally is done by interested groups 
or their attorneys. The number or proportion of signatures 
required is set by law or constitution. 

I hope these points will be considered by the Com- 
mittee on Amendments and Transitory Provisions. 

Two more points. Madam President. Regarding the 
percentage of registered voters that will propose amend- 
ments to the Constitution through initiative, I think I 
agree with the first interpellator that this system of 
initiative should be made more difficult. 

In the State of Arizona, the number of electorate 
that can propose a legislative measure is 1 0 percent, but 
it is higher for those who will propose any amendment 
to the Constitution. Maybe, since the Constitution is a 
fundamental law, it is more serious than a legislative 
measure. So, we can increase the percentage to 15 
percent as in the case of Arizona. 

Madam President, Section 2 provides: 

The people may, after five years from the date of the 
last plebiscite held, directly propose amendments to this 
Constitution. . . 

What if the people feel that there should be an 
amendment to meet a situation, does not the sponsor 
think this provision is quite stringent or strict? I ask 
this question because Section 4 of the State Constitu- 
tion of Alaska provides that an initiative petition to 
proposed amendments to the Constitution may be filed 
any time. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will the honorable sponsor yield 
to two questions? 

MR. SUAREZ. With pleasure. Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. The first question is: Does the 
sponsor think that proposing amendments to the Consti- 
tution is necessary? 

MR. SUAREZ. In view of recent developments and in 
order to give meaning and significance to the concept of 
people’s power, I would answer in the affirmative. 
Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. In other words, one cannot look 
forward to an effective way of proposing constitutional 
amendments anymore if Section 2 is not adopted? 

MR. SUAREZ. Not necessarily, because we still have 
the two traditional methods of proposing amendments 
to the Constitution under Section 1 , paragraphs (a) and 
(b) of the resolution. Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Therefore, it is not necessary; it is 
perhaps opportune at some time. 

MR. SUAREZ. It could be necessary in a situation 
where the methods outlined under paragraphs (a) and 
(b) could not be utilized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. An example of this would be if, say, 
the National Assembly cannot muster the necessary 
three-fourths vote in order to constitute itself as a 
constituent assembly or that the two-thirds vote re- 
quired for the calling of a constitutional convention 
could not be obtained, in which event this extraordinary 
situation develops and a single individual can take it 
upon himself or herself to resort to the exercise of this 
method of initiating an amendment to the Constitution. 
And I recall at one time — I think it was Honorable Ople 
who mentioned this — a gentleman, one single indi- 
vidual, in the State of California who came up with 
a proposition, and succeeded in amending or heading 
Proposition No. 13, which was accepted by the entire 
state. We are thinking along those lines. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


391 


The second major question is; Does this section allow 
for two or more groups concurrently getting signatures 
like, let us say, at a certain period, five groups may be 
trying to get signatures from 2,700,000 people on dif- 
ferent, maybe contradictory, proposals for amend- 
ments? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. It could even 
contemplate that the two different groups would be 
submitting two different proposals which finally would 
have to be submitted to the people for ratification in a 
plebiscite. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


possible that, in effect, what will be presented to the 
people for ratification is the work of the legislature 
rather than of the people? Does this provision exclude 
that possibility? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, it does not exclude that possi- 
bility because even the legislature itself as a body could 
propose that amendment, maybe individually or col- 
lectively, if it fails to muster the three-fourths vote in 
order to constitute itself as a constituent assembly and 
submit that proposal to the people for ratification 
through the process of an initiative. 

FR. BERNAS. What I mean is: Does this procedure 
allow the legislature to amend the formula which may 
have been presented? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. FR. BERNAS. It does not. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 


MR. SUAREZ. It does not contemplate that situa- 
tion, definitely not. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just two simple 
clarificatory questions. 

First, on Section 1 on the matter of initiative upon 
petition of at least 10 percent, there are no details in 
the provision on how to carry this out. Do we under- 
stand, therefore, that we are leaving this matter to the 
legislature? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. And do we also understand, therefore, 
that for as long as the legislature does not pass the 
necessary implementing law on this, this will not 
operate? 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you. Madam President. 

On another point, on Section 3, the last phrase says 
“submit the question of calling such a convention to the 
electorate.” I notice that the word “electorate” is used. 
Earlier, the sponsor was saying that a plebiscite or a 
referendum can be held quite independently of an 
election. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. And when the word “electorate” was 
used here, would the sponsor not contradict his previous 
statement? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President, because when 
we speak of electorate, these are the voters who would 
participate either in a plebiscite or an election. 


MR. SUAREZ. That matter was also taken up during 
the committee hearing, especially with respect to the 
budget appropriations which would have to be legis- 
lated so that the plebiscite could be called. We deemed 
it best that this matter be left to the legislature. The 
Gentleman is right. In any event, as envisioned, no 
amendment through the power of initiative can be 
called until after five years from the date of the ratifi- 
cation of this Constitution. Therefore, the first amend- 
ment that could be proposed through the exercise of 
this initiative power would be after five years. It is 
reasonably expected that within that five-year period, 
the National Assembly can come up with the appro- 
priate rules governing the exercise of this power. 

FR. BERNAS. Since the matter is left to the legisla- 
ture — the details on how this is to be carried out — is it 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Aquino be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Will the honorable sponsor yield to a 
few questions? 


MR. SUAREZ. With pleasure, Madam President. 

MS AQUINO. Do I understand from the sponsor that 
e intention in the proposal is to vest constituen 
)wer in the people to amend the Constitution. 


392 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. That is absolutely correct. Madam 
President. 

MS. AQUINO. I fully concur with the underlying 
precept of the proposal in terms of institutionalizing 
popular participation in the drafting of the Constitution 
or in the amendment thereof, but I would have a lot of 
difficulties in terms of accepting the draft of Section 2, 
as written. Would the sponsor agree with me that in the 
hierarchy of legal mandate, constituent power has 
primacy over all other legal mandates? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is right. Madam 
President. 

• 

MS. AQUINO. And would the sponsor agree with 
me that in the hierarchy of legal values, the Constitu- 
tion is source of all legal mandates and that therefore 
we require a great deal of circumspection in the drafting 
and in the amendments of the Constitution? 

MR. SUAREZ. That proposition is nondebatable. 

MS. AQUINO. Such that in order to underscore the 
primacy of constituent power we have a separate article 
in the constitution that would specifically cover the 
process and the modes of amending the Constitution? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Therefore, is the sponsor inclined, as 
the provisions are drafted now, to again concede to the 
legislature the process or the requirement of determin- 
ing the mechanics of amending the Constitution by 
people’s initiative? 

MR. SUAREZ. The matter of implementing this 
could very well be placed in the hands of the National 
Assembly, not unless we can incorporate into this 
provision the mechanics that would adequately cover 
all the conceivable situations. 

MS. AQUINO. In other words, the sponsor would be 
amenable at the proper time to accommodate amend- 
ments that would define or modify or amplify these 
provisions in Section 2 of this Article? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. The Com- 
mittee would be delighted to accept reasonable proposi- 
tions at the appropriate time. 

MS. AQUINO. On another point, do I understand it 
correctly that the provisions in Section 2 are not self- 
executing in the sense that it would further require the 
procedure enunciated in Section 4; that is, notwith- 
standing the source of the proposed amendment, it 
would have to be ratified by a majority of the votes cast 
in a plebiscite? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 


MS. AQUINO. We understood that. 

MR. SUAREZ. Section 2 must be interpreted toge- 
ther with the provisions of Section 4, except that in 
Section 4, as it is presently drafted, there is no take-off 
date for the 60-day and 90-day periods. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. In other words. Section 2 is 
another alternative mode of proposing amendments to 
the Constitution which would further require the 
process of submitting it in a plebiscite, in which case it 
is not self-executing. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, not unless we settle and deter- 
mine the take-off period. 

MS. AQUINO. But as stated now, it is the process. 

MR. SUAREZ. It is. 

MS. AQUINO. In which case, I am seriously bothered 
by providing this process of initiative as a separate 
section in the Article on Amendment. Would the 
sponsor be amenable to accepting an amendment in 
terms of realigning Section 2 as another subparagraph 
(c) of Section 1, instead of setting it up as another 
separate section as if it were a self-ex ecu ting provision? 

MR. SUAREZ. We would be amenable except that, as 
we clarified a while ago, this process of initiative is 
limited to the matter of amendment and should not 
expand into a revision which contemplates a total over- 
haul of the Constitution. That was the sense that was 
conveyed by the Committee. 

MS. AQUINO. In other words, the Committee was 
attempting to distinguish the coverage of modes (a) and 
(b) in Section 1 to include the process of revision; 
whereas, the process of initiation to amend, which is 
given to the public, would only apply to amendments? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. Those were the terms 
envisioned in the Committee. 

MS. AQUINO. I thank the sponsor; and thank you, 
Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


393 


Will the distinguished proponent yield to a few ques- 
tions? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Before I ask my questions, I would 
like to say that I concur with the view of Commissioner 
Sarmiento that the 10 percent might, perhaps, be in- 
creased to 1 5 percent for the reasons advanced by him. 
In answer to the question of Commissioner Rodrigo, the 
sponsor spoke of the 10 percent as referring to signa- 
tures obtained for this purpose. Am I correct? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. I know there is a dispute going on 
in one of the committees of this Commission as to 
whether or not illiterates should be allowed to vote. 
Does this mean that this Committee has already made a 
decision that, as far as this particular process is con- 
cerned, illiterates would be excluded? 

MR. SUAREZ. They would not be excluded because 
they could signify their conformity to the proposal in 
the manner outlined by law. 

MR. GUINGONA. So, it is not necessary to require 
signatures only? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. I see. Thank you. 

Speaking of initiative, the Committee on the Legisla- 
tive headed by Commissioner Davide, of which I am a 
member, has come up with a proposed provision which I 
thought might be more appropriate in view of the 
sponsor’s answer to the question of Commissioner 
Bernas that the details of this matter concerning initia- 
tive will be left to the legislature; such matters, for 
example, as determining safeguards against any attempts 
to violate the sanctity of the expression of the people’s 
will like bribery, questions on appropriation and so 
forth. The Legislative Committee has come up with a 
proposal that the National Assembly shall provide for a 
system of initiative whereby the people may, after five 
years from the date of the last plebiscite held, directly 
propose amendments to this Constitution through ini- 
tiative. I am not just using the words of the provision, 
but I am applying them to the proposed provision on 
initiative. In other words, one distinction is that there is 
a specific reference to the National Assembly or the 
legislature. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. GUINGONA. In the Committee’s proposed 
provision, there is no such reference. 

Second, I was going to add the words UP TO REGIS- 
TERED VOTERS in the immediately preceding election 
to clarify which registered voters this provision refers to. 


MR. SUAREZ. We took that into account when we 
came up with this wording. In the contemplation that 
there could be a continuing process of registration, the 
take-off period should be counted from the date of sub- 
mission of the proposed amendment. The list of regis- 
tered voters that should prevail is the one existing at the 
time of the submission of the proposal, not from the 
date of the last voting or plebiscite as the case may be. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

The last question may be a reversal to the supposition 
advanced by Commissioner Bacani that this proposal 
about initiative might not be approved. I would say, I 
am assuming that it will be approved. I was thinking 
that if this is to be approved, would it not be better that 
the last portion of Section 3, lines 1 7 to 1 8, which I will 
read; **or by a majority vote of all its Members, submit 
the question of calling such a convention to the elec- 
torate ” be deleted if there is already the provision on 
initiative because this is rather a cumbersome process as 
pointed out by Dean Irene Cortez of the U.P.? We will 
call a convention and there will be, of course, the ex- 
penses resulting from such a convention, and then we 
will follow it with another exercise, which is the ratifica- 
tion after the proposal. I thought, maybe, if initiative 
were to be accepted by the honorable Members of this 
Commission, then perhaps this portion might be 
removed. 

I thank the sponsor; thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Natividad be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will the Gentleman yield? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

Paragraph (a). Section 1, reads. 

XXX Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitution 


(7byT£.ta, upon a vote of ,h,ee.fou«hs 

of all its Members. 

Will this be automatic or will the legislature enact the 
mabline legislation to be presented to the people. 


MR. SUAREZ. I am sorry I did not get the full mean- 
ing of the question. 


394 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Suppose the National Assembly, 
by a vote of three-fourths of all its Members, proposes 
an amendment to the Constitution, will this need 
legislation before a plebiscite can be held? 

MR. SUAREZ. As I understand it, based on historical 
precedence, the National Assembly will come up with a 
proposition and then submit this to the people for 
ratification in a plebiscite called for the purpose. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Has there been any instance in 
this historical precedence that this has been delayed 
because of lack of legislation? 

MR. SUAREZ. I am not aware of any such situation 
in the past, Madam President. What I was only aware of 
is the fact that time and again there were plebiscites 
called and the people were screaming that they had not 
been given the full opportunity to thoroughly discuss, 
analyze and review the proposals submitted. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. How about the previous Con- 
Con? Was there any problem about enabling legisla- 
tion? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, we did not have any problem. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I see. In Section 2, there is a 
phrase which reads: “after five years from the date of 
the last plebiscite held.” Is this designed to prevent 
frequent amendments to the Constitution? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. Madam President. It is 
a measure to prevent too frequent amendments to the 
Constitution which might result in the impoverishment 
of the government. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But Section 2 refers to a mode of 
amendment by initiative only. Am I correct? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But suppose we apply this to all 
modes of amendments so that we prevent frequent 
amendments to the Constitution that the powers-that-be 
would like to undertake. What we have witnessed is that 
the frequency of amendments to the Constitution is 
becoming a national sport. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Gentleman suggesting that the 
five-year limitation period be applied equally to sub- 
sections (a) and (b) of Section 1 ? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. It should apply to all modes and 
ways of amending the Constitution. Suppose we limit it 
to, say, once in every six years in order to prevent the 
frequent amendments to the Constitution to suit the 
powers-that-be. 


MR. SUAREZ. That proposal or suggestion could be 
taken up at the appropriate time during the period of 
amendments. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. This is just to preserve the Consti- 
tution because I think we are beginning to develop a 
reputation of changing the Constitution too often. 

How about Section 3? Where is this amendment? 

MR. SUAREZ. It is in Section 2. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Is this in Section 2? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. In the case of recall, it has been 
said that if the percentage is 10 or 20 percent, it would 
be inadvisable not to designate from what area it comes 
because in the realities of politics in this country, 
most politicians have bailiwicks to rely upon — the 
north, the south, the central part of the country. 
And a politician with a bailiwick can easily influence 
the mode of recall or initiative or referendum. The big 
families, the dynasties, can easily sway and martial big 
blocks of votes. So that in the case of recall, especially 
in small towns, the requirement of 20 percent, if not 
equitably distributed, would easily be collected and 
raised by a politician who has a bailiwick. 

My question is: Does the Committee find no objec- 
tion if a certain area of our country would raise this 1 0 
percent and initiate an amendment to the Constitution, 
or would it rather propose that this be equitably dis- 
tributed or spread out to make it more responsive? I 
was just thinking of our debates in the old Congress and 
the Batasan where the proposal of recall was met with 
resistance precisely because if we follow the trend, it 
will exacerbate a situation where there is too much 
politicking involving the law and the statutes in the 
Constitution of our country. So, is it the sponsor’s view 
to let this pass without any equitable distribution? Is it 
acceptable to him as it is written now? 

MR. SUAREZ. We pointed out a while ago that the 
Committee would be amenable to propositions spread- 
ing out, as the Gentleman has defined it, the matter of 
the people’s participation even on the provincial level. 
And we were thinking in terms of five percent from 
each province as an example. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. I am putting up this view, 
Madam President, because of the realities of politics 
and it might not achieve what the authors would like to 
achieve. At the proper time, we will present some 
volunteered information. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong, the last speaker, be recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


395 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, will the dis- 
tinguished sponsor yield to a few questions? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 


With that reply, the next question would be: Instead 
of causing the election of delegates, has the legislature 
the power to just name the delegates to the constitu- 
tional convention? 

MR. SUAREZ. Under what provision would the 
Gentleman relate that? 


MR. MAAMBONG. First of all, I would like to thank 
the sponsor for clarifying his answer to my query last 
night. As it stands now, it is very clear to our mind that 
the matter of calling a constitutional convention can 
now be done not only by election but also by a plebi- 
scite. This was also clarified in a clarificatory question 
of Commissioner Bernas. I would also like to indicate 
that it is now very clear in the Constitution that we have 
such words as “revision” or “amendment,” which were 
not found in the 1935 Constitution. Previously, if I 
recall correctly, in the case of Occena vs. COMELEC 
(G.R. 56350, April 12, 1981), the Supreme Court inter- 
preted the word “amendment” to cover a thorough 
revision of the Constitution, but that was also clarified 
by Commissioner Padilla. 

As premise to my question, I would like to associate 
myself with the concern of Commissioner Rodrigo 
about the process we are now talking about because, as 
one authority puts it, the amending process of the 
Constitution could actually avert a revolution by provid- 
ing a safety valve in bringing about changes in the 
Constitution through pacific means. This, in effect, 
operationalizes what political law authors call the “pre- 
scription of sovereignty.” There is one point which is 
nagging my mind and, with the sponsor’s indulgence, I 
would like to have this clarified. This is the term “con- 
stitutional convention.” I understand that this was inter- 
preted in the framing of the 1935 Constitution as it was 
also interpreted in the framing of the 1973 Constitution 
by the 1971 Constitutional Convention. But 1 am afraid 
that all these interpretations may not be acceptable in 
the present exercise that we are doing. So my first ques- 
tion is: When the decision to call a constitutional con- 
vention has been resolved by the people or the National 
Assembly, is it not a fact that there should be an 
election of delegates to the constitutional convention? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is what is envisioned under this 
constitutional provision. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And when we say, there should 
be an election of delegates to the constitutional con- 
vention, there should also be an enabling law not only 
for that purpose but also for the purpose of providing 
funds therefor. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman is right, although not 
only in connection with the budgetary situation but also 
in the number of the delegates to the constitutional 
convention. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I am following up the sponsor’s 
answer that when we talk of constitutional convention, 
we are talking of elective delegates to the constitutional 
convention. In other words, it negates the authority of 
the legislature to just name delegates to the constitu- 
tional convention without calling an election. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is very obvious. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

Since the legislature could not name delegates with- 
out calling an election, it also goes without saying that 
the legislature cannot delegate the power to somebody 
for that authority to name delegates to the constitu- 
tional convention? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman is right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the sponsor. 

Can the legislature determine the number of delegates 
to be elected to the constitutional convention? 

MR SUAREZ. Yes, as they did in 1971. In the 1970 
enabling law, they specifically stated the number to be 
320 delegates from all over the country. 

MR MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. And no 
other body can determine the number of elective dele- 
gates to the constitutional convention? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. This will be my last question, 
egarding the process of election of delegates, does e 
lonsor agree with the opinion of the Supreme (^^ourt-- 
nd I am actually quoting this opinion of the Supreme 
durt of Maine, U.S.A., in the opinion of Justices 167 
PL. 1 76 — that it is not valid to elect delegates to the 
institutional convention at large? And the upreme 
ourt said and I quote: 

Although a convention is summoned by the legislature, 
it derives its power from the sovereign people. It has ac- 
cordingly been the practice to have as delegates those fair y 
representing the political subdivisions of the ta e. 
evident therefore that in every constitutional convention o 
which we have knowledge, delegates have been chosen not 
at large but from various localities within the State. 

Would the sponsor agree with that? 


396 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes. And that is exactly what hap- 
pened in connection with the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention, by districts and provinces. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Forgive me, but I have one last 
question: Will the sponsor agree that once the constitu- 
tional convention is convened, the legislature has no 
more control over it? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is absolutely correct. Madam 
President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the sponsor; thank you, 
Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, for the last clarifica- 
tory question, I ask that Commissioner Lerum be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. I just have one question. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Referring to Section 2 which provides 
for at least 10 percent of registered voters, who will 
determine this 10 percent? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commission on Elections, Madam 
President; that is why we were thinking in terms of using 
as a take-off date the issuance of a certification by the 
Commission on Elections that the required number of 
registered voters have indeed been obtained. 

MR. LERUM. Does it mean that the. petition itself 
should also be addressed to the Commission on Elec- 
tions? 

MR. SUAREZ. I did not get the question. 

MR. LERUM. What I mean is that after the 10-per- 
cent requirement has been obtained, will this have to be 
submitted to the Commission on Elections also? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is what is envisioned. Madam 
President. 

MR. LERUM. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, since there are no 
more interpellators and there are no registered speakers 
pro or en contra, I move that we close the period of 
sponsorship and debate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The floor is open for amendments. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I propose the following amend- 
ment: delete the whole Section 2. 

Madam President, this new provision is not necessary. 
There is no need for it. The present provisions of the 
Constitution on the proposal for amendments to the 
Constitution are most satisfactory, very democratic. 
This is done by either the National Assembly composed 
of representatives elected by the people all over the 
Philippines by a vote of three-fourths or by a constitu- 
tional convention, again, composed of delegates elected 
by all from all parts of the Philippines. And, usually, 
these delegates are elected on the basis of their stand 
on certain constitutional issues. 

Madam President, ours is a republican government 
which means a representative government. This satisfies 
the essence of democracy. I do not know why all of a 
sudden we now insist on this reserved “people power. 

If we base it on the EDSA peaceful revolution that is 
called “people power,” that is one event in our history 
which, I think, can hardly be repeated — bloodless 
revolution that toppled the dictator. Now, we want to 
use people power even in enacting laws and in proposing 
amendments to the Constitution. Non sequitur. Madam 
President. It does not follow. There is no popular 
clamor for this. I do not know that our people, because 
of the EDSA peaceful revolution, are now clamoring to 
initiate constitutional amendments directly. There is no 
such clamor from the people. And so, why clutter 
our Constitution with a provision that is untried and 
impractical? 

We are told that there are some states in the United 
States that follow this. But those are states in the 
United States with less population than the Philippines. 
And remember that the Philippines is an archipelago. It 
is so difficult to go around and obtain 2,700,000 signa- 
tures based on the 10-percent requirement; so, at 15 
percent, more than 4,000,000 signatures. After all, these 
4,000,000 people who will sign that, if one can get 
them, are not the ones who prepared the proposed 
amendment. They do not even participate in the draft- 
ing of the proposed amendment. Maybe, only one man, 
as the sponsor said, or a group of men would prepare 
this. And this would go around for signatures, and those 
whose signatures are affixed cannot even modify or 
amend the proposed amendment. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


397 


It is so impractical, Madam President, to have this go 
around the 7,000 islands in the country with so many 
different dialects. Maybe, this proposed amendment has 
to be translated in all the dialects. It is impractical. I 
think it is an exercise in futility. We will just clutter up 
our Constitution with a provision that will not, in any 
way, be used. 

Madam President, we are here as a Constitutional 
Commission. We have a time constraint. Our aim is to go 
back to normal constitutional democracy as soon as 
possible. Let us not go into controversial matters like 
this which can hardly be understood by our people 
who, after all, are the, ones who are going to either 
ratify or reject this Constitution. Let us go to the basics. 
Let us not depart radically from what we have found to 
be satisfactory in our country for the last half-century 
or more than half-century, and that is the republican 
form of government — a government run by duly-elected 
representatives of the people. This is practical. It is not 
perfect, but it is the best kind of government that we 
know. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the sponsor? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee regrets that it cannot 
accept the amendment by deletion submitted by the 
Honorable Rodrigo. First, we want to provide a mecha- 
nism that is very responsive to the sentiments of the 
people. Second, the fact that it is supposed to be im- 
practical is fallacious in the sense that, if a situation 
develops where the mechanisms provided under Section 
1 (a) and (b) could not be fully implemented in this 
wise, a time may come when in spite of the clamor of 
the people for proposing amendments to the Constitu- 
tion, the National Assembly may not be able to muster 
enough votes in order to constitute itself as a consti- 
tuent assembly or to call a constitutional convention. 
So, in that sense, it is a very practical avenue or safety 
valve which is available to the people. And with respect 
to the third ground we should go back to the basics 
of the Constitution. This is basic; this is fundamental 
because it emanates from the people. It is a direct 
representation made in behalf of the people. And so, it 
is a fundamental right that finds expression in this 
system of initiative. So, we regret that we cannot accept 
the proposed amendment. We would rather that this be 
submitted to the floor for consideration. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other speaker for the 
amendment? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are two speakers 
en contra. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is it on the amendment of Com- 
missioner Rodrigo? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President, on the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Rodrigo, two Members have 
registered to speak against and I have requested that 
we divide the five-minute limit between the two of 
them. So, I ask that Commissioner Tad eo be recognized 
for two minutes. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, alam naman natin na 
ang nagsampa sa Cory government ay ang people power. 
At kaya naririto ngayon ang Con-Com ay dahil sa 
people power. Noong pumunta tayo rito, punung-puno 
ang ating damdamin kung paano natin i-institutiorialize 
ang people power. Paano natin ito ilalagay sa Saligang 
Batas? Dalawa ang kinakailangang magawa natin para 
magkaroon ng laman at dugo ang people power, para ito 
ay hindi papel lamang. Sa paanong paraan? Kmakaila- 
ngang bigyan natin ang mamamayan ng political power; 
kinakailangang bigyan natin ang people power ng eco 
nomic power. Ano ang isang nakita natin para magka- 
roon siya ng political power? Sa pamamagitan ng multi- 
party system na pinirmahan noong 17, kung saan sina- 
sabi natin, yung 250, ang liniampu ay para doon ^ 
multisectoral. Alam natin na maliit pa lyan, -0 percent 
lang iyan. Maaaring maging isang dekorasyon lyan. Ano 
pa ang nakikita natin na pwedeng magbigay sa mga tao 
ng political power? Ang sabi natin, ang maga j 

dang nakita namin sa UP draft ay ang system of recall 
and system of initiative. Ngayon, anong ibig sabihin na 
ito ay impractical ayon sa sinabi ng aking a a ay n 
si Commissioner Rodrigo? 

Kamukha ng Kilusang Magbubukid ng Pilipinas 
(KMP) kami ay isang pambansang organization. Ang 
lysS of initiative a/wo„g iiral sa "ag^ica a, ™aj_- 

gagawa na siyang pinakamalaking sec or p kami av 

fiya ng tinatawag na political power. S^pagkat kam^^^^^ 

pambansa, mayroon kaming . jj „ erupo 

Hindi po yung sinasabi niyang individual o ilang grup 
rana ng tao kundi ang tinatawag na tunay na militan- 

ienl Kilusmig Magbubukid ng 
kaming pang-regional na organization, may 
Central Luzon, Northeastern ‘ ^ ^^g- 

Mindanao. At ang nakikita lamang na i |,„otavvae na 
dadagdag sa aming political power ay f"g/'"^7?rac- 
system of initiative. Hindi ito impract.ca ku^d prac^ 
tLl. Tinututulan ko ang tinatawag ."^ division, 
k'inakflilflnffane manatili ang system of ini i 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Gascon be 
recognized. 


398 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would also like to express my objection to the 
amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo on the following 
grounds; First, we are trying to create a republican 
state which is supposed to be a representative govern- 
ment. Second, according to Commissioner Rodrigo this 
proposal of initiative is impractical. First and foremost, 
I would like to remind him that what we are doing here 
is also a basic affirmation of the fundamental will — that 
power emanates from the people. We are now expressing 
our will to put initiative in the Constitution because of 
the people power’s revolution at EDSA. 

I would like again to remind this body that even the 
basic issue of establishing a government is people power; 
we are trying to establish a government for the people, 
of the people and by the people. So it must be re- 
sponsive to them. I feel that through this process of 
initiative, we assert that the power of the government 
emanates from the people and that the people’s will 
must prevail. Because of such, I would like to support 
the basic principle that initiative must be enshrined in 
the Constitution. It is not an exercise in futility because 
I have faith in our people. In our long history of struggle 
for national independence and social change the people 
have shown their decision and definitiveness to fight for 
what is right. The people themselves can decide when- 
ever they wish to, especially on matters pertaining to 
the Republic or the State which they claim to represent. 

In reality there have been many cases where the rep- 
resentatives have only been the target and have only 
expressed the interest of their particular class. As such I 
would like to express my objection. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we vote 
on the amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will now vote on the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Rodrigo which is to delete Sec- 
tion 2 in the revised resolution submitted by the hon- 
orable sponsor this afternoon. 

Those in favor of the amendment of Commissioner 
Rodrigo will please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 8 votes in favor and 27 against; the 
amendment is lost. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized for another amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I propose to substitute the entire Section 2 with the 
following: SECTION 2. - ANY AMENDMENT TO 
THIS CONSTITUTION MAY LIKEWISE BE DIRECT- 
LY PROPOSED BY THE PEOPLE THROUGH INITIA- 
TIVE UPON A PETITION, DULY VERIFIED BEFORE 
THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS OR ANY OF ITS 
REGISTRARS, OF AT LEAST TEN PERCENT OF 
THE TOTAL NUMBER OF REGISTERED VOTERS 
AS OF THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING NATION- 
AL ELECTION, OF WHICH EVERY LEGISLATIVE 
DISTRICT MUST BE REPRESENTED BY NOT LESS 
THAN TWO PERCENT THEREOF. THE PETITION 
SHALL BE FILED WITH THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS WHICH SHALL FORTHWITH TRANS- 
MIT THE PETITION TO THE NATIONAL ASSEM- 
BLY. THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SHALL, NOT 
LATER THAN THIRTY DAYS FROM RECEIPT 
THEREOF, ENACT A LAW SUBMITTING THE PRO- 
POSED AMENDMENT TO AND APPROPRIATING 
FUNDS FOR A PLEBISCITE. 

NO AMENDMENT UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL 
BE AUTHORIZED WITHIN FIVE YEARS FROM THE 
APPROVAL OF THIS CONSTITUTION NOR OFTEN- 
ER THAN ONCE EVERY FIVE YEARS THERE- 
AFTER. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes in order to give the sponsor time to go over the 
proposed amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. We appreciate that. Madam President. 

It was 4:33 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:59 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


399 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have modified 
the proposed amendment after taking into account 
the modifications submitted by the sponsor himself 
and the honorable Commissioners Guingona, Monsod, 
Rama, Ople, de los Reyes and Romulo. The modified 
amendment in substitution of the proposed Section 2 
will now read as follows; “SECTION 2. - AMEND- 
MENTS TO THIS CONSTITUTION MAY LIKEWISE 
BE DIRECTLY PROPOSED BY THE PEOPLE 
THROUGH INITIATIVE UPON A PETITION OF AT 
LEAST TWELVE PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NUM- 
BER OF REGISTERED VOTERS, OF WHICH EVERY 
LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT MUST BE REPRESENTED 
BY AT LEAST THREE PERCENT OF THE REGIS- 
TERED VOTERS THEREOF. NO AMENDMENT 
UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE AUTHORIZED 
WITHIN FIVE YEARS FOLLOWING THE RATIFICA- 
TION OF THIS CONSTITUTION NOR OFTENER 
THAN ONCE EVERY FIVE YEARS THEREAFTER. 

THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SHALL BY LAW 
PROVIDE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
EXERCISE OF THIS RIGHT.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, considering that the 
proposed amendment is reflective of the sense contained 
in Section 2 of our completed Committee Report No. 7, 
we accept the proposed amendment. 


voting? Under the Commissioner’s amendment, would 
the legislature be allowed to set forth such a pro- 
cedure? 

MR. DAVIDE. It can. 

MR. ROMULO. Under those systems, if the proposi- 
tion as stated by the attorney-general is not accepted 
by the proponents, they are allowed to go to court to 
challenge his submission of their proposition. 

MR. DAVIDE. The proponents can, if the legislative 
body will really leave that particular matter to another 
body. 

MR. ROMULO. In this case it is the COMELEC who 
will put it in proper form. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, it is already silent. 

MR. ROMULO. No, but it says “shall be submitted 
to the COMELEC.” 

MR. DAVIDE. That was the original proposal; it was 
already deleted. 

MR. ROMULO. But the Commissioner’s amendment 
does not prevent the legislature from asking another 
body to set the proposition in proper form. 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote on this 
proposed amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. Excuse me. Madam President. May we 
request written copies of Commissioner Davide’s amend- 
ment so that we can adequately decide on it? 

MR. DAVIDE. We will request the Secretariat to pre- 
pare typewritten copies. 

THE PRESIDENT. The sponsor will please furnish a 
copy to the Secretariat. In the meantime, can we 
proceed with other amendments, if there are any? 


MR DAVIDE. The Commissioner is correct. In other 
vords, the implementation of this particular right would 
)e subject to legislation, provided the legislature cannot 
onA/mrtrp the. nercentagc of the requirement. 


MR ROMULO. But the procedures, including the 
determination of the proper form for submission to the 
people, may be subject to legislation. 


IR DAVIDE. As long as it will not destroy the sub- 
tive right to initiate. In other words, none of the 
:edures to be proposed by the legislative body must 

• 1 X 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- ROMULO In that provision of the Constitution 

sioner Romulo be recognized. procedures which I have discussed be legislated? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Will Commissioner Davide yield to a 
few questions regarding his amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Under Commissioner Davide’s 
amendment, is it possible for the legislature to set forth 
certain procedures to carry out the initiative, as in some 
American states where the proposition is normally sub- 
mitted to the state attorney-general who puts it in 
proper form before it is submitted to the people for 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Natividad be 
given the floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, will Commis- 
sioner Davide yield? 


400 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Is Commissioner Davide willing 
to consider a possible amendment to his amendment? 
This amendment is brought about by comments I read 
from a book from PHILCONSA on constitutional and 
policy issues and it is based on the comments of a 
certain Fortunato de Leon who recommends that the 
Constitution, in order that it will not fall into the hands 
of the powers that be, should only be amended no 
oftener than once in six years. 

I would also premise my question by reading the 
comments of our own colleague here. Chief Justice 
Concepcion. His article entitled, “The Constitution and 
The Proposed Amendments Thereto” states and I 
quote: 

A Constitution is not only a legal document, not merely 
a covenant between the people of a democratic society like 
ours. It is a symbol of the unity of the people; it is a rally- 
ing point for them as a nation. If the Constitution is to re- 
tain this role as the rallying point for the people, it should 
not be touched except when absolutely necessary or when 
there is no other possible choice. 

A Constitution that does not suffer many changes ac- 
cumulated in the course of time, a mass of customs, tradi- 
tions and practices tending to impart to the people the feel- 
ing that their nation has a solid foundation; that it is strong 
enough to withstand the buffetings of the ages. A Constitu- 
tion should not be amended, unless the people feel that 
their welfare would otherwise be in imminent danger of 
serious impairment. 

My proposal is that instead of five years could it be 
six years as proposed by the eminent authors hereof? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Committee has already accepted 
the individual amendment. Personally, I do not think 
that one year would make a lot of a difference. What is 
one year among friends? As a matter of fact, since the 
National Assembly is also authorized to propose amend- 
ments by a vote of three-fourths of its members or to 
submit the question of calling a constitutional conven- 
tion by a majority vote, amendments may actually be 
more frequent than once every five years. We are limit- 
ing the right of the people, by initiative, to submit a 
proposal for amendment only, not for revision, only 
once every five years. But we cannot prevent the legis- 
lature from proposing amendments as often as it would 
want to under its authority by a vote of three-fourths 
and also its authority to submit the question of calling 
a convention to the people. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If it is the sense of the Constitu- 
tional Commission, I think we may, if we have been 
given a frame of reference to the power of initiative. 

MR. DAVIDE. If at all we should limit the period for 
the submission of an amendment, it should also be made 
applicable to amendments proposed by the legislature. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. That is my proposal. If the Com- 
missioner is willing to make the initiative pegged to five 
or six years, I feel that there would be no basis for us 
not to make this applicable to the legislature also. But, 
as the distinguished sponsor said, the idea here is not to 
embark into frequent amendments of the Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. By initiative. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. By initiative, yes, but not by any 
other means as what the sponsor said, if it is accepted 
that the Constitution is not supposed to be changed as 
often as a law. So, if we accept that postulate, then, 
perhaps we should consider that if we limit the exercise 
of initiative we can also limit the exercise of the other 
modes of amending the Constitution. If our purpose 
now is to indicate through these amendments that our 
Constitution should not be tampered with very often as 
had been done, then this is the time to do it. The prob- 
lems confronting the nation are easUy addressed by 
law. It is not necessary that at any given time we may 
tamper with the Constitution. 

So, I propose to change “5” to ^ years so that if the 
final decision of the Commission would be a six-year 
term for the President, then this will dovetail the six- 
year term of the President and it will work as guideline 
that the Constitution will not be amended more than 
once during the term of the President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have no objection 
to that proposal, provided we preserve the proposal that 
a similar prohibition shall be imposed upon the National 
Assembly in calling a constitutional convention or pro- 
posing an amendment. So probably the Commissioner 
may introduce an amendment to that effect. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, in that case, 
may I address this amendment to the distinguished 
sponsor? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If it is seasonably proper, may I 
then propose an amendment to Section 1. On line 7, 
after the word “proposed,” delete the colon (:) andjin 
lieu thereof, put a comma (,) and add the following 
words: BUT NOT MORE OFTEN THAN EVERY SIX 
(6) YEARS FROM THE DATE OF THE LAST PLEBI- 
SCITE. 

The whole section will read: “Section 1. Any amend- 
ment to, or revision of, this Constitution may be pro- 
posed, BUT NOT MORE OFTEN THAN EVERY SIX 
(6) YEARS FROM THE DATE OF THE LAST PLEBI- 
SCITE.” 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee suggests that the 
amendment be submitted to the floor for consideration. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


401 


My amendment is to change “5” to 6 years to dove- 
tail the six-year term of the President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The idea is also to limit the 
authority of the National Assembly to propose amend- 
ments to the Constitution. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, Madam President, in line 
with the suggestion of the distinguished proponent of 
the amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


posed, BUT NOT MORE OFTEN THAN EVERY SIX 
(6) YEARS FROM THE DATE OF THE LAST PLEBI- 
SCITE.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Natividad will please raise 
their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 6 votes in favor and 25 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

Is there any other proposed amendment? 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, before we take up 
the proposed amendment of having ^ years instead of 
“5” years, I intend to ask the sponsor of the amend- 
ment some questions. Thereafter, the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Natividad to the amendment of 
Commissioner Davide may then be considered. 

THE PRESIDENT. Actually, the amendment of Com- 
missioner Natividad is on Section 1, while that of Com- 
missioner Davide is on Section 2. Is that correct? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, but we are talking 
of Section 2. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the distinguished sponsor. Commissioner Davide, 
yield to a few questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. He may, if he so desires. 

MR. DAVIDE. Very gladly. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. That was deferred. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it is now Section 1 where 
Commissioner Natividad is proposing an amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. I did not know that it was deferred. I 
wanted to ask some questions regarding the amendment 
by substitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will have that later on. 

Is the proposed amendment of Commissioner Nativi- 
dad acceptable to the honorable sponsor? 

MR. SUAREZ. As we suggested a while ago, we 
would rather that the matter be decided by the Commis- 
sion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Natividad 
insist on his amendment? Then, let us put it to a vote. 

Will Commissioner Natividad kindly repeat his pro- 
posed amendment on Section 1? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. My amendment is to delete the 
colon (:) after the word “proposed” on line 7, and in 
lieu thereof, put a comma (,) and add the following: 
BUT NOT MORE OFTEN THAN EVERY SIX (6) 
YEARS FROM THE DATE OF THE LAST PLEBI- 
SCITE. 

The section will now read: “Section 1. Any amend- 
ment to, or revision of, this Constitution may be pro- 


MR. PADILLA. The Committee has submitted its 
iginal report which made reference to Section P^‘ 
aph (c) which states: “directly by the people them- 
Ives thru initiative as provided for in Article VIII, 
!Ction 27 of the Constitution.” But since it was ^X' 
ained that the initiative refers to ordinary legislation 
• the National Assembly, the Committee on Amend- 
ents had to introduce Section 2 which is now sought 
be amended by substitution. 

I notice that we have 10 percent 
ught to be increased to 12 percent, "ega^ 

dinary legislation, the Committee on . ^ 

oposed a 10-percent requirement for ^ 
e people. Does not the Commissioner Relieve Oiatj^e 
ould reduce the 10-percent requ“’®"ient P JP 
■ initiating legislation rather j2 per- 

lirement for constitutional the 

nf> In other words, since the Committee on me 

• 1 f iiQc in nercent the proposed amendment 
jgislative has 10 percent, me p ^ nercent for 

)W is for a higher percentage, which P 

:onstitutional amendment. 

MR. davide. A distinction has to be 

ason that under this proposal, what is m ^ 

aendment to the ° by the National 

jn would ordinarily require a ProP®^' . ^all a 
ssembly by a vote of threeTou^ "hVher num- 
mstitutional convention would g 

:r. Moreover, just to submit the issue of calling 


402 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


constitutional convention, a majority of the National 
Assembly is required, the import being that the process 
of amendment must be made more rigorous and dif- 
ficult than probably initiating an ordinary legislation or 
putting an end to a law proposed by the National As- 
sembly by way of a ref^erendum. I cannot agree to 
reducing the requirement approved by the Committee 
on the Legislative because it would require another 
voting by the Committee, and the voting was precisely 
based on a requirement of 1 0 percent. Perhaps, I might 
present such a proposal, by way of an amendment, 
when the Commission shall take up the Article on the 
Legislative or on the National Assembly on plenary 
sessions. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

We agree that there must be a greater percentage for 
an amendment to the Constitution, and a lower per- 
centage for an amendment to ordinary legislation. The 
Article on the National Assembly or the Legislative will 
be an anterior article. Article VIII, I suppose, whereas 
the Article on Amendment will be subsequent. Article 
VI. I notice that the committee report on the legislature 
mentions a petition signed by at least 1 0 percent of the 
registered voters in the immediately preceding elections. 
However, I do not see in this report on the legislature 
any particulars as to whether the signatures will be veri- 
fied by the COMELEC and then referred to the National 
Assembly for action, and then for providing appropria- 
tions, et cetera. Does not the Commissioner believe that 
if such procedural details are necessary for a proposed 
amendment allowing the people, through initiative, to 
amend or even repeal an ordinary legislation, which will 
appear at the earlier part of the Constitution, such 
details should be included in the Article on National As- 
sembly? Hence, if all those details are necessary even 
for the proposed amendment of the Constitution by ini- 
tiative of the people, then we can just make reference 
to Article VIII, Section 27 of the report on the National 
Assembly. In other words, what I wish to say is that if 
all those details are necessary, why do we not insert 
them in an anterior article, so that if those details can 
be referred to by reference, they do not have to be 
repeated in a subsequent article? 

MR. DA VIDE. We appreciate the proposal. However, 
we feel that in the matter of authorizing the people to 
initiate an amendment to the Constitution, the proper 
situs for that would really be the Article on Amend- 
ment. We will clearly distinguish between the right of 
the people in proposing an ordinary legislation and that 
in proposing amendments to the Constitution which 
would become a constituent function, not just an or- 
dinary legislative function. The mere fact that this may 
come later in the Constitution does not mean that this 
will repeal a previous provision under the National As- 
sembly because the two concepts are entirely distinct 
and separate from one another. 


MR. PADILLA. We recognize that an amendment to 
ordinary legislation is different from an amendment to 
the Constitution. But what I am wondering about is, if 
in the provision on the National Assembly there is 
already the phrase “a petition signed by at least 10 
percent of the registered voters in the immediately 
preceding elections” and there are no further specifics 
or details for its implementation, why should not the 
same percentage of registered voters with regard to an 
amendment to the Constitution be followed without all 
these specifics or details? 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President and Mr. Vice- 
President, actually, the proposal on initiative and 
referendum in the proposed Article on the National 
Assembly would also lead to ordinary legislation, the 
mechanics, the manner and even the exceptions thereto. 
The only requirement that is mandatory upon the legis- 
lature is on the number of signatures in a petition for 
initiative or a petition for referendum. So, we have 
parity already. Here, we leave it to the National As- 
sembly to implement the exercise of the right, and in 
the Article on the National Assembly, a legislation is 
also necessary to implement the concept of initiative 
and referendum. 

MR. PADILLA. Do I understand that under Section 
27 of the committee report on the National Assembly, 
this phrase “at least 10 percent of the registered voters 
in the immediately preceding elections” will be deter- 
mined by the National Assembly regardless of any 
action to be taken by the COMELEC? 

MR. DA VIDE. That requirement will be mandatory 
in the law to be enacted by the legislature to implement 
the right of initiative and referendum. It was also the 
sense of the Committee that the matter of requ^ing a 
certain percentage of the total number of votes in any 
given areas within the 10-percent requirement should 
be provided by law. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, will the dis- 
tinguished proponent of the amendment yield to a few 
questions? 

MR. DAVIDE. With pleasure. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My first question: Commissioner 
Davide’s proposed amendment on line 1 refers to 
“amendments.” Does it not cover the word revision 
as defined by Commissioner Padilla when he made the 
distinction between the words * amendments and 
“revision”? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


403 


MR. DA VIDE. No, it does not, because “amend- 
ments” and “revision” should be covered by Section 1. 
So insofar as initiative is concerned, it can only relate 
to “amendments” not “revision.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

The second point is, there is a time frame on line 5 to 
line 8. Is it the intention of the proponent that this time 
frame will only apply to amendments by initiative and 
not to the other forms of amendments found in the 
other parts of the section? 

MR. DA VIDE. The Commissioner is absolutely 
correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As far as I am concerned, this last 
point is a very worrisome problem. It is indicated on 
lines 2 and 3 that: 

. . . upon petition of at least 12 percent of the total num- 
ber of registered voters, of which every legislative district 

must be represented by at least three percent of registered 

voters thereof. 

I contemplate a scenario of this nature on the as- 
sumption that the 12 percent is not nationwide, such 
that when we say we have 200 legislative districts, that 
is only an assumption. In one district for example, the 
7th District of Cebu from where I come, less than three 
percent of the votes cast is in favor of this amendment. 
Would it mean that even though we get more than 12 
percent and that one district votes less than three per- 
cent, the amendment through initiative is lost? 

MR. DA VIDE. That is correct. The entire proposed 
amendment will be lost, but I doubt very much if in 
the 7th District of Cebu where the Commissioner might 
be the Assemblyman by then, he will not be able to 
obtain more than three percent because that would, be 
a very critical issue. He has to support it; otherwise, he 
will lose the support of his people. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The point here is really academic. 
By way of academic discussion it is, therefore, possible 
for an amendment to be acceptable even by 50 percent 
of the whole nation, but it can be lost just because the 
leader in a certain legislative district strongly opposes it. 
Is that the intention of the proponent? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would really be the effect 
because we would like that the 10 percent be truly 
representative of all districts and that is why we require 
a certain percentage of the registered voters in any given 
district or in all districts. So, anyone campaigning for an 
amendment through initiative must see to it that he will 
have more than three percent in all the representative 
districts, and I do not fear that this proposal can easily 
be -supported by at least three percent because we have 
the contending political parties thereat. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Without presenting any specific 
amendment, I suggest that the proponent and the dis- 


tinguished sponsor who accepted this amendment 
should perhaps think this over considering that one 
district could defeat the intention of the whole country. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, actually, the original 
proposal of this Member was only two percent, but by 
way of amendment, there were modificiations made by 
other Commissioners. So, I yielded to the collective 
wisdom of those who wanted to make a modification on 
the requirement. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

Will the proponent yield to some questions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. I have just two clarificatory ques- 
tions. 

The first is on the interpretation that the first peti- 
tion can be filed after five years. Am I right. 

MR. DAVIDE. The first limitation is five years from 
the ratification of this Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right; since the sentence says 
“every five years thereafter” not oftener than once, can 
there be another one on the sixth year? 

MR. DAVIDE. There can be; but between the sixth 
and the tenth year, we can only have one. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right. So, we can have one on 
the sixth and one on the eleventh. 

MR. DAVIDE. It can be done; the second may be on 
the eleventh year. 

MR. MONSOD. My second question is; Is the Com- 
mission on Elections envisaged to be the body that will 
pass on the authenticity of the signatures? 

MR. DAVIDE. That may be provided for in a law by 
the National Assembly for the implementation of the 
exercise of this right. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rigos be recognized. 


404 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I would like to file a 
motion to amend the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Davide: namely, that we eliminate or delete the 
last sentence of the first paragraph which reads: “NO 
AMENDMENT UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE 
AUTHORIZED WITHIN FIVE YEARS FOLLOWING 
THE RATIFICATION OF THIS CONSTITUTION NOR 
OFTENER THAN ONCE EVERY FIVE YEARS 
THEREAFTER.” If we are not willing to limit the Na- 
tional Assembly in making the necessary amendments, 
the more reason we should not limit the people in 
making the necessary amendments any time they think 
amendments are needed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the only amend- 
ment of this Member on this matter is the initiative 
calling for amendment after the first five years. Insofar 
as the first five years is concerned, that was an original 
proposal of the Committee. Insofar as that portion of 
the proposal covered by my original amendment is con- 
cerned, it is with deep regret that I cannot accept the 
proposal. That might even be divisive because every year 
people might be campaigning for a proposed amend- 
ment. It will really destroy the sense of stability of a 
constitution. It is enough that we recognize that right to 
be exercised by them at least once every five years. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I do not see the 
logic in giving full freedom to the National Assembly in 
making the necessary amendments, and yet limiting the 
people to every five years. It seems to me that I will ask 
the House to vote on this proposal. 

MR. SUAREZ. Since the amendment to the amend- 
ment has not been accepted by the proponent, may we 
request a vote on the matter. Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. For clarification, the;amendment 
of Commissioner Rigos is to delete the second s*entence 
of the first paragraph of Section 2. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Rigos, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 13 votes in favor of the amendment 
and 18 against; the amendment to the amendment is 
lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be 
recognized for one question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I move to delete the portion limiting 
my question to one. 

Will the Gentleman yield? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may yield, if he 
so desires. 

MR. RODRIGO. The proposed amendment says that 
a petition of at least 1 2 percent of the total number of 
registered voters is required. Is it possible that two 
national groups, let us say, two national political groups 
or two nationwide labor organizations, campaign for 
two inconsistent amendments and both of them get 
more than 12 percent and both amendments also get at 
least 3 percent in every legislative district. 

MR. DAVIDE. It should be done simultaneously 
because if it would be one after the other within a 
period of five years following the first five years after 
the ratification, then it cannot be done. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, simultaneously, one organiza- 
tion senses or knows. 

MR. DAVIDE. Two or three or four amendments can 
be proposed simultaneously but it can only be submit- 
ted to a plebiscite once every five years. 

MR. RODRIGO. What happens if four inconsistent 
amendments get more than 1 2 percent? 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, both amendments 
qualify with the requirements and numbers. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was starting with only two amend- 
ments but the Gentleman said it is even possible to have 
four. What will be done with those four amendments, all 
of which qualify under this section? 

MR. DAVIDE. Even if these amendments are incon- 
sistent with one another, the people will have the final 
say in the plebiscite. 

MR. RODRIGO. How will they be presented to the 
people in a plebiscite? 

MR. DAVIDE. The National Assembly shall, by law, 
provide for the implementation of the exercise of this 
right. So, the law may provide that in such instances 
where there are separate and inconsistent proposals for 
amendments, then whichever of the amendments may 
be approved by a majority of the people will be deemed 
valid amendments. We leave it to the people, if they 
agree to inconsistent provisions. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


405 


MR. RODRIGO. So, in a plebiscite it is possible for 
the people to approve by a majority vote two incon- 
sistent amendments to the Constitution. 

MR. DA VIDE. That is the will of the people in a 
plebiscite — to opt for a proposal for amendments 
submitted. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is why I say this is impractical 
because in the case of an amendment proposed by the 
legislature or by a constitutional convention, no such 
situation would arise. But precisely it is not the me- 
chanics of this that I object to. I like the idea but I will 
be in favor of the idea only if I see it is practical. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, that may be re- 
mote. But in the event it happens, there is still the 
power of the legislature to propose an amendment by a 
vote of three-fourths to cure the inconsistency. 

MR. RODRIGO. There is an initiative by the people 
by means of the required number of votes. The last 
sentence says that the National Assembly shall, by law, 
provide for the implementation and exercise thereof, 
which means to say that the National Assembly must 
appropriate the money and submit the amendments to 
the people in a plebiscite. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would depend now on the provi- 
sion of the particular enabling statute. For instance, if 
the legislature can foresee such a situation where incon- 
sistent amendments are presented by initiative in a given 
year, it might agree to defer the consideration of an 
inconsistent amendment, say, after five years, provided 
the two amendments are so inconsistent that the danger 
of them being approved might result in an absurdity. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then what happens to the required 
1 0-percent vote? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is why if, indeed, two or more 
simultaneous amendatory proposals would be clearly 
and substantially inconsistent with one another, we 
leave it to the sound discretion of the legislature. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recog- 
nized to present an amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. My amendment is with respect to the 
second line of the proposed amendment. Delete the 
words “THROUGH INITIATIVE” after the word 


“PEOPLE” because the proposal is made by the people 
so that the phrase “THROUGH INITIATIVE” is already 
redundant. That is the reason for the suggested deletion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable. Commissioner 
Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. May I refer to the Committee? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee finds merit in the pro- 
posed amendment to the amendment but we would 
rather leave this to the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Ople? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, on this subject at hand, 
may I just say that there is not necessarily incongruity 
or superfluity in saying that the people may act directly 
through initiative because then that puts the stamp of a 
great democratic institution or tradition on this for- 
mulation, which means the Gentleman connects to the 
great traditions of democracy, such as the thousand-year 
old tradition of the initiative and referendum in the 
of Switzerland. We are not really reinventing 
the will in installing initiative as an additional mode of 
proposing an amendment to the Constitution, and as a 
reserve power of the sovereign people, when they are 
dissatisfied with the National Assembly and, therefore, 
if there is a default of the National Assembly in re- 
sponding to a critical situation requiring a constitutional 
amendment, this initiative vests the power of direct 
action in the people themselves. It is largely, I think, re- 
serve power, precisely a fallback position of the people 
in the event that they are dissatisfied. When we include 
the word “initiative,” then we introduce into the for- 
mulation the great body of democratic conditions based 
on initiative especially in the countries where this has 
been most successful. 

So I would like to request Commissioner Jamir - if 
it does not detract too much from his own sense of 
being important - to kindly leave the word “initiative 
there. It also matches to some extent or correlates the 
initiative, referendum and recall that are actually used 
in the Legislative Committee. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Jamir? 

MR JAMIR. Considering the eloquent request of the 
Gentleman from Bulacan, I agree to withdraw my 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the amendment is withdrawn. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento be recognized to make an amendment 
to the amendment. 


406 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I address a few questions to 
the distinguished proponent of the amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The U.P. draft and the state 
constitutions refer to initiative as a reserved power, 
together with recall and referendum. The last line of the 
amendment mentions exercise of this right. Will the 
Gentleman agree to use the word “exercise” instead of 
“right”? 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it will read: “THE NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY SHALL BY LAW PROVIDE FOR THE IM- 
PLEMENTATION OF THIS POWER.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. No objection. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment? 

MR. SUAREZ. We have no objection. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will first put this proposed 
amendment to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Sarmiento, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 26 votes in favor and 2 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. For the last two questions, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Line 3 reads: “AT LEAST 
TWELVE PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF 
REGISTERED VOTERS.” Nothing is specified whether 
these are registered voters of the preceding general 
election. The state constitutions I read make mention 
of registered voters of the preceding general election. 
Will the honorable proponent agree with me to include 
the words: REGISTERED VOTERS OF THE PRE- 
CEDING GENERAL ELECTION. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the original pro- 
posal of this Member made reference to the total 
number of registered voters in the immediately preced- 
ing national election but there were amendments there- 
to and the original draft of the Committee made refer- 
ence to a registered number of voters only, the idea 
being that the total number of registered voters as of the 
presentation of the proposed amendment to the Consti- 
tution must be the basis. I yielded to the wisdom of that 
proposal because we limit now the amendment by ini- 
tiative after the first five years following the ratification 
of this Constitution and not oftener than once every 
five years thereafter. So, if we have to make as a refer- 
ence the total number of registered voters in the imme- 
diately preceding general election, the total number of 
signatories required would be very much less, and, there- 
fore, it might not adequately represent the sentiments 
of those who may have registered after the immediately 
preceding election. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with that 
manifestation I withdraw my proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment is with- 
drawn. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Last question. Madam President. 

May I invite the attention of the honorable pro- 
ponent to line 2 which states: “PROPOSED BY THE 
PEOPLE THROUGH INITIATIVE UPON A PETITION 
OF.” Commissioner Jamir gladly accommodated the 
eloquent manifestation of Commissioner Ople and he 
agreed that the words “THROUGH INITIATIVE” be 
maintained. I was looking at state constitutions, Madam 
President, and the words they used were these: “pro- 
posed by the people upon an initiative petition.” I ^rn 
not for the deletion of the words “THROUGH INI- 
TIATIVE” but a reformulation, so that line 2 would 
read: “PROPOSED BY THE PEOPLE UPON AN INI- 
TIATIVE PETITION OF AT LEAST TWELVE PER- 
CENT.” 

MR. DAVIDE. The wording, as proposed and as 
appearing in the original committee report; that is, 
“THROUGH INITIATIVE UPON A PETITION,” 
may be much better than the language as proposed 
which would appear to be foreign. Let us have our 
own phraseology in the proposal. 

MR. SARMIENTO. If the intent is pro-Filipino, pro- 
people, then I withdraw my proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
registered speakers to propose amendments on Section 
2. However, there is still somebody who would like to 
amend or present an amendment to the amendment. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


407 


I ask that Commissioner Gascon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. I would like to ask a question first 
with regard to line 4. May I know why the line states 
“LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT”? 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, the Committee on 
the Legislative voted on a scheme of representation for 
Members of the National Assembly by district. 

So, that is the reason we speak here of “LEGISLA- 
TIVE DISTRICT.” 

MR. GASCON. The proposal to include “LEGIS- 
LATIVE DISTRICT” is mainly to advert to the problem 
that may arise from too much concentration in a par- 
ticular region of a particular initiative petition, is that 
correct? 


MR. GASCON. If that is the case, I withdraw my pro- 
posal for the word REGION and instead change 
“LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT” to PROVINCE. 

THE PRESIDENT. “PROVINCE OR CITY.” 

MR. GASCON. Yes, PROVINCE OR CITY. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to ask the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUAREZ. How about the cities? 

MR. GASCON. My issue is basically to make it much 
easier for the people to initiate. 

MR. DAVIDE. What about the cities? 

MR. GASCON. EVERY PROVINCE OR CITY. 


MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. However, a legislative district is much 
smaller than a province or a region; is that correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. A legislative district may be the same 
as the province if the population of the province is less 
than the number of the ratio provided for, or it could be 
several districts in a given province, depending on the 
number of inhabitants in the province. 

MR. GASCON. Actually, I would like to support the 
spirit behind the inclusion of the term “LEGISLATIVE 
DISTRICT” but upon considering it further, it might 
make the principle of initiative very diffficult for the 
people. 

So, I would like to propose an amendment. Instead of 
using the term “LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT,” let us use 
REGION. 


MR. SUAREZ. As far as the Committee is concerned, 
that is an acceptable proposal. 


MR. DAVIDE. It is also acceptable to this Member, 
dadam President, provided it would be: “OF WHICH 
iVERY PROVINCE OR CITY MUST BE REPRE- 
lENTED BY AT LEAST THREE PERCENT OF THE 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment? 


MR. SUAREZ. The Committee accepts, Madam 
President. 

MR. DAVIDE. It is also acceptable to this Member, 
Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. We have to define the word. Right 
now, for political administration, we have 13 regions, 
including the National Capital Region. If the Gentleman 
refers to the traditional geographical regions, we have 
only three. 

MR. GASCON. As far as the definition of region is 
concerned, I would allow the legislature to define such 
because there are proposals for autonomous regions and 
I believe that this should be included. 

So, when I speak of region, I am thinking of the 13 
existing regions, plus whatever may be created as auto- 
nomous regions. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would rather throw it to the body. 
Madam President, because of the difficulty, first, of 
defining what a region is since there are several regions, 
and, second, it might dilute the sanctity of the original 
proposal. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR MONSOD. By city, does the Gentleman mean 
chartered city? There are 16 chartered cities but there 
are about 50 cities. What are we referring to here - 
chartered cities or all cities? 

MR. GASCON. All cities. 

MR. MONSOD. All right; thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. All cities, whether component or 
highly urbanized. 

MR. BENGZON. Before we take a vote. Madam Pres- 
ident, may I just have one minute to speak against that 
proposed amendment? 


408 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. BENGZON. I am afraid that if we do pass that 
amendment, it is going to be used as a political tool by 
the politicians because there are certain big provinces 
that have so many districts. If certain politicians band 
together and do away with some of the districts, they 
can generate the necessary three percent by just getting 
the necessary three percent from the various districts 
and disregard completely the other districts in that 
province. So, it is a very tempting situation to be used 
as a political tool. That is why I am opposed to it. 

MR. GASCON. May I speak then. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. GASCON. But the basic issue is the initiative 
process. I think we should make it as easy as possible 
for the people to initiate. In recognition of the problem 
that it might be too concentrated in one particular 
region, let us say, Metro Manila, I am supporting the 
issue to have a specified political region, whether it be 
legislative district, province or region. I would also like 
to emphasize that the initiative process does not end 
there. After it goes through the initiative process, it will 
be presented to the people for approval or disapproval. 
So, that problem which the Gentleman raised can easily 
be responded to by the process of ratification of the 
amendment. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take a vote on the 
amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will proceed to take a vote. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask a 
question for clarification? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo may 
proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the amendment say “EVERY 
PROVINCE OR CITY”? 

THE PRESIDENT. Both. 

MR. DA VIDE. Province and city. 

MR. RODRIGO. How about Metro Manila? The City 
of Manila, City of Pasay, City of Caloocan? 

MR. DAVIDE. May I answer that. Madam President? 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Usually, Metro Manila is treated 
differently, and it is so stated in the law because Metro 
Manila is composed of four cities. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide requests 
that he answer the question; he may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. Metropolitan 
Manila was evolved because of the creation of the 
Metropolitan Manila Commission. It is composed of 
provinces from Rizal and from Bulacan and the cities 
within the area. So, under the proposal, we have to 
consider every city in Metro Manila and the municipali- 
ties in relation to the provinces to which they belong, 
Rizal and Bulacan. 

MR. RODRIGO. Valenzuela no longer belongs to 
Bulacan. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the Metropolitan Manila Com- 
mission, but I do not think the Commission is recog- 
nized as a separate political subdivision under the 
Committee on Local Governments — I really do not 
know — because there is even a move to abolish this 
metropolitan concept of government. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us have this clarified because 
this is a very important provision. So, in case of Metro 
Manila, if it is by city, then at least three percent is 
needed in the City of Manila, Pasay City, Quezon City 
and Caloocan City. How about San Juan and Manda- 
luyong? 

MR. DAVIDE. San Juan will be considered part of 
Rizal. 

MR. RODRIGO. But who will decide that? I did not 
know that. I always thought of San Juan and Mandalu- 
yong as part of Metro Manila. This is a very important 
provision; we must specify; we must make it clear. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, this matter may be 
reviewed later depending on what is the report of the 
Committee on Local Governments. The municipalities in 
the metropolitan area will be returned to each respective 
province. So, now in computing the percentage for pur- 
poses of initiative, the vote in that particular municipal- 
ity must be taken into account with the votes of the rest 
of the province to where that municipality actually 
belongs. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a 
few minutes. 

It was 6:05 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


409 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:09 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Gascon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you, Madam President. 

After assessing the whole thing and with the as- 
surance that retaining “LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT” 
may make it easier for the people to assert their sover- 
eign will in as far as initiative is concerned, I withdraw 
my proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment is then 
withdrawn. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion for reconsideration of the amendment to change 
the word “Right” to POWER? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I object to the 
motion for reconsideration. Firstly, the proposition or 
the motion is out of order. Secondly, I believe that 
POWER is stronger than the word “right.” It is people’s 
power. All along we have been speaking of people’s 
power — participatory democracy, blessings of people’s 
power. I have already mentioned the reasons why 
POWER is more appropriate than “right.” I respectfully 
submit, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I reiterate my motion that we take a 
vote on the whole Section 2. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I submit to the 
ruling of the Chair on my motion for reconsideration. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take a vote on the entire 
Section 2. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I may be out of order but I would 
seek the kind indulgence and liberality of the Chair to 
allow me to seek reconsideration of the voting that 
amended the last sentence of Section 2 by changing 
the word “Right” to POWER. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. This is significant for me because 
POWER represents a concept; it is not just a matter of 
words or lexicon. I believe that the word “right” is even 
more potent and even more determinative as against 
POWER. Power, in the nature of its connotation, is a 
political concept which requires as a condition the 
presence of strength before one could even invoke it; 
while right, when enshrined in a law, is a right, regard- 
less of whether one has the strength or the power to 
assert it. Thus, I believe the word “right” is even more 
potent than the word POWER. 

It was because the Chair immediately called for a 
division of the House that I was not able to timely inter- 
pose my objection to the amendment. 

I move for a reconsideration of the amendment on 
this point. Madam President. 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Chair will first make its 


ruling. 

Commissioner Aquino has appealed to the liberality 
of the Chair, and I believe T choose to be liberal this 
afternoon. Therefore, I will just submit the motion to 
the body for reconsideration. 

As many as are in favor of the motion of Coinmis- 
sioner Aquino to reconsider the amendment, that is, o 
retain the word “Right” in the last sentence of Section 
2, please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 

hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


The results show 22 votes in favor of the reconsidera- 
tion and 6 against; the motion for reconsideration is 
ipproved and the word “Right” in the last sentence of 


9 retained. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I reiterate my motion that we take a 
vote on the whole Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
take a vote on the whole Section 2? 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I request 
a reading of the section so that we will understand. 
There have been so many amendments. 


410 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the sponsor please read 
Section 2, as amended? 

MR. DA VIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Section 2, as amended, reads as follows; “AMEND- 
MENTS TO THIS CONSTITUTION MAY LIKE- 
WISE BE DIRECTLY PROPOSED BY THE PEOPLE 
THROUGH INITIATIVE UPON A PETITION OF AT 
LEAST TWELVE PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NUM- 
BER OF REGISTERED VOTERS, OF WHICH EVERY 
LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT MUST BE REPRESENTED 
BY AT LEAST THREE PERCENT OF THE REGIS- 
TERED VOTERS THEREOF. NO AMENDMENT 
UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE AUTHORIZED 
WITHIN FIVE YEARS FOLLOWING THE RATI- 
FICATION OF THIS CONSTITUTION NOR OFTEN- 
ER THAN ONCE EVERY FIVE YEARS THERE- 
AFTER. 

THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SHALL BY LAW 
PROVIDE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
EXERCISE OF THIS RIGHT.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
2, as amended, please raise their hand. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 31 votes in favor and 3 against: 
Section 2, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized to present the last amendment to the last 
section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment to Section 4 in order to reflect the necessity of a 
plebiscite in the exercise of the right under Section 2. 
As it reads now, the phrase “after the approval of such 
amendment or revision” refers only to amendments 
under Section 1. 

So, I would like to propose the addition of the 
following lines after the phrase “approval of such 
amendment or revision”; UIWER SECTION 1 OR THE 

DECLARATION BY THE COMMISSION ON ELEC- 
TIONS OF THE COMPLETION OF THE PETITION 
FOR AMENDMENT UNDER SECTION 2 OF THIS 
ARTICLE. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will the pro- 
ponent of the amendment accept an amendment to the 
amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. The Gentleman will please state his 
amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I propose that on line 20, 
between the words “Constitution” and “shall,” we 
insert the phrase UNDER SECTION 1, SUBPARA- 
GRAPHS (A) AND (B). Is that all right? 

MR. MONSOD. That is all right, yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. What line, please? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Line 20, Madam President. 
Between the words “Constitution” and “shall,” insert 
the phrase UNDER SECTION 1, SUBPARAGRAPHS 
(A) AND (B) to indicate the fact that Section 4 refers 
to the amendment under Section 1 (a) and (b) — by the 
National Assembly or by the constitutional conven- 
tion. 

MR. MONSOD. I accept the amendment to the 
amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Then, I propose to include 
another paragraph after line 23, which will read; 
AMENDMENT UNDER SECTION 2 SHALL BE 
VALID WHEN RATIFIED BY A MAJORITY OF THE 
VOTES CAST IN A PLEBISCITE WHICH SHALL BIE 
HELD . . . The continuation will be the Gentleman s 
amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. It reads; NOT EARLIER THAN 
SIXTY DAYS AND NOT LATER THAN NINETY 
DAYS AFTER THE DECLARATION BY THE COM- 
MISSION ON ELECTIONS OF THE COMPLETION OF 
THE PETITION. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is my amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. I accept the amendment to the 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. What is the complete wording. Madam 
President? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I move for a suspension of the 
session so that we can consolidate our amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 6:19 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6:23 p.m., the session was resumed. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


411 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. May I read the proposed amendment 
which is a consolidation of the proposals of Commis- 
sioners de los Reyes, Aquino and myself. Section 4 will 
now read: “ANY AMENDMENT TO, OR REVISION OF 
THIS CONSTITUTION UNDER SECTION ONE (1) 
SUBPARAGRAPHS (A) AND (B) SHALL BE VALID 
AND RATIFIED BY A MAJORITY OF THE VOTES 
CAST IN A PLEBISCITE WHICH SHALL BE HELD 
NOT EARLIER THAN SIXTY DAYS AND NOT 
LATER THAN NINETY DAYS AFTER THE AP- 
PROVAL OF SUCH AMENDMENT OR REVISION. 

AMENDMENT UNDER SECTION TWO (2) SHALL 
BE VALID WHEN RATIFIED BY A MAJORITY OF 
THE VOTES CAST IN A PLEBISCITE WHICH SHALL 
BE HELD NOT EARLIER THAN SIXTY DAYS AND 
NOT LATER THAN NINETY DAYS AFTER THE 
CERTIFICATION BY THE COMELEC OF THE SUF- 
FICIENCY OF THE PETITION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment ac- 
cepted by the honorable sponsor? 


MR. SUAREZ. It is accepted. Madam President, 
except that the word “COMELEC” should read: COM- 
MISSION ON ELECTIONS. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, “COMMISSION ON ELEC- 
TIONS,” Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments? 
Are we ready to vote on the proposed amendment, as 
amended, of Commissioner Monsod? 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
as amended, of Commissioner Monsod, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

This is the last amendment intended to give more 
teeth to Section 3. On line 18, after the word “elec- 
torate,” add the phrase IN A REFERENDUM and 
after that, add a new sentence to read as follows: 
IF THE QUESTION IS AFFIRMATIVELY VOTED 
UPON, THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SHALL, WITH- 
IN THIRTY (30) DAYS FROM THE DAY OF THE 
REFERENDUM, ENACT THE LAW CALLING THE 
CONVENTION. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, the Committee 
would rather submit the proposal to the floor for 
consideration. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please do so. 


MR. DAVIDE. In the original provision of both the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions, the submission to the 
electorate of the question calling such a convention is in 
an election. That was eliminated by the proposal, the 
idea being probably, that since it would be tied up with 
an election, the issue on the call may not be meritorious- 
ly considered by the people. So it is necessaty that 
we should put here that the submission must be in a 
referendum which can never be simultaneous with an 


lection. 

Secondly, if we do not add fhe new sentence: IF 
HE QUESTION IS AFFIRMATIVELY VOTED 
PON THE N^IONAL ASSEMBLY SHALL, WITH- 
riHi™ (30) DAYS FROM ™E DAY OF THE 
EFERENDUM, ENACT THE LAW CALLING THE 
ONVENTION the will of the people in approving the 
latter of submitting the revision or amendment to a 
institutional convention might easily be 
ongress by not acting at all after the question has been 
ibmitted and affirmatively voted upon ^e peopl^ 
0 I submit that the proposed amendment is necessary 




MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


AR. MAAMBONG. I thought that this matter on 

tion 3 has already been ^e done 

nsor to the extent that this could actually be done 

ler in an election or a plebiscite. At any rate, the 

posed amendment is too involved. 

day I ask for a suspension of the session. Madam 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 6:28 p.m. 


412 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 6:30 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the sponsor 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, we would like to 
call the attention of the movant to the fact that under 
Section 3, it is the National Assembly that is ordained 
by a two-thirds vote of all its Members to call a consti- 
tutional convention, and it is incumbent upon the 
National Assembly to come up with the enabling act 
providing the necessary mechanism for the constitu- 
tional convention to submit the proposed amendment 
to the people in a plebiscite called for the purpose. This 
is already built-in in whatever enabling act the National 
Assembly may promulgate, and that is the reason the 
Committee feels that it is no longer necessary to provide 
the statement suggested by the Gentleman. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, on the understand- 
ing that the call is in itself the enabling statute for the 
constitutional convention, if the question is affirma- 
tively voted upon by the people, then I am willing to 
withdraw the proposed amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The proposed amendment is hereby withdrawn. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 322 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on Amendment or Revision) 

MR. RAMA. I move that we now vote on Proposed 
Resolution No. 322, as amended, the whole Article on 
Amendment or Revision. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will now proceed to the voting. 

As many as are in favor of Proposed Resolution 
No. 322, the Article on Amendment or Revision of the 
Constitution, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and none against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 322, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Second Reading. (Applause) 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, in behalf of the 
members of the Committee on Amendments and Transi- 
tory Provisions, may we extend our deepest gratitude to 
each and everyone of the Members of the Commission 
for bearing with us in this marathon session. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The message of the Gentleman is 
duly noted. 

Is there any other business? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

NOMINAL VOTING ON PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 263 ON THIRD READING 
(Article on National Territory) 

MR. RAMA. I move that we vote on Third Reading 
on Proposed Resolution No. 263. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 263 were 
distributed on July 8, 1986, pursuant to Section 28, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the pro- 
posed resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 263, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
resolution, and the Secretary-General will call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Azcuna 

Alonto Bacani 

Aquino 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I would like to 
explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani has three 
minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER BACANI EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

BISHOP BACANI. Fundamentally, the reason I vote 
no is because voting yes seems to me to be foreclosing 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


413 


the claim to Sabah. I have no objection to dropping the 
claim, but it seems that despite the protestations that 
the claim is not foreclosed in any way whatsoever, it is 
nevertheless actually foreclosed. I can foresee a possible 
scenario like this in the future — the Philippine govern- 
ment trying to renegotiate the claim and the people of 
Sabah saying, “Why do you claim Sabah? Is this your 
territory? ” And we would answer: “Well, we are not 
sure whether it is our territory or not, but it may be.” 
Then they can just say, “It certainly is not your terri- 
tory.” Why? 

According to the Committee’s definition of “terri- 
tory,” it is “all the other territories over which the 
government exercises sovereign jurisdiction.” However, 
we do not exercise sovereign jurisdiction over this now, 
and, therefore, this is in no way ours, and we cannot lay 
any claim to it. Therefore, for this reason, I vote no. But 
if it is approved, I would like to emphasize that this 
formulation, in no way, forecloses the claim to Sabah. 
Nevertheless, I cannot see that being realized because 
language is only flexible to a certain extent, and this 
formulation cannot bear the burden of the interpreta- 
tion that is being given to it. 

Thank you. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bengzon Bernas 

Bennagen 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas has three 
minutes. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I explain 
my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro has 
three minutes. 


COMMISSIONER DE CASTRO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I vote no 
because with the proposed statement in our national 
territory, we are giving up our claim on Sabah. Through 
no amount of hard thinking can I convince myself that 
the phrase “and all other territories over which the 
government exercises sovereign jurisdiction means we 
are still keeping our claim over Sabah; for, indeed. 
Madam President, everybody knows that at this time we 
do not exercise sovereignty nor jurisdiction over Sabah. 
Our claim is based on historic right, the right established 
by our forefathers. To give up that right by a play of 
words such as **over which the government exercises 
sovereign jurisdiction” and then say that we are still 
keeping our claim on Sabah is gravely misleading. 

The citation of areas over which the Philippines holds 
historic and legal rights as belonging to our national 
territory may be the only way of sohdifymg the Philip- 
pine position preparatory to negotiation. Any agree- 
ment later would not run counter to this provision, but 
would become a clarification. 

Let history record, therefore, that today the Consti- 
tutional Commission of 1986, by a majority vote, is 
dropping the Philippine claim on Sabah without giving 
the Executive an opportunity to be heard on such a 
grave and important question. 

Thank vnu. Madam President. 


COMMISSIONER BERNAS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

FR. BERNAS. I vote for three reasons: First, 
because the last sentence is a statement of one aspect 
of the archipelagic principle which we, together with 
many other nations, accept. Second, I vote yes because 
it is a good description of the territory we actually have 
today. That territory comprises two parts: The first part 
is the Philippine Archipelago; that is, all the territories 
ceded by Spain to the United States, and eventual- 
ly transferred to the sovereignty of the Republic of 
the Philippines. The second part comprises all other 
territories — territories outside the Archipelago over 
which the government exercises jurisdiction. Third, I 
also vote because the Article does not make any 
uncertain claim of any territory, and, therefore, avoids 
creating useless or even harmful friction. At the same 
time, however, under the generally accepted principles 
of international law which we adopt, it does not prevent 
us from making use of any accepted modes of establish- 
ing a claim to a territory. For these reasons, I vote yes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rosario Braid Calderon 

Brocka Castro de 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Colayco Concepcion . . 


MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President, may I explain 
my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion has 
three minutes. 

COMMISSIONER CONCEPCION 

explains his vote 


^R. CONCEPCION. I regret to say that I cannot vot 
irmatively by reason of one word, that is exer- 
>s ” If that word “exercises” ivere ^ubstiti^e 
AS jurisdiction,” there would be no . J . 

I a few more words. Actual exercise of sovereignty ^ 
mtial to the acquisition of a temtoiy 

mtial to the retention of the ^^^^HHoDines was 
■itory. And that is why when PhU ppi 

upied by the Japanese forces, we 
ity. But to require that our claim to 

; the Archipelago be subject to ^gfgats it 

ereignty not only weakens our claim, but de 


414 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


My interpretation of the votes cast yesterday is that 
many of the Members of the Commission are not sure or 
are not prepared to render a judgment on whether or 
not we have a valid claim to Sabah, and that without 
passing upon the “mouth” of this issue, they would like 
to keep the door open to the assertion of our right to 
Sabah. 

It is one thing to exercise sovereignty; another thing 
is to be sovereign. Once he acquires sovereign rights, he 
does not need actual exercise of those rights to retain 
sovereignty. To require the exercise of our sovereignty 
over territories not forming part of our archipelago, is to 
deal a deathblow upon our claim on Sabah. 

My vote is no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading; 

Davide 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide has three 
minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER DAVIDE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DAVIDE. Although the committee report is 
based on my resolution, I am constrained to vote no 
to the final draft for the following reasons: First, it casts 
a serious cloud of doubt on the validity of our claim 
over Sabah. Secondly, it diminishes our right to pursue 
or enforce our historic and rightful claim over Sabah; 
and, finally. Madam President, a vote of yes on the pro- 
posal would be an act of liberality on our part to 
accommodate not the Filipinos but some other people. 

So, I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Foz Gascon 

Garcia 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER GASCON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GASCON. Because I believe that as we continue 
the struggle for independence and self-determination, 
we must also recognize the will of other peoples of the 
world, particularly in Southeast Asia, for their own 
liberation, and for giving peace a chance, I vote in 
favor of the Article. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Guingona 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I be al- 
lowed to explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER GUINGONA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

I have stated before that the proposed provision on 
National Territory should be made as flexible as possible 
so as not to close the door to any claim which our 
government may wish to make in the future, claims that 
are foreseen such as the Sabah claim, as well as those 
that are unforeseen. 

I have objected to the Bernas’ amendment, first, 
because the provision, as amended, could be construed 
correctly or misconstrued to mean that we have 
abandoned our claim to Sabah even before a thorough, 
unbiased and searching evaluation has been made. There 
are many issues to be resolved, Madam President, and 
many questions remain unanswered, including the 
so-called self-determination by the Sabahans. 

Second, we are presuming that our officials would be 
making, on our behalf, irresponsible and illegal claims 
which, I think, would contradict the statement made by 
the honorable proponent of the amendment that we 
should presume that our officials would perform then- 
functions properly. 

Third, because even the Malaysians themselves in the 
Manila Accord that I had the privilege to read in this 
hall accept our right to pursue our claim to Sabah. 

Finally, may I invite attention to the fact that quite 
a number of those who voted in favor of the amendment 
of Commissioner Bernas, in effect, voted conditionally 
because they were relying on assurance which, in my 
opinion, would have no binding effect. 

My vote is no. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Lerum 

Maambong 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong has 
three minutes. 

COMMISSIONER MAAMBONG EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, my concern at 
the beginning of the deliberation on this provision, as 
can be gleaned from the gist of my interpellations, is 
that I was afraid that the wording of the provision might 
create uncertainty as to what is really our territory. But 
after hearing the distinguished sponsor. Commissioner 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 9. 1 986 


415 


Nolledo, answer the interpellations, I began to realize 
that the limits are really set forth right there in the 
provision on the National Territory. As a matter of fact, 
Commissioner Nolledo said that there are other laws 
which can be referred to in the determination of the real 
boundaries of our territory; namely, Republic Act 
No. 3046, on the computation of the straight baseline; 
the Treaty of Paris; Presidential Decree No. 1599, on 
the exclusive economic zone; and Presidential Decree 
No. 1 596, on our Kalayaan claim. 

In view of the definiteness of the answer of the 
distinguished sponsor, I am convinced that we indeed 
have a provision which specifies our territory in definite 
terms. As a matter of fact, the honorable Secretary- 
General was kind enough to give us a map on the 
development of the archipelagic doctrine, a recognized 
principle of international law. 

And so, Madam President, with the addition of the 
phrase “over which the government exercises sovereign 
jurisdiction,” I am convinced that we have specified in 
actual terms our territory and its boundaries. For that, I 
vote to the Article. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Monsod Nieva 

Natividad Nolledo 


COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, taking into ac- 
count the well-taken observations of Commissioners 
Bacani and Concepcion, but considering my being the 
sponsor of the definition of our national territory and, 
at the same time, my being courteous to Commissioner 
Bernas, I deeply regret that I have to abstain. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Ople 


Constitution. It is a sort of inventory of all that we hold 
in common, including the air space, the land, the waters, 
the seabed and the insular shelves, and I thought that I 
could support and I did support the Bemas amendment, 
the second amendment which, in my opinion, improved 
upon the original formulation. It did not waive any just 
claim of the Philippines. It could have removed certain 
mirages and preconceptions, which I considered germs 
of potential conflict. 


We are trying to write a Constitution of peace; a 
reconciliation with our brothers in Mindanao is, right 
now, almost on the top of our national agenda. I put a 
lot of weight on the opinions expressed by our three 
brother Muslims from Mindanao Ambassador 


Abubakar, Commissioners Domocao Alonto and Lugum 
Uka - all of whom thought that this reformulation by 
the Bernas amendment of the National Territory would 
help accelerate the return of peace and enduring unity 
between Muslims and Filipinos in Mindanao. I regret 
some of the unkind tendencies of earlier remarks that 
attributed motives other than or less patriotic to those 
who voted for the Bernas amendment - I think that is 
foul I think we are not accommodating any other 
nation. I think that the interest of Malaysia does not 
appeal to anyone here and to insinuate that this coul 
have affected some of the thinking of those who voted 
is certainly unkind and unparliamentary. I thmk that 
as it stands, this is a good definition of our national 
territory. It responds to our best conceptions of the 
territory which is indulged with sanctity for every 
Filipino - that territory is certainly under our sovere^n 
jurisdiction. We may have claims to other of the 
world but these are in the nature of claims which are 
not foreclosed under international law and which can- 
not partake of the same sanctity for us Filipmos of that 
territory over which the Republic of the Philippines 
now exercises sovereign jurisdiction and w ic^ can 

ciir^rPTTip <Mcrifice in the 






future. 


Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople has three 
minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER OPLE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I vote ^ and thank 
the Chair for the opportunity to recapitulate the reasons 
for doing so. 

I opposed the first Bernas amendment by deletion of 
the whole Article on National Territory on a plea, at 
that time, that this was in the nature of a municipal law, 
and that, therefore, no matter what we said here would 
have no effect whatsoever on the perceptions of the 
the international community concerning our national 
territory. I said then, and I would like to repeat it, it is 
good to have this National Territory provision in the 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Padilla 

MR. PADILLA. May I explain my vote. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has three 
minutes. 


iMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

R. PADILLA. I voted against the 

;le on National Territory because I ^ 

Constitution should have a provision on National 

itory. . 

adam President, the Article on nhr^e 

in the 1973 Constitution mcluded the phrase 


416 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 9, 1 986 


“historic right or legal title.” This was changed to the 
phrase “over which the government exercises sovereign 
jurisdiction.” As a consequence of that amendment, 
the provision in the 1973 Constitution which reads: 
“over which the Philippines has sovereignty or jurisdic- 
tion” was eliminated. In other words, Madam President, 
the phrase or the clause “over which the Philippines 
has sovereignty or jurisdiction” has practically been 
eliminated to give way to the phrase “over which the 
government exercises sovereign jurisdiction.” I cannot 
accept this amendment. 

First, the word “Philippines”has been changed to 
“government.” Second, the words “the Philippines has” 
have been changed to “the government exercises” and 
the phrase “sovereignty or jurisdiction” to “sovereign 
jurisdiction.” “Sovereignty” and “jurisdiction” are not 
identical but the word “sovereignty” has been trans- 
formed into an adjective to qualify “jurisdiction!’ More- 
over, it would require under the present text that not 
only the Philippines has jurisdiction or sovereignty 
but it was changed to the actual exercise of sovereign 
jurisdiction by the government. 

Madam President, I like the phrase introduced by 
Commissioner Azcuna regarding terrestrial, fluvial and 
aerial domains, but because of this change from “the 
Philippines has sovereignty or jurisdiction” to the clause 
“government exercises sovereign jurisdiction,” I regret 
I have to vote no, 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Quesada Rama 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I explain mv 
vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER RAMA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RAMA. I vote no. I believe in the validity of our 
claim to Sabah. I should know because I made a re- 
search on this matter in the 1 960’s, and I would like to 
believe that the articles that I wrote in the Free Press 
led to the formal filing of the Philippine claim on Sabah. 

One item that I did not mention the last time I stood 
here to document the validity of our claim was the fact 
that the British government invoked the document of 
the annexation order as basis for its claim of sovereignty 
over Sabah. I would like to inform the body that this 
annexation order was dated July 10, 1946, only six 
days after we declare our independence on July 4, 
1946. Ironically, it was former Governor-General 
Francis Burton Harrison, as foreign affairs adviser to 
President Quirino, who called the attention of the 
Philippine government, stating that the annexa- 
tion order passed by the Parliament of Britain 


was a surreptitious and a unilateral act, “a political 
aggression” taking advantage of the prostrate situation 
of the Philippines which has just emerged from the 
rubble of a war. Therefore, former Governor-General 
Harrison urged the Philippine government to present to 
the United Nations a claim on Sabah because he re- 
pudiated and was scandalized by the acts of the British. 
But there is no perfect crime because when one 
examines the annexation order whereby the British 
government claimed sovereignty over Sabah, it was full 
of defects and the major defect was this: According to 
that annexation order, the British government claimed 
sovereignty over Sabah by virtue of the fact that it has 
assumed the rights of the British North Borneo Com- 
pany. Our records will show that the British North 
Borneo Company never exercised public power nor 
sovereign rights since it was a private corporation. In 
other words, it could not have given to the British 
government what it did not have — Nemo dat quod non 
habet. 

As to the argument that this may give rise to violence, 
I would also advert to the body the fact that the Philip- 
pine government insisted on a peaceful settlement and 
even invited Malaysia to take this question to the Inter- 
national Court of Justice. Precisely, we wanted a peace- 
ful settlement, a civilized settlement among nations, but 
it was Malaysia who refused to go to that peaceful 
settlement and, therefore, courted trouble. 

Therefore, Madam President, I am more concerned 
about the rights of the Filipinos than the rights of 
Malaysians. 

I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Regalado Rigos 

Reyes de los 

REV. RIGOS. May I explain my vote. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER RIGOS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

REV. RIGOS. I vote no for the same reason given by 
Commissioner Concepcion. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rodrigo 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I explain my 
vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo has three 
minutes. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


417 


COMMISSIONER RODRIGO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I vote because 
this Article defined very clearly what is rightly our 
territory and at the same time it saves me from violating 
the mandate: Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s 
territory. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Romulo Sarmiento 

Rosales 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I explain 
my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, in the spirit of 
Asian solidarity and the fact that this provision on 
National Territory will not preclude this government, 
and the future governments from pursuing its claim over 
any territory, I vote yes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Suarez 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I explain my 
vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER SUAREZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUAREZ. I vote no because I certainly have no 
wish to waive and renounce our nation’s historic rights 
and legal title. Secondly, I would not feel comfortable 
relying upon assurances that are not integrated in our 
Constitution. Ambiguities have no place in the supreme 
law of the land. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Sumulong Tadeo 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, may I explain my 
vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER TADEO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. TADEO. I vote no, naniniwala kasi ako na maka- 
buluhan at mahalaga na manatili ang “historic right” at 
“legal title.” 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tan Trenas 

Tingson Uka 


MR. UKA. May I explain my vote. Madam President? 

I vote yes because my understanding of the meaning 
of the Artide on National Territory does not in any way 
preclude us from claiming any area or territory in the 
future, including the moon. This Article describes very 
clearly our present territory over which we have sover- 
eignty. For if we include future territories, we will really 
have a very large territory. Let us cross the bridge when 
we come to it. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villacorta 

MR. VILLACORTA. May I explain my vote. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has three 
minutes. 


COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR VILLACORTA. Madam President, I vote ^ 
’tVr having consulted specialists in interna lona. law 
,d di^macy Who assured me .ha. 
irisdiction” is not an auto-hmitation that precludes 
^ilippines from asserting her ^^vere^ty over temto 
es which she may either lose tem 

oreover, these users of the Consti- 

sovereign shall always mn 

ition that where a Earned te ly 

iece of land bu " mhabited^^^^^ 

srsons will mu pgopie and the people’s self- 

. resides only ^unreme over historic right, legal 
termination reigns supreme . j jhis 

tie and other theme of our 

rinciple is consistent people’s rights and interest. 

)86 Constitution; namely, people rig 

THE SECRETARY.GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas 


SECOND ROLL CALL 


' prfsTDENT The Secretary-General will con- 
: S ca? for those who have no. registered 

otes. 


Abubakar . . 
Alonto .... 
Aquino .... 
Azcuna .... 
Bengzon . . . 
Bennagen . . 
Rosario Braid 



Brocka . . 


Calderon . 

Yes 

Colayco . 

Yes 


Yes 


Yes 

Jamir . . . 

Yes 



Yes 

Yes 


418 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


Lerum 


Romulo 


Monsod 


Rosales 


Natividad .... 

Yes 

Sumulong . . . . 

Yes 

Nieva 

Yes 

Tan 


Quesada 

Yes 

Tingson 


Regalado 

Yes 

Trefias 

No 

Reyes de los . . . 

Yes 




THE PRESIDENT. The results show 22 votes in 
favor, 1 1 against and 1 abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 263 is lost on Third Read- 
ing for failure to meet the required majority vote of 
all the Members. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. BENGZON. There are some of us who are not 
present and it would be fair if these proceedings on 
Third Reading continue until tomorrow in order that 
the votes of those absent may be obtained on nominal 
voting. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT.Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I object to the motion because that 
would be against the Rules. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion is out of order. We 
already had a voting; therefore, the only remedy open 
would be for a motion for reconsideration which we 
could consider at some future time. 

MR. BENGZON. May I beg your pardon. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. I said we already had a voting on 
the resolution. The resolution was lost and so, the only 
remedy open is for a motion for reconsideration which 
we can consider tomorrow. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I say some- 
thing? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. Under the circumstances, I would 
like to move for the suspension of the Rules in order to 
obviate the filing of a motion for reconsideration 
tomorrow. So, may I move for a suspension of the Rules 
today, so that we could continue with the nominal 
voting tomorrow. 

MR. GUINGONA. I object. Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I object. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I object because 
I am afraid this will create a bad precedent that every- 
time a vote is taken and it is lost, we will ask for a sus- 
pension of the Rules. 

MR. BENGZON. In that case, as suggested by the 
Chair, the motion for reconsideration will be presented 
tomorrow. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, parliamentary in- 
quiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Before any motion for reconsideration 
is presented at the appropriate time, would the results 
of the voting today mean that the new Constitution will 
be without an Article on National Territory, unless the 
Committee will propose another? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, as it is now, there is no provi- 
sion for the National Territory in the Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there a motion for adjourn- 
ment? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I move that 
the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles take it up again for presenta- 
tion to the body? 

THE PRESIDENT. Then, we will take that up when 
the motion for reconsideration is submitted. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a minor point of parlia- 
mentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We just want to find out exactly 
how many Members participated in the voting — just for 
the record. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 1986 


419 


THE PRESIDENT. The result of the voting is: 22 
affirmative; 11 negative; 1 abstention; so, that is 34. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we ad- 


journ the session until tomorrow at two-thirty in the 
afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 7:14 p.m. 











♦»*» fn*M 

1^ ' V 'Ml ii jii 

ffir 

0vr, tft wqnvH?*^*! 

■* ^ 


my. \\ 


mr ■• p ,^\'!^< -.U • t . ,.,*« 






1 •» i 

, 




‘ '' V ',_, r -> 


.-» • » . V 


> **' '■'•■<1 j *;‘ . • ;>' 








V * v <« .. 

#<.*'.1' ... A . '♦, .,;-■ 


V , 
\ 


r • 

n 


f^fyUir'f }i . > v; ^' . * ^ 

tit, ■ .A»^' * J(,'Vll -\ j*'^ It #'.¥■ • •► , , ,-. I. 

,. ■ it,; ‘■* '^.'rr I 4,i.(* ^'i 


t'»^i .r 




THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


421 


R.C.C. NO. 27 
Thursday, July 10, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 3:10 p.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 


Padilla 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . . 

. . . Absent 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Uka 

, . . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

, . . Present 

Rosales 

. . Absent 

Villegas 

, . . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 42 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Christine A. Tan. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

SR. TAN. Good Father, we are pressured and some- 
times tense. Show us how to keep the space in our heart 
where You will be able to show Yourself; and when You 
do, show Yourself beyond reason and law. Give us the 
simplicity to recognize You and to act accordingly. 
Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present 

Alonto Present 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present* 

Bernas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka Absent 

Calderon Absent 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 


Davide 

. . Present 

Foz 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. . Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we ap- 
prove the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none: the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
solutions on First Reading. Communications and 
mmittee Reports, the President making the corre- 
nding references: 


^Appeared after the roil call 


422 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 458, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FIXING THE TERM OF THE INCUMBENT 
PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Maambong and Natividad. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 459, entitled: 

RESOLUTION STRENGTHENING THE SEPARATION BE- 
TWEEN CHURCH AND STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Natividad, de los Reyes, 
Jr. and Maambong. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 460, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR REPRESENTATION OF 
THE OPPOSITION IN THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Maambong. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 461, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION REPEALING ALL LAWS, DE- 
CREES, PROCLAMATIONS, ORDERS, INSTRUCTIONS, 
RULES OR REGULATIONS WHICH ARE INCONSIS- 
TENT WITH THE FREEDOM CONSTITUTION AND THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 462, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
THE TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION MANDATING THE OB- 
JECTIVES AND PARAMETERS OF GOVERNMENT 
REORGANIZATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 463, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
THE TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION ON URGENT MEASURES 
ON NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, RECOVERY AND 
RECONCILIATION TO WHICH THE FIRST NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY MUST GIVE UTMOST PRIORITY. 


Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 464, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS FIXING LIMITATION TO THE 
PERIOD WITHIN WHICH GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
AND EMPLOYEES MAY BE SEPARATED FROM THE 
SERVICE DUE TO THE REORGANIZATION OF THE 
GOVERNMENT, PROVIDING THE RULE ON SEPARA- 
TION AND MANDATING THE BENEFITS AND PRIVI- 
LEGES OF SEPARATED EMPLOYEES. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 465, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE REPEAL OF ALL 
LAWS WHICH ARE INIMICAL AND/OR TEND TO 
DEPRIVE THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS ETHNIC 
MINORITIES OVER THEIR ANCESTRAL LANDS. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 466, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR THE ADOPTION OF A 
MULTIPARTY SYSTEM. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 467, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING RELATIVES OF 
INCUMBENT LOCAL OFFICIALS WITHIN THE THIRD 
DEGREE OF CONSANGUINITY OR AFFINITY FROM 
RUNNING FOR THE POSITION TO BE VACATED BY 
THE INCUMBENT LOCAL OFFICIAL. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 471, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT IN THE CONSTI- 
TUTION THE RECOGNITION OF THE STATE OF THE 
RIGHT OF THE CITIZENRY TO SPORTS AND PHY- 
SICAL EDUCATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Sarmiento, Garcia, 
Suarez, Nolledo and Brocka. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


423 


Proposed Resolution No. 472, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO BROADEN THE SCOPE OF THE AR- 
TICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS TO INCORPORATE 
ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Sarmiento, Villacorta, 
Garcia, Maainbong, Foz, Nieva, Bennagen, Aquino, 
Gascon, Tan, Brocka, Davide, Jr., Rosario Braid, 
Uka, Tadeo, Nolledo and Suarez. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Bulacan Social Action Movement signed by 
Mr. Tirso G. Robles, Jr., proposing a provision mandat- 
ing the Legislature to enact laws on socialized medicine. 

(Communication No. 161 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Bicol Multi-Sectoral Organization, Manila, 
signed by Sr. Gloria A. Martires, CFIC and 32 others, 
requesting the inclusion of provisions on environmental 
protection from pollution, deforestation and unscru- 
pulous gathering of corals. 

(Communication No. 166 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Aksyon Para sa Kapayapaan at Katarungan 
(AKKAPKA) signed by Ms. Esther Felipe of 224 Sto. 
Domingo St., Quezon City and 1,181 others, proposing 
a separate article on education, labor and employment, 
housing and agrarian and urban land reform. 
(Communication No. 167 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Letter from the Promotion of Church People’s Rights 
signed by Fr. Rogelio Obja-an, OSA, Sr. Aurora R. Zam- 
brano, ICM, and other members from the regions of 
Mindanao and Visayas and the national office, pro- 
posing the removal of foreign military bases, and sug- 
gesting provisions on land reform, national industrializa- 
tion and human rights. 

(Communication No. 162 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from the Union United Churchmen of 
Northern Mindanao, suggesting that a portion of the 
income tax proceeds be set aside and administered by 
religious denominations for the purpose of helping the 
poor. 

(Communication No. 163 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Fr. Bernard D. Verberne, MSC, of the 
Multi-Sectoral Alliance for Tribal Concerns in Agusan, 
requesting public hearings to give tribal Filipinos oppor- 
tunity to express themselves on their right to land, their 
own culture and system of justice. 

(Communication No. 164 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Davao Inventors Society signed by Mr. Dom- 
nino S. Cagape, submitting a resolution petitioning the 
Commission for the creation of an Inventors Trust 
Fund. 

(Communication No. 165 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Letter from Center for Solidarity Tourism signed by 
Mr Crescencio A. Yaco, enclosing a resolution request- 
ing a provision for the development of alternative tour- 
ism or “backyard tourism.” 

(Communication No. 168 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


COMMITTEE REPORTS 


Committee Report No. 18, prepared by the Committee 
on the Judiciary, entitled: 

ARTICLE ON THE JUDICIARY, 


commending its approval. 

lonsored by Hon. Concepcion, de los ^^^yes Jr 
'Cum, Guingona, Colayco, Davide, Jr., Suarez Regala 
I, Romulo, Treflas, Padilla, Sumulong, Jamir, Sarmien- 
,’uka, Natividad and Bengzon. 


nmittee Report No. 19 on Proposed Resolution 
468, prepared by the Committee on Constitutiona 
nmissions and Agencies, entitled. 

tESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE THE NEW ^ 
TUTION THE COMMON PROVISIONS ON THE CONST 
TUTIONAL COMMISSIONS AND THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION, 
mimending its approval in substitution of Proposed 

lolution Nos. 51, 54, 108, 117, 135, 139, 238, 240, 

,356 and 357. 

msored by Hon. Foz, Rigos and Regalado, 
the Steering Committee. 


424 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


Committee Report No. 20 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 469, prepared by the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 21 and 282. 

Sponsored by Hon. Foz, Jamir and Monsod. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 21 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 470, prepared by the Committee on Local Govern- 
ments, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 182, 329 and 361. 

Sponsored by Hon. Nolledo, Calderon, Tingson, Rosales, 
Alonto, de Castro, Bennagen, Rigos, Regalado, Jamir 
and Ople. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 22, prepared by the Committee 
on the Legislative, entitled: 

ARTICLE ON THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, 

recommending its approval. 

Sponsored by Hon. Davide, Jr., Azcuna, Abubakar, 
Alonto, Aquino, Calderon, Concepcion, de los Reyes, 
Jr., Garcia, Guingona, Jamir, Lerum, Rodrigo, Sumu- 
long and Trenas. 

Cosponsored by Hon. Villacorta, Romulo, Regalado, 
Foz, Gascon, Tingson, Monsod, Rigos and Sarmiento. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we consider the proposal on 
the Article on National Territory, and I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

RECONSIDERATION OF VOTE 
ON THIRD READING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 263 
(Article on National Territory) 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move for a 
reconsideration of the vote on Third Reading that took 
place last night on the Article on National Territory. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of Commissioner Bengzon that the voting on 
Third Reading which was held last night be recon- 
sidered? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

SUSPENSION OF THE RULES 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I also move for 
the suspension of the Rules in order to bring back the 
status of the Article on National Territory to Second 
Reading for the sole purpose of accommodating one 
amendment to change a phrase which presently reads: 
“all the other territories over which the government 
exercises sovereign jurisdiction” into the phrase “all 
other territories over which th6 PHILIPPINES HAS 
SOVEREIGNTY OR jurisdiction.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, pursuant to the 
motion for the suspension of the Rules for the very 
exclusive purpose of inserting a change in the contro- 
versial phrase, I would like to propose that present 
amendment. We have in the text which was voted on 
yesterday the phrase starting on the third line which 
reads “and all the other territories over which the 
government exercises sovereignty or jurisdiction.” The 
changes proposed would be: in place of the word 
“government,” we put PHILIPPINES; in place of the 
word “exercises,” we put HAS; in place of the word 
“sovereign,” we put SOVEREIGNTY, and then we add 
OR. Thus, the amended phrase would read: “and all the 
other territories over which the PHILIPPINES has 
SOVEREIGNTY OR jurisdiction.” And the explana- 
tion, if I may be allowed, is; on the change from 
“government” to PHILIPPINES, this is a recognition of 
the recommendation made by Commissioner Padilla 
that instead of “government” we use PHILIPPINES; 
on the change from “exercises” to HAS, this is in 
recognition of the sole objection of Commissioner 
Concepcion to this Article. The word HAS is of a 
broader application than “exercises.” As explained by 
Commissioner Concepcion yesterday, one can continue 
to have jurisdiction over a territory even if it is physical- 
ly wrested from him, whereas, in order to acquire a 
territory, one must exercise jurisdiction over it. But one 
does not lose a territory simply because he has lost the 
physical exercise of jurisdiction. One still continues to 
have jurisdiction even if he has lost effective exercise. 
The example given yesterday was that the jurisdiction 
over the Philippines when Japan was exercising control 
over the Philippines was not lost. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


425 


So, with these, may I repeat, the phrase will now be: 
“and all the other territories over which the PHILIP- 
PINES HAS SOVEREIGNTY OR jurisdiction.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the parliamentary situation 
right now is, first of all, the suspension of the Rules in 
order to allow this proposed amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

Is there any objection? May I please proceed first? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection for the 
suspension of the Rules for the sole purpose stated by 
Commissioner Bernas? (Silence) The Rules then are 
suspended for this particular purpose and the remarks 
of Commissioner Bernas are taken into account. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

On behalf of the Committee on Preamble, National 
Territory, and Declaration of Principles, I would like to 
manifest that the members of the Committee gladly 
accept the amendments of Commissioner Bernas and we 
commend his high sense of statesmanship. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished sponsor of the 
amendment yield to some clarificatory questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Bernas 
say? 

FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, under the new 
proposed amendment, would “SOVEREIGNTY mean 
past and present sovereignty? 

the PRESIDENT. The question is addressed to 
Commissioner Bernas. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Would the word “SOVER- 
EIGNTY” in the new proposed amendment mean either 
past sovereignty or present sovereignty? 


FR. BERNAS. It certainly would mean present 
sovereignty. 

MR. DAVIDE. As well as past sovereignty? 

FR. BERNAS. It would not refer to past sovereignty 
because if sovereignty is past, that means it has been 
lost. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, the import is just the 
same as the original proposal? 

FR. BERNAS. No, the change in import is in the 
change of the word “exercises” to HAS. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, “HAS SOVEREIGNTY OR juris- 
diction”? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. Nevertheless, the meaning again of 
“HAS SOVEREIGNTY” would only be present sover- 
eignty, not past sovereignty? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, that would be true because if, as 
I said, sovereignty is past, it is lost; it is gone; one does 
not have it. 


MR. DAVIDE. In other words, I would repeat, the 
import of the new proposal is just the same as the 
original proposal? 


FR. BERNAS. No, I would say, it is not because 
the difference is in the word HAS. The original pro- 
posal could be understood to mean that if one is unable 
physically to exercise control, then he loses the tem- 
tory • whereas, in the new proposal, even if one is unable 
to exercise the control, he continues to have the sover- 
eignty. Let me give an example. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponent give an example 
on the matter of Sabah? 








MR. DAVIDE. Can the example not be extended to 
Sabah? 

FR. BERNAS. Let me first give my own example 
since I am the one giving the example. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. We will accommodate that, 
Madam President. 


L BERNAS. Let us take the example of Batane^ 
avnuZction over Batanes. We .are actually and 
cally exercising sovereignty and , 

les. Let us suppose that tomorrow, a very p 
overcomes our government m Batanes ^ 
s us of control over that area. We continue to ha 


426 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


jurisdiction over it even if the invading force may be 
able to impose its laws on it by force. We have jurisdic- 
tion, but temporarily we are unable to exercise jurisdic- 
tion. 

MR. DA VIDE. Since the meat of the original pro- 
posal and the present proposal would precisely be on 
the issue of Sabah . . . 

FR. BERNAS. On the issue of Sabah now, Sabah 
would be included, if it can be proven that we have 
sovereignty or jurisdiction. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, our historic right or legal title to 
Sabah would now be dropped. 

FR. BERNAS. No, it is not being dropped. It is being 
left unsettled by us because we are not a judicial body 
capable of passing judgment on a factual issue. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, to be very clear about 
it, under the present wording, we have not foreclosed 
any claim over Sabah because we have historic title over 
it? 

FR. BERNAS. We have not foreclosed any claim to 
Sabah, period. Neither are we saying that we have. 

MR. DAVIDE. That becomes more confusing. 

I thank the proponent and thank you. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There are no more interpellators. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May the Honorable Bernas yield 
to a few questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Very gladly. 

MR. DE CASTRO. As I get it, we have not fore- 
closed, as the proponent has said, our claim over Sabah 
with this phrase “the PHILIPPINES HAS SOVEREIGN- 
TY OR jurisdiction.” Am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. We are not making any claim over 
Sabah. We are not dropping any claim. This prescinds 
any claim. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, we are not making any claim 
nor dropping any claim? 

FR. BERNAS. No, we are prescinding from any 
uncertain claim. 


MR. DE CASTRO. We are, therefore, losing our 
historic right or legal title over Sabah. Am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. In my humble opinion, the Gentle- 
man is not correct. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Why? 

FR. BERNAS. Because we can always claim it under 
international law. There are accepted modes of esta- 
blishing a claim over a territory under international law 
and I am sure that our Constitution will uphold the 
generally accepted principles of international law. 

MR. DE CASTRO. In short, with this proposal on the 
Article on National Territory, as well as the sponsor’s 
amendment now, we are dropping our claim over Sabah 
and we leave it to international law to settle our claim 
on it. Am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. My position is: We are not interfering 
with whatever the executive department might do about 
the claim over Sabah. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I know the reason why we 
dropped the words “historic right or legal title” con- 
tained in the Article on National Territory of the 1973 
Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. If I will be allowed to repeat what we 
have repeated over and over again in this session hall, I 
will repeat the reasons. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I ask this because before this 
amendment, when the phrase was still “government 
exercises sovereign jurisdiction,” the sponsor insisted 
that we are not dropping our claim over Sabah with that 
phrase. That is why I am now asking why we are drop- 
ping our claim per the sponsor’s explanation. 

FR. BERNAS. I already said we are not dropping any 
claim. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The sponsor is not dropping any 
claim but he leaves this claim to be settled under inter- 
national law and not state it on the provision on Nation- 
al Territory, am I correct? 

FR. BERNAS. I said I am prescinding from any 
claim which may have been made by the government 
of the Philippines. It is not a question of dropping 
or continuing; it is a question of prescinding — 
P-R-E-S-C-I-N-D-I-N-G. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, we are playing 
with words here. Frankly and forthrightly, why do we 
not state that we are claiming or we are abandoning our 
claim? Why play with words? 

Thank you. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


427 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I just want to task one simple 
question that requires a simple answer. Has the Philip- 
pines ever acquired jurisdiction over Sabah? I mean, 
within the context of the term “jurisdiction.” 

FR. BERNAS. We are not answering that question 
here; we are prescinding from that question here. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. But we spoke of jurisdiction. Why 
are we afraid to face the issue and not answer the ques- 
tion if ever we have acquired jurisdiction over Sabah? 

FR. BERNAS. ‘Because I am not in a position to 
answer the factual issues of the case. The complicated 
issues of the case are factual. We have not been given the 
documents for us to examine. How can we make a 
judgment over that? 

We believe that if we have to make a judgment, it 
must be a judgment with due process. And due process 
is a process which decides only after hearing. We have 
not heard; we have not seen the evidence. 


sovereignty refers to present sovereignty, then it would 
appear we cannot claim sovereignty over the territory 
that we will acquire 200 years from now because the 
wording here is “HAS SOVEREIGNTY,” and it only 
refers to the present; it is used in the present tense. 

So, I regret very much that this has to be opened. I 
had hoped that we would let the word “SOVER- 
EIGNTY” remain as it is without the necessity of fur- 
ther interpretation or construction. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just a word of reply, 
please. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bemas may 
do so. 

FR. BERNAS. In my reply to the interpellation of 
Commissioner Davide, the only thing I excluded was 
past sovereignty. I did not exclude whatever we might 
have in the future; I did not exclude whatever we may 
have in the future. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. In other words, from the spon- 
sor’s reply and from his knowledge and whatever 
evidence we heard, he does not put in the Record that 
the Philippines has acquired jurisdiction over Sabah? 

FR. BERNAS. We are not. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. The honorable Members of this 
Commission will perhaps recall that last night, I ob- 
jected to the motion for reconsideration and made a 
manifestation that today I would make a motion to 
recommit the Article on National Territory to the com- 
mittee concerned. But this morning, after consultation, 
I agreed not to object and not to present any motion. 
However, may I say that I find it unfortunate that the 
question regarding sovereignty has to be raised. I had 
the occasion to read the statement of Messrs. Kaplan 
and Katzenbach wherein, speaking of sovereignty, they 
said: 

There is no more confusing concept in international 
law than sovereignty. It has been viewed indiscriminately 
in a number of different meanings by decision-makers and 
scholars alike. 

I regret that we have to distinguish sovereignty, 
whether it is past, present or future, because 200 years 
from now, if the Philippines were to acquire a territory 
and if we follow the interpretation given here that 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The amendment has been sufficiently 
debated and none has registered to further interpellate. 
So, I move that we take a vote on the amendment ot 
Commissioner Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

We will now proceed to take a vote on the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Bernas. 

FR. BERNAS. The phrase to be added in substitution 
will be: “all the other territories over which the PHILIP- 
PINES HAS SOVEREIGNTY OR jurisdiction. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
.endmenl, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
sed their hand.) 

Those against the proposed amendment, please raise 
=>ir hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 38 votes in favor of the amendment 
. a .1 k therefore, approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I 
the period of amendments on the 
Territory. 


move that we close 
Article on National 


428 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the voting on Third Reading on the Article 
on National Territory. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I think a voting on Third Reading will 
not be proper at this time because we have just reopened 
the period of amendments to accommodate one amend- 
ment. So, we must first have a voting on Second Read- 
ing, not on Third Reading. 

THE PRESIDENT. What we have just finished is the 
voting on the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Bernas. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 263 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on National Territory) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, to accommodate 
Commissioner Davide, I move that we approve on 
Second Reading the Article on National Territory, as 
amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the approval on 
Second Reading of the whole Article on National Terri- 
tory, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand. ) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 39 votes in favor, 3 against and no 
abstention; the Article on National Territory, as 
amended, is approved on Second Reading. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized.. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

SUSPENSION OF THE RULES 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I move for the 
suspension of the Rules so that we can vote on Third 
Reading on the Article on National Territory. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


NOMINAL VOTING ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION 
NO. 263 ON THIRD READING 
(Article on National Territory) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we vote 
on Third Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 263. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 263 were 
distributed on July 8, 1986, pursuant to Section 27, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read th*e title of the pro- 
posed resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 263, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
resolution and the Secretary-General will call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . 

Yes 

Bennagen . . . 

. . . Yes 

Alonto 

Yes 

Bernas 

. ... Yes 

Aquino 


Rosario Braid . 

. . Yes 

Azcuna 

. . . . Yes 

Rrnrka . . . 


Bacani 

Yes 

Calderon .... 


Bengzon 


Castro de ... 



MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I explain my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro has three 
minutes to explain his vote. 

COMMISSIONER DE CASTRO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I vote ni2, be- 
cause whatever play of words we have in this Article on 
National Territory, our country would, in effect, drop 
its claim to Sabah and to any territory it may want to 
claim in the future, as stated by Commissioner Guin- 
gona. We should also have given the Executive the 
opportunity to have a hand in so delicate and important 
an issue like our claim to Sabah. My remarks last night 
stand. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


429 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Colay CO Yes Davide 

Concepcion Yes 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
explain my vote very briefly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER DAVIDE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DAVIDE. My vote is no, because I am unable to 
perceive the difference between the original and modi- 
fied Bernas’ amendment. Both amount to the same 
thing. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Brocka Rosales 

Calderon Tingson 

Munoz Palma 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 263 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on National Territory) 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 39 votes in 
favor, 4 against and no abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 263 is approved on Third 
Reading.* 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Foz Yes Gascon Yes 

Garcia Yes Guingona 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I be al- 
lowed to explain my vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona has three 
minutes. 

COMMISSIONER GUINGONA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

First of all, I wish to thank Commissioner Bernas for 
partially accepting my suggestion of changing “sovereign 
jurisdiction” to “sovereignty or jurisdiction ” or “title.” 
I was hoping that even with the nonacceptance of the 
third word, I might be able to vote in favor, but because 
of the manifestation made during the interpellations by 
the honorable Commissioner Davide, notwithstanding 
my view that the interpretation is not binding, I am 
constrained to vote no. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Jamir 

. Yes 

Rigos 

Yes 

Laurel .... 

. . Yes 

Rodrigo .... 

Yes 

Lerum 

. . . Yes 

Romulo .... 

Yes 

Maambong . . . 

. . . Yes 

Rosales 


Monsod . . . 

. . . Yes 

Saimiento ... 

Yes 

Natividad . . . 

. . . Yes 

Suarez 

Yes 

Nieva .... 

. . . Yes 

Sumulong . . . . 

Yes 

Nolledo 


Tadeo 

Yes 

Ople 


Tan 

Yes 

Padilla 

, . . Yes 

Tingson 


Munoz Palma . . . 


Trenas 

... Yes 

Quesada 

. . Yes 

Uka 

... Yes 

Rama .... 

. . No 

Villacorta . . . . 

... Yes 

Regalado 

. . Yes 

Villegas 

... Yes 

Reyes de los . . . 

. . Yes 




SECOND ROLL CALL 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 
conduct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


NOMINAL VOTING ON PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 7 ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Citizenship) 


MR. RAMA. I move that we vote on Third Reading 
on Proposed Resolution No. 7. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 7 were 
distributed on July 9, 1986 pursuant to Section 27, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution is, therefore, in 
order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the pro- 
posed resolution. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
3. 7, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

HE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on this 
josed resolution and the Secretary-General will call 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . 
Alonto . . . . 
Aquino . . . . 
Azcuna .... 
Bacani . . . . 
Bengzon . . . 
Bennagen . . 
Bernas . . . . 
Rosario Braid 
Brocka . . . . 
Calderon . . . 


Yes 

Castro de 

Yes 

Colayco 

Yes 

Concepcion 

. Yes 


. Yes 


. Yes 


. Yes 


. Yes 

Guingona 

. Yes 



Lerum 


Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 


♦See Appendix 


430 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


Maambong . . . . 

. . Yes 

Rodrigo 

Yes 

Monsod 

. . Yes 

Romulo 

Yes 

Natividad 

. . Yes 

Rosales 


Nieva 

. . Yes 

Sarmiento . . . . 

. . . Yes 

Nolledo 

. . Yes 

Suarez 

... No 

Ople 

. . Yes 

Sumulong . . . . 

... Yes 

Padilla 

. . No 

Tadeo 

... No 

Munoz Palma . . . 


Tan 

... Yes 

Quesada 

. . Yes 

Tingson 


Rama 

• • Yes 

Trenas 


Regalado 

• • Yes 

Uka 

... Yes 

Reyes de los ... 

. . Yes 

Villacorta . . . . 

... Yes 

Rigos 

. . Yes 

Villegas 

... Yes 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Brocka Munoz Palma 

Calderon Rosales . . . . 

Foz Tingson . . . 

Lerum 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO 7 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on Citizenship) 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 36 votes in 

favor, 5 against and no abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 7 is approved on Third 

Reading. * 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:02 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:06 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Adolfo S. Azcuna, presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
honorable Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that the 
Chairman of the Steering Committee be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. It is a pleasant surprise, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon may proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. May I call the attention of the 
Members of this Commission that in the Order of Busi- 
ness yesterday. Committee Report No. 18, the draft 
Article on the Judiciary, was included and a separate 
sheet was distributed to each Commissioner making the 
committee report as an additional Reference of Busi- 
ness. It is supposed to have been included in the Calen- 
dar of Business so that it could be taken up today, but 
due to an oversight of the Bills and Index Division, 
Committee Report No. 18 was not included in the 
Business for the Day. For this reason, since the Rules 
has been followed and we agreed informally yesterday 
that this will be taken up for sponsorship, interpella- 
tions and, possibly, for amendments, and considering 
further that the Chairman and the members of the Com- 
mittee on the Judiciary are ready to sponsor this com- 
mittee report, I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 18 as part of the Business for the Day so 
that we can proceed to its consideration. 

A MEMBER. I second the motion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). It has 
been moved and seconded that Committee Report 
No. 18 on the Judiciary be taken up on Second Reading 
as part of the Business for the Day. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 18 
(Article on the Judiciary) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that 
we consider Committee Report No. 18 on Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 14, 18, 52, 75, 78, 1 12, 1 15, 140, 143, 
146, 147, 153, 204, 236, 259, 275, 292 and 313 as 
reported out by the Committee on the Judiciary. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

Consideration of Committee Report No. 18 is now in 
order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the committee report 
without prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole 
text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Committee Report 
No. 18, entitled: 

ARTICLE ON THE JUDICIARY. 

(The following is the whole text of the draft Article on the 
Judiciary per C.R. No. 18.) 


*See Appendix 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


431 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 18 

The Committee on the Judiciary to which were referred the 
following proposed resolutions: Proposed Resolution No. 14, 
introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO RETAIN THE PROVISIONS OF ARTI- 
CLE X, SECTION 11 (1) OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION 
AND TO MAKE THE SAME MANDATORY AND AP- 
PLICABLE TO CASES PENDING BEFORE THE 
COURTS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 18, introduced by Hon. Azcuna, en- 
titled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL 
WRIT OF AMPARO, 


Proposed Resolution No. 143, introduced by Hon. Davide, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING COURTS FROM ISSUING 
MINUTE RESOLUTIONS, AMENDING FOR THE PUR- 
POSE SECTION NINE OF ARTICLE TEN OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 146, introduced by Hon. Regalado, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION ON THE SPECIFICITY AND REQUISITES 
FOR THE EXERCISE OF THE POWER OF THE SU- 
PREME COURT TO DECLARE THE UNCONSTITU- 
TIONALITY OR INVALIDITY OF TREATIES, EXECU- 
TIVE AGREEMENTS AND LAWS, 


Proposed Resolution No. 52, introduced by Hon. Guingona, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ARTICLES ON THE JUDICIARY TO SAFE- 
GUARD AND ENHANCE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE 
SUPREME COURT, 

Proposed Resolution No. 75, introduced by Hon. Colayco, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING THE DESIGNA- 
TION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT 
AND OF THE OTHER COURTS CREATED BY LAW TO 
PERFORM NONJUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
BODIES OR AGENCIES EXCEPT WITH THE APPROVAL 
OF THE MAJORITY VOTE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE 
SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 78, introduced by Hon. Davide, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AP- 
POINTMENT TO THE SUPREME COURT AND OTHER 
COURTS TO ENSURE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE 
JUDICIARY, 


Proposed Resolution No. 147, introduced by Hon. Regalado, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE REQUISITES FOR 
THE IMPOSITION OF THE DEATH PENALTY IN 
CRIMINAL CASES BY THE SUPREME COURT, 


Proposed Resolution No. 153, introduced by Hon. Romulo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING THE CREATION OF A JUDI- 
CIAL COUNCIL, 


Proposed Resolution No. 204, introduced by Hon. Colayco, 
entitled: 


RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF 
THE MEMBERS OF THE SUPREME COURT, THE IN- 
TERMEDIATE APPELLATE COURT, AND OF THE 
OTHER COURTS ESTABLISHED BY LAW, INCLUDING 






,osed Resolution No. 236, introduced by Hon. Romulo, 
tied: 

^SOLUTION PROPOSING A 
CONSTITUTION AUTHORIZING THE CHIEF JUSTICE 


Proposed Resolution No. 112, introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION REMOVING FROM THE SUPREME COURT 
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION OVER ALL COURTS 
AND PERSONNEL THEREOF AND VESTING THE 
SAME IN A JUDICIAL COMMISSION AND FOR OTHER 
PURPOSES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 115, introduced by Hon. Davide, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING A GENERAL 
REVAMP OF THE JUDICIARY BY LEGISLATION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 140, introduced by Hon. Suarez, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE SECURITY OF 
TENURE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY, 


jposed Resolution No. 259, introduced by Hon. Trefias, 
titled: 

resolution to include in the proposed consti- 
tution a PROVISION REQUIRING APPROVAL BY 
TOE SWMME COURT OF RULES CONCERNING 
™aDING PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE PRO- 
MULGATEi BY QUASI-JUD|CIAL ^ BEFORE 
THESE RULES CAN BECOME EFFECTIVE, 

, posed Resolution No. 275, introduced by Hon. Trefias, 
itied: 

resolution to INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION ELEVEN, PARAGRAPH (I), AR- 
TOL^X OF WE 1973 CONSTITUTION WITH MOOT 

FICATIONS AND WITH AN 

TO FURTHER STRENGTHEN THE COMPULSORY 
CHARACTER OF SAID PROVISION, 


432 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 292, introduced by Hon. Padilla, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR APPEAL FROM JUDG- 
MENT OF ACQUITTAL WHEN IT IS MANIFESTLY 
AGAINST THE EVIDENCE AND IS CONTRARY TO 
LAW, 

Proposed Resolution No. 313, introduced by Hon. Suarez, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR AN ANNUAL BUDGET 
FOR THE JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT TO INSURE ITS 
INDEPENDENCE, 

has considered the foregoing proposed resolutions and has the 
honor to report them back to the Constitutional Commission of 
1986 with the recommendation that all of the listed proposed 
resolutions be approved as revised, amended or adopted by the 
Committee and as hereinafter described. 

Each proposed resolution accepted by the Committee was not 
considered and amended on a line-by-line basis. Rather, the Com- 
mittee adopted the basic concept or substance of the proposed 
resolutions and embodied it in the attached draft of the Article 
on the Judiciary. Thus, in this report, we indicated hereunder in 
which section of the proposed Article on the Judiciary a parti- 
cular proposed resolution is reflected. 


Proposed Resolution 

Section Embodied In 

No. 14(de los Reyes) 

Sec. 14 

No, 18 (Azcuna) 

Sec. 7 (5) 

No. 52 (Guingona) 

Sec. 13 & 15 

No. 75 (Colayco) 

Sec. 8 

No. 78 (Davide) 

Sec. 6 

No. 1 12 (de los Reyes) 

Sec. 6 

No. 115 (Davide) 

Sec. 2, 2nd Para. 

No. 140 (Suarez 

Sec. 2, 2nd Para. 

No. 143 (Davide) 

Sec. 1 2, 2nd Para. 

Nos. 146 & 147 (Regalado) 

Sec. 3 (2) 

No. 153 (Romulo) 

Sec. 6 

No. 204 (Colayco) 

Sec. 6 

No. 236 (Romulo) 

Sec. 16 

No. 259 (Trehas) 

Sec. 7(5) 

No. 275 (Trenas) 

Sec. 14 

No. 292 (Padilla) 

Sec. 12, 3rd Para. 

No. 313 (Suarez) 

Sec. 15 

We have recommended to 

the Committee on Transitory Pro- 


visions the following: 

“Section The Supreme Court shall adopt for itself and 

the lower courts a systematic plan to expedite the decision or 
resolution of cases or matters filed with the Supreme Court or the 
lower courts prior to the effectivity of this Constitution.” 

“Section . All courts existing at the time of the ratifica- 

tion of this constitution shall continue and exercise their jurisdic- 
tion, until otherwise provided by law in accordance with this 
constitution, and all cases pending in said courts shall be heard, 
tried, and determined under the laws then in force. The provi- 
sions of the existing rules of court not inconsistent with this 
constitution shall remain operative unless amended, modified, or 
repealed by the Supreme Court or the National Assembly.” 


The Committee hereby gratefully acknowledges the valuable 
contribution of the various resource persons who either appeared 
in person or submitted position papers. 

(Sgd.) Roberto R. Concepcion 
Chairman 

Committee on the Judiciary 

ARTICLE 

THE JUDICIARY 

Section 1. The judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme 
Court and in such lower courts as may be established by law. 

Judicial power includes the duty of courts of justice to settle 
actual controversies involving rights which are legally demandable 
and enforceable and to determine whether or not there has been a 
grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdic- 
tion on the part of any branch or instrumentality of the govern- 
ment. 

Section 2. The National Assembly shall have the power to 
define, prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its jurisdiction 
over cases enumerated in Section 7 hereof. 

No law shall be passed reorganizing the judiciary when it 
undermines security of tenure. 

Section 3. (1) The Supreme Court shall be composed of a 
Chief Justice and ten Associate Justices. It may sit en banc or in 
two divisions. 

(2) All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty, inter- 
national or executive agreement, or law shall be heard and 
decided by the Supreme Court en banc, and no treaty, interna- 
tional or executive agreement, or law may be declared unconsti- 
tutional without the concurrence of a majority plus one of the 
members who actually participated when the case was submitted 
for decision. The same number of votes shall be required for the 
imposition of the death penalty. 

(3) All other cases including those involving the application or 
operation of presidential decrees, proclamations, orders, instruc- 
tions, ordinances and other regulations which under the rules of 
court are required to be heard en banc shall be decided with the 
concurrence of a majority of the members who actually par- 
ticipated when the case was submitted for decision. 

(4) Cases heard by a division shall be decided with the concur- 
rence of a majority of the members who actually participated 
when the case was submitted for decision but if such required 
number is not obtained, the case shall be decided en banc: Pro- 
vided, that no doctrine or principle of law laid down by the court 
in a decision rendered en banc or in division may be modified or 
reversed except by the court sitting en banc. 

Section 4. (1) No person shall be appointed member of the 
Supreme Court unless he is a natural-born citizen of the Philip- 
pines, at least forty years of age, and has for fifteen years or more 
been a judge of a lower court or engaged in the practice of law in 
the Philippines. 

(2) The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifications of 
judges of lower courts, but no person may be appointed judge 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


433 


thereof unless he is a natural-bom citizen of the Philippines and 
a member of the Philippine Bar. 

Section 5. The Members of the Supreme Court and judges 
of lower courts shall be appointed by the President from a list of 
at least three nominees prepared by a Judicial and Bar Council 
for every vacancy. Such appointments need no confirmation. 

Section 6. (1) A Judicial and Bar Council is hereby created 
under the supervision of the Supreme Court composed of the 
Chief as exofficio Chairman, the Minister of Justice and a rep- 
resentative of the National Assembly as exofficio members, a 
representative of the integrated bar of the Philippines, a pro- 
fessor of law, a retired member of the Supreme Court, and a 
representative of the private sector. 

(2) The regular members of the Council shall be appointed 
by the President for a term of four years. Of the members first 
appointed, the representative of the integrated bar of the Philip- 
pines shall serve for four years, the professor of law for three 
years, the retired justice for two years, and the representative of 
the private sector for one year. 

(3) The Clerk of the Supreme Court shall be the Secretary 
exofficio and shall keep a record of the proceedings of the 
Council. 

(4) The regular members of the Council shall receive such 
emoluments, and the exofficio members shall receive such 
allowances, as may be determined by the Supreme Court. The 
Supreme Court shall provide in its annual budget the appro- 
priations for the Council. 

(5) The Council shall have the principal function of recom- 
mending appointees to the judiciary. It may exercise such other 
functions and duties as the Supreme Court may assign to it. 

Section 7. The Supreme Court shall have the following 
powers: 

(1) Exercise original jurisdiction over cases affecting ambas- 
sadors, other public ministers and consuls, and over petitions for 
certiorari, prohibition, mandamus, quo warranto, and habeas 
corpus. 

(2) Review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal or 
certiorari, as the law or the rules of court may provide, final 
judgments and decrees of lower courts in — 

(a) All cases in which the constitutionality or validity of 
any treaty, international or executive agreement, law, or- 
dinance, executive order, proclamation, or regulation is in 
question. 

(b) All cases involving the legality of any tax, impost, as- 
sessment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in relation thereto. 

(c) All cases in which the jurisdiction of any lower court is 
in issue. 

(d) All criminal cases in which the penalty imposed is death 
or life imprisonment. 

(e) All cases in which only an error or question of law is 
involved. 

(3) Assign temporarily judges of lower courts to other stations 
as public interest may require. Such temporary assignment shall 


not last longer than six months without the consent of the judge 
concerned. 


(4) Order a change of venue or place of trial to avoid a miscar- 
riage of justice. 

(5) Promulgate rules concerning the protection and enforce- 
ment of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and procedure in 
all courts, the admission to the practice of law, the integrated bar, 
and legal assistance to the underprivileged. The National Assem- 
bly may repeal, alter, or supplement the said rules with the advice 
and concurrence of the Supreme Court. Such rules shall provide a 
simplified and inexpensive procedure for the speedy disposition 
of cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade, and 
shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights. Rules 
of procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial bodies shaU take 
effect upon approval by the Supreme Court. 

(6) Appoint all officials and employees of the judiciary in 
accordance with the Civil Service Law. 


Section 8. The Members of the Supreme Court and of other 
ourts established by law shall not be designated to any agency 
performing quasi-judicial and/or administrative functions. 

Section 9. The Supreme Court shall have administrative super- 
ision over all courts and the personnel thereof. 

Section 10. The Members of the Supreme Court and judges of 
,wer courts shall hold office during good behavior until they 
;ach the age of seventy years or become incapacitated to dis- 
harge the duties of their office. The Supreme Court en banc 
lall have the power to discipUne judges of lower courts or 

rder their dismissal by the vote of a f 

lembers who actually participated when the matter was 

iibmitted for resolution. 

Section 11. The conclusions of the 
ase submitted to it for decision en banc or m division shall be 

cached in consultation before the case is 

or the writing of the opinion of the court. A certification to this 
??eS signedt' the Chief Justice shall be issued and a copy there- 

Jed 

^7r„"iro?relo„. ne 

hall be observed by aU lower coUegiate courts. 

Section 12. No decision shall be rendered by any court 
5 >ection .igarlv and distinctly the facts and the 

without expressing therein cieariy ai 

iw on which it is based. 

dthout stating the legal basis therefor. 

. u 11,,. crate and/or the offended party from ajudg- 

An appeal by the State and/or ^ 

[lent of acquittal may ,pview on certiorari on the 

upreme Court by 

round that it is manifestly against fj„,j 3 diction. 

buse of discretion amountmg to lack or excess or j 

C *• 11 The salary of the Chief Justice and of the Asso- 

Secticn 13. The salary nfiudees of lower courts 


434 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


shall receive an annual salary of and each Associate 

Justice pesos. 

Section 14. (1) All cases or matters filed after the effectivity 
of this Constitution must be decided or resolved within twenty- 
four months from date of submission for the Supreme Court, and 
unless reduced by the Supreme Court, twelve months for all 
lower collegiate courts, and three months for all other lower 
courts. 

(2) A case or matter shall be deemed submitted for decision or 
resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or memo- 
randum required by the rules of court or by the court itself. 

(3) Upon the expiration of the corresponding period, a certifi- 
cation to this effect signed by the Chief Justice or the presiding 
judge shall forthwith be issued and a copy thereof attached to the 
record of the case or matter, and served upon the parties. 

Section 15. An amount equivalent to not less than two percent 
of the national budget shall be automatically appropriated and 
regularly released for the judiciary. 

Section 1 6. The Supreme Court shall, within thirty days from 
the opening of each regular session of the National Assembly, 
submit to the President and the National Assembly an annual 
report on the operations and activities of the judiciary. The Chief 
Justice shall address the National Assembly at the opening of 
each regular session. 


MR. RAMA. May I ask that the sponsor of the Article 
on the Judiciary, Commissioner Concepcion, be recog- 
nized? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 4:09 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
session is resumed. 

The honorable Commissioner Concepcion is now 
recognized to sponsor the proposed Article on the 
Judiciary. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER CONCEPCION 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

I will speak on the judiciary. Practically, everybody 
has made, I suppose, the usual comment that the 
judiciary is the weakest among the three major branches 
of the service. Since the legislature holds the purse and 
the executive the sword, the judiciary has nothing with 
which to enforce its decisions or commands except the 
power of reason and appeal to conscience which, after 


all, reflects the will of God, and is the most powerful of 
all other powers without exception. But before I pro- 
ceed, I would like to present my regrets for being out, 
not being in the session hall when the Committee was 
called to report. I thought we had a recess. And con- 
sidering our experience last night, when most of us were 
unable to reach our homes until late in the evening, I 
thought it was an opportune moment to get some rein- 
forcement, if I may use the expression. And so, with the 
body’s indulgence, I will proceed to read the provisions 
drafted by the Committee on the Judiciary. 

The first section starts with a sentence copied from 
former Constitutions. It says: 

The judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme Court 
and in such lower courts as may be established by law. 

I suppose nobody can question it. 

The next provision is new in our constitutional law. 
I will read it first and explain. 

Judicial power includes the duty of courts of justice to 
settle actual controversies involving rights which are legally 
demandable and enforceable and to determine whether or 
not there has been a grave abuse of discretion amounting to 
lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part or instrumentality 
of the government. 

Fellow Members of this Commission, this is actually a 
product of our experience during martial law. As a 
matter of fact, it has some antecedents in the past, but 
the role of the judiciary during the deposed regime was 
marred considerably by the circumstance that in a 
number of cases against the government, which then had 
no legal defense at all, the solicitor general set up the 
defense of political questions and got away with it. As a 
consequence, certain principles concerning particularly 
the writ of habeas corpus^ that is, the authority of 
courts to order the release of political detainees, and 
other matters related to the operation and effect of mar- 
tial law failed because the government set up the 
defense of political question. And the Supreme Court 
said: “Well, since it is political, we have no authority to 
pass upon it.” The Committee on the Judiciary feels 
that this was not a proper solution of the questions 
involved. It did not merely request an encroachment 
upon the rights of the people, but it, in effect, encour- 
aged further violations thereof during the martial law 
regime. I am sure the members of the Bar are familiar 
with this situation. But for the benefit of the Members 
of the Commission who are not lawyers, allow me to 
explain. I will start with a decision of the Supreme 
Court in 1973 on the case oi Javellanavs. the Secretary 
of Justice, if I am not mistaken. Martial law was an- 
nounced on September 22, although the proclamation 
was dated September 21. The obvious reason for the 
delay in its publication was that the administration had 
apprehended and detained prominent newsmen on 
September 21. So that when martial law was announced 
on September 22, the media hardly published anything 
about it. In fact, the media could not publish any story 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


435 


not only because our main writers were already incar- 
cerated, but also because those who succeeded them in 
their jobs were under mortal threat of being the object 
of wrath of the ruling party. The 1971 Constitutional 
Convention had begun on June 1, 1971 and by Septem- 
ber 21 or 22, had not finished the Constitution; it had 
barely agreed on the fundamentals of the Constitution. 
I forgot to say that upon the proclamation of martial 
law, some delegates to that 1971 Constitutional Conven- 
tion, dozens of them, were picked up. One of them was 
our very own colleague. Commissioner Calderon. So, the 
unfinished draft of the Constitution was taken over by 
representatives of Malacanang. In 1 7 days, they finished 
what the delegates to the 1971 Constitutional Conven- 
tion had been unable to accomplish for about 14 
months. The draft of the 1973 Constitution was pre- 
sented to the President around December 1, 1972, 
whereupon the President issued a decree calling a plebis- 
cite which suspended the operation of some provisions 
in the martial law decree which prohibited discussions, 
much less public discussions^of certain matters of public 
concern. The purpose was presumably to allow a free dis- 
cussion on the draft of the Constitution on which a 
plebiscite was to be held sometime in January 1973. If I 
may use a word made famous by our colleague. Commis- 
sioner Ople, during the interregnum, however, the draft 
of the Constitution was analyzed and criticized with such 
a telling effect that Malacanang felt the danger of its dis- 
approval. So, the President suspended indefinitely the 
holding of the plebiscite and announced that he would 
consult the people in a referendum to be held from 
January 10 to January 15. But the questions to be sub- 
mitted in the referendum were not announced until the 
eve of its scheduled beginning, under the supposed 
supervision, not of the Commission on Elections, but of 
what was then designated as “citizens assemblies or 
barangays.” Thus the barangays came into existence. 
The questions to be propounded were released with pro- 
posed answers thereto, suggesting that it was unneces- 
sary to hold a plebiscite because the answers given in the 
referendum should be regarded as the votes cast in the 
plebiscite. Thereupon, a motion was filed with the 
Supreme Court praying that the holding of the refe^ 
endum be suspended. When the motion was being heard 
before the Supreme Court, the Minister of Justice 
delivered to the Court a proclamation of the President 
declaring that the new Constitution was already in force 
because the overwhelming majority of the votes cast in 
the referendum favored the Constitution. Immediately 
after the departure of the Minister of Justice, I pro- 
ceeded to the session room where the case was being 
heard. I then informed the Court and the parties the 
presidential proclamation declaring that the 1973 
Constitution had been ratified by the people and is now 
in force. 

A number of other cases were filed to declare the 
presidential proclamation null and void. The main 
defense put up by the government was that the issue 
was a political question and that the court had no 


jurisdiction to entertain the case. 

Under the Constitution, the President may declare 
martial law in case of invasion, insurrection or rebellion 
or imminent danger thereof. If public safety or public 
interest requires it, he may suspend the privilege of the 
writ of habeas corpus or place the Philippines or any 
part thereof under martial law. 

The government said that in a referendum held from 
January 10 to January 15, the vast majority ratified the 
draft of the Constitution. Note that all members of the 
Supreme Court were residents of Manila, but none of 
them had been notified of any referendum in then- 
respective places of residence, much less did they par- 
ticipate in the alleged referendum. None of them saw 
any referendum proceeding. 

In the Philippines, even local gossips spread like wild 
fire. So, a majority of the members of the Court felt 
that there had been no referendum. 

Second, a referendum cannot substitute for a plebi- 
scite. There is a big difference between a referendum 
and a plebiscite. But another group of justices upheld 
the defense that the issue was a political question. 
Whereupon, they dismissed the case. This is not the only 
major case in which the plea of “political question” was 
set up. There have been a number of other cases in the 
past. 

I hope the Commissioners who are not lawyers will 
bear with me as I explain further because the matter is 
really a technical one. The Senate and the House had, 
under the 1935 Constitution, a House Electoral Tri- 
bunal and a Senate Electoral Tribunal. Our friend, 
Mr. Lorenzo Tanada, was the only member of the 
minority party in the Senate. The Constitution provided 
that electoral protests involving senators would be a 
nine-man Senate Electoral Tribunal. Of these nine, three 
were to be members of the majority party in the Senate 
and another three members for the minority party in 
the Senate; and lastly, three Justices of the Supreme 
Court. After the majority party had elected its three 
representatives to the Electoral Tribunal, and when it 
came to the nominations of the three senators for the 
opposition. Senator Taftada said that he could not 
nominate any senator except himself because there was 
no other senator belonging to the minority. The majori- 
ty then nominated two senators belonging to the 
majority to form part of the group of three to represent 
the minority. As a consequence, the majority would 
actually have had five members: the Supreme Court, 
three and the minority, one. When the issue was 
brought to the Supreme Court, the defense put up by 
the government was that the matter involved a political 
question. But in that case of Tanada vs. Cuenco, the 
Court held that the Senate Electoral Tribunal was to 
consist of nine senators, because the possible partisan- 
ship of the three members for the majority would be 
offset by that of the three members of the minority. The 
group of three members of the Supreme Court consti- 
tuting the third group would ensure the impartiality in 


436 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


the decision of the Electoral Tribunal. The defense of 
the political question was rejected because the issue was 
clearly justiciable. 

We still had another important case. It was early 
after liberation. You probably remember that during 
World War II, President Roosevelt of the U S an- 
nounced over the television that the American govern- 
ment would compensate or indemnify all damages we 
may suffer during the war up to the last carabao. 
Liberation came and the American Congress appro- 
priated $1 billion for war damages but with strings 
attached. We had to give them parity rights. The ques- 
tion was whether or not we should grant these rights 
because of the issue in the election held in 1946. The 
majority party was in favor and another political party 
opposed it, because there was $1 billion together with 
the parity rights. 

In order to give parity rights to the Americans, it 
was necessary, however, to get a qualified majority in 
both Houses of Congress. But the number of votes avail- 
able to the majority party was a few votes short of the 
required qualified majority. At that time there were 
half a dozen members elected in districts believed to be 
dominated by leftists. By the way, the members of the 
minority belonged to what was known as the Democra- 
tic Alliance. These members of the minority were 
suspended upon the ground that their election was 
tainted with fraud and terrorism. 

Then the constitutional amendment granting parity 
rights was taken and got the qualified majority re- 
quired by the Constitution. Assailed in the Supreme 
Court, the Supreme Court held that the question 
whether the suspended Members should be counted in 
the determination of the required qualified majority was 
a political question. It was obvious that the members of 
the Democratic Alliance were suspended to enable 
the ruling party to get the votes necessary for the ap- 
proval of the bill calling a plebiscite on the parity rights. 
When your Committee on the Judiciary began to per- 
form its functions, it faced the following questions: 
What is judicial power? What is a political question? 

The Supreme Court, like all other courts, has one 
main function: to settle actual controversies involving 
conflicts of rights which are demandable and enforce- 
able. There are rights which are guaranteed by law but 
cannot be enforced by a judicial party. In a decided 
case, a husband complained that his wife was unwilling 
to perform her duties as a wife. The Court said: “We can 
tell your wife what her duties as such are and that she is 
bound to comply with them, but we cannot force her 
physically to discharge her main marital duty to her 
husband. There are some rights guaranteed by law, but 
they are so personal that to enforce them by actual 
compulsion would be highly derogatory to human 
dignity.” 

This is why the first part of the second paragraph of 
Section I provides that: 


Judicial power includes the duty of courts to settle 
actual controversies involving rights which are legally de- 
mandable or enforceable . . . 

The courts, therefore, cannot entertain, much less decide> 
hypothetical questions. In a presidential system of 
government, the Supreme Court has, also, another im- 
portant function. The powers of government are 
generally considered divided into three branches: the 
Legislative, the Executive and the Judiciary. Each one is 
supreme within its own sphere and independent of the 
others. Because of that supremacy power to determine 
whether a given law is valid or not is vested in courts of 
justice. 

Briefly stated, courts of justice determine the limits 
of power of the agencies and offices of the government 
as well as those of its officers. In other words, the 
judiciary is the final arbiter on the question whether or 
not a branch of government or any of its officials has 
acted without jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction, or 
so capriciously as to constitute an abuse of discretion 
amounting to excess of jurisdiction or lack of jurisdic- 
tion. This is not only a judicial power but a duty to pass 
judgment on matters of this nature. 

This is the background of paragraph 2 of Section 1, 
which means that the courts cannot hereafter evade the 
duty to settle matters of this nature, by claiming that 
such matters constitute a political question. 

I have made these extended remarks to the end that 
the Commissioners may have an initial food for thought 
on the subject of the judiciary. 

Section 2 of the draft prepared by the Committee is 
merely the second sentence of Section 1 of Article X of 
the 1973 Constitution which states, and I quote: 

The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its juris- 
diction over cases enumerated in Section 7 hereof. 

There is a second paragraph which reads: 

No law shall be passed reorganizing the judiciary when it 
undermines security of tenure. 

This provision reflects the apprehension in a number 
of resolutions referred to the Committee: the resort to 
judicial reorganization in order to circumvent the 
security of tenure. 

Section 3 of the draft says: 

The Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief Justice 
and ten Associate Justices. It may sit en banc or in two 
divisions. 

Under the 1973 Constitution, the Supreme Court 
shall be composed of a Chief Justice and 14 Associate 
Justices. It may sit en banc or in two divisions. The 
second, third and fourth subsections or paragraphs of 
this section state, and I quote: 

(2) All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty, 
international or executive agreement, or law shall be heard 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


437 


and decided by the Supreme Court en banc, and no treaty, 
international or executive agreement, or law may be de- 
clared unconstitutional without the concurrence of a 
majority plus one of the members who actually participated 
when the case was submitted for decision. The same 
number of votes shall be required for the imposition of the 
death penalty. 

The present Constitution requires 10 votes of the 
Supreme Court. Our draft requires only a majority plus 
one; 

(3) All other cases including those involving the applica- 
tion or operation of presidential decrees, proclamations, 
orders, instructions, ordinances and other regulations which 
under the rules of court are required to be heard en banc 
shall be decided with the concurrence of a majority of the 
members who actually participated when the case was sub- 
mitted for decision. 

(4) Cases heard by a division shall be decided with the 
concurrence of a majority of the members who actually 
participated when the case was submitted for decision but 
if such required number is not obtained, the case shall be 
decided en banc\ Provided, that no doctrine or principle 
of law laid down by the court in a decision rendered en 
banc or in division may be modified or reversed except by 
the court sitting en banc. 

There are two important changes introduced by this 
section: the court may sit in two divisions or en banc. 
As usual, a majority is necessary to have a quorum. 
But to render a decision, only a majority plus one is 
necessary to declare a law unconstitutional. Whereas 
under the present Constitution the Supreme Court 
is composed of 15 members, the vote of 10 members is 
required to declare a law unconstitutional. Often, how- 
ever, the actual membership of the court is limited to 12 
or even 1 1. To require 10 votes for the declaration of 
unconstitutionality, the votes of three or four members 
would prevail over those of a clear majority of the Court 
members. This has happened several times in the past. 
The two-thirds requirement, therefore, strengthens the 
executive and weakens judicial power. 

The first paragraph of Section 4 of the draft states. 

(1) no person shall be appointed member of the 
Supreme Court unless he is a natural-born citizen of the 
Philippines, at least forty years of age, and has for fifteen 
years or more been a judge of a lower court or engaged in 
the practice of law in the Philippines. 

Several important changes are thereby introduced. 
The present law requires 10 years as a judge of a court 
of record to be qualified for appointment to the 
Supreme Court, Our draft provision increases the 
requirement to 1 5 years. 

Besides, we have eliminated the words “of record in 
the phrase “court of record” because all lower courts 
are now courts of record. 

Paragraph (2) of the draft Section 4 provides: 


The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifications 
of judges of lower courts, but no person may be appointed 
judge thereof unless he is a natural-born citizen of the Phil- 
ippines and a member of the Philippine Bar. 

Section 5 reads: 

The Members of the Supreme Court and judges of the 
lower courts shall be appointed by the President from a hst 
of at least three nominees prepared by a Judicial and Bar 
Council for every vacancy. Such appointments need no 
confirmation. 

The choice of the President in filling vacancies in the 
judiciary is limited to a list of nominees prepared or sub- 
mitted by a Judicial and Bar Council of which we will 
speak later more in detail. 

Moreover, the “appointments by the President need 
no confirmation” by another body. 

This is a provision suggested by practicing lawyers 
upon the ground that in the past judges had to kowtow 
to members of the legislative body to get an appoint- 
ment or at least to see the Chairman of the Committee 
on the Judiciary in Congress and request his support to 
the confirmation of his appointment. The idea is to 
forestall as much as possible the influence of partisan 
politics. 

Section 6 of the draft is to the effect that: 

A Judicial and Bar Council is hereby created under the 
supervision of the Supreme Court composed of the Chief 
Justice as ex-officio Chairman, the Minister of Justice and 
a representative of the National Assembly as ex-officio 
members, a representative of the Integrated Bar of the 
Philippines, a professor of law, a retired member of the 
Supreme Court, and a representative of the private sector. 

The Committee sought to have in the Council a rep- 
resentation for the major elements of the community. 

Paragraph 2 of the draft of Section 5 provides: 

The regular members of the Council shall be appointed 
by the President for a term of four years. 

The phrase “regular members” refers to all those who 
are not exofflcio members. 

The paragraph continues: 

XXX Of the members first appointed, the representative of 
the Integrated Bar of the Philippines shall serve for four 
years, the professor of law for three years, the retired jus- 
tice for two years, and the representative of the private 
sector for one year. 

(3) The Clerk of the Supreme Court shall be the Secre- 
tary ex-officio and shall keep a record of the proceedings of 
the Council. 

(4) The regular members of the Council shall receive 
such emoluments, and the ex-officio members shall receive 
such allowances as may be determined by the Supreme 
Court. The Supreme Court shall provide in its annual 
budget the appropriations for the Council. 


4s8 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


The reason for this should be obvious. The Council 
will actually have to work throughout the year, screen- 
ing nominees for 2,200 positions in the bench. 

The last paragraph of Section 6 is: 

(5) The Council shall have the principal function of 
recommending appointees to the judiciary. It may exercise 
such other functions and duties as the Supreme Court may 
assign to it. 

Pursuant to Section 7 of the draft: 

The Supreme Court shall have the following powers: 

(1) Exercise original jurisdiction over cases affecting 
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and over 
petitions for certiorari^ prohibition, mandamus, quo war- 
ranto, and habeas corpus. 

(2) Review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal 
or certiorari, as the law or the rules of court may provide, 
final judgments and decrees of lower courts in — 

(a) All cases in which the constitutionality or validity 
of any treaty, international or executive agreement, law, 
ordinance, executive order, proclamation, or regulation 
is in question. 

(b) All cases involving the legality of any tax, impost, 
assessment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in relation 
thereto. 

(c) All cases in which the jurisdiction of any lower 
court is in issue. 

(d) All criminal cases in which the penalty imposed 
is death or life imprisonment. 

At this point, I might invite attention to the fact that 
the members of the Committee are aware of the cir- 
cumstance that in any other Committee the death 
penalty was voted to be abolished. Should the opinion 
of the Commission be in favor of elimination of the 
death penalty, we will adjust this paragraph. 

(e) All cases in which only an error or question of law 
is involved. 

Justice Colay CO is kind enough to suggest that the 
reading of the draft be assigned to our Secretary- 
General. By the way, before she does so, I wish to thank 
the Members of the Commission for their attention in 
adopting means for my comfort today. 

Our Secretary-General will continue the reading of 
the draft without prejudice to the interpellations later. 

I will try to answer as best I can. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

(3) Assign temporarily judges of lower courts to other 
stations as public interest may require. Such temporary as- 
signment shall not last longer than six months without the 
consent of the judge concerned. 

(4) Order a change of venue or place of trial to avoid a 
miscarriage of justice. 

(5) Promulgate rules concerning the protection and en- 
forcement of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and 


procedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of 
law, the integrated bar, and legal assistance to the under- 
privileged. The National Assembly may repeal, alter, or sup- 
plement the said rules with the advice and concurrence of 
the Supreme Court. Such rules shall provide a simplified 
and inexpensive procedure for the speedy disposition of 
cases, shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade, and 
shall not diminish, increase or modify substantive rights. 
Rules of procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial 
bodies shall take effect upon approval by the Supreme 
Court. 

(6) Appoint all officials and employees of the judiciary 
in accordance with the Civil Service Law. 

Section 8. The Members of the Supreme Court and of 
other courts established by law shall not be designated to 
any agency performing quasi-judicial and/or administrative 
functions. 

Section 9. The Supreme Court shall have administrative 
supervision over all courts and the personnel thereof. 

Section 10. The Members of the Supreme Court and 
judges of lower courts shall hold office during good 
behavior until they reach the age of seventy years or be- 
come incapacitated to discharge the duties of their office. 
The Supreme Court en banc shall have the power to discip- 
line judges of lower courts, or order their dismissal by the 
vote of a majority plus one of the Members who actually 
participated when the matter was submitted for resolution. 

Section 11. The conclusions of the Supreme Court in 
any case submitted to it for decision en banc or in division 
shall be reached in consultation before the case is assigned 
to a Member for the writing of the opinion of the court. A 
certification to this effect signed by the Chief J ustice shall be 
issued and a copy thereof attached to the record of the case 
and served upon the parties. Any Member dissenting or 
abstaining from a decision shall state the reason for his 
dissent or abstention. The same requirement shall be ob- 
served by all lower collegiate courts. 

Section 12. No decision shall be rendered by any court 
without expressing therein clearly and distinctly the facts 
and the law on which it is based. 

No petition for review or motion for reconsideration of 
a decision of the court shall be refused due course or denied 
without stating the legal basis therefor. 

An appeal by the State and/or the offended party from 
a judgment of acquittal may be allowed in the discretion of 
the Supreme Court by a petition for review on certiorari on 
the ground that it is manifestly against the evidence and 
with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess 
ofjurisdiction. 

Section 13. The salary of the Chief Justice and of the 
Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, and of judges of 
lower courts shall be fixed by law. During their continuance 
in office, their salary shall not be diminished nor subjected 
to income tax. Until the National Assembly shall provide 
otherwise, the Chief Justice shall receive an annual salary of 
, and each Associate Justice 


pesos. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


439 


Section 14. (1) All cases or matters filed after the effec- 
tivity of this Constitution must be decided or resolved with- 
in twenty-four months from date of submission for the 
Supreme Court, and unless reduced by the Supreme Court, 
twelve months for all lower collegiate courts, and three 
months for all other lower courts. 

(2) A case or matter shall be deemed submitted for 
decision or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, 
brief, or memorandum required by the rules of court or by 
the court itself. 

(3) Upon the expiration of the corresponding period, 
certification of this effect signed by the Chief Justice or the 
presiding judge shall forthwith be issued and a copy thereof 
attached to the record of the case or matter, and served 
upon the parties. 

Section 15. An amount equivalent to not less than two 
percent of the national budget shall be automatically appro- 
priated and regularly released for the judiciary. 

Section 16. The Supreme Court, shall, within thirty days 
from the opening of each regular session of the National 
Assembly, submit to the President and the National Assem- 
bly an annual report on the operations and activities of the 
judiciary. The Chief Justice shall adddress the National 
Assembly at the opening of each regular session. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
honorable Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Will Commissioner Concepcion please yield to inter- 
pellations? 

MR. CONCEPCION. With pleasure. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Before I ask my questions, I do not know if it is 
proper for me to state that the 1973 Constitution was 
ratified by barangay assemblies as the Gentleman stated. 
There were pictures produced by the previous adminis- 
tration showing people raising their hands and Marcos 
claimed that they were voting for the Constitution. But 
the questions asked, according to our information, were 
these: “Sino ang gustong kumain ng siopao at uminom 
ng Coca-Cola at Pepsi? ” So the people raised their hands, 
a picture was taken of them, and the President con- 
cluded that they ratified the 1973 Constitution which is 
one of our working drafts. I do not know also if it is 
inappropriate for me to state, in connection with the 
Chief Justice’s narration of the Javellana case, that the 
Honorable Napoleon Rama and I were among those in- 


carcerated. Napoleon Rama was incarcerated in Fort 
Bonifacio; I was incarcerated in Camp Crame. 

The second paragraph of Section 1 states: “Judicial 
power includes the duty of courts of justice to settle 
actual controversies ...” The term “actual controver- 
sies” according to the Commissioner should refer to 
questions which are political in nature and, therefore, 
the courts should not refuse to decide those political 
questions. But do I understand it right that this is 
restrictive or only an example? I know there are cases 
which are not actual and yet the court can assume juris- 
diction. An example is the petition for declaratory 
relief. 

May I ask the Commissioner’s opinion about that? 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Supreme Court has no juris- 
diction to grant declaratory judgments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman used the term 
“judicial power” but judicial power is not vested in the 
Supreme Court alone but also in other lower courts as 
may be created by law. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And so, is this only an example? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, I know this is not. The 
Gentleman seems to identify political questions with 
jurisdictional questions. But there is a difference. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because of the expression “judicial 
power ; 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. Judicial power, as I said, 
refers to ordinary cases but where there is a question as 
to whether the government had authority or had abused 
its authority to the extent of lacking jurisdiction or 
excess of jurisdiction, that is not a political question. 
Therefore, the court has the duty to decide. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the Commissioner. 

I would like to ask the second question with respect 
to the second paragraph of Section 2, which reads: “No 
law shall be passed reorganizing the judiciary when it 
undermines security of tenure. 

The Supreme Court ruled in some cases that there is 
no vested right to public office and that if a public of- 
fice is abolished, security of tenure is not adversely 
affected. 

Would the Gentleman say then that that doctrine is 
changed by this proposed provision? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Certainly. First, reorganization 
should not be resorted to for the purpose of dismissing 
any judge. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

The third question . . . 


440 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


MR. CONCEPCION. I think Commissioner Davide 
has filed a resolution on that point and he can explain 
his thoughts on the matter. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

This particular proposal was based on a resolution 
filed by this representation and amended basically by 
the amendment of Commissioner Padilla. We realize, of 
course, that in 1980 for instance, under the guise of a 
judicial reorganization, the so-called judicial reorganiza- 
tion was made. So, there was a general revamp of the 
judiciary. Supposedly, the intention of the revamp was 
to attain economy, but actually the main purpose of 
that general revamp was to eliminate from the judiciary 
people whom the leadership at the time believed to be 
not loyal to the administration and to replace them with 
people who were loyal to the administration. Necessa- 
rily, the result was massive expulsion or ouster of several 
people, especially of those who had no padrinos, as well 
as the entry into the judiciary of people who had the 
necessary connections with the politicians of the 
dispensation at the time. 

I recall very well that despite the creation of the 
Integrity Council to effect the revamp, the recom- 
mendations of the Integrity Council were disregarded. I 
know personally of an assemblyman who recommended 
somebody whose name was in the final list, but even- 
tually another list was submitted to Malacanang and 
what happened was that this gentleman, who was 
recommended and who already gave a treat to the as- 
semblyman, found himself without any position. Unfor- 
tunately, he was holding at the time a position in the 
lower courts of the judiciary. And so, he lost both posi- 
tions because somebody replaced him and he was not 
able to get the appointment that was supposedly 
intended for him on the basis of the first list that was 
submitted. 

We cannot protect the independence of the judiciary 
nor can we enhance its independence if a revamp of the 
judiciary can be made at any time by the National 
Assembly for any reason whatsoever. So, this proposal 
seeks to enhance, preserve, promote and maintain a 
really authentic independence of the judiciary. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman must be referring 
to the case of de la Liana vs. Alba, where the Supreme 
Court speaking through former Chief Justice Enrique 
Fernando said that abolition of public office does not 
involve security of tenure. So, as I understand it from 
Commissioner Davide, this ruling is now obsolete if we 
adopt this provision. 

MR. DAVIDE. That was a general doctrine and in this 
particular case, we limit ourselves to our position on the 
security of tenure in the judiciary. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I do not know if any member of the 
Committee is willing to enlighten me on the meaning of 
international agreement because, as I understand it, 
when we talk of executive agreement, we talk of two 
chief executives entering into an agreement on tariff, 
customs, etc. But it seems to me this is my first time to 
hear the term “international agreement” because as I 
understand it, when we call it an international agree- 
ment, we must be referring necessarily to a treaty. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, there are 
conventions, for example, the Hague Convention, where 
the word “treaty” is not proper for the set of rules 
incorporated into these international agreements. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Commissioner does not mind, 
I presented Resolution No. 188, which is not mentioned 
in the committee report, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ENSHRINE IN THE ARTICLE ON THE 
JUDICIARY OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION, ETHICAL 
RULES ON QUALIFICATIONS AND CONDUCT OF 
MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY. 

It is unfortunate that the reputation of our judges is 
not so good and so, I do not know what is the sense of 
the Committee. I would like to tell the members in 
advance that I intend to present this as an amendment 
for consideration — that in connection with Section 4, 
perhaps we can add a subsection there which may run 
like this: THAT NO ONE SHALL BE APPOINTED 
AS MEMBER OF THE JUDICIARY UNLESS HE IS A 
PERSON OF PROVEN COMPETENCE, INTEGRITY, 
PROBITY AND INDEPENDENCE and THAT THE 
ACTUATIONS OF A MEMBER OF THE JUDICIARY 
IN OR OUTSIDE THE COURT MUST BE BEYOND 
REPROACH. 

This is similar to a provision in “Canons of Judicial 
Ethics,” but history states that those provisions are 
more honored in breach than in observance. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, when we discipline a member of 
the judiciary, perhaps it will strengthen the intention if 
we can quote a constitutional mandate that he has not 
acted beyond reproach as enjoined by the Constitution. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Committee is well aware 
of the fact that our task is to make good laws. But it is 
also fully aware of the fact that no matter how good the 
laws are, if the persons chosen to enforce those laws are 
not the right persons, they may be doing a disservice to 
the country. In connection with the judges, that is the 
reason for the Judicial and Bar Council. 

MR. NOLLEDO. When we set forth these moral 
qualifications, they may be considered guidelines by the 
Judicial and Bar Council when they determine the quali- 
fications of prospective appointees. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


441 


MR. CONCEPCION. But that is understood: honesty, 
competence, etc. That is the only purpose of the 
Judicial and Bar Council. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Just two more questions, if Com- 
missioner Concepcion does not mind. 

Section 7 (3) on page 4 says: “Assign temporarily 
judges of lower courts to other stations as public in- 
terest may require.” I would like to know the meaning 
of “other stations” because as now constituted by law, 
we have regional trial courts within a particular region. 
So when a judge is assigned temporarily to another 
court within a region, is that an assignment to other 
stations or not? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, Commissioner. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If my memory serves me right, there 
is an obiter dictum of the Supreme Court that it is not 
considered an assignment because it is within the region. 
A station is different from a region. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The appointments are extended 
for a particular branch of a given region but one branch 
is different from the others. A judge may have a good 
assignment — in terms of housing facilities, etc. — and he 
may be threatened to be transferred to a place where 
those facilities are absent. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

My last question is about my Resolution No. 367, 
entitled: RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONS- 
TITUTION THAT THE DEATH PENALTY IMPOSED ON AN 
ACCUSED MUST BE RESOLVED BY THE SUPREME COURT 
WITHIN TWO YEARS FROM THE DATE OF JUDGMENT, 
OTHERWISE THE SAME SHALL BE REDUCED TO LIFE 
IMPRISONMENT, EXCEPT IF THE ACCUSED, BY WRIT- 
TEN MANIFESTATION, INSISTS ON THE RESOLUTION 
OF HIS PLEA OF INNOCENCE. 

I am mentioning this in advance so that he may dis- 
cuss with the members of the Committee, if it will be 
acceptable to them that the proposed resolution be 
included in Section 14 (4) on page 6. 

MR. CONCEPCION. There really is a problem of 
coordination. The question refers to cases where the 
death penalty has been imposed, whereas our impression 
is that the majority of another committee has voted to 
abolish the death penalty. That is why I make reference 
to the fact that insofar as the jurisdiction of the Su- 
preme Court is concerned, there is a paragraph there 
where the death penalty or capital punishment or life 
imprisonment is referred to. But whether or not the 
death penalty shall be imposed is subject to the decision 
of the Commission. 

If the Commissioner has time to go over the draft 
proposal of the Committee, he will notice that the 
Committee has tried to be as polite as possible to judges 


so as not to impair their image. We should be the first 
to protect the image of the judges. It will also be noted 
that there are other provisions in our draft which try to 
ensure better compliance with the present rules. For 
instance, the date of submission of the case must be 
certified in its record. The date of expiration of the 
period prescribed by law must similarly be certified in 
the record. We do not say, “Do this or else,” because 
that would be treating judges like kids. But this is the 
full implication of the provisions referred to. 

MR. NOLLEDO. This is definitely the last question, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
Gentleman has one minute more. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Concepcion, this is 
in connection with Section 14. It was the sense of the 
1971 Constitutional Convention to consider the time 
limit for decision of cases as mandatory, but the 
Supreme Court, in many cases, ruled that this should 
only be directory. 

What is now the sense of the Committee with respect 
to Section 14(1) which reads: 

(1) All cases or matters filed after the effectivity of this 

Constitution must be decided or resolved within twenty- 

four months from the date of submission for the Supreme 

Court, twelve months for all lower collegiate courts, and 

three months for all other lower courts. 

MR. CONCEPCION. It is mandatory, but we do not 
use the word “mandatory”; instead we say “must.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. How would the Commissioner inter- 
pret that? Is that directory or mandatory? 

MR. CONCEPCION. It is not directory; it is an order 
that is why we say “must.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Supreme Court ruling says 
“must” or “shall” in view of the clogging of cases which 
made it impossible for the Supreme Court to decide 
the cases within the stated period. 

MR. CONCEPCION. We have not only said “it must 
do this” but we also say that the Supreme Court shall 
devise a plan to unclog the dockets of the courts. Fur- 
thermore, the Gentleman will notice that there is an 
addition in the draft which says: “The Chief Justice 
shall appear before or address the National Assembly at 
the opening of its regular session.” The idea is to en- 
courage him by giving him a better image, and at the 
same time allow him to confront the representatives 
of the judiciary and convey their criticisms on the 
operation of courts. 

We did not want to put it in such a language as would 
debase the dignity of the bench, but expressed our idea 
in a polite language. 


442 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The time 
of the Commissioner has expired. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized and is given 1 5 minutes. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer and Commis- 
sioner Davide, in response to a question propounded 
by Commissioner Nolledo on the proposed provision 
that reads: “No law shall be passed reorganizing the 
judiciary when it undermines security of tenure,” may 
I be permitted to say that the Batasang Pambansa 
enacted a Judiciary Reorganization Act which was as- 
sailed as illegal and unconstitutional. However, the Act 
was upheld as valid, and the result was the reorganiza- 
tion of the courts, including the Court of Appeals which 
was renamed the Intermediate Appellate Court; the 
Courts of First Instance, renamed Regional Trial Courts; 
and the Municipal Courts renamed Municipal Trial 
Courts. This resulted in legislating out of their judicial 
offices some members of the courts lower than the 
Supreme Court. That said Reorganization Act not only 
undermined the independence of the judiciary, but, 
likewise, was a direct assault against the principle of the 
security of tenure of judicial officers. 

I recall, Mr. Presiding Officer, that one of my first 
cases before the Supreme Court when I was appointed 
Solicitor General in 1954 was the case of Ocampo vs. 
Secretary of Justice. At that time. Congress then ap- 
proved a law abolishing the positions of judges-at-large 
and cadastral judges. The 1935 Constitution, as well as 
the subsequent Constitution, recognized district judges. 
And the anomalous practice was that sometimes a judge- 
at-large or a cadastral judge who did not have a judicial 
district of his own was assigned to a particular trial 
court to hear a particular case. That was bad, because 
the designation would be made by the Secretary of 
Justice and presumably upon the suggestion or direction 
of the President. 

In that case, while I subscribe to the principle of an 
independent judiciary, I invoked the defense that the 
law abolishing judges-at-large, or cadastral judges which 
are not recognized in the 1935 Constitution for it only 
recognizes district judges, is not a violation of the 
Constitution but is an implementation thereof. That 
defense was sustained by three or four of the justices, 
although the majority still were of the opinion and held 
that insofar as it could legislate judges out of their 
judicial position, even if their appointments were 
judges-at-large or cadastral judges, it was unconstitution- 
al because it violated the tenure of office of those 


judges-at-large and cadastral judges. That law did not 
receive the sufficient number of votes, two-thirds of 
the members of the Supreme Court, to declare it un- 
constitutional. But even though it was not declared 
unconstitutional, the fact remains that the majority 
of the court reiterated the sacred rule, the judicial 
sanction, I might say, to the fundamental principle of 
security of tenure to assure the independence of the 
judiciary. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, this sentence, “No law shall be 
passed reorganizing the judiciary when it undermines 
security of tenure” was based on a resolution proposed 
by Commissioner Davide and was restated in this report 
of the Committee. What is important is the word “re- 
organizing,” as well as the more important phrase 
“security of tenure,” so that the legislature should not 
be allowed to pass a bill to revamp or reorganize, or use 
any other term, when its purpose and its effect would 
be to undermine the security of tenure of judicial 
officers. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I add 
a few words. 

It is not so important whether the President will or 
will not use the power to reorganize the judiciary. But 
so long as the power is vested in him, that serves as a 
sword that will always exist over the heads of all judges. 
So at all times, judges may have insecurity of tenure. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just be 
allowed to ask some clarificatory questions on the same 
provision that was being discussed just a while ago. 

Do I understand the sponsor correctly that this is not 
a prohibition of reorganization? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

FR. BERNAS. It is not a prohibition of reorganiza- 
tion. In case there is an attempt to reorganize, it must 
be done in such a way that it does not undermine the 
security of tenure of judges. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is correct. 

FR. BERNAS. And whether or not their attempted 
reorganization undermines security of tenure, that is 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


443 


something which is to be decided upon by the Supreme 
Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

FR. BERNAS. In the same way that it was done in 
the past. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Not in the same way, because in 
the past the number of votes necessary for constituting 
a majority was offset by the minority, but under our 
Constitution, we need 10 votes or at least two-thirds 
of all the Members. 

FR. BERNAS. Ultimately, therefore, it will always 
have to be decided by the Supreme Court according to 
the new numerical need for votes. 

On another point, is it the intention of Section 1 to 
do away with the political question doctrine? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. 

FR. BERNAS. It is not. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, because whenever there is 
an abuse of discretion, amounting to a lack of jurisdic- 
tion. . . 

FR. BERNAS. So, I am satisfied with the answer that 
it is not intended to do away with the political question 
doctrine. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, certainly not. 

When this provision was originally drafted, it sought 
to define what is judicial power. But the Gentleman will 
notice it says, “judicial power includes” and the reason 
being that the definition that we might make may not 
cover all possible areas. 

FR. BERNAS. So, this is not an attempt to solve the 
problems arising from the political question doctrine. 

MR. CONCEPCION. It definitely does not eliminate 
the fact that truly political questions are beyond the 
pale of judicial power. 

FR. BERNAS. Another question. Commissioner 
Concepcion. 

Line 27 reads: “All other cases including those in- 
volving the application or operation of presidential 
decrees . . I understand this to have reference to the 
application or operation of the presidential decrees, but 
not to the presidential decree itself. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Insofar as a decree is invalid, it 
really affects the application and operation. 

FR. BERNAS. But is it not possible for a valid law 
to be invalidly applied? 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

FR. BERNAS. So, for purposes of invalidating the 
application or operation, he needs this type of vote. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. For purposes of invalidating the 
decree itself, what kind of vote is needed? 

MR. CONCEPCION. We will require a majority plus 
one, of those Members who actually participated in the 
deliberation. 

FR. BERNAS. So it is the same as in the preceding 
paragraph. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

On page 5, line 5 says; “when they reach the age of 
seventy years or become incapacitated . . .” Who will 
decide whether they have become incapacitated? 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Committee has not decided 
on that. But, presumably, the Judicial and Bar Coun- 
cil would be consulted about it and, of course, the 
Supreme Court. 

FR. BERNAS. But if an actual case arises, and we 
notice that a particular Justice of the Supreme Court 
seems to be incapacitated and his capacity is challenged, 
who would decide on that? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. That is not settled by the 
draft proposal. 

FR. BERNAS. Could that matter be settled by 
ordinary legislation? 

MR. CONCEPCION. As to the procedure, I suppose 
so. 

FR. BERNAS. It could be. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. May I go back to page 4, Section 8 
which says: 

The Members of the Supreme Court and of other courts 

established by law shaU not be designated to any agency 

performing quasi-judicial and/or administrative functions. 

Is this also a prohibition against justices giving advi- 
sory opinions to the President? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, not that. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. Commissioner. 


444 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the sponsor yield to a few 
questions for clarification? 

MR. CONCEPCION. With pleasure. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I want to ask 
questions on some novel provisions in this proposal. At 
present, the Constitution provides for a definite number 
of the votes of justices in order to decide certain mat- 
ters, for example, at least 10. But here the basis is a 
majority plus one, of the Members who actually parti- 
cipated. In case of an en banc court, there are, at most, 
1 1 justices. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. How many of them have to par- 
ticipate? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Six of them have to participate. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, if only six participated, then the 
vote of four . . . 

MR. CONCEPCION. Four plus one, because three is 
not a majority - out of six, it is only one-half. So, four 
plus one, five. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, in an en banc decision, even if 
there are 1 1 justices actually in the Supreme Court, a 
vote of only four can already . . . 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, a vote of five. 

MR. RODRIGO. A vote of four. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No; a majority plus one. 

MR. RODRIGO. Majority plus one. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is the minimum number of 
those who should participate? 

MR. CONCEPCION. There must always be a quorum. 

MR. RODRIGO. Six? 


MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, at least, for an en banc 
decision. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us say that only six participated. 
Then, mitad mas uno will be . . . 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right, because mitad is 
not majority. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mitad mas uno. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, majority plus one. 

MR. RODRIGO. Concurrence of a majority plus one. 
That is why I wanted that clarified. So, a vote of five is 
enough to render a decision of the Supreme Court en 
banc, even if there are 1 1 justices, although five is not a 
majority of all the members of the court. In very im- 
portant matters, is it not better to provide for a vote 
of a majority of all the justices? 

MR. CONCEPCION. It will be better in the court 
where it is always full. But our experience has shown 
that during martial law, the majority seldom, if ever, 
had been fully composed of the number prescribed in 
the Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. I mean a majority of all the actual 
members of the Supreme Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, but if there are vacancies ... 

MR. RODRIGO. Then, of all the actual members of 
the Supreme Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The problem is this; Former 
Solicitor General Padilla mentioned the case of Ocampo 
vs. Secretary of Justice. The votes there were seven to 
four. The four won the case because the law then re- 
quired eight votes, and we do not want that to be main- 
tained. Secondly, we want the court to act expeditiously 
in the disposal of cases. And, thirdly, one judge of a 
lower court can declare a law unconstitutional. Why not 
five from the Supreme Court? 

MR. RODRIGO. Let me go to another point then. 

On page 2, Section 5, there is a novel provision about 
appointments of members of the Supreme Court and of 
judges of lower courts. At present it is the President 
who appoints them. If there is a Commission on Ap- 
pointments, then it is the President with the confirma- 
tion of the Commission on Appointments. In this pro- 
posal, we would like to establish a new office, a sort of a 
board composed of seven members, called the Judicial 
and Bar Council. And while the President will still ap- 
point the members of the judiciary, he will be limited 
to the recommendees of this Council. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is correct. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10 , 1986 


445 


MR. RODRIGO. And the Council will, whenever MR. CONCEPCION. The only purpose of the Com- 
ther? is a vacancy, recommend three. mittee is to eliminate partisan politics. 

MR. CONCEPCION. At least three for every vacancy. MR. RODRIGO. So, the member who is appointed 

for a one-year term can be reappointed for a three- or 
MR. RODRIGO. And the President cannot appoint four-year term. There is no limitation on reappoint- 
anybody outside of the three recommendees. ment? 


MR. CONCEPCION. Nomination by the Council 
would be one of the qualifications for appointment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose the President does not 
want to appoint any of the three, will the Council be 
asked to submit another list? 

MR. CONCEPCION. In other words, it is just the 
same as saying the President is not willing to comply 
with the Constitution. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, he is willing to comply, but he 
does not want to appoint any of the three. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is it. The Constitution 
requires that the nominee be included in the list of the 
Council. 

MR. RODRIGO. No. That is what I want to know. 
The Council submits three nominees, but the President 
does not want to appoint any of them. Can he ask the 
Council to submit another list of three nominees? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, definitely. 

MR. RODRIGO. And if he does not want these three 
new nominees, the Council could still submit another 
three? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. I understand that there is 
also a proposal requiring the filling of vacancies within a 
specified period. 

MR. RODRIGO. Of the seven members of the Judi- 
cial and Bar Council, the President appoints four of 
them who are the regular members. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, that is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, majority of the members of the 
Council are appointees of the President. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Can the members of the Council be 
reappointed? 

MR. CONCEPCION. They can be reappointed. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, they can be reappointed, 
because the tenure of office is staggered - one is ap- 
pointed for four years, the others are for three years, 
two and one. 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Another point. Under our present 
Constitution, the National Assembly may enact rules of 
court, is that right? On page 4, the proviso on lines 1 7 
to 19 of the Article on the Judiciary provides: 

The National Assembly may repeal, alter, or supplement 

the said rules with the advice and concurrence of the 

Supreme Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, two things are required of the 
National Assembly before it can repeal, alter or supple- 
ment the rules concerning the protection and enforce- 
ment of constitutional rights, pleading, etc. - it must 
have the advice and concurrence of the Supreme Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. This renders the job of the Assem- 
bly inutile because it is absolutely dependent on the 
Supreme Court. It cannot initiate anything; it has to 
solicit first the advice and concurrence of the Supreme 
Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The President is not the Al- 
mighty God. He cannot know better than the courts. 
The courts control internal operation. That is the pur- 
pose. 

MR. RODRIGO. Why not just remove this power, 
which is inutile, from the National Assembly? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is the Commission’s 
concern. If it wants to eliminate it, we will not object to 
it. 

MR. RODRIGO. Instead of giving it a power, which is 
no power at all, we might as well eliminate this. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The point is this. We feel that no 
President can know better than the court what the 
demands of its internal operations are. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. I think I made myself clear on 
that point. 

Another point, Mr. Presiding Officer, which we took 
up in the Committee on the Legislative is that of giving 
the State or the offended party the power to appeal 
from a judgment of acquittal in a criminal case. For the 


446 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


benefit of those who are not lawyers in this body, there 
is the rule at present against double jeopardy, which 
provides that if an accused is acquitted at any stage of 
the judicial proceeding, he can no longer be tried. So, if 
an accused is acquitted in the municipal court, the judg- 
ment of acquittal cannot be appealed to the regional 
court or to the court of appeals. 

Section 1 2, on page 5, states: 

An appeal by the State and/or the offended party from 
a judgment of acquittal may be allowed in the discretion of 
the Supreme Court by a petition for review on certiorari 
on the ground that it is manifestly against the evidence and 
with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess 
of jurisdiction. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Even if it is not a mere question of 
law but of appreciation of facts or evidence? 

MR. CONCEPCION. If there has been an abuse of 
discretion, the court has no jurisdiction and, of course, 
if the court has no jurisdiction, there could be no valid 
decision. That is it. 

MR. RODRIGO. But lack of jurisdiction can be based 
on a mistake of the appreciation of facts because it 
says: ‘‘review on certiorari on the ground that it is mani- 
festly against the evidence.” 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, it is manifestly against the 
evidence on record. 

MR. RODRIGO. But it says here: ‘‘in the discretion 
of the Supreme Court.” I would like to clarify this. Is it 
only the Supreme Court to which a judgment of acquit- 
tal can be appealed? Can a judgment of acquittal of a 
municipal court be appealed to a regional trial court? 

MR. CONCEPCION. When it affects jurisdiction, it 
goes to the Supreme Court. The power to review cases 
involving jurisdiction is stated in the Constitution. That 
is simple — if there is no jurisdiction, there is no authori- 
ty, and if there is no authority, the decision rendered is 
null and void. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the offended party may appeal 
to the Supreme Court. Suppose somebody is acquitted 
in the municipal court, can the offended party appeal to 
the regional trial court? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I suppose he could not but if he 
wants to question the jurisdiction, that is another thing. 
If is not an appeal. I think Commissioner Rodrigo is not 
speaking of appeal in general. 

MR. RODRIGO. By a petition for review on cer- 
tiorari. 


MR. CONCEPCION. It is an appeal based on the 
allegation that there has been such abuse of discretion 
that the court which rendered the judgment acted with- 
out jurisdiction. 

MR. RODRIGO. I go back to my question. Suppose 
the accused is acquitted in the municipal court and the 
offended party wants a petition for review on certiorari, 
can he petition the regional trial court for it or does he 
have to go to the Supreme Court? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I ask Commissioner Padilla, the 
author of the provision, to answer the Commissioner’s 
question because I do not want to preempt him. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azeuna). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, the provision, 
as it appears in the committee report, is limited to a 
petition for review on certiorari to the Supreme Court, 
subject to the discretion of the Supreme Court. My 
original proposal referred to the discretion of the ap- 
pellate court, but the Committee felt that, when the 
question involves lack or excess of jurisdiction, the 
petition should be directed or confined to the Supreme 
Court. I would like to add that the ground is specific 
and restricted. Besides being discretionary on the part 
of the Supreme Court, it may dismiss a petition for 
review on certiorari outright if it has no merits. 

In addition, the ground for a petition for review on 
certiorari is not only if the judgment is manifestly 
against the evidence but also if it is rendered with grave 
abuse of discretion. In my original proposal, it was 
either of these, but the Committee felt that in addition 
to the judgment of acquittal being manifestly against 
the evidence, it must also have been rendered with grave 
abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of 
jurisdiction. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let me repeat my question. Suppose 
an accused is acquitted by the municipal court under 
this provision by the Committee, can the offended party 
petition for review on certiorari to the next higher court 
which is the regional trial court? 

MR. PADILLA. No, the provision, as redrafted by 
the Committee, is clear that this petition for review on 
certiorari may only be filed with the Supreme Court, 
which has the discretion to dismiss or to give it due 
course. 

MR. RODRIGO. But in the Vice-President’s original 
proposal, this petition for review on certiorari can be 
filed in the regional trial court. 

MR. PADILLA. To an appellate court. 

MR. RODRIGO. Which is better, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer? I am sure the Vice-President’s own ‘‘baby” is 
better. 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


447 


MR. PADILLA. Our own proposals, which we some- 
times feel are the best, must yield to the better judg- 
ment of the members of the Committee, and I did agree, 
otherwise, I would have insisted on my original pro- 
posal. 

MR. RODRIGO. I will propound the question to the 
sponsor now. 

There are thousands of criminal cases all over the 
Philippines, in the municipal, city, and regional trial 
courts. If all the appeals from judgment of acquittals by 
the offended party or the State be in the discretion of 
the Supreme Court, does not the sponsor believe the 
Supreme Court will be swamped by an avalanche of 
petitions for review on certiorari? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Only God can tell and answer 
the Commissioner’s question whether it will be 
swamped by petitions for review on certiorari or not. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo’s 1 5-minute period is over. 


situated in the seacoasts and transportation is rather 
difficult. In highly urbanized areas, it would not be so 
difficult because the executive judge and, perhaps, even 
the judges themselves can get together with the justice/s 
of the Supreme Court and discuss the problem. 

My original thought was this, if the Commissioner 
may allow me to explain. There are at present 1,700 
judges out of 2,200 positions for judges. If each judge 
were required to decide one case in addition to his 
normal number of decisions, we would have 1,700 addi- 
tional cases disposed of apart from those filed after the 
adoption of this Constitution. If we multiply 1,700 by 
1 2 months, that would be quite a big number. That is 
how I see it in Manila. I do not know how it will work 
in the provinces, especially in Palawan. I was assigned 
there as a judge, but I have not been to that place since 
1 940. It was difficult to go from one place to another, 
for instance, from Puerto Princesa to Brooke’s Point 
which is closest to Java or perhaps Sabah. There are 
problems of communications, court facilities, and libra- 
ries. So, I would prefer that the Supreme Court devise 
ways and means by consulting local judges with the 
assistance of the Judicial Administrator to unclog the 
dockets. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
honorable Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I invite the sponsor’s attention 
to page 5 of the committee report, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, but not of the draft Article, wherein it is stated 
that two sections are recommended to be included in 
the Transitory Provisions. 

My question is: Is it not that the function of the 
Supreme Court in providing for a systematic plan to 
expedite the decision or resolution of cases or matters 
filed with the courts or the lower courts is something 
continuing? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, that is correct. 

MR. BENGZON. So, why do we not include this 
section in the Article on the Judiciary? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Again, the answer is simple. Not 
all courts have the same problems, and one court may 
find a method more suitable than that which would be 
suitable in other regions. There are regions in the Philip- 
pines, for instance, where most of the municipalities are 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, what I am 
referring to is that since this is a continuing work, the 
Supreme Court will always have to find ways and means 
to expedite decisions because of varied reasons. My 
question is: Should we not make this section a part of 
the regular Article on the Judiciary instead of putting 
it in the Transitory Provisions? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I do not think the members of 
the Committee would object to that. 


MR. BENGZON. My next question is on the cases 
heard by a division. On page 2, lines 1 to 3 of the pro- 
posed Article on the Judiciary say: 

Cases heard by a division shall be decided with the con- 
currence of a majority of the members who actually parti- 
cipated when the case was submitted for decision. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 


MR. BENGZON. Suppose there are five members in a 
division, if three of them, which constitute a quorum, 
actually participated in the deliberation of the case, a 
concurrence of the majority of the three, which is two 
members, would decide the case for the entire court. 


IR. CONCEPCION. That is right. That is also part of 
attempt to have the Supreme Court clear the 
ket. If one judge of a municipal court or one region- 
idge can declare a law unconstitutional, why can two 
ices of the Supreme Court not? That is the philo- 


MR. BENGZON. I am still on page 2, line 30. What 
was the basic reason of the Committee for its decision 


448 


THURSDAY, JULY 10, 1986 


on a term of four years for the regular members of the 
Judicial and Bar Council? 

MR. CONCEPCION. One might say it was done at 
random or because there would be four members to be 
appointed by the President. Actually, the Committee felt 
there should be a renewal or change of membership 
from time to time. That is why their terms are staggered 
— to assure certain continuity in the policies, so that at 
no time would the Council have members who are not 
posted on the policies of the officers who preceded 
them. 

MR. BENGZON. I am going back to Section 6, lines 
22 to 25, page 2. One of the problems the Judicial 
Administrators or Judicial Superintendents had was 
every justice of the Supreme Court wanted to put in 
his two cents’ worth with respect to recommendations 
they would make, so there was a great delay in the 
supervision of the lower courts. 

The question is: When we create this Judicial and Bar 
Council, which is under the supervision of the Supreme 
Court, how would we obviate such a happening from 
being repeated? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I will start by saying that the 
Commissioner’s major premise is not exactly correct 
because it is a generalization of some incidental 
situations during the Marcos regime. 

By the way, our committee report mentions the 
personalities who appeared before the Committee. They 
were, among others, the solicitor general who rep- 
resents the government. Chief Justice Teehankee, 
former Chief Justice Makasiar and Atty. Belo, a pro- 
minent member of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines. 
The general consensus is that the major problem of the 
judiciary is political interference, particularly the power 
of reorganization which is dangerous, unless subject to 
some limitations. 

MR. BENGZON. My last question, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, is— and this is for the record so that it will be 
properly entered in our Journal— on page 4, Section 7 
(6) states: “appoint all officials and employees of the 
judiciary.’’ The Committee is referring to appointments 
of sheriffs, clerks of court, bailiffs and all the employees 
in the judiciary. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, that is right. 

MR. BENGZON. All these appointments are made by 
the Supreme Court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. By the Supreme Court, yes. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
honorable Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Before we adjourn, I would like to 
accommodate the request of Commissioner Gascon to 
file a motion for reconsideration, which has to be filed 
now otherwise it will be lost according to our Rules. 

So, I ask that Commissioner Gascon be recognized, 
and that the consideration of that motion for recon- 
sideration be deferred for tomorrow or some other day. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The Chair 
recognizes Commissioner Gascon. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Yesterday, we approved on Second Reading Commit- 
tee Report No. 7, the Article on Amendment or Re- 
vision. After seriously considering the statements there- 
in, I would like to file a motion for reconsideration so 
that I may introduce amendments on Section 2 on ini- 
tiative which are: to put a period (.) after the word 
“Constitution” and to delete “nor oftener than once 
every five years thereafter.” 

I feel it is awkward to give freedom to the National 
Assembly as far as proposing amendments to the Consti- 
tution is concerned since we do not give the same 
freedom to the people. So, I would like to file this 
motion for reconsideration. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we defer consideration of 
the motion for reconsideration for tomorrow. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at nine o’clock in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Azcuna). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine o’clock in 
the morning. 

It was 6:48 p.m. 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


449 


R.C.C. NO. 28 
Friday, July 11, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:30 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Bias F. Ople. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. OPLE. Lord, You were the Original Taskmaster. 
In the Old Testament, You gave a covenant to Your 
people. It was a good CBA or Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, as we would call it now, but the enjoyment 
of its benefits required reciprocal performance and 
sacrifice. 

Y ou promised them deliverance from oppression and 
the ultimate refuge of a land of justice flowing with 
milk and honey. But this was not going to be a simple 
gift of Your bounty. You did not promise a free lunch. 

It was going to be a test of faith on a long journey 
beset by all kinds of dangers, hunger, discord and 
mutinies, the sword of unforeseen enemies, and the 
ultimate risk, the loss of moral endurance and of the will 
to struggle, the people’s capitulation not to external 
enemies but to their own internal weakness. 

Lord, in this Constitutional Commission, we are 
drafting a Constitution that when ratified, will be the 
highest covenant between our people and their govern- 
ment. We are humbled by the sheer majesty of this task. 
It is beyond our means to promise a covenant that will 
redeem our people from the bondage of centuries of 
poverty, disease and injustice, and that will bring them 
to a promised land flowing with milk and honey. But it 
is within our means to forge, with common dedicated 
labors, a framework of law and justice that will honor 


the humanity in every man and put the odds of the 
unending struggle for justice on earth on the side of the 
just and the faithful among Your children. 

Extend to us, O Lord, the grace of Your own cove- 
nant with Your people. Help us so that we may live up 
to our name as the one Christian nation in Asia, a 
Christian nation graced by a new and stronger solidarity 
with our Muslim brothers in Mindanao. Help us frame a 
covenant between our people and their government that 
will heal all remaining wounds and bitterness from the 
past, that will forge a lasting solidarity among us 
through the structures of a just society, but always 
under the grace of Your Divine inspiration and guidance. 
Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar Present* 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present* 

Bennagen Present 

Bemas Present 

Rosario Braid . . . Present* 

Brocka .... Present 

Calderon Present 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Absent 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present 

Poz Present 

Garcia Present 

Gascon Present 

Guingona Present 

Jamir Present 

Laurel Present 

Lerum Present 

Maambong .... Absent 


Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

NoUedo .... 

. . Present 

ople 

. . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Trefias 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Absent 

Villacorta . . . 

Present* 

Villegas 

Present 


Monsod Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 39 Members responded to the call. 


’‘‘Appeared after the roll call 


450 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move to dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Report, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 473, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE 
ON THE TRANSITORY PROVISIONS A PROVISION 
AUTHORIZING THE PRESIDENT TO REVIEW ALL 
CONTRACTS, CONCESSIONS, PERMITS, OR OTHER 
FORMS OF PRIVILEGES FOR THE EXPLORATION 
DEVELOPMENT, EXPLOITATION OR UTILIZATION 
OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ENTERED INTO, 
GRANTED, ISSUED OR ACQUIRED BEFORE THE 
EFFECTIVITY OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION, AND TO 
AMEND, MODIFY OR REVOKE THE SAME. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 474, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT UNTIL THE NATIONAL 


ASSEMBLY FIRST ELECTED UNDER THIS CONSTI- 
TUTION SHALL HAVE ELECTED THE SPEAKER, 
THE INCUMBENT VICE-PRESIDENT SHALL BE THE 
PRESIDING OFFICER THEREOF. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 475, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS A PROVISION FIXING 
THE DATE OF EFFECTIVITY OF THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AND ITS EFFECTS ON PREVIOUS CONSTI- 
TUTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 476, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PRO- 
VISION ACCORDING RECOGNITION TO LAWS, PRO- 
CLAMATIONS, ORDERS, DECREES, INSTRUCTIONS 
OR ACTS NOT OTHERWISE INCONSISTENT WITH THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION, UNLESS THEY ARE MODIFIED 
OR REPEALED BY THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 477, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO EXTEND STATE RECOGNITION AND 
SUPPORT TO COMMUNITY MEDIA AND OTHER 
FORMS OF SMALL MEDIA. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 478, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE RIGHT TO COMMUNI- 
CATE AND INITIATE COMMUNICATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 479, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES THE RECOGNITION OF RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT AND AGRARIAN REFORM AS 
PRIORITIES OF THE STATE. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


451 


Proposed Resolution No. 480, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A SECTION IN THE DECLA- 
RATION OF PRINCIPLES RECOGNIZING NON- 
GOVERNMENTAL INSTITUTIONS AND MASS-BASED 
ORGANIZATIONS AS PARTNERS IN DEVELOPMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 481, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION RECOGNIZING THE ROLE OF 
THE YOUTH IN NATION-BUILDING AND GUARAN- 
TEEING THEIR REPRESENTATION IN POLICY- 
MAKING BODIES OF THE GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Gascon. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 482, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO GIVE MEANING AND SUBSTANCE TO 
THE CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION AGAINST CRUEL 
OR UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, Maambong, Ople and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 483, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT A SECTION IN THE TRANSITO- 
RY PROVISIONS FREEZING ALL SEQUESTRATION 
ORDERS ISSUED BY VIRTUE OF PROCLAMATION 
NO. 3 ON MARCH 25, 1986 UPON THE ADOPTION OF 
THIS CONSTITUTION UNTIL JUDICIAL CONFIRMA- 
TION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bernas and Aquino. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 484, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS A PROVISION REQUIRING ALL QF- 
FICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERNMENT, 
INCLUDING THOSE IN GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR 
CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND THE OFFICERS 
AND MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE 
PHILIPPINES TO TAKE AN OATH TO SUPPORT, 
PROTECT, PRESERVE, AND DEFEND THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 485, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PRO- 
VISION REQUIRING THE SUBMISSION OF ALL 
TREATIES OR INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS 
WHICH WERE NOT RATIFIED BY THE PREVIOUS 
LEGISLATURES TO THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY FOR 
APPROPRIATE ACTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the National Nutrition Council signed by 
Dr. Josefina Atienza-Salvana, requesting mention of 
nutrition as one of the fields in which the state shall 
provide social services. 

(Communication No. 169 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from the Labor Advisory Consultative Council, 
signed by Mr. J. Edralin and three others, submitting a 
draft resolution proposing protection to labor and 
guaranteeing basic human and trade union rights. 
(Communication No. 170 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the Supreme Cooperative Council of the 
Philippines signed by Messrs. Arcadio S. Lozada, Manuel 
F Verzosa and Vicente A. Martires, submitting a draft 
resolution proposing a state policy on cooperatives. 
(Communication No. 171 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Qrilo A. 
Rigos, transmitting a letter from Mr. Liberate Gamo, a 
retired civil servant of 253 Constancia St., Sampaloc, 
Manila, requesting a constitutional assurance that 
retirees shall receive in full their gratuities at the time 
of their retirement. 

(Communication No. 172 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 

Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Jeremias U. Montemayor for the 
Federation of Free Farmers, submitting a copy ot the 
article “Social Justice and the Constitution. 


452 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


(Communication No. 1 73 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Communication from Mr. Fabian M. Dayrit, recom- 
mending provisions on science and technology. 

(Communication No. 1 74 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 23 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 486, prepared by the Committee on Citizenship, 
Bill of Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and 
Human Rights, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 4, 84, 26, 28, 40, 45, 48, 58, 65, 94, 
98, 101, 103, 131, 154, 160, 165, 169, 175, 184, 191, 
202, 209, 210, 226, 237, 242, 245, 250, 258, 261, 274, 
287, 293,297 and 314. 

Sponsored by Hon. Laurel, Jr., Bernas, Davide, Jr., 
Bengzon, Jr., Abubakar, Colayco, Sarmiento, Tadeo, 
Garcia, Villegas, Rodrigo, Bennagen, Lerum, Bacani, 
Padilla and Natividad. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bengzon be 
recognized for an information. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Good morning. 

Madam President, may I announce to the Commission 
that, in line with the results of the caucus of the Chair- 
man and the Vice-Chairman of the Steering Committee 
the other day, it was decided that the last day for the 
filing of proposed resolutions will be on July 15; there- 
after, whatever proposals the Commissioners may have 
will be introduced already as amendments. 

Likewise, may I take this opportunity to announce 
that if we finish the Article on the Judiciary today, the 
Steering Committee intends to schedule the period 
of sponsorship and debate and also the period of amend- 
ments on Monday for Committee Report Nos. 19 and 
20 with respect to the Civil Service Commission and the 
Commission on Audit. 

So, may I alert the Chairman and members of the 
Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agen- 
cies to be prepared for Monday in the event that we 
finish the Article on the Judiciary today. 

Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Foz be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in response to the 
announcement of the Chairman of the Steering Com- 
mittee regarding our reports, I wonder if it is feasible to 
take up Committee Report No. 19 first before Commit- 
tee Report No. 20. Committee Report No. 1 9 refers to 
the Civil Service Commission including the Common 
Provisions for the three constitutional commissions. I 
do not see how we can tackle the two reports at the 
same time. 

MR. BENGZON. I did not mean that we would con- 
sider Committee Report Nos. 1 9 and 20 simultaneously 
but one after the other. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Committee Report No. 19 refers 
to the Civil Service Commission and Committee Report 
No. 20 refers to the Commission on Audit. Is that 
correct? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 18 
(Article on the Judiciary) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of Committee Report No. 18 on the draft Article 
on the Judiciary. We are still in the period of sponsor- 
ship and debate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tadeo be recognized to interpellate the sponsor. 

THE PRESIDENT. If the other members of the 
Committee on the Judiciary desire to sit with the 
Chairman, they can do so. Maybe we can provide chairs 
for them. 

Commissioner Tadeo is recognized. 


FRIDAY, JULY n. 1986 


453 


MR. TADEO. Madam President, Kagalanggalang na 
Commissioner, Chief Justice Concepcion, mayroon 
lamang po akong ilang paglilinaw tungkol dito sa page 6, 
lines 8 to 1 1 na nagsasaad: 

All cases or matters filed after the effectivity of this Consti- 
tution must be decided or resolved within twenty-four 

months from date of submission for the Supreme Court 

XXX. 

Batay po ito sa isang konkretong karanasan ng mga 
magbubukid at sakada sa Negros kung saan naisampa 
ang kaso nila tungkol po sa “amelioration fund” o iyong 
1 0 centavos per picul ng asukal. Simula po ng naisampa 
ito sa Korte Suprema bumilang na po ito ng 20 taon o 
mahigit pa. Samantalang dito sa bagong panukalarig 
resolusyon, ang isinasaad lamang ay 24 na buwan. Ang 
kaso pong ito sa Korte Suprema ay inabot ng maraming 
taon at lumagpas na sa panahong ayon dito sa resolus- 
yon. Hindi naman nila maihabla ang mga Justices ng 
Korte Suprema at tinatanong ng mga magbubukid kung 
bakit natapos na ang maraming taon ay wala pang desis- 
yon. Saan pa sila pupunta? Ang Korte Suprema na ang 
pinakamataas na hukuman. 

Kagalanggalang na Commissioner Concepcion, ang 
sabi po ng Korte Suprema tungkol dito ay wala pa raw 
regulasyon para maisakatuparan ang taning na panahong 
18 o 24 na buwan. Ano po kaya ang paraan para hindi 
naman ito maabuso? Lumagpas na sa panahon po ang 
kasong ito ng mga magbubukid. Ang isinasaad po sa 
1973 Constitution ay 18 buwan; dito po naman sa ating 
bagong panukala ay kinakailangang makapaghatol 
kaagad ang Korte Suprema sa loob ng 24 na buwan mula 
nang isampa ang kaso. Pero iyon pong kasong iyon ay 
napakaraming taon na ang binilang, wala pa ring nang- 
yayari. Ano po kaya ang mabuting paraan para hindi 
natin ito maabuso? 

MR. CONCEPCION. By the way, may I announce to 
the Commission that the members of the Committee 
on the Judiciary have been kind enough to help me in 
arguing on a number of questions and they have offered 
individually to speak on certain specific matters; and 
this question happens to be the subject on which Com- 
missioner Trenas has offered his assistance. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Trenas is 
recognized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, fellow Commis- 
sioners: It is true that under the 1973 Constitution, we 
have Section 1 1 , paragraph 1 of the Article on the 
Judiciary which required the maximum period of 18 
months for the Supreme Court to decide a case submit- 
ted to it. However, in a decision rendered by the Su- 
preme Court, the word “shall” was construed or 
interpreted as merely directory. That is why the Com- 
mittee, in going over this provision, wanted to make it 
clear to the Supreme Court and to the other collegiate 
and lower courts that this provision is not merely 


directory but mandatory. Hence, we decided to change 
the word “shall” to MUST which is stronger. However, 
the present provision shall apply after the effectivity of 
the present Constitution. Insofar as cases filed before 
the effectivity of the present Constitution are con- 
cerned, Chief Justice Teehankee informed us that it is 
physically impossible to apply the period. That is why 
we have recommended in the Transitory Provisions that 
the court shall take such proper means for the early 
disposition of cases filed before the effectivity of the 
present Constitution. Am I clear? 


MR. TADEO. Kung sa kabila nito ay lumagpas pa rin 
ang 24 na buwan na wala pang desisyon, ano po ang 
epekto nito? 


MR. TRENAS. As clarified by our Chairman, who 
was a former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, while 
we did not put it very clearly, we feel that this will now 
constitute a violation of the Constitution. Furthermore, 
the Commissioner will note that we added a new 
provision to Section 14, subsection 2, which says: 

A case or matter shall be deemed submitted for decision 
or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or 
memorandum required by the Rules of Court or by the 
court itself. 


So, the Constitution itself clarifies when a case or 
matter is deemed submitted for decision. 

Furthermore, we added another new provision, sub- 
section 3, which says: 


Upon the expiration of the corresponding period, a 
certification to this effect signed by the Chief Justice or the 
presiding judge shall forthwith be issued and a copy thereof 
attached to the record of the case or matter, and served 


upon the parties. 

Therefore, there will now appear in the record of the 
ase the fact that said period has already expired be- 
ause the corresponding certification shall be issued and, 
herefore, the parties adversely affected may take such 
ppropriate action they may deem necessary and 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Tadeo satisfied? 


MR. TRENAS. Am I clear? 


MR. TADEO. Yes. 

MR. TRENAS. Thank you very much. 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 


454 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

Will the honorable Commissioner yield to some 
questions? 

MR. CONCEPCION. With pleasure. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod may 
proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

In Section 15, it is provided that an amount equi- 
valent to not less than two percent of the national 
budget shall be automatically appropriated and regularly 
released for the Judiciary. May I know the basis of this 
two percent? 

MR. CONCEPCION. May I refer the matter to Com- 
missioner Suarez. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

When Chief Justice Claudio Teehankee and former 
Chief Justice Felix Makasiar discussed this matter with 
the Committee on the Judiciary, both of them strongly 
recommended that in order to maintain the inde- 
pendence of the Judiciary, the annual budget allocated 
for it should be determined and fixed and should be 
automatically released regularly without the necessity 
of the chief magistracy of the land lobbying in the 
executive and in the legislative departments, which is 
not only demeaning to the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court but violative of the principle of independence of 
the three departments. 

Chief Justice Claudio Teehankee recommended that 
at least three percent of the total annual national budget 
be set aside for the Judiciary corresponding to its annual 
budget. But when we discussed this in the committee 
level, we came up with the suggestion that the three 
percent might be a little too much; hence, we agreed to 
recommend to the Constitutional Commission at least 
two percent. 

On the basis of the 1986 national budget, which is 
about P68 billion, the Judiciary would therefore be 
entitled, based on a two-percent mathematical figure, 
to something like PI. 2 billion. That is the basis for 
your Committee recommending a two percent for the 
Judiciary. 

MR. MONSOD. Is the Committee aware that the 
budget for 1986 is about PI 14 billion? 

MR. SUAREZ. We took that into account also. In 
other words, the figure based on two percent could be 
increased from year to year. The three main features of 
this particular provision are: one, there must be a fixed 
budget for the Judiciary; second, it must be auto- 


matically appropriated; and third, it must be regularly 
released without need of provocation on the part of the 
Judiciary. Those were our main concern. 

MR. MONSOD. If the provision were imposed, say, 
this year, the budget for 1986 as originally provided was 
about P750 million, of which about PIO million was for 
capital expenditures. If this two-percent automatic pro- 
vision stays in the Constitution, the budget for the 
Judiciary for 1986 will be increased to P2.2 billion, 
almost three times the original budget. 

My concern^ is that a fixed percentage like this would 
be tantamount to a preemption by the Judiciary of the 
budget process and priorities which do not belong to the 
Judiciary. Even if it is assumed that the Judiciary needs 
to increase the salaries of its personnel and it needs one- 
time expenditures for capital requirements, the P2.2 
billion seems to be far in excess of what the Judiciary 
would need at the moment. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman is, therefore, suggest- 
ing that it should be reduced to reasonable levels? 

MR. MONSOD. My suggestion is to introduce an 
amendment at the appropriate time that would assure 
fiscal autonomy to the Judiciary — which I assume is 
the primary objective — and at the same time, for it not 
to impose an undue burden on the budget by means of 
an arbitrary allocation that may not have a basis on the 
actual requirements, both operating expenses and 
capital expenditures. 

MR. SUAREZ. The way we understand the reason for 
Chief Justice Teehankee’s suggesting a three-percent 
budget based on the total national budget is that the 
Judiciary may need funds for the construction of build- 
ings and also the possible regionalization of the Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court. 

MR. MONSOD. I concede that there may be a one- 
time need for capital expenditures, but let us remember 
that when we put a section like this in the Constitution, 
this now becomes a recurring allocation from year to 
year. But at some point in time, capital expenditures may 
not be needed; the Judiciary will then have excess funds. 
I agree that the integrity of the people in the Judiciary 
is such that, perhaps, they will be prudent to return 
some of the money. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Unfortunately, considering human 
nature and the nature of bureaucracy, expenditures 
usually expand to the amount of money available. We 
may then really be taking money away from more 
priority expenditures. 

For example, the budget for the entire University of 
the Philippines System is about P676 million. The 
budget for the entire secondary education is about P894 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


455 


million. So, if we perpetuate this, we may be really 
prioritizing wrongly the needs of the people, with 
respect to the funds in excess of the real needs of the 
Judiciary. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman mentioned a possible 
situation where the allocation would exceed the actual 
needs of the Judiciary. Let us rely on the integrity of 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court; he would cer- 
tainly take steps for the reversion of these appropriated 
funds to the National Treasury. That is the normal 
course of . . . 

MR. MONSOD. My suggestion is that we institution- 
alize some safeguards so that we do not rely solely on 
the integrity and prudence of the Judiciary. 

MR. SUAREZ. If the Gentleman has in mind a prac- 
tical and effective measure in order that at least this 
matter of independence of the Judiciary can be secured, 
the Committee will be very happy to accept any sugges- 
tion. i 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

In his response. Commissioner Trenas said that when 
the Chief Justice appeared before the Committee, he 
asserted that it was physically impossible — these are the 
words used by the Commissioner — for the Supreme 
Court to render decision within 18 months as provided 
for. Am I correct? 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Let me clarify this before Commis- 
sioner Trenas does, if he wishes to. 

The 1 8-month period does not refer to new cases. He 
was saying that, in fact, they cannot possibly finish the 
backlog in 1 8 months and, therefore, any new manda- 
tory period should be prospective, not retroactive. That 
is really what Chief Justice Teehankee meant. Would 
Commissioner Trefias wish to add something? 


MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. May I only add to the thinking of a 
practical solution. One problem here is that the adminis- 
tration of justice and, therefore, the delivery of justice 
to our people is always put at the bottom of the list. 
The end of government is to deliver justice, so the 
priority should be number one. We have to point out to 
the legislature — because it often forgets — that beyond 
the economic needs, there is at least an equal need for 
justice. We cannot have an efficient delivery of justice 
through the courts without the corresponding appro- 
priations. I do not necessarily disagree with the Gentle- 
man but I think we have to keep in mind that in the 
order of priorities, justice should certainly be on top. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think there is 
no dispute as to the priority of justice. There may be a 
dispute as to the priority of buildings as against expendi- 
tures for essential services. Maybe we can take all that 
into consideration during the period of amendments. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Renato V. Sarmiento. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Yes, 
the Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 


MR. TRENAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, in reply to the 
request for clarification, the sense was as explained by 
Commissioner Romulo insofar as cases already filed 
with the Supreme Court are concerned. That is why, 
when we explained that we intended to make the pro- 
visions of Section 14 (1) mandatory. Chief Justice 
Teehankee was agreeable, provided that these provisions 
shall be prospective. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 


MR CONCEPCION. There are about 5,000 old cases 
pending in the Supreme Court. In the lower courts, 
there are about 538,000. Let us hmit ourselves to the 
Supreme Court. If we seek to adopt identical meas- 
ures to finish old and new cases, it would be impossible 
for the court to reduce its backlog, apart from the psy- 
chological effect on the justices. A new justice, perhaps, 
would have to begin with about 1,000 old cases m addi- 
tion to the cases that may be filed hereafter. So, we 
thought that the old cases should be the object of a plan 
or method or treatment different or separate from the 
new cases. The draft proposed by the Committee 
imposes in a mandatory manner a period of 24 months 
for the new cases filed with the Supreme Court. But 
with respect to the old cases, plans should be made not 
only for the Supreme Court but also for the lower 
fr^r thp rpHiiction of the backlog. 


Psychologically, when a justice has so rnany cases, he 
knows it is impossible for him to dispose of them during 
his tenure or term. The psychological effect is to say.^ 
“What is the use? At any rate, it is impossible tor me. 
But if we give him means to keep up with the new cases 
and then dispose of some of the old cases, that would 
show him that he is given ample opportunity to con- 
tribute to the reduction of the backlog with reference 


456 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


to the old cases. He may develop a certain feeling of 
security that the job is not beyond his capacity to 
handle properly. So, there are two policies there: one, 
with respect to the old cases; and the other, all those 
that may be filed hereafter. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

But a reading of Section 14 shows that there is no 
distinction made as to cases, such that all cases do not 
refer to prospective or back cases. I thought the Gentle- 
man may be referring also to the backlog of 50,000 
cases that the honorable Commissioner Concepcion had 
mentioned. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No distinction was made in that 
paragraph or section because the period prescribed in 
the previous paragraph refers to cases filed hereafter. 

MR. GUINGONA. I see. Thank you. 

Considering the concept of “justice delayed is justice 
denied,” I was also wondering whether it would be in 
the interest of justice for the justices of the Supreme 
Court to tackle the prospective cases, and then take up 
little by little the back cases, or whether to first give 
preference to back cases because some of them have 
been pending for many, many years, as mentioned by 
Commissioner Tadeo. If we go immediately to the 
prospective cases because these are the cases that the 
new justices of the Supreme Court will be able to 
appreciate better, what happens to the back cases? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I will put it this way: I had 
occasion to mention yesterday that there are 1,700 
judges, excluding those of the Supreme Court, as of 
now. If each one disposes of one case a month among 
those which are debated and which are backlogs, every 
month there would be 1,700 cases less in the backlog. 
In 10 months that would be 17,000 cases, and in 12 
months, it would be 20,000 while the new cases are 
being disposed of within the period newly established 
for them. I think that will contribute considerably to 
unclogging the docket. However, we have to consider 
another problem. We have had, in effect, three reor- 
ganizations since the proclamation of martial law. When 
martial law was proclaimed, all judges were required to 
file their resignations. We can imagine its psychological 
effect upon the incumbents at the time. At this point in 
time, it is only human for judges to think “What is the 
use? ” They may be dismissed from the service, or some- 
thing else may happen resulting in their transfer to 
another station. The disenchantment of the judges 
affected is understandable. 

The reorganization also took place in 1980 with the 
same effect. With the present revolutionary government, 
there is, in effect, the same sword dangling over the 
heads of all judges in the Philippines. We hope that these 
things do not happen again; that no reorganization shall 
take place at the expense of the tenure of incumbent 


judges. Otherwise, reorganizations would affect the 
morale of the Judiciary. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

May I add a parenthetical remark. Under Proclama- 
tion No. 3, Her Excellency, the President, had set one 
year for government reorganization. So, as far as the 
Judiciary is concerned, the reorganization is not yet 
completed. We will have to wait for one year, from the 
time Proclamation No. 3 was promulgated before the 
sword dangling over their heads . . . 

MR. CONCEPCION. But still the sword is hanging 
and that has a very deleterious effect. 

MR. GUINGONA. I was told that I have only three 
minutes more. I was referring to the Supreme Court, not 
to the lower courts, when I asked the question because 
the Gentleman mentioned that there are 50,000 cases 
in the Supreme Court that have not yet been decided. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, about 5,000. 

MR. GUINGONA. Even then, 5,000 is a large number 
of cases. 

The second question has reference to Section 9, 
about the administrative supervision over all courts to 
be retained in the Supreme Court. I was wondering if 
the Committee had taken into consideration the pro- 
posed resolution for the transfer of the administrative 
supervision from the Supreme Court to the Ministry of 
Justice. But as far as I know, none of the proponents 
had been invited to explain or defend the proposed reso- 
lution. 

Also, I wonder if the Committee also took into con- 
sideration the fact that the UP Law Constitution 
Project in its Volume I, entitled: Annotated Provision 
had, in fact, made this an alternative proposal, the 
transfer of administrative supervision from the Supreme 
Court to the Ministry of Justice. 

Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. May I refer the question to 
Commissioner Regalado? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

We did invite Minister Neptali Gonzales, who was the 
proponent for the transfer of supervision of the lower 
courts to the Ministry of Justice. I even personally 
called up and sent a letter or a short note inviting him, 
but the good Minister unfortunately was enmeshed in a 
lot of official commitments. We wanted to hear him 
because the Solicitor General of his office, Sedfrey 
Ordofiez, appeared before us, and asked for the main- 
tenance of the present arrangement wherein the super- 


FRIDAY, JULY 11. 1986 


457 


vision over lower courts is with the Supreme Court. But 
aside from that, although there were no resource per- 
sons, we did further studies on the feasibility of trans- 
ferring the supervision over the lower courts to the 
Ministry of Justice. All those things were taken into 
consideration motu proprio. 

Proposed Resolution No. 363 cites as one of the 
Committee’s reasons for asking that the administrative 
supervision be transferred to the Ministry of Justice 
the case of Manila Electric Company vs. Easay Trans- 
portation wherein the Supreme Court refused to be 
constituted as a board of arbitrators that would exer- 
cise administrative or quasi-judicial functions. Un- 
fortunately, the same is not involved in the present 
situation. It was the case of the Supreme Court being 
made a board of arbitrators. 

I did further researches on this and I also noted the 
UP draft as well as all the other drafts that we had. 

In his memorandum to us. Chief Justice Teehankee 
did amplify on that situation when he stated that what 
appears in the 1973 Constitution wherein supervision 
over the lower courts is with the Supreme Court merely 
recognized what has been even before a present and 
existing power because it is inherent in the Supreme 
Court as a judicial power. He took note of his ex- 
perience when he was Secretary of Justice which depart- 
ment at that time was in charge of the supervision over 
courts. He also noted the opinions of such legal and 
constitutional stalwarts like the late Chief Justice 
Ricardo Paras, Senators Claro M. Recto, Vicente J. 
Francisco, Quin tin Paredes, Lorenzo Tanada, and our 
colleague. Commissioner Ambrosio Padilla, who are 
living legends in their own time. He came up with the 
statement that the position of the Secretary of Justice 
in our government then as supervising the lower courts 
has no counterpart in the United States or in Europe 
where the chief function of the head of the department 
of justice is merely to act as a chief legal adviser of the 
government or to supervise the public prosecutors. 
He also pointed to the fact that contrary to the im- 
pressions in some quarters, the Supreme Court is not 
unnecessarily burdened with administrative problems 
affecting inf^erior courts and personnel because the main 
bulk of these problems is handled by the Office of the 
Court Administrator. He cited statistics on the setup of 
the Supreme Court and others which, if necessary, I 
will get into. 

The proper cases on this matter are People vs. Gutier- 
rez, November 26, 1970,* Garcia V5. Macaraig, 1971; 
Osmena, Jr. vs. Secretary of Justice, 1971, wherein the 
Supreme Court said that the practice of having the 
Minister of Justice supervise the lower courts is of 
doubtful constitutionality. That is also reiterated in 
the book of Commissioner Bernas and in the book of 
now Justice Isagani Cruz. The position here of the 
Supreme Court is that supervision will not necessarily 
unburden the Supreme Court. Aside from the fact 
that there is the court administrator, we have now also 


added further the Judicial and Bar Council which, 
aside from merely proposing nominees to the President, 
will have such other duties as to help in the performance 
of functions of the Supreme Court. The theory of this 
is that the power of the Supreme Court to supervise 
the inferior courts is an inherent judicial power only 
articulated in the 1973 Constitution, and since the 
Supreme Court has the power to discipline the members 
of the lower courts, the power to discipline necessarily 
carries with it the power to supervise because in the 
power to supervise, we are aborting what would even- 
tually be an administrative case. Since it is the Supreme 
Court which will remove the judges or provide for 
sanctions on matters of disciphne, why do we have to 
wait for that matter to become an administrative case 
when the element of supervision may prevent the acts 
of the lower courts from aggravating into an adminis- 
trative case; after all, it is still homespun logic that an 
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure? 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

May I just make it of record that none of the signers 
of the proposed resolution regarding the transfer of 
administrative supervision from the Supreme Court to 
the Ministry of Justice had, in fact, been invited to 
attend and express their views. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have to 
protest against that statement. They have been invited 
but they did not show up. 

MR. GUINGONA. I am sorry, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. CONCEPCION. My secretary personally called 
up the Office of the Minister of Justice about six or 
seven times, and each time found reason why he could 
not come. We did not merely write to him. We have 
written even to the judges of the Shari’a courts in 
Mindanao. 

MR. GUINGONA. I appreciate that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But I object to the Gentleman’s 
statement that none of those in favor had been invited. 


MR. GUINGONA. No, I was referring to t^he pro- 
onents of the proposed resolution that the Commis- 
loner. Honorable Regalado, had referred to earlier, 
am sorry; perhaps, I did not clarify. 

MR. CONCEPCION. It is all right; I am sorry, too. 

MR. REGALADO. May I add further that aside from 
le invitations sent by Justice Concepcion, an asi 
*om the telephone calls of our committee secre y, 
also talked with Commissioner Josefina Garcia wno 


458 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


is presently with Minister Gonzales, and through her I 
sent a personal invitation, even a position paper. Un- 
fortunately, we never received a response. 

MR. GUINGONA. I have no quarrel about that. I do 
believe the Gentleman invited the Minister many times. 
I was not referring to the Minister. 

May I also make of record that it is my view that the 
case cited by the honorable Commissioner, which is 
Manila Electric Company vs. Pasay Transportation, is, 
in fact, a reiteration of the provision contained here 
except that insofar as that case was concerned, it 
referred only to the Supreme Court and not to the 
lower courts. But when it spoke of board of arbitrators, 
it was speaking of an agency or an office that was 
exercising administrative function. Since we are talking 
about administrative supervision, there is no question 
that administrative supervision is also an administrative 
function. 

The last question, Mr. Presiding Officer, is in con- 
nection with the testimony of Chief Justice Teehankee. 

I wonder if the 24-month period was suggested by the 
honorable Chief Justice or was set by the Committee. 
If it had been set by the Committee, has there been a 
reaction from the Chief Justice, a reaction in the sense 
that he concurred with the 24-month allotment, that 
they can finish both the prospective cases and the back 
cases in reasonable time? 

MR. ROMULO. No, he concurred that they could 
work on the new cases but not the old cases. We pre- 
cisely asked him how many months he thought they 
would need because this would now be mandatory. 

MR. GUINGONA. I thank the Commissioner. Thank 
you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
honorable Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I refer the 
Commissioner to Section 2 on the power of the National 
Assembly to define, prescribe and apportion the juris- 
diction of the various courts. Does the Gentleman con- 
template giving to the National Assembly, likewise, the 
power to add to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court? 

MR. CONCEPCION. This Section 2 was part of 
Section 1 of the 1973 Constitution. Therefore, we did 
not intend to give or withdraw from the National 
Assembly any of these powers. 


MS. AQUINO. How does this section contemplate 
the power to abolish courts? May the legislature enact 
a statute declaring an existing judicial position vacant? 

MR. CONCEPCION. What section is this? 

MS. AQUINO. With regard to the same section, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, how does this contemplate the 
power of the National Assembly to abolish the court? 

MR. CONCEPCION. This is part of the 1973 Consti- 
tution. 

MS. AQUINO. As to Section 1 , how does this portion 
treat the matter of political questions or nonjusticiable 
controversies? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is a very nice question. 

I had occasion to explain at the beginning of my 
remarks yesterday that the committee members were 
worried about the inaction of the Supreme Court 
over some of the most important cases, both from the 
legal and the national viewpoint, in view of the allega- 
tion that the issue before them was a political question. 
The Committee found it necessary to define “judicial 
power” and “political question.” There were a number 
of decisions in the past endeavoring to define “political 
question.” Yet, while they did not seem to be sufficient- 
ly effective, if I may use this expression, upon the 
courts, there was still something hazy and the matter 
of political question came up from time to time. Since 
it was rather risky to define a political question, the 
Committee felt it would be best to say that certain 
questions were not political. That is what appears in 
the second part of the second paragraph — “. . . To de- 
termine whether or not there has been a great abuse of 
discretion amounting to lack of or excess jurisdiction 

55 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you for the explanation. 

I appreciate the intention of the Committee in 
addressing that problem because for a while I was labor- 
ing under the impression that the Committee may have 
confused the distinction between “jurisdiction” and 
“judicial power” in this proposal. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, the Commissioner will 
notice that the paragraph begins with the statement: 
“Judicial power includes the duty of courts of justice 
to settle actual controversies involving rights which are 
legally demandable or enforceable. . .” That is judicial 
power per se, but in a number of cases the court 
declared that it has no such power because the questions 
raised were political in nature. Now we are saying that 
questions involving jurisdiction or abuse in its exercise 
are nonpolitical but justiciable cases. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


459 


May I draw the Gentleman’s attention to subpara- 
graph (2) of Section 3 and its effects. There is, of course, 
a growing tendency among governments to accumulate 
more and more power on the pretext of general welfare, 
and that kind of a tendency is practically irresistible. 
My apprehension is in Section 3 (2). Under this rule, 
all that the Executive or the National Assembly needs 
for the confirmation of its acts would be a small num- 
ber, considering that the requirement to strike down 
a law as unconstitutional is a majority plus one. Of 
course, we appreciate the committee report being 
already a radical departure from the 1973 Constitution 
which requires a vote of 10. This made it very difficult 
for the Supreme Court to correct the errors of an execu- 
tive or legislative action. Conformably, with the intent 
of the principle of checks and balances, would it not be 
more apt to just limit the required number to a majority 
vote instead of a majority plus one? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That was the original plan of the 
Committee, but there were other members who felt that 
that was too much. As usual, the Committee had to 
yield to some of its members to find a middle ground on 
which there could be a consensus. 

MS. AQUINO. It is my sense that the function of the 
judiciary is to protect individual rights, that it should 
not be some kind of an arsenal for the exercise of the 
legislative or the executive power. That was why I 
thought it might be best to limit it to just a majority 
vote. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is a good observation, 
but if the Commissioner will go over Section 7(5), 
she will notice that this portion says: “Promulgate rules 
concerning the protection and enforcement of constitu- 
tional rights . . ” Note also that this is the first part of 
the paragraph. This was introduced upon the request 
of Commissioner Azcuna in order to stress that constitu- 
tional rights are not merely declaratory but are also 
enforceable. That is why this phrase which did not 
appear in the 1 973 Constitution is an innovation. 

MS. AQUINO. I thank Commissioner Concepcion 
for calling my attention to that portion, but in the same 
section, even as the Supreme Court is given the power 
to initiate to the legislature, in effect, it is reserved the 
power to repeal. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But “with the advice and con- 
currence of the Supreme Court” - that is another inno- 
vation. 

MS. AQUINO. That is noteworthy because it is by 
itself already a radical departure from the 1973 Consti- 
tution. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is definitely substantial. 


MS. AQUINO. But in the ultimate analysis, the effect 
of this provision is to vest in the two branches of the 
government the power to provide for the rules in the 
enforcement of constitutional rights and the conduct 
of the Bar, etc. I was thinking whether it would not be 
more proper and more appropriate to confine the 
powers of the legislature to just confirmation, meaning, 
the Supreme Court has rightfully the power to initiate 
the rules, and to the legislature the power to confirm 
these. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Perhaps if the Commissioner 
will read the provision in the Constitution, the rule- 
making power of the Supreme Court would be subject 
to revocation, alteration and modification by the legis- 
lature, but the members of the Committee felt that the 
members of the legislature should not govern the inter- 
nal operation of the court. 

Second, the legislature cannot claim to know better 
than the court itself — its internal problems and how to 
solve them. But it will be noticed that we did not re- 
quire concurrence only; we require advice. In other 
words, there should be consultation. 

MS. AQUINO. I agree perfectly with the Commis- 
sioner. If that was the intention, would it not have been 
more appropriate, therefore, to vest in the legislature 
just the power of confirmation? When we reserve to 
the legislature the power to repeal and to revoke, t e 
ultimate effect is that the legislature is more supenor 
to the judiciary. 

MR. CONCEPCION. May I refer the matter to Com- 
missioner Regalado? 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

We actually envisioned the situation where 
Supreme Court and the legislature, working han m 
hand, can individually initiate, subject to the concur 
rence of the other, the revisions of the Rules oj a 
The Rules of Court partakes of the nature of law and 

has the effect of a law. 

Therefore, if we say that the legislature cannot 
will it not be contrary to the constitutional provisi 
against irrepealability of laws? 

MS. AQUINO. It was not really much of a clarifi- 
cation. Thank you anyway. 

May I call the attention of the honorable sponsor to 
Section 14 (3) which provides for the issuance o 
certification when the period of 24 months sha ave 
lapsed. What is the effect of this? Is this 
or directory? If the court is unable to act^withm 
months, does it lose jurisdiction over the case . 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, but these certifications are 
required to facilitate the impeachment of the ju or 
justices concerned because they would provide ocu 


460 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


mentary evidence signed by them showing that they 
have knowingly failed to comply with the Constitution. 
By the presentation of the document, the burden would 
fall upon the judge concerned. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Commissioner will note that, 
in addition to this and before this certification, there is 
another certification required upon submission of the 
case for decision. 

So, these are warnings that are given to the judges, 
who, if they are really lawyers, should understand the 
implications of the warning — that the Constitution ex- 
tends all possible facilities to make it possible for them 
to discharge their duties, and if they fail to do so, they 
are required to put on record a number of things which 
furnish evidence of their violation of the Constitution. 
These measures cannot leave any doubt as to the man- 
datory nature of the period prescribed. 

MS. AQUINO. Finally, on the matter of exemption 
from tax of the salary of justices, does this not violate 
the principle of the uniformity of taxation and the 
principle of equal protection of the law? After all, 
tax is levied not on the salary but on the combined 
income, such that when the judge receives a salary 
and it is comingled with the other income, we tax the 
income, not the salary. Why do we have to give special 
privileges to the salary of justices? 

MR. CONCEPCION. It is the independence of the 
Judiciary. We prohibit the increase or decrease of their 
salary during their term. This is an indirect way of 
decreasing their salary and affecting the independence 
of the judges. 

MS. AQUINO. I appreciate that to be in the nature 
of a clause to respect tenure, but the special privilege 
on taxation might, in effect, be a violation of the prin- 
ciple of uniformity in taxation and the equal protection 
clause. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Lerum be 
recognized for the clarificatory question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Lerum is recognized. 

MR. LERUM. Will the distinguished sponsor answer 
just one or two questions? 

MR. CONCEPCION. With pleasure. 


MR. LERUM. Under the 1973 Constitution which 
provides for 1 5 justices, cases have accumulated to such 
an extent that the said court was even unable to comply 
with the requirement that cases should be decided 
within 1 8 months. However, under the proposed amend- 
ment, this number is being reduced to 11. May we 
know the reason for the reduction? 

MR. CONCEPCION. In the first place, the member- 
ship of 15 provided in the 1973 Constitution did not 
help increase the output of the Supreme Court. On 
the other hand, in many respects, it was a deterrent 
to the speedy disposition of cases. Of course, one other 
factor is the economy, I mean, the cost of operating 
a court. Then, too, it is easier for the 1 1 to reach a con- 
sensus than the 15. At any rate, the court in the past 
seldom had a full complement of 1 5 justices — the usual 
thing has been a court of 1 1 or 1 2. And considering the 
number of votes required for certain matters, that consti- 
tuted a further deterrent to the speedy disposition of 
cases. 

MR. LERUM. We realize that, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
but I think the cure for this is to put into this Constitu- 
tion a provision that vacancies in the Supreme Court must 
be filled within one month or two months because that 
is one way of ensuring a full complement of 1 5. Does the 
Commissioner not think that that is the more reasonable 
action to be taken in this regard? 

MR. CONCEPCION. As I mentioned, 15 is more un- 
wieldy than 1 1 . 

MR. LERUM. We realize that also, but will 1 5 people 
studying all the cases appealed to the Supreme Court 
not produce more than the 1 1? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Theoretically, yes, but it all 
depends also upon who are appointed to the Supreme 
Court. 

MR. LERUM. We have a new President and new 
appointees now. Does the Commissioner not think that 
by adding some more to these people already appointed, 
their output will be more? 

MR. CONCEPCION. The President barely knows the 
appointees, I mean, their professional performance and 
potentialities. I will tell of one case: There was a justice 
in the Supreme Court who went on sick leave for two 
months. Then he returned to the Philippines. At the end 
of the year, he had disposed of more cases than those 
who worked with the Supreme Court for 12 months. 
The problem really is in the selection of the best men. 
It is just like most everything, I suppose. Every young 
man tries to marry the best woman but very often, what 
he thought the best was the worst. This is part of the 
imperfections of human beings, I suppose. 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


461 


MR. LERUM. 1 will come to another point regarding 
the amendment which provides that all cases filed after 
the approval of the Constitution shall be decided within 
24 months. I am worried about what is going to happen 
to these pending cases in the Supreme Court because 
with that provision, the members of the Supreme Court 
will devote their time to the new cases being filed and 
neglect the cases that should have been decided by them 
within 1 8 months as provided by the present Constitu- 
tion. 

Does the Commissioner not think that this is unfair 
to the litigants with cases pending with the Supreme 
Court? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I have explained to Commis- 
sioner Aquino that there is a paragraph or section re- 
quiring the Supreme Court to adopt a system whereby 
the backlog can be gradually reduced. I stated that I 
suppose all judges, including justices, if they have an 
output of, let us say, five cases a month, could easily 
make six cases a month — just one addition, one of the 
old pending. 

There is another reason why we modified the pro- 
vision of the Constitution. Under the old Constitution, 
upon the expiration of the period prescribed, in a 
number of cases the decision appealed from would be 
considered affirmed and in other cases the petition 
would be denied. Private practitioners consider this 
unfair. Why, they say, should our client suffer for the 
inaction of the court? So we would want our cases just 
the same to be decided. 

Likewise, we have adopted certain measures whereby 
we indicate that disciplinary action in the form of 
impeachment insofar as the members of the Supreme 
Court are concerned, and disciplinary action by the 
Supreme Court over lower courts will be taken. In other 
words, we say, “This is not biro-biro, this is totohanan. 
We will go after your head. We have given you certain 
facilities but do not abuse them. You begin a new 
slate.” So that is it. 

MR. LERUM. I have asked these questions because I 
am intending to present an amendment so that there 
will be no discrimination between the old and the new 
cases. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. May I just ask why 1 1 may be more 
effective than 15. It must be remembered that this is a 
collegial court and, therefore, decisions must be arrived 
at by a majority. As our experience in this Commission 
validates, it is easier for us to agree in the Committee 
than in the Commission as a whole because there are 
more ideas that have to be put in. As to the second 
point, let me read our suggested provision; 

The Supreme Court shall adopt for itself and the lower 

courts a systematic plan to expedite the decision or resolu- 
tion of the cases or matters filed with the Supreme Court or 


the lower courts prior to the effectivity of this Constitu- 

tuion. 

One must reckon with human limitations. If we 
impose a mandatory period for both the old and the 
new, we will end up with neither the old nor the new 
being decided in time. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

At this juncture, the Presiding Officer relinquished 
the Chair to the Honorable Jose E. Suarez. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Suarez). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The honorable sponsor was my professor in Constitu- 
tional Law . . . (Laughter) in the graduate school. And if 
ever I ask a few questions or make some suggestions, it 
is in the spirit of a student asking his professor or 
suggesting to his professor. 

Honorable sponsor, upon my retirement in the 
Armed Forces in 1 964 and from being the Chairman of 
the Police Commission in 1973, I began my practice of 
law. Since then and up to 1986, I have had some horri- 
fying experiences with our judges and our courts. 

Section 14 on p 3 ge 6 has been the center of questions 
since yesterday and the whole morning today. I will not 
add anymore to the many comments made by my 
comembers in the Commission, but I would like only to 
inform the honorable sponsor that if he sees the notice 
of hearings of lower courts, particularly of the regional 
trial courts and the municipal trial courts, it is always 
for 8:30 in the morning. And as my usual practice, i 
would prefer to be ahead thirty minutes than be ate y 
one minute. So, I normally arrive at about 8: 10 or 8:2U 
hurrying up my breakfast and dressing up as best as I 
can to be present at the court ahead of time. 

Normally, I would be very thankful if the judge 
would appear at nine o’clock. Usually, it is at ten 
o’clock, and sometimes he would not appear at all an 
just send word through his clerk of court that all cases 
are postponed, for no reason at all. Oftentimes, e 
would appear at ten o’clock and when one counsel 
would ask for postponement, it was granted '^Jjhout the 
judge asking for any good reason at all. So, I a een 
left there waiting for him for two hours only to in ou 
that the hearing was cancelled. 

With so many cases pending in court, I really wonder 
how our judges and our courts — the lower cour s, 
particularly — can litigate these cases. 


462 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


So, I will request the honorable sponsor to write and 
inform the honorable Chief Justice on this matter. I was 
trying to find out when Chief Justice Teehankee would 
appear before the Committee because I would like to 
air this problem to him. 

I filed a motion for preliminary mandatory injunction 
in one case and urged in a written motion for immediate 
resolution of the case. I approached the judge and 
reminded him about it but it took him one-and-a-half 
years to decide that motion. 

This is just for the information of the honorable 
Chairman. As I said, I have been in the practice for only 
12 years; I do not know about the experience of the 
other practitioners. If the honorable Chairman of the 
Judiciary Committee can bring this matter to the at- 
tention of the honorable Chief Justice, perhaps it may 
resolve pending cases much faster. There was a judge 
whose neck I nearly grabbed because he would not issue 
an order for attachment unless there was PI, 000 under- 
neath the table. When the PI, 000 was put under the 
papers of the case, in one minute the order for pre- 
liminary attachment was signed. 

This is with regard to Section 6 (4) on page 3 which 
says: 

The regular members of the Council shall receive such 

emoluments, and the ex-officio members shall receive such 

allowances, as may be determined by the Supreme Court. 

We have in the general provisions a prohibition on 
double compensation. I think this was filed by the 
honorable Commissioner Davide. Allowances are con- 
sidered double compensation in our general provisions. 

I think this subsection 4 needs a reconciliation by the 
Committee on Style. 

MR. ROMULO. That is a good point. Precisely, we 
are taking that into account. So, whatever the Commis- 
sioner decides in the General Provisions, we will abide 
by it. It is a present concept that allowances are not 
considered double compensation. But if the new Consti- 
tution considers allowances double compensation, we 
will delete this provision. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. There is another reason, which is, 
that those assigned to a Judicial and Bar Council will 
have their hands full for years and there is no end to it. 
So at least they are entitled to transportation expenses. 
Even the ex-officio members particularly would have to 
spend transportation expenses for the discharge of then- 
duties. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, in our 
deliberations, we did not consider transportation ex- 
penses an allowance because one asks for reimbursement 
for what he spends for his transportation. 


At this juncture, the Presiding Officer relinquished 
the Chair to the Honorable Renato V. Sarmiento. 

MR. CONCEPCION. So, the Commissioner suggest 
that instead of the word “allowance,” it be ACTUAL 
EXPENSES INCURRED. I do not know if the Commit- 
tee would consider that matter favorably. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I think the Committee will con- 
sider that because during the past regime a Cabinet 
member was receiving as much as PI 00,000 in allow- 
ances only. I think that was the reason the Honorable 
Davide filed that motion which we took as a very good 
one. On page 4, subsection 3 states: 

Assign temporarily judges of lower courts to other 
stations as public interest may require. Such temporary 
assignment shall not last longer than six months without 
the consent of the judge concerned. 

I have a case under a judge who comes from Cavite 
assigned in the Regional Trial Court of Binan. While our 
case was under pretrial, his six months’ assignment had 
elapsed and he waited for his order for reassignment. 
Until now, I have not heard about my case which has 
been under pretrial since October 1 985. I really wonder 
how long a pretrial case could last, if we have this sys- 
tem of assignment of judges every six months by the 
Supreme Court. I suggest that we assign a permanent 
judge who could handle voluminous cases. I hope this 
matter could be remedied. 

Subsection 5, lines 22 to 24, states: 

XXX Rules of Procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial 
bodies shall take effect upon approval by the Supreme 
Court. 

We resolved in the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies that quasi-judicial bodies, 
such as the Civil Service Commission, the Commission 
on Audit and the Commission on Elections, shall decide 
their cases within 60 days based on the rules they 
submit to the Supreme Court for approval. I really 
wonder how the Supreme Court can immediately ap- 
prove or disapprove such rules. I presume that the 
reason for this is to give administrative due process to 
whoever the respondent is, and these quasi-judicial 
bodies are ever aware of administrative due process on 
the cases they handle. I really wonder if this could be 
made in the reverse such that the rules and procedures 
promulgated by quasi-judicial bodies should take effect 
until repealed, revised or amended by the Supreme 
Court. If we wait for the approval of the rules by the 
Supreme Court, just as we have waited for the decisions 
within 24 months on our cases handled by the Supreme 
Court under Section 14, I wonder how these quasi- 
judicial bodies could terminate their cases within 60 
days as mandated by the Committee. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


463 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rustico de los 
Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will the honorable sponsor and 
his cosponsors yield to a few questions? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Gladly. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

Most of the questions I would have asked were 
covered by the questions of Commissioner Aquino, so, I 
just have two points to clarify, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
one of which is the right of the state to appeal. As I 
understand it, this constitutes a radical departure from 
the usual concept of double jeopardy. Once an accused 
is acquitted by any court which has jurisdiction over the 
case, after arraignment and plea and a trial has been 
held, the decision is final and an appeal by the state can- 
not be entertained for any reason because that will place 
the accused in double jeopardy. Therefore, by inserting 
this provision in the committee report, the Committee 
on the Judiciary has preempted the right of the Com- 
mittee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights 
and Obligations and Human Rights to pass upon that 
question. If ever an appeal were granted to the state, it 
should be on the limited ground of mistrial, which 
means that there has been no trial at all or that the 
prosecution has been denied due process. But when 
there is complete trial, complete with the appreciation 
and presentation of evidence by both the prosecution 
and the accused, I do not think the state should be 
allowed to appeal, even on the ground that the judg- 
ment of acquittal is manifestly against the evidence 
and with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or 
excess of jurisdiction. The terms ‘‘manifestly against the 
evidence” and “with grave abuse of discretion” are very 
flexible, and I think this will work against the poor 
litigants. I am just a small town lawyer in our province 
and I have been in practice for 25 years. I consider the 
court my second home, the Revised Penal Code and the 
Rules of Court my second bibles. I could see that 95 
percent of these litigants are poor people. They are de- 
tained in the city jail, municipal jail or in the provincial 
jail. They cannot even afford to file bail bonds. They are 
defended by de officio lawyers who sometimes come to 
court unprepared; it is good that we now have the 
CLAO. If these poor people are the offended parties, 
does the sponsor believe they could afford to hire a 
good lawyer to prepare them a petition for review on 
certiorari to show the Supreme Court that the decision 
was manifestly against the evidence and with grave 
abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of juris- 
diction? Only the right litigants could afford that. Very 


few rich litigants get convicted, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
because they either pay the victims or their families to 
settle the case or pay off the witnesses to silence them. 
As I said, Mr. Presiding Officer, from my little ex- 
perience as a lawyer, it is these 95 percent poor people, 
who line up in courts waiting for their cases to be heard, 
that will be affected by this provision of giving the state 
the right to appeal. 

In the 1971 Constitutional Convention where the 
same question was raised. Delegate Julias had this com- 
ment which turned the tide and resulted in the disap- 
proval of giving the state the right to appeal: 

There is reason to commend but the reasons against far 
outweigh the reasons in favor. 

In the first place, it would tend to multiplicity of suits; 
it would increase the burden of the Supreme Court. 
Second, it would be expensive if we meet fiscals who have 
an exaggerated opinion of themselves and who have more 
professional pride or amor propio than gray matter in their 
heads. 

Let me give an example: Here is a farmer or a poor 
laborer who is lucky because he was acquitted. But his 
opponent happens to be a millionaire who can afford to 
get a top-notch lawyer to prepare a petition for certiora- 
ri, so instead of enjoying his freedom after haying 
languished in jail for two years or three years, he finds 
himself again exposed to the jeopardy of being con- 
victed because of that appeal by the state. 

I have heard the assurances of certain sponsors that 
he will be set free in the meanwhile. But the general rule 
is that while the appeal is pending, the judgment is not 
final and generally the accused would continue to 
languish in jail. Assuming he will be set free, the tempta- 
tion to flee on the part of the accused who was found 
guilty is very great because he does not know whether 
he will be convicted again by the Supreme Court. 
Although there is a saying that the innocent is as bold as 
a lion while the wicked flees, that is not true in 
A man who is afraid he might get convicted by t e 
Supreme Court is tempted to flee. I think we are saying 
that the Supreme Court is infallible, that it will not and 
cannot commit any mistake; that it is the lower cour 
that usually commits the mistake. 

One retired Justice of the Supreme Court told me 
that the only difference between a lawyer committing a 
mistake when he cites the Roman Law and the Supreme 
Court committing a mistake is that the lawyer loses e 
case while the Supreme Court’s mistake becomes e 
supreme law of the land, because the Supreme Cour is 
supreme even in its errors. 

I, therefore, believe, that the mischief sought to be 
prevented by allowing the state to appeal due to oc- 
casional mistakes of the lower court in acquitting, 
perhaps, a guilty person is nothing compared to the mis 
chief and injustice a poor accused will suffer. It wi 
open the gates to endless appeals. It will clog t e 
dockets of the Supreme Court which will be hard put m 


464 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


determining even preliminarily the existence of a ground 
that the decision was manifestly against the evidence 
and with grave abuse of discretion. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, why should we discourage 
appeal by the state? The controlling consideration is 
the inequality of the parties in power, situation and 
advantage in criminal cases where the government with 
its unlimited resources, trained detectives, willing of- 
ficers and counsel learned in the law, stood arrayed 
against a single defendant unfamiliar with the practice 
of the courts, unacquainted with their officers or attor- 
neys, often without means and frequently too terrified 
to make a defense, if he had one, while his character 
and his life, liberty or property rested upon the result 
of the trial. 

Here is an accused who, after already suffering 
enough by undergoing a long and rigorous trial while 
languishing in jail, gets acquitted. Finally, the state ap- 
peals. Not even the most corrupt soul in the Judiciary, 
not even the most corrupt judge in the lower courts, 
could be so dismally insensitive as to pronounce the 
exculpation of a defendant without looking at the 
proof. 

Here is another reason the state should not be granted 
appeal. In the case of Greene v. United States, 355 
U.S., 184, 1957, it says: 

The underlying idea is that the State, with all its re- 
sources and powers, should not be allowed to make re- 
peated attempts to convict an individual for an alleged 
offense, thereby subjecting him to embarrassment, expense 
and ordeal, and compelling him to live in a continuing state 
of anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing the possi- 
bility that even though innocent, he may be found guilty. 

I hope with these observations the sponsor will 
reconsider his proposal to allow the state to appeal. 

Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I refer the matter to Commis- 
sioner Padilla. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
honorable Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable Ople is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Does Commissioner de los Reyes not 
want a reply from the Committee? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I took a seat because I have no 
more questions to ask. The Committee may reply, if it 
so desires. 

Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. We would like Commissioner Padilla 
to reply for a few minutes. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am not going to talk about the infallibility of the 
Supreme Court or the fallibility of a trial judge, because 
that does not seem to be very relevant to the legal issues 
involved. Of course, no human institution is perfect or 
infallible, but there is greater security or more reason 
for good administration of justice should the Supreme 
Court give due course to a petition for review on cer- 
tiorari than the trial judge who, in addition to the many 
circumstances mentioned by Commissioner de Castro, 
may act with arbitrariness in manifest disregard of the 
evidence and with grave abuse of discretion amounting 
to lack or excess of jurisdiction. 

Also, I would not want to comment too much on the 
poor litigant, who is assumed by Commissioner de los 
Reyes to be the accused. Perhaps, in comparison with 
the resources of the state, the accused may be regarded 
as poor. But oftentimes, it is the victim of the crime, the 
offended party, who is poor. 

Rule 122, Section 2 of the 1964 Rules of Court 
reads: 

The People of the Philippines cannot appeal if the 
defendant would be placed thereby in double jeopardy. In 
aU other cases, either party may appeal from a final judg- 
ment or ruling, or from an order made after judgment af- 
fecting the substantial rights of the appellant. 

The present rule. Rule 122, Section 2 of the 1985 
Rules on Criminal Procedure, is more simple: Any party 
may appeal from a final judgment or order except if the 
accused would be placed thereby to double jeopardy. 

In a decision rendered by the Supreme Court under the 
present law. People vs. Veridiano, 113, SCR A, 64, the 
respondent judge reversed the city court’s judgment of 
conviction acquitting Mr. Veridiano on the ground that 
his liability to the complainant was purely civil in nature 
and directed him to comply with the civil obligation to 
return to the complaining witness the sum of P6,000. 
The fiscal appealed the decision directly to the Supreme 
Court. He was required to file the appropriate petition 
under RA 5440, a 1968 law not known to some judges 
and lawyers up to this time which superseded Rule 42 
and Rule 1 22 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Court in the sense that 
an appeal to the Supreme Court on a question of law is 
no longer a matter of right. 

The Supreme Court has the discretion to give due 
course to the appeal or to deny it outright. That is one 
remedy to prevent the clogging of the dockets of this 
court. We hold that the judgment of acquittal rendered 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


465 


by the Court of First Instance is void for lack of ap- 
pellate jurisdiction, corum non judice. So even under 
our present law, an appeal may be had by the state or 
by the fiscal when the trial court or the lower court — 
whether acting in appellate or original jurisdiction — has 
no jurisdiction. When there is a question of error of 
jurisdiction, the remedy is by certiorari, as distinguished 
from an error of judgment which is not covered by 
petitions for certiorari. 

In the case of the United States v. Kepner, a Philip- 
pine case (1 1 Phil. 669) that reached the U.S. Federal 
Supreme Court (195 U.S. 100), Justice Holmes, in his 
dissenting opinion, stated: 

It seems to me that, logically and rationally, a man 
cannot be said to be more than once in jeopardy in the 
same case however often, he may be tried. The jeopardy 
is one continuing jeopardy from its beginning to the end of 
the cause. One may be accused of manslaughter that is the 
equivalent of homicide, and yet, if the victim dies, he may 
be prosecuted and convicted for murder. 

This remark or observation of Justice Holmes is 
embodied in Rule 117, Section 7 on “Former Convic- 
tion or Acquittal, Double Jeopardy,” which added 
under “However,” new provisions; paragraphs a, b and 
c. These new provisions of the 1985 Rules on Criminal 
Procedure read: 

However, the conviction of the accused shall not be a bar to 
another prosecution or an offense which necessarily in- 
cludes the offense charged in the former complaint or 
information under any of the following instances: 

(a) The graver offense developed due to intervening facts 
arising from the same act or omission constituting the 
former charge . . . 

An example is this paragraph (a) where the victim 
suffered serious physical injuries and the accused 
pleaded guilty and was convicted. But thereafter, the 
victim died and there was a judicial proceeding, not for 
the lesser offense or serious physical injuries but for the 
graver offense of homicide. There are other exceptions 
acknowledged by the Supreme Court in the 1985 Rules 
on Criminal Procedure, and I quote: 

(b) The facts constituting the graver charge became 
known or were discovered only after the filing of the 
formal complaint or information. Or, 

(c) The plea of guilt to the lesser offense was made 
without the consent of the fiscal and of the offended party. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, the opinion of Justice Holmes 
in the Kepner case says: “The Constitution permits a 
second trial in the same case. The reason, I submit, is 
that there can be but one jeopardy in one case.” Then 
he concludes: 

A second trial in the same case must be regarded as only 
a continuation of the jeopardy which began with the trial 
below. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, the opinion of Justice Holmes 
even speaks of a new trial, but the proposal is limited to 


an appeal by petition for review on certiorari based on 
the ground already in the record of the same case with- 
out further a new trial proceeding. When the judge who 
rendered a judgment of acquittal or dismissal has dis- 
regarded manifestly the evidence on record, his conduct 
is with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or 
excess of jurisdiction. 

It may be said that the opinion of Justice Holmes was 
a dissenting view in the Kepner case. That dissenting 
opinion has become the majority opinion by the de- 
cision penned by Justice Cardoso in Palko v. Connec- 
ticut, 302, U.S. 310 which involved the following de- 
cision: 

A statute of Connecticut permitting appeals in criminal 
cases to be taken by the State is challenged by appellants as 
an infringement of the 14th amendment of the Constitu- 
tion of the United States. 


The argument was that the effect of the new trial was 
to place the accused twice in jeopardy for the same of- 
fense and in so doing violated the 14th amendment of 
the Constitution of the United States. In this decision, 
after discussing the principle of double jeopardy, it 
made express reference to the United States v. Kepner 
case in 1904 by a closely divided court. Justice Cardoso 
said, and I quote: 

XXX Dissenting opinions show how much was to be said 
in favor of a different ruling. Right-minded men, as we 
learn from those opinions, could reasonably, even mistaken- 
ly, believe that a second trial was lawful in prosecutions 
subject to the Fifth Amendment, if it was all in the same 
case. Even more plainly, right-minded men could reason- 
ably believe that in espousing that conclusion they were not 
favoring a practice repugnant to the conscience of mankind. 

Is double jeopardy in such circumstances, if double jeo- 
pardy it must be called, a denial of due process forbidden 
to the State? 

After discussing other basic principles of the Consti- 
tution, like the right against self-incrimination or not to 
be a witness against oneself, the right of peaceful assem- 
bly, the immunities granted in the Constitution, the 
immunity from compulsory self-incrimination, and t e 
principle of due process of law, the decision in said case 
of Palko V. Connecticut through Justice Cardoso states. 


ind I quote: 

The state is not attempting to wear out the accused by a 
multitude of cases with accumulated trials. It asks no 
more than this, that the case against him shall go on until 
there shall be a trial free from the corrosion of substantial 
legal error. State v. Felch, 92 Vt. 477, 105 A. 23 . . . This is 
not cruelty at all, nor even vexation in any immoderate 
degree. If the trial had been infected with error adverse to 
the accused, there might have been a review at his instance, 
and as often as necessary to purge the vicious taint. A 
reciprocal privilege, subject at all times to the discretion o 
the presiding judge V. Carabetta, 106 Conn, 114, 137 
A, 394), has now been granted to the state. There is here no 
seismic innovation. The edifice of justice stands, in its 
symmetry, to many, greater than before. 


466 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


Madam President, when a case is submitted to the 
judgment of a trial judge, we should, perhaps, presume 
that that judgment is in accordance with the evidence 
and the law. But there are instances — I hope, few 
and rare instances — when a trial judge does not act 
as an impartial judge for good administration of justice 
for even when the evidence is overwhelming to prove 
beyond reasonable doubt the guilt of the accused, he 
arbitrarily acquit the accused for some extraneous 
reasons other than the merits of the case, perhaps, 
through bribery, superior order, under influence of 
others or for whatever reason. Sometimes, the decision 
appraises the evidence that will lead to no other con- 
clusion but guilt, and yet, in violation of all the premises 
in the decision; the conclusion is acquittal or dismissal. 
Now, the proposed appeal is only in the discretion of 
the Supreme Court and only by a petition for review on 
certiorari and only on the ground that, as stated, is 
manifestly against the evidence and with grave abuse of 
discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction. 
This proposal will lead to a good and sound administra- 
tion of justice. This will also serve as a deterrent against 
few corrupt judges who, in derogation of all principles 
of reason and justice, will simply come to the con- 
clusion that the accused is acquitted even contrary to 
the evidence presented. And invariably, the acquittal is 
with such grave abuse of discretion that it amounts to 
lack or excess of jurisdiction. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, in the course of a criminal trial 
where both parties are given the opportunity to present 
their evidence, and the judge decides to acquit the 
accused, even if the judge is mistaken, but honestly, 
probably the fiscal or the offended party should not be 
allowed to disturb judgment of acquittal. But when such 
judgment of acquittal is deliberate due to corruption, 
then the state and/or the offended party should be ex- 
tended some relief. There may be diversity of opinions 
whether a particular judgment of acquittal is justice to 
the accused or an injustice to the offended party. This 
provision does not allow the state nor the offended 
party an absolute right to appeal. There must be a peti- 
tion for review on certiorari based on the grounds 
mentioned that are very restrictive. Such a petition may 
even be dismissed outright in the discretion of the 
Supreme Court. But there must be an avenue for the 
correct and sound administration of justice. Many of us 
always talk of the accused and we never remember the 
mention of the crime, the complainant, and the of- 
fended party. The complainant is entitled to justice as 
much as the accused. And to say that the offended 
party is rich and the accused is poor, I feel that the 
situation is just the reverse. Oftentimes, those who com- 
mit crimes, those who disobey the Ten Commandments 
and violate the tenets of good conscience in society are 
the rich, the powerful, the influential, and the victims 
are the poor, the underprivileged, the oppressed. That is 
the real situation. We cannot overlook it and claim in 
general terms that this proposal will only benefit the 
accused who are poor. 


So, in the light of the abuse, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
the question is: Would an appeal by petition for review 
on certiorari constitute double jeopardy? Double 
jeopardy really means a separate, a new proceeding. In 
other words, based on the same fact, Mr. Veridiano has 
been prosecuted and another trial or another case is 
filed to prosecute the same accused for the same act and 
for the same offense. That is the essence of double 
jeopardy. But as stated by Justice Holmes, even an 
appeal is not a separate trial. It is a continuation of the 
same case. And in the cases that I quoted, especially the 
case of Palko v. Connecticut, which contemplated not 
only a new trial, a separate trial, but even an ordinary 
appeal, our proposal is very restrictive in the sense that 
it does not justify a new trial, much less, a separate trial. 
And then, it is not a matter of right but of discretion of 
the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court has juris- 
diction over all cases involving the jurisdiction of the 
courts. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
make a short rejoinder to Commissioner Padilla’s com- 
ment? 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. A reservation was made by Commis- 
sioner Ople to speak en contra and he is the last speaker. 
With respect to the request of Commissioner Rustico de 
los Reyes, I am registering him under the period of 
amendments. He will have all his time there. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I yield one minute of my time to 
my colleague. Commissioner Rustico de los Reyes, if 
that will be allowed by the Chair. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable de los Reyes is recognized to speak for one 
minute. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

The case cited by Commissioner Padilla, with all due 
respect, I think, would not be a case in point. He cited 
a case where an accused is charged with a complaint for 
frustrated homicide and later on, the victim died. 
Naturally, the information had to be amended to homi- 
cide and the Supreme Court held that there was no 
double jeopardy there because an intervening factor 
came about. 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


467 


In all the other cases cited by Commissioner Padilla, 
including those American cases, there was supposed to 
be some sort of a mistrial where the state was not af- 
forded the opportunity to present its evidence com- 
pletely. But in a case, as contemplated in this provision, 
where there was a plea, where there was a presentation 
of evidence by both parties, and the court, after ap- 
preciating the evidence, reached the conclusion that the 
accused was not guilty, that principle cited by Commis- 
sioner Padilla does not apply. And that is upheld in the 
case of People vs. Montemayor, 26 SCRA 687, where the 
Supreme Court reaffirmed the doctrine that this consti- 
tutional guarantee is an insuperable obstacle to the state 
appealing from a judgment of acquittal. That is the 
latest decision on the matter. 

I yield now to Commissioner Ople. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Honorable Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

I have no legal erudition to contribute to this debate 
which is, I think, getting to be an exclusive dialogue of 
lawyers in the Constitutional Commission, and it is 
always with trepidation that laymen like myself cross 
this threshold of the arcane domain of the men of the 
bench and the Bar. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I thought I would like to look 
at this Article on the Judiciary from a macro view and 
later on would like to proceed to specific provisions. I 
would like to raise questions of general equity for the 
government. I must confess 1 am disturbed by the pro- 
pensity throughout this Article in its various provisions 
to accord the Supreme Court, the lower courts and the 
judicial system as a whole, a whole plethora of privileges 
and immunities that are denied the rest of the govern- 
ment of the Republic of the Philippines. There is a bold 
assumption of executive and legislative powers in this 
proposed Article. 

Of course, we share deeply the concern expressed by 
the sponsor. Commissioner Roberto Concepcion, for 
whom we have the highest respect, to surround the 
Supreme Court and the judicial system as a whole with 
a whole armor of defenses against the executive and 
legislative invasion of their independence. But in so 
doing, some of the citizens outside, especially the 
humble government employees, might say that in try- 
ing to erect a bastion of justice, we might end up with a 
fortress of privilege, an island of extraterritoriality 
under the Republic of the Philippines, because a good 
number of powers and rights accorded to the Judiciary 
here may not be enjoyed in the remotest degree by 
other employees of the government. 

An example is the exemption from income tax, which 
is a kind of economic immunity, which is, of course, 
denied to the entire executive department and the 
legislature. 


There is an appropriation power built in this Article, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, an appropriation authority being 
exclusively reserved by the Constitution without provid- 
ing the same power to the legislature. It says that two 
percent of the national budget is automatically appro- 
priated for the Judiciary. I understand the budget for 
this year is PI 16 billion. Two percent of that would be 
equivalent to P2.3 billion, if my instant calculation is 
correct, versus the budget of the Judiciary for 1986 — if 
I am not mistaken, it is about P600 million. And, there- 
fore, under this provision, certainly, the Supreme Court 
and the lower courts will be getting more than 1 00 per- 
cent increase in their budget at a time when all the 
teachers and employees of the government would like 
to join marches and rallies. Some of them have actually 
declared strikes in order to alleviate or to mitigate then- 
own plight. 

Also, this Article, of course, seeks to perpetuate a 
situation where the Supreme Court administers the 
courts, instead of the executive branch. I think there is a 
tendency to equate judicial independence with certain 
immunities and privileges for the courts to such a degree 
and a quantum as to raise a real question of equity and 
justice for employees of the government in general. 

And, of course, I am also disturbed by a proposed 
provision according to which the Chief Justice shall 
address the National Assembly at the opening of its 
regular session, which is just a formality . But, I think, in 
effect, it also elevates the courts to the same pre- 
eminence and majesty as that of the Chief Executive of 
the Republic of the Philippines since historically the 
opening of the National Assembly is the occasion for 
the head of state or head of government to deliver a 
state-of-the-nation address. I am not against the Chief 
Justice addressing the National Assembly, but, perhaps, 
we can allow him to do so on the second day or any 
other day, not on the first day. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I spoke of certain legislative 
powers assumed here. And, earlier. Commissioner 
Aquino has adverted to that and stated that my objec- 
tion is on a different ground from her. I think it must be 
understood that the legislative power should be exer- 
cised by the legislature even if there is a sense in which 
the Supreme Court may be accorded all the autonomy 
that it desires for formulating rules that have to do with 
their own function; that the advice and concurrence of 
the Supreme Court is stated as a requirement before the 
National Assembly can exercise its own law-making 
power. I think this is a real diminution of the legislative 
power that should remain unimpaired. 

And, again, in Section 2 of the proposed Article, the 
legislature is restrained from exercising its authority to 
reorganize the government where the security of 
of the Judiciary might be impaired. I think we should 
dissociate security of tenure from the exercise of legis- 
lative power. There must be a strong guarantee tor 
security of tenure, but not put in such a way as 
the hands of the lawmaking power in what I consider 


468 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


a very inappropriate intrusion into the field of law- 
making. 

So, these are some of what I said earlier would be a 
macroapproach to the proposed Article on the Judicia- 
ry. And having said that, I just would like to pose two 
or three questions to the sponsor, if he will yield. 

MR. CONCEPCION. With pleasure. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

During the period of amendments, can the sponsor 
consider an amendment wherein they might consider 
returning the management of the courts to the executive 
branch of the government? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I did not get the question. 

MR. OPLE. I have in mind Section 9 on page 5, 
which says: “The Supreme Court shall have administra- 
tive supervision over all courts and the personnel there- 
of,” and another section provides that the appointing 
power for court officials and personnel is also vested in 
the Supreme Court. 

Is the deliberation of the Committee so far gone and 
their commitment so firm to the management of the 
courts by the Supreme Court that they may no longer 
be able to consider during the period of amendments a 
proposal to revert the administration of the courts to 
the executive branch of the government while their 
substantive function is fully protected from any 
invasion by the executive branch? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That has been considered by the 
Committee, but the members of the Committee - and I 
think a good number of the Members of the Commis- 
sion — feel that one of the major infirmities in the 
administration of justice in the Philippines has been the 
overwhelming intrusion of politics in the operation of 
the courts not only in the appointment of judges but 
also of their staff. Graft and corruption was such I 
would say that under the last administration it was 
considerably widespread. I will give an illustration. 

At one time, the Department of Justice felt that it 
was necessary to increase the number of judges in the 
Courts of First Instance by seven. The Supreme Court 
or the Department of Justice was told, “if you want this 
group to be successful, you should agree to have a new 
additional branch to each province.” 

I have another illustration. A young man was ap- 
pointed judge to one of these new branches. The branch 
could not operate because of the absence of a clerk of 
court. Why was there an absence of a clerk of court? 
Because the congressman for the district or province 
concerned insisted that a pharmacist be appointed as 
clerk of court. 

First of all, political intervention made it difficult to 
organize the court. Second, it tended to show to the 


Judiciary that the Judiciary’s fate is considerably 
dependent upon the politician. 

MR. OPLE. I thank the Presiding Officer and the 
sponsor. 

In that respect, I consider it a great loss to this 
Commission that the Minister of Justice failed to arrive 
on the due date after having been invited. And, certainly, 
the other side of the question — the President through 
the Minister of Justice having superintendence over the 
courts — may never be fully known to this Commission 
in the absence of an authoritative spokesman. I am told 
by Commissioner Guingona that Minister Gonzales 
would come, but he has not settled his doubts on the 
propriety of coming here in the light of some admoni- 
tions he received that members of the Cabinet may be 
misinterpreted or misunderstood as trying to influence 
the Constitutional Commission. But in any case, these 
are subjects that I hope the sponsor would be kind 
enough to allow to be brought up again during the 
period of amendments. The Floor Leader has been 
circulating very diligently during the past few minutes, 
I hope not in an excess of the exercise of his constitu- 
tional powers. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I please be allowed to clarify 
some points in just one minute? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just 
wanted to clarify this matter. Commissioner Ople asked 
me why I think Minister Gonzales did not come. In my 
reply, I made no reference at all — if the honorable 
Commissioner will remember — to Minister Gonzales. I 
think perhaps the members of the Cabinet are reluctant 
to come because of the statement made by the President 
here and released in the papers to the effect that she 
does not want to exert any influence at all, directly or 
indirectly, in the drafting of this Constitution. I said 
that members of the Cabinet might have the feeling that 
they might be indirectly influencing the committee 
meetings if they will come here. But I did not make any 
definite reference to Minister Gonzales because I have 
not had a chance to ask him or to talk to him. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, it is already 
12:07 p.m. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just for the 
record, the point raised by Commissioners Guingona and 
Ople has been clarified by Commissioner Regalado, and 


FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986 


469 


he can stand up on that. There was no objection on 
anybody’s part for them to appear here; and that, in 
fact, some of his fellow Ministers have appeared here. 
Perhaps, he did not want to champion a lost cause. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we close the period of 
sponsorship and debate on the Article on the Judiciary. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the period of sponsorship and debate is closed. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
adjourn until Monday at nine o’clock in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the session is adjourned until Monday at nine o’clock 
in the morning. 

It was 12:08 p.m. 


. m 


iiM>rO .•ir . „ 

'■•’ ”^'h ' ■ vf ■> 


■i •fk''*^ 




*'*' , 4 fiy>i 


- •*l'’ .'•* ’V, 


>k 


•f %•; »t , . 4 ' : 

IWW M.. , ..-'f 

Wjwa ir Uif.il.. , 

^ ' * ** ' ■' ' ' 

V 




,f' 

.f'lK' • ■ ^ *' ..•: 

'■ ‘ ’■•■' ' • ■ V ^ 

.A. • ' 

.■• . ' * 

' iffl; ,1 t/tt'ji * -Vr ^ 

' *■’' ’'‘ ' 


f*. 


n *• 


- .,‘Y 

4 ^/ C^:, h. ' 

' *1 #4 I'fci 

.v^ ■ 


, ^1 




•^'^7 


k 


Ml 



% 


V 





MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


471 


R.C.C. NO. 29 
Monday, July 14, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:35 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Arithem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Vice-President, 
the Honorable Ambrosio B. Padilla. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. PADILLA. Almighty God, Creator of the 
Universe, Master of Mankind and our Sovereign Lord, 
“without Thee, we can do nothing; with Thee, nothing 
is impossible.” Thou madest possible the political 
miracle of February 22—25 through the peaceful revolu- 
tion of the people, a unique event unknown in the 
history of our Asian neighbors and unprecedented in 
our own history. Our people succeeded without violence 
in terminating and in toppling down the dictatorship 
which had been entrenched in absolute power during 14 
years of martial misrule. More things are wrought by 
prayers than this world dreams of. Lord, many a time 
in the past. Thou hast shown deep affection for our 
country and abiding love for our people. 

God of power and light, come to our aid again, in this 
^^ur delicate responsibility of formulating a new and 
permanent constitution. We must solicit and beseech 
Thine Divine Providence for aid and guidance, to en- 
lighten our minds, to instill understanding in our hearts 
and to fortify our resolve to labor assiduously with 
devotion and dedication, so that we may submit to our 
sovereign people a fundamental charter that will not 
only embody our ideals and aspirations but also assure 
a just society, an honest government, a responsive 
administration with the blessings of truth, justice, 
freedom, peace and progress in a living and effective 
democracy. 


Beloved Mother Mary, You have never abandoned, 
but have ever extended. Your motherly affection and 
love to our people. In these days of our need for Your 
assistance, we pray that You be with us today and 
always, to bless our people with a better life and for all 
to enjoy a government not only of and by the people, 
but more importantly, for the people. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Present* 

Alonto Present* 

Aquino Present 

Azcuna Present 

Bacani Present 

Bengzon Present 

Bennagen Present* 

Bernas Present* 

Rosario Braid . . . Present 

Brocka . Present* 

Calderon Present* 

Castro de Present 

Colayco Present 

Concepcion .... Present 

Davide Present* 

Foz Present 

Garcia ....... Present* 

Gascon Present* 

Guingona Present 

Jamir ........ Present 

Laurel Present* 

Lenim Present 

Maambong .... Present* 

Commissioner Villegas is on official mission. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 26 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


Monsod .... 

. . Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Ople . 

. . Present* 

Padilla ..... 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama ...... 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present* 

Tadeo 

. Present* 

Tan 

. . Absent 

Tingson .... 

. . Absent 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Uka 

. . Absent 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


472 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of last session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of last Friday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Floor Leader? ( Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Report, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 487, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PRO- 
VISION MANDATING THE TRANSFER OF ALL 
RECORDS, EQUIPMENT, BUILDINGS, FACILITIES 
AND OTHER PROPERTIES OF ANY OFFICE OR BODY 
ABOLISHED OR REORGANIZED UNDER THIS CON- 
STITUTION TO THE OFFICE OR BODY TO WHICH ITS 
POWERS, FUNCTIONS, AND RESPONSIBILITIES SUB- 
STANTIALLY PERTAIN. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 488, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE STATE TO 
UNDERTAKE THE TRANSLATION OF THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION INTO THE VARIOUS PHILIPPINE 
LANGUAGES AND TO PROVIDE A FREE COPY TO 
EVERY FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD. 

Introduced by Hon. Bennagen and Sarmiento. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 489, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROTECTING THE INDISSOLU- 
BILITY OF MARRIAGE AND THE STABILITY OF THE 
FILIPINO FAMILY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 490, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PRO- 
VISION RECOGNIZING THE AUTHORITY AND JURIS- 
DICTION OF EXISTING COURTS, MANDATING THE 
DETERMINATION OF PENDING CASES IN ACCORD- 
ANCE WITH THE LAWS THEN IN FORCE, UPHOLDING 
THE PROVISIONS OF THE EXISTING RULES OF 
COURT, PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUANCE OF 
INCUMBENT MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY AND 
THEIR REMOVAL ONLY FOR CAUSE, AND REQUIR- 
ING SPECIAL COURTS AND QUASI-JUDICIAL BODIES 
TO SUBMIT THEIR RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR AP- 
PROVAL BY THE SUPREME COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 491, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION PROVISIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE 
RIGHTS AND WELFARE OF FILIPINO OVERSEAS 
WORKERS (ROW’S). 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Tadeo and Aquino. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 492, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PRO- 
VISION AUTHORIZING THE PRESIDENT TO REVIEW 
CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO BY THE PREVIOUS 

government or any subdivision, agency or 
instrumentality thereof, including govern- 
ment-owned OR controlled CORPORATIONS 
AND TO REVOKE, MODIFY OR AMEND THE SAME 
WHEN THE NATIONAL INTEREST OR WELFARE SO 
REQUIRES. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 493, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT 
OF AN INDEPENDENT CENTRAL MONETARY 
AUTHORITY. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


473 


Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 494, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PRO- 
VISION MANDATING THE GRANT OF SEPARATION 
PAY AND OTHER BENEFITS TO CIVIL SERVICE 
ELIGIBLES WHO WERE SEPARATED FROM THE 
SERVICE FROM FEBRUARY TWENTY-SIX 1986. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 495, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PRESCRIBING THE ORDER OF SUC- 
CESSION TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN 
CASE OF PERMANENT VACANCY OR TEMPORARY 
DISABILITY AND PROVIDING FOR THE MECHANISM 
FOR THE DECLARATION OF INCAPACITY OF THE 
PRESIDENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Maambong, Ople, Natividad and 
de los Reyes, Jr. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Ceferino P. Padua, former Constitu- 
tional Convention delegate, submitting the article 
“Right to Education — Somewhere in the Bill of 
Rights.” 

(Communication No. 175 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Ms. Cristina M. Liamzon of the Philippine 
Partnership for the Development of Human Resources 
in Rural Areas, forwarding a resolution proposing the 
inclusion of provisions on agrarian reform and rural 
development. 

(Communication No. 176 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the Personnel Officers Association of the 
Philippines, Inc., signed by Mr. Bayani A. Aquino, 
recommending certain provisions on the Civil Service. 

(Communication No. 177 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Resolution No. 217 of Sangguniang Panlungsod of 
Davao City, proposing to abolish the integration of the 


local police and the Philippine Constabulary and to 
return the administrative supervision and control of 
local police to the mayors. 

(Communication No. 178 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Telegram from Mr. Enrique Soriano of Iloilo City pro- 
posing the adoption of the jury system. 

(Communication No. 1 79 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Letter from Mr. Rey lyog of Sugbongcogon, Misamis 
Oriental, requesting the inclusion of a provision that 
would expedite the resolution of cases in the courts. 

(Communication No. 1 80 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 

Resolution of the Federation of Senior Citizens of the 
Province of Albay suggesting the inclusion of a provision 
giving due recognition to senior citizens. 

(Communication No. 181 — Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Major Amador R. Tanael, Jr. of the Region- 
al Special Action Force Batallion, PC/INP Regional 
Command 4, requesting the inclusion of a provision 
integrating into the regular force of the AFP rese^e 
officers who have rendered ten or more years active 
service. 

(Communication No. 182 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Ms. Judith N. Relato of 23 N. Baesa Road, 
Quezon City, proposing the retention of US bases, dis- 
enfranchisement of illiterate voters, synchronization ot 
elections, and a six-year-no-reelection term tor all 
elective officials. 

(Communication No. 183 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication from the Promotion of Church People s 
Rights - Mindanao, requesting provisions for the regula- 
tion of activities olf transnational corporations tor e 
preservation of natural resources and the dismantling o 
paramilitary forces. 

(Communication No. 1 84 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 


474 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from the Honorable Neptali Gonzales, 
Minister of Justice, forwarding a communication from 
members of the Veterans Federation of the Philippines 
and other veterans’ associations, proposing a presidential 
form of government with a bicameral legislature. 

(Communication No. 1 85 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Letter from Mr. Robert V. Dulay, Officer-in-Charge, 
Province of La Union, transmitting proposals on the 
declaration of principles and state policies, local govern- 
ment, autonomous regions and transitory provisions. 

(Communication No. 1 86 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from the , honorable Commissioner Regalado E. 
Maambong, enclosing a copy of the Magna Carta of 
Social Justice and Economic Freedom by Commissioner 
(Speaker) J.B. Laurel, Jr., and saying that the basic 
policies enunciated therein are still valid today. 

(Communication No. 1 87 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Tomas L. Joaquin of Mendiola St., 
Alabang, Muntinlupa, Metro Manila, proposing pro- 
visions that will require religious organizations to pay 
real estate and income taxes; election of the Justices of 
the Supreme Court and the members of the Commission 
on Elections by the legislature and the election of fiscals 
by the electorate, among others. 

(Communication No. 1 88 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Orlando G. Rogelio of Victoria, Orient- 
al Mindoro, proposing that the six-year term of Pres- 
ident Corazon C. Aquino and Vice-President Salvador H. 
Laurel shall commence upon the ratification of the new 
Constitution; recommending severance of diplomatic 
relations with communist countries and the retention 
of United States military bases, and opposing regional 
autonomy. 

(Communication No. 1 89 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from the United Church of Christ in the Philip- 
pines, signed by Bishop Erme R. Camba and Dr. Emilio 
C. Capulong, Jr., urging the retention of the present 
provisions calling for and implementing the principle of 
separation of church and state. 


(Communication No. 190 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Resolution of the Philippine Medical Women’s Associa- 
tion, Inc., proposing the principle that it shall be the 
duty of the state to give free primary health care to its 
underprivileged citizens. 

(Communication No. 191 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 24 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 496, prepared by the Committee on National 
Economy and Patrimony, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 10, 12, 16, 22, 46, 47, 63, 89, 122, 
211, 213, 219, 288, 309,317,368,369,374,375,378, 
388,389,401 and 412. 

Sponsored by Hon. Villegas, Tadeo, Bacani, Bengzon, 
Jr., Bennagen, Foz, Gascon, Monsod, Natividad, Opie, 
Romulo, Sarmiento, Suarez, Uka and Villacorta. 

To the Steering Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 9:52 a. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:29 a.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Jose F. S. Bengzon, Jr. presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, before anything 
else, the Chair would like to acknowledge the presence 
of college students from the College of the Holy Spirit 
who are here to observe us. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 18 
(Article on the Judiciary) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are now in the 
period of amendments on the Article on the Judiciary. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


475 


I ask that Commissioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I call the attention of the Committee members 
to the second paragraph of Section 1 , defining judicial 
power. Would it be possible for the Committee to ac- 
cept an amendment which would incorporate a positive 
and explicit definition of the powers of the Judiciary to 
provide for the redress of wrong for the violation of 
such rights, such that the amendment by insertion in 
between the words “inforceable” and “and” would 
read: THE REDRESS OF WRONGS FOR VIOLA- 
TIONS OF SUCH RIGHTS? 


MS. AQUINO. But do I understand it correctly that 
when the second paragraph was formulated, the idea 
was to provide in the inclusive formulation the duty of 
the courts to settle actual controversies and affirmative- 
ly asserting that it is likewise the duty of the courts to 
positively provide for the redress of wrongs for the 
violations of such rights? 

MR. CONCEPCION. How would the Commissioner 
phrase the paragraph in question? 

MS. AQUINO. On line 6, Section 1, after the word 
“and,” insert the phrase THE REDRESS OF WRONGS 
FOR VIOLATIONS OF SUCH RIGHTS . . . 

MR. CONCEPCION. “Settle actual controversies 
involving rights.” That would be a redundancy. 


MR. CONCEPCION. It is possible, and it is, in fact, 
included in the draft prepared by the Committee. It is 
found in Section 7 (5) which states that the Supreme 
Court has, among others, the power to promulgate rules 
concerning the protection and enforcement of constitu- 
tional rights. The promulgation of such rules indicates 
that the protection and enforcement of these consti- 
tutional rights is something that the courts have to 
consider in the exercise of their judicial power. 

MS. AQUINO. I am conscious of that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. It is just that I have in my mind the need to 
“explicitate” that responsibility on the part of the 
court, if only to give teeth and muscle to judicial power, 
essentially the power to adjudicate civil rights. In the 
formulation of the second paragraph, there is almost a 
mistaken connotation that judicial power would only 
refer to the adjudication of adverse litigants, as if it 
were always in the nature of a private conflict. Would 
it be possible for the Committee to accept this amend- 
ment, if only to underscore the resp^^nsibility of the 
Judiciary being the bulwark of civil liberties? 


MS. AQUINO. . . which are legally demandable and 
inforceable and THE REDRESS OF WRONGS FOR 
VIOLATIONS OF SUCH RIGHTS.” 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the position of 
the Committee is that it is unnecessary and we are will- 
ing to admit on record that the Commissioner’s amend- 
ment is not acceptable because it is already mcluded in 
the second paragraph of Section 1, particularly in 
relation to Section 7 (5). 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, on the strong 
representation of Commissioner Romulo, I understand 
it correctly that it is the implicit intention of the Com- 
mittee to likewise read into this provision this kind of 
a duty on the part of the court. 

I am respectfully withdrawing my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you very much. Commissioner Aquino. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 


MR. CONCEPCION. That declaration is included 
in the first part of the sentence “Judicial power in- 
cludes — note the words ‘the duty,’ we did not say ‘the 
power’ — the duty of courts of justice to settle actual 
controversies involving rights which are legally demanda- 
ble and inforceable . . .” It seems that this part of the 
paragraph is what the Commissioner would want to be 
specifically stated. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is not an 
amendment for which I am willing to put my life on 
the line. But may I be clarified on the intention of the 
Committee in not accepting this amendment? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, because it is a duplication 
which we see as unnecessary. Generally, constitutional 
provisions are brief, concise but all-embracing. That is a 
policy acknowledged in constitution-making. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is an ante- 
rior amendment, so I ask that Commissioner Maambong 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer and honor- 
able Commissioners: 

I am adverting to Section 1, line 5 of the second 
paragraph. I wonder if the Committee would accept an 
amendment to delete the word “actual” m the phra^ 
“to settle actual controversies” on line 5. May 1 expiam 
for just a few seconds. 


476 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


If we say “actual,” we are actually contemplating a 
situation where there are parties, petitioners, respond- 
ents, plaintiffs and defendants. But there are so many 
cases filed in court where there are actually no con- 
testing parties. For example, in a case of declaratory 
relief, there are really no actual parties, and so by 
deleting the word “actual” we do not damage the whole 
provision, but we would only be more specific in our 
terminology. 

I submit, honorable Commissioners. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I beg to call the Commissioner’s 
attention to the fact that the Supreme Court has neither 
authority nor judicial power to pass or grant a declara- 
tory judgment. Judicial power per se is merely the 
power to settle controversies. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I understand that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, but the first paragraph in Section 1 talks not 
only of the Supreme Court but also of such lower 
courts as may be established by law. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. That is why I said, 
judicial power is limited to the settling of actual contro- 
versies. 

It is very risky for any court to pass upon hypo- 
thetical questions. The same set of principal basic facts 
may be affected by the surrounding circumstances 
which will necessarily be lacking for a judgment on a 
hypothetical case. 

Judicial powers deal with relations among people. 
Two persons may commit the same crime of homicide 
but the circumstances surrounding the same constitute 
part of the equities that may and should be considered 
by the court in deciding the case. Those equities are 
lacking in hypothetical cases. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just to leave this point, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, is it, therefore, the decision of the 
Committee that declaratory relief is actually an actual 
controversy? Is that the thinking of the Committee? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Determination of what is the 
law, as between two parties who have a conflict based 
upon what the law is or whether there is any law, would 
be an actual controversy. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And in the same category, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, quieting of title, for example, would 
also be an actual controversy. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized to amend Section 3. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I preface my amendment to Section 3 (2) by 
noting that there is a growing tendency of governments 
to accumulate more and more power on the pretext of 
promoting general welfare, and that tendency is prac- 
tically irresistible, such that for any provision on judicial 
review to be meaningful, the exercise of the power of 
judicial review should be feasible and viable, unfettered 
by the daunting constraints of meeting a high number to 
be able to strike down a law as unconstitutional. 

I was wondering if the Committee would consider ah 
amendment by deletion of the words “plus one” on 
lines 23, 24 and 25, or in the alternative, if that is re- 
tained, to delete the whole phrase “of the members who 
actually participated when the case was submitted for 
decision,” on line 24. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Regalado will reply. 

MR. REGALADO. Upon consultation with the other 
members of the Committee, it is our feeling that with 
respect to the proposed amendment for a declaration of 
unconstitutionality, we will maintain the vote require- 
ment of majority plus one of the members. The reason 
for this is that since a law has been deliberated upon by 
the legislature, and later has been approved by the 
President, we therefore have had the participation of the 
two branches of the government. Therefore, it should 
take a higher number of votes to declare such a law 
unconstitutional. 

Although it was not mentioned by the proponent of 
the amendment, I might as well include also the fact 
that the Committee has agreed that with respect to the 
number of votes, whether majority or majority plus one, 
we will eliminate the phrase “members who actually 
participated.” 

MS. AQUINO. That was my alternative proposal. In 
other words, if we delete the phrase “members who 
actually participated when the case was submitted for 
decision,” the required number of votes would only be 
seven as distinguished from the deletion of “plus one” 
which should mean six. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MS. AQUINO. So, I would concede to the require- 
ment of making a distinction between any ordinary 
decision and that which would declare a law as uncon- 
stitutional such that I was advancing this alternative 
proposal. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


477 


MR. REGALADO. The reason why, instead of 
making a specific statement as to the number of votes, 
we are resorting to the phrase “majority plus one,” is 
that there are also proposals for the increase of the 
number of the membership of the court. So, we just 
decided to make it “majority plus one,” regardless of 
what would be the eventual outcome as to the total 
membership of the court. 

MS. AQUINO. So, do I understand it correctly that 
the Committee is amenable to that proposal to delete 
just the phrase “the members who actually parti- 
cipated”? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). For 
clarity, will the Committee now, therefore, read the 
provision as has been accepted? 

MR. REGALADO. Section 3 (2) will, therefore, read: 
“All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty, 
international or executive agreement, or law shall be 
heard and decided by the Supreme Court en banc, and 
no treaty, international or executive agreement, or law 
may be declared unconstitutional without the concur- 
rence of a majority plus one of the members.” 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is Com- 
missioner Aquino satisfied? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you very much. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be 
allowed to introduce an amendment on Section 7 (5). 

MR. RODRIGO. Anterior amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to call on Commissioner 
Lerum for an anterior amendment on Section 3. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I just make some remarks in 
connection with the amendment just accepted by the 
Committee. This is very important because as a conse- 
quence of that amendment, we should also amend the 
same phrase “a majority of the members who actually 


participated” which appears on lines 31 and 32 of page 
1 and lines 2 and 3 of page 2. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, we accept that. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). So for 
the record, may we know from the Committee how 
many amendments have been accepted. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a minute. 
Commissioner Padilla has a remark with regard to Com- 
missioner Rodrigo’s comment. 

MR. PADILLA. The phrase “of the members who 
actually participated when the case was submitted for 
decision” should remain in paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
Section 3 because oftentimes, the Supreme Court 
Justices are not in full complement. The reasons are: 
(1) vacancy or nonappointment; (2) legal disqualifica- 
tion; (3) voluntary inhibition; or (4) justices are absent 
or on leave. So for some reasons, a court of eleven (11) 
may only have seven (7) or maybe eight (8) members 
who actually participate. It is not correct to have the 
opinion of a minority of the court prevail over a major- 
ity of the members participating. There were instances 
in the past where a motion for reconsideration was 
decided and even a decision of conviction in a criminal 
case reversed on appeal by the accused because the con- 
currence of eight (8) members, out of fifteen (15), 
which was the full membership of the court, was not 
obtained. The full membership was usually never com- 
plete, so there had been instances where seven (7) voted 
for a motion for reconsideration which was denied based 
on four (4) or five (5) votes against. And because the 
seven votes do not constitute the majority of fifteen, t e 
motion for reconsideration was lost, and even the 
ment of conviction in a criminal case was reversed. / 
is the effect of several decisions where an aggrieved 
party or the state in a criminal case or a party in a peti- 
tion, or in a motion for reconsideration received 7 votes 
as against 4 or 5 and yet the minority prevailed, and 
that is what I denounced before as the tyranny o a 
minority in the Supreme Court. 

So while I agree that in determining the validity of a 
treaty or the constitutionality of a law we should ave a 
majority or a majority plus one of the members because 
that is quite important to declare a law unconsti u mn , 
in all other cases we should have a majority o e 
members participating, and I do not believe we ^ 
remove that phrase in the two subsequent paragrap s. 

MR. ROMULO. So, Mr. Presiding Officer I stand 
corrected. We accept the alternative amen men o 
Commissioner Aquino to Section 3 (2), but we ® ^ 
accept the amendment to paragraphs 3 and 4 ot ec 
3. 

MR. PADILLA. As a matter of fact, Commissioner 
Aquino did not propose the elimination. 


478 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just thought 
that for uniformity’s sake this phrase, which appears in 
both paragraphs 3 and 4, should also be revised ac- 
cordingly. However, since that phrase still remains, may 
I ask a clarification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair will first dispose of the amendment proposed by 
Commissioner Aquino which has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

MR. RODRIGO. I thought it was already approved. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). It has 
been accepted by the Committee but we have not put 
it to a vote yet. 

MR. RODRIGO. I move that we vote on it. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Those 
in favor of the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Aquino, please raise their hand. ( Several Members raised 
their hand.) 

Those against the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. (No Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Since the phrase “majority of the 
members who have actually participated when the case 
was submitted for decision” still appears on paragraphs 
3 and 4 of Section 3, may I ask some clarificatory 
questions for the record. 

If a case is brought before the Supreme Court, briefs 
are submitted - appellant’s brief, attorney’s brief, reply 
brief - sometimes together with the petition for cer- 
tiorari and reply. Afterwards, oral argument follows and 
sometimes, memoranda are filed. Then a deliberation 
by the court follows. In this instance, what is the mean- 
ing of “members who actually participated”? Let us 
say a member has read all the briefs, all the pleadings 
but was not present at the oral argument, did he or did 
he not participate? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, he participated. It is not neces- 
sary that the justices should be present at every single 
instance during the proceedings. However, in the resolu- 
tion or decision of the court, sometimes it is stated that 
some justices took no part or are on leave, and these 
are those who did not participate. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. “Participated” means those 
members who took part in the deliberations and reached 
the conclusions that are incorporated in the court’s 
opinion. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose a member has read all the 
briefs and the memoranda and he was at the oral argu- 
ment but was not present during the deliberations by 
the members of the court, had he not participated? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Actually he had not participated 
because he was not present in the deliberations. He did 
not vote or express his opinion for consideration by his 
colleagues. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose he had read all the briefs 
and the memoranda and had listened to the oral argu- 
ment but he happened to have been sick when the court 
deliberated, would he not have been considered as 
having participated? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. 

MR. RODRIGO. So he would not be included in 
determining the majority plus one? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. The deciding factor then is that the 
member must have participated in the deliberations of 
the court. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is the meaning of the draft 
proposed by the Committee. 

MR. RODRIGO. As long as he was present during the 
deliberations by the members of the court, then he had 
participated. 

MR. CONCEPCION. He cast his vote then. 

MR. RODRIGO. For the record, I would like to get 
an answer because this is very important. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Does the Commissioner mean 
one who was not present but who concurred in the 
written opinion? 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us first say he was actually 
present — that would be the determining factor he was 
physically present in the deliberations by the court. Is 
that the determining factor? 

MR. CONCEPCION. If he also signed the concurring 
opinion, then he participated. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


479 


MR. RODRIGO. Even if he was not physically 
present in the deliberations by the court? 


MR. RODRIGO. But how could he take part, if he 
was not physically present? 


MR. CONCEPCION. Commissioner Regalado will 
answer. 

MR. REGALADO. I think we have to take into 
consideration another related provision because we 
speak here of concurrence of a majority of the members 
who actually participated when the case was submitted 
for decision. Section 14 (2) says: 

A case or matter shall be deemed submitted for decision 
or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, brief, or 
memorandum required by the rules of court or by the court 
itself. 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is it. He did not take part 
in the deliberations. So he did not participate. 

MR. RODRIGO. So even if he was physically present 
but just kept quiet, he did not participate? 

MR. CONCEPCION. If he kept quiet, that means he 
agreed with the opinion of the majority. Silence means 
consent. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I just make my question very, 
very simple. Must a justice be physicaUy present during 
the deliberations to be considered as having participated? 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes. That is not my point. My point 
is to define “participated.” When is a justice considered 
to have participated or not in the deliberations of the 
court? This is very, very important because this will 
decide whether or not he would be included in the 
number which will serve as basis to determine the 
majority or the majority plus one. 

MR. CONCEPCION. As we already said, “parti- 
cipated” means those who took part in the deliberations 
and cast their votes that were taken at the end of the 
deliberations when the case was referred to one of the 
members of the court for the writing of the court’s 
opinion. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, I repeat my question. Does he 
have to be physically present in the deliberations? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. I thought it was said that even if he 
was not physically present but concurred in the court’s 
opinion, he would be considered as having participated? 

MR. CONCEPCION. We mean having participated in 
the deliberations and concurred in the opinion. 

MR. RODRIGO. He must be physically present and 
concur in the court’s opinion? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose he was physically present 
but he dissented? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, he participated. 

MR. RODRIGO. He participated. So the important 
thing is his physical presence? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, his taking part in the 
deliberations. 


MR. CONCEPCION. As I said, he must be present in 
the deliberations and cast his vote before the case is 
assigned to one of the members of the court for the pre- 
sentation of the opinion. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, two things must be considered: 
First, he must be physically present in the deliberations 
and second, he must cast his vote. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose he was physically present 
in the deliberations and said he would abstain, is he con- 
sidered as having participated also? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, he participated also. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the important thing is his 
physical presence. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, because he has to vote also, 
or at least abstain from voting. 

MR RODRIGO. Yes. So if he abstained from voting 
but was physically present, is he considered to have 
participated? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
loor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Lemm be 
cognized to introduce an amendmen on 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
issioner Lerum is recognized. 

MR. LERUM. Mr. Presiding 

on Section 3(1), line 17 which consists in the substi 
ition of the word “ten” to FOURTEEN. As amended, 


480 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


Section 3(1) will read as follows: “The Supreme Court 
shall be composed of a Chief Justice and FOURTEEN 
Associate Justices.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. LERUM. I think the reason here is plain com- 
mon sense because 15 justices will be able to render 
more decisions than 11. If we reduce the number, we 
are impliedly criticizing the former members of the 
Supreme Court, because under the present provision, we 
have 15 justices and stUl there is an accumulation of 
cases from around 3,000 to 5,000. 

It means that these justices have not been doing then- 
work, and I do not think that is correct. 

Therefore, in order to ease this backlog of cases, plus 
those that will be filed, I am proposing that we retain 
the 1 5 justices that we have under the present Constitu- 
tion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee regrets that it cannot 
accept the amendment, but would prefer that the body, 
as a whole, decide the matter. 

We are unable to accept the amendment because, 
firstly, the 15 slots were never really filled up; secondly, 
the backlog resulted although there were already 1 3 or 

14 justices; and, finally, since it is a collegial body with 

15 full membership, we would need more people in 
putting into deliberations before a decision is made. 

MR. LERUM. May I answer? May I reply to that? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Lerum has one minute. 

MR. LERUM. On the first point where the 15 slots 
were never filled up, I think that could be remedied by 
an amendment to the effect that in case a vacancy 
occurs in the Supreme Court, it must be filled within 
two months from the date that the vacancy occurs. 

On the other hand, the Gentleman said that there are 
around 3,000 to 5,000 cases. If we divide the work, 
with 5,000 cases and 1 1 justices, that means that 40C) 
cases will have to be assigned to each of these 1 1 jus- 
tices. On the other hand, if we have 1 5, that means that 
about 300 will be assigned for every justice. So, with 15 
justices, more decisions will be rendered. I do not agree 
with the statement that 1 1 justices can solve the backlog 
of cases rather than the 15. We cannot see the logic to 
that. As a matter of fact, during my consultation with 
the labor sector, they said it is stupid to reduce 1 5 to 11 
when these 1 5 cannot do the work. I submit to a vote. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The observation is good if the 
backlog was incurred during normal times. But the 


backlog took place under a climate of uncertainty under 
the past administration which precisely is sought to be 
set up by the approval of the new Constitution. Second- 
ly, a Member of this body consulted the present Chief 
Justice and the latter stated that they can make it with 
1 1 members. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair believes that the issue has been amply ventilated. 
Therefore, the Chair now would like to call for a vote. 

MR. LERUM. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think this 
provision is very important. The labor sector is very 
much interested in this because there are many cases 
now pending with the Supreme Court involving laborers. 
In my case, I think I have more than five pending cases 
for the last 1 0 years. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes. Can 
we just confine the Commissioner to his arguments that 
have not yet been articulated? 

MR. LERUM. It is true that before, we had very few 
cases. But now, under the present circumstances, we 
have plenty of cases and most of them come from the 
labor sector. I think everyday there is a case being filed 
in the Supreme Court involving laborers, and this will 
continue under the present situation. If this were so, 
and we only have 1 1 justices, which is usually the 
number necessary during normal times, I do not think 
we will be creating a favorable situation where the 
government will have the respect of the workers. As far 
as the workers are concerned, they want their cases to 
be decided as soon as possible. That is why they say that 
this provision is stupid. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I propose an 
amendment to the amendment. I wonder if the pro- 
ponent will accept an amendment to the amendment. 

MR. LERUM. I wish to hear the Commissioner s 
amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, this is an amendment to the 
amendment: on line 18, change the word “two” to 
THREE, so that the line will read: “The Supreme Court 
shall be composed of a Chief Justice and FOURTEEN 
Associate Justices. It may sit en banc or in THREE 
divisions.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does Commissioner Lerum say? 

MR. LERUM. Just a minute. Will the Commissioner 
kindly repeat his amendment? I was getting my copy. 

MR. RODRIGO. The last sentence in subsection 1 
will read: “It may sit en banc or in THREE divisions.” 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


481 


MR. LERUM. I accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Let us 
vote on the amendment now as amended. 

Will Commissioner Lerum read his amendment as 
amended by Commissioner Rodrigo? After that, we 
will call for a vote. 

MR. LERUM. The amendment will read as follows: 
“The Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief 
Justice and FOURTEEN Associate Justices. It may sit 
en banc or in THREE divisions.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment of Commissioner 
Lerum, as amended by Commissioner Rodrigo, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 20 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. LERUM. Mr. Presiding Officer, on the same 
section, I am going to propose the following amend- 
ment: After the first sentence, insert the following: IN 
CASE OF ANY VACANCY, THE SAME SHALL BE 
FILLED WITHIN TWO MONTHS FROM THE OCCUR- 
RENCE THEREOF. This will be between the first and 
the second sentence. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
is willing to consider that amendment favorably, if the 
proponent will make it THREE MONTHS to enable the 
President to deliberate on the matter. 

MR. LERUM. I accept, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will 
Commissioner Lerum kindly read his amendments? 

MR. LERUM. The amendment will read: IN CASE 
OF ANY VACANCY, THE SAME SHALL BE FILLED 
WITHIN THREE MONTHS FROM THE OCCUR- 
RENCE THEREOF. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman yield to some 
questions? 


MR. LERUM. Willingly. 

MR. RODRIGO. The appointment under the 1973 
Constitution is made by only one man. I think in the 
Constitution which we are drafting, the consensus is to 
revive the Commission on Appointments. So, it is 
possible that the President might appoint within three 
months; but if Congress is not in session and the Com- 
mission on Appointments is part of Congress, the ap- 
pointment cannot be confirmed. Three months might 
be sufficient, if only one man, one appointing power, is 
involved. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Excuse 
me. Commissioner Rodrigo. On page 2, Section 5 of the 
committee report, the appointments of the members of 
the Supreme Court and the judges of the lower courts 
are not subject to confirmation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. But I am going to file an 
amendment to delete that portion and restore the power 
of appointment to the Commission on Appointments 
instead of that seven-man committee. So, if the Com- 
mission on Appointments is restored, insofar as the 
appointment of judges is concerned, three months might 
be too short because it will involve not only choosing by 
the President of the man he will appoint but actually 
appointing him and then having it confirmed by the 
Commission on Appointments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Would 
Commissioner Lerum, therefore, agree to a deferment of 
that proposed amendment until such time as the body 
decides whether or not the appointment of judges and 
justices will have to be confirmed by the Commission on 
Appointments? 

MR. LERUM. I think this amendment can stand 
because this is a mandate on both the President an e 
Commission on Appointments, if there will be one. n 
the meantime, I think an ad interim appointmen can 
be made so that the vacancy can be filled because our 
purpose here is to help the justices perform their unc 
tions. But if, as in the past, some positions of justices 
are not filled, then we are not helping in the promotion 
of a speedy settlement of justice. So, I think that cou 
be taken care of by an ad interim appointment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). In that 
case, we will proceed to vote. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. May we have a slight postponement? 
Our Chairman has to leave the room momentarily. 


482 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 11:14 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:29 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Lerum be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will 
Commissioner Lerum please restate his amendment so 
that we can proceed to the voting? 

MR. LERUM. I am requesting that my amendment 
be put to a vote. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will he 
please restate his amendment? 

MR. LERUM. My amendment reads: IN CASE OF 
ANY VACANCY, THE SAME SHALL BE FILLED 
WITHIN THREE MONTHS FROM THE OCCUR- 
RENCE THEREOF. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Maambong be recognized to propose an 
amendment on Section 3. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer and mem- 
bers of the Committee, I have the intention to propose 
an amendment on line 28, specifically on Section 3, 
paragraph 3. I intend to propose an amendment to 
delete the words “presidential decrees,” but before I do 
that, I would like to explain in a very short way. 

There are several categories of laws as understood by 
lawyers, students, courts and practitioners. The first 


category of law, of course, is the Constitution. The 
second one in the line of the six categories is the 
statutes, properly so-called, passed by the law-making 
body. In most of the books on statutory construction, 
presidential decrees have been categorized in the second 
category of laws, which is known as statutes, properly 
so-called. And, therefore, if that is the interpretation — 
and that has been interpreted by the Supreme Court in 
that like — the words “presidential decrees” would 
actually be covered by the word “law” which is found 
in Section 3, paragraph 2. 

I would like to add further that when we talk 
of presidential decrees, we are talking of several laws 
which not only affect the operation of the govern- 
ment; they also affect vested rights, contracts and even 
international commitments. For example, we have dif- 
ferent codes now which are in the nature of presidential 
decrees. We have the Labor Code, the Insurance Code, 
Child and Youth Welfare Code, Code of Muslim and 
Personal Laws, and I can go on. Actually, the reason in 
my intention to delete the words “presidential decrees” 
is that they have the category of law which is already 
mentioned under Section 3, paragraph 2, in contradis- 
tinction with the lower category of laws which are 
mentioned in Section 3, paragraph 3. These are the 
proclamations, orders, instructions, ordinances and 
other regulations which are lower in category. We 
submit the proposal for comment so that we can file the 
necessary motion, if needed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Regalado will reply. 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee actually took into 
account the matter of a presidential decree having the 
status of a law. But then, we also took into account that 
under the Transitory Provisions in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion, all presidential issuances were considered part of 
the law of the land. While it is true that it is generally 
accepted in academic circles that a presidential decree 
has the standing of a statutory law, not all people have 
agreed that it should be given that elevated level. The 
purpose here of the Committee is to avoid any question 
in the future because presidential decrees may eventual- 
ly be invoked in cases before the Supreme Court. The 
purpose, therefore, of the Committee is to make it 
specific with due respect to the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court to include presidential decrees, pro- 
clamations, orders, instructions, ordinances, and other 
regulations, just to avoid any question about the cover- 
age of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to be clarified on the 
specific terms on this matter. Is it the thinking of the 
Committee that presidential decrees do not have the 
status of statutory law or what is properly known by 
lawyers, students and judges as “statutes”? 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


483 


MR. PADILLA. “Statutes” usually refer to Republic 
Acts, Commonwealth Acts, Acts of the Philippine Com- 
mission, and laws passed by the National Assembly and 
usually approved by the President. 

One paragraph in the Transitory Provisions of the 
1973 Constitution states that all proclamations, pres- 
idential decrees, executive orders and letters of instruc- 
tions shall be valid and effective and shall form part of 
the law of the land. I believe that is the basis for some 
saying that presidential proclamations have the force 
and effect of law. But I believe there is a real difference 
between a statute, like a Republic Act or a Batas Pam- 
bansa that was approved by the National Assembly 
and a decree or proclamation issued unilaterally by the 
President especially during the martial law regime. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would not go so far as to 
categorize presidential decrees with general orders, 
letters of instructions, letters of implementation and 
proclamations. I am more concerned only in presiden- 
tial decrees promulgated by the President in the exercise 
of his lawmaking power. At any rate, in order to 
obviate any further discussion, I would like to reiterate 
my motion to delete the words “presidential decrees” 
on line 28, Section 3 (3). 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee regrets that we can- 
not accept the Commissioner’s amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In view of my serious thinking on 
this matter, I would like that this be put to a vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
body will put to a vote the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Maambong to delete “presidential de- 
crees” on line 28, Section 1, paragraph 3 on page 1. 

Those in favor of the amendment of Commissioner 
Maambong, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 23 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized to present an amendment on the same 
section. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. We have observed that in many 
instances, several justices of the Supreme Court are 
absent because they go abroad. As a result, there are 
many pending cases in the Supreme Court. Sometimes 
they cannot get a quorum to declare a law or a decree 
unconstitutional. 

We have limited the number of justices in the 
Supreme Court to 11, so allow me to introduce an 
amendment in continuation of line 18 on Section 3 
(1), which is to add a sentence to read as follows: IN 
NO CASE SHALL THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS 
PRESENT BE LESS THAN EIGHT. Thus, only three 
may be able to go outside the country. I know of a 
justice who is always going abroad. To remedy this, I 
suggest that we push through with my amendment to 
add a sentence on line 18, Section 3 (1) on page 1, as 
follows: IN NO CASE SHALL THE NUMBER OF 
MEMBERS PRESENT BE LESS THAN EIGHT. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee deeply sympathizes 
with the objective of the proponent. However, we 
believe that it may complicate the requirement for a 
quorum and so, we regret that we cannot accept the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is given a chance to articulate. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Will the sponsor please repeat the 
ruling of the Committee? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee sympathizes with the 
Commissioner’s objective, but we cannot accept the 
amendment because it may complicate the requirement 
for a quorum and thus delay the decision of cases all the 
more. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Precisely, we want to maintain 
that quorum especially when there are 1 1 justices only. 
A majority plus one is 7, so I propose 8 to be present. 
At one time I read in the papers that five justices went 
to a certain congress and another one went to the 
United States for medical treatment, until finally we 
had only about 7 or 8 left out of the 15. We are after 
the resolution of the pending cases in court. If the Com- 
mittee does not accept my amendment, I would request 
that it be put to a vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
body will put the amendment to a vote. 

Those in favor of the amendment of Commissioner de 
Castro, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand.) 


484 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


Those against, please raise their hand. ( Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 4 votes in favor and 18 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized to present an amendment to Section 4. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I propose to delete the term 
“natural-born” before the word “citizen” in Section 4, 
paragraphs (1) and (2). But before I actually propose 
my amendment, may I just ask the Chairman or any 
member of the Committee two questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Just two 
questions. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Does the term “natural-born” mean that all things 
being considered, ethical and professional, and qualifi- 
cations of the judges, the natural-born citizen is con- 
sidered better than the naturalized citizen? 

MR. CONCEPCION. We would prefer that the matter 
be voted upon by the Commission. As a matter of 
courtesy, we feel that it should be submitted to the 
body. 

BISHOP BACANI. So, let me just give them the 
reason why I submit this amendment. If we fear that a 
person who is going to be a judge or a justice may not 
yet be fully integrated into the Filipino way of life, 
then we can assure the realization of that factor by 
means other than by disqualifying in perpetuum a per- 
son who is not a natural-born citizen from holding any 
of these positions. Besides, if we reserve these positions 
only to natural-born citizens we will be classifying our 
citizens into two classes. In fact, the equal rights of 
citizens which we considered during the discussions on 
the Article on Citizenship do not apply in this particular 
case. Perhaps, if we do not put the term “natural-born” 
anymore, cases like that of Justice Teehankee will never 
crop up in the future. 

So, I would like to make this amendment an ex- 
pression of trust not only in the naturalized citizens, but 
also in the process of naturalizing them which, hope- 
fully, will become more thorough in the future. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is Com- 
missioner Bacani proposing that the term “natural- 


born” before the word “citizen” on lines 9 and 15 be 
deleted? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, so that any citizen of the 
Philippines with the necessary moral and professional 
qualifications can hold any position. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I want to explain briefly why 
the Committee cannot accept the proposal. There are 
other provisions in the Constitution which require, as 
one of the qualifications, a natural-born citizen, like, 
for instance, in the Office of the President and in other 
offices. So it is a matter that affects not only the 
Judiciary but the entire policy in drafting the Constitu- 
tion. For this reason, we prefer that the Commission 
vote on this question. It is intimately related to other 
provisions which are beyond the Committee’s jurisdic- 
tion. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. When I was proposing my 
amendments to the Article on Citizenship, I was told 
that the amendments had to be proposed individually 
during the period of amendments. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). We will 
now put the amendment to a vote. 

Those in favor of the amendment of Commissioner 
Bacani, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand.) 

All those against, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 3 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Nolledo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

My amendment is to add a new subsection (3) on 
Section 4 which reads; A MEMBER OF THE JUDI- 
CIARY MUST BE A PERSON OF PROVEN COM- 
PETENCE, INTEGRITY, PROBITY, AND INDE- 
PENDENCE. 

Before the Committee decides on whether or not to 
accept the amendment, I would like to explain it first. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, this is a moral provision lifted 
with modifications from the “Canons of Judicial 
Ethics.” The reputation of our justices and judges has 
been unsavory. I hate to say this, but it seems that it has 
become the general rule that the members of the Judi- 
ciary are corrupt and the few honest ones are the 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


485 


exceptions. We hear of justices and judges who would 
issue injunctive relief to the highest bidder and would 
decide cases based on hundreds of thousands, and even 
millions, mercenary reasons. 

The members of the deposed Supreme Court, with a 
few exceptions, catered to the political likings and 
personal convenience of Mr. Marcos by despicably 
surrendering their judicial independence. Why should we 
resist incorporating worthy moral principles in our 
fundamental law? Why should we canalize our con- 
servative thoughts within the narrow confines of pure 
legalism? 

I plead to the members of the Committee and to my 
colleagues in this Constitutional Commission to support 
my amendment in order to strengthen the moral fiber 
of our Judiciary. Let not our Constitution be merely a 
legal or political document. Let it be a moral document 
as well. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair commends Commissioner Nolledo for staying 
within the five-minute rule. 

Thank you very much. 

What does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. First, we wish to make of record that 
Commissioner Nolledo has filed with us such a resolu- 
tion, and we joyfully accept his amendment in the hope 
that with his amendment the lawyers in heaven will have 
more than St. Thomas More. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I would like to mention that Commissioners Napo- 
leon Rama and Crispino de Castro are coauthors of this 
amendment. 

I also thank the Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
amendment has been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for a 
suspension of the session until two-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair would like to know whether there are other Com- 
missioners who have registered to propose their amend- 
ments. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. Precisely, the 
next amendment would be a long amendment on a very 
critical provision to be presented by Commissioner 


Rodrigo. So, probably, it would be better if we suspend 
the session and discuss that amendment during the 
suspension. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended until two-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 11:57 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:37 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is a point 
of clarification to be made by Commissioner Sarmiento 
on the same provision. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask a clarificatory ques- 
tion of my committee, the Committee on the Judiciary. 
May I know whether or not the Judicial and Bar Coun- 
cil, an innovative creation of the Committee, has the 
power to receive complaints, administrative and criminal, 
against the members of the Bench and upon finding of a 
prima facie case, to prosecute the same before the 
Supreme Court or the Sandiganbayan? 

I asked the question because a few days ago, after the 
Committee on the Judiciary had submitted its report, I 
received a letter from a proper lawyer suggesting that 
the Judicial Commission, now the Judicial and Bar 
Council, be given the important function of receiving 
complaints, administrative and criminal, against the 
members of the Bench and upon finding of a prima facie 
case, to prosecute the same before the Supreme Court or 
Sandiganbayan. This lawyer, Mr. Presiding Officer, was 
responsible for prosecuting two RTC judges, one of 
whom was recently dismissed from the service by the 
Supreme Court. Briefly, allow me to read his letter. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can we 
just incorporate the letter into the Record so that we do 
not have to read the whole thing, and maybe if the 
Gentleman has sufficiently articulated his questions. . . 

MR. SARMIENTO. Maybe I need not read the letter 
but address the question directly to the members. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
could the Gentleman just address his question directly 


486 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


to the members of the Committee so that they can 
answer? 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask Commissioner Romulo 
who was the proponent of this Judicial and Bar Council, 
his baby? 

MR. ROMULO. The Judicial and Bar Council resolu- 
tions were also cosponsored by many others, such as 
Commissioners Davide, de los Reyes and Colayco — so 
this is a collective work. 

My answer is that under the present wording of the 
section it does not explicitly say that. The section goes 
on to read: “It may exercise such other functions and 
duties as the Supreme Court may assign to it.” It is 
within the original contemplation of the resolutions 
filed that such an activity may ultimately be handled by 
the Judicial and Bar Council. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Commissioner 
Romulo. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I propose the 
following amendment: On page 2, line 18, after the 
word “President,” insert the words WITH THE CON- 
SENT OF THE COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS, 
so that the sentence would read: “Section 5. The mem- 
bers of the Supreme Court and judges of lower courts 
shall be appointed by the President WITH THE CON- 
SENT OF THE COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS.” 
Then delete everything from the word “from” on line 
18, page 2, until line 15, on page 3. In other words, 
delete the whole provision creating the Judicial and Bar 
Council. 

May I explain my amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Honorable Rodrigo has five minutes. 

MR. RODRIGO. If my amendment is approved, then 
the provision will be exactly the same as the provision 
in the 1935 Constitution, Article VIII, Section 5. 

Our experience under the 1935 Constitution regard- 
ing appointments to the Judiciary by the President with 
the confirmation of the Commission on Appointments 
was very satisfactory. From President Quezon on to 
Osmefla, Roxas, Quirino, Magsaysay, Garcia, Macapagal 
and even Marcos before he declared martial law, the 
appointments to the Judiciary, especially to the 
Supreme Court and to the Court of Appeals, were high 


class, so much so that we had the highest, the utmost 
respect for the Judiciary. Before the declaration of 
martial law, we regarded the Supreme Court, up to the 
Concepcion Court, with awe and respect. And so why 
should we change this now, merely because of what 
happened during martial law? 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I have to concede that the 
respect and trust of the people in the Judiciary has 
deteriorated since the declaration of martial law. First 
of all, after martial law was declared, there was no more 
Commission on Appointments; all appointments were 
made by only one man, by the dictator. 

Secondly, with the declaration of martial law and 
even after the approval of the 1973 Constitution with 
the transitory provisions, the security of tenure of the 
justices and judges was demolished because the Pres- 
ident, the dictator, could remove any justice or judge by 
the mere expediency of appointing his successor. Not 
only that, the President, the dictator, was in office for 
20 years, and so for the first time in our history, all the 
members of the Supreme Court and of the Court of 
Appeals and a majority of the judges of the lower 
courts were appointed by just one man. And on top of 
that, our economy deteriorated — our currency lost its 
value and, consequently, the salaries received by the 
members of the Judiciary were not sufficient. On top of 
that, the example of graft and corruption came from 
above and this contaminated the members of our Judi- 
ciary, but this is not the fault of the system of appoint- 
ment under the 1935 Constitution which we found 
very, very satisfactory. 

If we do not remove the proposed amendment on the 
creation of the Judicial and Bar Council, this will be a 
diminution of the appointing power of the highest 
magistrate of the land, of the President of the Philip- 
pines elected by all the Filipino people. The appointing 
power will be limited by a group of seven people who 
are not elected by the people but only appointed. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, if this Council is created, there 
will be no uniformity in our constitutional provisions on 
appointments. The members of the Judiciary will be 
segregated from the rest of the government. Even a 
municipal judge cannot be appointed by the President 
except upon recommendation or nomination of three 
names by this committee of seven people, commis- 
sioners of the Commission on Elections, the COA and 
Commission on Civil Service . . . even ambassadors, 
generals of the Army will not come under this restric- 
tion. Why are we going to segregate the Judiciary from 
the rest of our government in the appointment of the 
high-ranking officials? 

Another reason is that this Council will be ineffective. 
It will just besmirch the honor of our President without 
being effective at all because this Council will be under 
the influence of the President. Four out of seven are 
appointees of the President, and they can be reap- 
pointed when their term ends. Therefore, they would 
kowtow to the President. A fifth member is the Minister 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


487 


of Justice, an alter ego of the President. Another mem- 
ber represents the legislature. In all probability, the con- 
trolling party in the legislature belongs to the President 
and, therefore, this representative from the National 
Assembly is also under the influence of the President. 
And may I say, Mr. Presiding Officer, that even the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is an appointee of 
the President. So, it is futile; he will be influenced 
anyway by the President. 

And on interpellation, the Committee, in answer to 
one of my questions, said that if the Council submits to 
the President the names of three nominees and the Pres- 
ident does not want to appoint any of those three, the 
President can ask the Council to submit another list of 
three. We are inserting here a provision which demeans 
the President elected by our people, the members of the 
Commission on Appointments, composed of elected 
representatives of the people in our legislature. 

May I have two more minutes? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, I 
was going to say that the Gentleman has one minute 
left. 

MR. RODRIGO. Why should this council of seven 
appointed persons be more powerful than the Commis- 
sion on Appointments composed of legislators elected 
by the people.^ Under this proposal, this committee of 
seven is more powerful than the Commission on Ap- 
pointments because while the Commission on Appoint- 
ments has the power of later or subsequent censorship, 
this committee has the power of previous censorship. 
Before the appointment is made, this committee already 
censors. 

Another reason is we will be burdening the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court with the burden of the 
Judiciary. I think we should not burden him anymore. 
And in practice, the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court will be swamped by people recommending this 
and that person — from Aparri to Jolo. I know this. This 
is practical politics. We will drag even the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court into politics. 

The last reason is financial. It was stated by the Com- 
mittee that we reduce the number of members of the 
Supreme Court from 15 to 11 — one of the reasons 
being to save money. If we create this Council with 
emoluments and allowances — they will have to have an 
office and personnel — I think the expenditure that we 
will incur is much, much more than whatever amount 
we save by reducing the number of justices from 1 5 to 
11 . 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you very much, Commissioner Rodrigo. 

What does the Committee say? 


MR. CONCEPCION. The Judicial and Bar Council is 
no doubt an innovation. But it is an innovation made in 
response to the public clamor in favor of eliminating 
politics in the appointment of judges. 

At present, there will be about 2,200 positions of 
judges, excluding those of the Supreme Court, to be 
filled. We feel that neither the President alone nor the 
Commission on Appointments would have the time and 
the means necessary to study the background of every 
one of the candidates for appointment to the various 
courts in the Philippines, specially considering that we 
have accepted this morning the amendment to the effect 
that no person shall be qualified unless he has a proven 
high sense of morality and probity. These are matters 
that require time, which we are sure the President does 
not have except, probably, he would have to endorse 
the matter to the National Bureau of Investigation or to 
some intelligence agency of the government. And we do 
not think that these agencies are qualified to pass upon 
questions of morality, integrity and competence of 
lawyers. 

As regards the implication that we are, in effect, 
depriving the President of the, power of appointment, all 
we do consider is the fact that the members of the 
Council are all appointees of the President. They are 
alter egos of the President so, in effect, they are exercis- 
ing the power by virtue of the appointment by the 
President. So, the alleged negation or denial or emascu- 
lation of the appointing power of the President does not 
really exist since all members of the Council, except 
those who are ex-officio members who, by the way, are 
also appointees of the President, are all appointees of 
the President. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has two more minutes. Is there anybody else 
in the Committee who would wish to answer? 


MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Colayco will answer 
and then I will follow him. 


MR. COLAYCO. The decision of the Committee in 
creating the Judicial and Bar CouncU was finally to 
establish the independence of the Judiciary. We all tal 
about the independence of the three departments o our 
government and everybody knows, including t e 
pellator, that the Judiciary is not independent It is the 
President who chooses, names and appoints the judges, 
and who is the President? He is a politician. 
that most of us know that our present Presi en is 
somebody above politics, a lot of rumors 
going around that politics has somehow managed to gei 
into the present reorganization of the Judiciary. • 
inescapable because the President owes pohtica favors^ 
They are not easy to refuse or to fail to acknowledge 
the part of the President-elect. 

Second, how can we say that the Judiciary 
pendent when it is the Legislative that ho s an 
trols the disbursement of funds to maintain it. 


488 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


Third, the Commission on Appointments is not as 
sincere in its mission to censor the qualifications of the 
appointees to the Judiciary as has been mentioned by 
the Honorable Rodrigo because many appointees who 
had to pass through the Commission on Appointments 
were witnesses to the fact that some members of the 
Commission on Appointments had used it to force the 
appointments of other people as a compromise for the 
approval of those who have been already designated by 
the President. This was an open secret. 

So, we felt that the creation of this Council would 
ensure more the appointment of judges and justices who 
will be chosen for their confidence and their moral 
qualifications, rather than to favor or to give something 
in return for their help in electing the President. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, in approaching 
this question of the independence of the Judiciary, 
which I do not think anyone will dispute is a necessary 
goal, the Committee has used a holistic approach — as if 
it were a four-legged stool. One of the essential legs is 
the appointment of competent men, honest and so on. 
Another is, of course, the security of tenure. The third 
is fiscal independence of the Supreme Court. And if 
any of the legs of the stool is missing, then the stool 
cannot stand. 

Our experience has been, even with the Commission 
on Appointments, that politics does get into the picture. 
We have tried to compromise in arriving at a unique 
system for us by making the Council a composition of 
representatives of the three branches of the government 
plus a wide spectrum of the private sector, and at the 
same time, without demeaning the power of the Pres- 
ident to. appoint because she or he inputs the considera- 
tions through the Minister of Justice; and the legislature, 
on the other hand, is able to express its considerations 
through the representatives of Congress. So we have 
what we believe is a good compromise. The Bar, equally 
for the first time, will be represented and has a definite 
say on appointments; and the private sector, as welt as 
the law schools, is given a representative. As we will 
notice, the private sector representative need not be a 
lawyer. So, as I say, it is a holistic approach. 

Finally, the problem of filling a vacancy in the 
Supreme Court within the three-month limit which we 
have all accepted, and the fact that the legislature may 
be in recess, is solved by this provision. I think we have 
to try something different, something radical because 
the past has not worked. And insofar as the Committee 
is concerned, we can have any form of government we 
like and we are safe, provided we have an independent 
and competent Judiciary. The English experience cer- 
tainly proves this. And if we are trying to bolster the 
independence of the Supreme Court, it is because in the 
end it is the Judiciary that will protect all of us. We are 
not trying to create an independent republic out of the 
Judiciary, only an autonomous region. 

Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I add 
a few words to the comments made by the elders? I am 
also a member of the Committee on the Judiciary. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee’s time has been exhausted. Commissioner 
Sarmiento. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask for liberality, Mr. 
Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, this Mem- 
ber believes that the creation of the Judicial and Bar 
Council is a step in the right direction towards achieving 
judicial independence. In the 1971 Constitutional Con- 
vention, many resolutions were filed — more or less 10 
resolutions — criticizing the Commission on Appoint- 
ments of the 1935 Constitution as “a highly partisan 
bargaining center” — and to quote then Con-Con dele- 
gate, now Commissioner Napoleon Rama, the commis- 
sion was “an instrument of blackmail.” 

Other countries have Judicial and Bar Councils in 
their constitutions, such as Thailand, Portugal, Spain, 
Italy and the States of Arizona and Alaska. In the book 
entitled — and I would like to share this with my fel- 
low Commissioners — Guide to Current American 
Government, we have these statements concerning this 
legislative commission on appointments, and I quote: 

Congress exerts influence over the judiciary in another 
major way — through the Senate’s prerogative to advise and 
consent in the President’s selection of candidates for judi- 
cial offices, including not only Supreme Court Justices but 
also other federal court judges. The power to name mem- 
bers of the federal judiciary to well-paid, prestigious life- 
time posts is perhaps the strongest patronage lever pos- 
sessed by an incumbent President. As a result, federaljudge- 
ships traditionally go to persons of the President’s political 
party despite the stated intention of almost every Chief 
Executive to make nonpartisan judicial appointments. 

The last paragraph says: 

In apparent contradiction of the American ideal of an 
independent nonpartisan judiciary, the process of selecting 
federal judges is pure politics. No constitutional guidelines 
exist beyond the provision that the President shall 
nominate and with the consent of the Senate, shall appoint 
judges of the Supreme Court and all other officers of the 
United States. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I also ask 
for a little leniency so that I can speak just for half-a- 
minute. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


489 


The Commission on Appointments was mentioned as 
an instrument of blackmail. Since nobody is here to 
defend the Commission on Appointments, I will stand 
up in its defense. I was a member of the Commission 
on Appointments for 10 years and the record of that 
Commission on Appointments, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
was excellent. We had a few black sheep once in a while, 
but that was unavoidable in any organization. 

Thank you very much. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
body is now ready to vote on the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Rodrigo. 

On page 2, line 1 8 of Section 5, after the word “Pres- 
ident,” insert the phrase “WITH THE CONSENT OF 
THE COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS.” Delete 
everything, starting from the word “from” on line 18, 
all the way to page 3 up to line 15, which, in effect, 
eliminates the creation of the Judicial and Bar Council. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 8 votes in favor and 26 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner de Castro be recognized for an amendment on 
Section 6. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

My amendment is a very minor one on page 3, Sec- 
tion 6 (4), lines 8 and 9. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have an 
anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized for an anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am a member of the Committee but 
I am constrained to present this amendment. On page 2, 
line 20, between the period (.) after “vacancy” and the 
word “Such,” insert a new sentence to read as follows; 
THE PRESIDENT SHALL ISSUE THE APPOINT- 


MENT WITHIN 60 DAYS FROM THE SUBMISSION 
OF THE LIST. 

MR. ROMULO. May I advise Commissioner Davide 
that this morning. Commissioner Lerum introduced a 
similar amendment with regard only to the Supreme 
Court which we have accepted. The amendment pro- 
vides that there be an appointment within three months. 
Is the Gentleman suggesting that the period will now 
apply to the lower courts? 

MR. DAVIDE. Since there was already an earlier 
amendment with regard to the Supreme Court, this will 
now apply to the lower courts. 

MR. ROMULO. The sense of the Committee is that 
60 days is awfully short and that the Council, as well as 
the President, may have difficulties with that. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am prepared to suggest 90 days so 
that the vacancy will not be long, otherwise, the Pres- 
ident may not also act on the list and, therefore, we will 
have a vacant court for a long time. 

MR. ROMULO. Is the Gentleman making it uniform, 
therefore, for the Supreme Court and the lower courts? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, uniform. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. May I request a suspension of the 
session, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 3:11 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:12 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, if the Commis- 
sioner will make it a uniform 90 days, the Commi ee 
accepts and would then leave it to the body to accept 
the amendment or not. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to go for a uniform rule. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). How 
will the sentence now read? 


490 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Could the body suggest the proper 
wording? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Perhaps 
then the wording of the amendment of Commissioner 
Davide will have to be harmonized with the wording of 
the amendment of Commissioner Lerum which has 
already been passed. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. DAVIDE. May I request a one-minute sus- 
pension, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 3:13 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:14 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The proposed amendment is a new paragraph to 
Section 5 and it will be placed between lines 21 and 22. 
It will read as follows: WITH RESPECT TO THE 
LOWER COURTS, THE PRESIDENT SHALL ISSUE 
THE APPOINTMENT WITHIN NINETY DAYS FROM 
THE SUBMISSION OF THE LIST. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment proposed by 
Commissioner Davide. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner de Castro be recognized to make an amend- 
ment on Section 6. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

As I was saying before the Honorable Davide stood 
up for an anterior amendment, I have a minor amend- 
ment on Section 6 (4), page 3, lines 8 and 9, to delete 
the clause “and the ex-officio members shall receive 
such allowances.” 


As proposed, the whole sentence in Section 6 (4) 
will read; “The regular members of the Council shall 
receive such emoluments as may be determined by the 
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court shall provide in its 
annual budget the appropriations for the Council.” 

I have explained my reason for the amendment 
during the debate and interpellations of the Committee 
on General Provisions regarding allowances being 
considered as double compensation. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Committee will accept the 
amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the proposed amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized to present an amendment on the same 
section. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, on page 2, 
Section 6 (2), lines 29 and 30, the provision says: “The 
regular members of the Council shall be appointed by 
the President for a term of four years.” I would like to 
propose an amendment by adding to the sentence the 
phrase WITH THE CONSENT OF THE COMMISSION 
ON APPOINTMENTS. 

The reason for this is, in the exposition made by the 
Committee, the purpose of the creation of the Judicial 
and Bar Council is to insulate the appointments in the 
Judiciary against political influence. However, the com- 
position of the Judicial and Bar Council does not 
really insulate it against the political influence of the 
President. 

So, in effect, we insulate the Council against the 
political influence of the legislature, but we do not 
insulate it against the political influence of the Pres- 
ident. In fact, we make the political influence of the 
President prevail because the Council is heavily com- 
posed of people appointed by the President. 

The requirement of confirmation by the Commission 
on Appointments, which I understand is provided in the 
proposal for the legislature, will have the effect of a 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


491 


check on the discretion of the President in the appoint- 
ments of the members of the Council. So, we have 
double insulation against political influence. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Can we have a few minutes? 

The Committee is disposed to accept the amendment. 
However, I think we would like to point out that 
instead of “ ‘THE’ COMMISSION,” the amendment 
would say “A COMMISSION,” since there apparently is 
a question as to what more . . . 

FR. BERNAS. I would be agreeable to that. That 
would be the sense of my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). How 
will the whole amendment now read? 

FR. BERNAS. So, the first sentence of Section 6 (2) 
shall now read: “The regular members of the Council 
shall be appointed by the President for a term of four 
(4) years WITH THE CONSENT OF A COMMISSION 
ON APPOINTMENTS.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized to present an amend- 
ment to Section 7. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer and the honor- 
able sponsors, Section 7 (5), page 4, line 13, reads: 

Promulgate rules concerning the protection and enforce- 
ment of constitutional rights, pleading, practice, and pro- 
cedure in all courts, the admission to the practice of law, 
the integrated bar, and legal assistance to the under- 
privileged. 

My proposed amendment constitutes a substitution 
on line 1 7 and subsequent deletion of the next sentence 
which reads: “The National Assembly may repeal, alter, 
or supplement the said rules with the advice and concur- 
rence of the Supreme Court.” 

Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be allowed to explain my 
proposal? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Commissioner has five minutes. 


MS. AQUINO. The rules of practice and the rules of 
procedure in court practice are very technical such that 
logically we confer upon the Supreme Court the power 
to promulgate such rules. Conformably with the for- 
mulation in Section 7 (5), the Committee has vested in 
the Supreme Court the power to promulgate the same 
rules. However, even as the Committee has vested in the 
Supreme Court this power — the power to initiate the 
rules — it has, likewise, reserved to the National Assem- 
bly the power to repeal and to revoke. 

I have the sense that when the Committee reserves to 
the National Assembly the power of repealing and 
revoking, it gives the legislature a mantle of superiority 
over the Supreme Court. I would like to propose this 
amendment on line 17: Instead of the period (.) after 
the word “privileged,” we place a comma (,) followed 
by the phrase WITH THE CONCURRENCE OF THE 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. In other words, it will be a 
full 360-degree swing from granting the power to repeal 
and revoke to the National Assembly to just granting it 
the power to confirm or concur. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 


MR. ROMULO. We would like a clarification because 
under the proposed provision as it reads, the Supreme 
Court, in effect, has a veto power. As we understand the 
Commissioner’s proposition, it is now the National 
Assembly which will be given the veto power. 

MS. AQUINO. If the intendment of the term “con- 
currence” is antecedent requisite for its validity, yes; 
but I would like to rid the formulation of the odium ot 
granting the National Assembly a superior power ol 
revoking and repealing. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, but the Supreme Court can 
render that power futile by vetoing it. 


MS. AQUINO. That is so, if we would retain the next 
:ntence, but I was proposing to delete the sen enc 
hich reads: “The National Assembly may repeal, alte , 
r supplement the said rules with the advice and concur- 
:nce of the Supreme Court.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, that amend- 
ent was similar to my amendment, but mine 
ive been just to repeal that sentence. It 
iide from just repealing it, tl^ Commissioner 


. AQUINO. My concern here is this: There is 

mtly an overemphasis on the independence a 

th of the Judiciary, which I think is warranted m 

rinciple of separation of powers. But as 

pointed out by a colleague, the essence o p 

)f powers balances off only with 
_ _ t ¥_ QQ we insulate one 


492 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


agency, we also give it free play and expose it to the 
dynamics of checks and balances such that I will be 
willing to concede to the National Assembly’s power of 
confirming the rules as drafted by the Supreme Court. 

MR. RODRIGO. So after deleting that sentence, what 
is the phrase that is added after the word “privileged”? 

MS. AQUINO. After the word “privileged,” place a 
comma (,) and insert the phrase WITH THE CONCUR- 
RENCE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY. My only 
concern is to expand the formulation of giving a possi- 
ble impression which would give the National Assembly 
superiority over the Supreme Court. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Commissioner would not want 
to remove that power completely from the National 
Assembly. 

MS. AQUINO. At first, I had that intention, but as I 
have mentioned earlier, I am conceding that power now 
to the National Assembly if only to allow a full play to 
checks and balances. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, that is correct. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). May we 
have the comments of the Committee? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we have 
a suspension, to ask Commissioner Aquino to explain to 
us. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 3:26 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:37 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

After a conference with the sponsors - we have agreed 
on a compromise formulation, Mr. Presiding Officer - 
the Committee agreed to my proposal to delete the sen- 
tence beginning on line 17 which reads: “the National 
Assembly may repeal, alter, or supplement the said rules 
with the advice and concurrence of the Supreme Court,” 
and in return I am willing to withdraw my proposed 
amendment to incorporate the phrase WITH THE 
CONCURRENCE OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
after the word “privileged.” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. We accept the amendment of Com- 
missioner Aquino, it being understood that both bodies, 
the Supreme Court and the Legislature, have their in- 
herent powers. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Maambongbe 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

On the same Section 7 (5), page 4, line 23, 1 move to 
delete the words “quasi-judicial bodies” so that the pro- 
posed sentence would read: “Rules of procedure of 
special courts shall take effect upon approval by the 
Supreme Court.” May I just explain that quasi-judicial 
bodies actually are not inferior courts. Properly, they 
belong to the executive department, and I can see no 
reason why the Supreme Court should have the power 
of approval of the rules of procedure. Parenthetically, I 
would like to indicate that in going over the rules of 
most quasi-judicial bodies, the last portion always states 
that the rules of court have suppletory effect on the 
rules which we have promulgated. Therefore, I feel that 
the words “quasi-judicial bodies” should not be in- 
dicated in this provision and the authority of the 
Supreme Court to approve any rules should mainly refer 
to rules of procedure of special courts and not to quasi- 
judicial bodies. 

I have stated my motion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Before 
the Committee gives its comments. Commissioner de 
los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
ask if the proponent of the amendment is agreeable to 
an amendment to the amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Gladly, if it would not conflict 
with my own amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The rules of procedure of 
special courts shall be valid unless otherwise disapproved 
by the Supreme Court. That will be reversed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let me understand this correctly. 
The sentence would now read: “Rules of procedure of 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


493 


special courts shall take effect upon approval by the 
Supreme Court,” and then the Gentleman will add that 
provision? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, Commissioner. The 
sentence would rather read: “Rules of procedure of 
special courts shall BE VALID UNLESS DISAP- 
PROVED by the Supreme Court.” In other words, in- 
stead of the rules being effective upon approval, they 
are effective unless otherwise disapproved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It would amount to the same 
thing. I have no objection, but my main point is to 
delete the words “quasi-judicial bodies.” 

I might as well add, Mr. Presiding Officer, that 
because of the volume of work of the Supreme Court, 
I recall very distinctly that the canons of professional 
responsibility which were submitted to the Supreme 
Court back in the ’70s were never acted upon by the 
body. We are still using the canons of professional ethics 
and the canons of judicial ethics of the American Bar 
Association. I think the Integrated Bar and Commis- 
sioner Regalado submitted that canons of professional 
responsibility and the Supreme Court never acted on 
these. There are so many quasi-judicial bodies, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, and the Supreme Court may not have 
the time to go over their rules. But I have no objection 
to the proposition of Commissioner de los Reyes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). So, as 
approved, how does the amendment, as amended, read? 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I request Commissioner de 
los Reyes to rephrase the amendment to the amend- 
ment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The amendment, as amended, 
now reads: “Rules of procedure of special courts 
shall BE VALID UNLESS DISAPPROVED by the 
Supreme Court.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Regalado will reply. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I propose an amendment 
to the amendment to include QUASI-JUDICIAL 
BODIES? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner de Castro, the amendment is to delete the words 
“quasi-judicial bodies,” so we will have to rule on that 
first. Besides, the Gentleman’s amendment is already a 
third degree amendment. Can we now have the com- 
ments of the Committee? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, considering 
the statement of the Chair regarding the prohibition on 


third degree amendments, probably Commissioners de 
los Reyes, de Castro and I could approach the Commit- 
tee and formulate the proposed amendment at one time 
so that we can save time not talking here on the floor. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Let us 
first hear the Committee, if it is willing to accept the 
concept, to begin with. 

MR. ROMULO. We are willing to discuss it, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 3:43 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:47 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, after 
lonsultation with the Committee and after taking into 
:onsideration the proposed amendment of ^ 
sioner de Castro, I would like to ask o nHment 
los Reyes to rephrase his amendment to the amendmen . 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
nissioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. 
amendment on lines 22 to 24, page , wi Quasi- 

lows: “Rules of procedure of special courts an q 
iudicial bodies shall REMAIN VALID AND EFF^ 
nVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED by the Supreme 

:ourt.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer it has been 

explained to this Member by the 
reason for retaining “quasi-judiciai bodies is t 
actually most of the decisions are appeale 
Supreme Court. 

I now accept the amendment ” 

without deleting the phrase “quasi-judici 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
Joes the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. 

Committee has accepted the amendment, as 


494 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment, as amended, is aj)proved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, point of inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner Foz may please proceed. 

MR. FOZ. I would like to ask the Committee whether 
or not the term “quasi-judicial bodies” includes the 
constitutional commissions; 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I believe they are covered by the 
term “quasi-judicial bodies” as long as they have adju- 
dicatory functions and rules related thereto. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to propose an amendment on Section 9 which is as fol- 
lows: THE ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION OVER 
LOWER COURTS SHALL BE PRESCRIBED BY LAW 
PROVIDED THAT, UNLESS SO PROVIDED SUCH 
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION REMAINS 
VESTED IN THE SUPREME COURT. 

May I be allowed to explain? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Guingona has five minutes to explain. 

MR. GUINGONA. There were nine Commissioners, 
including this Member, that filed Proposed Resolution 
No. 363, wherein we gave the following reasons: 

1. Administrative supervision is fundamentally and 
essentially an executive function which is inherent in 
the executive and which supports the basic principle 
of separation of powers. 

The eminent American jurist, Felix Frankfurter, 
speaking of the court in the case of Coleman v. Miller, 
had observed and I quote: “Our exclusive business is 
litigation.” Our court in the Philippines in the case of 
Manila Electric Company vs. Pasay Transportation said: 
“It is judicial power and judicial power only which is 
exercised by the Supreme Court.” 

2. Justices of the Supreme Court and Cabinet mem- 
bers and other officials differ as to their primary or 
principal qualifications. 


In the case of the former, it would be their outstand- 
ing legal and judicial expertise, while in the case of the 
latter, administrative or management ability would be 
of primary concern. 

3. The Supreme Court is a collegiate body. 

We know that collective authority is less efficient and 
less effective in matters of administration and super- 
vision. 

4. The Supreme Court already exercises judicial 
supervision over the lower courts. If we were to add 
administrative supervision, the concentration of au- 
thority in the Supreme Court might affect the growth of 
law in the country. 

5. The statements of law practitioners, including 
Commissioners Nolledo and Maambong — where Com- 
missioner de Castro recalled what he called his horri- 
fying experience with court operations — indicated that 
such operations had had their share of inefficiency or 
neglect. And yet, such undesirable happenings occurred 
during a period when the lower courts were, in fact, 
under the administrative supervision of the Supreme 
Court. 

Notwithstanding these arguments, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, this humble Member would not object strenuously 
to the removal from the Supreme Court the administra- 
tive supervision over the lower courts. But I feel that 
there is a very strong and compelling argument to con- 
sider where this administrative supervision of lower 
courts should be vested during these times. This argu- 
ment is the fact that such a provision would work 
against the interest of justice in this country. There 
would be a denial of justice resulting in delays in render- 
ing decisions. The Supreme Court, considering the 
intensive and extensive work required in administrative 
supervision of literally hundreds of lower courts and 
22,000 personnel, would have no time to attend to this 
complicated work of administrative supervision without 
sacrificing the principal function of adjudication. It 
cannot simply wash its hands by saying it delegates this 
authority to a court administrator, because in the final 
analysis, it is still the Supreme Court which is vested 
with the supervision. 

May I quote Mr. Toto Olivera in one of his recent 
columns: 

It is said the Supreme Court is so swamped with cases 
that it is not fair to burden the overworked magistrates 
with administrative functions. 

In support of this view, proponents of the move to relieve 
the tribunal of this administrative duty point out that there 
are cases still pending adjudication by the Supreme Court 
dating back ten years or more. 

Considering the backlog of cases that exists and the 
fact that there have been additional authorities granted 
to the Supreme Court - the right to review cases 
involving political questions under Section 1, second 
paragraph of the committee report, the appeal by the 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


495 


state from a judgment of acquittal, the suspension 
of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, and so 
forth — it is reasonable for us to conclude that it would 
take quite a number of years before the Supreme Court 
could dispose of all past cases, assuming that it could 
comply with the 24-month mandatory period to render 
a decision, which I doubt. Also, we are reducing the 
number of members from 1 5 to 11. 

Justice John Catron of the United States said, and I 
quote: 

The Constitution is a practical instrument made by 

practical men and suited to the circumstances in which it 

was intended to operate. 

Obviously, the prevailing circumstances which I have 
enumerated do not justify the granting of administrative 
supervision to the Supreme Court at this time. So, let 
the question as to which body or office should exercise 
administrative supervision over lower courts, whether it 
is the Supreme Court, the Ministry of Justice or a 
separate body to be created by law, be determined by a 
legislative enactment or by a direct action of the people 
through referendum. Let us not reject the logical and 
reasonable presumption of regularity in the performance 
of official duties. Let us not ignore the political 
maturity of our people which was amply demonstrated 
by their actions before, during and after the February 7 
election. Let us always remember the wise words of 
Justice Catron that we should include in our Constitu- 
tion provisions which would take into account the 
circumstances of our times, including, if I may use the 
words of Commissioner de Castro, the horrifying num- 
ber of pending cases. 

I, therefore, submit, Mr. Presiding Officer, that we 
should allow the law to determine where the adminis- 
trative supervision of lower courts should be at a given 
time depending upon the circumstances that exist. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you. 

What does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee cannot accept the 
amendment. This is one provision the Committee is 
willing to die for. We believe it could set back the 
administration of justice 20 years. We deny the major 
premises of the proponent. First, administrative super- 
vision of lower courts is not yet an inherent power of 
the Judiciary. Second, it would not overload the 
Supreme Court because we have a court administrator 
who will take care of it. On the contrary, transferring 
this administrative supervision to the Minister of Jus- 
tice would overburden the Minister because he has 
thousands of prosecutors to supervise. Finally, in the 
1935 Constitution it made sense of the power to be 
vested in the Secretary of Justice because under Sections 
67 and 97 of the Judiciary Act of 1948, the power of 


removal of judges was vested in the President. However, 
the 1973 Constitution so wisely provided that super- 
vision should be left to the Judiciary because of the 
principle of separation of powers and this is the fourth 
leg of the stool I was talking about. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). We will 
put the Commissioner’s amendment to a vote. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, in view of 
the manifestation of Commissioner Romulo that the 
Committee members are willing to die for this provision, 

I will not ask for a vote. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
proposed amendment is withdrawn. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. This is a very minor amendment 
on Section 1 0, page 5, line 5, which is to put a comma (,) 
after “incapacitated” and to add AS DETERMINED BY 
A GOVERNMENT PHYSICIAN and another comma (,). 
The reason is that sometimes the incapacitation of an 
individual is determined by the individual himself; it is 
difficult to put the matter of determining whether or 
not an individual is incapacitated on the individual 
himself. And yet he is only 67 years old and he con- 
tinues to work till he reaches the age of 70. 

In the Armed Forces, incapacitation is determined 
by the medical officer, more particularly the medical 
officer of the V. Luna General Hospital. An individual 
cannot say he is incapacitated. Hence, as amended, the 
whole section shall read: “The Members of the Supreme 
Court and judges of lower courts shall hold office during 
good behavior until they reach the age of seventy years 
or become incapacitated, AS DETERMINED BY A 
GOVERNMENT PHYSICIAN, to discharge the duties 
of their office.” The rest of the sentence remains. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I am afraid the Committee 
cannot accept the proposed amendment. As a matter o 
fact, and I say, fact, the actual practice has been or 
the Supreme Court to designate or create a committee 
of doctors to go over the case and submit these records 
to the Supreme Court to examine the whole matter and 
make the recommendations. 


496 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


The court has deemed it best to choose in every case 
the doctors who shall probably determine the incapa- 
citation of a member or judge to insure impartiality. 

MR. DE CASTRO. In that case, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
we can put AS DETERMINED BY THE GOVERN- 
MENT PHYSICIAN CHOSEN BY THE SUPREME 
COURT, because if we leave it at that, nobody will 
determine the incapacity of that member or judge. 

MR. CONCEPCION. As I said, it is determined by a 
committee of doctors created by the Supreme Court. 
Another thing, the head of clinics is generally engaged 
in the general practice of medicine, whereas the in- 
capacity may require an intervention of experts in 
special lines which are supposed to be related to the 
incapacity in question. So that is the present practice 
which is more acceptable. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is the 
proponent insisting on his amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I do, because while I agree with the 
Honorable Concepcion on his explanation, it must be 
stated in the Constitution who really determines the 
incapacitation of that judge. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will the 
proponent then please restate his amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 10 would now read: “The 
Members of the Supreme Court and judges of lower 
courts shall hold office during good behavior until they 
reach the age of seventy years or become incapacitated 
AS DETERMINED BY A GOVERNMENT PHYSICIAI^ 
to discharge the duties of their office.” The rest of th^ 
sentence remains. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). We will 
now put the amendment to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 2 votes in favor and 31 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Maambong be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, my pro- 
posed amendment refers to the same section mentioned 
by Commissioner de Castro. On page 5, line 5, change 
“seventy” to SIXTY-FIVE. I understand this is a very 
emotional issue. I do not want to burden the Commis- 
sion with the pros and cons of the word “seventy” or 
“sixty-five.” I think all the Members are well aware of 
the issues on this. So, in the event the Committee does 
not accept the amendment, all I ask is for it to at least 
discuss before this body in brief the pros and cons of 
the issue so that we can vote thereon. I now formally 
move to change “seventy” to SIXTY-FIVE on page 5, 
line 5. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Committee had proposals 
to increase the age of retirement rather than to decrease 
the same. Also, the Committee heard the opinion of the 
present Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and a 
former Chief Justice, as well as that of the Solicitor 
General, and considering their experience apart from the 
personal experience of the one addressing the Commis- 
sion now, it felt that in general the retirement age of 70 
years is a fair choice. Many of the present members of 
the Supreme Court are past the age of 65 years. One of 
them is Justice Feria who is 69 years old, but he is one 
of the most active, most efficient, and most competent 
justices, not to speak of his integrity. There were some, 
perhaps, in the past, who might have retired from the 
Supreme Court at an earlier age, like Justices Recto and 
Laurel. But we all know that they had retired not be- 
cause of incapacity but for some other personal reasons. 
In general, the retirement of a majority of those who 
left the court below the age of 65 years was due to 
financial considerations. They could not live adequately 
and decently on the salary that they were receiving and 
which the members of the court are presently receiving. 
I think that seventy is a fair choice. Of course, if we 
were to speak about the experience of the American 
Supreme Court, a number of its justices retired at the 
age of 90. But these are, of course, exceptional cases. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has two more minutes. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Suarez would like to 
comment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Commissioner Maambong will recall 
that the 1935 Constitution provided that the retirement 
age for justices be fixed at 70 years. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, I understand that. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


497 


MR. SUAREZ. In the 1971 Constitutional Conven- 
tion, it was decided to reduce the retirement age from 
70 to 65 years on the theory that many of the judges 
opted to retire at the age of 65 years without necessarily 
indulging on the assumption that age would reduce their 
efficiency level. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will not question that state- 
ment, considering that the Commissioner was a member 
of the 1971 Constitutional Convention. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. And that was the reason 
which motivated the delegates of the 1971 Constitu- 
tional Convention to propose the reduction of the 
retirement age of the judges from 70 to 65 years. 

On the other hand — and this is what gives a very 
unsavory characterization to the increase of the retire- 
ment age from 65 to 70 years — in the January 1980 
elections, a plebiscite question was tacked on the ballot 
for the local elections which called for the increase in 
the retirement age of justices and judges from 65 to 70 
years, because at that time, the Chief Justice and no 
less than four Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 
who happened to be former classmates of Mr. Marcos 
were approaching the age of 65 years. It was felt by 
the Chief Executive that this problem should be met 
squarely to allow continuity in the martial law adminis- 
tration insofar as its interpretation affected the member- 
ship in the Supreme Court. 

Is the Commissioner also aware of that situation, 
Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am particularly aware of the 
date of its submission in the plebiscite as it was tacked 
on the 1980 elections ballot because then I ran as 
Provincial Board Member of Cebu. But as regards the 
Commissioner’s other statement of the reasons there 
was such submission to the people in the plebiscite, I 
have no personal knowledge. 

MR. SUAREZ. In any event, the result was the retire- 
ment age of judges and justices was increased from 65 to 
70 years. And the game of political “yo-yo” as far as 
affecting the Judiciary was concerned was terminated, 
and is sought to be terminated with this proposal to fix 
the retirement age of judges and justices from 65 to 70 
years under the new Constitution. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but I would just like to 
inject the statement that there is now a general clamor 
of the members of the Judiciary, especially in the lower 
courts, that the retirement age be reduced to 65 years. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is a different matter, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. We are only trying to point out that insofar 
as fixing the retirement age of judges and justices from 
65 to 70 years is concerned, we would like to remove it 
altogether from its unsavory flavor as experienced 
during the martial law regime. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I agree with that statement, but 
as I mentioned earlier, considering that this is rather an 
emotional issue and in order not to burden the Commit- 
tee, I suggest that this issue be submitted to the body 
for a vote. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
amendment is on line 5, page 5, which is to change 
“seventy” to “SIXTY-FIVE.” 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 9 votes in favor and 24 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I ask for some clarification on Section 10, page 
5, lines 3 to 6 because it may need an amendment. 

Does the Committee mean the security of tenure 
applies only when the position exists? For example, rnay 
the legislature enact a statute declaring an existing 
judicial position vacant? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, the fault here is that the justices 
or judges can only be removed by impeachment and, 
therefore, during good behavior they remain in off^e 
until the age of 70 years or are incapacitated. On 
whether the legislature can abolish their position and 
declare it vacant, the second paragraph of Section 
answers that question: “No law shall be passed reor* 
ganizing the Judiciary when it undermines security o 
tenure.” 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I ask for a clarification on the first paragraph 
of Section 12 that begins on line 21. Is it the intention 
of the Committee to prohibit minute resolutions. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. 

MS. AQUINO. In all cases? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. The Committee realizes that 
there are some routine court matters in all cour s o 
justice which do not require a statement of reasons, i e 
petitions for postponement or extension of time an e 


498 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


like, in which case, minute resolutions should be 
allowed to expedite the administration of justice. 

MS. AQUINO. In that case, what are the conse- 
quences of nonobservance of the first paragraph of 
Section 12? 

MR. CONCEPCION. A judge of a lower court would 
be subject to disciplinary action and a member of the 
Supreme Court to impeachment proceedings. 

MS. AQUINO. I ask this because I was thinking this 
might require statutory implementation. If it is not the 
intention of the Committee to prohibit minute resolu- 
tions, I think the first paragraph of Section 12 would 
be a surplusage. In fact, it might even amount to an in- 
sidious assault on the integrity of the Supreme Court by 
requiring it to articulate or explicate the reasons for its 
decision. 

MR. CONCEPCION. There is a second paragraph on 
the same section which reads: 

No petition for review or motion for reconsideration of 

a decision of the court shall be refused due course or denied 

without stating the legal basis therefor. 

We will notice that it refers to a petition for review or 
a motion for reconsideration of a court decision which 
affects the subject matter of the merits of the case. 

MS. AQUINO. For petition for review or motion for 
reconsideration. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. But if it is explicitly stated in the 
record that Section 12, first paragraph, is enforceable as 
a ground for impeachment, I am satisfied, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. It is actionable because it might 
be a violation. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you very much. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Anterior amendment, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, anterior 
amendment to Section 1 1. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Sumulong is recognized. 

MR. SUMULONG. Thank you. 

On page 5, Section 11, line 11, insert AND OF THE 
INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE COURT between 
“Court” and “in.” 

On line 12, change the word “it” to THEM and on 
line 15, after “Chief Justice,” insert OF THE SUPREME 
COURT OR BY THE PRESIDING JUSTICE OF THE 
INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE COURT, AS THE 
CASE MAY BE. 

So the first two sentences of Section 1 1 will read as 
follows: “The conclusions of the Supreme Court AND 
OF THE INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE COURT sub- 
mitted to THEM for decision en banc or in division shall 
be reached in consultation before the case is assigned to 
a Member for the writing of the opinion of the court. A 
certification to this effect signed by the Chief Justice 
OF THE SUPREME COURT OR BY THE PRESIDING 
JUSTICE OF THE INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE 
COURT, AS THE CASE MAY BE, shall be issued and a 
copy thereof attached to the record of the case and 
served upon the parties.” 

May I explain these amendments, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Sumulong has five minutes to explain. 

MR. SUMULONG. The Supreme Court is a collegiate 
court and so is the Intermediate Appellate Court. It is 
only natural and logical that the decisions of these 
collegiate courts should be arrived at after all the 
justices shall have studied the case before them and shall 
have deliberated upon the briefs and the oral argument 
of the parties before a justice is assigned to be the 
ponente of the case. If that is true of the Supreme 
Court, it should be true also of the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court. But I am more concerned about the Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court because I know for a fact that 
many of the divisions of the Intermediate Appellate 
Court, formerly the Court of Appeals, simply choose 
one of their members to make a draft decision and then 
just pass this draft decision to the other members of the 
division for their concurrence and signature. So only 
one justice studies and decides the case. That is the 
reason for proposing my amendment on Section 1 1 , so 
that the provisions contained therein will apply not only 
to the Supreme Court but also to the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court. As a matter of fact, Mr. Presiding Officer, 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


499 


I know of many cases where lawyers and litigants 
appealed cases to the Court of Appeals or the Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court knowing that the practice is 
for a division to select one member to make a draft 
decision and let the other members concur. Many 
lawyers use fixers to find out who makes the draft 
decision, and they concentrate their pressure on that 
justice of the Court of Appeals. This is a practice that 
should be terminated as early as possible, and I think 
this provision contained in Section 1 1 will be the solu- 
tion by applying it not only to the Supreme Court but 
also to the Intermediate Appellate Court. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair thanks Commissioner Sumulong. 

May we have the comments of the Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Regalado will reply. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we all share 
the concern of the honorable Chairman of the Commit- 
tee on the Executive. We also know those alleged 
practices in the Intermediate Appellate Court, however, 
I would make two comments on that point. 

The Intermediate Appellate Court is a statutory 
court, not a constitutional re-created court. If we 
mention here specifically the Intermediate Appellate 
Court, then it becomes part of the Constitution, 
although the fact is the Intermediate Appellate Court 
may also be abolished merely by statute later. 

Second, because we appreciate and fully share the 
concern of Commissioner Sumulong, we added this 
sentence: “The same requirement shall be observed by 
all lower collegiate courts,” which means that the Inter- 
mediate Appellate Court and the Sandiganbayan, which 
are collegiate courts, have to follow the same require- 
ments that their decisions shall be reached at only after 
consultation before a case is assigned to a member for 
the writing of the opinion with the corresponding certi- 
fication of the highest magistrate of that particular 
collegiate body. By the way, there may be a little typo- 
graphical error on line 19. It should be “The same 
requirements shall be observed by all lower collegiate 
courts.” 

MR. SUMULONG. Do I understand this last sentence 
which will read: “The same requirements shall be ob- 
served by all lower collegiate courts” will require the 
Intermediate Appellate Court, the Sandiganbayan, the 
Court of Tax Appeals and all other collegiate courts to 
follow the rule established in Section 1 1 and that these 
collegiate courts are not allowed to assign the prepara- 
tion of a draft decision to one justice alone and have it 
concurred by the other justices to reach a decision? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, the 
Intermediate Appellate Court, the Sandiganbayan and 


the Court of Tax Appeals have to follow the same 
requirements. 

MR. SUMULONG. Is that the clear intent and pur- 
pose of this Section 1 1 , Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUMULONG. I am satisfied, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). So the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Sumulong is 
withdrawn? 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, I am 
satisfied with the explanation of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have 
another amendment on Section 12, second paragraph. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is an ante- 
rior amendment by Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, members of 
the Committee, I am just following up the statements of 
Commissioner Sumulong regarding Section 1 1 . The 
second sentence of Section 1 1 says: 

A certification to this effect signed by the Chief Justice 

shall be issued and a copy thereof attached to the record of 

the case and served upon the parties. 

I am not quite clarified on the word certification, 
but I take it to mean that this certification contains two 
things: (1) that there was a consultation and (2) that the 
writing of the court’s opinion is assigned to a member. 
Commissioner Sumulong just mentioned that with t is 
assignment to a member, some parties might go to t a 
particular member and influence him in some way, 
because it is also stated that a copy thereof sha e 

attached to the record of the case and served upon e 

parties. 

I wonder, Mr. Presiding Officer, whether this require- 
ment of serving the parties a copy of the certification 
that the writing of the court’s opinion has been assigned 
to a member is necessary. And I am now making a speci 
fic motion to delete the words “of the case and serve 
upon the parties” on line 1 6, in line with the statemen 
of Commissioner Sumulong that this might indica e o 
the party-litigant who the member writing the cour s 
decision is. 

I so move for the deletion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


500 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to propose an amendment to the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Maambong, and this refers also to the 
second sentence of Section 1 1 which partially reads: “A 
certification to this effect signed by the Chief Justice...” 
It seems that this section is applicable only to the 
Supreme Court, so I would like to propose that after 
the words “Chief Justice,” we insert OF THE SUPREME 
COURT OR BY THE PRESIDING JUSTICE OF ANY 
OTHER COLLEGIATE COURT, AS THE CASE MAY 
BE. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I cannot 
accept the amendment considering the explanation of 
Commissioner Regalado. Actually, the situation con- 
templated by Commissioner Sumulong is covered by the 
last sentence of the same section which reads: “The 
same requirements shall be observed by all lower col- 
legiate courts.” I think that covers all collegiate courts 
below the Supreme Court. 

MR. SUMULONG. I am referring, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, to the phrase “A certification to this effect signed 
by the Chief Justice. . .” which does not seem to cover 
all collegiate courts but only the Supreme Court. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can we 
have the comment of the Committee on that so this 
whole question can be clarified? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, originally 
I had proposed the words “Presiding Judge,” but the 
members of the Committee preferred “Chief Justice.” 
But when it says “the same requirement,” it does not 
necessarily refer to the Chief Justice but to the Presiding 
Judge. That is the implication. 

MR. SUMULONG. Do I understand from the dis- 
tinguished Chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary 
that the last line of this Section 1 1 means that with 
respect to lower collegiate courts, the certification wUl 
be made by the presiding justice? 

MR.^ CONCEPCION. I would prefer to use “Presiding 
Judge” because there is a tendency to call everybody a 
justice. That may be changed in the future. So the 
presiding judge should make the certification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
question of Commissioner Sumulong has been answered 
in the sense that the last sentence covers the point he is 
referring to. 

MR. CONCEPCION. This requirement of the cer- 
tification by the Presiding Judge has been deemed 
necessary precisely to forestall the practice which the 


members of the Committee have heard followed by 
some courts. There must be not only a consultation but 
also a certification of the consultation which must be 
attached to the record of the case. 

With respect to the amendment proposed by Commis- 
sioner Maambong, the purpose of that is precisely in 
response to the demands of other members of the Com- 
mittee, that unless it is attached to the records and 
copies served upon the parties, the public would not 
know when the function has been performed, so we 
can forestall any attempt in the future for the court to 
say that it was not submitted or discussed until some 
other time. 

This is one of the things we are providing to insure 
that failure of judges to comply with the provisions of 
the Constitution shall be actionable on the basis of the 
certifications made by them particularly and specifically. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have no 
difficulty on that portion of the certification, but from 
my understanding . . . 

MR. ROMULO. For clarification, our intention is not 
to name the member who will write the decision but 
only to specify that the writing of the court’s decision is 
assigned to a member of the court. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, I think this needs clarification because when the 
certification says that the case is assigned to a member, 
we have to specify in the certification who the member 
is. 

If we stop right here on line 16, which states: “... shall 
be issued and a copy thereof attached to the record of 
the case...,” there is no serious difficulty. But when we 
say “and served upon the parties,” the parties now 
would know who the member assigned to write the 
opinion of the court is. And it has been stated clearly by 
Commissioner Sumulong that this may be dangerous, 
considering that party-litigants may use influence. 

MR. ROMULO. As we said, that is not the intention. 
However, even if we do not serve the party with a copy 
of the certification, once it is attached to the record of 
the case, the lawyer has a right to look at the expedien- 
te. so he will find out anyway. I hope the Commissioner 
would suggest a better word. We merely wish the certi- 
fication to state that a member has been assigned to 
write the court’s decision. We do not wish to identify 
him. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, that would be best, but I am 
not in a position to suggest how the Committee would 
reword it in such a manner that the name of the justice 
assigned to write the court’s opinion would not be 
identified in the certification. I leave that to the 
Committee. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


501 


However, I would like to restate my primary amend- 
ment to delete the words “and served upon the parties” 
on line 17. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee cannot accept the 
amendment because one of our main objectives is 
precisely to advise the parties with regard to the period 
because we would like it to be actionable later on. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, if the 
understanding is that in the certification to be served 
to the parties the name of the justice assigned to write 
the opinion of the court is not identified, then I 
withdraw my amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. That is the understanding. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, with the 
explanation of Chairman Concepcion, I am satisfied 
and I withdraw my amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong has withdrawn his amendment to the 
amendment which is to delete the phrase “and served 
upon the parties” on the understanding that the name 
of the justice will not be identified. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I will proceed to the last sentence which reads: 

Any Member dissenting or abstaining from a decision shall 

state the reason for his dissent or abstention. 

We are all aware, Mr. Presiding Officer, that there are 
so many decisions of the Supreme Court mentioned in 
the Philippine Reports and the Supreme Court Reports, 
Annotated^ wherein a member merely mentions, “I con- 
cur” and sign or “I abstain” and sign or “I dissent” and 
sign. 

Before I propose any amendment, I would like to 
know from the Committee if this last sentence means 
that a member of the court who dissents or abstains 
should state, as a matter of a mandatory requirement, 
the reason for his dissent or abstention, or, could a 
member who dissents or abstains just do the usual thing 
and place there, “I dissent” or “I abstain,” then sign? 

MR. REGALADO. We will make it mandatory. May I 
explain? The line here says: “Any Member dissenting 
or abstaining from a decision shall state the reason for 
his dissent or abstention.” This is to eliminate the 
practice of just saying “no part,” and then, he places 
therein his initials or comment “I dissent.” The Gentle- 
man wants it to be more or less mandatory because of 
the phrase “shall state the reason for his dissent or 
abstention.” 


MR. REGALADO. If the Gentleman wants it to be a 
little stronger and in a more mandatory manner, I think 
the Committee will have no objection to changing the 
word “shall” to MUST. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then, I so move, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, to change the word “shall” to MUST with the 
following clarification: If it is already acceptable to the 
Committee that when a member who dissents or 
abstains will not indicate his reasons, would that be a 
nonfeasance in the performance of official duty? 

MR. REGALADO. That would be a culpable viola- 
tion, unless he explains why he was not able to indicate 
his reasons. In the rules on impeachment, it is not only 
a violation of the Constitution but a culpable violation 
thereof. So, if despite this directive which is about the 
strongest we can use without ruffling the sensibilities of 
the members of the Supreme Court — the word “must” 
is already an indication of the mandatory nature of that 
requirement — and they have no reason whatsoever for 
not complying therewith then it is not only a violation, 
but a culpable violation, without prejudice to such 
action as may be taken against him by his own peers in 
the Supreme Court. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one final point, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. Could a justice just say on the bottom of the 
decision, “I take no part,” then sign it? 

MR. REGALADO. He has to say, for instance, “I 
take no part because I am disqualifying myself for the 
following reasons,” and some of them are the reasons 
for disqualification from participation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. But if he just says, “no part ” 
considering the mandatory nature, that would already 
be a violation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Sumulong is recognized. 

MR. SUMULONG. May I just address a few ques- 
tions to the Committee on the Judiciary regar mg 
paragraph 2 of Section 1 2? 


MR. MAAMBONG. I just would like to know the pucciTVTMr, OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). We are 

intention, Mr. Presiding Officer. ™ pertod anfentaent^ Commissioner Sumulong. 


502 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


MR. SUMULONG. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. This 
will determine whether I will propose an amendment or 
not. I want to know whether this provision which says 
“No petition for review . . .” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Sumulong, we have to dispose of that amendment 
accepted by the Committee changing the word “shall” 
to MUST on line 18. 

Do we have any objection from the floor? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would 
prefer to eliminate the word “MUST.” Perhaps, I would 
prefer to say: NO MEMBER OF THE COURT MAY 
DISSENT OR ABSTAIN UNLESS HE STATES THE 
REASONS FOR HIS DISSENT OR ABSTENTION. The 
word “MUST” in dealing with the courts is somewhat 
strong. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can we 
not leave that to the Committee on Style? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Of course. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner Sumulong is recognized. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just wish 
to propound a question to the Committee regarding the 
meaning of paragraph 2, Section 1 2, which reads: 

No petition for review or motion for reconsideration of a 

decision of the court shall be refused due course or denied 

without stating the legal basis therefor. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, in several cases that I have 
handled - and I think this is true also of the other 
lawyers who are Members of this Commission - regard- 
ing motions for reconsideration or petitions for review, 
we sirnply receive a resolution saying “denied for lack of 

merit.” Is that enough to comply with this paragraph 2 
Section 12? y b v , 

MR. CONCEPCION. This is precisely in response to 
the clamor against minute resolutions affecting merits. 

MR. SUMULONG. So, if the resolution simply says, 
“denied for lack of merit,” that does not comply with 
this? 

MR. CONCEPCION. It depends upon what is being 
resolved. If it is a motion for extension of time, a 
motion for postponement or any of the routine matters, 
it need not be reasoned out. 

MR. SUMULONG. I am only referring to a motion 
for reconsideration or a petition for review, an appeal 
by certiorari to the Supreme Court. 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. The reasons must 
be stated. 

MR. SUMULONG. Would it not be enough just to 
say, “denied for lack of merit”? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. The reasons must be stated. 

MR. SUMULONG. That would not be sufficient be- 
cause that happens several times. We file a petition for 
review by certiorari which is an appeal to the Supreme 
Court discussing the facts and the laws involved, but 
when the resolution comes to us, it simply says, “Reso- 
lution/petition denied for lack of merit.” 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is it. That is not enough. 
It must state why. 

MR. SUMULONG. That would not be enough. 

MR. ROMULO. It would not be enough. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The reasons are there. 

MR. SUMULONG. The reasons and the facts in 
support of the resolution have to be given. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Not anymore, while it is neces- 
sary to state. 

MR. SUMULONG. It has to be stated. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
question has been answered. 

MR. SUMULONG. I am satisfied. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you very much. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, this has refer- 
ence to page 5, Section 12, and my proposed amend- 
ment is the deletion of lines 27 to 32. A similar proposal, 
not exactly the same, was given to the Committee on 
Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights and Obliga- 
tions and Human Rights, but this was not accepted. 

Let me just explain the reasons why I am asking for 
the deletion of this paragraph. First of all, I would like 
to state that, as worded, it does not change the existing 
doctrine on double jeopardy. My understanding in the 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


503 


adoption of double jeopardy is that two things must 
be established: the first jeopardy attached and the 
first jeopardy terminated. And the termination of 
jeopardy is either by conviction or by acquittal. We have 
decisions saying that if the acquittal is rendered by a 
court that exercises grave abuse of discretion amounting 
to lack or excess of jurisdiction, it is not an acquittal at 
all, so that pursuing the case is not pursuing a new case; 
it is not putting a person in second jeopardy, but simply 
pursuing the same jeopardy. And the idea being that, 
while the accused has a right to a day in court, the 
people have also a right to a day in court. If there is an 
abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of juris- 
diction, it means that the people have not had a day in 
court. The basic reason, therefore, why I ask for its 
deletion is that: 1) it is not necessary; and 2) while it is 
not necessary, keeping it here can be very harmful. I say 
it is not necessary because, as I have already explained, 
what is stated here can be done even without this pro- 
vision. It was done in the case of People vs. Pablo, 
decided in 1 980. It was also done in the case decided last 
week, the Veridiano case. 

My principal objection to this is if we wave the flag 
saying that acquittals may be appealed, even under this 
very detailed explanation, and when we consider that 
only the Supreme Court has jurisdiction over this, then 
we could be subjecting an accused individual to a very 
serious danger of harassment from a prosecutor who is 
proud, perhaps, or who has a grudge against the defense 
or from a complainant who just wants to harass an 
individual even if he has already been acquitted. So, I 
grant that there may be certain cases where the Supreme 
Court makes a mistake in an acquittal. The harm, how- 
ever, which will follow from waving this flag of possibil- 
ity of appeal and, therefore, almost inviting appeal from 
irresponsible prosecutors, could be much more than 
letting a guilty person go. So, in the interest of making 
valid acquittals final and in the interest of creating a 
situation which could invite harassment, I would ask 
that lines 27-32 be dropped. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Padilla will reply. 

MR. PADILLA. The legal reasons given by Commis- 
sioner Bernas would justify this paragraph rather than 
its deletion, because he says that this paragraph does not 
violate the principle of double jeopardy, that there 
must be a start and a termination of jeopardy, and that 
if it is in the same case, there is no violation of double 
jeopardy. So, those very same reasons for deletion are 
the good reasons for inclusion of this provision. 

The case of Veridiano that I mentioned yesterday, 
which involved a judgment of acquittal by the regional 
trial court reversing a decision of conviction by the 
municipal trial court, has clearly held that the petition 
by the fiscal or by the state, not as a matter of right but 
in the discretion of the Supreme Court, is in accordance 
with the law that protects an accused from double 
jeopardy, because there is no such double jeopardy, and 


the only limitation in our rules of court, both 1 964 and 
1985, against an appeal , is when such appeal would 
violate the principle of double jeopardy. 

It is contended that it is not necessary, but actually it 
is necessary to clarify the many obscure notions of 
many people, including those learned in the law, that 
any judgment of acquittal is final and not appealable. 
This, precisely, explains the common erroneous im- 
pression that there can be no appeal or no review when 
the judgment is one of acquittal, regardless of whether 
there is lack of jurisdiction or there is grave abuse of 
discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction. 
And this provision does not contemplate any new pro- 
ceeding. As I stated yesterday, quoting Justice Holmes 
in the Kepner case and later Justice Cardoso in the 
Palko V. Connecticut case, even those cases would enter- 
tain a new trial. And yet according to those decisions, 
there is no violation against the immunity or the 
protection against double jeopardy. 

In this case, as reworded by the Committee, its 
provision is very restrictive because it does not con- 
template a new trial. Only the records are open to 
review in exceptional cases, and only in the discretion 
of the Supreme Court on specific grounds, manifest dis- 
regard of the evidence and grave abuse of discretion. So, 
this is not harmful; this is beneficial to a sound adminis- 
tration of justice. While we must protect the accused 
especially against double jeopardy, we cannot disregard 
the interest of the victims of the crime, the offended 
party, for a sound administration of justice. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair will give one minute to the proponent of the 
amendment to close his remark. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. As I said, I agree that this does 
not change the doctrine on double jeopardy. What I am 
saying is that there will be many lawyers who wUl rea 
this as a change on the rule on double jeopardy. Yes er- 
day, we listened to the impassioned speech of Commis- 
sioner Rustico de los Reyes, and certainly the substance 
of his speech was that he read this as a change on e 
doctrine of double jeopardy, therefore, allowing for an 
appeal. How many fiscals will read it the same way or 
how many offended parties will read it the same w^ as 
Commissioner Rustico de los Reyes? It is in those 
instances where we can have a serious danger of harass- 
ment. Removing this will still open the gate for e 
State to make a position for review on certiorari on e 
basis of abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess 
of jurisdiction. As a matter of fact, this provision now 
makes it more difficult for the State and for le ac 
cused because under present law, it is enough to reopen 
the case, if there is grave abuse of discretion amoun in 
to lack or excess of jurisdiction. In this par icu 
provision, there is an additional requirement ^ * 
manifestly against the evidence. And precise y, e 
will be situations that the decision is not mam es y 
against the evidence precisely because there is grave 


504 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


abuse of discretion in the manner in which it was ran. 
So, it makes it more difficult for the State and for the 
offended party to reopen a case because of that require- 
ment. So, because of this, it would seem to me that it 
would be for the best interest of the State and for the 
offended party and also for the protection of the 
accused that this be removed. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
the issue has been amply discussed. The body should 
now vote on the issue. The amendment is the deletion 
of the paragraph from line 27 to line 32. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 17 votes in favor and 12 against; 
the amendment is approved. 

This paragraph is deleted. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is an anterior amendment on 
Section 14. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Excuse 
me. There is an anterior amendment. 

Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, on Section 13, 
page 6, line 3, which begins with the following: “During 
their continuance in office, their salary shall not be 
diminished nor subjected to income tax,” the amend- 
ment is to change the word “diminished” to DE- 
CREASED and to delete the words “nor subjected to 
income tax.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). So, the 
amendment is to change the word “diminished” toTiE- 
CREASED” and to delete the phrase “nor subjected to 
income tax.” What does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Regalado will reply. 

REV. RIGOS. I understand that this was in the 1935 
Constitution but was deleted in the 1973 Constitution; 
for what reasons, I cannot now recall. But at any rate, 
the thing to remember is that if we are to give substance 
to equality among the three branches in the govern- 
ment, one of the branches should not be given more 


privileges than the other. If we give it to one, we better 
give it to all. Very soon, the senators, congressmen and 
even the President might clamor for the same privilege. 
So, I believe that the justices and the judges should 
share in the burden of generating the necessary income 
needed for the support of our government and must pay 
their taxes as honestly as possible. If there is any group 
of people that should be exempted from paying its 
income taxes, it should be the teachers, the janitors, the 
security guards and others whose salaries are dismally 
small. But I think the justices and the judges can be 
magnanimous enough, if we are to ask them to pay their 
income tax. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, under the 
1935 Constitution, the provision was that during their 
continuance in office, the salaries of judges and justices 
shall not be diminished. And it was understood to mean 
that it was not subject to income tax. 

In the 1973 Constitution, according to Commissioner 
Jamir here, although they had also intended that the 
salaries would not be subjected to income tax, the word 
“diminished” was changed to “decreased” resulting in a 
different interpretation. 

In explaining the 1935 Constitution and our pro- 
vision that the salaries shall not be diminished while in 
office and that thereby the Constitution was not creat- 
ing a privileged class of people who enjoy income tax 
exemption unlike the others, the Supreme Court in 
Perfecto vs. Meer, Volume 85 of Wvq Philippine Reports, 
page 552, stated, and I beg the Gentleman’s indulgence 
to get their explanation: 

. . . the independence of the judges is of far greater im- 
portance than any revenue that could come from taxing 
their salaries. The exemption of the judicial compensation 
from reduction is not in any true sense a gratuity, privilege 
or exemption. It is essentially and primarily a compensa- 
tion based upon valuable consideration. 

I will jump to the other points: 

On the other hand, the members of the judiciary relinquish 
their position at the bar with all its professional emolu- 
ments, sever their connections with their clients, and 
dedicate themselves exclusively to the discharge of the 
onerous duties of their high office. So, it is irrefutable 
that the guarantee against a reduction of salary by the 
imposition of a tax is not an exemption from taxation in 
the sense of freedom from a burden or service to which 
others are liable. The exemption for a public purpose or a 
valid consideration is merely a nominal exemption, since 
the valid and full consideration or the public purpose pro- 
moted is received in place of the tax. 

And the Supreme Court of the Philippines relied on 
the same practice in the United States as explained in 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


505 


the case of Evans v. Core, Volume 253 of the United 
States Reports, page 245. 

That was their explanation. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, we would like 
to put it to a vote on the floor. 

FR. BERNAS. May I be allowed to say a few words 
in support of the amendment? 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask that 
Commissioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Bernas, is this in support of the amendment? 

FR. BERNAS. This is in support of an amendment to 
the amendment with the request for a modification of 
the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). So, will 
the Commissioner propose an amendment to the amend- 
ment? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. I am going to propose an amend- 
ment to the amendment saying that it is not enough to 
drop the phrase “shall not be subjected to income tax,” 
because if that is all that the Gentleman will do, then 
he will just fall back on the decision in Perfecto vs. 
Meer and in Dencia vs. David which excludes them from 
income tax, but rather I would propose that the state- 
ment will read: “During their continuance in office, 
their salary shall not be diminished BUT MAY BE SUB- 
JECT TO GENERAL INCOME TAX.” In support of 
this position, I would say that the argument sdems to be 
that the justices and judges should not be subjected to 
income tax because they already gave up the income 
from their practice. That is true also of Cabinet mem- 
bers and all other employees. And I know right now, for 
instance, there are many people who have accepted 
employment in the government involving a reduction of 
income and yet are still subject to income tax. So, they 
are not the only citizens whose income is reduced by 
accepting service in government. 

REV. RIGOS. I accept the proposed amendment to 
my amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner de los Reyes? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I move for a few minutes’ 
suspension just to confer with the proponent of the 
amendment and the proponent of the amendment to 
the amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 5:10 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:33 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I reiterate my 
proposed amendment on Section 13, page 6, lines 3 to 
5 ; “During their continuance in office, their salary shall 
not be decreased” and place a period (.), then delete the 
words “nor subjected to income tax.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). May we 
have the reaction of the Committee? 

Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. I am not in a position to announce the 
decision of the Committee. Let us wait; our Chairman 
is coming. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I under- 
stand from Commissioner Romulo that an agreement 
has already been reached. 

Commissioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. No; Commissioner Bernas will now 
propose his amendment to the amendment. That is 
the parliamentary situation. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. During the suspension, we came to an 
understanding with the original proponent. Commis- 
sioner Rigos, that his amendment on page 6, line 4 
would read: “During their continuance in office, their 
salary shall not be DECREASED.” But this is on the 
understanding that there will be a provision in the 
Constitution similar to Section 6 of Article XV, the 
General Provisions of the 1973 Constitution, which 
says: 

No salary or any form of emolument of any public 

officer or employee, including constitutional officers, shall 

be exempt from payment of income tax. 


506 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


So, we put a period (.) after “DECREASED” on the 
understanding that the salary of justices is subject to 
income tax. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). That 
provision that the Commissioner read will be under the 
Article on General Provisions? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. I do not know if such an Article 
will be found in the General Provisions. But at any rate, 
when we put a period (.) after “DECREASED,” it is on 
the understanding that the doctrine in Perfecto vs. Meer 
and Dencia vs. David will not apply anymore. 

REV. RIGOS. Agreed, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, the Committee will accept the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
understanding, therefore, is that there will be a pro- 
vision under the Article on General Provisions. Could 
Commissioner Rosario Braid kindly take note that the 
salaries of officials of the government including constitu- 
tional officers shall not be exempt from income tax? The 
amendment proposed herein and accepted by the Com- 
mittee now reads as follows: “During their continuance 
in office, their salary shall not be DECREASED”; and 
the phrase “nor subjected to income tax” is deleted. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. I would request a clarification pertain- 
ing to Section 14, subparagraph 3. In Section 11 of the 
1973 Constitution, in the Article on the Judiciary, there 
was an explicit proviso on the effect of noncompliance 
with the reglamentary period provided for by law which 
states that the decisions being appealed shall be con- 
sidered affirmed in the absence of any decision on the 
part of the Judiciary. What is the effect of this? Earlier, 
in the period of debate, the honorable sponsors men- 
tioned that the Court does not automatically lose juris- 
diction. So, I would like to be clarified about the in- 
tention of the Committee in deleting the pertinent 
provisions of the 1973 Constitution. This might render 
unnecessary the possibility of any amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 


MR. CONCEPCION. What portion would the Com- 
missioner consider directory? 

MS. AQUINO. That was at the instance of my query 
in the period of debate when I asked if this paragraph 
would have a mandatory effect. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes, it is. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, it would have a mandatory 
effect. That is precisely why we amended the provision 
on the 1 973 Constitution which, in effect, said that the 
lower courts’ decision would be affirmed if the Supreme 
Court does not decide it within the 18-month period. 

MS. AQUINO. So, what is the enforceability of this 
provision? 

MR. ROMULO. So, the import of this provision, 
together with Section 14 (1), is to show through the 
various certifications required with regard to the begin- 
ning and the end of the period that should the Supreme 
Court or any other court not decide within the period 
prescribed, it shall constitute a culpable violation of the 
Constitution, for which, of course, appropriate action 
can be taken. 

MS. AQUINO. And what makes it actionable accord- 
ing to the provision is that the Chief Justice or the 
Presiding Judge, as the sponsor mentioned earlier, will 
issue a certification that he has not complied with the 
Constitution; in effect, this will create for him the 
evidence against himself. 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
That will obviate any amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be rec- 
ognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I would like to pose an amendment 
to Section 1 5. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Anterior amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Anterior 
amendment. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


507 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
section? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Section 14. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes may proceed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On line 9 of Section 14, the 
word “must” was used. I understand from the dis- 
tinguished sponsor. Chief Justice Concepcion, that 
“must” is too strong a word. So, I propose that it 
be changed to SHALL; however, it be placed on record 
that it is the collective sense of the Committee and the 
Members of this Assembly that this provision is manda- 
tory. In other words, we remove the word “must,” 
which according to Chief Justice Concepcion does not 
sound all right. 

MR. ROMULO. May I comment? 

The Chairman’s reservation was addressed to Section 
1 1 , specifically to the sentence which reads: “Any Mem- 
ber dissenting or abstaining from a decision shall state 
the reason for his dissent or abstention.” However, I 
believe the Chairman has no objection to the use of 
“must” in Section 14(1), because we wish the Supreme 
Court to know that this is mandatory. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. All right; I do not insist on my 
amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. SUMULONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Does 
Commissioner Sumulong have any anterior amend- 
ment? 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes, I have an amendment to 
offer with respect to paragraph 2 of Section 14. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Sumulong is recognized. 


MR. SUMULONG. May I proceed, Mr. Presiding 
Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes. 

MR. SUMULONG. Paragraph 2 of Section 14 reads as 
follows: “A case or matter shall be submitted for de- 
cision or resolution upon the filing of the last pleading, 
brief, or memorandum required by the rules of court or 
by the court itself.” I propose that after the word 
“pleading” on line 15, delete the comma (,); and then 
on line 16, delete the word “memorandum” and in lieu 
thereof insert AFTER ORAL ARGUMENT so that this 
paragraph 2 will read as follows: “A case or matter shall 
be deemed submitted for decision or resolution upon 
the filing of the last pleading or AFTER ORAL ARGU- 
MENT required by the rules of court or by the court 
itself.” 

May I briefly explain this, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
please go ahead. 

MR. SUMULONG. Formerly, the procedure is for 
setting the case for oral argument where both parties 
will be allowed to argue for or against in the presence 
of all the justices of the Supreme Court or whatever 
court it was. And after the oral argument, then the 
members of the court, while the facts were still fresh in 
their mind, would deliberate and reach a decision. But 
now, the procedure has changed. Under our Rules of 
Court now, after the appellant has filed a reply brief, 
then the case is already considered submitted for 
decision. And usually that reply brief lies there for 
months or for a long time without any decision. And 
that is why I believe that the wording of this paragraph 
should be changed because the words “last pleading 
cover already the reply brief of the appellant, and the 
word “memorandum” applies in case there is an oral 
argument. Usually, the court says, “Well, you file; let 
the appellant file a memorandum within 10 days. 
And then, the appellee can submit a reply memorandum 
within 10 days also from receipt of the appellant s 
memorandum. 

That was the procedure, Mr. Presiding Officer. And I 
think that if we want to avoid decisions which are 
studied only by one justice or allowed to lie sleeping for 
a long time, we should revert to the old rule of setting 
the case for oral argument where all the justices will 
have to be present. They should read all the briefs iiv 
volved and then hear the arguments of both sides. And 
after the oral arguments, they should deliberate •’isbt 
away while the facts and the law are fresh in their mind, 
and reach a decision. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 


508 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


MR. CONCEPCION. I would want to ask for a clari- 
fication. How would the Commissioner rephrase para- 
graph 2? How would he put his idea across? 

MR. SUMULONG. I am proposing that on line 15, 
after “pleading,” delete the comma (,) and then on line 
16, delete “memorandum” and in lieu thereof insert 
AFTER ORAL ARGUMENT so that this sentence will 
read: “A case or matter shall be deemed submitted for 
decision or resolution upon the filing of the last plead- 
ing or AFTER ORAL ARGUMENT required by the 
rules of court or by the court itself.” 

This will allow a case to be submitted immediately 
after oral argument. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Does the Commissioner mean 
that the Court should hear all cases on oral argument? 

MR. SUMULONG. The Court should set the case for 
oral argument where all the justices will be present and 
both sides will argue before them; and after the oral 
argument, while the facts and the law are fresh in their 
mind, then the justices can deliberate and reach a 
decision. 

MR. CONCEPCION. But still, the question is: Does 
the Commissioner wish to have an oral argument in all 
cases so that the Court could not decide without an oral 
argument? 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes, I would prefer that, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. There should be an oral argument in 
all cases especially before the Supreme Court and the 
Court of Appeals. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Suppose the parties agreed? 

MR. SUMULONG. Because under the present rules, 
there is delay where it says that after fUing the reply 
brief of the appellant the case is deemed submitted for 
decision. And usually not all the justices partake in the 
writing of the decision. 

MR. CONCEPCION. My first question is still unan- 
swered. So, no case can be decided without a previous 
oral argument. 

MR. SUMULONG. We can allow the appellant to 
submit his brief then, after that, the appellee will file his 
brief. And after both parties have submitted their briefs, 
we should set the case for oral argument and then reach 
a decision. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Sumulong, the question precisely is that every 
single case that is brought up to the Supreme Court, 
therefore, must be set for oral argument. 


MR. SUMULONG. Yes, I prefer that because, I think, 
the results will be better. If there is an oral argument, all 
the justices will be required to be present. They will 
hear both sides. Whereas, if we say that after the filing 
of the reply brief of the appellant, the case is submitted 
for decision, we cannot be sure that all the justices will 
study the case. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Suppose the parties have agreed 
to submit the case without oral argument. 

MR. SUMULONG. That is disadvantageous, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, because if there is no oral argument, 
we will not be sure that all the justices will participate, 
study and deliberate the case. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is why there is a certifica- 
tion required of the deliberations. 

MR. SUMULONG. I beg the sponsor’s pardon. 

MR. CONCEPCION. There is required a certification 
about the deliberation in the court, if that is what the 
Commissioner wants to ensure. There is a provision in 
the Rules that once a case has been discussed by the 
court, there must be a certification to that effect. 

MR. SUMULONG. There was a time, I remember, 
where every case, before it is submitted for resolution, 
is set for oral argument. And I think the reason is to 
make sure that all the justices will study the case before 
the oral argument is held. More so, during the oral 
argument, they will be hearing both sides. After that, 
while the facts and the law are fresh in their mind, they 
can make a speedy decision which cannot be done, if 
there is no oral argument. I understand that that is the 
procedure being followed in the US federal courts. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will the 
Committee accept the proposed amendment? 

MR. CONCEPCION. We prefer to submit that to the 
Commission. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we 
vote, I would like to make some observations. 

Paragraph 2 of Section 14 should be read in conjunc- 
tion with paragraph 1. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). That is 
right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Paragraph 1 does not only refer to 
the Supreme Court and the collegiate courts but even to 
lower courts. So, this applies even to regional trial 
courts. Does the proponent mean to say that even in 
regional trial courts, there should be an oral argument? 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


509 


MR. SUMULONG. Yes. I think it should be done in 
the Court of Appeals, the Court of Tax Appeals and in 
the Sandiganbayan. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the Commissioner mean that 
in the regional trial courts and the municipal courts, 
there should also be oral argument after hearing? As I 
said, paragraph 2 refers to all the courts referred to in 
paragraph 1 ; and paragraph 1 refers even to lower courts 
including municipal courts and city courts. The last 
phrase there mentions a period of “three months for all 
other lower courts.” 

MR. SUMULONG. No, I would apply my proposal to 
have an oral argument before submission of the case 
where the court is collegiate. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then the proposed amendment has 
to be reworded. 

And another question, as the Commissioner himself 
has said, usually after an oral argument, the parties are 
given time to submit memoranda. Does he mean to say 
that after oral argument, no memorandum should be 
allowed and immediately after oral argument, the case 
should be submitted for decision? 

MR. SUMULONG. That will depend upon the court. 
If they believe that after the oral argument they would 
need the filing of the memorandum, that can be done. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then in that case, the case should 
be deemed submitted for a decision not after the oral 
argument, but after the filing of memoranda, if any. 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes, that is a last pleading. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Natividad? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will the proponent of the amend- 
ment yield to just one question? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is Com- 
missioner Sumulong willing to yield to some questions? 

MR. SUMULONG. Yes, with pleasure. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

I wonder if Commissioner Sumulong’s stand would 
change especially with regard to Section 1 1 which says: 

The conclusions of the Supreme Court in any case sub- 
mitted to it for decision en banc or in division, shall be 

reached in consultation before the case is assigned to a 

member for the writing of the opinion of the court. 


The reason for the Commissioner’s amendment is for 
the participation of all the justices, and this section 
insures this participation. 

MR. SUMULONG. My proposed amendment, in 
which an oral argument is necessary before a case is 
submitted for resolution, is complementary to Section 
1 1 to make sure that a case will be studied by all the 
justices and not only by one. Under the present rule, 
after a reply brief has been filed by the appellant, the 
case is considered submitted for resolution. I know of 
many cases where only one or a few justices have 
studied the case. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I submit, Mr. Presiding Officer. I 
would just remind the honorable Commissioner. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
the issue has been amply discussed and everything is 
clear on both sides. We are ready to vote now. 

Those in favor of the amendment of Commissioner 
Sumulong, please raise their hand. ( Few Members raised 
their hand.) 

Those against the amendment, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 6 votes in favor and 23 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I want to propose an amendment by 
substitution on Section 15. I propose to delete the 
entire section and in lieu thereof place the following: 
SECTION 15. THE JUDICIARY SHALL ENJOY 
FISCAL AUTONOMY. APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE 
JUDICIARY MAY NOT BE REDUCED BY THE 
LEGISLATURE BELOW THE AMOUNT APPRO- 
PRIATED FOR THE PREVIOUS YEAR AND, AFTER 
APPROVAL, SHALL BE AUTOMATICALLY AND 
REGULARLY RELEASED. 

I just want to clarify that the reason for this amend- 
ment is that the Judiciary should not be exempt from 
the budgetary process of submitting and justifying its 
budget, except that upon approval, it should be auto- 
matically and regularly released. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 


510 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts. May I ask if 
the second and the last sentences are joined in one? 

MR. MONSOD. No, there are only two sentences 
here. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Maambong be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer and mem- 
bers of the Committee, I propose to delete the last 
sentence on Section 16, lines 28 to 30 which reads: 
“The Chief Justice shall address the National Assembly 
at the opening of each regular session.” 

May I explain that I have gone over the operations of 
other deliberative assemblies in some parts of the world, 
and I noticed that it is only the Chief Executive or head 
of state who addresses the National Assembly at its 
opening. When we say ‘‘opening,” we are referring to 
the first convening of any national assembly. Hence, 
when the Chief Executive or head of state addresses the 
National Assembly on that occasion, no other speaker is 
allowed to address the body. 

So I move for the deletion of this last sentence. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is con- 
tained in my resolution and I think the Commi^'tce 
agrees that we should retain it, except that the Chief 
Justice should not address the Assembly on the same 
day that the President does, but on any other subse- 
quent day. We have three reasons for this: First, as 
Commissioner Ople says, we live by symbols nowadays; 
and thus, we want to dramatize the importance of 
justice through the personification of the Chief Justice 
appearing before the National Assembly. 

Second, since the amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod will not make the appropriations automatic, 
we want the Chief Justice to be able to explain to the 
legislature the needs of the Judiciary in a very dramatic 
way without lowering his dignity or seemingly appearing 
to beg. 


Third, we want to impress upon the Chief Justice and 
the members of the court that they have a responsibility 
to answer for their performance by appearing before the 
representatives of the people. 

We would prefer that the body vote on it. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer, will my 
colleague from the Opposition yield. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I yield, but on the floor I am not 
a member of the Opposition; I am only an opposition 
outside. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I withdraw the word “Opposi- 
tion” and in lieu thereof I use the word “Commis- 
sioner.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Is it not a fact that the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court was always invited by the 
Batasan, when it converted itself into a committee of 
the whole, to address that body during appropriations 
hearings but not on the opening day? The same is true 
in the old Congress, when we converted the House into 
a committee of the whole during appropriations hear- 
ings and the Chief Justice was then invited to address us. 

I wonder if the Commissioner was a Member then of 
the Batasan when Chief Justice Castro came here to 
discuss the Judiciary’s budget. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In reply to the Commissioner’s 
statement, traditionally, that is the correct procedure 
being followed in the old Congress and also in the First 
Regular Batasang Pambansa. As a matter of fact, during 
the opening ceremonies of both bodies, all Cabinet 
ministers, justices of the Supreme Court — not only the 
Chief Justice — were invited, together with the members 
of the diplomatic corps. It is also true that upon invita- 
tion the Chief Justice addressed the legislature when 
converted into a committee of the whole. 

Traditionally, Cabinet ministers who were not 
Members of the Assembly were not allowed to address 
the First Regular Batasang Pambansa. So they had to 
appoint their respective parliamentary deputy ministers 
who were Members of the Assembly to answer the 
questions during the Question Hour. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, the Batasan converted itself 
into a committee of the whole, whenever a Cabinet 
minister who was not a Member of the Batasan ad- 
dressed the Assembly. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


511 


So, considering that past practice, I feel that the 
Chief Justice may be invited by the National Assembly. 
However, his addressing the body on the same day the 
President does has no precedent yet. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee wishes to explain 
that that is not our meaning. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I accept that, that is why I was 
trying to find out if the proponent of the motion to 
delete the last sentence of Section 16 would change his 
stand if the Chief Justice is invited for another day. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I feel very awkward about this 
provision. I moved for its deletion because it is not 
really necessary to institutionalize this practice in the 
Constitution. 

At any rate, as pointed well by Commissioner Nativi- 
dad, the Chief Justice can always address the National 
Assembly when it is converted into a committee of the 
whole. Actually, I find no necessity for this provision. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I submit to the Commissioner. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair notes that the intention of the Committee is not 
really to have the Chief Justice address the Assembly at 
the opening of the regular session. 

Is the proponent still insisting on his amendent by 
deletion or would he tailor his amendment to accom- 
modate the intention of the Committee? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I object to that last sentence 
because it says: “at the opening,” which means the first 
day of convening the Batasang Pambansa or the Na- 
tional Assembly. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee is willing to amend 
by putting AFTER. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask the Committee a 

question. 

It is now clear that the Committee is willing to delete 
that sentence so that the Chief Justice does not have to 
address the National Assembly at the opening session. 

It is the sense of the Committee to make it com- 
pulsory for the Chief Justice to address the National 
Assembly during its session and for the National Assem- 
bly to invite him? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then, I know how to vote on that 
amendment because 1 am really against making it com- 


pulsory for the Chief Justice to address the National 
Assembly and for the National Assembly to invite him. 
That was never done during our time. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
the issue has been amply discussed. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask 
for a suspension of the session so that we can confer 
with the members of the Committee? Probably, we can 
iron this out without the necessity of voting on it. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 6:01 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:08 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. First of all, I would like to with- 
draw my primary amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
primary amendment is withdrawn. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In lieu of that primary amend- 
ment, I would like to substitute the following on lines 
28 to 30: THE CHIEF JUSTICE MAY ADDRESS THE 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ON A DAY SET FOR THE 
PURPOSE DURING ITS REGULAR SESSION. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. Upon the advice of the Commissioner, 
who is far wiser than I, the Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment. Is there any 
objection? 

MR. RODRIGO. Much as 1 do not want to object, it 
is really a useless provision. Why should we encumber 
our fundamental law of the land with a useless pro- 
vision? The people might laugh at us. 


512 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Since 
there is an objection, the Commission will now vote on 
the amendment of Commissioner Maambong. 

Those in favor of the amendment, please raise then- 
hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 1 5 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RODRIGO. Parliamentary inquiry. Does it mean 
that the last sentence remains? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
because the amendment was lost. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then I will present an amendment 
to delete the last sentence on lines 28 to 30. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
we have debated on this enough. Let us now vote. 

Those in favor of the amendment to delete the last 
sentence on page 6, lines 28 to 30, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor and 10 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized for a one-word amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to have another 
amendment outside of that? But, first, may I move to 
reconsider an approved amendment. The amendment 
that was approved earlier and which I am now seeking 
to reconsider is the amendment introduced by Commis- 
sioners Maambong and de los Reyes on line 23, page 4. 

MR. MAAMBONG. With the kind indulgence of 
Commissioner Davide, I have an anterior amendment 
which I reserved with the Floor Leader. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, Bishop Bacaniand 
I have reserved time with the Floor Leader and with the 
members of the Committee for a reconsideration of the 
vote on Section 5. 

Does Commissioner Davide’s amendment pertain to 
any section anterior to that? 


MR. DAVIDE. Posterior; the proposed reconsidera- 
tion will be an amendment to paragraph 5 of Section 7. 

MR. OPLE. I have the permission of Commissioner 
Davide to seek the floor first on the basis of an anterior 
amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to yield. 

MR. OPLE. What about Commissioner Maambong? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that my reservation 
with the Floor Leader refers to Section 1, may I go 
ahead with my anterior amendment? 

MR. OPLE. I recognize precedence of Commissioner 
Maambong’s amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This proposed amendment may 
not be actually necessary, if I can get some clarificatory 
answers from the Committee. 

I am referring to Section 2, line 14 which reads: “No 
law shall be passed reorganizing the Judiciary when it 
undermines security of tenure.” 

The way I see it this probably refers to a particu- 
lar law, the Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1981 
(BP No. 129). From that point of reference, I would 
just like to know whether there is any form of judiciary 
reorganization which does not, in some way, undermine 
the security of tenure. We had the Judiciary Act of 
1943, which was amended several times before the 
Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1981, and if I recall 
correctly, upon the implementation of Isoth laws, there 
was always some form, one way or the other, of abridg- 
ing the security of tenure. So, if there is such an abridg- 
ment of security of tenure, I find that this provision 
may not be tenable. I would just like to get a clarifica- 
tion from the Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee does not prevent a 
reorganization or a revamp, but prohibits it if the only 
purpose is to kick out judges. That is the essence of this 
provision. Therefore, a reorganization in good faith, as 
in the de la Liana case, would be acceptable. But if the 
main purpose is really to throw out the judges so that 
we bring in a completely new set, then it is not in good 
faith. So, this provision seeks to prohibit that kind of a 
reorganization. But let us say that the legislature re- 
organizes the number of courts because in one region it 
is either too many or too little, then that would seem to 
be a valid reorganization. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My point is that with this pro- 
vision we are actually shackling the legislative body or 
the Supreme Court. Forgive me if I am wrong, but as I 
see it, a real honest-to-goodness judiciary reorganiza- 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


513 


tion — without any intention of kicking out judges just 
like that — has to undermine the security of tenure in 
some way. And if we put this provision, there would be 
no situation wherein a law will be passed without under- 
mining the security of tenure. So, why should we place 
a provision which will shackle the legislative body? 

MR. ROMULO. I think the intention is not to 
prevent the National Assembly from passing a reorgani- 
zation law, but to give the judges, the citizens, or some 
other petitioners a chance to question it. For example, 
if we increase the number of courts, there may be a 
reorganization but that does not undermine the security 
of tenure. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a point of reference. In the 
last judicial reorganization, we changed the jurisdiction 
and nomenclature of the courts, for instance, from 
municipal court to municipal circuit trial court. Because 
of the changes in the structural arrangement of the 
Judiciary from the top down to the lower courts, 
whether the government liked it or not, the abridgment 
of the security of tenure was not avoided. 

May I repeat my point that if we put such a provision, 
there may be no instance at all where we will be reor- 
ganizing the Judiciary without violating the Constitu- 
tion. So, this is a suggestion which I may put to a 
motion. Why do we not just delete this provision as it is 
very self-limiting? 

MR. ROMULO. Perhaps the proponent. Commis- 
sioner Davide, would like to say a few words. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I would like to support the deletion of 
this provision because it does not really add anything. 

During the interpellations yesterday, I asked whether 
or not this is an absolute prohibition of reorganization 
and I was told it is not. There can be reorganization 
provided it does not violate the security of tenure. If it 
does, then the reorganization will be unconstitutional. 
Therefore, the validity of the reorganization will have to 
be decided ultimately by the Supreme Court as provided 
in paragraph 2 of the subsequent section. So, any reor- 
ganization act is just a law, just like any other law. But 
if we challenge its constitutionality, then we throw it to 
the Supreme Court on the basis of Section 2. So it 
seems to me that these two lines are useless. A reor- 
ganization act is a law. The validity or constitutionality 
of a law can always be passed upon by the Supreme 
Court under paragraph 2 of Section 3. So to me, this is 
unnecessary. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). We have 
already had two speakers in favor of the amendment by 
deletion. Just for the record, is Commissioner Maam- 
bong formalizing that amendment by deletion? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I so move to defete the second 
paragraph of Section 2, lines 14 to 15, which states: 
“No law shall be passed reorganizing the judiciary when 
it undermines security of tenure.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has given its views, so the body will now 
vote. 

Those in favor of the amendment by deletion, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 16 votes in favor and 19 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

At this instance, I am associating myself with Com- 
missioner Bacani regarding Section 4. There was a 
previous voting on this section. May I explain what we 
would like to propose to the Committee and to the 
Commissioners? I think we have the leave of the Com- 
mittee. We have secured it previously for a reopening of 
the action of the Commission on this section. 

Section 4, subsection 2 reads: 

The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifications 

of judges of lower courts, but no person may be appointed 

Judge thereof unless he is a natural-born citizen of the 

Philippines and a member of the Philippine Bar. 

We would like to propose that the phrase “natural- 
born” be deleted. May I explain? As written, I think 
this subsection would bar from the lower courts any 
naturalized citizen. We would not like to disturb this 
requirement for the Supreme Court. This is a tim^ 
honored policy of the State that the occupants of such 
exalted offices as the President, Vice-President, mem- 
bers of Congress and Justices of the Supreme Court 
should be natural-born citizens. But in this case, an act 
of gross wholesale indiscrimination is being committe 
against naturalized Filipinos who may not even qualify 
for the lowest position in the Judiciary, say, in a 
municipal trial court. This should not be a salient 


514 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


feature of a constitution devoted to the equality of our 
citizens except where there are compelling traditions 
that reserve the highest and the most exalted offices 
to natural-born citizens. 

It is most unlikely that naturalized citizens will apply 
for positions in the lower courts. I think their tempera- 
ments and training fairly impel them to seek careers 
other than those of the Judiciary. But to provide in this 
Constitution a blanket prohibition against naturalized 
citizens serving in the lower courts, I think, is also a very 
deplorable indictment of a whole class of citizens who 
have already passed the tests established by our own 
laws for them to become Filipino citizens. 

Although the Supreme Court must remain reserved to 
natural-born Filipinos, there must be no constitutional 
prohibition against naturalized citizens seeking access 
for services in the lower courts as members of the 
Judiciary. Of course, when they enter the Judiciary at 
the lowest level, they know in advance that they may 
not aspire for membership in the Supreme Court. But at 
least, all of them are on notice as naturalized Filipino 
citizens that they cannot rise to that zenith in the same 
manner that great secretaries of state in the United 
States, the latest of them, Henry Kissinger, who are 
naturalized Americans go through these careers knowing 
that they will never qualify to become President or 
Vice-President of the United States. 

So, in the interest of fairness and equity for those 
who have embraced the duties and obligations of 
Filipino citizens other than the natural-born, Commis- 
sioner Bacani and I would like to plead with the mem- 
bers of the Committee and with the body to allow the 
deletion of the requirement of natural-born citizens for 
the qualification of judges of lower courts, if they are 
otherwise qualified. Hence, Commissioner Bacani and 
I seek a reconsideration of the earlier vote on Section 4 
subsection 2. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PpsiDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). We must 
i^st ask the Commission to vote whether or not a recon- 
sideration would be in order. 

So, is Commissioner Ople, therefore, proposing a 
motion to reconsider the decision of the body? 

MR. OPLE. I move for a reconsideration of the earlier 
vote on Section 4, subsection 2. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The voting on Section 4, subsection 2 is reconsidered. 

Is the Commissioner now moving to delete the term 
“natural-born” on line 15? 


MR. OPLE. Yes. But before I put this to a motion, 
may I inform the Assembly that we have secured the 
prior permission of the Committee, headed by the Chief 
Justice, to make this proposal to the Commission. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. We would only like to point out that 
the term “lower court” includes the appellate court. So, 
it is not just the regional trial court that will be affected, 
but also the appellate court. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Meaning, 
the Intermediate Appellate Court? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, including the Sandiganbayan 
and the Court of Tax Appeals. 

MR. OPLE. As I said earlier, a naturalized Filipino 
who starts from the bottom of the ladder knows in 
advance that the absolute zenith he can aspire to in a 
career requiring a lifetime of devotion to the law, as a 
member of the bench, would be the Intermediate 
Appellate Court, and no higher. 

MR. ROMULO. Then, we would rather submit the 
question to a vote. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. President, just a point of clarifi- 
cation. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. If we were to delete the qualifier 
“natural-born,” would it be within the power of the 
National Assembly to require that a justice of the 
Intermediate Appellate Court be a natural-born citizen? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. I do not think this prohibits in 
advance the enactment of a law, setting that matter in 
favor of the natural-born citizen for the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals. 

FR. BERNAS. Is that the understanding of the 
Committee also? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. We believe that the legislature 
can impose that condition on the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court, having been created by statute. 

FR. BERNAS. But then, we follow the principle that 
unless the Constitution makes a distinction between 
natural-born and naturalized citizens, the law should not 
make a distinction. 

MR. ROMULO. That is a valid rule of interpretation. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


515 


FR. BERNAS. So, that would prevent the legislature 
from prescribing that justices of the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court be natural-born citizens. 

MR. ROMULO. Assuming that the legislatuffe agrees 
with our statutory construction. 


MR. ROMULO. Does Commissioner Davide mean 
that to become a member of a collegiate court, one 
must be a natural-born Filipino citizen? 

MR. DAVIDE'. Yes, similar to that of the Supreme 
Court. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is Com- 
missioner Bernas clarified now? 


MR. ROMULO. This will, therefore, partially dilute 
the amendment we have just approved. 


FR. BERNAS. In other words, we are putting this on 
record, for purposes of the legislature, telling it that as 
far as we are concerned, this does not prevent it from 
requiring that a justice of the Intermediate Appellate 
Court be a natural-born citizen. 

MR. OPLE. May I say that that is the intent of the 
sponsor as well. 

May I formally propose that amendment and move 
for its approval. 

VOTING 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
issue has been amply discussed. We will now put that 
to a vote. 

Those in favor of the amendment to delete the words 
“natural-born” on line 15, page 2, Section 4, subpara- 
graph (2), please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. ( Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 21 votes in favor and 12 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but I would like to invite the 
attention of the body that there will be more qualified 
natural-born Filipino citizens with the expansion of our 
interpretation of “natural-bom Filipino citizens” under 
the Article on Citizenship — granting those who elected 
Philippine citizenship under the 1935 Constitution and 
all those who were born before January 17, 1973 the 
status of natural-born citizens. We will have enough 
lawyers of this class of citizens. But beyond that, the 
members of the intermediate or lower collegiate courts 
occupy a very delicate position. I could just imagine if 
we have a naturalized Filipino attending to cases involv- 
ing the interest of naturalized Filipinos or aliens. We 
cannot truly expect that all those who became Filipino 
citizens by naturalization could truly be assimilated into 
the Philippine community and that they could really 
imbibe the customs, traditions, aspirations, hopes and 
dreams of the Filipinos. So, probably for the lower 
courts, that may be allowed but not for the members of 
the Supreme Court and the lower collegiate courts. 

Thus, I plead for the approval of this proposal. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, one clarificatory 
question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Does the proponent of the amend- 
ment also mean that any justice or judge of a collegiate 
court must not only be a natural-born citizen but a 
least 40 years of age, and has for 1 5 years or more been 
a judge of a lower court or engaged in the practice o 
law and so forth? 

MR. DAVIDE. That could be the effect because the 
amendment is in paragraph (1). 


MR. DAVIDE. As a consequence of the approval of 
that particular amendment and considering my deep 
concern regarding the entry into the Judiciary, a very 
delicate position, of naturalized citizens, may I be 
allowed to introduce an amendment on the first para- 
graph of Section 4, specifically on line 9. 

Between the words “Court” and “unless,” insert the 
following: OR ANY LOWER COLLEGIATE COURT. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 


FR. BERNAS. Hindi ba mahirap iyon? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). All 
right, what does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. What is the final amendment now, 
Mr. Presiding Officer? 


HE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
mdment reads: “No person shall be appoint^ 
of the Supreme Court OR ANY LOWER CO 


516 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


LEGIATE COURT unless he is a natural-born citizen 
of the Philippines . . 

MR. ROMULO. Would the proponent clarify what 
he means by “LOWER COLLEGIATE COURT”? 

MR. DAVIDE. This phrase would refer to the follow- 
ing present courts: the Sandiganbayan, the Court of Tax 
Appeals and the Intermediate Appellate Court, or any 
other collegiate courts which may be created later. 

MR. ROMULO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment with the observation that in many cases the 
decision of the Intermediate Appellate Court is final. 

MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, that is among the reasons 
why, with more vigor, we must allow the passage of this 
amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of the Commissioner? 

MS. AQUINO. I would only like to ask the proponent 
some clarification. 

MR. DAVIDE. Willingly. 

MS. AQUINO. Apparently, Commissioner Davide’s 
proposal does not only cover the question on Citizen- 
ship. In other words, he is putting the justices of the 
Intermediate Appellate Court in the same rank as those 
of the Supreme Court, with all the qualifications enu- 
merated in Section 4. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be the effect of the pro- 
posed amendment. But if the Commissioner wants, we 
could place here somewhere the other requirements’like 
age, length of service as a judge at a lower court, or 
length of practice of law in the Philippines. 

MS. AQUINO. I would be amenable to an amend- 
ment which would allow naturalized citizens to be mem- 
bers of the lower collegiate courts, but for all of these 
requisites to likewise apply to them, we might be dump- 
ing constraints to the possibility of being appointed to 
this position. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. DAVIDE. May I request a suspension of the 
session? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 6:40 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:46 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be 
allowed to propose a modification of the original 
amendment? The modification consists of two amend- 
ments. The first on line 9, and the second on line 10. 
On line 9, insert between “Court” and “unless” the 
following: OR ANY LOWER COLLEGIATE COURT. 
On line 10, put a period (.) after the word “Philippines” 
and after the period (.), insert this phrase: A MEMBER 
OF THE SUPREME COURT MUST BE. Between “and” 
and “for,” delete the word “has” and substitute it with 
MUST HAVE BEEN. So, it will now read as follows: 
“No person shall be appointed member of the Supreme 
Court OR ANY LOWER COLLEGIATE COURT unless 
he is a natural-born citizen of the Philippines. A MEM- 
BER OF THE SUPREME COURT MUST BE at least 
forty years of age, and MUST HAVE BEEN for fifteen 
years so . . .” Then continue on the succeeding lines 
until the Nolledo amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Until 
the phrase “Philippine Bar.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Also, the word “been” on line 1 1 
should be deleted to read: “and MUST HAVE BEEN for 
fifteen years or more a judge of a lower court or 
engaged in the practice of law in the Philippines . . .” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Would 
the Gentleman read the second sentence again? 

MR. DAVIDE. “A MEMBER OF THE SUPREME 
COURT MUST BE at least forty years of age, and 
MUST HAVE BEEN for fifteen years or more a judge of 
a lower court or engaged in the practice of law in the 
Philippines.” Then the Nolledo amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Maambong? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Would the proponent accept an 
amendment to the amendment so that the provision 
would read: “A MEMBER OF THE SUPREME COURT 
MUST BE at least forty years of age, and MUST HAVE 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


517 


FOR FIFTEEN YEARS OR MORE BEEN a judge of a 
lower court . . Because it would look awkward if we 
say; “MUST HAVE BEEN for fifteen years or more 
been a judge.” 

MR. DAVIDE. No, there is no “been” anymore on 
line 1 1 ; we have deleted “been.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, I am repeating my amend- 
ment to the amendment. The provision then reads: 
“AND MUST HAVE FOR FIFTEEN YEARS OR 
MORE BEEN a judge of a lower court or engaged in the 
practice of law in the Philippines.” 


MR. DAVIDE. They should really have. . 

MR. MONSOD. So, it should read: “UNLESS HE IS 
A NATURAL-BORN CITIZEN OF THE PHILIPPINES 
AND A MEMBER OF THE PHILIPPINE BAR.” And, 
additionally, THE SUPREME COURT MEMBERS 
MUST BE. That could also be a matter of style, but that 
is just to have consistency between paragraphs 1 and 2. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. We can leave it to the Style Commit- 
tee, although I believe that “have” should immediately 
be followed by “been.” 


BISHOP BACANI. I would like to speak against the 
amendment. I was told I could still speak against the 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Davide. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can we 
leave it to the Style Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. We can leave it to the Style Commit- 
tee. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Suarez is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is 
Commissioner Suarez proposing any amendment? 

MR. SUAREZ. No. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The amendments are not clear to us 
now. What is the amendment? 


MR. SUAREZ. Just one point of clarification. 

As proposed, the Gentleman would admit the possi- 
bility of a situation where the National Assembly may 
provide that members of the Intermediate Appellate 
Court, the Sandiganbayan or the Court of Tax Appeals 
be less than 40 years of age. They do not have to have 
been engaged in the practice of law for 15 years and 
they do not have to be in the Judiciary for 1 5 years. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be the effect because in 
the original proposal of the Committee, the members 
of the lower collegiate courts are classified as belonging 
to lower courts. So, the basic qualification will be that 
they are natural-born citizens of the Philippines and 
members of the Philippine Bar. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just wanted 
to make a small suggestion. 

Should they also be members of the Philippine Bar 
because, otherwise, there will be no phrase saying that 
members of the collegiate courts should be members of 
the Philippine Bar, which would have been a require- 
ment under Section 2? 

MR. ROMULO. They could not have practised law. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will the 
Gentleman restate his amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, there was a proposal by Commis- 
sioner Monsod which I am still studying. 

So, the original amendment merely consists in the im 
sertion of the phrase OR ANY LOWER COLLEGIATE 
COURT between “Court” and “unless” on line 9. And 
on lines 10 and 1 1, we place a period (.) after pines 
of the word “Philippines.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Could 
the Gentleman just read the whole amendment, so that 
the whole body can follow. 


MR. DAVIDE. Section 4(1) will read: “No person 
shall be appointed member of the Supreme Court OR 
ANY LOWER COLLEGIATE COURT unless he is a 
natural-born citizen of the Philippines. A MEMBER OF 
PHE SUPREME COURT MUST BE at least forty years 
of age, AND MUST HAVE BEEN FOR FIFTEEN 
YEARS OR MORE a judge of a lower court or en^ged 
in the practice of law in the Philippines xxx en 
followed by the Nolledo amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Where 

does the suggestion of Commissioner Monsod come in. 


MR. DAVIDE. The suggestion of Commissioner 
Monsod is also to require specifically that the members 


518 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


of any lower collegiate court be members of the Philip- 
pine Bar. But it is just a question of placement. 

I would seek the assistance of the Committee. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am sorry, but 
may I ask one more question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. If we are going to limit the applica- 
tion of the rest of the provisions to a member of the 
Supreme Court, that would practically render null and 
void the Nolledo amendment regarding the require- 
ment that Justices of the Supreme Court and all other 
members of the lower courts must be with proven 
integrity. That might render this academic. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can the 
Commission not decide on the concept and intention 
and leave the styling to the Committee on Style? 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Regalado? 

MR. REGALADO. There was that matter about 
membership in the Philippine Bar Association. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Under Section 4(2), the National 
Assembly shall prescribe the qualifications of judges of 
lower courts and this includes the Intermediate Ap- 
pellate Court, the Sandiganbayan as well as the Court of 
Tax Appeals. They are required to be members of the 
Philippine Bar. Does that answer the question of Com- 
missioner Monsod? 

MR. DA VIDE. Yes, but the main concern of Commis- 
sioner Monsod is that we actually raise the level of lower 
collegiate courts. The level now is on the first paragraph. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Davide, I think the point of Commissioner 
Monsod is that he was apprehensive about the fact that 
membership in the Philippine Bar was not included in 
this qualification for the Supreme Court or Intermediate 
Appellate Court. That is already taken care of by the 
second paragraph. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the interpretation of the second 
paragraph insofar as membership of the Philippine Bar 
is concerned would be that it would also apply to the 
members of the lower collegiate courts, I think that 
would be enough. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee believes so. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is the 
Gentleman satisfied? 

MR. DAVIDE. I am already satisfied. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Could 
the Gentleman restate his amendment then for the 
benefit of the Members of the Commission so that those 
who would want to speak against it may do so. 

MR. DAVIDE. Section 4 (1), as amended, would 
now read as follows: “No person shall be appointed 
member of the Supreme Court OR ANY LOWER COL- 
LEGIATE COURT unless he is a natural-born citizen 
of the Philippines. A MEMBER OF THE SUPREME 
COURT MUST BE at least forty years of age, and 
MUST HAVE BEEN for fifteen years or more a judge of 
a lower court or engaged in the practice of law in the 
Philippines.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of the Committee? 

MR. ROMULO. We accept the amendment. ■ 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized to speak against the amend- 
ment. He has five minutes. 

BISHOP BACANI. I speak against the amendment 
because if accepted, the amendment will, as long as it 
exists, forever disqualify naturalized citizens even 
perhaps more patriotic than natural-born citizens from 
occupying posts in the lower collegiate courts. Also, it is 
not likely that a person who is not fully assimilated will 
rise that high in the hierarchy of the Judiciary. So, for 
those two reasons, I do not accept the amendment. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
body will now vote on the amendment. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment of Com- 
missioner Davide, please raise their hand. ( Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 28 votes in favor and 3 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized for one last amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


519 


MR. DAVIDE. But before that, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
may I request a reconsideration of the approved Maam- 
bong— de los Reyes amendment on line 24, page 4 which 
amended the last sentence of Section 7 (5). As amended, 
the last sentence will read: “Rules of procedure of 
special courts and quasi-judicial bodies shall REMAIN 
VALID AND EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED 
by the Supreme Court.” 

I would seek for a reconsideration of the approval 
of that amendment reading; “REMAIN VALID AND 
EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED by the Supreme 
Court.” After that, I will introduce a very minor amend- 
ment but its effect would be very substantive. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection to the reconsideration proposed by Com- 
missioner Davide? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The topic is now open for discussion. 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment is only to delete the 
words “VALID AND” so it will read as follows: “Rules 
of procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial bodies 
shall REMAIN EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED 
by the Supreme Court.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. CONCEPCION. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection from the body? ( Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we close 
the period of amendments, I ask that Commissioner 
Bernas be recognized for an important clarificatory 
question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is that 
the last one? 

MR. RAMA. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, this has refer- 
ence to page 1 , Section 3 (2) and (3). 

First of all, Section 3 (3) speaks of the application or 
operation of presidential decrees. The question I asked 
last Friday was: If the question is the constitutionality of 
presidential decrees, what kind of vote is needed? I was 
answered last Friday that on the matter of the constitu- 
tionality of presidential decrees, the vote needed is what 
is prescribed in Section 3 (2). That was the answer given 


to me last Friday. I understand that this morning there 
was a different answer. So, just for the sake of clarity, 
may I just propose the same question. For purposes of 
passing judgment on the constitutionality — not applica- 
tion or operation — of presidential decrees, what kind of 
vote is needed? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That required “to declare a law 
on constitutionality.” 

FR. BERNAS. Paragraph 2? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. 

FR. BERNAS. How about proclamation? 

MR. CONCEPCION. All of those. 

FR. BERNAS. All of those — proclamations, orders, 
instructions, ordinances, etc. If it is a question of consti- 
tutionality, it is paragraph 2. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is the 
Gentleman clarified? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just want 
a reclarification of this matter on presidential decrees 
because this morning during my interpellation, it was 
very clear from the answer of the Committee members 
that presidential decrees do not have the stature or the 
category of a statute or a law passed by a lawmaking 
body. In view of the answer of the honorable Chairman, 
is it now clarified that presidential decrees are, after all, 
of the same stature and category as law, considering 
that in the consideration of the constitutionality or 
unconstitutionality thereof, what will apply now would 
be paragraph 2 of the section referred to by Commis- 
sioner Bernas? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Could 
the Committee please answer? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Is the Gentleman asking a 
question? 

MR. MAAMBONG. This morning we had an extensive 
discussion as to the exact categorization of a presiden- 
tial decree. From the answers of the Committee mem- 
bers, it wfis clear that presidential decrees do not have 
the same category as laws passed by the lawmaking 
body. I took that to mean that presidential decrees are 
lower in category than laws properly so-called or w at 
are known as statutes. 

In the answer to the interpellation of Commissioner 
Bernas, it now appears that to declare a law uncons i u 
tional, we have to refer to paragraph 2 of the sec ion 
referred to. In other words, taking that answer, it would 
now^ appear that presidential decrees do have tl^ 
category as statutes passed by the lawmaking o y. 


520 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


just want to clarify that. The Committee can answer one 
way or the other, and I will now sit down after the 
answer. 

MR. ROMULO. May I clarify because the Chairman 
was out at that time. Commissioner Padilla made the 
distinction; if the Gentleman will recall a presidential 
decree is not the same as a statute passed by a legisla- 
ture. Therefore, the required vote challenging a pres- 
idential decree or proclamation would fall under Section 
3 and not under Section 2. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is now exactly the opposite 
of the clarification received by Commissioner Bernas. 
So, I would rather give the floor to Commissioner 
Bernas to clarify. 

FR. BERNAS. I am confused now because the Com- 
mittee has conflicting answers to the questions. The 
Chairman has an answer different from the answer of 
the Vice-Chairman. So for purposes of the record, for 
the guidance of the Supreme Court and other courts 
later on, which is the answer? 

MR. ROMULO. We will ask Commissioner Regalado 
to give the Gentleman the official version. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. This morning we agreed that 
Section 3 (2) should read as follows: “All cases involv- 
ing the constitutionality of a treaty, international or 
executive agreement, or law shall be heard and decided 
by the Supreme Court en banc, and no treaty, inter- 
national or executive agreement, or law may be declared 
unconstitutional without the concurrence of a majority 
plus one of ALL the members.” We deleted the phrase 
“who actually participated when the case was submitted 
for decision.” 

Section 3 (3), on the other hand, states: “All other 
cases including those involving the application or opera- 
tion of presidential decrees, proclamations, orders, 
instructions, ordinances and other regulations which 
under the rules of court are required to be heard en 
banc shall be decided with the concurrence of a major- 
ity of the members who actually participated when the 
case was submitted for decision.” Commissioner Padilla 
made the distinction that insofar as constitutionality of 
treaties and other agreements is concerned, it must be 
upon the vote of a majority plus one of all the members. 
But with respect to decrees, it will only be majority of 
the members who actually participated. I think Com- 
missioner Padilla can further clarify that. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, this morning I 
stated that a statute like a Republic Act or a Batas 
Pambansa, or even the prior Commonwealth Act and 
Act of the Philippine Commission is undoubtedly a 


statute or a law. Proclamations, presidential decrees, 
executive orders and letters of instructions were under 
the Transitory Provisions of the 1973 Constitution, and 
were declared valid and effective as forming part of the 
laws of the land. They shall be effective unless amended 
or repealed. 

The Freedom Constitution, Proclamation No. 3, 
which I did not mention this morning, states that the 
Transitory Provisions of the 1973 Constitution shall be 
superseded. In other words, in my opinion there is a 
clear difference between a statute that has been passed 
by the legislative assembly and then approved by the 
President and a proclamation, decree, order or letter 
of instructions issued solely by the President especially 
during martial law. 

I believe that a unilateral — although presidential - 
proclamation, decree, order or letter of instructions 
does not, in my opinion, have the category of a statute 
that has been passed by the legislative department and 
approved by the President. In fact, many of these pro- 
clamations, decrees, orders and instructions issued under 
martial law and covered by the Transitory Provisions of 
the 1973 Constitution are illegal and unconstitutional, 
and, definitely, they were not passed by the Legislature 
and approved by the President. That was the distinction 
I made. I believe that a law should be confined to a 
statute like a Republic Act or a Batas Pambansa or a 
Commonwealth Act, but it should not be identical with, 
or strictly in the same class of, a statute, especially 
because the Transitory Provisions of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion considered it a law as forming part of the laws of 
the land. That was the distinction I made. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I see the distinc- 
tion very clearly but that is not quite my question. My 
question was by what vote is the constitutionality of 
a presidential decree declared because paragraph (3) 
does not speak of constitutionality. So for purposes of 
clarity, I would like to propose an amendment to 
paragraph (3), so it would read: “All other cases in- 
cluding those involving the CONSTITUTIONALITY, 
application or operation of presidential decrees, pro- 
clamations, orders, instructions, ordinances and other 
regulations which under the rules of court are required 
to be heard en banc shall be decided with the con- 
currence of a majority of the members who actually 
participated when the case was submitted for decision.” 

Clearly now, the constitutionality of a presidential 
decree will be decided by a vote required by paragraph 
(3), not paragraph (2). 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


521 


FR. BERNAS. In order to harmonize everything, I 
would also recommend that we go to page 3, Section 7 
(2), subpairagraph (a). I propose to add PRESIDENTIAL 
DECREE after the word “law” on line 27. So, the pro- 
vision, as amended, will read: “all cases in which the 
constitutionality or validity of any treaty, international 
or executive agreement, law, PRESIDENTIAL DECREE, 
ordinance, executive order, proclamation or regulation 
is in question.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. For the last clarificatory questions, I ask 
that Commissioner Natividad be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Just for the last clarificatory 
question. 

I refer to page 5, Section 12 of the committee report, 
which says: 

No decision shall be rendered by any court without express- 
ing therein clearly and distinctly the facts and the law on 

which it is based. 

Suppose a decision is rendered without complying 
with Section 12, what is the effect? 

MR. ROMULO. The effect is that the justice who 
does so is subject to appropriate penalties. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But the effect of the decision can 
be final and executory? 

MR. ROMULO. That happened in the case of Air 
France vs. Carrascoso, where the judge was adminis- 
tratively reprimanded. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am not referring to the adminis- 
trative action against the judge; I am after the effect of 
the decision. For the record, can the decision be final 
and executory without complying with Section 1 2? 

MR. ROMULO. In the case referred to, the judge 
was required to complete his decision. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. So, we can presume that it cannot 
be final and executory without complying with Section 
12 ? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No, that is not the meaning. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. What is the meaning? 

MR. CONCEPCION. If the party does not raise that 
question, the decision is still a decision, and it becomes 
final in due course. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Without prejudice to an adminis- 
trative action against the judge? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Of course, definitely. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I have another question to clarify 
before I vote on this article. 

Page 2, Section 3 (4) states: 

. . . Provided, that no doctrine or principle of law laid down 

by the court in a decision rendered en banc or in division 

may be modified or reversed except by the court sitting 

en banc. 

Suppose this happens, what is the effect of the 
decision, as in many cases, such as Philippine Banking 
Corp. vs. Louie Sy and Elcano vs. Gil. May I ask the 
Committee if this constitutes a legal precedent? 

MR. ROMULO. Is the Gentleman asking for the 
effect of a decision rendered by a division which would 
change the doctrine or principle of law previously laid 
down by the Supreme Court? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, in violation to this doctrine 
laid down here. 

MR. ROMULO. Insofar as the Committee is con- 
cerned, if a decision changes a doctrine or principle of 
law laid down by the Supreme Court en banc or in 
division, it can be modified or reversed only by the 
court sitting en banc and, therefore, such a decision 
would be invalid. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If the understanding is that the 
decision will be invalid, I would not offer an amend- 
ment. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote on Second Reading 
on Committee Report No. 18, as amended, I would like 


522 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


to call attention to the fact that there are two blanks on 
page 6, lines 5 and 7, which read: 

. . . until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise, 

the Chief Justice shall receive an annual salary of 

and each Associate Justice pesos. 

Is the Committee ready to specify the amount? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, we are just waiting for the Exe- 
cutive Committee to decide how much to give to the 
President because we would not want to recommend 
salaries of Supreme Court Justices more than that of the 
President. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair, in its capacity as Chairman of the Steering Com- 
mittee, inquired from the Chairman of the Executive 
but the Executive Chairman is also waiting. So, the 
Chair suggested that the Committee Chairmen of the 
Executive, the Legislative and the Judiciary get together 
on this matter. 

If the body votes on Second Reading on Committee 
Report No. 18, the Article on the Judiciary, it is under- 
stood that the compensation aspect will have to wait 
until all the three committees get together and decide 
on an amount. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
That is what I wanted to clarify. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Bernas? 

FR. BERNAS. Just one follow-up clarification on the 
question of Commissioner Natividad, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. The answer given by Commissioner Romulo was 
that a judgment is invalid. 

Suppose there is no reconsideration and the decision 
becomes final, would not the judgment be binding only 
on the parties but it would not reverse the previous 
judgment? 

MR. ROMULO. It would depend on how one views 
it. If it is in excess of jurisdiction, then it has no validity 
whatsoever. If it is not in excess of jurisdiction, then it 
is binding only on the part of the . . . 

FR. BERNAS. In such a situation, is it in excess of 
jurisdiction? 

MR. ROMULO. If the explicit intent of this is fol- 
lowed, I would say it is in excess of jurisdiction. 

FR. BERNAS. Therefore, the decision on the case 
can be reopened anytime? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we close the period of 
amendments on the Article on the Judiciary. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF C.R. NO. 18 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Judiciary) 

MR. RAMA. I move for a vote on Second Reading on 
the Article on the Judiciary with the understanding that 
Section 13, which has yet to be filled up, will not be 
included in the voting. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Section 
13, on the salaries of Justices? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). As 
many as are in favor of the Article on the Judiciary, 
as amended, please raise their hand. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand, (bio 
Member raised his/her hand.) 

The results show 34 votes in favor and none against. 

Committee Report No. 1 8 on the Article on the Judi- 
ciary, as amended, is approved on Second Reading. 
( Applause). 

Thank you very much. Please do not leave; it is only 
7:24 and the Floor Leader will file a motion to call on 
Commissioner Vicente B. Foz to sponsor the Article on 
the Constitutional Commissions. We suggest that we get 
through with the sponsorship of the Article on the 
Constitutional Commissions and continue the inter- 
pellations tomorrow. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 468 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
consider Committee Report No. 19 on Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 468, as reported out by the Committee on 
Constitutional Commissions and Agencies. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


523 


Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 468 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read only the title of the proposed reso- 
lution without prejudice to inserting in the Record the 
whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 468, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION THE COMMON PROVISIONS ON THE 
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS AND THE PRO- 
VISIONS ON THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution 
per C.R. No. 19.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 19 

The Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies 
to which were referred: Proposed Resolution No. 5 1 , introduced 
by Hon. Serafin Guingona, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ARTICLES ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS IN ORDER TO SAFEGUARD AND ENHANCE 
THEIR INDEPENDENCE. 

Proposed Resolution No. 54, introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, 
Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING ELECTIVE OF- 
FICIALS TO SERVE THE FULL TERM OF OFFICE FOR 
WHICH THEY WERE ELECTED AND PROHIBITING 
THEM TO SEEK IMMEDIATE REELECTION FOR 
SAID OFFICE OR TO BE APPOINTED TO ANY OTHER 
OFFICE DURING SUCH TERM AND WITHIN TWO 
YEARS FOLLOWING THE EXPIRATION THEREOF, 
AND, FURTHER, PROHIBITING WITHIN THE SAME 
PERIOD THE SPOUSE AND/OR RELATIVES BY CON- 
SANGUINITY OR AFFINITY WITHIN THE THIRD 
CIVIL DEGREE OF SUCH ELECTIVE OFFICIAL TO 
SEEK ELECTION FOR THE OFFICE TO BE VACATED 
BY THE LATTER OR TO BE APPOINTED IN ANY MAN- 
NER TO ANY OFFICE EXCEPT TO AN OFFICE FOR 
WHICH HE HAS THE APPROPRIATE CfVIL SERVICE 
ELIGIBILITY AND IS QUALIFIED AND COMPETENT. 

Proposed Resolution No. 108, introduced by Hon. Vicente Foz, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THAT NO ELECTIVE OFFI- 
CIAL SHALL BE ELIGIBLE FOR APPOINTMENT TO 
ANY OFFICE OR POSITION DURING HIS TERM OF 
OFFICE, AND THAT NO CANDIDATE WHO HAS LOST 
IN AN ELECTION SHALL, WITHIN TWO YEARS FOL- 
LOWING SUCH ELECTION, BE APPOINTED OR REAP- 
POINTED TO ANY OFFICE IN THE GOVERNMENT, 
OR IN ANY GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED 
CORPORATION, OR IN ANY OF ITS SUBSIDIARIES. 


Proposed Resolution No. 117, introduced by Hon. HUario 
Davide, Jr., entitled: 

A RESOLUTION CALLING FOR THE INCORPORATION 
IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF A PROVISION WHICH 
WOULD INDUCE AN ELECTIVE OFFICIAL TO AS- 
SUME HIS POSITION WITHOUT DELAY BY SETTING 
ASIDE HIS ELECTION AND DISQUALIFYING HIM TO 
HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE IF HE FAILS TO ASSUME 
OFFICE WITHIN THIRTY DAYS FOLLOWING THE 
DATE FIXED BY LAW FOR HIM TO DO SO. 

Proposed Resolution No. 135, introduced by Hon. Florangel 
Rosario Braid, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON 
THE CIVIL SERVICE TO ENSURE ITS INDEPENDENCE. 

Proposed Resolution No. 139, introduced by Hon. Jose Suarez, 
Alberto Jamir and Jaime Tadeo, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE SECURITY OF 
TENURE OF CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES WHOSE 
QUALIFICATIONS MEET THE STANDARD OF GOOD 
GOVERNMENT AND WHO HAVE BEEN FOUND EF- 
FICIENT, DESERVING AND HONEST. 

Proposed Resolution No. 238, introduced by Hon. Hilario 
Davide, Jr., entitled: 

A RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN THE CIVIL SERVICE 
COMMISSION BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION PROVISIONS REQUIRING THAT AP- 
PQINTMENTS THERETO SHALL BE MADE FROM A 
LIST OF NOMINEES SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS SEC- 
TORS AND INCREASING THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR 
APPOINTMENT AS COMMISSIONER. 

Proposed Resolution No. 240, introduced by Hon. Hilario 
Davide, Jr., entitled: 

A RESOLUTION TO ENSURE THE DEVELOPMENT OF A 
STRONG CIVIL SERVICE BY CONSTITUTIONALLY 
MANDATING THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION TO 
UNDERTAKE REFORMS IN VARIOUS AREAS OF 
CONCERNS AND INCORPORATING IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A PROVISION GRANTING BROADER 
POWERS TO THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION. 

Proposed Resolution No. 281, introduced by Hon. Hilario 
Davide, Jr., entitled: 

A RESOLUTION FIXING THE PERIOD WITHIN WHICH 
THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION SHALL DECIDE 
CASES BROUGHT BEFORE IT AND PROVIDING FOR 
APPEALS THEREFROM TO THE SUPREME COURT. 

Proposed Resolution No. 356, introduced by Hon. Vicente Foz, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR HIGHER SALARIES FOR 
THE CHAIRMEN AND MEMBERS OF CONSTITUTION- 
AL COMMISSIONS AND PROHIBITING THE DE- 
CREASE OR INCREASE THEREOF. 


524 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 357, introduced by Hon. Vicente Foz, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION FIXING THE TEMPORARY OR ACTING 
AND PERMANENT APPOINTMENTS OF A CHAIRMAN 
OR MEMBER OF A CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 
TO AN AGGREGATE OF NOT MORE THAN SEVEN 
YEARS, 

has considered said resolutions and has the honor to report them 
back to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recom- 
mendation that Proposed Resolution No. 468 prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE COMMON PROVISIONS ON THE CON- 
STITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS AND THE PROVISIONS 
ON THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION, 

be approved in substitution for Proposed Resolution Nos. 5 1 , 54, 
108, 117, 135, 139, 238, 240, 281, 356 and 357, with the Com- 
mittee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies and 
Hon. Guingona, Davide, Jr., Rosario Braid, Suarez and Tadeo as 
authors thereof. 

(Sgd.) Vicente B. Foz 
Chairman 

Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 468 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COM- 
MISSIONS. 

Be it resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session 
assembled. To incorporate in the Constitution the following pro- 
visions: 

ARTICLE XII 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS 
A. Common Provisions 

Section 1. The Constitutional Commissions shall be the Civil 
Service Commission, the Commission on Elections and the Com- 
mission on Audit. 

Sec. 2. Until otherwise provided by law, the Chairman and 
each of the Commissioners shall receive an annual salary of one 
hundred twenty thousand pesos and one hundred ten thousand 
pesos, respectively, which shall not be decreased or increased 
during their tenure. 

Sec. 3. No Member of a Constitutional Commission shall, 
during his tenure, engage in the practice of any profession or in 
the management of any business, or be financially interested, 
directly or indirectly, in any contract with, or in any franchise or 
privilege granted by the Government, any of its subdivisions, 
agencies or instrumentalities, including a government-owned or 
controlled corporation or any of its subsidiaries. 

Sec. 4. The Commissions shall enjoy fiscal autonomy. Appro- 
priations for the Commissions once approved shall be automatic- 
ally released. 


Sec. 5. Each Commission shall decide by a majority vote of all 
its Members any case brought before it within sixty days from the 
date of its submission for resolution. Unless otherwise provided 
by law, any decision, order or ruling of each Commission may be 
brought to the Supreme Court on certiorari by the aggrieved 
party thirty days from receipt of a copy thereof. However, final 
decisions, orders or rulings of the Commission on Elections on 
municipal and barangay officials shall be final, inappealable and 
executory. 

Sec. 6. The Constitutional Commissions shall appoint their 
officials and employees in accordance with law. 

B. THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 

Section 1. (1) The Civil Service embraces all branches, sub- 
divisions, instrumentalities and agencies of Government, including 
government-owned or controlled corporations. 

(2) Appointments in the Civil Service shall be made only 
according to merit and fitness to be determined as far as practica- 
ble by competitive examination. 

(3) No Member of the Civil Service shall be removed, sus- 
pended or otherwise disciplined except for just causes as may be 
provided by law. 

(4) No officer or employee in the Civil Service shall engage, 
directly or indirectly, in any partisan political activity. 

Sec. 2. (1) The Civil Service shall be administered by an inde- 
pendent Civil Service Commission composed of a Chairman and 
two Commissioners who are natural-born citizens of the Philip- 
pines and, at the time of their appointment, at least thirty-five 
years of age, preferably with proven capacity for public adminis- 
tration, and must not have been candidates for any elective 
position in the election immediately preceding their appointment. 

(2) The Chairman and the Commissioners shall be appointed 
by the President for a term of seven years without reappoint- 
ment. Appointments to the Commission need no confirmation. 
Of those first appointed, the Chairman shall hold office for seven 
years, a Commissioner for five years, and another Commissioner 
for three years, without reappointment. Appointment to any 
vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of 
the predecessor. In no case shall any Member be appointed in a 
temporary or acting capacity. 

Sec. 3. The Civil Service Commission, as the central personnel 
agency of the Government, shall establish a career service, pro- 
mulgate and enforce policies on personnel actions, classifying 
positions, prescribe conditions of employment except as to com- 
pensation and other monetary benefits which shall be provided 
by law, and exercise all powers and functions inherent in and 
incidental to human resources management, to promote morale, 
efficiency, and integrity in the Civil Service. It shall submit to the 
President and the Congress an annual report on its personnel 
programs, and perform such other functions as may be provided 
by law. 

Sec. 4. Unless otherwise provided by law, no elective official 
shall be eligible for appointment or designation in a temporary 
or acting capacity to any public office or position during his 
term. 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1986 


525 


Sec. 5. No candidate who has lost in any election shall, within 
one year after such election, be appointed to any office in the 
Government, or any government-owned or controlled corporation 
or in any of its subsidiaries. 

Sec. 6. No officer of the Armed Forces in the active service 
shall, at any time, be appointed or designated in a temporary or 
acting capacity to a civilian position in the Government. 

Sec. 7. No elective or appointive public officer or employee 
shall receive additional or double compensation unless specifically 
authorized by law nor accept without the consent of the Congress 
any emolument or official title of any kind from any foreign 
government. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized to sponsor the proposed resolu- 
tion. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER FOZ 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

The Committee intends to file three separate reports, 
and we have, so far, filed two reports on separate provi- 
sions with the concurrence of our committee. The first 
report is Committee Report No. 19, embodying Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 468, which has to do with the 
common provisions on the three constitutional commis- 
sions; namely, the Civil Service Commission, the Com- 
mission on Elections and the Commission on Audit. The 
second resolution is Proposed Resolution No. 469 under 
Committee Report No. 20. This has to do with the pro- 
visions on the Commission on Audit. Earlier, we have 
instructed our committee secretary to file the commit- 
tee report on a proposed resolution on the Commission 
on Elections. At the outset, we would like to take up 
with the body the common provisions affecting the 
three constitutional commissions. We have introduced 
some basic changes which we believe will make for 
reforms in the functioning of the three constitutional 
commissions. 

The first one is fiscal autonomy. Under this concept 
of fiscal autonomy, appropriations once approved shall 
be automatically and regularly released to the respective 
commissions. We will recall that a similar provision has 
just been approved in the Article on the Judiciary. We 
thought that if fiscal autonomy should be provided for 
the Judiciary as a means of insuring its independence, 
then fiscal autonomy should also be granted to the 
constitutional commissions in order for the constitu- 
tional bodies to perform effectively their constitutional 
missions. We have provided in the common provisions 
certain factors which we think will help insure the 
independence of the commissions. One of them is, of 
course, the fked term of office without reappointment. 
The second factor is the staggered term, not only to 
insure continuity of the functioning of the commissions 
but also as a measure to minimize the opportunity of a 
President to appoint all members during his term of 


office. Another factor is that the salaries of the mem- 
bers of the three commissions cannot be decreased nor 
increased during the term of office. The fourth — again, 
this is a take-off from the provisions on the Judiciary — 
is that appointments need no confirmation. We have 
fbced the salaries of the members of the commissions 
and the minimum, as stated in our copies of the pro- 
posed resolution, is PI 20,000 for the chairman and 
PI 10,000 for the other members of the commissions. 
But personally, I think this amount should be increased 
in consonance with the increase being contemplated 
by the other committees for the President and the 
Vice-President, as well as for the members of the 
Supreme Court. 

Also, in the common provisions we have provided a 
common period for the commissions to decide cases and 
a common provision for appeals to the Supreme Court. 
In the case of the provision on the Civil Service Commis- 
sion, we have reenshrined the merit system and also the 
principle of political neutrality and the provision for the 
security of tenure of employees. These three concepts 
or principles — the merit system, political neutrality, 
and security of tenure — we believe, constitute the 
tripod of our civil service system. 

In the case of the Civil Service Commission, we have 
tried to emphasize its status as the central personnel 
agency of the government, with all powers and func- 
tions inherent in and incidental to human resources 
management. 

One provision concerning the civil service which we 
have embodied in our draft but which is not found in 
the present Constitution is a provision against the ap- 
pointment of members of the armed forces in the active 
service to civilian positions in government. 

I guess that is all we can say about the common 
provisions as well as the provisions on the Civil Service 
Commission. 

We intend to call on Commissioner Jamir to give 
us some features of the provisions on the Commission 
on Audit, but I guess he has left. So, I am now open 
to interpellations. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Foz, as you have suggested earlier, we are going 
to take one constitutional commission at a time, so we 
have scheduled the sponsorship of the common pro- 
visions and the Civil Service Commission. So, are we 
through with the sponsorship of the Civil Service 
Commission? 

MR. FOZ. We are through with the ^onsorship, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, and we are ready to answer any 
question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


526 


MONDAY, JULY 14, 1985 


MR. RAMA. Nobody has registered to interpellate. session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine thirty in the 

So, I move for the adjournment of the session until morning for interpellations on the proposed article on 

tomorrow at nine thirty in the morning. the Civil Service Commission. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The It was 7:36 p.m.. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


527 


R.C.C. NO. 30 
Tuesday, July 15, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:33 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Minda Luz M. Quesada. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

MS. QUESADA. Before we say our regular prayer, 
may we all bow down our heads for a one-minute medi- 
tation for the eternal repose of the father of the Honor- 
able Rene Sarmiento who passed away last night. 

PRAYER 

Our most gracious God Almighty, as we start 
another session today, help us to remember the be- 
reaved, the homeless, the hungry, the sick, the landless, 
the dispossessed and all those suffering from all forms of 
deprivation. We pray, O Lord, for them even as we 
pray for mercy when we gloss over the sad realities of 
existence among many of our poor, deprived and 
oppressed people. 

In their cries for food and shelter, we can hear, in 
the silent corners of our conscience, the appeal they 
make on us not only to pray, but to act, not only to 
work, but to struggle. 

Our Heavenly Father, we who are so privileged as to 
have been chosen to draft the new fundamental law of 
the land, touch our hearts and minds that when we 
make vital decisions, we shall always keep the ideals, 
aspirations and interests of the majority poor and our 
country as our guiding principles. 

Enlighten us as we struggle, as we now decide 
whether to give the people with less in life, more in our 
fundamental law, or on the issue of opening our 


boundaries limitless to foreigners even to the detriment 
of our national identity and sovereignty. 

Warm our hearts as to radiate goodness, and 
strengthen us, O Lord, that we remain physically and 
mentally healthy as we work hard to complete the 
enormous task given us. 

All these we ask through Jesus Christ, the Great 
Physician, Teacher, Worker, Brother, Advocate and 
Redeemer. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

CaJderon 

. Absent 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present* 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Rosales ..... 

. . Present 

Davide 

, Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present* 

Tan 

. . Present 

Janiir 

. Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. Present* 

Uka 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present 




The Secretariat is in receipt of official advice of 
absence of Commissioner Tingson. 


Commissioner Villegas is on official mission. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 28 Members responded to the 
call. 


Appeared after the roll call 


528 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we dispense with the read- 
ing of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the mo- 
tion that we approve the Journal of the previous ses- 
sion? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Reports, the President making the corres- 
ponding references: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 
Proposed Resolution No. 497, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR THE STATE TO PROVIDE 
ADEQUATE CARE, BENEFITS, AND PREFERENTIAL 
TREATMENT FOR WAR VETERANS AND GOVERN- 
MENT RETIREES. 

Introduced by Hon. de Castro and Nolledo. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 498, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION ONE OF THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION WITH AN 
AMENDMENT TO QUALIFY THE ORIGIN OF THE 
SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 


Proposed Resolution No. 499, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES OF THE 1986 
CONSTITUTION A STATEMENT OF NATIONAL PUR- 
POSE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 500, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES OF THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A SECTION ON THE FILIPINO COM- 
MITMENT TO PEACE, BENEVOLENCE, AND RECON- 
CILIATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 501, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES AND STATE POLICIES OF THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION A SECTION PROVIDING FOR THE 
DEFENSE OF THE NATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 502, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS FIXING THE INITIAL SALARIES 
OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT, SPEAKER, 
AND MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, AND 
THE CHIEF JUSTICE AND JUSTICES OF THE SUP- 
REME COURT. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committtee on the Executive. 

Proposed Resolution No. 503, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVI- 
SION MANDATING THE IMMEDIATE FILLING UP OF 
VACANCIES IN THE JUDICIARY. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 504, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT AS AMENDED ARTICLE II, 
SECTION 6 OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION FOR INCOR- 
PORATION IN THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 
AND STATE POLICIES OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


529 


Proposed Resolution No. 505, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT AS AMENDED, TO FURTHER 
EMPHASIZE THE RIGHTS OF THE FAMILY, ARTICLE 
II, SECTION 4 OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION FOR 
INCORPORATION IN THE DECLARATION OF PRIN- 
CIPLES AND STATE POLICIES OF THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 506, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT AS AMENDED ARTICLE II, 
SECTION 5 OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION FOR INCOR- 
PORATION IN THE DECLARATION OF PREvtCIPLES 
AND STATE POLICIES OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
EMPHASIZING THE ROLE AND RIGHTS OF THE 
YOUTH. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 507, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE AS AMENDED IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION ARTICLE V, SECTION 1 OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION UNDER THE ARTICLE ON THE 
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

Proposed Resolution No. 508, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE AS AMENDED IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION ARTICLE V, SECTION 3 OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION UNDER THE ARTICLE ON THE 
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human 
Rights. 

proposed Resolution No. 509, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE SOCIAL 
SECURITY AGENCY TO PROVIDE COVERAGE TO 
ALL WORKERS WHO WORK FOR PRIVATE EM- 
PLOYERS INCLUDING DOMESTIC HELPERS AND 
SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS WHO VOLUNTARILY 
SUBMIT THEMSELVES FOR COVERAGE. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Quesada. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Proposed Resolution No. 510, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION TO MAKE ALL GOVERNMENT 
WORKERS AND EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO CIVIL 
SERVICE RULES AS PERMANENT WORKERS AFTER 
RENDERING SIX MONTHS OF SERVICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Quesada. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 512, entitled; 

RESOLUHON TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION FOR THE HARMONIZA- 
TION OF THE INCONSISTENCIES BETWEEN CIVIL 
LAWS AND RELIGIOUS LAWS ON THE ANNULMENT 
OF MARRIAGES. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 513, entitled: 

RESOLUHON TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION MORE SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR PRO- 
MOHNG AND PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF LABOR. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia and Gascon. 

m 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 514, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION TO REDUCE INEQUALITY AND 
THEREBY PROMOTE THE WIDEST PARTICIPATION 
OF CITIZENS IN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia and Gascon. 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


Proposed Resolution No. 515, entitled: 

RESOLUHON INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS TO REGULATE THE OWNER- 
SHIP, USE AND DISTRIBUTION OF LAND. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia and Gascon. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Proposed Resolution No. 516, entitled: 

RESOLUHON TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO PROVIDE FOR THE SUC- 
CESSION TO THE PRESIDENCY AFTER THE EXPIRA- 
TION OF THE PERIOD OF EIGHT CONSECUTIVE 
YEARS IN CASE THE INCUMBENT PRESIDENT 
SHOULD RUN FOR REFLECTION AND WINS. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the Executive. 


530 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 518, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION FOR FREE EDUCATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Rosales. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 5 1 9, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION MAKING THE STUDY OF THE 
ELECTORAL PROCESS A PART OF THE SCHOOL 
CURRICULUM. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento and Rosales. 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Proposed Resolution No. 520, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON AN EFFECTIVE HEALTH 
CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM, MAINTENANCE OF AN 
EFFECTIVE FOOD AND DRUG MONITORING BODY 
AND HEALTH MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Bennagen, Brocka, 
Sarmiento and Suarez. 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Ma. Teresa 
F. Nieva, presenting the preliminary and partial results 
of the consultations on the new Constitution initiated 
by the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference for Human 
Development. 

(Communication No. 192 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from the women sector signed by Ms 
Evelyn L. Ranises and 17 others of Gingoog City, pro^ 
posing a presidential form of government with a bica- 
meral legislature and provisions on the bill of rights, 
national economy, sovereignty and foreign relations’ 
social services, among others. 

193 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Horacio V. Marasigan for Concerned 
Citizens of San Juan, Batangas, submitting a position 
paper on value system and attitudes. 

(Communication No. 194 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from the Federation of Senior Citizens Asso- 
ciation of the Philippines, San Jose, Occidental Min- 
doro, signed by Mr. Felix Gabriel, endorsing the pro- 


posal that citizens have the right to material assistance 
when they are old, sick or disabled. 

(Communication No. 195 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the Chamber of Commerce of the Philip- 
pines Foundation, Inc., signed by Ms. Lourdes L. Sanvic- 
tores, submitting the recommendation of its Constitu- 
tional Reforms Committee. 

(Communication No. 1 96 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Andres Cristobal Cruz of the Ministry 
of Information, for the Kapisanan ng Balitaan sa Kati- 
mugang Tagalog (KABALIKAT), submitting proposals 
on the right to information and the right to have a 
family and duty to foster the planning of family size. 

(Communication No. 197 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Francisco T. Arpon of Luz Village, 
Butuan City, suggesting that the Constitution center 
on economic benefits for the poorest sectors of the 
society. 

(Communication No. 198 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Gabriel U. Iglesias of the College of 
Public Administration, University of the Philippines, 
submitting three documents: “Towards Decentraliza- 
tion Strategy Through Regional Government,” “PSSC 
Resource Statement on the Form of Government: 
Presidential Form,” and “PSSC Resource Statement 
on the Form of Government: Federal.” 

(Communication No. 1 99 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Letter from Mr. Anselmo S. Roque and four others 
representing provincial mediamen in Nueva Ecija, pro- 
posing media-related provisions. 

(Communication No. 200 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Foundation for Active Christian Evangeliza- 
tion and Services, Inc., signed by Mr. Silvestre J. Acejas, 
submitting proposals on citizenship training, moral 
character development, and nonformal education, 
among others. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


531 


(Communication No. 201 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines 
signed by Messrs. Jeremias U. Montemayor, Ernesto F. 
Herrera, and Democrito T. Mendoza submitting the first 
part of its “Position Paper on the Draft of the Philip- 
pine Constitution.” 

(Communication No. 202 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

COMMITTEE REPORTS 

Committee Report No. 25 on Proposed Resolution No. 
511, prepared by the Committee on Local Govern- 
ments, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS IN THE ARTICLE 
ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 15, 17, 138, 176, 178, 247, 394, 409 
and 414. 

Sponsored by Hon. Nolledo, Calderon, Tingson, Rosa- 
les, Alonto, de Castro, Bennagen, Rigos, Regalado, 
Jamir and Ople. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 26 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 517, prepared by the Committee on the Executive, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE DEPART- 
MENT, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 9, 55, 56, 59, 107, 1 18, 124, 128, 151, 
152, 156, 158, 183, 197, 198, 234, 255, 257, 352 and 
433. 

Sponsored by Hon. Sumulong, Regalado, Alonto, 
Aquino, Bernas, Calderon, Concepcion, Davide, Jr., 
Foz, Jamir, Lerum, Maambong, Natividad, Rama and 
Sarmiento. 

Cosponsored by Hon. de Castro, Ople, de los Reyes, Jr., 
Bengzon, Jr., Romulo, Azcuna, Nolledo, Tingson and 
Guingona. 

To the Steering Committee. 

Committee Report No. 27 on Proposed Resolution No. 
521, prepared by the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS, 


recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 57, 60, 62, 68, 110, 193, 195, 225, 
244, 284, 305, 308, 312, 349, 350, 358, 380 and 410. 

Sponsored by Hon. Foz, Monsod and de los Reyes, Jr. 
To the Steering Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 9:53 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:01 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 469 
(Article on the Commission on Audit) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 20 on Proposed Resolution No. 469 as 
reported out by the Committee on Constitutional Com- 
missions and Agencies. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 469 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the proposed resolu- 
tion without prejudice to inserting in the Record the 
whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 469, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution 
per C.R. No. 20.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 20 

The Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, 
to which were referred Proposed Resolution No. 21, introduced 
by Hon. Jose Nolledo, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE CONSTITUTION 
THAT NO TRANSACTION INVOLVING PUBLIC FUNDS 
WHETHER OF GOVERNMENT ENTITIES OR GOVERN- 


532 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED ENTERPRISES 
SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM AUDIT 

and Proposed Resolution No. 282, introduced by Hon. Hilario 
Davide, Jr. entitled: 

RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING APPEALS ON QUESTIONS 
OF FACT FROM DECISIONS, ORDERS OR RULINGS 
OF THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

has considered the same and has the honor to report it back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recom- 
mendation that Proposed Resolution No. 469 prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION 

be approved in substitution for Proposed Resolution Nos. 21 and 
282, with the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies and Hon. Nolledo and Davide, Jr. as authors thereof. 

(Sgd.) Vicente B. Foz 
Chairman 

Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 469 


under this Constitution, (b) autonomous educational institutions, 
(c) government-owned or controlled corporations and their sub- 
sidiaries, and (d) such non-governmental entities receiving subsidy 
or equity, directly or indirectly, from or through the Govern- 
ment, which are required by law or the granting institution to 
submit to such audit as a condition of subsidy or equity. It shall 
keep the general accounts of the government and, for the period 
as may be provided by law, preserve the vouchers pertaining 
thereto. 

(2) The Commission shall have the exclusive authority, subject 
to the limitations in this Article, to define the scope and extent 
of its audit and examination, formulate and establish the tech- 
niques and methods required therefor, and promulgate account- 
ing and auditing rules and regulations including those for the 
prevention or disallowance of irregular, unnecessary, excessive, 
extravagant expenditures or uses of government funds and pro- 
perties. 

Sec. 3. The Commission shall submit to the President and the 
Congress, within the time fixed by law, an annual report of the 
Government, its subdivisions, agencies, and instrumentalities, in- 
cluding government-owned or controlled corporations, and recom- 
mend measures necessary to improve their efficiency and effective- 
ness. It shall submit such other reports as may be required by law. 

Sec. 4. The Commission shall perform such other duties and 
functions as may be prescribed by law. 


RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVISIONS ON 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION. 


Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitution; 
Commission in session assembled to incorporate in Article XII c 
the new Constitution, the following provisions; 

D. The Commission on Audit 

Section 1.(1) There shall be an independent Commission o 
Audit composed of a Chairman and two Commissioners, wh 
shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines and, at the tim 
ot their appointments, at least thirty-five years of age, an 
certified public accountants with not less than ten years of audi 
mg experience or members of the Philippine Bar for at least te 

years. At no time shall all Members of the Commission belong t 
the same profession. 

U Chairman and the Commissioners shall be appointe 

y e President for a term of seven years without reappoin 
mem. Appointments to the Commission need no confirmatioi 
Of those first appointed, the Chairman shall hold office for sevei 
years, one Commissioner for five years, and the other Commi; 
sioner for three years without reappointment. Appointment t 
any vacancy thereafter shall be only for the unexpired portio 
of the term of the predecessor. In no case shall any Member b 
appointed in a temporary or acting capacity. 


Sec. 2. (1) The Commission on Audit shall have the power and 
authority to examine, audit and settle all accounts pertaining to 
the revenue and receipts of, and expenditures or uses of funds 
and property, owned or held in trust by, or pertaining to, the 
government, or any of its subdivisions, agencies or instrumental- 
ities, including on a post-audit basis: (a) constitutional bodies, 
commissions and offices that have been granted fiscal autonomy 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I ask that Commissioner 
Jamir be recognized to sponsor Committee Report No. 
20 . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER JAMIR 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you, Madam President. 

To avoid a lengthy presentation of the Committee’s 
proposal regarding the Commission on Audit, we shall 
merely touch on the differences between the proposed 
provisions and the provisions in the 1973 Constitution, 
considering that the proposal is mainly based on the 
latter. 

By the way, the provision in the 1973 Constitution, 
together with the proposal of the UP Law Center, and 
the amendments thereto proposed by the Commission 
on Audit, were also considered by the Committee. 

Under this proposal, we reduced the age qualification 
of the Commissioners from 40 to 35 years of age, be- 
cause the Committee feels that 35 is the ripe age for 
members of the Commission to carry on their tasks. 

We will recall that in the 1973 Constitution, the 
members of the COA are required to be certified public 
accountants or members of the Philippine Bar. With 
respect to the certified public accountants, the Com- 
mittee has added the qualification that they must have 
auditing experience, because there was no such quali- 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


533 


fication in the 1973 Constitution and we feel that this 
is a very essential qualification for membership in the 
Commission on Audit. 

In order to avoid the possibility, such as what exists 
at present, of having all the commissioners of the Com- 
mission on Audit picked from one profession, say, 
from the law profession or from the profession of certi- 
fied public accountants, the Committee proposal pro- 
vides that at no time should all the members of the 
Commission belong to one profession. Therefore, at 
one time, the Commission may either consist of one 
lawyer, two CPA’s, or one CPA and two lawyers, in 
order that they would compose a well-rounded team of 
auditors. 

We also propose that no commissioner shall be ap- 
pointed on a temporary basis, whether acting or by de- 
signation, because we want to avoid the possibility of 
a commissioner being extended a designation and then 
afterwards given a permanent appointment, thereby 
exceeding his seven-year tenure. 

With respect to the powers and duties of the Com- 
mission on Audit, its legal history shows that as early 
as the military government in the Philippines, there 
was already the Office of the Auditor created by an 
executive order of President McKinley. Following that 
order, the War Depanment issued an executive order 
on May 8, 1899, defining the duties of the Auditor. 
That duty has been progressively expanded from time 
to time, first, by Act No. 90 of the US-Philippine 
Commission, then by Act No. 1792 of the same Com- 
mission, after which came the Jones Law on August 
29, 1916. But the Jones Law confined the effect of the 
decision of the Auditor to the executive branches of 
the government only. However, that limitation was 
later on taken away by the Philippine Legislature in 
Act No. 3066 in 1933 so that the decisions of the 
Auditor became effective to all the three branches of 
the government subject, of course, to the right of 
appeal. 

When the 1935 Constitution was enacted, the audit- 
ing office was constitutionalized because of the in- 
creasing necessity of empowering the auditing office 
to withstand political pressure. Finding a single Auditor 
to be quite insufficient to withstand political pressure, 
the 1973 Constitution established the Commission 
consisting of three members — a chairman and two com- 
missioners. 

The powers of the COA under the present proposals 
practically remain the same, except in the inclusion 
under the aegis of the COA of the subsidiaries of govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporations and the power 
to audit nongovernmental entities. 

Under the proposal on audit, constitutional bodies 
with fiscal autonomy, autonomous educational institu- 
tions and government-owned and controlled corpora- 
tions, including their subsidiaries, are subject to post- 
audit. Also, nongovernmental enterprises are subject to 


postaudit, if they receive any subsidy or equity from the 
government, either directly or indirectly, and the right 
to audit them is one of the conditions stipulated in the 
grant of subsidy or equity. 

Under the Committee’s proposal, the power of the 
COA to define the scope of its audit is made exclusive 
in order to avoid any conflict. The power of the COA to 
promulgate rules and regulations has been extended by 
the Committee to include disallowance of irregular, 
unnecessary expenses and uses of government funds. 

That concludes our presentation of the proposal on 
the Commission on Audit. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. Commissioner Jamir. 

MR. RAMA. Is the sponsor ready for interpella- 
tions? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I suggest that the inter- 
pellations should be limited, first, to the provisions 
on civil service, including the common provisions for 
all the constitutional commissions; second, to the 
provisions concerning the Commission on Audit. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify the situation, 
yesterday what we had was the sponsorship speech on 
Committee Report No. 1 9, regarding the common 
provisions and the Civil Service Commission. So, correct 
me if the interpellations should be made first on this 
particular report. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 468 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we con- 
tinue the consideration of Resolution No. 468. We are 
still in the period of debate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo be recognized to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to ask a couple of questions on the 
report of the Committee on the Civil Service. On page 
2, number 2, that is a continuation of Section 3, does 
the word “subsidiaries” include privately-formed cor- 
porations? 


534 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. FOZ. Before we proceed, may I request Com- 
missioner Nolledo to use the amended version of Reso- 
lution No. 468. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Can I be furnished a copy please? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, the copies of the 
amended version were distributed yesterday. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am now getting a copy. Madam 
President. 

The word “subsidiaries” appears on line 1 6. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Nolledo please 
refer to the page. Let us first ask the basics. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is preparatory to the provisions 
on the civil service, because the President talked not 
only on civil service but on provisions applicable to all 
kinds of commissions. That will be on the first page, 
line 16. Does the word “subsidiaries” include corpora- 
tions which can be considered privately organized under 
the Corporation Code because a government entity 
may organize a subsidiary — for example, the PNB may 
organize a subsidiary and its officers may be among 
the incorporators under the Corporation Code? 

MR. FOZ. The way we understand, the term “subsi- 
diaries ” may refer to a corporation organized by the 
parent government-owned or controlled corporation 
under a special law or the general corporation law. That 
is the coverage of the term “subsidiaries.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Going to the second question, may 
I refer the proponent to page 2, line 4 of Section 1(1). 
It is stated here that the civil service shall include 
government-owned or controlled corporations. I think 
the Gentleman is aware that the incumbent President 
last May 1 made an announcement that the provisions 
of the Labor Code should also apply to government- 
owned or controlled corporations, indicating that the 
employees of government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions may engage in concerted activities, as well as 
form unions. 

The Committee seemingly adopted the provisions of 
the 1973 Constitution. I understand also that there are 
two kinds of government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions - those organized by special law and those or- 
ganized under the private corporation law or the Cor- 
poration Code. It seems that the presidential order 
covers only government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions organized under the Corporation Code. Now, in 
the concept as reported by the Committee, what is the 
coverage of the term “government-owned or controlled 
corporations” with respect to civil service? 

MR. FOZ. This provision on the scope of the civil 
service is meant to be a general description of the extent 
of what we know as civil service. Frankly, we did not go 


into a sophisticated delineation or definition of what 
a government-owned or controlled corporation is. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why I suggest that the Com- 
mittee study these aspects because I am very sure that 
the labor sector will object to the all-embracing meaning 
of the term “government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions,” and I am very sure also that the workers in the 
government-owned or controlled corporations organized 
under the Corporation Code will, likewise, object, be- 
cause they might claim some sort of inequality or denial 
of equal protection of the law. 

MR. FOZ. We are not making any distinction. As I 
said, this is meant to be a general description of what 
constitutes the civil service. But we know very well that 
such a general definition or description of the extent 
or scope of the term “civil service” will have to admit 
exceptions which, within the parameters of Section 1, 
cannot be included. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There may be some sort of de- 
lineations as to qualifications. Perhaps, the civil service 
can apply, but as to the right to form a union and to 
engage in concerted activities, perhaps, the law may 
allow them under the Labor Code. 

MR. FOZ. That would be a matter of legislation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is the Committee prepared to adopt 
that delineation I talked about, that as regards the 
qualifications for appointment in government-owned 
or controlled corporations, the civil service shall apply, 
but with respect to the right of the workers in those 
government-owned or controlled corporations to form 
unions and to engage in concerted activities, they are 
at par with other workers in the private sector? 

Is the Committee prepared to adopt that view? 

MR. FOZ. If that is the proposal of the Commis- 
sioner, the better course, I think, would be not to 
include such a distinction in the definition under 
Section 1, but perhaps in a later provision of this set 
of provisions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 1 (2) on page 2, lines 7 and 
8 says: 

Appointments in the civil service shall be made only 

according to merit and fitness to be determined as far as 

practicable by competitive examination. 

I would like to be clarified on this because of the 
words “as far as practicable.” Competitive examination 
is not the only means of determining merit and fitness. 
Am I correct? 

MR. FOZ. That is right. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


535 


MR. NOLLEDO. Another important question. Does 
the Commissioner recall the exceptions with respect 
to positions that are policy-determining, primarily 
confidential and highly technical? They are found in 
the 1935 Constitution, and it seems to me that they are 
also found in the 1973 Constitution. Has the Committee 
deleted those exceptions? 

MR. FOZ. The Commissioner is correct. 

First of all, the intention here is to make a general 
statement as to the principle of the merit system. It is 
to be the general rule. Secondly, the phrase “policy- 
determining, primarily confidential, and highly tech- 
nical” is no longer used in the existing law. The existing 
Civil Service Law, Presidential Decree No. 807, does 
not even mention all these terms, and even the last 
Reorganization Act does not use them but uses the 
terms “career and non-career service,” so that if we 
continue perhaps to adopt these terms in our funda- 
mental law, we may be behind the times. Since we are 
writing it at this point in time, we are given a chance 
to rewrite or revise our Constitution. Perhaps we have 
to adopt what is currently used by existing law to keep 
up with the times. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have only two more questions. 
Madam President. 

May I refer the Gentleman to Section 2 (1) on page 
2, line 19 specifically with reference to the word “pre- 
ferably.” Because of the use of the word “preferably,” 
the meaning will be that the requirement of proven 
capacity for public administration will only be direc- 
tory. Is the Committee willing to delete the word “pre- 
ferably,” and instead say emphatically “with proven 
capacity for public administration”? 

MR. FOZ. Before we answer the question. Madam 
President, we would like to apologize for an oversight. 
We would like to request Commissioner de Castro to 
sit here with us as member of the panel. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I would prefer to sit here because 
I have some questions and interpellations to be made 
to the Committee. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, that does not prevent 
anyone of those who are now sitting here to interpellate 
the Committee. But may we ask Commissioner de 
Castro to answer the question of Commissioner Nolledo 
because it was Commissioner de Castro who proposed 
the phrase now being questioned by Commissioner 
Nolledo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

When we were discussing this in the Committee, I 
did not use the word “preferably.” We were considering 


“public administration” then, but certainly I did not use 
the word “preferably.” I am sorry, I cannot explain it. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That must have been a typo- 
graphical error. Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may I request that Com- 
missioner Rigos answer the question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, it was I who sug- 
gested the phrase “preferably with proven capacity for 
public administration.” I think the suggestion of Com- 
missioner Nolledo is a good one, and which the Commit- 
tee would entertain during the period of amendments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The question sequent to that is, how 
does the Gentleman determine “proven capacity”? 

REV. RIGOS. That will be the problem of the 
appointing power. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Madam President, I would like to ask one question 
on Section 6, page 3, lines 13 to 16 which says: 

No officer of the Armed Forces in the active service 

shall, at any time, be appointed or designated in a tem- 
porary or acting capacity to a civilian position in the 

government. 

If we equate this with other provisions, we cannot 
prevent the President from appointing the officer to 
a double position, not necessarily in a temporary 
capacity, if the law allows it because the Constitution 
does not prohibit double position, it only prohibits 
double compensation. So with the term “temporary 
or acting capacity,” the purpose behind this provision 
may be negated, if there is a law allowing a member of 
the Armed Forces to hold, concurrently, a civilian 
position. So, why does the Committee not say can- 
not be designated in any capacity to a civilian posi- 
tion in the government” because there is a possibility 
that there may be a law allowing double position? In 
fact, even double compensation may be allowed, if the 
law so specifically states. Considering that the pro- 
ponent’s prohibition is with respect only to temporary 
or acting capacity, would it not be gratuitous on my 
part to recommend to the Committee to change the 
expression “temporary or acting capacity to in any 
capacity”? 

MR. FOZ. But the Committee believes that as pre- 
sently worded, Section 6, page 3, would already bar the 
appointment of any officer in the active service of the 
Armed Forces of the Philippines from being appointed 


536 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


in any capacity. The phraseology is so encompassing as 
to really prohibit even the Legislature from passing a 
law that would go against the grain of such a provision. 

It says here, “appointed or designated in a temporary 
or acting capacity.” What situation would still be left 
out, if this provision were approved? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Commissioner Foz. | 

Thank you. Madam President. \ 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:29 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:40 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

To clarify certain matters, we have several docu- 
ments here now on our tables, such as the basic docu- 
ment that was presented yesterday, and copies of the 
common provisions which we amended by substitution. 
So, please be guided by these particular documents 
where the lines are numbered on the left margin. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. ® 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I would like 
to tollow up the interpellation of Commissioner Nolledo 
m connection with Section 1 (1) on the phrase “in- 
cluding government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions. The Gentleman has already argued for the 
removal of this phrase which might eventually run 
in conflict with certain provisions in the Bill of Rignts 
such as the granting of the right of workers in both 
government and private institutions, including these 
government-owned or controlled corporations. But 
anyhow, I would like to find out, if the Committee is 
“willing to die” for the inclusion or the retention of 
this particular phrase so that when the time comes, v/e 
know what the stand of the Committee is. Is it that 
important for the Committee to retain this particular 
phrase for which many government workers are “willing 
to put their lives on”? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee is amenable to any reason- 
able amendments at the proper time. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

Secondly, I would like to address the issue here as 
provided in Section 1 (4), line 12, and I quote; “No 
officer or employee in the civil service shall engage, 
directly or indirectly, in any partisan political activity.” 
This is almost the same provision as in the 1973 Con- 
stitution. However, we in the government service have 
actually experienced how this provision has been 
violated by the direct or indirect partisan political 
activities of many government officials. 

So, is the Committee willing to include certain clauses 
that would make this provision more strict, and which 
would deter its violation? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, the existing Civil Service 
Law and the implementing rules on the matter are more 
than exhaustive enough to really prevent officers and 
employees in the public service from engaging in any 
form of partisan political activity. But the problem 
really lies in implementation because, if the head of a 
ministry, and even the superior officers of offices and 
agencies of government will themselves violate the 
constitutional injunction against partisan political 
activity, then no string of words that we may add to 
what is now here in this draft will really implement the 
constitutional intent against partisan political activity. 
But Just the same, the Committee is amenable to any 
suggestion that the Commissioner or others believe will 
improve the phraseology of this existing provision. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

Another point I would like to raise is on page 2, 
Section 3, line 36. This is about the functions of the 
Civil Service Commission as the central personnel 
agency of the government, specifically those of “per- 
sonnel actions, classifying positions, prescribing condi- 
tions of employment except as to compensation and 
other monetary benefits.” What is the Committee’s 
intention here for the Civil Service Commission to cover 
the functions exercised right now by the Office of Com- 
pensation and Position Classification under the Office 
of Budget and Management? 

MR. FOZ. Right now under the existing law and 
procedures, we concede that this function of classifying 
positions in the government service is being performed 
by the Office of Budget and Management. But that does 
not preclude, right now under existing law, the Civil 
Service Commission from doing certain classification of 
positions. But, of course, when it comes to salary scales 
and rates, the Commission has to coordinate with the 
OBM. The Committee would be amenable to suggestions 
or amendments that would clarify this function that we 
are assigning to the Civil Service Commission. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. Madam President. 

At the appropriate time, I shall introduce some 
amendments. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


537 


MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I am a member of the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies but 1 have certain inquiries 
to make. Records will show that I have never been 
absent in their proceedings and I am always the one 
ahead of anybody in the Committee. I regret that I have 
to make certain clarifications on this matter. 

On Section 1, page 1, the sponsor stated that the 
Constitutional Commissions shall be the Civil Service 
Commission, the Commission on Elections and the 
Commission on Audit. Since there are other proposed 
resolutions for other agencies to be made constitutional 
bodies, will this statement not prevent any of those pro- 
posed constitutional bodies to be included in the event 
that the resolutions shall be approved by this body? 
For example, the National Police Commission, the 
Human Rights Commission, the National Pollution 
Control Commission and the Good Government Com- 
mission are the proposed constitutional bodies. In the 
event that the proposals will be approved by the body, 
will the Committee be willing to make additional 
sentences to Section 1? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. When Proposed Re- 
solution No. 468 was drafted, the other proposals on the 
creation of other constitutional bodies and commissions 
had not been disposed of by the Committee on Consti- 
tutional Commissions and Agencies, so the way is still 
open for inclusion of other bodies in this section once 
the Committee has acted on the other proposals for 
constitutional bodies. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

On Section 2, page 1, lines 6 and 7, the salary of 
the Chairman is PI 20,000, and each Commissioner, 
PI 00,000. How was this arrived at, considering that in 
the 1973 Constitution, the salary of the President is 
only PI 00,000? 

MR. FOZ. During our deliberations, we sought data 
on the salaries of the members of Mie Supreme Court, as 
well as those of the Intermediate Appellate Court. We 
were informed that in the case of the members of the 
Supreme Court, the salary of the Chief Justice, for in- 
stance, is around — I cannot cite the exact figure now — 
PI 30,000; in the case of an associate member or Justice 
of the Supreme Court, it was, of course, much lower; in 
the case of the members of the Intermediate Appellate 
Court — I cannot remember the exact figure now — but 
the salary range is something below what we cite here in 
Section 2. 


So, the proposal here is to fix the minimum salaries 
of the members of the commissions at something be- 
tween the scale of the Supreme Court and that of the 
Intermediate Appellate Court. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Would the sponsor consider sug- 
gestions when the time comes, or to have this portion 
for salaries amended? 

MR. FOZ. Would the Gentleman propose an increase, 
a further increase in the salaries of commissioners? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I do not know whether it would 
be a further increase or decrease, but when the time 
comes would the sponsor consider? 

MR. FOZ. As long as it would increase salaries, I 
think the Committee would be amenable. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Section 3, page 1, lines 9, 10, and 1 1 says: “No mern- 
ber of a Constitutional Commission shall, during his 
tenure, engage in the practice of any profession . . .” 

Is teaching considered the practice of a profes- 
sion? I am asking this because I would like to put on 
record my perceptions on this, which I failed to do 
during our committee hearings. Is teaching, for example, 
the teaching of law, a practice of a profession? 

MR. FOZ. We did not reach any decision on this 
matter. There were views to the effect that teaching 
should be considered as practice of a professioii, but 
there were opposite views, and so, on the suggestiori of 
some members, we dropped the subject on that point. 

MR. DE CASTRO. During the discussions, a certain 
jurisprudent — I do not know who brought it up was 
cited as stating that teaching is not a practice of a pro- 
fession. I said there is no better practice of a profession 
than teaching. If you teach, you study, you research and 
you teach, so you are practicing your profession. 

When the time comes, will the sponsor be amenable 
to certain amendments on this matter? 

MR. FOZ. The Gentleman would specify that teach- 
ing is not practicing? 

MR. DE CASTRO. To my perception, yes. Would 
the sponsor, at an appropriate time, accept certain 
amendments on this? 

MR. FOZ. We will consider, but we cannot promise. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 4, line 17, page l.says: 
“The Commissions shall enjoy fiscal autonomy.^ What 
does the Committee mean by “fiscal autonomy here. 


538 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. FOZ. The term is explained by the second 
sentence of the provision which states, and I quote: 
“Appropriations for the Commissions once approved 
shall be automatically released.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, “fiscal autonomy” only refers 
to automatic releases? Do I get it that way? 

MR. FOZ. As presently worded, that seems to be the 
intention. 

MR. DE CASTRO. When we say a Commission has 
fiscal autonomy, is it just the automatic release of its 
appropriations? 

MR. FOZ. We know that “fiscal autonomy” as a 
term would encompass a broader field, but I think it 
was the feeling of the Committee that it should be 
narrowed down to automatic release of funds once 
appropriated and approved by the legislature. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

On page 2, Section 2 (2), lines 31 to 32 says: “In no 
case shall any member be appointed in a temporary or 
acting capacity.” Does the word “member” here include 
the Chairman? 

MR. FOZ. The word “member” is inclusive of the 
Chairman. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Does it include the Chairman and 
all the members? 

MR. FOZ. It includes the Chairman because “mem- 
ber” is a generic term. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I noticed that we have been using 
the word “Chairman” in Section 2(1)- “the Chairman 
and two Commissioners” - but in the last sentence of 
Section 2 (2) the word “member” is used that is why I 
am asking whether this includes the Chairman and all 
the commissioners thereof. 

MR. FOZ. “Member” would include the Chairman. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Just a few clarificatory questions. 
Madam President. Section 5, line 23 of the Common 


Provisions says: “. . . any decision, order, or ruling of 
each Commission may be brought to the Supreme Court 
on certiorari by the aggrieved party. . .” Do we mean by 
this that the only ground for bringing it to the Supreme 
Court is grave abuse of discretion? I say this because 
the phrase “may be brought to the Supreme Court” is 
exactly the same as the phrase in the old Constitution, 
particularly in the provisions on the Commission on 
Elections, and our Supreme Court has already held: 

We hold, therefore, that under this provision the cer- 
tiorari jurisdiction of the Supreme Court over orders, 
rulings and decisions of the COMELEC in this instance 
should be confined to instances of grave abuse of discretion 
amounting to patent and substantial denial of due process. 

MR. FOZ. May we request Commissioner Regalado to 
respond to the question? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, that case cited by Commis- 
sioner Bernas was the wording of Justice Barredo with 
respect to the decisions or orders of the COMELEC. But 
this provision here contemplates a petition for review by 
certiorari under Rule XLV of the Rules of Court and 
that includes as grounds grave abuse of discretion, lack 
of jurisdiction and excess of jurisdiction. 

FR. BERNAS. The decision I cited was precisely 
an interpretation of the clause in the provisions on the 
COMELEC which says: “Any decision, order, or ruling 
of the Commission may be brought to the Supreme 
Court on certiorari ...” In interpreting that provision in 
the case of Aratuc, the Supreme Court said: 

We hold, therefore, that under the existing constitutional 
and statutory provisions, the certiorari jurisdiction of the 
Court over orders, rulings and decisions of the Comelec 
is not as broad as it used to be and should be confined to 
instances of grave abuse of discretion amounting to patent 
and substantial denial of due process. 

Does that express the sense of the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. That was the view of Justice 
Barredo in the Aratuc case while he was the ponente, 
but I do not have the citations at hand. In subsequent 
decisions wherein Chief Justice Teehankee concurred, 
he believed that the mode of review on certiorari under 
Rule XLV is to be understood as including acts of the 
Constitutional Commissions, without jurisdiction or 
acting in excess of jurisdiction. 

FR. BERNAS. This seems to me the same thing. If it 
is without jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction, there 
is grave abuse of discretion. 

MR. REGALADO. No, Commissioner. Grave abuse of 
discretion may be equivalent to lack of jurisdiction, if it 
was done in a capricious or whimsical manner. But 
excess of jurisdiction is a little different, meaning, that 
the Supreme Court had jurisdiction but it overstepped 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


539 


the bounds of jurisdiction in the exercise thereof. That 
is what Justice Teehankee also pointed out. Grave abuse 
of discretion, I agree, results in lack of jurisdiction, but 
excess of jurisdiction presupposes that the Court, while 
with jurisdiction, just overstepped the permissible 
bounds in the exercise thereof. 

FR. BERNAS. So, for purposes of the record now, 
what is the intention of the Committee? What are the 
grounds for certiorarP. 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee which refers 
specifically to a technical term of review by certiorari 
would be relying on the provisions of Rule XLV of the 
Rules of Court that laid down the three grounds. 

FR. BERNAS. My next question is on the Civil 
Service Commission — Section 1 (2) on page 2. This, to 
some extent, has already been brought up by Commis- 
sioner Nolledo. And I also notice that the old phrase 
“policy-determining, primarily confidential and highly 
technical” has been eliminated. Does this mean that 
such classification no longer exists? It seems to me that 
even within the classifications of career and noncareer 
service, we can still have subclassifications of highly 
technical, policy-determining and primarily confidential 
appointments which are the bases for the distinction 
between competitive and noncompetitive appointments. 
In other words, the way I understand the old law, 
appointments to the civil service were always according 
to merit and fitness. But merit and fitness were deter- 
mined in some cases by competitive examination. In the 
cases of policy-determining, primarily confidential and 
highly technical positions, merit and fitness are not 
determined by competitive examination. 

MR. FOZ. As I mentioned in my reply to Commis- 
sioner Nolledo, the phrase “policy-determining, prima- 
rily confidential and highly technical in nature” is no 
longer being used. As a matter of fact, in the Civil 
Service Law or P.D. No. 807 and the implementing rules 
promulgated pursuant thereto, the phrase is no longer 
used and instead the classification of positions in the civil 
service has been under two broad categories; namely, 
career and noncareer service. 

FR. BERNAS. I quite realize that there is such a 
distinction, but under “career and noncareer service” 
there is still a subclassification of policy-determining, 
primarily confidential and highly technical positions, 
but I think we can . . . 

MR. FOZ. I do not recall reading those terms, as far 
as the Civil Service Law is concerned. 

FR. BERNAS. At any rate, perhaps we could come 
back to that during the period of amendments. 

I have another question on Section 1 (3), lines 9 to 
1 1 which says: 


No member of the Civil Service shall be removed, sus- 
pended or otherwise disciplined except for just causes as 

may be provided by law. 

Does the phrase “as may be provided by law” refer 
merely to the procedure or also to the cause? In other 
words, does this mean that it is not enough that the pro- 
cedure of law be followed but that the causes must 
themselves be specified by law? 

MR. FOZ. In both cases. Madam President — pro- 
cedural and substantive. 

FR. BERNAS. On page 3, Section 4, line 5, the 
provision begins with the phrase “Unless otherwise 
provided by law” which does not exist in the 1973 
Constitution. This was inserted in a 1981 amendment. 
We know the reason why this was put in here. It prac- 
tically renders the provision useless because the whole 
matter becomes discretionary with the legislature. It 
is one of those instances in the 1973 Constitution, as 
amended and constantly reamended, where they throw 
in the phrase “Unless otherwise provided by law” 
precisely to give the President a free hand in his decree- 
making power. 

MR. FOZ. The original provision in our draft actually 
adopted the provision in the 1973 Constitution. In other 
words, it was without that phrase “Unless otherwise 
provided by law” but the Committee thought that 
should be included. 

FR. BERNAS. So that ultimately it depends on the 
legislature. 

MR. FOZ. As presently worded now, the provision 
would allow the legislature to really provide otherwise, 
meaning, to allow an elective official to be appointed to 
an executive office. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President 
and members of the Committee. 

I understand that the reason for the creation of 
constitutional commissions is to give these bodies in- 
dependence, and it goes with the terms “nonpartisan 
and “impartial.” But the fact remains that the people 
who are appointed to these commissions are still 
presidential appointees, in accordance with the provi- 
sions. The Committee even suggested that the appoint 
ments would no longer require confirmation, which 
means that these do not have to pass through the Com- 
mission on Appointments or any such body and these 
could be considered purely a presidential act. 


540 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


This is the reason we should try to put in some 
checks and balances inside the commissions. In fact, I 
filed Proposed Resolution No. 460, which, unfortunate- 
ly, has not been referred to in any way in the report, 
and I take it to mean that it has not been considered. In 
my proposal, I said: 

The Constitutional Commissions shall be the Civil Service 
Commission, the Commission on Elections and the Com- 
mission on Audit. One-third of the composition of each 
shall be appointed from a list of competent persons recom- 
mended by opposition parties, 

to provide some checks and balances. 

However, upon discussing this matter with one of the 
members, Honorable Jamir, to be specific, I agree with 
his thinking that Proposed Resolution No. 460 should 
not apply really to the Civil Service Commission and the 
Commission on Audit because these are professionalized 
bodies. But Commissioner Jamir was thinking — and I 
hope I got him correctly — that probably this should 
apply more to the COMELEC. I recall — of course, this 
has been denied — that former Commissioner Felipe, 
now Chairman of the COMELEC, was supposed to have 
been appointed, according to the newspapers, on 
account of the fact that he was with the opposition. 
But, of course, that has been denied by Chairman 
Felipe. 

In the case, for example, of the other members of the 
Commission on Elections, if .we have to talk about 
former Dean Bacungan, he had no political party what- 
soever. He was appointed because of his competency, 
his knowledge of the law, and so on. But I am toying 
with this idea, and I am asking the Committee if we 
could probably talk about it and decide whether we are 
going to push Proposed Resolution No. 460 through 
which provides that, in the COMELEC at least there 
should be appointed from a list of competent persons 
those recommended by the opposition parties. 

How does the Commission feel about this? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee will be ready to discuss it 
at the proper time. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

I will go to another point because I have been given 
only very few minutes. 

I am worried about Section 5, page 3, lines 9 to 12 
which says: 

No candidate who has lost in an election shall, within one 
year after such election, be appointed to any office in the 
government, or any government-owned or controlled 
corporation or in any of its subsidiaries. 

It is an all-embracing prohibition. I have been going 
over the books on constitutional law, including the 
book of Father Bernas, and I cannot seem to find any 
justification for this provision. I was going over our 
present Constitution and may I refer the Committee to 
Article V, Section 3 which says: 


It shall be the duty of every citizen to engage in gainful 

work to assure himself and his family a life worthy of 

human dignity. 

Here is a man who tries to serve the public by 
presenting himself as a candidate. He may have all the 
qualifications in the world but he happens to be a very 
bad politician and he lost in the elections. And because 
of that we punish him. We do not give him a job even 
though he is qualified, and so, he is now a lame duck 
because he cannot find gainful employment. What is he 
supposed to do? 

If somebody could please give me the rationale for 
this provision, perhaps we could understand this better. 
Is there any particular reason why we are retaining this 
provision from the 1973 Constitution? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, the Commissioner is right that this is 
just a reenactment of an existing provision in the 1973 
Constitution, with the difference that in our proposed 
provision now there is the addition of the phrase ‘‘or in 
any of its subsidiaries,” referring to government-owned 
or controlled corporations. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This makes the prohibition 
worse, because it now covers any of its subsidiaries. 

MR. FOZ. As explained by Commissioner Bernas in 
his book on the 1973 Constitution, this provision at- 
tacks the evil practice of rewarding political lame ducks 
with appointments in government positions. That is the 
statement of Father Bernas. And we subscribe to the 
proposition that the practice of appointing lame ducks 
is an evil political practice. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I regret that I have not read that 
portion of the book of Father Bernas, the big one, the 
big book . . . 

MR. FOZ. It is the green book. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is the green book which is rather 
expensive. I was reading actually the book of the wife of 
former Chief Justice Fernando and other books. But 
even with that explanation, I still could not get it, but 
perhaps we can talk about it when it comes to that 
particular provision so that we will not delay the dis- 
cussions. 

We have another point here regarding this statement 
made yesterday by the proponent on the tripod of the 
civil service system when he said that we have the merit 
system, the principle of neutrality and security of 
tenure. I can understand both the merit system and the 
security of tenure, but I do not understand neutrality. 
What is this? Does it have something to do with the 
US bases or something? 

MR. FOZ. I know that the Commissioner is just being 
funny about this, but I know he is familiar with the 
principle of political neutrality in the civil service. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


541 


MR. MAAMBONG. I really am not, I am sorry. 

MR. FOZ. It means that the professional body of 
men and women who are in the public service must not 
involve themselves — at least not overly involve them- 
selves — in political activities because the purpose of the 
civil service is efficiency in the delivery of services to its 
clients, which refers to the people at large. The belief is 
that, if members of the civil service engage in partisan 
political activity, they may be distracted from their 
original and essential goal or objective of performing 
their jobs in the public service efficiently. That is the 
main idea. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I understand it now. Just one 
point on that Section 5, Madam President. In the 1973 
Constitution as amended in 1984, elective officials can 
hold other positions in government under two instances: 
One, if he is a Cabinet member, and, two, if it is so 
provided by law. This provision has now been de- 
leted in the present configuration of the proposed 
provision. I would like to know whether or not with 
the deletion of that provision in the Constitution, 
elective officials can already hold other positions in 
government considering that the original provision was 
a prohibitory provision with an exception. 

What is the position of the Committee on that now? 

MR. FOZ. Is the Gentleman referring to Section 4? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am referring to Section 5, and 
this section was lifted from the 1973 Constitution, but 
as that Constitution was amended in 1984, there was a 
general prohibition against elective officials holding 
other offices. However, there were two exceptions: he 
can hold on to another office as a member of the 
Cabinet, or as provided for by law. 

I want to know whether or not that prohibition still 
applies because it was deleted from this proposal. 

MR. FOZ. First of all. Madam President, I think the 
Gentleman is referring to Section 4, page 3, starting on 
line 5. It is not Section 5 but Section 4. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, that prohibition 
before is now covered by Section 4. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, it is Section 4 in our draft. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

Just one more statement. 

MR. FOZ. I have not answered the Gentleman’s 
question. I was just trying to correct the reference to 
Section 5; it is Section 4 in our draft. 


dropped and this new provision is under Section 4, that 
could solve the problem one way or the other. 

I just want to make a final statement regarding the 
statement of Commissioner de Castro about the teach- 
ing of law as a profession. I do not know if there are 
new decisions now — because I taught legal ethics a long 
time ago — but if I recall, the Supreme Court was verj'^ 
specific in saying that when a lawyer practices as a 
notary public, he is, in effect, practicing law. But I have 
not seen any decision of the Supreme Court as of the 
moment, which says that when a lawyer teaches law, he 
is practicing a profession. 

That is just my impression; I have not read any such 
decision. Probably there is a decision which I do not 
know of. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tan be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 


SR. TAN. Madam President and Members of this body, 
I refer to Section 4, page 3, lines 5. I was wondering 
if the Committee would consider Proposed Resolution 
No. 54 of Commissioner Davide which cites “that many 
public officers have becohie the ‘property’ of many 
politicians or a piece of inheritance of many families. 
Commissioner Davide also states that many officials 
“devote most of their time preparing themselves for re- 
election or for the election of a wife, a son, a son-in-law 


Would the Committee consider adding sornething like 
lis, after Section 4 or whatever section it could be 
Jded to: WITHIN TWO YEARS FOLLOWING TOE 
XPIRATION OF THE TERM OF AN ELECTIVE OF- 
ICIAL, NO SPOUSE OR RELATIVE BY COI^ 
ANGUINITY OR AFFINITY WITHIN THE THIRD 
IVIL DEGREE OF SUCH OFFICIAL SHALL BE 
LIGIBLE FOR ELECTION TO THE OFFICE TO BE 




Would the Commissioner consider this amendment as 
out of the question? 


MR. FOZ. The Committee, I think, will consider 
that. I remember. Madam President, that a stoilar pro- 
vision is now part of the draft on the executive deparU 
ment. I recall a similar provision on a similar ban which 
was approved by the Committee on the Executive. Bu 
the Committee would be willing to entertain such an 
amendment. 


SR. TAN. Thank you very much. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I think it MR. RAMA. Madam President, 1 ask that Commis- 
answers my question, because if that provision was sioner Davide be recognized. 


542 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the sponsor yield to some questions? 

MR. FOZ. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will begin with the Constitutional 
Commissions based on the amended draft. 

On Section 3, on the matter of the prohibition, it is 
not very clear here whether the member of a constitu- 
tional commission shall also be prohibited from holding 
any other public office or employment in the govern- 
ment or any of its subdivision, instrumentality or 
agency. Would it not be appropriate, to be consistent 
with the policy of the government now, that members 
of the Commission should also be prohibited from 
holding any public office or employment? 

MR. FOZ. Does the Commissioner refer to a provi- 
sion in the Article on the Legislative which prohibits 
members of the legislature from holding any other 
position or employment in the government? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

Another point, Madam President. As to the computa- 
tion of the period within which a commission shall 
decide a matter or a case pending before it which states: 

sixty days from the date of its submission for resolu- 
tion,” how would the sponsor determine the exact date 
when the matter is deemed submitted for resolution? 

MR. FOZ. I think Commissioner Davide is referring 
to Section 5. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

. This is on line 20, page 1, of our amended 

draft which reads: 

Each Commission shall decide by a majority vote of all its 

members any case brought before it within sixty days from 

the date of its submission for resolution. 

Commissioner is how to deter- 
mine the date of submission for resolution. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. Would it not 
be best to apply the rule just approved by the Commis- 
sion in the matter relating to the Judiciary? 

MR. FOZ. May I know the rule, Madam President? 

MR. DAVIDE. For instance, we can state here that 
a case or matter is deemed submitted for decision or 
resolution “upon the filing of the last pleading, brief or 
memorandum required by the rules of the Cornmission 
or by the Commission itself.” 


MR. FOZ. That proposal would advance the date 
from which to compute the period. 

MR. DAVIDE. When is the matter deemed submitted 
for decision? 

MR. FOZ. Of course, by saying that from the date of 
the last pleading . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, almost similar to the approved 
section of the Article on the Judiciary. 

MR. FOZ. But after the date of the last pleading, 
there would still be some proceedings, for instance, for 
oral arguments. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is why we indicate here “upon 
the filing of the last pleading, brief, or memorandum 
required by the rules of the Commission or by the Com- 
mission itself,” because we authorize a commission to 
promulgate its own rules. 

MR. FOZ. Would that not put the commission in 
great difficulty? 

MR. DAVIDE. It would not because the period of 60 
days computed from the date of submission would be 
sufficient. 

The idea here is only to provide a rule requiring the 
Commission to decide a particular matter or a case with- 
in a definite period, so that it will not actually put any 
matter subject to its whims and caprices. 

On another matter. Section 5, lines 27 and 28, states 
that the decisions of the Commission on Elections on 
municipal and barangay officials shall be final, inappeal- 
able and executory as recommended. Would it cover all 
kinds of issues affecting municipal and barangay offi- 
cials or would it refer only to contests relating to the 
election, returns and qualifications of such officials? 

MR. FOZ. This refers only to electoral contests. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, at the appropriate time, is the 
sponsor willing to accept an amendment specifying the 
area relating to municipal and barangay official? 

MR. FOZ. There was really an oversight here, and we 
are willing to entertain an amendment to clarify this. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will bring the sponsor’s attention to 
page 2, on the Civil Service Commission proper, more 
particularly on the prohibitions against partisan poli- 
tical activity. The present provision of the 1973 Consti- 
tution provides further: “or take part in any election 
except to vote.” I notice, however, that in this draft, 
that particular clause has been deleted. May we know 
the philosophy for its deletion. 


TUESDAY,] ULY 15 , 1986 


543 


MR. FOZ. The last clause which states: “or take part 
in any election except to vote” was deleted to remove 
any confusion or ambiguity of words in the implementa- 
tion of this provision. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the deletion not amount to a 
denial of the right to vote, because voting is a partisan 
political activity? 

MR. FOZ. No, we are not saying that public officials 
and employees are barred from voting. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. To be very safe about it, would 
the sponsor not grant the need for the restatement or 
restoration of the phrase “or take part in any election 
except to vote”? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are willing to 
entertain a clarification, but the philosophy behind it 
is that the previous provision seemed to indicate that 
the only two types of activities are voting and partisan 
political activity. As a matter of fact, the only non- 
partisan political activity one can engage in as a citizen 
is voting. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that is why I intend to amend 
this by retaining the original words “or take part in any 
election except to vote,” but we should allow the public 
officer or employee to participate in any other manner 
of voting which is not partisan like in a plebiscite, 
referendum or initiative proceedings. Probably, we 
could add “participation in any plebiscite, referendum 
or initiative proceedings shall not be considered 
partisan.” 

MR. MONSOD. Perhaps, Madam President, we could 
also add the phrase “that would allow civil service 
servants to engage in nonpartisan political activities such 
as poll watch and safeguarding the polls as citizens.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Anyway, we have allowed accredita- 
tion of the citizens arm in the provision on the 
COMELEC, so that would really be considered as an 
exception. 

Let us proceed to the Commission on Audit. 

the president. The Chair would like to remind 
Commissioner Davide that the Commission on Audit 
will be taken up later. Upon request of the Chairman of 
the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies, Commissioner Foz, we are concentrating our 
interpellation on the Common Provisions of the Article 
on Constitutional Commissions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

1 reserve my right to interpellate the sponsors on the 
Commission on Audit at the proper time. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Ople be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the sponsor yield to a few questions? 

MR. FOZ. Willingly, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I refer to Section 1 (1) of this Article on the Civil 
Service which states; “The Civil Service embraces all 
branches, subdivisions, instrumentalities and agencies 
of the Government, including government-owned or 
controlled corporations.” 

May I know from the Committee and its Chairman, 
who has written copiously on labor law and workers’ 
rights, whether this definition of the scope of the civil 
service denies the right to self-organization and collec- 
tive bargaining of all those embraced in this definition. 

MR. FOZ. We are not making any such declaration. 
Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. I would like to call the attention of the 
Committee to this prolonged legal stalemate or constitu- 
tional stalemate between the labor and civil service 
provisions of the 1973 Constitution, specifically Article 
II, Section 9, which extends to workers and employees, 
regardless of whether they are in the private sector or 
in the public sector, the right to self-organization and 
collective bargaining. However, there is a dispute per- 
taining to the Article of the Civil Service of the 1973 
Constitution, because the general presumption of at 
least the executive branch of government is that the 
guarantee to self-organization in Article II, Section 9, 
extends only to the employees of the private sector, 
and in some cases, also to those of government-owned 
and controlled corporations with original charter. I 
think this Commission ought not to shrink from the 
duty of finally clarifying what I just called a constitu- 
tional stalemate between one article of the Constitution 
and another. Therefore, I anticipate the presentation of 
an amendment during the period of amendments, pro- 
bably an additional section, which more or less will read 
as follows: “Notwithstanding any provision of this Ar- 
ticle, the right to self-organization and collective bar- 
gaining shall not be denied to government employees 
unless otherwise provided by law.” I suppose the legisla- 
tive body would want to exempt the armed forces and 
the police forces and other employees in analogous 
positions who exercise very essential security functions 
from the coverage of this proposed section. 

May I know how the Committee will revise this 
provision when this amendment is presented? 


544 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. FOZ. We would like to respond to the statement 
of Commissioner Ople. 

We really believe that the Declaration of Principles, 
which is Article II as mentioned by the Commissioner, 
does not make any distinction when it says that the 
State shall assure the right of workers to self-organiza- 
tion and collective bargaining. It does not say this right 
extends only to those in private employment. It is a 
general statement that obviously applies to all our 
workers. 

The provision on the Article on the Civil Service in 
the 1973 Constitution which specifically mentions that 
government-owned or controlled corporations are 
within the ambit of the civil service does not also state 
that those employed in government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations are deprived of their right to self- 
organization and collective bargaining. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I am very delighted to 
hear this response. 

MR. FOZ. I think there was a misunderstanding when 
this provision was discussed in the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention. There was the apprehension of labor rep- 
resentatives to that convention that if the phrase 
“government-owned or controlled corporations” was 
included in the definition of “civil service,” then the 
consequence was that employees in those government- 
owned or controlled corporations would be deprived of 
their right to self-organization and collective bargaining. 
But as I see it now, and even at the time when this 
provision was being discussed in the convention, there is 
really nothing here that seeks to deprive the workers 
of any right granted in the Declaration of Principles. 


(PCGG) and now actually under the supervision, if not 
under the control, of various task forces that owe their 
appointments to the PCGG. Two most outstanding 
examples are the San Miguel Corporation and the 
United Coconut Planters Bank, the majority shares of 
which have been sequestered by the PCGG. And on the 
basis of a recent memorandum by the President em- 
powering these task forces to vote the shares, they have 
actually done so and nominated what appears to be the 
majority directors of the boards of these corporations. 
Does any provision in this proposed Article contemplate 
this new type of government-owned and controlled 
corporations and how they are regulated? 

I think there are basically two groups of government 
employees, those belonging to the civil service and those 
outside the civil service. Does the Civil Service Commis- 
sion have anything to do with this new type of govern- 
ment-owned and controlled corporation. Madam Pres- 
ident? And if they have not been anatomized yet in 
this Article with respect to their proper category, then 
what sort of legal status may be assigned to them for 
purposes of clarity? 

MR. FOZ. There is an existing law. Madam President, 
that defines government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions which is P.D. No. 2029. Under this law, the so- 
called acquired assets corporation or affiliate corpora- 
tions are not considered government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations. So in the case of the San Miguel 
Corporation, even if the majority of its shares of stock 
had been acquired by the government through seques- 
tration, it still remains a private corporation and not a 
government-owned or controlled corporation. 


MR. OPLE. I fully subscribe to this interpretation o 
the provisions of the 1973 Constitution, and I wil 
certainly be even more delighted if the Committee will 
at the proper time, entertain an amendment that wil 
make this protection for 1,200,000 employees of th( 
government an explicit right. 

Just one more question. 


MR. OPLE. So that, in effect. Madam President, 
Commissioner Foz is assigning them to a kind of legal 
limbo under the heading of “The Acquired Assets 
Department” of the government? 

MR. FOZ. San Miguel, for instance, remains a private 
corporation. 


MR FOZ Before the Commissioner proceeds, we 
understand that in another proposed Article in the new 
Constitution, this right to self-organization and collec- 
tive bargaining is sought to be embodied. I just cannot 
recall which Article or which committee 
volved. 


now is in 


MR. OPLE. It is probably the Committee on Social 
Justice, but we will look into the relevance of that 
provision later. 

Madam President, my next question has to do with 
new species of government-owned or controlled corpo- 
rations which do not seem to fit any category in the 
Constitution. I refer to firms that have been sequestered 
by the Presidential Commission on Good Government 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. Just one 
final question which has to do with Section 1 (4) on 
page 2, line 28, which states: 

No officer or employee in the civil service shall engage, 
directly or indirectly, in any partisan political activity. 

What may be denominated as nonpartisan political 
activity which presumably is not covered by this pro- 
hibition? Will belonging to NAMFREL, for example, be 
an exception to this prohibition? 

MR. FOZ. Since NAMFREL is nonpartisan in charac- 
ter, it is not supposed to side with any political party 
for political causes. So, engagement in NAMFREL 
activities is not covered by the prohibition. Madam 
President. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


545 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

But with respect to this, I think we have noted con- 
troversies concerning the nonpartisan character of the 
NAMFREL, an impression which has hardly been 
mitigated by the appointment following the elections of 
some leaders of NAMFREL to some Cabinet positions 
in the government of President Aquino. I am not raising 
this as a valid conclusion to show that the NAMFREL is 
not nonpartisan, but we can have in the future con- 
troversies concerning this presumption of nonpartisan- 
ship of the NAMFREL. The Committee, however, is 
saying that as part of their intent this prohibition on 
partisan political activity will not extend to government 
employees who will work for the NAMFREL in the 
coming elections. And I suppose the Committee has 
already ratified the fact that the NAMFREL is indeed 
nonpartisan. 

MR. FOZ. We never took it up in the Committee. 
What I said was a personal statement. But in that con- 
nection, I think NAMFREL, as organized, is really 
nonpartisan. But if some government employees or of- 
ficers join in its activities and engage in some partisan 
activities, then the blame should not be laid at the door 
of NAMFREL as an institution or organization, but on 
the particular government officers or employees who 
did engage in partisan activities. 

MR. OPLE. I can accept that. I have nothing against 
the NAMFREL because we worked together very well 
in the Province of Bulacan in the previous elections. 
What I am trying to point out. Madam President, is that 
in many localities in the country, government em- 
ployees who would like to seek cover for partisan 
activity would be strongly tempted to apply to the 
NAMFREL for volunteer work so that under the cover 
of a noble and idealistic organization, they will proceed 
to take sides in the local elections. And so, I just want to 
input these into the Committee on perceptions of what 
should be the law. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, since the idea and 
the subject matter has been inputted, I will gladly 
discuss this more fully with the honorable Commis- 
sioner at some other time and place. I just want to say 
that regarding these accusations about the partisanship 
of NAMFREL, many observers also say that those who 
claim that NAMFREL was partisan were those who 
wanted to cheat. And with respect to the appointment 
of NAMFREL people in government, I think civic- 
minded people who are qualified to hold government 
positions are not disqualified for having participated 
in a nonpartisan organization like NAMFREL. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to ask two clarificatory questions? 

Section 5, lines 26 to 29 reads: 

XXX However, final decisions, orders or rulings of the Com- 
mission on Elections on municipal and barangay officials 

shall be final, inappealable and executory. 

My question is: Why do we limit finality of decisions 
to cases of municipal and barangay officials? Why do 
we exclude city and provincial officials? Are we not 
discriminating against city and provincial officials? 
What is the explanation. Madam President? 

MR. FOZ. Under existing law, the decisions of the 
municipal courts as regards barangay election contests 
are final. 

MR. SARMIENTO. What about municipal officials? 
What makes them different from city officials? 

MR. FOZ. Let me finish my reply. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. But in the case of electoral contests involv- 
ing municipal officials, the decisions of the municipal 
court are appealable to the Regional Trial Court at 
present. So under this provision the decisions of the 
Commission on Elections would also be final in the case 
of municipal and barangay officials. 

In the case of city and provincial officials, I cannot 
recall the existing law. But, I have the idea that they can 
be tried by the Regional Trial Court, and its decisions 
are appealable to the Intermediate Appellate Court. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Will the sponsor agree with the 
possible inclusion of city officials in the finality of 
decisions of the Commission on Elections? 

MR. FOZ. We have no basic objection to that, but 
this may raise some kind of a howl from those who are 
involved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I proceed to my next 
question. Madam President. 

Section 5, line 25 reads: “certiorari by the aggrieved 
party thirty days from receipt.” Is the Committee 
contemplating a period within 30 days from receipt of a 
copy thereof? 


546 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. FOZ. I am sorry. Madam President. There was 
really an omission here. There should be the word 
“within” to precede “thirty days.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. Madam 
President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tadeo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, bilang paglilinaw 
lang po. Section 1 (3), lines 9 to 1 1 of the provisions on 
the Civil Service Commission, states: 

No member of the civil service shall be removed, sus- 
pended or otherwise disciplined except for just causes as 

may be provided by law. 

Ginamit po natin dito ay plural, “just causes.” Does 
this mean that the ground to remove, suspend or dis- 
cipline must be at least more than one cause? Hindi ba 
sapat na iyong isa o kinakadangang higit sa isa? 


Doon po sa 1973 Constitution, Section 1 of the 
provisions on the Civil Service Commission, ang naka- 
saad ay “to any office,” hindi po kasama ang “public.” 

Bakit nilagyan natin ngayon ng “public”? Hindi ba ito 
magiging isang butas? Halim bawa mayroong isang 
magaling na mayor. Dahil sa ang kanyang Vice-Mayor 
ay ating kamag-anak, puwede nating ilagay iyong Mayor 
sa isang office na hindi public para mailagay iyong 
ating kamag-anak na Vice-Mayor bilang Mayor. 
Doon sa 1973 Constitution ang nakasaad ay “any of- 
fice,” pero itong ating Constitution ay “any public 
office.” Ano po ang dahilan at nilagyan natin ng 
“public”? 

MR. FOZ. The basic idea really is to prevent a situa- 
tion where a local elective official will work for his 
appointment in an executive position in government, 
and thus neglect his constituents. But the Commis- 
sioner’s question is on the addition of the word “pub- 
lic” to describe “office or position.” I think there was 
no basic difference intended in the previous provision 
which did not have the word “public.” A government i 
office was what was really meant. ! 


MR. FOZ. Just one cause, of course, may be suffi- 
cient. This is really a misprint again. It should be only in 
the singular, “just cause.” 


MR. TADEO. Another point. Section 1 (4), lines 12 
to 14 states: 

No officer or employee in the civil service shall engage, 
directly or indirectly, in any partisan political activity. 

Doon po sa 1973 Constitution, Section 5 of the 
provisions on the Civil Service Commission, ang naka- 
saad ay ito: ‘including members of the Armed Forces.” 
a ay sa ating karanasan, kahit nakalagay na roon iyong 
tungkol sa members of the Armed Forces, naging 
partisan pa rin sila. Bakit natin inalis ngayon? 

MR. FOZ In reply to that, the same was formulated 

vkinnT V Committee on General Pro- 
bers of has specific provisions regarding the mem 

. . ® rmed Forces. And one of the specific pro- 

visions approved by the Committee on General Provi- 
sions IS precisely the one which prohibits members of 
the Armed Forces of the Philippines from engaging ir 
partisan political activity. That is the reason. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I add to that 
It is also our understanding that the military is not part 
of the civil service and, therefore, must be dealt with in 
another section of the Constitution. 


MR. TADEO. Section 4, page 3, lines 5 to 8, states: 

Unless otherwise provided by law, no elective official 
shall be eligible for appointment or designation in a tempo- 
rary or acting capacity to any public office or position 
during his term. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor I.eader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. For the last interpellator, I ask that 
Commissioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

These are only clarificatory questions. Madam Pres- 
ident. May I call the sponsor’s attention, first of all, to 
Section 2 (2) on the Civil Service Commission wherein 
it is stated: “In ho case shall any Member be appointed 
in a temporary or acting capacity.” I detect in the Com- 
mittee’s proposed resolutions a constitutional hangover, 
if I may use the term, from the past administration. Am 
I correct in concluding that the reason the Committee 
introduced this particular provision is to avoid an in- 
cident similar to the case of the Honorable Francisco 
Tantuico who was appointed in an acting capacity as 
Chairman of the Commission on Audit for about 5 
years from 1975 until 1980, and then in 1980, was 
appointed as Chairman with a tenure of another 7 years. 
So, if we follow that appointment to logical conclusion, 
he occupied that position for about 12 years in violation 
of the Constitution? 

MR. FOZ. It is only one of the considerations. 
Another is really to make sure that any member who is 
appointed to any of the commissions does not serve 
beyond 7 years. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15 , 1986 


547 


MR. SUAREZ. So an identical provision governing 
the three constitutional commissions would be included 
in the sponsor’s proposed draft. 

MR. FOZ. This would be a common sentence or pro- 
vision for all the three constitutional commissions. 
Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let me call the sponsor’s attention to Section 4, page 
3 of the proposed draft, particularly lines 5 to 8. Com- 
missioner Tadeo already asked the sponsor about the 
insertion of the word “public” to define the word “of- 
fice.” My question is this; We will recall that under the 
1973 Constitution, Article 12 (B), Section 4(1) it was 
expressly provided in no uncertain terms that no elec- 
tive official shall be eligible for appointment to any 
office or position during his term of office. However, 
again, this is one of the hangovers from the past regime. 
Certain elective officials were appointed to multi- 
farious positions in the government, the most out- 
standing example of which is my “kabalen” who was 
at that time not only governor but was also the Minister 
of Justice and Solicitor General. Did the sponsor have 
these officials in mind in proposing the provision which 
reads: 

Unless otherwise provided by law, no elective official 
shall be eligible for appointment or designation in a tempo- 
rary or acting capacity to any public office or position 
during his term? 

MR. FOZ. Of course, we did not have in mind the 
Commissioner’s “kabalen.” But I filed a resolution 
which adopted the original provision of the 1973 Con- 
stitution, but in our committee deliberations, it was the 
consensus to add that clause: “Unless otherwise pro- 
vided by law,” so I was overruled. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President, because a pro- 
vision was contained in Resolution No. 110 that was 
submitted in a plebiscite on January 27, 1984 which 
would substantiate the sponsor’s proposed amendment 
because in that plebiscite this provision was approved, 
which reads: 

Unless otherwise provided by law, no elective official 
shall be eligible for appointment to any office or position 
during his tenure except as Member of the Cabinet, 

taking into consideration the semi-parliamentary system 
of government that was established during the Marcos 
administration. Is it the intention of the sponsor to 
adopt the amended provision that was introduced in the 
plebiscite held on January 27, 1984? Is my understand- 
ing correct, Madam President? 

MR. FOZ. No, Madam President, because as presently 
worded in our draft, the phraseology of this provision 


does not mention exceptions which were provided in 
the 1973 Constitution. We do not have these in the 
draft of the provision. 

MR. SUAREZ. But when we use the phrase “tempo- 
rary or acting capacity,” this might give the impression 
that an elective official may be eligible for appointment 
or designation in a permanent capacity. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe the intent 
of the Committee by the phrase “for appointment or 
designation” is this: “appointment” refers to a per- 
manent capacity and “designation” to a temporary or 
acting capacity. However, to clarify the intent of the 
Committee, we are willing to entertain an amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The last point is with respect to Section 6, page 3, 
lines 13 to 16 where mention is made about civilian 
positions in the government. Again, I refer the sponsor 
back to the past regime. Does the sponsor mean that 
“civilian positions” refer to positions in the Bureau 
of Customs, Land Transportation Commission, Veterans 
Administration and Manila International Airport where 
army officers were appointed to during the past 
regime? Is my understanding correct. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

MR. FOZ. We are not referring to a particular office 
but we have been prompted to draft this provision to 
forestall the general practice in the last few years^^ 
anointing military men in the active service to purely 
civilian positions. We do not see any reasonable basis for 
such practice. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does “civilian positions” include 
those positions, whether permanent or temporary, 
in institutions like the Jacinto Steel Mills and the 
MERALCO? 

MR. FOZ. Those corporations mentioned by the 
Commissioner are under some kind of government 
control. 

MR. SUAREZ. Not in the case of MERALCO and the 
Jacinto Steel Mills; those are purely a private concern. 

MR. FOZ. In the case of the Jacinto Steel Mills, I 
understand it has been foreclosed by government insti- 
tutions. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, it may have been foreclosed by 
the government but, nonetheless, it is still a private 
corporation. 

MR. FOZ. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Committee would not pro- 
hibit the appointment, temporary or otherwise, o 


548 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


members of the Armed Forces in the active service to 
positions like officer-in-charge of the MERALCO or of 
the Jacinto Steel Mills? 

MR. FOZ. That would come within the spirit of our 
proposed provision. 

MR. SUAREZ. I see. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
speakers who wish to interpellate, therefore, I move that 
we close the period of sponsorship and debate on Com- 
mittee Report No. 1 9 on the Civil Service Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) | 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for a sus- 
pension of the session until two-thirty in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:11 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:42 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Efrain B. Trenas presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Before we proceed to the period of 
amendments, I move that we take up the additional 
Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none- the 
motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the additional Refer- 
ence of Business. 


ADDITIONAL REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolution on First Reading, Communication and Com- 
mittee Report, the Presiding Officer making the corre- 
sponding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 523, entitled: 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE SINCERE CONDO- 
LENCE OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 
1986 ON THE DEATH OF THE FATHER OF THE 
HONORABLE RENE V. SARMIENTO. 

Sponsored by Hon. Quesada. 

To the Steering Committee. 

COMMUNICATION 

Communication from the Civic Assembly of Women of 
the Philippines (CAWP), National Council of Women, 
proposing provisions on the declaration of principles 
and state policies, citizenship, suffrage, constitutional 
commissions and general provisions. 

(Communication No. 203 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 28 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 522, prepared by the Committee on Preamble, 
National Territory, and Declaration of Principles, 
entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ARTICLES ON THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Pro- 
posed Resolution Nos. 3, 64, 86, 190, 231, 295, 302, 
372, 383, 393 and 437. 

Sponsored by Hon. Davide, Jr., Nolledo, Bengzon, Jr., 
de Castro, Villacorta, Rama, Calderon, Sarmiento, 
Tingson, Rosales, Aquino, Azcuna, Rosario Braid, Foz, 
Garcia, Quesada and Villegas. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the period of 
amendments on Committee Report No. 19 of the Com- 
mittee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Colayco be recognized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


549 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Colayco is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the 
sponsor answer a clarificatory question? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will the 
sponsor yield? 

MR. FOZ. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. COLAYCO. I am referring to Section 4 of the 
proposed Article XII, which reads: 

Unless otherwise provided by law, no elective official 

shall be eligible for appointment or designation in a tempo- 
rary or acting capacity to any public office or position 

during his term. 

The way I understand this is that we are giving the 
legislature the power to authorize the appointment or 
designation in a temporary or acting capacity of an 
elective official to any public office or position during 
his term. Am I right? 

MR. FOZ. If a law is passed regarding this matter, 
then such law may reverse this provision as worded, but 
we have said earlier that we will entertain suggestions 
from the floor. 

MR. COLAYCO. Personally, I find the policy esta- 
blished in this provision meritorious. To make it a firm 
policy, I suggest that we delete the prefatory phrase 
“unless otherwise provided by law.” 

MR. FOZ. We agree with the Commissioner. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

At this juncture, I would like to find out if the basis 
for our amendments will be the amended draft Article 
on the Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, 
copies of which were distributed yesterday. 

MR. FOZ. This is the same amended draft, copies of 
which were distributed yesterday. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, the amended draft which already 
contains the proposed amendments of the Committee. 


MR. FOZ. That is right, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. But there is nothing in the record to 
show that the basis now would be the amended draft. 
So, I move that for purposes of the deliberations of the 
Commission . . . 

MR. FOZ. Before the Commissioner proceeds with 
his motion, I would like to inform him that before 
copies of this amended draft were circulated to the 
Members of the Commission, there was a previous paper 
which contains the committee amendments, copies of 
which were also distributed yesterday. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, but before a commit- 
tee amendment may be admitted, the same must be 
introduced in plenary session. However, I understand 
that the committee amendments are now incorporated 
in the amended draft. 

MR. FOZ. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. So I now move that the amended 
draft Article of the Committee be considered the basis 
of presenting the individual amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none, the 
motion is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. So on the basis of the amended draft, 

I would like to introduce the following amendments on 
page 1 , Section 2, which will affect lines 5, 6 and 8. 

MR. FOZ. Commissioner Davide may please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 2, page 1, line 5, on Com- 
mon Provisions of the amended draft, insert between 
the words “receive” and “annual” the article AN. On 
line 6, change “salaries” to SALARY, and on line 8, 
delete the words “or increased” so that the entire 
section will now read as follows: “Until otherwise pro- 
vided by law, the Chairman and each of the Commis- 
sioners shall receive AN annual SALARY of one hun- 
dred twenty thousand pesos and one hundred ten 
thousand pesos, respectively, which shall not be 
decreased during their tenure. 

MR. FOZ. What is the purpose of the proposed 
amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, first of all, 
insofar as annual salaries are concerned, it should be in 
the singular because the Committee refers to the annual 
salary of the chairman and that of each of the commis- 
sioners. And in the matter of decrease or increase to be 
consistent with the other provisions of the Constitution, 
the restriction should be on the decrease not on the in- 
crease. We prevent the legislature from decreasing the 


550 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


annual salary but not from increasing it, so it must be 
flexible depending on the economic conditions of the 
country. 

MR. FOZ. But, on the other hand, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, there is the possibility that the national leader- 
ship may increase the salary of the Chairman or the 
members of a commission to influence their action on 
cases pending before them, and thus impair the in- 
dependence that we would like to assure them under 
this new Constitution. 

MR. DA VIDE. In the matter of increase, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer, the independence of the commission will 
never be impaired. As a matter of fact, it would enhance 
its independence because it will be adequately com- 
pensated. Suppose the exchange rate, two or four years 
from now, is P50 to a dollar, if we do not allow any 
increase during their tenure which is seven years, what 
will happen to their compensation? It cannot be in- 
creased anytime within seven years, which is even very 
dangerous. 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I remember 
yesterday that the Chairman was doubtful about the 
amount of compensation. If we approve this now, it is 
going to be fixed. So I would like to ask the Chairman 
whether he likes to leave this out in the meantime. 

MR. FOZ. If the Commissioner will recall, during the 
sponsorship of this committee report I made the state- 
ment that personally, this amount that we have fixed in 
his Section 2 was even inadequate. So, I am amenable 
to tne Commissioner’s suggestion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. ROMULO. So will Commissioner Davide accept 
an amendment to temporarily leave out the amount of 
compensation indicated in line with the Chairman’s 


MR. DAVIDE. I willingly accept. In other words, we 
just leave it blank. 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Yes, Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Just a follow up on this subject at hand. 
May I ask Commissioner Davide whether or not he is in 
favor of formulating a general principle out of this 
compensation rate for the constitutional commissions? 


MR. DAVIDE. I think that would be the effect of the 
proposal of Commissioner Romulo — to leave it blank in 
the meantime. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but I mean more than that, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. I think Commissioner Davide is right 
in pointing out that this is an era of high volatility in 
currency values, exchange rates, and so on. The peso, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, of 1978 in real terms is now only 
28 centavos. We may say in a constitution that the 
salary of a justice of the Supreme Court is so much and 
may not be diminished, but the truth is, our peso is 
eroding day by day because of inflation. Fortunately, 
the inflation now has been placed under control, but 
there were years when, as in November 1984, the in- 
flation rate jumped to 64 percent. And that diminished 
the salary of a justice or a member of a constitutional 
commission in spite of a constitutional guarantee. 

When I speak of raising this to the level of a general 
principle, I mean that perhaps the salary or the com- 
pensation to be fixed in this Constitution which is writ- 
ten for posterity, as well as for the present generation, 
ought to have some flexibility. The compensation is 
fixed in the constitutional provision, but can we not say 
“or as provided by law” later on? 

MR. DAVIDE. Actually, Mr. Presiding Officer, the 
first portion of Section 2 already provides “Until 
otherwise provided by law.” 

MR. OPLE. Then, that is the flexibility I am looking 
for. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. Before we proceed, may we request per- 
mission for the other members of the Committee like 
Commissioners Rodrigo, Regalado, de Castro, Con- 
cepcion, Abubakar, Guingona and Rosales to join us 
here in front so that we can sit as a panel and consult 
each other whenever amendments are submitted for our 
acceptance. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. May I just make an observation to 
the suggestion or amendment of Commissioner Romulo 
which was accepted by Commissioner Davide to leave 
the amount blank in the meantime. 

We talk about inflation. Naturally, if the rate of in- 
flation rises, even if we fix the amount which is based, 
say, on today’s exchange rate or valuation, the pur- 
chasing power of the peso will be reduced. But we 
should also consider that if we have a good government, 
less corruption and more productivity, there may be a 
deflation. That means that the exchange rate of the peso 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


551 


may lower and its purchasing power may correspond- 
ingly increase. 

Sometimes, it is dangerous to fix the amount today 
based on our present exchange rate or the purchasing 
power of the peso, because that will bind us for many 
years. In other words, I only want to make of record 
that while we are always afraid of inflation, because that 
is really a very bad economic factor that destroys the 
economic order, we are hoping that in better days we 
will have a decline in inflation which will increase the 
purchasing power of the peso. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

• 

MR. RAMA. There are a number of Commissioners 
who desire to amend the proposal. So, I move that we 
suspend the session for ten minutes to enable them to 
confer with the Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 3:01 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:14 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The proposed amendments to Section 2 of the 
amended draft are as follows: On line 5, insert the word 
AN between the words “receive” and “annual.” On line 
6, change “salaries” to SALARY. Still on line 6, pur- 
suant to the amendment of the Honorable Romulo 
delete momentarily the words “one hundred twenty 
thousand pesos” and also the word “one” at the end of 
the line. On line 7, delete the words “hundred ten 
thousand pesos”; on line 8, delete the words “or in- 
creased.” 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I intro- 
duce an amendment to Commissioner Davide’s amend- 
ment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 


MR. ROMULO. Is Commissioner Davide willing to 
change “Until” on line 4 of Section 2 to UNLESS, 
because “until” connotes a point in time and it seems 
that only the forthcoming legislature can change the 
law, whereas if we say “unless otherwise provided by 
law,” all future legislatures can? 

MR. DAVIDE. I willingly accept the proposal. It will 
be consistent with the proposal under the Judiciary and 
also as recommended in the Legislative, as well as in the 
Executive. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. An amendment to the amendment 
which is a matter of form: after deleting “one hundred 
twenty thousand pesos” and “hundred ten thousand 
pesos,” put blanks in their stead. 

MR. DAVIDE. I thank Commissioner Rodrigo for 
that. It should be blank in the meantime. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Will Com- 
missioner Davide now read his proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. As amended. Section 2 will now read 
as follows: “UNLESS otherwise provided by law, the 
Chairman and each of the Commissioners shall receive 

AN annual SALARY of and 

respectively, which shall not be decreased during their 
tenure.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment as 
amended? 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized for an anterior amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would rather 
request Commissioner Bernas to introduce the anterior 
amendment because we have previously conferred on it. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 


552 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. I wanted to give way to beauty, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 


MR. FOZ. Does that prohibit a member of the com- 
mission from engaging in business? 


MS. AQUINO. I always believe that age takes primacy 
over beauty. ( Laughter) 

FR. BERNAS. The proposed amendment is on page 
2, Section 1 (2). 

MR. DA VIDE. Anterior amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is still on the Common Provi- 
sions. On Section 3, line 10, between “tenure” and “en- 
gage” insert HOLD ANY OTHER OFFICE OR EM- 
PLOYMENT, OR so that the entire line 10 of Section 3 
will read as follows; “shall, during his tenure, HOLD 
ANY OTHER OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT, OR engage 
in the practice of any.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 3, line 11, insert GOV- 
ERNANCE OR between “the” and “managements,” so 
it will read: “profession or in the GOVERNANCE OR 
management of any business.” It refers to the member- 
ship of a member of a constitutional commission in the 
board of directors of any other corporations, and so on. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. Will the Commissioner restate the amend- 
ment? 


MR. DAVIDE. That will be entirely different because 
as proposed here, what is prohibited is engagement in 
the practice of any profession or in the management of 
any business. But if he is a member of the board of 
directors of any corporation, he is actually in business. 

MR. MONSOD. Is it all right with the Commissioner 
if we place on record that by management, we mean not 
only the presidency or the day-to-day management, but 
also membership in the board because, actually, the 
board of directors of a company is in charge of the 
overall management of a company? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but there is really a distinction. 
When we come to the General Provisions; say, in tele- 
communications and public utilities, a distinction is 
made between the governing board and the managing 
board. However, if that is the sense of the term “man- 
agement,” to include the governing activity of the com- 
missioner, then I have no objection. But let it be clearly 
understood that the prohibition in the management of 
any business would also mean a prohibition in the mem- 
bership of the board of directors of any firm, business, 
or entity. 

MR. FOZ. Just for clarity, Mr. Presiding Officer, does 
it not prohibit a member from being in business? 

MR. DAVIDE. There is already a general prohibition. 
He cannot engage in the management of business. 

MR. FOZ. But what about the situation in which the 
commissioner, the owner of the business, does not par- 
ticipate in management and is not a member of the 
board of directors? 

MR. DAVIDE. He can be allowed to own a business. 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


MR. DAVIDE. The amendment is just the inserti 
of the words GOVERNANCE OR between the woi 
the and management” on line 1 1, so that the ent 
line will read: “profession or in the GOVERNANCE ( 
management of any business, or be.” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. FOZ. Just one question. What is the difference 
between governance and management? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. In management, a person is involved 
in the management aspect, like if one is a manager, and 
so on. In governance, mere membership in the board of 
directors is enough. The board of directors of a corpora- 
tion is the governing body, not necessarily the managing 
body. 


MR. FOZ. Just a clarification. Is the word proposed 
by Commissioner Davide and which we have accepted 
“governance”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. I do not know whether there is a 
more appropriate word than that. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


553 


MR. MON SOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a point of 
clarification. I was made to understand that the propo- 
nent was willing not to put the amendment if we accept 
the interpretation that the word “management” in- 
cludes membership in the board of directors. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts that inter- 
pretation. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, with the acceptance of that inter- 
pretation to this particular section regarding the prohibi- 
tion imposed on the commissioners to engage in the 
management of any business, I now withdraw my 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). We shall 
reconsider the approval of the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the approval is reconsidered. 

The proposed amendment is withdrawn. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Maambong be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am 
particularly concerned about this Section 3. Earlier I 
sent a note to the Committee suggesting that we sit 
down and align these provisions with the provisions on 
the Executive which contain practically the same words 
only framed in another way, because I am afraid that 
with the formulation of the prohibition against the 
President which is indicated now in Committee Report 
No. 9, there will be no symmetry between the two pro- 
visions. And the second which I really fear most is that 
there are more prohibitory provisions in the case of the 
President, the Vice-President and the members of the 
Cabinet than in that of the members of the constitu- 
tional commissions. I would like to point out, for 
example, that we mentioned here in the original Section 
3, the prohibition in the management of any business. 
When it comes to the President, the Vice-President and 
the members of the Cabinet, there is the prohibition in 
participating directly or indirectly in any business. Then 
we also have this prohibition of the President, the Vice- 
President and the members of the Cabinet: that they 
shall strictly avoid any conflict of interest in the con- 
duct of their offices. What I really mean is that if we do 
not align the provisions on prohibition against the 
members of the constitutional commissions with that 


directed against the President, the Vice-President and 
the members of the Cabinet, we will have a lopsided 
Article. That is why I suggested earlier that perhaps in a 
few minutes’ time we should align these in order to have 
symmetry and to achieve the purpose for which these 
are intended. 

MR. FOZ. But, Mr. Presiding Officer, I think we 
have to look at it this way. We actually have to be 
stricter with the President and the members of the 
Cabinet because they exercise more powers and, there- 
fore, more checks and restraints on them are called for 
because there is more possibility of abuse in their case. 
Let us say in the case of the members of the constitu- 
tional commissions, the competence and the jurisdic- 
tion are very much less compared with those of the 
President, the Vice-President and the members of the 
Cabinet. So I think there is a justification for such an 
arrangement whereby the top executive leaders or offi- 
cials of government are subjected to more restraints. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I think I have already taken much 
of the time of the Commission, so we agreed on a 
general principle that the prohibition against the Pres- 
ident, the Vice-President and the members of the 
Cabinet should be stricter than that of the members of 
the constitutional commissions, considering that the 
newspapers abound with statements that ours is a 
constitution based on hate against the former Pres- 
ident. If we are agreed on that proposition, I will now 
sit down. But I think we should think it over first so 
that we can really align these provisions with that on the 
Executive. The Committee on Style will not have a hard 
time because only some substantive provisions might 
not be aligned with the prohibitions in all these offices. 
I just want to put that issue clearly on the floor. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee, in the first place, has 
nothing to do with those provisions which were adopted 
in the Committee on the Executive. So, we are not m a 
position to make any pronouncement, declaration or 
stand at this point. The individual members of the Com- 
mittee will pass judgment on those proposed provisions 
at the proper time. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Shall we leave this point, there- 
fore, with an open statement that this is subject to con- 
sultations between the Chairmen of this Committee and 
the Committee on the Executive, and that in the final 
draft of the Constitution this will be looked into again 
more closely, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. FOZ. I think so, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


554 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Section 3, lines 10 and 1 1 states: “engage in the prac- 
tice of any profession.” I would like to put on record 
that this phrase includes teaching. If the Committee 
agrees on that, I will not introduce any amendment on 
this. 

MR. FOZ. We said before, when the Commission 
broached the matter during our sponsorship of the 
draft, that we would consider it, but at this point, I 
would like to throw the matter on the floor. 

MR. DE CASTRO. All right. 

MR. FOZ. What is the amendment of the Commis- 
sioner? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I have no amendment. I would 
like only to put on record, with the concurrence of the 
Committee, that the phrase “engage in the practice of 
any profession” include teaching, because as the Com- 
missioner will recall, when we were talking with the 
representative of the Commission on Audit, he stated 
that he was a lawyer, but when he was appointed 
Commissioner, he ceased to teach law. However, he said 
other Commissioners were teaching law on the ground 
that teaching was not a practice of the profession. I 
always say that teaching is a practice of the profession 
that is why I would like the Committee to put on record 
that the phrase “engage in the practice of any profes- 
sion includes teaching. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo IS recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to state that if we put 
that on record, we will be stricter with the members of 
the constitutional commissions than with those of the 
Supreme Court. Many members of the Supreme Court 
teach part-time because it refreshes their minds on legal 
provisions. So, if members of the Commission on Elec- 
tions teach part-time in the evening to refresh their legal 
knowledge, I do not think that that is prohibited by 
these provisions. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I add 
to that? 


MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask 
Commissioner Rodrigo a question on his comments? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Do I understand that when we put 
here “that it is prohibited to engage in the practice of 
any profession,” a member of the Commission on 
Elections can teach law? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, part-time. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then, let us delete this phrase 
“engage in the practice of any profession,” because if 
one is a lawyer and he teaches law, he is in reality prac- 
ticing his profession. One cannot teach law even if he is 
a lawyer unless he studies everything on jurisprudence. 
To me, that is the actual practice of law; it is more than 
making pleadings. 

So, if we allow members of the Supreme Court or any 
other justice to teach part-time to refresh their minds 
or for other purposes, that is exactly the practice of the 
law profession. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the way I 
understand the paragraph, it refers to the handling of 
cases, not to teaching; like the practice of medicine is 
treating patients, but not teaching, let us say. Anatomy. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I put this question on the floor: 
Does the phrase “engage in the practice of any pro- 
fession” include teaching? 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Teaching as a profession presup- 
poses, in effect, tenure. There are some teachers who are 
actually given tenure and do teaching as a full-time or a 
part-time occupation. In the matter of part-time teach- 
ing, the members of the Judiciary are merely required to 
get a permit to teach. In the law office where I work, 
there are many Justices of the Supreme Court and of 
the Intermediate Appellate Court who get their permit 
to teach from the Supreme Court and from the Presid- 
ing Justice, respectively. The officers of the Armed 
Forces get their permit to teach from the Office of the 
President. This permit to teach part-time is subject to 
certain conditions, such as the number of hours, and 
these part-time teachers shall not in any way have any 
hand in the management of any educational institution. 

Teaching law is not considered a profession because 
it is not the advocacy or the handling of a case in court 
or a legal work or business for which they are com- 
pensated. It is actually imparting to the students what 
they know about the law. Just like doctors of medicine. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


555 


when they teach medicine, they are not practicing 
medicine. They do not give curative, palliative or any 
other treatment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are not 
talking here of permit by higher authority for one to 
teach law or his profession, but of prohibiting any 
commissioner of any constitutional commission to 
engage in the practice of any profession. The point here 
is: Does engaging in the practice of any profession 
include teaching? The Honorable Regalado talked 
about medicine. He is not actually practicing medicine, 
but he is teaching his students medicine. Is that not a 
practice? As I said, when a lawyer practices law, he 
does research and teach jurisprudence. When he makes 
pleadings, he also does research and studies juris- 
prudence. Where is the practice and the nonpractice? 
So, I ask that this question be put to the floor to cut the 
proceedings: Does “engage in the practice of any 
profession” include teaching? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to ask Commissioner 
de Castro only one question. 

Is it not true that the practice of law involves an 
attorney-client relationship? It seems to me that in 
teaching, there is no attorney-client relations. 

Mr. DE CASTRO. When a lawyer appears before the 
Supreme Court as an amicus curiae, he is practicing law; 
he has no client. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 

Mr. foz. We would like to submit the question to 
the body. 


Mr. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the position of 
the Committee is that teaching is not prohibited under 
this provision. 


Mr. de CASTRO. It is not a practice of the pro- 
fession? 

Mr. monsod. It is not included among the prohibi- 
tions. 

Mr. de CASTRO. No. Is it a practice of the pro- 
fession? 

MR. MONSOD. It is not a practice of the profession. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I beg to disagree with that pro- 
vision of law. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). I think the 
matter brought up by Commissioner de Castro has been 
sufficiently discussed. The Commissioner has inquired 
from the Committee what is its interpretation of the 
practice of law, and the Committee gave it. If the Com- 
missioner is not satisfied, he can introduce an amend- 
ment during the period of amendments. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I would just like to put on record 
that the practice of any profession includes the teaching 
of that profession. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
suggests that the Commissioner present his amendment 
to the specific Article now being considered. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will go back to that, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. Please give me a little time because I have 
another amendment. So, we will hold it back until I put 
up the right words to include teaching in the practice 
of any profession. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.Trefias). On Section 
3, is there any anterior amendment? 

The Vice-President is recognized. 


MR. PADILLA. The clause “or in the management of 
any business” which appears on Section 3, page 1, line 
1 1 of our draft was taken from Section 3 of the Article 


on the Constitutional Commissions of the 19^3 Consti- 
tution. I notice that the only common provision in the 
1935 Constitution has a qualification which states 
“private enterprise which in any way may be affected 
by the functions of their office.” My amendment is to 
qualify this term “in the management of any business, 
by inserting after “business”: WHICH, IN 
MAY BE AFFECTED BY THE FUNCTIONS OF HIS 
OFFICE. May I just say in less than one minute the 
reason for this proposed amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
Commissioner will please proceed. 


MR. PADILLA. I believe that the provision in the 
1935 Constitution is better in the sense that the pro- 
hibition or the inhibition in the management of any 
private enterprise is limited to those that may be af- 
fected by the functions of the concerned. If we make 
this absolutely general and comprehensive, it may dis- 
courage good people who may want to serve and who 
are fully qualified in the different constitutional com- 
missions, for example, a member may be in the balut 
business which has no relation whatever to the function 
of being a commissioner of a constitutional comrnis- 
sion. Not only that, it will eliminate a member who has 
some kind of legitimate business which may not in any 


556 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


way interfere with or affect the discharge of his public 
functions. If we insist on this, it may discourage some 
deserving public servants, who have private businesses, 
for appointment. Otherwise, we may have members of 
a constitutional commission who have no other source 
of income. And this might be a temptation for them to 
utilize the functions of their office for additional extra- 
neous means. So, my amendment is to qualify the term 
“in the management of any business” by adopting the 
provision of the 1935 Constitution. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. To the proponent of the amendment, 
just what will be the effect of his amendment on the 
rest of the provision? 

MR. PADILLA. There is none because in the 1935 
Constitution, it continues: “nor shall they, directly or 
indirectly, be financially interested in any contract”; it 
is the same. 

MR. FOZ. Under the Commissioner’s amendment, he 
would allow a member of a constitutional commission 
to be in any kind of business as long as it is not affected 
by the functioning of his office. 

MR. PADILLA. Correct, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, the Commissioner is trying 
to avoid a conflict of interests. 

MR. PADILLA. Correct. 

MR. FOZ. But in the following portions of the 
provision, the objective is not exactly to avoid a 
conflict of interest, because it says there that the mem- 
ber of the commission is prohibited from being in- 
terested in any kind of contract with the government. It 
extends beyond a business in which he has a conflict of 
interests in the performance of his duties. 

MR. PADILLA. No, on line 13, when we say 
contract with the government,” that is something else; 
it is not a private business. When the Constitution refers 
to franchise or privilege granted by the government, I 
agree that he should not have any interest, direct or 
indirect, in any contract, franchise or any other privilege. 
But the reference to private business or private enter- 
prise is all-comprehensive. Thus, the shoe industry in 
Marikina, well, I do not know what connection it can 
have with, for example, this Constitutional Commission. 
So, if we retain this very general statement, I believe we 
are going too far; we are discouraging good people to 
engage in legitimate, honest business and preventing 
them from rendering service, if qualified, in any of these 
constitutional commissions. 


MR. FOZ. Let us give an example, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, of somebody who is in the manufacture of 
paper, to make it more practical. Would a member of a 
commission who is engaged in the business of manufac- 
turing paper be prohibited from engaging in such kind 
of business? 

MR. PADILLA. I think he should be prohibited or 
inhibited in the COMELEC because the COMELEC has 
plenty of contracts with regard to the manufacture of 
paper and the printing establishments. And that would 
be included in an enterprise which, according to the 
1935 Constitution, may be affected by the functions of 
his office. So, in the sponsor’s example, if he is going to 
be appointed Commissioner of COMELEC and he has a 
printing press or is engaged in the manufacture of paper, 
I think he would fall under the prohibition, because that 
will affect the function of his office. 

MR. FOZ. But in the last portion of the provi- 
sion, if he does not enter into any contract with the 
COMELEC, being a printer in itself, should he be 
prohibited? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, but that is something else. 
Clearly, if he enters into a contract, it is prohibited. If 
he is a grantee of a franchise or any privilege, that is 
covered by the provision. But with regard to private 
business, I believe it should be limited to businesses 
which will, in any way, affect the function of his office. 

MR. FOZ. In the case of a printer, if he is in the 
printing business but he does not do any business with 
the COMELEC, would the Commissioner still prohibit 
him to engage in that kind of business? 

MR. PADILLA. It would be the sponsor’s inter- 
pretation and mine because the 1935 Constitution was 
quite strict on this for it says “private enterprise which 
in any way may be affected by the functions of their 
office.” So, it is not necessary that he be directly in- 
volved already, even if it may affect the function. He 
should not be in that kind of business. 

MR. FOZ. The mere possibility then of being affected 
by the function of his office would be sufficient to bar 
him from being a member of the commission. 

MR. PADILLA. I would not say “possibility,” maybe 
“probability.” The chances are that it will in a way 
affect the function of his office. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will 
Commissioner Padilla state his amendment so that the 
Committee can either accept or not accept it. 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


557 


MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would object. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized first. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain my 
objection? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. The prohibition, as worded now, is in 
the engagement in the management of a business. It is 
not prohibiting a commissioner from engaging in busi- 
ness, because if he manages that business, it would 
interfere with his functions as a commissioner. He might 
spend more time in the management of the business. In 
short, I would like to repeat, the proposed prohibition 
is only in engaging in the management of a business. It is 
not a prohibition to engage in business. He can have 
some businesses but he should not manage them. So, if 
we accept the proposal, we will really destroy the 
very important and critical element of the function 
of a commission. He will lose time because he will be 
allowed to manage a business. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). May we 
hear from Commissioner de Castro? 

MR. FOZ. Can we just say “act”? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Just a 
minute. Commissioner de Castro was first. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

A while ago, the sponsor wanted me to put my 
amendment of my favorite phrase “engage in the 
practice of any profession.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Just a 
minute, we have a pending amendment. Is the Commis- 
sioner proposing an amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. This is the period of amendments, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). No, 
precisely, there is a pending amendment by Commis- 
sioner Padilla. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am willing to wait, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). It is all 
right. 

Will Commissioner Padilla restate his amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. I was just going to state, in reference 
to the observation of Commissioner Davide, that the 
1935 Constitution already mentioned “in the manage- 
ment or control of any private enterprise which in any 
way may be affected by the functions of their office.” 
My amendment is on line 1 1 ; after the phrase “in the 
management of any business,” add WHICH IN ANY 
WAY MAY BE AFFECTED BY THE FUNCTIONS OF 
HIS OFFICE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
the Committee say? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we just 
have a one-minute suspension in order that we could sit 
down with the proponent? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
session is suspended for one minute. 

It was 3:54 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:06 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I objected to 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Padilla be- 
cause I believe that the provision now, as worded, which 
is in line with the wording of the 1973 Constitution, is 
very adequate. The prohibition, as I said, relates only to 
the management of any business. If we follow the 
Padilla proposal, it would mean that a commissioner 
may be allowed to manage a business provided that that 
business would not in any way be affected by the func- 
tions of his office. But that is very dangerous because we 
will have a situation where a commissioner may devote 
most of his time as a manager of a particular business, to 
the damage, prejudice and detriment of public service. 
This is a constitutional commission and, therefore, we 


558 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


should never allow such a situation where we give a 
chance or an opportunity for a member of the commis- 
sion to actively manage a business and devote most of 
his time in his business. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, we throw the 
question to the floor. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Just a 
minute. Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized for a 
parliamentary inquiry. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. Commissioner Davide says 
that the present provision refers only to management. 
If I remember right, he introduced an amendment to 
include “governance.” What happened? Was that ap- 
prove so that now it reads: “governance and manage- 
ment”? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). According 
to the record, it was withdrawn. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized. 


MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I propose an amendment to 
the amendment of Commissioner Padilla because of his 
apprehension about a person who is chairman and so 
forth, but not actually managing a business. Would that 
situation be solved by stating it as follows: “profession 
or in the ACTIVE management of any business WHICH 
IN ANY WAY MAY BE AFFECTED BY THE FUNC- 
TIONS OF HIS OFFICE.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What 
does Commissioner Padilla say? 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, what we propose 
is “ACTIVE management.” 


MR. PADILLA. If this word “management,” Mr. Pr 
siding Officer, were interpreted to refer to the gener 
manager who will stay in the office of his business moi 
of the time, then I would probably agree. But the wor 
“management” is very broad. A person is, say, a men 
ber of a board or even its chairman, but is not th 
general manager; maybe he does not actually administ« 
and manage the business, yet that is considered as to 
management. That is the problem. 

How do we interpret this term “management”? ] 
the interpretation is that he will be the general manage 
and he has to devote the hours of work in his busines; 

en I agree. He should not be considered as a membe 
u! ^"^^‘tutional commission. But as I said beforf 
the 1935 Constitution mentioned management as cor 
trol ot private enterprise, and it disqualified only thos 

whose duty may be affected by the functions of the 
office. 


So, my proposal is not to make this prohibition or 
this disqualification too broad and comprehensive 
otherwise we may have men in the commissions who 
have no business connection whatsoever and who pro- 
bably have no source of independent income. I think, so 
long as he is qualified and he wants to serve, what- 
ever secondary or tertiary business he has or whatever 
small investments he may have which will not in any 
way affect the functions of his office, should not 
disqualify him. And so, my amendment again is: on line 
1 1 , after the words “profession or in the management of 
any business,” add WHICH IN ANY WAY MAY BE 
AFFECTED BY THE FUNCTIONS OF HIS OFFICE. 


MR. PADILLA. I accept the amendment to my 
amendment, by inserting the word “ACTIVE” to quali- 
fy “management.” 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, I submit the ques- 
tion to the floor. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). As many 
as are in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. ( Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 15 votes in favor and 7 against; the 
amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized for his amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am still on my favorite phrase, “engage in the 
practice of any profession.” Between the words “pro- 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


559 


fession” and “or,” add the phrase WHICH INCLUDES 
THE TEACHING THEREOF. As it is, Section 3 will 
read: “No member of a constitutional commission 
shall, during his tenure, engage in the practice of any 
profession WHICH INCLUDES THE TEACHING 
THEREOF, or . . and so on. 

It is my stand that teaching is a practice of the 
profession. And I think if we say that it is not, I do not 
know how the teaching profession can be practiced. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, we throw the 
question to the floor. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). As many 
as are in favor of the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner de Castro, please raise (Few Members 

raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand). 

The results show 3 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de los Reyes 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, on line 
1 6 of page 1 , I propose that we add an S to “corpora- 
tion,” and to delete the words “any of its” and instead 
substitute the word THEIR. Moreover, on line 15, 
delete the article “a” between “including” and “govern- 
ment” so it will read: “including government-owned or 
controlled CORPORATIONS or THEIR subsidiaries.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized for an anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

This is just a consequence of the Padilla amendment. 
On line 11, Section 3, after the word “management,” 
insert the words OR CONTROL. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

This morning, I asked the proponent of this resolu- 
tion what is included in the term “fiscal autonomy. 
The answer I got is that it is for the automatic release 
of the budget. I propose that the sentence The Com- 
missions shall enjoy fiscal autonomy” be deleted but 
the second sentence shall remain. The reason is that 
it is already redundant. Fiscal autonomy means the 
automatic release of appropriations. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we answer 
the honorable Commissioner. 

I think the answer of the Chairman of our Committee 
this morning was that it would involve the automatic 
and regular release of the funds once approved. In addi- 
tion, we are suggesting that fiscal autonomy include the 
nonimposition of any other procedures, for example, a 
preaudit system in the commissions or bodies that enjoy 
fiscal autonomy. So, actually, the definition of fisca 
autonomy would be a bit broader than just the automa- 
tic release. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Does the Commissioner mean that 
these commissions will not be subjected to preaudit? 


560 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Our proposal actually in the provi- 
sions on the Commission on Audit is that they be 
subjected to comprehensive postaudit procedures and 
where their internal control system is inadequate, in the 
opinion of the Commission on Audit, then the commis- 
sion may also take such measures as are necessary to 
correct the inadequacies which might include special 
preaudit systems. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Does it include exception from 
preaudit? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, it would include the imposition 
of certain preaudit requirements for release, because if 
the preaudit requirements are inserted into the process 
of release, it would defeat the objective of automatic 
and regular release. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
understands, therefore, that the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner de Castro is not acceptable to the 
Committee? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Not yet, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
because we are still on the answer to me this morning, 
which stated — the record will bear me out — that 
fiscal autonomy means the automatic release of appro- 
priations. It means the automatic release and nothing 
more. We were in the same Committee and when we 
asked the COA about this, they insisted that there must 
be preaudit. If fiscal autonomy means that there will 
be no preaudit, I do not know what will happen to this. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). So, what 
is the stand of the Committee insofar as the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner de Castro is concerned? 

CASTRO. May I just say one sentence, 
Mr. Presiding Officer? If the Committee’s stand is that 
fiscal autonomy means the automatic release of the 
appropriations, then I say that the first sentence - “The 
Commissions shall enjoy fiscal autonomy” — should be 
deleted because it is a repetition of the second sentence. 

Thank you. 


MR. DE CASTRO. When we talk of preaudit, we are 
not talking of release; we are talking of preaudit of a 
certain project or a certain matter for which the budget 
may be used. That is the preaudit system. But for the 
release from the Budget Commissioner, there is no 
preaudit. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the preaudit 
procedures include the right to disallow any expendi- 
tures which, in the opinion of the auditor, is not con- 
sistent with what is proper. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. And, therefore, the preaudit proce- 
dures include the right to stop disbursement. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, but not the release, because 
the release that we are talking about here is the release 
from the Budget Commissioner, not the release of the 
funds for which it may be used for the project. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I am willing to keep these two 
sentences as of now until we come to the Commission 
on Audit on preaudit. Then, we will understand it 
better; and from then on, I will make my appropriate 
amendment on this common provision. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the position ( 
other tiv ^ fiscal autonomy may indue 

of the funS automatic and regular relea: 


expla.fatio'lf OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). With that 

Castro^ Dn;.T Commissioner de 

Castro. Does he insist on his amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is the Chairman changing hi« 
answer from this morning’s question? If he does, f will 
ask some more questions about fiscal autonomy. 


MR. monsod. Mr Presiding Officer, I think at the 
beginning of this exchange, we already told the honor- 
able Commissioner that the Chairman of the Committee 
had not meant to make it an all-inclusive definition 
And if he was misled into thinking of another meaning 
we apologize for it. But our position is that fiscal auto- 
nomy would include other rights than just merely 
automatic and regular disbursement. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). So, do we 
understand from Commissioner de Castro that he is for 
the moment withdrawing his proposed amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, until 
we reach the portions on the Commission on Audit 
where we will explain what is a preaudit. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Then we 
shall proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, just for a point 
of clarification. When we say “release the funds,” it is 
the other side of disbursing to the appropriate commis- 
sion. So that if a preaudit procedure is exercised and 
there is a prohibition of disallowance, the release cannot 
be made and, therefore, the disbursement cannot be 
made. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


561 


MR. DE CASTRO. Just one sentence, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. When we talk of “appropriations for the Com- 
missions, once approved, shall be automatically re- 
leased,” is this not directed to the Budget Commission 
to release the funds of the Commission or is this for the 
procurement by the Commission of certain matters 
which need preaudit? 

MR. MONSOD. Under the preaudit procedures, if the 
COA auditor does not allow the expenditure, then the 
Ministry of the Budget cannot release those funds. And, 
therefore, the Commission or any agency cannot dis- 
burse it for the expenditures for which it was budgeted. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Let us read: “Appropriations for 
the Commissions once approved shall be automatically 
released.” 

Who will release? 

MR. MONSOD. The Ministry of the Budget will 
release such funds to the Commission. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Does it need preaudit before it is 
released? 

MR. MONSOD. The way the procedures operate is 
that the expenditures are first presented to the COA, 
and while this may be two separate acts at any time, the 
process is such that when there is a stop order, the parti- 
cular appropriation is not released by the Office of 
Budget and Management. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, if the COA, in its preaudit, 
finds that it is not necessary at this time, no automatic 
release by the Budget Minister can be made? 

MR. MONSOD. That is the implication, if there is no 
fiscal autonomy. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We will take that up when we go 
to the Commission on Audit because they were pre- 
cisely cross-examining the Commission on Audit on 
preaudit. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. On the same Section 4, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The amendments will be on lines 1 7, 1 8 and 1 9. After 
the period (.) following “autonomy” on line 1 7, add the 
following: THE APPROVED ANNUAL; on line 18, the 
capital “A” in “Appropriations” must be in the lower 
case, then delete the words “once approved”; on line 
19, insert between “automatically” and “released” the 
words AND REGULARLY. So that the entire section 
will read: “Sec. 4. The Commissions shall enjoy fiscal 
autonomy. THE APPROVED ANNUAL appropriations 
for the Commissions shall be automatically AND 
REGULARLY released.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendments, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendments are approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rosario Braid 
be recognized for an amendment to the same section. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, Com- 
missioner Davide has introduced the amendment that 
I was going to suggest. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I address 
this to the sponsor, although I am a member of the 
Committee. I am asking this question just for clarifica- 
tion not only for myself but also for the other Members 
of the Commission. But first, before I state the ques- 
tion, I would like to bring to his attention what appears 
to be a typographical error on line 25: after the words 
“certiorari by the aggrieved party,” insert WITHIN. 

For clarification and for the benefit of all, my ques- 
tion is: What is the reason of the Committee in adopting 
the last sentence of Section 5, lines 26 to 29, declaring 


562 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


final and executory “decisions or orders of the Com- 
mission on Elections with respect to municipal and 
barangay officials”? 


the possibility of an original special civil action for 
certiorari, prohibition, or mandamus, as the case may 
be, under Rule 65 of the Rules of Court. 


MR. FOZ. In Committee Report No. 27 on Proposed 
Resolution No. 521, copies of which have been dis- 
tributed to all the Members, there is a provision among 
the powers and functions of the Commission on Elec- 
tions which would vest the Commission with the power 
of being the sole judge of all contests relating to the 
elections, returns and qualifications of all elective 
provincial, city, municipal and barangay officials. 

MR. REGALADO. But my question is: Does this 
mean that with respect to decisions, final orders or 
rulings of the Commission on Elections not involving 
municipal and barangay officials, the same will not be 
immediately executory or final but would still be ap- 
pealable? We seem to have made a distinction here. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. In the case 
of electoral contests involving, let us say, city and 
provincial officials, the decision of the Commission on 
Elections will not be final and still be appealable to the 
higher courts. 


MR- REGALADO. With respect, however, to thi 
wordings barangay officials” on line 28, parenthetical 
ly. Commissioner Nolledo, I understand, in the Commit 
tee on Local Governments, wants a return to the tern 
barrio” instead of “barangay.” At any rate, it says hen 
that final decisions, orders or rulings with respect t( 
municipal and barangay officials shall be “final, inap 
pealable and executory.” May I propose an amendmen 

1 ® “inappealable”? In the first place 

this should read unappealable.” Line 28 should read 

. . . barangay officials shall be final and IMMEDIATE 
i-i executory. 


MR. FOZ. That is understood, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. At least it is on record. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What is 
the pleasure of the Commissioner? 

MR. RODRIGO. I was planning to introduce an 
amendment to the amendment, however, I would like 
to ask a question before I do so. 

In a previous interpellation, I remember that the 
Committee said that this sentence applies to election 
cases involving municipal officials. Am I right? 

MR. FOR. That is right, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the Gentleman then accept 
this amendment to the amendment? On line 27, 
between the words “on” and “municipal,” add the 
words ELECTION CASES INVOLVING so that the 
sentence will read: “However, final decisions, orders or 
rulings of the Commission on Elections ON ELECTION 
CASES INVOLVING municipal and barangay offi* 
dais ...” 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would Commissioner Rodrigo accept 
an amendment to the amendment in order to attain a 
symmetry with the wordings on the subdivision relating 
to the Commission on Elections? 


we^sLidd 26, line 2 

always final ® because decisions a 

always final as distinguished from interlocutory ordei 

ruhnL'”To final Orders 

“ ^Of tZ from interlocutory ordei 

. . . ot the Commission on Elections on municinal ai 
barangay officials shall be final and IMMEDIATE! 
executory. 

That would be my proposed amendment. 


MR. FOZ. Accepted, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
Commissioner Rodrigo say? 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to hear the amendment 
to the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment would consist in the 
insertion between the words “on” and “municipal” on 
line 27 of the following: CONTESTS RELATING TO 
THE ELECTIONS, RETURNS, AND QUALIFICA- 
TIONS OF. 


MR. REGALADO. It is understood, however, that 
while these decisions with respect to barangay and 
municipal officials are final and immediately executory 
and, therefore, not appealable, that does not rule out 


MR. RODRIGO. I accept. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
Commissioner Regalado say insofar as the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo is concerned? 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


563 


MR. REGALADO. May I have the amendment again 
because I was talking with Commissioner Bernas. 

MR. DA VIDE. The amendment is on line 27; be- 
tween the words “on” and “municipal,” insert the 
following: CONTESTS RELATING TO THE ELEC- 
TIONS, RETURNS, AND QUALIFICATIONS OF. 

MR. REGALADO. That would be acceptable because 
that is uniform with our own provisions in the Commit- 
tees on the Legislative and the Executive. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. On this last sentence that has specific 
reference to the Commission on Elections, will the Com- 
mittee agree to have this transferred to the Commission 
on Elections? I understand that it was inserted here for 
fear of the general rule that every final order or decision 
is subject to appeal by certiorari within 30 days. But it 
seems a little awkward that in the Common Provisions, 
we have specific provisions; however, that has particular 
reference to the Commission on Elections. My sug- 
gestion is to transfer this last sentence to the Commis- 
sion on Elections so that there will be no fear that when 
there is a general provision and a specific provision, it is 
always the specific provision that governs or prevails. It 
is a matter of form. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In line with the suggestion of 
Commissioner Padilla, with which I concur, 1 would like 
to call the attention of the Committee that we have 
Committee Report No. 27, and Section 10, page 4 of 
this committee report specifically states: “final deci- 
sions, orders or rulings of the Commission on election 
contests involving elective municipal and barangay 
offices shall be final, inappealable and executory.” In 
effect, it is only a repetition of what is already con- 
tained now in the provisions on Common Provisions, so 


I suggest we take seriously the suggestion of Commis- 
sioner Padilla. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. The Committee is amenable to a transposi- 
tion of this last sentence. Anyway, Section 10 of Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 521 already contains the same 
provision, but still unamended. So, the Committee is 
agreeable to having this last sentence transposed, as 
amended, to Section 10 of Proposed Resolution No. 521 
on the Commission on Elections. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). So, the 
proposed amendment is to delete the last portion of 
Section 10 and transpose it to the provision on the 
Commission on Elections. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Anterior amendment. As a conse- 
quence of that removal of the sentence, I propose the 
following amendment: lines 22 and 23 will read: “Un- 
less otherwise provided by THIS CONSTITUTION OR 
by law, any decision. . .” so that it will be very clear. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. Accepted, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The proposed amendments will be on Section 5. On 
line 20, after the word “Commission,” put a comma (,) 
and insert the following: OR A DIVISION THEREOF 
WHENEVER AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS ARTICLE, 
then put a comma (,). 

On line 21, between the words “case” and “brought, 
insert OR MATTER. 

On line 22, between the words “for” and ‘ resolu- 
tion,” insert the words DECISION OR; and after the 


564 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


period (.), following “resolution,” add the following 
new sentence: A CASE OR MATTER IS DEEMED 
SUBMITTED FOR DECISION OR RESOLUTION 
UPON THE FILING OF THE LAST PLEADING, 
BRIEF, OR MEMORANDUM REQUIRED BY THE 
RULES OF THE COMMISSION OR BY THE COMMIS- 
SION ITSELF. So that the first two sentences 
of Section 5 will now read as follows: “Each Com- 
mission OR A DIVISION THEREOF WHENEVER 
AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS ARTICLE, shall decide 
by a majority vote of all its members any case OR 
MATTER brought before it within sixty days from the 
date of its submission for DECISION OR resolution. A 
CASE OR MATTER IS DEEMED SUBMITTED FOR 
DECISION OR RESOLUTION UPON THE FILING 
OF THE LAST PLEADING, BRIEF, OR MEMO- 
RANDUM REQUIRED BY THE RULES OF THE 
COMMISSION OR BY THE COMMISSION ITSELF.” 


FORE IT OR BEFORE ANY OF ITS OFFICES. SUCH 
RULES HOWEVER SHALL NOT DIMINISH, IN- 
CREASE OR MODIFY SUBSTANTIVE RIGHTS. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. One observation, Mr. Presiding Officer. As 
a quasi-judicial body, each commission has the inherent 
authority to promulgate its own rules. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I noticed that in 
the subdivision for the COMELEC, it has that provision. 
But in the Commission on Audit and the Civil Service 
Commission, there is no corresponding provision regard- 
ing the rules. 

MR. FOZ. Commissioner Concepcion is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, on the first 
proposed amendment we wanted to give the COMELEC 
the flexibility to promulgate its own rules with respect 
to decisions by division. Among the commissions, it 
is only the COMELEC that meets by division, and they 
wanted that flexibility because there may be instances 
where they may say that they may require more than a 
majority, or a unanimous vote according to their own 
rules and regulations. So, we want to be silent on that 
in this section. 


that interpretation, I would no 1 
insist on the proposed amendment on line 20. So the 
rest ot the proposed amendments would stay. 

sen^e^ce^Jh^t^?!?' ^ clarification. Is th( 

entence that the Commissioner read with the phrase 

ciary?^"’^^ submitted,” similar to the one in the Judi 


MR. CONCEPCION. We do not prefer that the rules 
be approved by the entire commission so that the rules 
in each commission would be uniform. 

MR. DA VIDE. That is the reason why we would like 
to insert in the Article on Common Provisions the 
authority of the commission itself to promulgate its 
own rules. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. But a commission con- 
sists of several divisions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then, for instance, with respect to the 
COMELEC, which is the only commission authorized 
to sit in division, that Commission itself may promul- 
gate its own rules. 

MR. CONCEPCION. It is all right. Perhaps, the Com- 
missioner had better clarify when he says “Each Com- 
mission,” because that might be understood, at least in 
actual practice, that every division is a commission 
itself. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is th 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none- i 
amendments are approved. ’ 


MR. DAVIDE. If there are no anterior amendments 
I would propose an amendment after Section 5. It 
would be an entirely new section to be denominated 
later on as SECTION 6. It reads: SECTION 6 EACH 
COMMISSION MAY PROMULGATE ITS OWN RULES 
CONCERNING PLEADINGS AND PRACTICE BE- 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I would prefer a modification of 
the language, to require the commission en banc, the 
full commission. 

MR. DAVIDE. As worded, it reads only EACH COM- 
MISSION MAY PROMULGATE ITS OWN RULES. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is the problem, although it 
may be construed as each division of the Commission. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then, I will modify: EACH COMMIS- 
SION EN BANC MAY PROMULGATE ITS OWN 
RULES, then put a period (.) and cancel the rest. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. That is acceptable. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


565 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Com- 
mittee has accepted the proposed amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, for the last 
amendment. 

MR. DA VIDE. I still have another amendment, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. If the Commissioner has some- 
thing else, perhaps he will consider the fact that these 
rules of the commission are subject to the approval of 
the Supreme Court. 

MR. DA VIDE. We already have the provision in the 
Article on the Judiciary. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is right. So, it is with that 
understanding that the rules shall be subject to subse- 
quent approval by the Supreme Court. 

MR. DA VIDE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I have another proposal, which is the insertion of 
another section to follow what has been approved. It 
may be denominated as the new Section 7. It reads: 
EACH COMMISSION SHALL PERFORM SUCH 
OTHER FUNCTIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY 
LAW. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. There is a similar provision. 

MR. DA VIDE. For only one commission, not for the 
others. 

MR. FOZ. For instance, in the case of the Civil Ser- 
vice Commission, there is on page 3, lines 3 and 4, a 
phrase which says: “and perform such other functions 
as may be provided by law.” 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. But in order to 
authorize all commissions under the Common Provi- 
sions, it may be best to set it here under Common Provi- 
sions. 

MR. FOZ. And in the case of the Commission on 
Elections, per Proposed Resolution No. 521, the last 
item in the enumeration of powers and functions, it 
says: “performs such other functions as may be 
provided by law.” 

MR. DAVIDE. We can probably shorten the entire 
Article on the commissions by only providing one 
section in the matter of the performance of other 


functions as may be provided by law. We can reduce by 
two other sections, if we approve this Article on 
Common Provisions. 

MR. FOZ. We accept, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, for the last 
amendment, I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. As a consequence, 1 wish to present 
the following amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. On line 30, Section 6 should be 
made to read as SECTION 8. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will the 
Commissioner please clarify? 

MR. RODRIGO. Because two sections were added. 
Section 6 and 7. So, “Sec. 6” on line 30 should be 
changed to SECTION 8. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. Accepted, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

We have a proposed amendment by addition of a new 
section, perhaps to be known now as SECTION is 
that correct? I speak for several colleagues on the 
floor — Commissioners Christine Tan, Minda Luz 
Quesada, Jaime Tadeo, Eulogio Lerum and myself. A 
new SECTION 9 is, therefore, added and it will read as 
follows: NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF 
THIS ARTICLE, THE RIGHT TO SELF-ORGANIZA- 
TION SHALL NOT BE DENIED TO GOVERNMENT 
EMPLOYEES. 

May I explain the reason for this proposed amend- 
ment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Please 
proceed. 


566 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. OPLE. In the course of the general debate this 
morning, the Chairman of the Committee was kind 
enough to grant that Section 9, Article II in the 1973 
Constitution, which provided guarantees for the right of 
self-organization and collective bargaining for workers 
and employees, pertains to government employees as 
well as private sector employees and workers. Unfor- 
tunately, the tendency of the government has been to 
interpret or to apply this provision of Article II, Section 
9, very restrictively and, therefore, to this day, because 
of the Article on the Civil Service Commission in the 
Constitution of 1973, the presumption is that about 
1,200,000 government employees had been taken out of 
the effective coverage of the right to self-organization in 
Article II, Section 9 of the 1973 Constitution. To 
remove what appears to be a developing constitutional 
stalemate between Article II, Section 9, the guarantee 
on self-organization, and the civil service provision of 
the Constitution, we propose that this amendment be 
considered by the Committee and the Commission, 
especially since President Aquino recently, on May 1, 
1986,. expressly assured the right to self-organization 
and collective bargaining for government workers and 
employees. 

I was given the impression that we are already talking 
about the civil service provisions. My agreement with 
the Floor Leader is that we would be called towards the 
end of the period of amendments on the Civil Service 
Commission. But I did not think that I wasted the time 
of tbc Commission and of the President, considering that 
this input will not be lost when this proposed amend- 
ment is finally presented at the right time. 

So, thank you very much, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
youaL^^^^*^^^^ OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Thank 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, we have no 
objection to the proposed section. We just wanted to 
make it of record that in the event the sponsorship 
committee, for example, looks at the total Constitution 
and it will find that it properly belongs to somewhere 
else, then we will yield to such decision. But we have no 
objection to putting it now in the civil service section. 

MR. OPLE. We will welcome this action of the Com- 
mittee, of course, without yielding the principle that the 
nexus to freedom of association ought to be located for 
government employees in this specific Article that deals 
with them as members of the civil service of the Philip- 
pines. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The post 
amendment has been accepted by the Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one mani- 
festation in relation to the amendment of Commissioner 
Ople. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. A similar provision is contained in 
the Bill of Rights upon the recommendation of Commis- 
sioner Lerum, which is exactly the same as in the report 
on the Bill of Rights. 

MR. OPLE. They will then happily reinforce each 
other in the section where they belong. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


R. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are now in the 
period of amendments on the Article on Civil Service. 

ao, 1 ask that Commissioner Bias Ople continue his 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Com 
sioner Ople may proceed. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a point of parliamentary 
inquiry: Does that mean that the approved amendment 
by adding a new section would be designated as Section 
8 (b) of the Civil Service Commission on page 3? 


MR. OPLE Mr. Presiding Officer, the only possit 
objection that I can imagine to this amendment is th 
it rightfully belongs to another section of the Constit 
tion. And I think I should make public what Comm 
sioner Monsod has just told me. His impression is tha1 
provision on self-organization and collective bargain! 
is contemplated to be included in the report of t 
Committee on Social Justice. Does this make this pro 
Sion redundant, superfluous, unnecessary? I do n 
think so. The proper place for this guarantee should 1 
in the Article on the Civil Service Commission. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). It is not 
yet approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Once approved, it should be an 
additional section. That is the parliamentary inquiry. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is one of 
the questions we have for Commissioner Ople. He is pro- 
posing this amendment. Where does he propose to put 
this amendment, in the Common Provisions or in the 
Civil Service Commission? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). What does 
the Committee say? 


MR. OPLE. In the Civil Service Commission, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


567 


MR. MON SOD. So, we will accordingly adjust at that 
time. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. According to Commissioner Ople as 
the proponent, is the proposed insertion of a section 
based on Article II, Section 9 of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion? I notice that Article II, Section 9 is mainly ad- 
dressed to workers; that is, to ensure equal work, 
regulate relations between workers and employers, 
the rights of workers to self-organization, collective 
bargaining, security of tenure and just and humane 
conditions of work. If we extend this to government 
employees, especially those in the civil service who, I 
believe, are not exactly workers in relation to employ- 
ers — the government employs personnel in the per- 
formance of public functions — I have hesitation, if not 
opposition, to extending the labor-employer relation to 
employees in government because they are in a different 
category. I do not believe they are identical. Moreover, 
when there is, for example, a declaration of strike by 
reason of an unfair labor practice or some alleged viola- 
tion of a provision in the collective bargaining agree- 
ment, strikes should not be fomented but restricted 
except for good substantial reasons as the last resort. To 
extend this to the government and apply it to the Civil 
Service Commission — we can apply it to the entire 
governmental machinery — there may come a time that 
a strike would paralyze the public service. A strike in 
one factory or plant or store may only affect the 
particular interest of those concerned in that particular 
segment or industry or commerce or business, but to 
extend this right not only for self-organization and col- 
lective bargaining to government employees, which may 
entail, as a necessary consequence, the right to strike, I 
think, is of far-reaching significance, because it would 
mean that the employees themselves can strike against 
the government itself and jeopardize public service. 

So, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would not accept just 
unhesitatingly and without material consideration the 
possible adverse effects against the public service, and I 
think there should be, for example, no strike against 
public service. If in very vital industries the government 
may even interfere, I believe with more reason in the 
performance of public functions this situation of a 
particular relation between some workers and their 
employer should not apply to government itself in 
relation to its public officers. 

So, I would request without hesitation for a recon- 
sideration of the acceptance by the Committee of this 
proposed amendment. 

MR. OPLE. May I be allowed to say something on the 
points raised by Commissioner Padilla? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Yes, Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I think Commissioner Padilla’s inter- 
pretation of the right to self-organization for the public 
service is based on nonexaggerated fear of a potentially 
unsettling influence through public service units which 
is what is formed when employees of the government do 
decide to exercise the right to self-organization. I think 
that this is not a mandate for government employees to 
go on strike. The government is in a sense the repository 
of the national sovereignty and, in that respect, it must 
be held in reverence if not in awe. It symbolizes the 
unity of the nation, but it does perform a mundane task 
as well. It is an employer in every sense of the word 
except that terms and conditions of work are set forth 
through a Civil Service Commission. The government is 
the biggest employer in the Philippines. There is an 
employer-employee relationship and we all know that 
the accumulated grievances of several decades are now 
beginning to explode in our faces among government 
workers who feet that the rights afforded by the Labor 
Code, for example, to workers in the private sector have 
been effectively denied to workers in government in 
what looks like a grotesque, a caricature of the equal 
protection of the laws. For example, I still remember 
that there were many occasions under the old govern- 
ment when wages and cost of living allowances were 
granted to workers in the private sector but denied to 
workers in the government for some reason or another, 
and the government did not even state the reasons why. 
The government employees were being discriminated 
against. As a rule, the majority of the world’s countries 
now entertain public service unions. What they really 
add up to is that the employees of the government form 
their own associations. Generally, they do not bargain 
for wages because these are fixed in the budget but they 
do acquire a forum where, among other things, pro- 
fessional and self-development is promoted and en- 
couraged. They also act as watchdogs of their own 
bosses so that when graft and corruption is committ^, 
generally, it is the unions who are no longer afraid by 
virtue of the armor of self-organization that become the 
public’s own allies for detecting graft and corruption 
and for exposing it. And so, I still maintain on behalf of 
the proponents: Sister Christine Tan, Minda Luz Quesa- 
da, Jaime Tadeo, Eulogio Lerum and myself, that this is 
an amendment that the Committee should consider and 
that the Commission should approve. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to some 
questions, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Will Com- 
missioner Ople yield? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 


568 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I understand 
that in the government, there are two basic functions 
involved: the sovereign or governmental functions and 
the proprietary functions, because one cannot deny that 
the government also engages in proprietary functions. 
And the Commissioner has said that government em- 
ployees, notwithstanding the provisions of the Consti- 
tution on civil service, should be given their right to 
self-organization. Does the Commissioner agree with me 
that the right to self-organization includes not only the 
right to form unions but also the right to engage in con- 
certed activities like strike or picketing? Does he mean 
to say that the right to self-organization should apply to 
both governmental and proprietary functions? 


MR. OPLE. Yes, but I distinguish between the right 
to self-organization and collective bargaining and the 
right to self-organization only. And the original version 
— collective bargaining — was incorporated into this 
provision. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I understand that the settled rule in 
the United States and even in the Philippines at present 
is that with respect to governmental functions, govern- 
ment employees cannot engage in concerted activities, 
because if all of them will go on strike at the same time, 
the government will be completely paralyzed; and, 
therefore, the national interest may be adversely af- 
fected, as observed by Senator Padilla. 


MR. OPLE. In the United States today, as the Corr 
missioner knows, especially under state government' 
there are many states where the right to self-organizatio 
for the public service is fully recognized. In Japan, thi 
IS a right fully recognized. The strongest unions in Japa 
are the public service unions. In Malaysia, they reoi 

Trade Union Congress recent! 
nd the public service unions became the dominan 
component of the MTUC. One does not hear of goverr 
Striking in Japan or in Malaysia or ii 

oftn " l Japan, the so-called “sprin 

offensives, when the National Railways System - it i 
a government-controlled corporation - generally goe 
on strike for a new bonus. 

That IS about all. But I think we should not exas 
gerate the potential for disaster in public service union 
because the world s experience so far shows we can trus 
our own people m the government to be responsible. 


H u Commissioner b, 

satisfied, if we state that with respect to governmenta 
functions, government employees will form association 
for their mutual benefit and then take advantage of th< 
provision in the Bill of Rights, that they can present t( 
the government petitions for redress of grievances 
instead of allowing them to strike, which may take a lo 
of time resulting in a stalemate, and in paralyzation o 
government activities? 


MR. OPLE. I will not expect any strike in govern- 
ment as a result of this. The arbitration powers of the 
state remains intact. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I hope Commissioner Ople will not 
mind, because when he was the incumbent Minister of 
Labor, he kept on saying that government employees, 
in the exercise of governmental functions, have no right 
to strike but only to petition for redress of grievances. 
Am I right? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, because at that time, the climate for 
policy reforms in labor was rather limited. But now, if 
one does not entertain this amendment, we are, in 
effect, reducing the benefits of labor, and because Pres- 
ident Aquino had already announced that public service 
employees should have the right to self-organization. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And if my memory serves me right, 
without disparaging my worthy colleague, he said that if 
government employees exercising governmental func- 
tions should be allowed to strike, the facilities of the 
government are not sufficient to meet the exigencies 
that may result from such strike. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. In principle, government employees can 
simultaneously walk out. Even now, without this 
amendment, which the teachers have been happily 
doing, and I want to give the information to the Com- 
mission that in the Ministry of Labor and Employment 
right now, they are registering public service unions and 
nothing catastrophic has followed as a consequence. As 
a matter of fact, they hold weekly forums in that minis- 
try where employees have already organized the first 
public service unions. And they talk of how to cooper- 
ate with the leadership. And now I am just told that 
another sponsor of this amendment would like to share 
my time, which I now willingly relinquish, with the 
leave of the Presiding Officer, to Commissioner Lerum. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I Just 
interpose a note here before Commissioner Lerum 
is recognized, because the Honorable Padilla, in his 
statement, I think, suggested that the Committee has 
agreed without reflection. We just wanted to say that 
this matter has been thoroughly discussed in many 
forums including the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference 
and our consultation with labor that this very same 
Constitutional Commission conducted at the Executive 
Building in Manila, and our agreement to the proposed 
new section was based on the wording on the right to 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


569 


self-organization. Perhaps, the honorable Commis- 
sioners Padilla and Nolledo are reading too much into 
the section. As a matter of fact, during the consultations 
with labor, the Industrial Relations Department of the 
University of the Philippines suggested that with self- 
organization, it is perfectly possible to have what 
we call “collective negotiations” rather than collective 
bargaining. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Floor 
Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Lerum be 
recognized for three minutes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Lerum is recognized for three minutes. 

MR. LERUM. I think what I will try to say will not 
take that long. When we proposed this amendment 
providing for self-organization of government em- 
ployees, it does not mean that because they have the 
right to organize, they also have the right to strike. 
That is a different matter. We are only talking about 
organizing, uniting as a union. With regard to the right 
to strike, everyone will remember that in the Bill of 
Rights, there is a provision that the right to form asso- 
ciations or societies whose purpose is not contrary to 
taw shall not be abridged. Now then, if the purpose of 
the state is to prohibit the strikes coming from em- 
ployees exercising government functions, that could be 
done because the moment that is prohibited, then the 
union which will go on strike will be an illegal union. 
And that provision is carried in Republic Act 875. In 
Republic Act 875, workers ^ including those from the 
government-owned and controlled corporations, are 
allowed to organize but they are prohibited from 
striking. So, the fear of our honorable Vice-President 
is unfounded. It does not mean that because we ap- 
prove this resolution, it carries with it the right to 
strike. That is a different matter. As a matter of fact, 
that subject is now being discussed in the Committee 
on Social Justice because we are trying to find a 
solution to this problem. We know that this problem 
exists; that the moment we allow anybody in the 
government to strike, then what will happen if the mem- 
bers of the Armed Forces will go on strike? What will 
happen to those people trying to protect us? So that 
is a matter of discussion in the Committee on Social 
Justice. But, I repeat, the right to form an organization 
does not carry with it the right to strike. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Notwith- 
standing the fact that the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Ople has been accepted by the Commit- 
tee, nevertheless, it appears that there is an objection on 
the part of Commissioner Padilla. We shall vote on the 
proposed amendment. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, before the vote, 
may I ask that Commissioner Quesada be recognized for 
one minute on the same subject. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, I would like to support the 
position already expressed by two of the sponsors, and 
that is for the Commissioners to give more respect and 
faith in the government workers. We need this particular 
civil service provision expressed explicitly. As a govern- 
ment employee for the past 26 years, I have experienced 
harassment and intimidation even in the effort to or- 
ganize, not for the purpose of any collective bargaining. 
Just the mere fact of organizing in a government institu- 
tion somehow received repressive actions from the 
authorities. So, we believe that we need this particular 
provision for the protection of government workers 
who remain one of the most exploited, underpaid and 
overworked sectors in our country. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. For an orderly procedure, in what 
part of the Civil Service Commission is this amendment 
going to be placed? It will be the last section. Yes, 
because the last section, as it is now, is Section 7; so, 
this will be Section 8 of the Civil Service Commission. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I say a 
few words. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Two 
minutes. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. Commis- 
sioners Lerum and Quesada say that this is limited to 
self-organization, and it does not include the right to 
strike. But Commissioner Ople says not only self- 
organization but collective bargaining. And not only 
that, he can also justify a strike. So, if it is only to fo^ 
an association, that is provided for in the Bill of Rights 
— the right to form an association for purposes not 
prohibited by law. There is no need for a specific pro- 
vision regarding employees in the government service. 
Commissioner Ople mentions civil service unions. I do 
not exactly know what is meant by “public service 
unions.” We had the Public Service Commission which is 
now the Land Transportation Commission, which has 
jurisdiction over public utilities as a transportation 
company, which is industrial or commercial. But e- 
cause of its public interest, it is called a public service 
company subject then to the Public Service Commis- 
sion. So, when mention is made of civil service unions, 
I believe it will apply to private industry that is engaged 
in some sort of public service like the public utilities, 
including the very vital function of transportation. It i 


570 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


is only self-organization, probably, there can be no 
disagreement because that is already provided for in the 
Bill of Rights. 


POLICY-DETERMINING, PRIMARILY CONFIDEN- 
TIAL AND HIGHLY TECHNICAL and a comma (,) 
after it. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). I regret 
that the time of Commissioner Padilla is up. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Shall we 
vote? I think the matter has been sufficiently discussed. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Ople, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand.) 


MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not really 
informed about the exact amendment. Is it only purely 
self-organization without collective bargaining? If so, 
I should not have spoken too long. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, maybe we 
should read the proposed amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes. 


MR. MONSOD. It says: NOTWITHSTANDING AN\ 
PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE, THE RIGHT TC 
SELF-ORGANIZATION SHALL NOT BE DENIED TC 
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Can we 
now have the results? 

The results show 33 votes in favor and one against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized to amend Section 1 on 
the civil service proposal. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 


In other words, the idea of the amendment is to 
restore the concept of policy-determining, primarily 
confidential, and highly technical positions, because no 
matter what we may say about these, these categories 
still exist. As the Supreme Court has constantly said, 
what determines whether a position is policy determin- 
ing, primarily confidential, or highly technical is the 
actual nature of the position, not the title. The only 
purpose of this classification is to exempt these cate- 
gories from competitive examination as a means for 
determining merit and fitness. 

We will notice that there has been a transposition of 
the phrase covering these three categories from the old 
system because the old phrasing, I think, was mislead- 
ing; it tended to mislead to the conclusion that these 
positions are not covered by security of tenure. The 
initial decisions of the Supreme Court said that these 
positions were not covered by security of tenure. How- 
ever, subsequent decisions clarified that these positions 
are covered by security of tenure but are only exempt 
from competitive examination as a means for determin- 
ing merit and fitness. 

The reason for this is, for instance, that a highly 
technical position is defined as something which re- 
quires more than just ordinary professionalism. For 
instance, an atomic scientist would be a highly technical 
professional; so, if we have somebody to be appointed 
to the Atomic Energy Commission, any scientist worth 
his salt would not want to submit to a competitive 
examination in order to qualify for this position. That is 
the only objective of the exceptions. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will the Gentleman yield to a few 
questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I will have to 
yield in favor of Commissioner Bernas. We have agreed 
on the proposed amendment to Section 1 (2). 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I thank Commissioner Aquino. 

On page 2, line 7 (2), I propose to insert a comma (,) 
between the words “determined” and “as.” On line 8, 
between the words “practicable” and “by,” we insert 
the phrase AND EXCEPT TO THOSE WHICH ARE 


MR. SUAREZ. I take it that under this particular 
section there will be only one level for the career civil 
service men and that is those who have passed the com- 
petitive examinations. The Commissioner is proposing 
that we reincorporate the existing provisions under the 
1973 Constitution with reference to those three classifi- 
cations already mentioned which are noncompetitive in 
character, such as: (1) policy-determining; (2) primarily 
confidential; and (3) highly technical in nature. 

FR. BERNAS. These are noncompetitive in the sense 
that they do not have to undergo competitive examina- 
tions for purposes of determining merit and fitness. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


571 


MR. SUAREZ. That is right, but, nonetheless, they 
would satisfy the requirement of merit and fitness. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, but there has to be some other 
way of determining their merit and fitness, not by 
competitive examination. 

MR. SUAREZ. Therefore, the Commissioner would 
want to substantially reincorporate in this section the 
provision under the 1973 Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, but the position of the phrase has 
been changed for purposes of clarity, because the 
original phraseology of the 1973 Constitution, which 
was a copy of the 1935 Constitution, led to the con- 
clusion that these positions are not covered by security 
of tenure. There was a decision of the Supreme Court to 
that effect, which subsequently was changed by that 
body, saying that the only thing they are exempted 
from is competitive examination. 

MR. SUAREZ. When the Commissioner speaks about 
the Supreme Court decision, is he referring to holding 
the position at the pleasure of the appointing power? 

FR. BERNAS. No. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am referring only to those falling 
within the three categories mentioned by the Commis- 
sioner. Do I take it that, as proposed by the Commis- 
sioner, these career or civil service eligibles, in spite of 
the fact that they did not pass any competitive examina- 
tions, would, nonetheless, enjoy security of tenure? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. And they should not be holding their 
offices at the pleasure or displeasure of the appointing 
power? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. The only thing which can confuse here 
is regarding the positions that are primarily confidential. 
If a person occupies such a position and he has lost the 
confidence of his superior, then his position is ter- 
minated. However, the Supreme Court has always said 
that termination is not equivalent to removal but rather 
the end of his term, because it is coterminous with 
confidence. 

MR. SUAREZ. So that is the 6nly exception. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. With respect to the two other classifi- 
cations, the policy-determining and the highly technical 


positions, should they enjoy that measure of security of 
tenure? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. I have a question. Commissioner Bemas. 

What about positions that are considered policy- 
determining in nature? Does an occupant of this 
position have the right to security of tenure? 

FR. BERNAS. He can be given the right to security. 
In other words, this classification has nothing to do with 
security of tenure but only with determining merit and 
fitness. The matter of security of tenure is handled dif- 
ferently: the employee might or might not be given 
security of tenure, or an office might be created for 
them, but that office is removable at will. 

The whole range of decisions in the Supreme Court 
on this is: This classification has nothing to do with 
security of tenure but only with determination of merit 
and fitness. 

MR. FOZ. Which department of government has the 
power or authority to determine whether a position is 
policy-determining or primarily confidential or highly 
technical? 

FR. BERNAS. The initial decision is made by the 
legislative body or by the executive department, but the 
final decision is done by the court. The Supreme Court 
has constantly held that whether or not a position is 
policy-determining, primarily confidential or highly 
technical, it is determined not by the title but by the 
nature of the task that is entrusted to it. For instance, 
we might have a case where a position is created requir- 
ing that the holder of that position should be a member 
of the Bar and the law classifies this position as highly 
technical. However, the Supreme Court has said before 
that a position which requires mere membership in the 
Bar is not a highly technical position. Since the term 
“highly technical” means something beyond the or- 
dinary requirements of the profession, it is always a 
question of fact. 

MR. FOZ. Does not Commissioner Bernas agree that 
the general rule should be that the merit system or the 
competitive system should be upheld? 

FR. BERNAS. I agree that that should be the general 
rule; that is why we are putting this as an exception. 

MR. FOZ. The declaration that certain positions are 
policy-determining, primarily confidential or nig y 
technical has been the source of practices which amoun 
to the spoils system. 


572 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. The Supreme Court has always said 
that, but if the law of the administrative agency says 
that a position is primarily confidential when in fact it is 
not, we can always challenge that in court. It is not 
enough that the law call it primarily confidential to 
make it such; it is the nature of the duties which makes 
a position primarily confidential. 

MR. FOZ. The effect of a declaration that a position 
is policy-determining j primarily confidential or highly 
technical — as an exception — is to take it away from 
the usual rules and provisions of the Civil Service Law 
and to place it in a class by itself so that it can avail 
itself of certain privileges not available to the ordinary 
run of government employees and officers. 

FR. BERNAS. As I have already said, this classifica- 
tion does not do away with the requirement of merit 
and fitness. All it says is that there are certain positions 
which should not be determined by competitive 
examination. 

For instance, I have just mentioned a position in the 
Atomic Energy Commission. Shall we require a physicist 
to undergo a competitive examination before appoint- 
ment? Or a confidential secretary or any position in 
policy-determining administrative bodies, for that 
matter? There are other ways of determining merit and 
fitness than competitive examination. This is not a 
denial of the requirement of merit and fitness. 

MR. FOZ. But experience has shown that these 
matters have been the source of abuse. One of the ef- 
fects of such a declaration is to remove it from the 
general run of government employees. Therefore, 
holders of these positions enjoy better rates of pay and 
compensation. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have said 
everything I want to say, so I submit it to a vote. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is the 
proposed amendment acceptable to the Committee? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I move that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized for another amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino may now proceed. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the proposed 
amendment will be on page 2, Section 4, line 13. 

MR. PADILLA. Prior amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. This is on page 2, Section 1, para- 
graph 3, lines 9 to 11. I notice that this section 
mentions the phrase “removed, suspended or otherwise 
disciplined.” The 1935 Constitution used the phrase 
“removed or suspended” while the 1973 Constitution 
used the phrase “suspended or dismissed.” The word 
“discipline” is a new insertion. I also notice that while 
the former Constitution spoke of “for cause provided 
by law,” this committee report qualifies “cause” with 
the word “just” and adds the phrase “as may be 
provided by law.” 

Will the Committee consider more or less the restora- 
tion of certain phrases in the relevant provisions of the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions and the exclusion of 
discipline which may not amount to any suspension, 
removal or dismissal? Why should we say “just cause as 
may be provided by law”? There may be a subsequent 
law that may provide additional cause for suspension or 
dismissal, and definitely it cannot be given any retro- 
active effect. Why not use the phrase “for cause pro- 
vided by law” as stated in the former Constitutions? 

MR. FOZ. What is the Commissioner’s amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will 
Commissioner Padilla please restate his amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. I propose to reword Section 1, para- 
graph 3, lines 9 to 12 on page 2 by deleting “otherwise 
disciplined,” the word “just” and the phrase “as may 
be,” such that it would read: “No Member of the civil 
service shall be removed or suspended except for cause 
provided by law.” 

MR. FOZ. What is the difference as far as the clause 
“as may be provided by law” is concerned? 

MR. PADILLA. The fear I entertain is that when a 
civil service employee has done an act which may be a 
cause for his suspension or removal as provided by law, 
that may be all right. But a subsequent law may add 
additional causes, and his act may be anterior to that, so 
that subsequent law should not be given any retroactive 
effect. The phrase “as -provided by law” is all right, but 
the former phrase “as may be provided by law” might 
entertain the idea of a subsequent law being enlarged or 
additional causes being included therein. The fear is that 
it might be justified by this phrase “as may be,” instead 
of the old text “as provided by law.” 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


573 


MR. FOZ. But what about his proposal to delete the 
word “just” before “cause”? 

MR. PADILLA. I propose to delete the word “just” 
because the law has already provided the causes. If there 
is a cause provided by law which will justify an em- 
ployee’s suspension or dismissal, well and good. How- 
ever, others might say: “That cause is not just.” So it 
will give rise to some unholy discussions and court 
proceedings to determine whether the cause already 
provided by law is just or unjust. In other words, I do 
not see any improvement by the addition of these words 
over the two similar provisions in both Constitutions 
except the words “removed” in one and “dismissed” in 
the other, which mean the same thing, which were 
already provided in the previous Constitutions. How- 
ever, if we do not intend to make any substantive 
change, we might as well adopt the former text, because 
that has already been recognized and has probably 
received judicial interpretation. 

MR. FOZ. On the proposition that the term “for 
cause” has acquired a definite meaning in law and for 
the reason stated by the proponent regarding the last 
clause, the Committee accepts the amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Com- 
mittee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I ask that Commissioner Aquino 
be recognized to propose her amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, my proposed 
amendment is on page 2, Section 1, subparagraph 4, 
lines 13 and 14. On line 13, between the words “any” 
and “partisan,” add the phrase ELECTIONEERING 
AND OTHER; and on line 14, delete the word “activity” 
and in lieu thereof substitute the word CAMPAIGN. 

May I be allowed to explain my proposed amend- 
ment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Aquino may proceed. 

MS. AQUINO. The draft as presented by the Com- 
mittee deleted the phrase “except to vote” which was 
adopted in both the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. The 


phrase “except to vote” was not intended as a guarantee 
to the right to vote but as a qualification of the general 
prohibition against taking part in elections. 

Voting is a partisan political activity. Unless it is 
explicitly provided for as an exception to this prohibi- 
tion, it will amount to disenfranchisement. We know 
that suffrage, although plenary, is not an unconditional 
right. In other words, the Legislature can always pass a 
statute which can withhold from any class the right to 
vote in an election, if public interest so required. I 
would only like to reinstate the qualification by specify- 
ing the prohibited acts so that those who may want to 
vote but who are likewise prohibited from participating 
in partisan political campaigns or electioneering may 
vote. 

MR. FOZ. There is really no quarrel over this point, 
but please understand that there was no intention on 
the part of the Committee to disenfranchise any govern- 
ment official or employee. The elimination of the last 
clause of this provision was precisely intended to 
protect the members of the civil service in the sense that 
they are not being deprived of the freedom of ex- 
pression in a political contest. The last phrase or clause 
might have given the impression that a government 
employee or worker has no right whatsoever in an elec- 
tion campaign except to vote, which is not the case. 
They are still free to express their views although the 
intention is not really to allow them to take part 
actively in a political campaign. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the point of the 
Chairman of the Committee is well-taken, but I believe 
his fear is more apparent than real. In fact, the explicit 
proviso “except to vote,” is, in effect, a definitive quali- 
fication of that general prohibition against participation 
in partisan political activity, because it is axiomatic that 
voting is a partisan political activity. In other words, the 
fear expressed by Commissioner Foz may be off-tangent. 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment with that 
clarification. 

MS. AQUINO. I thank Commissioner Foz; and I also 
thank the Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The Com- 
mittee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I seek recogni- 
tion of Commissioner Suarez for his amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Suarez is recognized. 


574 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have the same 
amendment similar to or identical with the amendment 
just approved now. 

MR. DA VIDE. I seek the recognition of Commis- 
sioner Romulo for some clarificatory questions before 
we go to other amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Can we go back to Section 3 of the 
Common Provisions, lines 15 and 16. It involves the 
phrase “including government-owned or controlled 
corporations or THEIR subsidiaries.” Does it mean that 
the Philippine Airlines, which is owned or controlled by 
the government, will be run according to Civil Service 
rules? 

MR. FOZ. No, the inclusion here of “government- 
owned or controlled corporations or their subsidiaries” 
has to do with the franchise or privilege granted by such 
government corporations or their subsidiaries. It has 
nothing to do with the management. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I understand 
that Commissioner Aquino has a proposed amendment 
on Section 2. 

MR. FOZ. It is not here. 

DAVIDE. Then, may I seek the recognition of 
Commissioner Maambong for paragraph 2 of Section 2? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, on page 2, 
Section 2, paragraph 2, line 24, after the word “Pres- 
ident,” I propose to insert the phrase WITH THE CON- 
SENT OF THE COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS. 
On line 25, delete the entire sentence “Appointments to 
the Commission need no confirmation.” 

May I explain for just a few seconds, Mr. Presiding 
Officer? 

I 3gree that the constitutional commissions should be 
independent. I think when we cause the appointment of 
the chairmen and commissioners thereof without the 
necessity of confirmation of the Commission on Ap- 
pointments, it would be carrying our independence a 
bit too far. I submit, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. We would like to be informed, if the 
proposal to reestablish the Commission on Appoint- 


ments in the legislative department is already assured of 
approval. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I specifically asked Commissioner 
Davide, the Chairman of the Committee on the Legisla- 
tive, and he assured me that the reinstallation of the 
Commission on Appointments is almost a certainty, so 
with his assurance, I think we will have a Commission 
on Appointments. 

MR. FOZ. With that information and the expectation 
that such a constitutional body will be established and 
approved by the Commission, then the Committee 
accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Com- 
mittee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not 
going to propose any other amendment. I will just make 
a reservation to make a similar amendment to the other 
constitutional bodies. 

Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. There has been a disagreement in the Com- 
mittee as to the last proposal or amendment. May I 
move for a reconsideration of the approval of the last 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Maambong? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I seek the recognition of Commis- 
sioner Quesada for an anterior amendment on Section 1. 

MR. FOZ. There is a pending matter. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am sorry. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we explain 
our reason and then leave it up to the body. The reason 
the Committee thought about not subjecting the ap- 
pointments to the Commission on Appointments is the 
desire not to introduce partisan politics into these 
constitutional commissions. It is our understanding that 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


575 


the composition of the Commission on Appointments 
would be something similar to the old Commission on 
Appointments. 

We were a little concerned that, for example, the 
Commissioners of the Commission on Elections would 
now be the subject of haggling and horse trading such 
that the list would now be composed of nominees of 
political parties. We were afraid that this would hurt the 
integrity of the electoral process. 

In the case of the Judiciary, which is allowed to have 
appointments, there is a Judicial and Bar Council. How- 
ever, it is our contention that in the case of the Judi- 
ciary, judges are appointed for life; whereas, in the 
case of the constitutional commissions, there is a natural 
stopper because the terms of the commissioners will in 
no case exceed seven years. 

So this was some sort of a trade-off here and we 
wanted to insulate these constitutional commissions 
from politics. That was the reason for that provision. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we 
put the issue to a vote, may I be allowed to put in a few 
words? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Com- 
missioner has two minutes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I sympathize with the concern of 
the Committee regarding the appointments of the mem- 
bers of the commission through the Commission on Ap- 
pointments, but I would like the Committee to under- 
stand that if the appointments will not go through the 
process of being gone over by the members of the Com- 
mission on Appointments, then the logical conclusion is 
that it would only be the President, himself a politician, 
who will decide. 

Second, Mr. Presiding Officer, historically in the 1935 
Constitution, members of the constitutional commis- 
sions went through the Commission on Appointments. 
The only reason this was deleted in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion was there was no more Commission on Appoint- 
ments. As stated by Commissioner Monsod, in the case 
of the members of the Judiciary, we do have a Judicial 
and Bar Council that can go over their qualifications. 

I feel very strongly that we should put the members 
of the constitutional commissions through a process of 
screening by the Commission on Appointments as far 
as their qualifications are concerned. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just have a minute? I just want 
to say that in drafting the provision, we took into con- 
sideration the staggered terms of the Commissioners so 
that not at any one time will they be beholden to one 
President. 

As a matter of fact, the appointment provision as 
now drafted says that even when an appointee takes the 


unexpired term of one commissioner, he cannot be 
reappointed. Moreover, we feel that there are safeguards 
in the system that would prevent one person from 
dominating the commissions. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one word in 
support of the amendment of Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I sympathize with the intention of the 
Committee to insulate the Civil Service Commission 
against politics, but as Commissioner Maambong said, 
the President is as much a political animal as the mem- 
bers of Congress. 

Moreover, in response to the argument that after all 
the terms are staggered, we should remember that the 
first appointees will be appointed by the same President. 
One principal complaint we had against the past 
administration was that the power of appointment 
became subject to abuse because it was not subject to 
any check. 

The proposal of Commissioner Maambong is precisely 
to put a check on the appointing authority, and that 
would be in the interest of insulating all these commis- 
sions against politics. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, Commissioner 
de Castro would like to add a little on this issue. May I 
seek for his recognition? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am a member of the Committee, and when we were 
discussing this matter a while ago, we were concerned 
about the statements made by Commissioner Monsod 
on insulating these members of the constitutional com- 
missions from partisan politics. I accepted that position 
on condition that my Resolution No. 330, substituting a 
Committee on Appointments in lieu of the Commission 
on Appointments, will be approved by the Committee 
on the Legislative. I submitted this resolution in view of 
our very bad experience with the Commission on Ap- 
pointments, whose members numbered 25 including the 
ex-officio Chairman, the Senate President. One member 
alone could table an appcrintment if the appointee 
would not approach that member. That appointment 
would remain hidden in the drawer of his table and he 
would be bypassed for several years, as I was bypassed 
for seven years because someone hid my appointment 
papers and did not release them before the Commission 
on Appointments. 

And so, if a Committee on Appointments instead of a 
Commission on Appointments will be passed by t e 


576 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


Committee on the Legislative, then I would agree that 
the commissioners of the constitutional commissions 
pass through the Committee on Appointments. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. The issue has been sufficiently dis- 
cussed. I move for a vote on the proposed amend- 
ments. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Those in 
favor of the proposed amendment will please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

All those against will please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 21 votes in favor and 7 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I move for the recognition of Commis- 
sioner Quesada for an anterior amendment on Section 1. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. President, I would like to intro- 
duce an additional paragraph to Section 1 and this 
would be paragraph 5. This is in reference to a resolu- 
tion introduced by Honorable Sarmiento and myself 
which seeks to make all government workers and em- 
ployees permanent workers after rendering six months 
of service subject to civil service rules. 

I believe there are thousands of workers and em- 
ployees who have been in the government service for 
more than five years but have not enjoyed many of the 
rights other workers have enjoyed such as the right to 
security of tenure and the right to self-organization. 

This particular group of workers is not protected by 
the government. As a matter of fact, the government is 
the number one exploiter of labor especially the manual 
workers. If we want to improve government service, 
then they should now enjoy some protection by the 
law. It was claimed earlier by some of the members of 
the Committee that this should be subject to legislation. 
But for many years casual workers in the government 
have pleaded to have that kind of protection since their 
counterparts in the private sector have been protected 
by the Labor Code. This Code has a parallel provision 
that would make the workers who have rendered six 
months of service permanent. But employees in the 
government sector remain casuals even up to the time 
they retire. 


So, there are thousands of workers who are willing 
to lay their life on this particular provision because it 
is very vital. This is often the cry of the government 
workers in our public hearings and consultations and 
even before the convening of this Constitutional Com- 
mission. I would particularly bring out the issue of 
government health workers who have oftentimes ex- 
pressed this problem and they are clamoring now for 
this constitutional body to redress the injustice that was 
committed against them. 

So, I propose to add a new paragraph to follow 
paragraph 4. This is a good provision that will refer 
to government servants. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, what is the exact 
amendment? 

MS. QUESADA. The proposed amendment is to in- 
sert, as the last paragraph of Section 1 , the following; 
GOVERNMENT WORKERS SHALL BE GRANTED 
PERMANENT STATUS AFTER RENDERING SIX 
MONTHS OF SATISFACTORY AND ESSENTIAL 
SERVICE. So, I have added here the words SATISFAC- 
TORY and ESSENTIAL, meaning, that their services are 
vital for the continuity of government service. 

MR. FOZ. I am sorry I did not get the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE For clarification, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
That proposed amendment would be a new paragraph 
on Section 1, and it should be placed between lines 
14 and 15. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, it is a new insertion. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, we would like to 
hear the amendment again. 

MS. QUESADA. The new amendment reads: GOV- 
ERNMENT WORKERS SHALL BE GRANTED PER- 
MANENT STATUS AFTER RENDERING SIX 
MONTHS OF SATISFACTORY AND ESSENTIAL 
SERVICE, meaning, that their services are needed to 
continue the service of that particular institution. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I ask the proponent some 
questions? 

MS. QUESADA. Gladly. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Does this contemplate a 
worker who has rendered continuous service? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


577 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Let us take the case, of a 
worker who was employed for one month; then later on 
was laid off. He was again employed, then later on laid 
off. Even if the accumulated period of his service 
amounted to six months, he would not be entitled to 
be a permanent employee. 

MS. QUESADA. I have in mind those workers who 
have rendered continuous service which is important to 
the organization. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. With that provision, that fate 
will be suffered by these employees. That is what the 
appointing power will do: not to allow the employee to 
render service continuously so that he cannot avail of 
permanent status. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I ask some questions? Does 
this jibe with the provision of Section 1 under the Civil 
Service Commission, subsection 2 which reads: 

Appointments in the civil service shall be made only 
according to merit and fitness to be determined, as far 
as practicable and except to those which are policy- 
determining, primarily confidential and highly technical, 
by competitive examination. 

Many casual employees who have no eligibility did 
not undergo any competitive examination. Is there no 
inconsistency between that policy enunciated in Section 
1, subparagraph 2 and this proposal making them 
permanent employees even if they are not civil service 
eligibles merely because they have already served for six 
months? 

MS. QUESADA. When we say “practicable ... by 
competitive examination,” this is not the only way by 
which we can judge the merit and fitness of a govern- 
ment employee. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the Commissioner would make 
this an exception to that general rule. Does she also say 
that this comes under those who would not be com- 
pelled to take this competitive examination because it is 
not practicable? 

MS. QUESADA. No. My concern mainly is the status 
of being temporary or permanent accorded to workers 
who have rendered services although I believe that 
casual public or civil servants could and should also go 
through the requirement of merit and fitness. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Commissioner also states in 
that amendment that the service must be “SATIS- 
FACTORY AND ESSENTIAL.” Is that right? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 


MR. RODRIGO. Who will judge whether the service 
is satisfactory? I suppose it is the chief. 

MS. QUESADA. That is supposed to be the function 
of the supervisor or the officer-in-charge. 

MR. RODRIGO. But suppose the officer-in-charge 
says: “No, your service has not been satisfactory,” what 
is the recourse of the casual employee? 

MS. QUESADA. He could raise this issue with the 
grievance machinery. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is this grievance machinery? 

MS. QUESADA. The Civil Service Law provides that 
a grievance machinery be created to which workers can 
seek redress for any injustice. 

MR. RODRIGQ. Will this be a quasi-judicial body 
which can render decisions? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, the Civil Service Commission 
also provides for promotion boards or grievance com- 
mittees within the organization. But I am really refer- 
ring to workers who do not enjoy any kind of pro- 
tection. They cannot even seek redress from grievance 
committees precisely because they are considered 
casuals. 

MR. RODRIGO. Who would decide the other deter- 
minant, that the service is essential? 

MS. QUESADA. I think the management of any of- 
fice would be able to certify that their services are 
necessary for the functioning of that particular institu- 
tion. 

MR. RODRIGO. If the officer-in-charge says: “No, 
this is not an essential service; this is not indispensable 
to the service,” should they go to the grievance commit- 
tee? 

MS. QUESADA. I think that there are other mechan- 
isms through which this particular group of workers 
could seek some redress. 

MR. RODRIGO. We are going into a lot of details. 
Would the Commissioner not want to leave this to legis- 
lative action? Would she want a constitutional mandate 
on this? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, because for many years, many 
government workers have not been protected at all by 
law. It appears that politicians would much rather have 
workers remain as casuals so that they can be part of 
the spoils system. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is the basis of setting six 
months and not one year? 


578 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MS. QUESADA. The private sector has this provision 
in the Labor Code. 

MR. RODRIGO. But that is an ordinary legislation. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, but government workers do not 
have anything to appeal to because there is no such law 
at all that protects them from this situation. 

MR. RODRIGO. This is a follow-up to the point 
raised by Commissioner de los Reyes. 

Suppose in order to evade this constitutional provi- 
sion, the officer-in-charge dismisses the casual employee 
five days before the six-month period elapses and then 
hires him again after five days. We get into details here. 
Sometimes there are matters which are better left to 
ordinary legislation. 


six months, or even one year under a merit system 
would not be encompassed by that provision. There 
may be some government workers who, by reason of 
meritorious conduct and performance, could possibly 
be made permanent employees after a continued service 
of merely three months, but if there is a six-month 
period in the Constitution, then the Legislature would 
not be that flexible. So, instead of putting a constitu- 
tional provision limiting the period strictly to six 
months, and give the Legislature a little more room for 
making adjustments on the different contingencies and 
different classifications, I am proposing a substitute 
amendment to Commissioner Quesada’s on Section 1 
(3), lin.e 9, so that the paragraph reads: “No member of 
the Civil Service shall be removed, suspended, or other- 
wise disciplined except for cause AND SHALL ENJOY 
SECURITY OF TENURE AS provided by law.” 


MS. QUESADA. I think the principle that has to be 
constitutionalized is the need to protect government 
workers who are not enjoying certain rights like the 
right to self-organization and the right to security of 
tenure which are enjoyed by other workers. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one clarifi- 
catory question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Just one question. 

Under the present jurisprudence, an appointment or a 
commission which in its term says it is temporary never 
ripens into a permanent appointment. Under the Com- 
missioner’s proposed amendment, will an expressly 
temporary appointment automatically ripen into a 
permanent appointment after six months'? 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, the said para- 
graph has already been amended by Commissioner 
Padilla. 

MR. REGALADO. Portion of Commissioner Padilla’s 
amendment reads: “. . . except for cause provided by 
law.” I propose to amend it to read: “otherwise disci- 
plined except for cause AND SHALL ENJOY SECUR- 
ITY OF TENURE AS provided by law.” This amend- 
ment sets forth a constitutional mandate, but leaving it 
to ordinary legislation to make the corresponding 
adjustments. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, but then the employee con- 
cerned here is not yet a member of the civil service 
because the status of his appointment is “casual.” So, 
what we are proposing is for temporary workers to 
enjoy the right of becoming permanent and be called a 
civil servant. 


MS. QUESADA. That is the intention. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for 1 
recognition of Commissioner Regalado on the sai 

nr? hT the Commission may 

prepared to vote. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). So the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Regalado is not 
accepted? 

MS. QUESADA. It does not really capture the spirit 
or the intention of my proposal. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Comm 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. J^EGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am one ( 
the members of the Committee who were approach^ 
by Commissioner Quesada regarding this problem SI 
expressed it correctly that there appears to have been r 
constitutional mandate for the grant of security ( 
tenure to government employees who are still c 
temporary or casual status. I answered her that it wou 
be best left to ordinary legislation with the correspon 
ing constitutional mandate for that purpose. She me 
tioned the Labor Code and the six-month period there 
for private workers. But then, perhaps, three month 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If Commissioner Regalado will not 
insist on his amendment to the amendment, I think the 
main amendment is now ready for voting. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one 
word. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


579 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Commissioner Quesada speaks of temporary ap- 
pointees and casuals. When a temporary appointment is 
made, I understand from the rules of the civil service 
that the temporary appointee does not possess the right 
civil service eligibility for the position he is holding, and 
such temporary appointment shall last for six months 
only. After six months he will occupy the position on 
permanent status even without the appropriate civil 
service eligibility, I understand, because there are ap- 
plicable civil service eligibilities for various positions, 
such as for supervisors and clerks. In this case, after six 
months, the employee becomes permanent even though 
he does not possess the appropriate civil service eligibili- 
ty. Thus, the whole gamut of the merit system of the 
Civil Service Commission is destroyed. 

I understand that these casuals are removable at any 
time because they do not have the appropriate civil 
service eligibilities and there are no positions for them, 
except that at the time of need there was so much work 
that had to be accomplished. They are usually laid off 
after their work is finished. If the work lasts for six 
months and these casuals have no appropriate civil 
service eligibilities yet and there are no actual positions 
— except that they will have to finish the work — to 
absorb them, it will put to naught all this merit system 
in the Civil Service. 

Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. I refer to workers who are actually 
essential to the smooth operation of any government 
entity and who perform certain functions described by 
the Civil Service Commission. I can cite many of these 
government workers with job descriptions spelled out as 
essential services. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DA VIDE. I think the issue has been sufficiently 
discussed. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask for just a 
minute because I think I have a very important question 
to raise before this matter is submitted to a vote. I 
would like to request Commissioner Quesada to answer 
a question. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Ople is given one minute. 

MR. OPLE. The Commissioner, having worked for 
the government once, realizes that the security of em- 
ployment of thousands of casuals in the government is 


largely dependent on fluctuating budgetary outlays of 
different agencies. In other words, we saw what hap- 
pened recently when many thousands of temporary 
employees were laid off because there was no money 
to support their continuation in office. The Commis- 
sioner, of course, will concede that the security of 
employment of casuals in the government is sometimes 
a function of policy; many other times it really depends 
on fluctuations of budgets. 

Therefore, will the Commissioner consider an 
amendment to her amendment, which merely reads 
as follows: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT SHALL ENJOY SECURITY OF 
TENURE AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW, which 
means a mandate to the Legislature to determine the 
terms and conditions of employment of these govern- 
ment casuals and to endeavor to give them security of 
tenure consistent with the financial configuration of the 
government at any given time. Will Commissioner 
Quesada welcome that reformulation? 

MS. QUESADA. I accept. 

MR. OPLE. Yes; so if the Chair is ready, then as 
reformulated the following is the amendment that will 
be put to a vote: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT SHALL ENJOY SECURITY OF 
TENURE AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

MS. QUESADA. Could the Commissioner include, 
however, AFTER HAVING RENDERED A NUMBER 
OF MONTHS? 

MR. OPLE. The law will take care of that and it will 
provide more than that. 

MS. QUESADA. I accept. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Ople? 

MR. FOZ. We would like to hear the amendment 
again; I would like to be clear about it. 

MR. OPLE. The amendment reads: TEMPORARY 
EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERNMENT SHALL EN- 
JOY SECURITY OF TENURE AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW. 

MR. FOZ. May we ask the Commissioner if the words 
“temporary” and “security of tenure are not incon- 
sistent. 

MR. OPLE. There need be no inconsistency in the 
sense that they are temporary now. As Commissioner 
Bernas said this is a class of employees that would m- 


580 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


elude those holding temporary appointments, and as 
Commissioner Quesada said, this would include all of 
these many thousands of casuals in the government. So, 
that is the scope of this amendment: that they shall 
enjoy security of tenure as may be provided by law. 
However, if that amendment still jars the sensibilities 
of the members of the Committee, I now reword it to 
read: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERN- 
MENT SHALL BE ENTITLED TO SECURITY OF 
TENURE AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

If Commissioner Quesada now agrees with me on the 
basis of the kibitzers and supporters around her, I now 
propose the following: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES 
SHALL ENJOY THE PROTECTION OF LAW, THE 
INTENT BEING THAT THEY SHALL BE ENTITLED 
TO SECURITY OF TENURE AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE 
AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Commissioner Quesada say? 


MS. QUESADA. Could the Commissioner include 
TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT SHALL RIPEN INTO 
PERMANENT APPOINTMENT AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW? 


MR. OPLE. That looks like a legislation. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MS. QUESADA. May I request a one-minute sus- 
pension of the session. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I request two minutes. 

THE PRESIDING QFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is suspended for two minutes. 

It was 6:33 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


At 6:40 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. 
session is resumed. 


Trenas). 


The 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Com- 
mittee has accepted the new amendment. 

Is there any objection? 

MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner Maambong seeks to be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is just 
a point of information. I was a member of the Commit- 
tee on Civil Service of the last Regular Batasang Pam- 
bansa, and I would like to inform the body that before 
we were dissolved we were precisely working on that 
kind of formulation to give permanent status to tempo- 
rary employees of the government. So I favor that 
provision in the Constitution. The future Batasang 
Pambansa, at least, will be made aware that there is 
really that intent of giving protection to temporary 
employees. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING QFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Thank 
you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Qfficer, there are still 
amendments to Section 2. May I propose the recogni- 
tion of the following Commissioners in the order they 
are named: Commissioners de los Reyes, Regalado, 
Aquino and de Castro. 

THE PRESIDING QFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will they 
speak on the amendments? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, on amendments to Section 2. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). There is a 
pending amendment now. 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I seek 
the recognition of Commissioner Quesada for the m 
fied amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. TreHas). Commis- 
sioner Quesada is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I thought it was approved already. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). No, Com- 
missioner de Castro has just stood up. May the Chair 
inquire from Commissioner de Castro if he is objecting 
to the amendment? 


MS. QUESADA. We are happy to report to the Chair 
the final formulation of an accepted amendment to 
read: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERN- 
MENT SHALL ENJOY THE PROTECTION OF LAW. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I object to the amendment. There 
are three kinds of appointments in the Civil Service 
Commission: (1) a permanent appointment which is 
usually extended when the employee has appropriate 
civil service eligibility for the position he is holding; 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


581 


(2) a provisional appointment when the civil service 
eligibility of the employee is not appropriate for the 
position he is holding. An employee with a provisional 
appointment is usually given six months which is re- 
newable for another six months unless he acquires the 
appropriate civil service eligibility for his position; and 

(3) a temporary appointment is when the employee has 
no eligibility whatsoever. Even if we put the phrase “as 
provided for by law,” this employee who has no eligi- 
bility whatsoever should take the Civil Service Commis- 
sion’s examination any time it will be given so that he 
can acquire the appropriate civil service eligibility. 

I object to the amendment because the whole gamut 
of the merit system of the Civil Service Commission will 
be destroyed, if we accept and give security of tenure to 
temporary employees. 

Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. I move for a vote on the amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, the proposed 
amendment, as I heard it, reads: TEMPORARY EM- 
PLOYEES SHALL ENJOY THE PROTECTION OF 
THE LAW. I do not know what protection of the law 
actually exists for these temporary employees. Once an 
employee is temporary or casual, he has no permanent 
status; hence, he has no right to security of tenure. I 
wonder what is meant by “SHALL ENJOY THE PRO- 
TECTION OF THE LAW.” I think it should be worded 
differently because, as I see it, there is no protection to 
temporary employees who have rendered service for six 
months or more, and that is the complaint of the pro- 
ponent. But now we are saying that temporary em- 
ployees shall enjoy the protection of the law. There is 
absence of protection. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
believes this matter has been thoroughly discussed. Are 
we ready to vote or will Commissioner Quesada enter- 
tain amendments or clarifications? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Treflas). Commis- 
sioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

I was also thinking about that because these workers 
with temporary appointments, under the present law, 
can be dismissed with or without cause. However, the 
provisional appointee cannot be dismissed except for 
cause. That is the situation. 

Commissioner Padilla commented on what protection 
the law can give temporary employees under the present 
amendment. Maybe the amendment should sound some- 
thing like this; TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES SHALL 
BE ACCORDED PERMANENT STATUS AFTER A 
PERIOD OF TIME AS PROVIDED BY LAW. 


I think that is what the proponent is asking. After a 
period of time, a temporary worker should be made 
permanent. In the government at present, these tempo- 
rary workers are given the so-called unassembled eligibil- 
ity after five years, not six months. I think they cannot 
prove that they have rendered essential work after only 
six months. They have to be on the job for five years, 
after which they may be considered eligibles. So, they 
cannot be removed anymore even though they have no 
eligibility, for they need not take a competitive exam- 
ination. I have my doubts though about this six-month 
period. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is Com- 
missioner Natividad proposing an amendment at this 
stage? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am suggesting an amendment to 
the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Commissioner Quesada say? 

MS. QUESADA. What is the amendment? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am just suggesting to provide 
the exact help that we would like to give the temporary 
employees, in this way: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES 
SHALL BE ACCORDED PERMANENT STATUS AF- 
TER A PERIOD OF TIME AS PROVIDED BY LAW. 

MS. QUESADA. That was the original intention, so 
I accept. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Shall we 
vote on that already? 

MS. QUESADA. I think it is more in the spirit in 
which the proposal was made by Commissioner Sar- 
miento and myself. 

MR. MQNSQD. Mr. Presiding Qfficer, may we know 
the parliamentary status? The proposal of Commis- 
sioner Quesada was accepted by the Committee. What is 
the parliamentary status of the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Natividad? Should it not be propounded to the 
Committee? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Precisely. 
Does the Committee accept? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. We would like to be clear about the 
amendment to the amendment as proposed by Commis- 
sioner Natividad. 


582 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. NATIVIDAD. We are not taking it now as six 
months. The help that we want to extend to tempo- 
rary employees is already clear in this amendment. We 
want them to be permanent after a period of time which 
is to be set by law. 

MR. FOZ. So how will the statement now read? 


Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trehas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. It should read: TEMPORARY 
EMPLOYEES SHALL BE ACCORDED PERMANENT 
STATUS AFTER A PERIOD OF TIME AS PROVIDED 
BY LAW. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. BENGZON. I just want to seek clarification on 
the actual meaning of the amended provision. There are 
two facets here: protection as a laborer or protection 
as a civil servant. I ask because if a temporary employee 
has no civil service eligibility and his position ripens into 
permanent without a civil service eligibility, it is the 
same thing; we will wreck the whole civil service merit 
system. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. FOZ. I would like to ask for a suspension of the 
session. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 6:50 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:56 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. DA VIDE. May I request for the recognition 
again of Commissioner Quesada for the final modified 
amendment. 


MR. FOZ. If I may be allowed to respond, that is a 
question that should be addressed to the Legislature. 

MR. BENGZON. No, that is an interpretation of that 
provision. We would like to know the sense of the 
proponent. If the intention in that amendment is to 
make that temporary appointment ripen into per- 
manency without the employee becoming a civil service 
eligible, it is the same thing as wrecking the whole civil 
service merit system. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will 
Commissioner Quesada explain? 

MS. QUESADA. The final proposal is going to set the 
opening for legislation that will provide protection to 
casual and temporary employees who are not enjoying 
any such protection. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Comm 
sioner Quesada is recognized. 


^ withdraw all amei 

ments introduced on the floor and submit the follow! 
final provisions. 

OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). All ame, 
ments have been withdrawn. 

MS. QUESADA. The final amendment should re-^ 
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES OF THEGOVERNMEt 
SHALL BE GIVEN SUCH PROTECTION AS ^Y 
PROVIDED BY LAW. ^>5 may j 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Since the Committee has some 
suggestions as to the framing of that provision, may we 
say that it is our understanding that it is possible for the 
law under that provision to impose certain conditions 
for the conversion into permanent status. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Treflas). The Com- 
mittee has accepted the amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

• MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask the honorable Commis- 
sioner Quesada a question? 

MS. QUESADA. Willingly. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


583 


MR. DE CASTRO. What protection do we expect 
from the law when we say “TEMPORARY EMPLO- 
YEES OF THE GOVERNMENT SHALL BE GIVEN 
SUCH PROTECTION AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY 
LAW.” 

MS. QUESADA. We will leave that to the Legislature. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is it a protection to be permanent 
in his position or what? 

MS. QUESADA. As may be provided by law, it is the 
right to security of tenure. 

MR. DE CASTRO. This will still lead to the wrecking 
of the whole merit system in the Civil Service Commis- 
sion. 

Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. The issue is now ready for a vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). All those 
in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Mertihers raised their hand.) 

All those against, please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and 5 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. I seek recognition of Commissioner 
Romulo for a parliamentary inquiry on Section 1. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I beg the indulgence of the Commit- 
tee. I was reading the wrong provision. 

I refer to Section 1, subparagraph 1 which reads: 

The Civil Service embraces all branches, subdivisions, 

instrumentalities and agencies of the government, including 

government-owned or controlled corporations. 

My query: Is Philippine Airlines covered by this provi- 
sion? 

MR. FOZ. Will the Commissioner please state his 
previous question? 

MR. ROMULO. The phrase on line 4 of Section 1, 
subparagraph 1 , under the Civil Service Commission, 
says: “including government-owned or controlled corpo- 
rations.” Does that include a corporation, like the 
Philippine Airlines which is government-owned or con- 
trolled? 

MR. FOZ. I would like to throw a question to the 
Commissioner. Is the Philippine Airlines controlled by 


the government in the sense that the majority of stocks 
are owned by the government? 

MR. ROMULO. It is owned by the GSIS. So, this is 
what we might call a tertiary corporation. The GSIS is 
owned by the government. Would this be covered be- 
cause the provision says “including government-owned 
or controlled corporations.” 

MR. FOZ. The Philippine Airlines was established as a 
private corporation. Later on, the government, through 
the GSIS, acquired the controlling stocks. Is that not 
the correct situation? 

MR. ROMULO. That is true as Commissioner Ople is 
about to explain. There was apparently a Supreme 
Court decision that destroyed that distinction between 
a government-owned corporation created under the 
Corporation Law and a government-owned corporation 
created by its own charter. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, we recall the Supreme Court decision 
in the case of NH A vs. Juco to the effect that all govern- 
ment corporations irrespective of the manner of 
creation, whether by special charter or by the private 
Corporation Law, are deemed to be covered by the civil 
service because of the wide-embracing definition made 
in this section of the existing 1 973 Constitution. But we 
recall the response to the question of Commissioner 
Ople that our intendment in this provision is just to give 
a general description of the civil service. We are not 
here to make any declaration as to whether ernployees 
of government-owned or controlled corporations are 
barred from the operation of laws, such as the Labor 
Code of the Philippines. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. May I be recognized, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, since my name has been mentioned by both sides. 

MR. ROMULO. I yield part of my time. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. In connection with the coverage of the 
Civil Service Law in Section 1(1), may I volunteer some 
information that may be helpful both to the inter- 
pellator and to the Committee. Following the proclama- 
tion of martial law on September 21, 1972, this issue of 
the coverage of the Labor Code of the Philippines and 
of the Civil Service Law almost immediately arose. I am, 
in particular, referring to the period following the 
coming into force and effect of the Constitution ot 
1973, where the Article on the Civil Service was sup- 
posed to take immediate force and effect. In the case ot 
LUZTEVECO, there was a strike at the time. This was 
a government-controlled and government-owned cor- 


584 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


poration. I think it was owned by the PNOC with just 
the minuscule private shares left. So, the Secretary of 
Justice at that time. Secretary Abad Santos, and myself 
sat down, and the result of that meeting was an opinion 
of the Secretary of Justice — which became binding 
immediately on the government — that government 
corporations with original charters, such as the GSIS, 
were covered by the Civil Service Law and corpora- 
tions spun off from the GSIS, which we called second- 
generation corporations functioning as private sub- 
sidiaries, were covered by the Labor Code. Samples of 
such second-generation corporations were the Philippine 
Airlines, the Manila Hotel and the Hyatt. And that 
demarcation worked very well. In fact, all of these com- 
panies I have mentioned as examples, except for the 
Manila Hotel, had collective bargaining agreements. In 
the Philippine Airlines, there were, in fact, three collec- 
tive bargaining agreements; one, for the ground people 
or the PALIA; one, for the flight attendants or the 
PASAC; and one for the pilots of the ALP AC. How then 
could a corporation like that be covered by the Civil 
Service Law? But, as the Chairman of the Committee 
pointed out, the Supreme Court decision in the case of 
NHA vs. Juco unrobed the whole thing. Accordingly, 
the Philippine Airlines, the Manila Hotel and the Hyatt 
are now considered under that decision covered by the 
Civil Service Law. I also recall that in the emergency 
meeting of the Cabinet convened for this purpose at the 
initiative of the Chairman of the Reorganization Com- 
mission, Armand Fabella, they agreed to allow the CBAs 
to lapse before applying the full force and effect of the 
Supreme Court decision. So, we were in that awkward 
situation when the new government took over. I can 
agree with Commissioner Romulo when he said that this 
is a problem which I am not exactly sure we should 
address in the deliberations on the Civil Service Law or 
whether we should be content with what the Chairman 
said - that Section 1 (1) of the Article on the Civil 
Service is just a general description of the coverage of 
the Civil Service and no more. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


moment Officer, for the 

record ^ satisfied if the Committee puts on 

the nhrase intent by this provision and 

the phrase including government-owned or controlled 

A^I-linS^*°"^ companies as the Philippine 


MR FOZ. Personally, that is my view. As a matter 
of |3Ct, when this draft was made, my proposal was 
really to^ eliminate, to drop from the provision, the 
phrase “including government-owned or controlled 
corporations.” 

MR. ROMULO. Would the Committee indicate that 
that is the intent of this provision? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I do not think 
the Committee can make such a statement in the face 


of an absolute exclusion of government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations. However, this does not preclude 
the Civil Service Law to prescribe different rules and 
procedures, including emoluments for employees of 
proprietary corporations, taking into consideration the 
nature of their operations. So, it is a general coverage 
but it does not preclude a distinction of the rules 
between the two types of enterprises. 

MR. FOZ. In other words, it is something that should 
be left to the legislature to decide. As I said before, this 
is just a general description and we are not making any 
declaration whatsoever. 

MR. MONSOD. Perhaps if Commissioner Romulo 
would like a definitive understanding of the coverage 
and the Gentleman wants to exclude government-owned 
or controlled corporations like Philippine Airlines, then 
the recourse is to offer an amendment as to the cover- 
age, if the Commissioner does not accept the explana- 
tion that there could be a distinction of the rules, 
including salaries and emoluments. 

MR. ROMULO. So as not to delay the proceedings, 

I will reserve my right to submit such an amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. First, a brief parliamentary 
inquiry with respect to page 2, line 19. Did the Com- 
mission agree to delete the word “preferably” there? It 
reads: “appointment, at least 35 years of age, preferably 
with.” I remember there were some discussions about 
the deletion of the word “preferably.” Was that ap- 
proved by the body? 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I answer 
that? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, this was sug- 
gested this morning by Commissioner Nolledo but 
there has been no formal motion to delete the word 
“preferably.” I would like to add that the reason the 
Committee used this word or agreed to use this word in 
the phrase “preferably with proven eapacity for public 
administration” is that the Committee is not totally 
excluding other people with expertise in other fields, 
like lawyers. 

MR. REGALADO. I move that the word “preferably” 
be deleted because even with such a deletion, it will not 
exclude lawyers with proven capacity for public 
administration. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


585 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I seek the recognition of Com- 
missioner Aquino for an amendment on Section 2? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Let us 
first dispose of the amendment proposed by Commis- 
sioner Regalado. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. I have an anterior amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. On page 2, line 5, I suggest the fol- 
lowing amendment after “corporations”: Add a comma 
(,) and the phrase EXCEPT THOSE EXERCISING PRO- 
PRIETARY FUNCTIONS. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. May we have a suspension of the 
session? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 7:16 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 7:21 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). The 
session is resumed. 

Commissioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am amending 
my original proposed amendment to now read as fol- 
lows: “including government-owned or controlled 

corporations WITH ORIGINAL CHARTERS.” The pur- 
pose of this amendment is to indicate that government 
corporations such as the GSIS and SSS, which have 
original charters, fall within the ambit of the civil ser- 
vice. However, corporations which are subsidiaries of 
these chartered agencies such as the Philippine Airlines, 
Manila Hotel and Hyatt are excluded from the coverage 
of the civil service. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 


MR. FOZ. Just one question, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
By the term “original charters,” what exactly do we 
mean? 

MR. ROMULO. We mean that they were created by 
law, by an act of Congress, or by special law. 

MR. FOZ. And not under the general corporation 
law. 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. With that understanding and clarification, 
the Committee accepts the amendment. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer, so those 
created by the general corporation law are out. 

MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
amendment has been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? ( Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I move for the recognition of Commis- 
sioner Aquino for her amendment on Section 2. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I call the attention of the Committee members 
to Section 2 (2) beginning on line 23. The intention on 
line 23 is to provide for staggering appointment such that 
under ordinary circumstances, no President would have 
an occasion to appoint more than one commissioner 
during his term of six years, except for the first one; am 
I correct? 

MR. FOZ. That is right. But another purpose is to 
have a continuing body so that, even if some members 
or one member of the commission retires, there are 
surely at least two left behind. 

MS. AQUINO. So, it is clear that the intent is to 
provide for a self-perpetuating commission that is lik^ 
wise insulated from the influence of the President and 
the Executive. The way the provision was designed 
would seem to presume that the term of the President 
is six years. What if the Commission decides on a our 
year term? In which case, with a four-year term for the 
President, the President will be appointing all of the 


586 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


three commissioners. Would this be flexible to accom- 
modate changes in case we decide on a four-year term 
for the President? 


MR. FOZ. What is the Gentlewoman’s proposal? 

MS. AQUINO. I would propose for an alternative 
provision subject to whatever is the decision of the body 
on the term of the President, if we are to conform with 
the desired objective in the staggering of appointment. 

MR. MONSOD. We have considered that possibility 
and realized that in order to get beyond the possible 
eight years of the President elect, then the term must be 
nine years or longer. On the other hand, we also realize 
that if a President has a fresh mandate from the people 
after four years, the intendment of the people is to 
indirectly give the President the right to appoint the 
officers for positions vacant during the period. However, 
having said that, if the Executive does provide a dif- 
ferent term than what we had assumed, we are open to a 
reconsideration and discussion at the time in order to 
see if we can synchronize these things better. 

MS. AQUINO. Which means in the alternative, it 
might mean a tenure of nine, six and three years, 
respectively. 


MR. MONSOD. May we reserve our discussions when 
the occasion arises, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

In the same paragraph, I would propose an amend- 
ment by addition on page 2, line 31. Between the period 
(.) after the word ‘ predecessor” and the sentence which 
bepns with ‘‘In no case,” insert THE APPOINTEE 

SERVE AN AGGREGATE 
PERIOD OF MORE THAN SEVEN YEARS. I was 
thmking that this may approximate the situation where- 
in a commissioner is first appointed as an ordinary com- 
missioner and later on appointed as chairman. I am will- 
ing to withdraw that amendment if there is representa- 
tion on the part of the Committee that this provision 
contemplates that kind of situation and that there is an 
implicit intention to prohibit a term that in the aggre- 
gate will exceed more than seven years. If that is the 
intention, I am willing to withdraw my amendment. 


a situation wherein a commissioner is upgraded to a 
position of chairman. But if this provision is intended to 
cover that kind of situation, then I am willing to 
withdraw my amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. It is covered. 

MR. FOZ. There is a provision on line 29 precisely to 
cover that situation. It states: “Appointment to any 
vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the 
term of the predecessor.” In other words, if there is up- 
grading of position from commissioner to chairman, the 
appointee can only serve the unexpii'ed portion of the 
term of the predecessor. 

MS. AQUINO. But we have to be very specific about 
it; the provision does not still account for that kind of a 
situation because, in effect, it might even shorten the 
term because he serves only the unexpired portion of 
the vacant position. 

MR. FOZ. He takes it at his own risk. He knows that 
he will only have to serve the unexpired portion of the 
term of the predecessor. 

MS. AQUINO. Regardless of that, my question is: 
Will this provision apply likewise to that kind of a 
situation? In other words, I am only asking for an as- 
surance that the safety valve applies to this situation. 

MR. FOZ. The provision does take care of that 
situation. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for the 
recognition of Commissioner de los Reyes for an amend- 
ment on Section 2. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On line 32, between the words 
“appointed” and “in,” I propose to insert the words OR 
DESIGNATED so that the whole sentence will read: “In 
no case shall any Member be appointed OR DESIG- 
NATED in a temporary or acting capacity.” 


MR. MONSOD. If the Gentleman will read the whole 
Article, she will notice that there is no reappointment of 
any kind and, therefore, as a whole there is no way that 
somebody can serve for more than seven years. The 
purpose of the last sentence is to make sure that this 
does not happen by including in the appointment both 
temporary and acting capacities. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. Reappointment is fine; that is 
accounted for and appointment of a temporary or act- 
ing capacity is also accounted for. But I was thinking of 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. But it changes the meaning of this sen- 
tence. The sentence reads: “In no case shall any Member 
be appointed in a temporary or acting capacity.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, the 
reason for this amendment is that some lawyers make a 
distinction between an appointment and a designation. 
The Gentleman will recall that in the case of Commis- 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


587 


sioner on Audit Tantuico, I think his term exceeded the 
constitutional limit but the Minister of Justice opined 
that it did not because he was only designated during 
the time that he acted as Commissioner on Audit. So, in 
order to erase that distinction between appointment and 
designation, we should specifically place the word so 
that there will be no more ambiguity. “In no case shall 
any Member be appointed OR DESIGNATED in a 
temporary or acting capacity.” 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. There are some amendments on 
Section 3. I request the recognition of Commissioner 
Aquino to propose her amendment on Section 3. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am about to introduce massive revisions on Section 
3 in terms of restructuring and the introduction of new 
concepts. I was wondering if the Commission is inclined 
to continue the session. 

MR. FOZ. We would like to hear the Commissioner’s 
proposal. 

MS. AQUINO. After the word “service” and the 
comma (,), delete the phrase “promulgate and enforce 
policies on” and the subsequent sentences until line 1 of 
page 3 inclusive. In substitution, I would propose the 
following which we have previously discussed to facili- 
tate the discussion: AND ADOPT MEASURES TO 
PROMOTE THE MORALE, EFFICIENCY AND IN- 
TEGRITY IN THE CIVIL SERVICE. IT SHALL 
STRENGTHEN THE MERIT AND REWARD SYSTEM, 
INTEGRATE ALL HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOP- 
MENT PROGRAMS FOR ALL LEVELS AND RANKS, 
INSTITUTIONALIZE A MANAGEMENT CLIMATE 
CONDUCIVE TO PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY, AND 
INCREASE INCENTIVES TO PROMOTE HONESTY, 
RESPONSIVENESS, PROGRESSIVENESS AND 
COURTESY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE. 

This proposal is intended to, first, amplify the new 
concept of which “central personnel agency of the 
government” was adopted in the committee report. 


I am proposing to delete the phrase “promulgate and 
enforce policies on” on line 35 and the subsequent 
phrases on the ground that these are unnecessary repe- 
titions and definitions of the concept of central person- 
nel agency. Instead of that I am proposing the inclusion 
of concepts which would redefine and realign the thrust 
and focus of the Civil Service Commission. 

MR. FOZ. Since the proposed amendment is a little 
bit long — although I have seen it and some of the mem- 
bers of the Committee have read it — perhaps it is best 
for the proponent to write it down and copies be made 
for distribution to all the Members of the Commission. 

MS. AQUINO. I would be more than willing to do 
that. In the meantime, I will just reserve my turn while 
the other proponents are introducing their amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Act- 
ing Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. With the expressed reservation that 
that amendment is to be taken up later, I move for the 
recognition of Commissioner Regalado. 

MR. REGALADO. Anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, while Com- 
missioner Aquino is making out her amendment, I 
would propose an amendment on page 3, line 3 after the 
phrase “and the Congress an annual report on its per- 
sonnel programs.” Delete the comma (,) and the rest of 
the sentence because they were already included in the 
Common Provisions. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I request a deferment of the con- 
sideration of that proposal because it may be embodied 
in the Aquino proposal. 

MR. REGALADO. May I go now to Section 4, unless 
there is an anterior amendment. On line 7, delete the 
phrase “a temporary or acting” and insert ANY such 
that the sentence will read: “Unless otherwise provided 
by law, no elective official shall be eligible for appoint- 
ment or designation in ANY capacity to any public 
office or position during his term.” If we specify 
“temporary or acting,” it may imply that a perrnanei^ 
appointment may be possible. Hence the phrase A 
capacity.” 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 


588 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I seek the recognition of Com- 
missioner Rodrigo for his amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was going to present the same 
amendment but as a consequence of that, I think, Com- 
missioner Regalado should amend Section 6 accordingly. 


I MR. REGALADO. I was thinking there might be an 
I anterior amendment. On Section 6, line 15, substitute 
' ANY for “a temporary or acting” such that the pro- 
vision will read: “No officer of the Armed Forces in the 
active service shall, at any time, be appointed or de- 
signated in ANY capacity to a civilian position in the 
Government.” 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Will the proponent consider an amend- 
ment to his amendment? 


MR. REGALADO. Gladly. 

MR. OPLE. I think this is a good provision. It 
responds to some real problems we are familiar with. 
There must be no leeway for members of the armed 
forces to preempt service opportunities in the civilian 
government from the civil servants in the government. 
However, we are writing a constitution not only for now 
but for the future, and we live in a volatile political era. 
It may be necessary for the President of the Philippines 
on occasion — and I am not speaking of a period of 
emergency formally declared as such but of vicissitudes 
in our national lives - to cause the designation on a 
temporary basis of, let us say, some officers of the 
armed forces with exceptional technical skills to 
positions in the government. 

Therefore, to allow for such contingencies, will the 
proponent and the Committee agree to the addition of a 
clause which states EXCEPT AS MAY BE DIRECTED 
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES? At that 
level, it is supremely difficult to get a designation. But 
the President is also the Commander-in-Chief of the 
armed forces and the point is that he/she will use this 
power only when in his/her view it is necessary for 
public interest. What we want to prevent are, let us say, 
political interventions such as Ministers and Deputy 
Ministers asking the Minister of National Defense to 
detail certain officers to the Bureau of Customs, to the 
Philippine Coconut Authority or to the Ministry of 


Public Works and Highways. But should the President 
require the temporary presence of certain officers with 
exceptional technical skills in government service, I do 
not think that that should be prescribed in advance by 
this Constitution. That is why I have proposed that 
amendment to the amendment of Commissioner 
Regalado. 

MR. REGALADO. Before I comment on that pro- 
posed amendment to the amendment, could Commis- 
sioner Ople give us by way of illustration the technical 
requirements which can be filled only by military offi- 
cers and not by civilians otherwise equally prepared? 

MR. OPLE. Let me begin with a foreign example, and 
then I will cull from local examples. 

In the United States, it is very rare that an officer gets 
extension beyond his retirement. But once in 50 years, 
the President of the United States finds it necessary to 
extend such an officer because of strategic requirements 
of that country, such as Admiral Rickover whose knowl- 
edge and skills in submarine technology were considered 
so indispensable that they made an exception of him. I 
am not saying that this situation will repeat itself in the 
Philippines, but let us say that there are in the Armed 
Forces of the Philippines brilliant engineers who may 
be required in an emergency and because of the rela- 
tionship between the civilian and the military, it may be 
necessary to designate them temporarily in the Ministry 
of Public Works in order to complete a strategic 
construction necessary to national security. 

Will we prevent the President from designating such 
officers for that purpose? 

MR. REGALADO. Under such an extreme situation, 
which the Gentleman himself agrees is a very rare and 
isolated contingency, would it not be within the power 
of the President to assign these military officers with 
such indispensable capabilities to work under the 
command of a civilian authority? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. By making them head in the 
office by themselves. 

MR. OPLE. Without the need of a designation. 

MR. REGALADO. They can be assigned there under 
a civilian authority and the military could always be 
called upon to assist without being designated to that 
civilian office or position. ' 

MR. OPLE. Yes, for me this is a bearable loss of 
presidential prerogatives, especially since I represent 
an opposition to the incumbent President, at least out- 
side the Constitutional Commission. But I do care about 
the future. I said that we live in a volatile era, and if the 
Committee, however, is insistent on denying this fiexi- 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


589 


bility to the President and future presidents, I will not 
press my amendment. 

MR. FOZ. The Committee has accepted the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Regalado. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). How 
about the proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople? 

MR. FOZ. He has withdrawn it. 

MR. REGALADO. His amendment was withdrawn, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). So the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Regalado on 
Sections 4 and 6 is accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DA VIDE. There is a proposed amendment on 
Sections 6 and 7 by Commissioner Aquino. I pray for 
her recognition. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. I 
would like to introduce an amendment on Section 7, 
line 19, page 3. 

MR. FOZ. Before the Commissioner proceeds, if I 
may be allowed, I remember that this Section 7 is 
already included in the General Provisions approved by 
the Committee on General Provisions, so I would see no 
need to have this amended. 

MS. AQUINO. Unless the Gentleman’s idea is just 
to transfer this to the General Provisions because the 
way the General Provisions was approved in that Com- 
mittee, there is a substantial difference. 

MR. FOZ. We would like to request the Chairman of 
the Committee on General Provisions to enlighten us 
on this matter. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, for the 
information of the body, it is indeed true as stated by 
Commissioner Foz that there is a parallel provision of 
Section 7 in the General Provisions with slight dif- 
ference. I would like to read the exact configuration of 
this provision as the Committee on General Provisions 
has approved it. It reads: 

No elective or appointive public officer or employee 

shall receive additional, double or indirect compensation, 

except pensions or gratuities, unless specifically authorized 


by law, nor accept, without the consent of the National 

Assembly, any present, emolument, office or title of any 

kind from any foreign state. 

The only correction or amendment was by Commis- 
sioner Aquino, the deletion of the phrase “unless speci- 
fically authorized by law.” Considering the statement of 
Commissioner Foz that we might have to transfer this 
provision to the General Provisions, our job then as far as 
this Committee is concerned will be much simpler. We 
do not have to talk about it as of this moment. 

MR. FOZ. We would like to defer to the Committee 
on General Provisions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. All right. In that case, I under- 
stand that there was already a Section 8 by Commis- 
sioner Ople. That Section 8 would probably become 
Section 7 now. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. If there are no other amendments, we 
can go back to Section 3 on the Aquino amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Anterior amendment. I 
missed this Section 6. A clarificatory question to the 
Committee. 

On Section 6, line 13, it is stated: “No officer of the 
Armed Forces. . .” 

Is there any reason why we did not include member 
or personnel? Would the Gentleman accept an amend- 
ment like “no personnel or no member of the Armed 
Forces”? 

MR. FOZ. What is the difference? What is the 
amendment the Commissioner is proposing? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Change “officer” to MEM- 
BER such that it will read: “No MEMBER of the 
Armed Forces in the active service.” 

MR. FOZ. What is the difference? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Some are not officers; they 
may be sergeants or noncommissioned officers or 
enlisted men. 

MR. FOZ. We would be amenable to such an amend- 
ment. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. What is the amendment? Will the Commis- 
sioner state the amendment? 


590 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will the 
Commissioner please restate her amendment? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. “No MEMBER of the Armed 
Forces in the active service.” 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


MR. DA VIDE. Yes, because as worded now, for as 
long as one has some proven capacity for public admin- 
istration, he can be a commissioner. He does not have 
to be a college graduate. So, we have to upgrade the 
qualification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Rigos is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. We are awaiting the proposed amend- 
ment to Section 3. In the meantime, this Representation 
would propose some perfecting amendments. 


REV. RIGOS. That is right. One does not have to 
be a college graduate as long as he has the capacity for 
public administration. That is the intendment of the 
Committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be a very specific ex- 
pertise in public administration. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Gen- 
tleman may proceed. 


MR. DAVIDE. We will avail of the time. 

On page 2, line 9, Section 1 (3), substitute the word 
“member” with OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE to be 
consistent with paragraph 4 of the same section. So, 
the provision will read; “No OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE 
of the Civil Service shall be removed. . .” 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 


thP Section 2 (1), substitute 

between “who” and “natural-born” 
with the words SHALL BE for symmetry with the 
other provisions. 


MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias) Is the 

amendment”"' 
amendment is approved. 

wi“ THIRY-nvE°" “3: 


REV. RIGOS. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. Whereas if one is a college degree 
holder, his orientation is much broader, and then he 
still has the qualification of having expertise in public 
administration. 

REV. RIGOS. Probably, in the majority of cases that 
will be true, but not always. There must be some ins- 
tances in which a person does not possess a college 
diploma, yet with some proven capacity for public 
administration. 

MR. DAVIDE. My main objective here is to at least 
put on the same category the qualifications of members 
of the commission because the public may not have 
due regard for a commission with a high school graduate 
commissioner, although he may have some special 
training in public administration. We already have so 
many college degree holders, and it would be an insult 
to the dignity of the commission if he is not a college 
degree holder. 

REV. RIGOS. The appointing power probably will 
consider that. And if the choice is between one who has 
a college degree and one who does not have the degree 
but with a capacity for public administration, probably 
he or she will prefer the one without a college degree. 


MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas) Is th 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the p 
posed amendment is approved. 


MR. DAVIDE. On the same line, after the comma ( ) 
following the word “age,” insert the following words- 
HOLDERS OF A COLLEGE DEGREE 


MR. DAVIDE. But it would be best if we require him 
to be with proven capacity in public administration; at 
least he must also be a college degree holder. 

I ask for a vote. I would only like to emphasize in 
the voting that, in effect, we might be degrading the 
sanctity of a constitutional commission. 

VOTING 


MR. FOZ. In other words, the Gentleman is reverting 
to the . . . 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Those in 
favor of the amendment, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


591 


Those against the amendment, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 12 votes in favor and 14 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. DAVIDE. I propose another perfecting amend- 
ment on line 29, Section 2 (2). It consists in the dele- 
tion of the comma (,) after “years” and the words “with- 
out reappointment.” 

MR. FOZ. In other words, the Gentleman is going 
to allow reappointment in this case. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because on line 25 there is already 
the phrase “without reappointment.” 

MR. FOZ. Yes, but in the past, that was a source of 
controversy. That was one of the points raised in one 
of the controversies in the Supreme Court. 

MR. DAVIDE. There would be no area of contro- 
versy because it is very clear: 

The Chairman and the Commissioners shall be appointed 

by the President for a term of seven years without re- 
appointment. 

So, it would even apply to the first set of three 
commissioners. 

MR. FOZ. But there is the argument made in the 
concurring opinion of Justice Angelo Bautista in the 
case of Vizcarra vs. Miraflor, to the effect that the 
prohibition on reappointment applies only when the 
term or the tenure is for seven years. But in cases 
where the appointee serves only for less than seven 
years, he would be entitled to reappointment. Unless 
we put the qualifying words “without reappoint- 
ment” in the case of those appointed, then it is possi- 
ble that an interpretation could be made later on that 
in their case, they can still be reappointed to serve for 
a total of seven years. 

Precisely, we are foreclosing that possibility by 
making it very clear that even in the case of those 
first appointed under this Constitution, no reappoint- 
ment can be had. 

MR. DAVIDE. Can it not be done by a mere inter- 
pretation because it would really appear to be repeti- 
tious? The wording itself on the first set of commis- 
sioners would clearly indicate that their term is really 
for seven years, but their tenure is staggered. So, we 
have to distinguish between term and tenure because 
the general term is really seven years. But of the first 
three to be appointed, the tenure of one is seven; the 
tenure of the second is five; and the tenure of the third 
is three. But technically, the term for which they are 
appointed is seven years. 


MR. FOZ. The Committee regrets to say that we 
cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I submit it to a vote, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Those in 
favor of the amendment, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 2 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 4, page 3, line 8, 1 propose 
for the substitution of the word “term” with TENURE. 

MR. FOZ. The effect of the proposed amendment is 
to make possible for one to resign from his position. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, we should allow that prerogative. 

MR. FOZ. Resign from his position to accept an 
executive position. 

MR. DAVIDE. Besides, it may turn out in a given 
case that because of, say, incapacity, he may leave the 
service, but if he is prohibited from being appointed 
within the term for which he was elected, we may be 
depriving the government of the needed expertise of 
an individual. 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none, the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am not proposing an amend- 
ment to Section 4, but in order that there will be no 
two similar provisions in the Constitution, I just want 
to put on notice that the Committee on General Provi- 
sions has an equivalent provision, which has already 
been approved and which reads: 

No elective or appointive public officer or employee 

should hold any office or employment in the government 

or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof, 

including government-owned or controlled corporations. 

Thank you. 


592 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, on line 16, 
Section 6, after “Government,” insert a comma (,) and 
the following: INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED 
OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS. 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DA VIDE. If the copies of the proposed amend- 
ment to Section 3 by Honorable Aquino have already 
been distributed, I pray for the recognition of Com- 
missioner Aquino to introduce the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 


personal agency of the government.” I believe that the 
lines we have mentioned are but redundant articulation 
of that same concept, unnecessary surplusage. 

MR. FOZ. For instance, will the power or function 
to promulgate policies on personnel actions be encom- 
passed by the Commissioner’s amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. It is not an amendment because I am 
retaining lines 33 to 35. I proposed an amendment after 
the words “career service.” I am only doing away with 
unnecessary redundancy. 

MR. FOZ. Can we say that all of the powers enume- 
rated in the original provision are still being granted 
by the Civil Service Commission despite the elimination 
of the listing of these powers and functions? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What is 
the inquiry of Commissioner de los Reyes? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. With the acceptance of the 
Davide amendment which includes government-owned 
or controlled corporations, is the provision again limited 
only to those corporations with original charter? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because that was the amendment 
to Section 1 by Commissioner Romulo. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is th 
Gentleman satisfied? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Comm 
sioner Aqumo may proceed. 

3 i^ a proposed amendment to Sectic 

240 fLTh"®?’ amended version of Resolution N 
^4U filed by Commissioner Davide. 

nrnnnspH^^ ^ Would like to ask some questions on tl 
proposed amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
Gentleman may proceed. 


(Mr. Trenas). The 


MR. FOZ. Will the amendment 
and functions of the Civil Service, 
original draft? 


reduce the powers 
as embodied in our 


proposed dele- 
tion of lines 35 to 40 of page 2 until line 1 of page 3 

would not m any way minimize the powers of the Civil 
Service because they are deemed implicitly included in 
the all-embracing definition and concept of “central 


MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, in the 
nature of a central personnel agency, it would have to 
necessarily execute all of these functions. 

MR. FOZ. And will the elimination of all these 
specific functions be a source of ambiguity and contro- 
versies later on as to the extent of the powers and 
functions of the commission? 

MS. AQUINO. I submit that this would not be sus- 
ceptible of ambiguity because the concept of a central 
personnel agency is a generally accepted concept and as 
experience would bear out, this function is actually 
being carried out already by the Civil Service Commis- 
sion, except that we are integrating this concept. I do 
not think it would be susceptible of any ambiguity. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. This is more for clarification. 

The original Section 3 states, among others, the 
functions of the Civil Service Commission — to pro- 
mulgate and enforce policies on personnel actions. Will 
Commissioner Aquino kindly indicate to us the corres- 
ponding provisions and her proposed amendment which 
would encompass the powers to promulgate and enforce 
policies on personnel actions? 

MS. AQUINO. It is my submission that the same 
functions are already subsumed under the concept of 
a central personnel agency. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, all those functions 
enumerated from line 35 on page 2 to line 1 of page 3, 
inclusive, are understood to be encompassed in the 
phrase “central personnel agency of the government.” 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


593 


MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, except that 
on line 40 of page 2 and line 1 of the subsequent page, 
it was only subjected to a little modification. 

MR. REGALADO. May we, therefore, make it of 
record that the phrase “ . . . promulgate and enforce 
policies on personnel actions, classify positions, pres- 
cribe conditions of employment except as to com- 
pensation and other monetary benefits which shall be 
provided by law” is understood to be subsumed under 
and included in the concept of a central personnel 
agency. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. When the functions were read by 
Commissioner Regalado, is it understood that the 
classification of positions would be subject to existing 
regulations or laws as to the right of the Office of 
Budget and Management? The amendment now would 
have eliminated the whole section. I wanted to clarify 
that because that could be a problem, if we say that 
classification of positions is purely the function of the 
Civil Service Commission. 


MS. AQUINO. I would have no objection to that. AQUINO. I have no objection to that. 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. This is just for clarification. 

The Commissioner’s amendment includes the phrase 
“IT SHALL STRENGTHEN THE MERIT AND RE- 
WARD SYSTEM.” Does the Gentlewoman not contem- 
plate that the merit and reward system under this pro- 
posals is weakend by the accepted amendment of Com- 
missioner Quesada? 

MS. AQUINO. I do not believe so; it is not weakened. 

MR. BENGZON. Stated otherwise, the entire Article 
on the Civil Service Commission by the adoption of 
this proposal is anchored on the merit and reward sys- 
tem. Is that correct? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. Continuing further, “INTEGRATE 
ALL HUMAN RESOURCES,” is it a typographical error 
that no comma (,) was placed after “RESOURCES”? 

MS. AQUINO. No, it is human resources development 
program, as one integral concept. 

MR. BENGZON. A human resources development 
program, that is just one concept? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, it is a concept. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just have another clarification, 
Commissioner Aquino. 


MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one 
more clarification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Yes, Com- 
missioner Regalado may proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. May I know from Commissioner 
Aquino whether the deletions in Section 3 will be from 
line 35 and all the way to line 40 including line 1 of 
page 3? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. But I 
would explain the deletion of line 40 and line 1 of page 
3. These lines were just subjected to some modifications 
in terms of literary semantics. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, line 35 to line 1 
of page 3 inclusive were substituted by this amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. Therefore, going back to my 
original proposal, the words “and perform such 
functions as may be provided by law” should be delete 
because they have already been transferred to the Com- 
mon Provisions on page 1 . The provision will then rea 
“It shall submit to the President and the Congress an 
annual report on its personnel programs. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say? 


MR. FOZ. I would like to offer an amendment to the 
roposal of Commissioner Aquino. 

The amendment is to put a comma (,) after the 
ord “RANKS” and insert the word AND. After 
ACCOUNTABILITY,” put a period (.) and delete 
le rest of the sentence because the clause 
^CREASE INCENTIVES TO PROMOTE HONEST^ 
ESPONSIVENESS, PROGRESSIVENESS AND 
OURTESY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE is a redundan- 
/ when compared with the first sentence which alr^^ y 
ates the goals of the measures to be adopted, which 


594 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


are to promote the morale, efficiency and integrity in 
the civil service. On the clause “INCREASE INCEN- 
TIVES,” this is already covered by the merit and reward 
system. 

MS. AQUINO. On that proposed amendment, I 
would be willing to delete the portion indicated by 
Commissioner Foz but, together with Commissioners 
Bennagen and Davide, we propose to transpose the con- 
cepts responsiveness, progressiveness and courtesy on 
line 3. 

MR. FOZ. I agree, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). For clarifi- 
cation, will the Commissioner please read the proposed 
amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. The first line would read: “THE 
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION AS THE CENTRAL 
PERSONNEL AGENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT, 
SHALL ESTABLISH A CAREER SERVICE AND 
ADOPT MEASURES TO PROMOTE THE MORALE, 
EFFICIENCY, INTEGRITY, RESPONSIVENESS, 
PROGRESSIVENESS, AND COURTESY IN THE 
CIVIL SERVICE.” 

In other words, we will just transpose the concepts 
which are being deleted. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Commissioner Aquino say? 

MS. AQUINO. If we admit that amendment to the 
amendment, it would do away with the concept of 
public accountability which I think is very vital. The 
idea behind the amendment is to define the new thrust 
of the Civil Service Commission, a case of learning from 
our experience of the past. 

MR. PADILLA. Precisely, I am stressing that. The 
provision should simply state: “MERIT AND RE- 
WARD SYSTEM CONDUCIVE TO PUBLIC AC- 
COUNTABILITY.” 

MS. AQUINO. I am sorry; I thought the Commis- 
sioner wanted to delete that, too. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would oppose the 
deletion of the clause “INTEGRATE ALL HUMAN 
RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS FOR 
ALL LEVELS AND RANKS” because this is an integral 
function of the Civil Service Commission and this 
should emphasize the role of the Commission in this 
respect. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Commissioner Aquino say on the proposed amend- 
ment? 


MR. FOZ. How does the second sentence read now? 

MS. AQUINO. The second sentence reads- “IT 
SHALL STRENGTHEN THE MERIT AND REWARD 

human resources 

programs for ALL LEVELS 
institutionalize A MAN- 

Sotab'Iuty™ to public 


MS. AQUINO. I would conform with the position of 
Commissioner Foz. In other words, I do not accept the 
proposed deletion by Commissioner Padilla. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What is 
the stand of the Committee? 

MR. FOZ. I think the proposal has been withdrawn, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias) What do So, I understand the Committee has 

the Committee say? already accepted the amendment. 


MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Vice 

Still in connprp recognized. Is thi: 

still m connection with this proposed amendment? 


MR. FOZ. With all the clarifications, inclusions and 
intentions of the proposal or amendment including the 
enumeration of the functions and powers in the draft, 
the Committee accepts the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Aquino. 


MR. PADILLA. Yes. May we not just sav “ 
SHALL STRENGTHEN THE MERIT AND reWf 
SYSTEM CONDUCIVE TO PUBLIC ACCOUNTABI 
ITY.” Let us make the provision simple and clear It st 
says here: “INTEGRATE ALL HUMAN RESOURCI 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS FOR ALL LEVEI 
AND RANKS, INSTITUTIONALIZE A MANAG 
MENT CLIMATE.” Could this not be eliminated ai 
simply state: MERIT AND REWARD SYSTEM COl 
DUCIVE TO PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Yes, Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will Commissioner Aquino 
clarify the phrase “INTEGRATE HUMAN RESOURCES 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS FOR ALL LEVELS 
AND RANKS?” Human resources development pro- 
grams would mean, of course, professional or training 
programs. Are these also within the civil service? 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


595 


MS. AQUINO. The point is this: The Civil Service 
Commission is authorized by law to initiate develop- 
ment programs. The concept of integration is that it 
will have to go beyond the programs that the Commis- 
sion has initiated in coordination with the other 
programs pertinent to their function. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. That is exactly my question 
because the Commission has its own Civil Service 
Academy but coordinates with other human resource 
development programs. So, I propose to change the 
word “INTEGRATE” with COORDINATE. 


AND ADOPT MEASURES TO PROMOTE THE 
MORALE, EFFICIENCY, INTEGRITY, RESPONSIVE- 
NESS, PROGRESSIVENESS, AND COURTESY IN 
THE CIVIL SERVICE. IT SHALL STRENGTHEN THE 
MERIT AND REWARD SYSTEM, INTEGRATE ALL 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS 
FOR ALL LEVELS AND RANKS, AND INSTITU- 
TIONALIZE A MANAGEMENT CLIMATE CON- 
DUCIVE TO PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Does the 
Committee accept the amendment? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
Commissioner Aquino say? 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, it is not just a 
matter of words. 


MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 


MR. FOZ. Since the Committee has always accepted 
the amendment, it is for the Committee now to re- 
spond. 

MS. AQUINO. Coordination and integration are 
different concepts. 

MR. FOZ. We would insist on the word “INTE- 
GRATE” because “coordinate” is a weaker word. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Shall we 
vote on the amendment? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. No, I withdraw the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What is 
the pleasure of the Vice-President? 

MR. PADILLA. I was trying to simplify, but the 
Chairman of the Committee objects to simplification 
and insists on the phrase “INTEGRATE ALL HUMAN 
RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS FOR 
ALL LEVELS AND RANKS, AND INSTITUTIONAL- 
IZE A MANAGEMENT CLIMATE.” To me, these are all 
good words but very hard to understand or implement. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The Chair 
believes this matter has been sufficiently discussed. 

MR. REGALADO. May we ask Commissioner 
Aquino to please read the whole thing before we vote. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will 
Commissioner Aquino read the proposed amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. The section, as amended, would now 
read: “THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION AS THE 
CENTRAL PERSONNEL AGENCY OF THE GOVERN- 
MENT, SHALL ESTABLISH A CAREER SERVICE 


MR. DAVIDE. There is one final proposed amend- 
ment. I seek the recognition of Commissioner de los 
Reyes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Before I propose my amend- 
ment, I would like to ask the Committee why it did not 
include among its proposals Section 6, Article XII of the 
1 973 Constitution which reads: 

The Batasang Pambansa shall provide for the standardi- 
zation of compensation of government officials and em- 
ployees, including those in government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations, taking into account the nature of 
the responsibilities pertaining to, and the qualifications 
required for, the positions concerned. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trefias). Will the 
;!ommittee answer the query? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Because if there is no reason 
or the deletion or for the noninclusion of that section 
vhich used to be part of the 1973 Constitution, I would 
ike to propose that the same be included to read as 
bllows: THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OR JHE LEGIS- 
ATURE SHALL PROVIDE FOR THE STANDARDI- 
SATION OF COMPENSATION OF GOVERNMENT 
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING THOSE 
N GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED COR- 
>ORATIONS TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE 
MATURE OF THE RESPONSIBILITIES PERTAINING 
rO, AND THE QUALIFICATIONS REQUIRED FOR, 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). What does 
the Committee say on the proposed amendment? 

MR. FOZ. This is somewhat of a surplusage. I am 
sorry to make that description. But Congress or tie 


596 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


Legislature is really expected to make such an under- 
taking. But, of course, we can always say that this is a 
mandate for the Legislature to do. But Congress should 
not wait for a provision like that in the Constitution to 
do its job. 


this is the proper place to put it. It states: NO SALARY 
OR ANY FORM OF EMOLUMENT OF ANY PUBLIC 
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE, INCLUDING CONSTITU- 
TIONAL OFFICERS, SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM 
PAYMENT OF INCOME TAX. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I asked that question because 
in the same manner we accepted an amendment by 
Commissioner Quesada that Congress should give pro- 
tection to temporary employees, the Congress is also 
duty bound to give protection to all kinds of employees; 
nonetheless, we placed that provision. And I see if that 
provision is placed in the Constitution, I think there is 
no reason to place the same provision for the purpose 
of standardizing compensation of government officials 
and employees. 

MR. FOZ. With the explanation and good intention 
of the Gentleman, the Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I understand 
Commissioner Lerum objects to that amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). The ruling 
has been reconsidered. 

MR. LERUM. With the permission of the Chair, I am 
objecting to that amendment because that has been used 
tor depriving government workers of their right to or- 
ganize and to ask for concessions. I object to that 
amendment. 


^ we have ac 

amendment that government em 
ployees-workers have the right to organize 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request 
Commissioner de los Reyes to defer consideration of 
that amendment because I understand there is a report 
of another committee, I believe it is the Committee on 
General Provisions. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The request is granted, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. There are no more registered propo- 
nents for any amendment. May I request from the 
Committee, if it would now want a voting on Second 
Reading on the Article on Common Provisions and on 
the Article on the Civil Service Commission; or shall we 
defer the voting on Second Reading after we shall have 
discussed the other constitutional commissions? 

The Committee would want a vote on Second Read- 
ing on the Article on Common Provisions and on the 
Article on the Civil Service Commission. 

I believe the body is now ready to vote. Before we 
vote on this, I move to close the period of individual 
amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 468 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions) 

MR. DAVIDE. I move for a vote on the Article on 
the Constitutional Commissions relating to Common 
Provisions and the Civil Service Commission. 


OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Will Com- 
missioner Lerum insist on his objection? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any object.on? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Commissioner de los Reyes still has 
another last amendment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). We will 
now proceed to a vote on Proposed Resolution No. 468. 

Those in favor of Proposed Resolution No. 468, 
as amended, please raise their hand. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against the resolution, please raise their hand. 
(No Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and none against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 468, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Second Reading. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, this will follow the Ople 
amendment. In the provision on constitutional com- 
missions, I propose to reproduce Section 6, Article XV 
on General Provisions of the 1973 Constitution. I think 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for the 
recognition of the Chairman of the Steering Committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 


TUESDAY, JULY 15, 1986 


597 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 523 

(Expressing the Sincere Condolence of the Con-Corn 
on the Death of Ret. Fiscal Juan A. Sarmiento) 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are all 
aware that the father of Commissioner Renato V. Sar- 
miento passed away last night after a sudden heart 
attack. We have Proposed Resolution No. 523 intro- 
duced by Honorable Minda Luz M. Quesada, which 
expresses the sincere condolence of the Constitutional 
Commission of 1986 on the death of the father of the 
Honorable Sarmiento. 

I move that we consider Proposed Resolution No. 523. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 523 is now 
in order. The Chairman of the Steering Committee will 
please proceed to read the title and text of the resolu- 
tion. 

MR. BENGZON. Proposed Resolution No. 523, 
entitled; 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE SINCERE CON- 
DOLENCE OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SION OF 1986 ON THE DEATH OF THE FATHER 
OF THE HONORABLE RENE V. SARMIENTO. 

WHERE.AS, retired Fiscal Juan A. Sarmiento, Sr., father of the 
Honorable Rene V. Sarmiento, Member of the Constitutional 
Commission of 1986, died on July 14, 1986: Now, therefore, be 
it 

Resolved by the Constitutional Commission of 1986, To 
express, as it hereby expresses, deep sorrow and sympathy, over 
the passing of retired Fiscal Juan A. Sarmiento, Sr., father of the 
Honorable Rene V. Sarmiento, Member of the Constitutional 
Commission of 1986. 


Resolved, further. To furnish and transmit to the bereaved 
family of the deceased, a copy of the Resolution upon its adop- 
tion. 

ADOPTION OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 523 

(Expressing the Sincere Condolence of the Con-Com 
on the Death of Ret. Fiscal Juan A. Sarmiento) 

MR. BENGZON. I move that Proposed Resolution 
No. 523 be adopted in toto. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas); Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chau hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 523 is adopted in toto. 

MR. BENGZON. The body is lying in state at the 
Arlington Funeral Homes on Araneta Avenue, and I 
think the funeral is on Friday. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move to close 
the period of sponsorship and debate on the Commis- 
sion on Audit. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move to 
adjourn until nine-thirty tomorrow morning to consider 
the amendments on the Commission on Audit. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Trenas). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning. 

It was 8:34 p. m 




t ,i.( , v 

»*' '"'V • • 111 (til 1. 


• ;,t M ^ .1, ,. 

*vlO •?«!"' »'j (W«.. . . > 

‘j„*. j . » 1., . w • i , . t- 


•• ijtf <•♦ * / » t I i f t 

“»nf ■»f«ir. .n«rt • , I • 



•-i ! 

. r 

0 

, , .it . • 

,4i 


fj 

1 > 

.V • H 

’ 1. 

M* 


,v 

:r. If IK ^ 





, ■ 1 I h . i *,' . ■> 


t 

. i l4 I 


' i*l f V 

* ^ f#i ,*/ » . 


t i*Ai 

1 


i ■* i .i'n.*. 

U 



C-Uj :.Ut 

in !#»," ,r\,. 

f, 

' . J ^ 

, 1 1 1 




'i» 


»f*‘ •- . 

. t 



4 V 

»i ■ I* * • 

‘***4|V . 4 

l:p. 

' » 4ht t 


,j 

1 f* «• 


^ . *1# 

• 1 i 

• j 

' * t • *i~ 

•vT 

{4 » ♦ 



^ tV„*. 


fir • ' , 


i •’ " 

A.1^1 .. 



n, 1 

K * • , ' 
1 


■ ^C^}I 


If) ijj 

?w 


a ^14 

.'li , ■ ^Oi( 

H . all 
•! il 


ilH' 1' 
* » ' u 




"IrJ 


'» Ilf*' ,0 

** 


vIj.I 

I'-.I-.lt 


TCjHii 


• iU 








■ ■ 


I /I t/tt . 


r. 

«. 


-1 

IV 




■1“rS 

1 




4t’4 


' 'r 

• i 

fc* h . 




WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


599 


R.C.C. NO. 31 
Wednesday, July 16, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:33 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Napoleon G. Rama. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. RAMA. Almighty God, there are those who call 
into question the value of a new constitution as an 
instrument to change a system and reform society. 
There are those who scoff at what they believe the 
exaggerated importance attached to the appointive 
Constitutional Commission as a solver of the national 
problems. 

So horrible and entrenched are the evUs in our system 
and society that it ought to be obvious that it takes 
more than words and pious incantation of principles on 
a piece of paper, however elegantly strung together, to 
exorcise them. 

Have we not perhaps, through our public hearings 
and press releases, set so lofty a goal, and thus set up the 
people for so crushing a letdown? Are we making a 
constitution and building an illusion? 

I was beginning. Lord, to have doubts myself about 
the soundness of the formula of constitution-making as 
an instrument of national reform and redemption. But I 
remember that You, too, had a formula for reforming 
man and saving mankind. 

I recall. Lord, that when You decided to re-create 
man in Your image and recover for him his lost Eden, 
You sent Your only Son to this world. And the first 
thing He did was to revise the old laws of Moses and to 
introduce new doctrines. He wrote a new constitution, 
now known as the New Testament. 


The New Testament, Your new Constitution bearing 
Your Son’s words and ideas, transfigured, ennobled and 
saved man. Constitution-making was also Your pro- 
cedure for bringing reform and salvation to mankind. 

We ask You now. Lord, let this new Constitution that 
we are now writing in this hall be the New Testament 
for the Filipino. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bennagen ^ . 

. Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bemas 

. Present 

Rama ....'.. 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present* 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present* 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present* 

Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Trenas 

, . Present 

Laurel 

. Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Lerum 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 
. Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 


The Secretariat is in receipt of official advice of 
absence of Commissioner Tingson. 

Commissioner Villegas is on ofticial mission. 


The President is present. 

The roll call shows 36 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


Appeared after the roll call 


600 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Assistant Floor Leader? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 


Proposed Resolution No. 525, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE RIGHT OF ALL CITI- 
ZENS TO DECENT SHELTER. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Just a minor correction on 
page 49 wherein it is stated: “Mr. de los Reyes noted 
that the normal practice.” I did not say “normal” but I 
said “usual” because it is an abnormal practice to break 
the continuity of service, but it is the usual practice. My 
correction is to change “normal” to USUAL. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; let the proper correction be 
made. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move for the 
approval of the Journal of the previous session, as 
corrected. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion of the Assistant Floor Leader to dispense with 
e reading of the Journal of the previous session and 
to approve the same? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the motion is approved. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President I 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


move that we 


Proposed Resolution No. 526, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE FOR THE SYNCHRONIZATION 
OF NATIONAL ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Proposed Resolution No. 527, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE PROVIDING FOR NATIONAL/ 
LOCAL ELECTIONS IN 1987. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 528, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO RESTRICT INSTANCES 
WHEN THE STATE MAY ENGAGE IN BUSINESS EN- 
DEAVORS. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Is there any objection? (Silence) 
1 ne Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolutions on First Reading, Communications and 
Committee Report, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS ON FIRST READING 
Propo.sed Resolution No. 524, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE RIGHTS AND ROLE 
OF PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


Proposed Resolution No. 529, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE RATIFICATION OF 
THE DRAFT CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Philippine Chamber of Health signed by 
Dr. Eduardo R. de la Cruz, proposing provisions on 
health in the preamble, declaration of principles and 
state policies, bill of rights, and general provisions. 

(Communication No. 204 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Deputy Minister Carmelo C. Noriel, Minis- 
try of Labor and Employment, submitting the position 
paper of the ministry on the subjects of profit-sharing, 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


601 


workers’ participation in decision-making and com- 
pulsory arbitration. 

(Communication No. 205 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Ahmad 
Domocao Alonto, transmitting Special Resolution 
No. 6-27, series of 1986, of Daaron Nadwatol Islamia, 
petitioning the Commission to include the rights of the 
Muslims of Southern Philippines for an autonomous 
government. 

(Communication No. 206 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Communication from Mr. Willie B. Dazo of 14 Don 
Matias Street, Don Antonio Heights, Quezon City, 
proposing the inclusion of a provision on the right to 
bear arms. 

(Communication No. 207 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Campaign for a Sovereign Philippines signed 
by Ms. Ma. Socorro I. Diokno, Ms. Loretta Ann P. 
Rosales, Messrs. Butch Abad and Efren C. Moncupa, and 
Rev. Elmo Gideon Manapat, calling for a ban from 
Philippine soil of all military bases and nuclear weapons 
and power plants. 

(Communication No. 208 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Jose Mari C. Gonzales, Officer-in- 
Charge, Bureau of Broadcasts, Ministry of Information, 
proposing the inclusion of a provision on the right to 
bear arms. 

(Communication No. 209 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Ms. Delia Rarela-Barcelona for the Asso- 
ciation for Non-Traditional Education, recommending 
the consideration of the need for alternative learning 
systems, along the lines of non-traditional education. 

(Communication No. 210 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from TransProResources Corporation signed by 
Rene S. Santiago, proposing a general provision for a 
balanced budget. 


(Communication No. 211 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from General Fidel V. Ramos, Chief of Staff, 
Armed Forces of the Philippines, submitting the NAFP 
position on the Constitution. 

(Communication No. 212 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Ms. Lily A. Rubio of the Ministry of In- 
formation, NCR, endorsing a proposal of Mr. Federico 
R. Co of Anahaw Street, Project 7, Quezon City, for 
the grant of old age pension to 70 years old and above 
citizens. 

(Communication No. 213 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry signed by Mr. Aurelio Periquet, Jr., submitting 
proposals on private enterprise. 

(Communication No. 214 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 29 submitted by the Committee 
on Human Resources. 

Re: EDUCATION 

Proposed Resolution Nos. 77, 102, 104, 451 (Davide), 
114, 276, 303, 471 (Quesada), 106, 130, 416, 441 
(Guingona), 134, 162, 163, 206, 166, 387 (Rosario 
Braid), 168 (Sarmiento), 220, 335 (Villacorta), 252 
(Tingson), 278 (Nolledo), 289 (Bacani), 311 (Gascon), 
417, 418 (Tan), 327 (Suarez) 

ARTS AND CULTURE 

Proposed Resolution Nos. 71 (Brocka), 299 (Tingson) 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 

Proposed Resolution Nos. 177 (Rosario Braid), 222 
(Quesada) 

NATIONAL LANGUAGE 
Proposed Resolution No. 286 (Uka) 

CULTURAL COMMUNITIES 

Proposed Resolution Nos. 298, 300, 301 (Tingson), 
346, 465 (Bennagen). 

Sponsored by Hon. Villacorta, Uka. Guingona, Quesada, 
Rigos, Brocka, Bennagen, Tan, Rosario Braid, Gascon 
and Trefias. 

To the Steering Committee. 


602 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 469 
(Article on the Commission on Audit) 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion on Second Reading of Committee Report No. 20 
on Proposed Resolution No. 469 as referred by the 
Committee on Constitutional Commission and Agencies, 
entitled; RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE PROVI- 
SIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION. 

I request that the sponsors, Commissioners Foz, 
Monsod and Jamir, be recognized and that they take 
their seats in front. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
continue the consideration on Second Reading of Com- 
mittee Report No. 20 on Proposed Resolution No. 469? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; Commissioners Foz, 
Jamir, and Monsod may proceed to sponsor the 
resolution. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo be recognized to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, we request that Com- 
missioners Monsod, de Castro, Regalado and the other 
members of the Committee join us in front. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 9:48 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 9:53 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. For clarification, yesterday there was a 
motion to close the period of sponsorship and debate on 
the resolution of the Committee on Constitutional Com- 
missions and Agencies, referring to the provisions on the 


Commission on Audit. In other words, we are now in 
the period of amendments. 

I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be recognized for 
his amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Before I formally present my amendment, I would 
like to ask some preliminary questions because it may 
not be necessary for me to present the amendment, if 
the answers are satisfactory. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I notice that on Section 2(1), lines 27 to 36, the 
Committee mentioned certain bodies, institutions or 
entities that are subject to audit on a postaudit basis. I 
am just wondering that instead of mentioning postaudit 
basis, can we not amend this section in such a way that 
it will read as follows: “The Commission on Audit shall 
have the power and authority to examine, audit and 
settle all accounts pertaining to the revenue and receipts 
of, and expenditures or uses of funds and property, 
owned or held in trust by, or pertaining to, the govern- 
ment, or any of its subdivisions, agencies, or instrumen- 
talities, including government-owned and controlled cor- 
porations and their subsidiaries and such nongovern- 
mental entities receiving subsidy or equity, directly or 

indirectly, from or through the government.” 

# 

I recommend this amendment because I think the 
entities or institutions maintained on lines 27 to 30 
really fall under the category of “government.” I refer 
to the constitutional bodies, commissions and offices 
that have been granted fiscal autonomy under this 
Constitution, as well as autonomous educational institu- 
tions. 

I would like to suggest that “on a postaudit basis” be 
deleted because the time may come when circumstances 
may warrant the need for a preaudit. Instead, we con- 
centrate on the word “audit” on line 22 as covering all 
these entities. I would like also to delete lines 34 to 36 
which read: “which are required by law or the granting 
institution to submit to such audit as a condition of 
subsidy or equity,” because that is very restrictive. 
Suppose there is no such requirement but there is a 
public fund invested in such nongovernmental entities, 
then these may not be required to submit to such audit. 
It is understood that whether the entities are govern- 
mental or nongovernmental, if public funds are in- 
volved, the Commission on Audit should not be deprived 
the right as well as the power to audit those funds. 
Before I formally present my amendment, may I know 
the sentiments of the members of the Committee? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


603 


MR. MONSOD. Maybe we should explain why the 
Committee made an exception on these institutions and 
made them on a postaudit basis, because normally COA 
audit is both on preaudit and postaudit basis. This 
decision was really very difficult on the part of the 
Committee, for it involved discussions, as well as a very 
lengthy testimony by the Commission on Audit. What 
we are trying to achieve here is some sort of balance. 

There are certain companies or institutions within 
the government itself which by the nature of their func- 
tions would be hampered by preaudit procedures. The 
question now is: Would limiting the COA to postaudit 
procedures not allow abuses on the part of these institu- 
tions? 

The situation is this: There is always a trade-off on 
issues like this; and one of the questions we posed to the 
Commission on Audit was this: “Suppose a PI 0-billion 
government corporation, let us say National Steel, 
where the board of directors is composed of people 
both from the public and private sectors, people of 
integrity and experience, and so on, decides to purchase 
a certain equipment worth, say, P2 million through 
public bidding, what is the role of the COA”? Their 
answer was: “In this case, we can inquire not only 
whether the expenditures were being made for the pur- 
pose, but also into the merits of the decision itself of 
the board of directors.” 

So what we are trying to avoid is a situation where 
with the presence of preaudit procedures we may 
have a little dictator above the board of directors of a 
company whose normal operations require more than 
the P500,000 ceiling of the COA which is exempt from 
preaudit according to present COA rules. 

In a corporation like that, most of the day-to-day 
operations is more than P500,000 and we have one man 
from the Commission on Audit who earns a middle level 
salary who has, in effect, the power to supersede the 
decision of a board over an expenditure of the corpora- 
tion. The expenditure itself may not be anomalous, but 
a two- or three-day delay in operation is very expensive. 
This man is like an investigator in the Bureau of Internal 
Revenue. And even if the expenditure is valid, the cor- 
poration may be very greatly tempted to cater to a 
preaudit of the COA just to enable it to purchase the 
equipment on time. 

As a matter of fact, if we look at the performance of 
the COA at this time, perhaps over 80-90 percent of the 
anomalies unearthed were on a postaudit basis. The 
reason there were so many anomalies during the Marcos’ 
years is not the absence of a preaudit or a postaudit 
function. As a matter of fact, there was a preaudit func- 
tion, but it was a whole system to defraud and misspend 
that was put in place — that prevented the COA from 
the exercise of its normal functions. 

Under normal circumstances, a postaudit is a very 
effective tool and deterrent, but we must balance it 
against the normal operations of corporations that 


must necessarily involve huge amounts of money on a 
day-to-day basis. 

We had, in fact, a discussion with COA Chairman 
Guingona and it came out that there are possibilities 
where the internal control system of a company may be 
so deficient that it does not function normally; so it is 
hard to catch the anomaly on a postaudit basis. 

We told Chairman Guingona that we would be 
prepared to accept an amendment where, if the COA 
found that the internal control system was inadequate, 
it could take such necessary and appropriate measures, 
including the use of temporary preaudit procedures, 
to correct the system’s deficiencies in order to protect 
the funds of the government. 

This is the procedure which we feel would serve as a 
good balance between the normal operations of such 
institutions and the watchdog function of the Commis- 
sion on Audit. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, while the Com- 
missioner’s reasons appear laudable, cannot those 
circumstances or instances stated by him be covered by 
the rules and regulations of the Commission on Audit 
under Section 2 (2) of the committee report? 

MR. MONSOD. It is possible to do that. As a matter 
of fact, certain representations have been made. But I 
have some personal experience on this. What the COA 
decided in .the case of companies called “behest com- 
panies,” private companies taken over by government, 
was to exempt such companies from preaudit for two 
years. 

In other words, it is a time relief, rather than address- 
ing itself to the problem of impairing the normal opera- 
tions of the company. So, we felt, and I believe, that we 
have some understanding with the Commission on Audit 
on this, that as long as the Commission on Audit were 
given special powers to look into the operations of a 
company to correct the deficiency and to initiate 
temporary measures, including preaudit, this could be 
a good compromise. 

MR. NOLLEDO. One last question, because I have 
arranged with Commissioner Guingona that he will 
present the amendment. Section 2 (1) on lines 34 to 36 
reads: 

. . . which are required by law or the granting institution to 
submit to such audit as a condition of subsidy or equity. 

Suppose there is no law requiring such kind of audit 
or the granting institution fails to lay down the condi- 
tion contemplated in this statement, will the govern- 
ment funds invested in these nongovernmental entities 
be exempt from audit? 

MR. MONSOD. May I answer that in this manner. 

We feel that this puts the responsibility on the grant- 
ing institution or any government financial institution 


604 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


to put appropriate conditions for the granting of such 
subsidy or equity. Let me give the Commissioner an 
example: The COA auditors were asked in our hearing 
what exactly this right entailed. We gave an example 
wherein the Philippine National Bank or the Develop- 
ment Bank of the Philippines put a 1 0-percent equity in 
Capitol Development Bank which, in turn, invested a 
10-percent equity in a certain company. We asked what 
right the COA had with respect to the company, since 
that is already a “grandfather equity relationship,” an 
equity relationship by the nature of an equity invest- 
ment that we do not know exactly where the money is. 
It is fungible. We put money into a company and very 
seldom is there a specific destination of funds. The COA 
said it would look into the expenditure of funds. The 
COA said it would look into the expenditure of the 
government money, but there is no way it could because 
it is an equity investment. We asked the COA what they 
would do, if there was no specific destination of funds, 
and its representatives said they would look into the 
entire operations of the company which involved the 
10-percent investment. By COA rules it can now go into 
each and every function and operation of that company. 
We are afraid that in following each and every peso of 
the government in a company, we effectively discourage 
all kinds of business operations. In any case, the PNB or 
the DBP has its own auditors, and the Central Bank has 
a right to investigate and review the operations of 
financial institutions and their portfolio. Not only that, 
COA, an automatic audit, would be a stifling environ- 
ment within which business might not flourish or 
operate. 

So we have to be careful in trying to correct the 
abuses of the past because we could create new forms of 
abuses or opportunities for abuse. We cannot swing 
from one extreme to the other. And if the situation was 
very bad in the past few years, it was because the system 
was not allowed to function, not because there were no 
functions or rights available to such institutions as the 

COA. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mada.m President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I just make a few remarks 
before I introduce my proposed amendments. 


the president. The Commissioner will please 
proceed under the five-minute rule. 

MR. GUINGONA. My understanding with the Floor 
Leader is that because we have not asked for recon- 
sideration, we might be given a little more time. Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. Commissioner 
Guingona. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 


I could see that the intention expressed by Com- 
missioner Nolledo and the misgivings expressed by 
Commissioner Monsod have their own merits. But I 
suppose we are all agreed that public funds should be 
protected, and the protection that is usually done is 
through audit. In fact, we created a Commission on 
Audit to serve as the watchdog or guardian of the 
people’s money. Commissioner Monsod gave an example 
of the so-called “grandfather equity” wherein a 10- 
percent equity was involved. First of all, I would like to 
cite again that I believe there is that logical and reasona- 
ble presumption that public officials will perform their 
duties in accordance with law. In other words, they will 
not abuse the exercise of their functions. Of course if it 
is only a PI 0-thousand equity, it would appear ridiculous 
for the Commission on Audit to go after it and waste its 
time sending people to such a corporation or entity just 
to make sure the people’s money is protected, but I 
would like to invite attention that the equity could run 
into millions. 


Anyway, under my proposed amendments there will 
be safeguards. Madam President, and because of thes 
we might wish to delete this provision that Comm’^ 
sioner Nolledo had spoken about, the requirement th*^t 
there should be granting of authority by the law or b ^ 
the charter that grants the equity. ^ 


Before I proceed. Madam President, I would like t 
invite attention to the wording of Section 2 (l) 
which refers to autonomous educational institutions 
Perhaps, instead of “autonomous educational institn 
tions,” we change it to AUTONOMOUS STATE COT 
LEGES AND UNIVERSITIES so as not to leave ^ 
doubt that we are referring to government or nubr^ 
educational institutions, not to private educar ° 
institutions. The whole Section 2, as amended 
now read as follows: “The Commission on Audit 
have the exclusive power and authority to exarn’ 
audit, and settle all accounts pertaining to the reve'*^^’ 
and receipts of, and expenditures or uses of funds 
property, owned or held in trust ^y> or pertaininp^^^ 
the Government, or any of its subdivisions, agen^-^^’ 
or instrumentalities, including on a postaudit h 
(a) constitutional bodies, commissions and officer 
have been granted fiscal autonomy under this r 
tution, (b) AUTONOMOUS STATE COLLEGES ANn 
UNIVERSITIES, (c) government-owned or control! h 
corporations and their subsidiaries, and (d) such non 
governmental entities receiving subsidy or equitv 
directly or indirectly, from or through the Government’ 
PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT IN THE INSTANCES 
ENUMERATED WHERE THE INTERNAL CONTROL 
SYSTEM OF THE AUDITED AGENCIES IS INADE 
5UATE, THE COMMISSION MAY ADOPT SUCH 
VIEASURES INCLUDING TEMPORARY OR SPECIAL 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


605 


PREAUDIT AS ARE NECESSARY AND APPRO- 
PRIATE TO CORRECT THE DEFICIENCIES.” 

First of all, I want to find out if the Committee will 
accept my proposed amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, because of the 
length of the amendments, may we be given two 
minutes to confer with the proponent because we just 
want to make sure we understand all the phrases he has 
introduced. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:15 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:35 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, after consulta- 
tion with the honorable members of the Committee, I 
have amended my proposed amendment by deleting the 
word EXCLUSIVE because I was made to understand 
that the Commission on Audit will still have the pre- 
ponderant power and authority to examine, audit and 
settle. 

THE PRESIDENT. By the way, for the information 
of the Commissioners, we are discussing the amended 
committee report on the constitutional commissions, 
particularly on the Commission on Audit, this two-page 
paper, copies of which were circulated the day before 
yesterday. 

Commissioner Guingona may proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

Section 2(1) will now read as follows; “The Commis- 
sion on Audit shall have the power and authority to 
examine, audit, and settle all accounts pertaining to the 
revenue and receipts of, and expenditures or uses of 
funds and property, owned or held in trust by, or per- 
taining to the government, or any of its subdivisions. 


agencies, or instrumentalities, including on a postaudit 
basis: (a) constitutional bodies, commissions and offices 
that have been granted fiscal autonomy under this 
Constitution, (b) autonomous STATE COLLEGES 
AND UNIVERSITIES, (c) government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations and their subsidiaries, and (d) such 
nongovernmental entities receiving subsidy or equity, 
directly or indirectly, from or through the government, 
which are required by law or the granting institution to 
submit to such audit as a condition of subsidy or equity: 

PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT WHERE THE IN- 
TERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE AUDITED 
AGENCIES IS INADEQUATE, THE COMMISSION 
MAY ADOPT SUCH MEASURES INCLUDING TEM- 
PORARY OR SPECIAL PREAUDIT AS ARE NECES- 
SARY AND APPROPRIATE TO CORRECT THE 
DEFICIENCIES.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Will the Commissioner please con- 
tinue because there is another sentence to complete that 
section. 

MR. GUINGONA. All right, I will finish the whole 
Section 2(1): “It shall keep the general accounts of the 
government and, for such period as may be provided by 
law, preserve the vouchers pertaining thereto.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Except for a minor correction on line 
27 which is to put a comma (,) after “including,” the 
Committee accepts the amendments. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I know the purpose of the 
comma (,) after “including.” 

MR. MONSOD. The purpose of the comma (,) is 
merely to clarify the intent of the Article, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the purpose is 
that on a postaudit basis the enumerations are included? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. I thank the members of the 
Committee. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendments. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendments 
of Commissioner Guingona? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendments are approved. 

Is there any other proposed amendment? 


606 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I think. Madam President, Commis- 
sioner Davide is ahead of Commissioner Ople for the 
amendments. 

MR. OPLE. I was made to understand by the Floor 
Leader that I would immediately follow Commissioner 
Guingona, unless this is now subject to correction by 
the Floor Leader. 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner Davide yields his 
position. Commissioner Ople may go ahead. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

Madam President, the proposed amendment deals 
with the same section. I have consulted with the Com- 
mittee beforehand, and in this respect, I would like to 
state that I am associating myself with the other pro- 
ponents of the proposed amendment; Commissioners 
Guingona, Nolledo and Rama. We would like to propose 
an amendment on Section 2(1), line 22, which is to 
delete “and” between “power” and “authority” and to 
insert the words AND DUTY between “authority” and 
“to,” so that the sentence will read: “The Commission 
on Audit shall have the power, authority AND DUTY to 
examine, audit and settle all accounts pertaining to the 
revenue and receipts of, and expenditures or uses of 
funds and property,” et cetera. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Ople to insert the 
words AND DUTY, which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

We propose to add a new section which is Section 3, 
to prevent future abuses, especially during times of a 
national emergency when martial law powers are 
assumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. It will be Section 3. 

MR. OPLE. I propose to add a new section on line 9, 
page 2 of the amended committee report which reads: 
NO LAW SHALL BE PASSED EXEMPTING ANY EN- 
TITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OR ITS SUBSIDIARY 
IN ANY GUISE WHATEVER FOR ANY INVEST- 
MENTS OF PUBLIC FUNDS FROM THE JURISDIC- 
TION OF THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT. 

May I explain my reasons on record. 

We know that a number of entities of the government 
took advantage of the absence of a legislature in the past 


to obtain presidential decrees exempting themselves 
from the jurisdiction of the Commission on Audit, one 
notable example of which is the Philippine National Oil 
Company which is really an empty shell. It is a holding 
corporation by itself, and strictly on its own account. 
Its funds were not very impressive in quantity but 
underneath that shell there were billions of pesos in a 
multiplicity of companies. The PNOC — the empty 
shell — under a presidential decree was covered by the 
jurisdiction of the Commission on Audit, but the 
billions of pesos invested in different corporations 
underneath it were exempted from the coverage of the 
Commission on Audit. 

Another example is the United Coconut Planters 
Bank. The Commission on Audit has determined that 
the coconut levy is a form of taxation; and that, there- 
fore, these funds attributed to the shares of 1 ,400,000 
coconut farmers are, in effect, public funds. And that 
was, I think, the basis of the PCGG in undertaking that 
last major sequestration of up to 94 percent of all the 
shares in the United Coconut Planters Bank. The charter 
of the UCPB, through a presidential decree, exempted 
it from the jurisdiction of the Commission on Audit, 
it being a private organization. 

So these are the fetuses of future abuse that we are 
slaying right here with this additional section. 

May I repeat the amendment. Madam President: NO 
LAW SHALL BE PASSED EXEMPTING ANY ENTITY 
OF THE GOVERNMENT OR ITS SUBSIDIARY IN 
ANY GUISE WHATEVER FOR ANY INVESTMENTS 
OF PUBLIC FUNDS FROM THE JURISDICTION OF 
THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know the position of the 
Committee on the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Ople? 

MR. JAMIR. If the honorable Commissioner will 
change the number of the section to 4, we will accept 
the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Gladly, Madam President. 

Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, point of inquiry 
on the new amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

May I just ask a few questions of Commissioner Ople. 

Is that not included in Section 2(1) where it states: 
“(c) government-owned or controlled corporations and 
their subsidiaries”? So that if these government-owned 
and controlled corporations and their subsidiaries are 
subjected to the audit of the COA, any law exempting 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


607 


certain government corporations or subsidiaries will be 
already unconstitutional. 

So I believe. Madam President, that the proposed 
amendment is unnecessary. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, since this has been 
accepted, we would like to reply to the point raised by 
Commissioner de Castro. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod will please 
proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. I think the Commissioner is trying to 
avoid the situation that happened in the past, because 
the same provision was in the 1 973 Constitution and yet 
somehow a law or a decree was passed where certain 
institutions were exempted from audit. We are just reaf- 
firming, emphasizing, the role of the Commission on 
Audit so that this problem will never arise in the future. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner de Castro satis- 
fied? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Just one more comment. Madam 
President. 

We are making a “hate charter,” as one of those news- 
papers stated, because we keep reminding ourselves that 
these institutions were already covered by this same 
provision and yet a presidential decree was passed know- 
ing it was unconstitutional, and nobody questioned it. 
But when we are in a free country, somebody will 
question it as unconstitutional. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just make 
one comment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. Earlier Commissioner Guingona, in 
withdrawing his amendment to add “EXCLUSIVE,” 
made a statement about the preponderant right of the 
COA. 

For the record, we would like to clarify the reason 
for not including that word. First, we do not want an 
Article that would constitute a disincentive or an ob- 
stacle to private investment. There are government insti- 
tutions with private investments in them, and some of 
these investors — Filipinos, as well as in some cases, 
foreigners — require the presence of private auditing 
firms, not exclusively, but concurrently. So this does 
not take away the power of the Commission on Audit. 
Second, there are certain instances where private audit- 
ing may be required, like in the listing in the stock 
exchange. In other words, we do not want this provision 


to be an unnecessary obstacle to privatization of these 
companies or attraction of investments. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we request Commissioner 
Ople to please repeat his proposed amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

The new section will now be SECTION 4 which 
states: NO LAW SHALL BE PASSED EXEMPTING 
ANY ENTITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OR ITS SUB- 
SIDIARY IN ANY GUISE WHATEVER FOR ANY IN- 
VESTMENTS OF PUBLIC FUNDS FROM THE JURIS- 
DICTION OF THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Ople which has 
been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have some proposed amendments on Section 1(1). 
The first is on line 7 which consists in the insertion 
between the words “Bar” and “for” of the following: 
WHO HAVE BEEN ENGAGED IN THE PRACTICE OF 
LAW. On line 8, after the word “years” add a comma (,) 
and the following: AND MUST NOT HAVE BEEN 
CANDIDATES FOR ANY ELECTIVE POSITION IN 
THE ELECTION IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THEIR 
APPOINTMENT. Lines 7 and 8. will now read as 
follows: “experience or members of the Philippine Bar 
WHO HAVE BEEN ENGAGED IN THE PRACTICE OF 
LAW FOR at least ten years, AND MUST NOT HAVE 
BEEN CANDIDATES FOR ANY ELECTIVE POSI- 
TION IN THE ELECTION IMMEDIATELY PRECED- 
ING THEIR APPOINTMENT.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say 
with respect to the amendments on lines 7 and 8? 

MR. JAMIR. The Committee accepts. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted both 
amendments of Commissioner Davide. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


608 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to make a comment 
on the prohibition regarding the appointment of former 
candidates for election which we also discussed last 
night. I wonder why we have to repeat this all over 
again. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, that refers to the 
Commission on Civil Service. It was not included in the 
Common Provisions, and that is exactly the reason we 
introduce this to be uniform with the requirement for 
appointment to the civil service. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It was my understanding that 
there was also a prohibition in the Common Provisions. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is none. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case. Madam President, I 
submit. 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Maambong 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, members of 
the Committee, I would like to introduce an amend- 
ment on Section 1 (2), line 11, by inserting between 
“President” and “for” the phrase WITH THE CON- 
SENT OF THE COMMISSION ON APPOINTMENTS. 
And on lines 12 to 13, delete the sentence which reads: 
“Appointments to the Commission need no confirma- 
tion.” 

Last night. Madam President, a parallel amendment 
on the provisions on the Civil Service Commission was 
voted favorably by the body, so I submit this now to 
the Committee. 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote on the 
amendments proposed by Commissioner Davide which 
have been accepted by the Committee? 

For the information again of the Commissioners, will 
the Commissioner please repeat his amendments. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. On line 7 

“for,” insert the follow 
have been ENGAGED IN THE PRAC 
TICE OF LAW. 

( 8, after ‘years,” add the following: a comms 

(,) and the phrase AND MUST NOT HAVE BEEN CAN 
DIDATES FOR ANY ELECTIVE POSITION IN THE 
ELECTION IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THEIF 
APPOINTMENT. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendments of Commissioner Davide which 
have been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendments are approved. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we yield to the 
judgment of the body on this, and we accept the pro- 
posed amendment as decided already by the body yes- 
terday in the case of the Civil Service Commission. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendments which have been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the pro- 
posed amendments are approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Just a matter of perfecting amend- 
ments on Section 1. I move to delete the letter “s” in 
the word “appointments” on line 4 and the word “and” 
before “certified” on line 5. 

MR. JAMIR. The Committee accepts. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. The perfecting amendments have 
been accepted. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendments? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendments are 
approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the proposed 
amendment would be on Section 1 (2), more particular- 
ly on line 17. It is a very minor amendment. Madam 
President, which is only the deletion of the word “there- 
after” after “vacancy.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. JAMIR. We accept. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 1 6, 1 986 


609 


Is there any objection to the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, on page 1, 
line 19, between the words “appointed” and “in,” insert 
the words OR DESIGNATED to be consistent with 
yesterday’s amendment. The whole sentence will read; 
“In no case shall any Member be appointed OR DE- 
SIGNATED in a temporary or acting capacity.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. JAMIR. The amendment is accepted. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes which 
has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Madam President. 

For simplicity’s sake, may I propose the following 
amendments by deletion. On page 2, line 3, delete the 
words “and extent,” so it would read: “to define the 
scope of its audit and examination.” On line 4, after the 
word “formulate,” delete the words “and establish” and 
also the words “and methods” after “techniques,” so it 
would read; “formulate the techniques.” On line 7, 
delete the words “unnecessary” and “excessive” and 
add the word AND after “irregular,” so it would read; 
“or disallowance of irregular AND extravagant expendi- 
tures.” On line 8, add the word AND after “funds,” so 
it would read; “government funds AND properties.” 

MR- JAMIR. Will the Commissioner please repeat his 
amendments? 

MR. SARMIENTO. As amended. Section 2 (2) will 
now read; “The Commission shall have the exclusive 
authority, subject to the limitations in this Article, to 
define the scope of its audit and examination, formulate 
the techniques required therefor, and promulgate ac- 
counting and auditing rules and regulations including 
those for the prevention or disallowance of irregular 


AND extravagant expenditures or uses of government 
funds AND properties.” 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. JAMIR. Will the Commissioner please explain to 
this body the reasons for his amendments? 

MR. SARMIENTO. As I mentioned, the words 
deleted are redundant, and I suggest these amendments 
for simplicity and economy so that we will have a brief 
but comprehensive Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe these 
words were used in the previous Constitution and one 
of our apprehensions is that the deletion of these might 
be interpreted as excluding them. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, if that is the 
intent, to repeat what had been previously stated in 
the old Constitution, may I know then the meaning of 
“scope” and “extent,” “formulate” and “establish,” 
“techniques” and “methods” which are one and the 
same thing? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President, we are refer- 
ring to the words “unnecessary” and “excessive” on 
line 7, because these words have different meanings 
from “irregular” and “extravagant.” But with respect 
to line 3, we agree with the Commissioner that “and 
extent” is a surplusage. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Commissioner 
Monsod. 

MR. MONSOD. On line 4, “and establish” is also a 
surplusage but we are not sure about “and methods ’ 
because “techniques” and “methods” have different 
connotations and so with “unnecessary” and “exces- 
sive.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think the words “excessive” and 
“extravagant” are one and the same thing. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Aquino is 
recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. I would like to interpose an objection 
to the proposal of Commissioner Sarmiento. The con- 
cepts “irregular, unnecessary, excessive and extra- 
vagant” were at one time or another the subject of 
controversial jurisprudence. In other words, these are 
not just accepted doctrines. These have been subjected 
to thorough debates in the Supreme Court. So I propose 
the retention of these concepts to preserve the doctrine 
of the jurisprudence laid down on these matters. 


610 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. With that manifestation of Com- 
missioner Aquino, I withdraw my amendment by 
deletion of the words “unnecessary” and “excessive.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, before Commissioner 
Sarmiento withdraws his amendment, may I ask him 
whether or not he wUl agree to an addition to further 
strengthen this provision? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I will agree. 

MR. OPLE. So that in the string of adjectives, it will 
now read like this: “irregular, unnecessary, excessive, 
extravagant AND UNCONSCIONABLE expenditures 
or uses of government funds and properties.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. I welcome the amendment by 
addition. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Padilla care to 
speak on the amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, on this point, I am glad to hear 
the objection of Commissioner Aquino which was 
accepted by the propc-^ent. I would like to state that 
the words “irregular, unnecessary, excessive or extra- 
vagant expenditures” appeared both in the 1935 and 
1973 Constitutions. The words “irregular” and “extra- 
vagant are objectionable because the preposition used 
in the previous Constitution was “or,” which is an alter- 
native, whereas, the word “and” is cumulative. So that 
if the phrase used is “irregular and extravagant,” we 
have to satisfy both requirements. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair be clarified by 
Commissioner Sarmiento. Is he agreeable now to retain 
the words “unnecessary, excessive”? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, to retain the words “unne- 
cessary, excessive” and to add the amendment by addi- 
tion as suggested by Commissioner Ople. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Monsod please 
repeat what has been accepted by the Committee. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe Commissioner Regalado has 
a suggestion. Perhaps after that we can formulate the 
entire provision. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. REGALADO. With respect to line 4, the Com- 
mittee has accepted the amendment of Commissioner 
Sarmiento to delete the words “and establish” and to 
retain the word “formulate.” I think it should be the 
other way around, that we should retain “establish” 
and delete “formulate and,” because one cannot esta- 
blish unless, in the first place, he has already formulated 
the techniques. But one can formulate without establish- 
ing. So lines 3 and 4 should read: “the scope of its audit 
and examination, establish the techniques and methods,” 
and so forth. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Sar- 
miento say? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have no objection. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please read 
this particular paragraph with his amendments. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the entire 
Section 2 (2) reads: “The Commission shall have the 
exclusive authority, subject to the limitations in this 
Article, to define the scope of its audit and examina- 
tion, establish the techniques and methods required 
therefor, and promulgate accounting and auditing 
rules and regulations including those for the prevention 
or disallowance of irregular, unnecessary, excessive, 
extravagant OR UNCONSCIONABLE expenditures or 
uses of government funds and properties.” 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendments have been 
accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendments 
of Commissioner Sarmiento? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendments are approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

The proposed amendment is on the same paragraph, 
subject matter of the Sarmiento amendment. On 
Section 2, page 2, line 5 of the amended draft, insert 
PRESCRIBE before the word “and,” then AN be- 
tween the words “promulgate” and “accounting” and 
SYSTEM RELATIVE THERETO between “account- 
ing and “and.” On line 6, between the words “the” 
and “prevention” insert DETERMINATION AND, so 
that lines 5 and 6 would now read as follows: “required 
therefor, PRESCRIBE and promulgate AN accounting 
SYSTEM RELATIVE THERETO and auditing rules and 
regulations including those for the DETERMINATION 
AND prevention.” 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


611 


THE PRESIDENT Does the Committee accept? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we will have a 
problem prescribing and promulgating an accounting 
system in all of these institutions because that is a very 
massive undertaking on the part of the COA. Actually, 
the COA accounting and auditing rules would be the 
framework within which the particular enterprises can 
design their own systems. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will withdraw the amendment con- 
sisting of the word PRESCRIBE, but I will insist on the 
rest. 

MR. MONSOD. So how will lines 5 and 6 now read? 

MR. DAVIDE. They will read as follows; “required 
therefor, and promulgate AN accounting SYSTEM RE- 
LATIVE THERETO and auditing rules and regulations 
including those for the DETERMINATION AND 
prevention.” 

MR. MONSOD. I think this is a question of inter- 
pretation of what “accounting system” means. If we 
are talking about general principles, we have no objec- 
tion. But if the COA will go into an individual type of 
accounting system for different types of enterprises 
and it might . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. The COA will only prescribe the 
general principles. 

MR. MONSOD. If the understanding is that the COA 
will only prescribe the general principles, we want to 
know the reaction of the Committee. 

For the record, Madam President, the COA is really 
more involved in the auditing function, not in the set- 
ting up of an accounting system. 

MR. DAVIDE. At any rate, the auditing function 
must be very related to the accounting system. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, as long as we go about general 
principles, we will accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the meaning, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide please 
read again lines 5 and 6? 

MR. DAVIDE. Lines 5 and 6, Madam President, will 
now read: “required therefor, and promulgate AN 
accounting SYSTEM RELATIVE THERETO and 
auditing ...” 

MR. MONSOD. If we say “promulgate accounting 
systems relative thereto,” is it plural or singular? 


MR. DAVIDE. It is singular, “AN accounting SYS- 
TEM.” “Accounting systems” would be a business. To 
be in line with the interpretation, I will amend again. 
Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Can we use PRINCIPLES, “. . . pro- 
mulgate accounting PRINCIPLES RELATIVE THERE- 
TO”? 

MR. DAVIDE. I yield to the proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. So it is “accounting PRINCI- 
PLES.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, “accounting PRINCIPLES 
RELATIVE THERETO.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will the 
proponent of the amendment accept an amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. May I hear the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My amendment reads: “and 
ADOPT accounting PRINCIPLES and PROMULGATE 
auditing rules and regulations.” 

MR. REGALADO. We cannot promulgate a system. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:14 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:18 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, after the explana- 
tion given by the Committee, I am prepared to with- 
draw, as I hereby withdraw, the proposed amendment, 
but I will have another on Section 3. 

THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, just to clarify. Are 
there no more amendments on Section 2? 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 3, line 11, substitute the 
word “Congress” with the word NATIONAL ASSEM- 
BLY. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 


612 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment to change the word “Congress” to 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DA VIDE. On line 15, Madam President, insert 
the following after corporations: AND THEIR SUB- 
SIDIARIES AND SUCH NONGOVERNMENTAL EN- 
TITIES RECEIVING SUBSIDY OR EQUITY FROM 
OR THROUGH THE GOVERNMENT. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 


MR. DAVIDE. The amendment on line 15 is: after 
corporations, add the following: AND THEIR SUB- 
SIDIARIES AND SUCH NONGOVERNMENTAL EN- 
TITIES RECEIVING SUBSIDY OR EQUITY FROM 
OR THROUGH THE GOVERNMENT. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that phrase is not 
complete. The Commissioner might want to complete it, 
because what has been accepted by the Committee also 
includes a phrase “which are required by law. . .’’Is the 
amendment still subject to that phrase? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that particular phrase should be 
inserted in the amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Which one? The phrase “which are 
required by law” or the “granting institution to submit 
to such audit as a condition of . . .”? 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment reads: AND THEIR 
SUBSIDIARIES AND SUCH NONGOVERNMENTAL 
ENTITIES RECEIVING SUBSIDY OR EQUITY FROM 
OR THROUGH THE GOVERNMENT, then add the 
phrase that was supposed to be added. 


MR. AZCUNA. I wonder if Commissioner Davide will 
accept an amendment to his amendment wherein we 
will just say: AND SUCH NONGOVERNMENTAL 
ENTITY SUBJECT TO ITS AUDIT, instead of repeat- 
ing the whole qualifying phrase. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is better; I yield to it. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is the last stand. Is that 
accepted now? 

MR. DAVIDE. We accept that, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
stated amendment of Commissioner Davide as amended 
by Commissioner Azcuna and which has been accepted 
by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 17, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Insert the following after the word 
‘‘effectiveness”: AND THE PROSECUTION OF PAR- 
TIES FOUND LIABLE FOR MALFEASANCE AND 
MISFEASANCE IN THE USE OF FUNDS OR PRO- 
PERTIES HEREIN REFERRED TO. 

MR. FOZ. Is Commissioner Davide then giving the 
Commission on Audit the power to directly prosecute? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, this is just among the recom- 
mendations, because it is the first entity to discover 
malfeasance or misfeasance. 

MR. REGALADO. Would Commissioner Davide agree 
to just delete the words “found liable,” because they 
appear to be a prejudgment or a conviction. 


MR. MONSOD. That is the original phrase. Madam 
President. So, if we agree that the qualifying phrase for 
that is: “which are required by law or the granting 
institution to submit to such audit as a condition of 
subsidy or equity,” then we do not have to put it there. 


» ^ wouiQ accept trie HmcnumciiL 

Regalado. It will now read: AND THE 
PROSECUTION OF PARTIES LIABLE FOR MAL- 
misfeasance in THE USE OF 
FUNDS AND PROPERTIES HEREIN REFERRED TO. 


MR. DAVIDE. That is really the qualifying phrase 
because this is just a consequence of the previous 
provision regarding nongovernment entities receiving 
subsidy or equity from or through the government. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will that be clear enough? 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. On this report not only to the 
msident but to the National Assembly, what does the 
National Assembly have to do with the prosecution of 

r%r\c>r\ey*} ^ 


MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Azcuna is 
recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. May I respond to it. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


613 


MR. DAVIDE. Under this section, the report is to be 
submitted to the President and the National Assembly. 
The report may contain recommendation of measures 
necessary to improve their efficiency and effectiveness. 
At the same time, its report may also contain a recom- 
mendation for the prosecution of parties. So, at least it 
will have some persuasive effect in the matter of the 
prosecution of individuals liable for malfeasance and 
misfeasance in the use of funds or properties as may 
be found by the Commission. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, this is a yearly 
report. The recommendation for the prosecution of 
those guilty of violating COA rules can be done 
periodically. That does not have to be done at one time 
in a yearly report both to the President and Congress. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. By way of additional comment 
to the statement of Commissioner Rodrigo, in that 
report I would assume that names of persons who have 
not even been convicted of any crime are included in 
the report. And I find something wrong in that pro- 
cedure, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely, Madam President, that is the 
idea because if we leave the matter of prosecution to the 
prosecution arm of the government, then there may be 
several cases which could no longer reach the prosecu- 
tion stage because of undue pressure and influence. But 
here, we have a commission which, through the process 
of determination, inquiry and verification, will deter- 
mine whether or not malfeasance or misfeasance has 
been committed and, therefore, it must somehow 
initiate the prosecution or induce or encourage the 
prosecution arm to make the necessary prosecution. 

I submit to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We regret. Madam President, we 
cannot accept it because we assume that it is inherent 
in the powers of the Commission on Audit to make such 
recommendations. Secondly, it need not be, as Com- 
missioner Rodrigo has said, at the end of the year. And 
third, the names of those not yet found guilty of mal- 
feasance or misfeasance need not be included in the 
report. For these reasons, we regret we cannot accept it 
and we throw it to the body for decision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Davide insist 
on a vote? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. May I make a short observation? 
The phrase “malfeasance and misfeasance” is rather 
vague and general because the Revised Penal Code does 
not use those words with regard to the crimes commit- 
ted by public officers in Article VII, Title 7, which are 
really the crimes against public administration. So, I 
would suggest that the words “malfeasance and mis- 
feasance” be eliminated or be clarified. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the words “mal- 
feasance and misfeasance” have a settled jurisprudential 
meaning already. And this would be broader instead of 
limiting the scope of the provision to a specific pro- 
vision of the Revised Penal Code which may be 
amended at any time. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the body 
is now ready to vote on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Davide, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 22 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. DAVIDE. And, finally. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I move for the deletion of the entire 
Section 4 on lines 19 and 20. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
explain? 

MR. DAVIDE. The reason is that this is already 
included in the Common Provisions. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed deletion of Section 
4 has been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


614 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized. 


entities unless there is an urgent or practical need for it, 
as mentioned by Commissioner Monsod. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 

With the permission of the sponsor, I would like to 
propose two new provisions. The first would read as 
follows: PRIVATE AUDITING FIRMS MAY NOT 
EXAMINE OR AUDIT ACCOUNTS PERTAINING 
TO THE REVENUE AND RECEIPTS OF, AND EX- 
PENDITURES OR USES OF FUNDS AND PROPERTY 
OWNED OR HELD IN TRUST BY OR PERTAINING 
TO THE GOVERNMENT OR ANY OF ITS SUBDIVI- 
SIONS, AGENCIES OR INSTRUMENTALITIES. 

Madam President, I would, therefore, exclude the 
four agencies and entities that are enumerated under 
Section 2, paragraph 1 . May I be allowed to explain my 
proposed amendments? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. GUINGONA. As we can see, this proposed 
amendment will only concern itself with government 
funds which belong to the government or any of its 
subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalitiesj in other 
words, funds belonging to us, to the people. 

When I proposed the word “exclusive” earlier, it was 
objected to and I agreed to remove it because of the 
explanation of Commissioner Monsod that there are 
some foreign investors who would require auditing by 
private auditing firms. And he also mentioned a law 
^ require the stock exchanges to be 

audited, I suppose, by private auditing firms But the 
way I understood it these are the exceptions What I 
want to establish is a general rule. I do not believe 
pnvate auditing firms should be allowed to look into 
government funds and government accounting records. 

And, secondly, I think that if we allow this, there will 
be an unnecessary duplication of work. If there is no 
pressing need as mentioned by Commissioner Monsod, I 
do not see why we have to ask knowing that anyway the 
Commission on Audit is not precluded from doing the 
auditing work. I do not see why we have to ask a private 
auditing firm to audit government funds as a general 
rule; first, because it is duplicative and, second, it is 
going to be very costly. The auditing firms that they will 
get will either charge their usual charges which will be 
quite high under the present conditions or they may 
give the government special discount, in which case, such 
an act might be open to suspicion. 


I would like to reiterate the fact that I am not includ- 
ing the agencies and entities that are enumerated under 
Section 2, paragraph 1. I am asking that private firms 
should not be made to put their hands into the govern- 
ment file and examine our books. I do not think we 
should open the books of the government to private 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. The assumption of the proponent is 
that there will never be a need ora requirement in enti- 
ties other than those enumerated. We mentioned those 
entities because we did not want to go into very lengthy 
expositions. But it is also a fact that even government 
agencies, instrumentalities and subdivisions sometimes 
borrow money from abroad. And if we are at all going 
to preclude the possibility of any concurrent auditing, 
if that is required, and insist that it is only exclusively 
the government which can audit, we may be unnecessa- 
rily tying their hands without really accomplishing 
much more than what we want. As long as the COA is 
there, and the COA’s power cannot be eliminated by 
law, by decree or anything of that sort, then the govern- 
ment funds are protected. 

As far as the question of fees is concerned, this is 
always negotiable. Besides, if one talks about auditing 
fees, these are governed by certain regulations within 
the auditing profession, beyond which auditing firms 
cannot go. Furthermore, the government can always 
refuse to pay unconscionable fees. So, that matter really 
is not that relevant. But I think what we want to insist 
on is that there should be some flexibility so that a 
procedural requirement does not impede a substantive 
transaction as long as COA is there. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I do not know if 
I mentioned it, but the proposed provision that I have 
would be qualified by the phrase AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW. Right now, the only cases that Com- 
missioner Monsod has mentioned are the two that I have 
also mentioned. Assuming that there are other cases, 
this can be brought to the attention of our legislature. 
But I object to the general allowance for private firms to 
come in and get involved in examining the funds, the 
books, the accounts of our government. I think the 
funds of our government, as much as possible, should be 
kept for review and examination by the government 
people. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Colayco would like to be recognized to oppose the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. On this particular matter also? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. I concur with the opinion voiced by 
Commissioner Monsod. So, I will not take the trouble of 
repeating it. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


615 


MR. GUINGONA. May I know if the Committee 
accepts the proposed provision? 

MR. MONSOD. We regret, Madam President, that we 
cannot accept the proposed provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we put it to a vote? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

May I be allowed to read it again? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please do so. 

MR. GUINGONA. The provision reads: PRIVATE 
AUDITING FIRMS MAY NOT EXAMINE OR AUDIT 
ACCOUNTS PERTAINING TO THE REVENUE AND 
RECEIPTS OF, AND EXPENDITURES OR USES OF 
FUNDS AND PROPERTY OWNED OR HELD IN 
TRUST BY OR PERTAINING TO THE GOVERN- 
MENT OR ANY OF ITS SUBDIVISIONS, AGENCIES 
OR INSTRUMENTALITIES EXCEPT AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Guingona, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 6 votes in favor and 27 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

Is there any other amendment? 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. The 
amendment reads: NONGOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 
RECEIVING SUBSIDY OR EQUITY EQUIVALENT 
TO 2/3 OF THEIR PAID-UP CAPITAL, DIRECTLY 
OR INDIRECTLY, SHALL BE SUBJECT TO TEMPO- 
RARY OR SPECIAL PREAUDIT IN CASES WHERE 
THE INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE SAID 
ENTITY OR ENTITIES IS INADEQUATE. 

May I please explain? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. The reason for this is, there is a 
saying in Filipino which says: “Aanhin pa ang damo 
kung patay na ang kabayo.” Here we are contemplating 
an instance where a lot of government money, running 
into billions, will be going into the so-called nongovern- 
mental entities. The amount involved could be very, 
very large. Madam President. The Committee has ex- 
pressed the view that the irregularity, extravagance, 
unconscionability could be discovered in postaudit. By 
that time, the money of the people, which is passed on 
to these nongovernmental entities, would have gone into 


the pockets of those running the nongovernmental 
entities. There is no recourse, especially if they are able 
to do \\diat other people have done who have gone 
abroad. Who will be left holding the bag? It will be the 
government or ultimately it will be the people. 

I agree with Commissioner Monsod. Where the 
government puts PI 0,000 in a nongovernmental entity, 
certainly, I would not insist that there should be a pre- 
audit. I am emphasizing temporary or special preaudit 
subject to specific conditions. But when the money 
runs to millions and even perhaps billions, why should 
our government, through the COA which is the watch- 
dog of the people’s money, not be allowed to look into, 
examine and audit the accounts of these nongovern- 
mental entities? 

May I just mention. Madam President, that according 
to the records of COA, about 70 percent of the coopera- 
tives under the National Energy Administration (NEA) 
are losing; many of them are subsidized up to 90 
percent to 100 percent while we have, for example, a 
nongovernmental entity which is 100 percent sub- 
sidized by the people’s money. Why should we prevent 
the government, through the COA, to look into the 
accounts to prevent or to stop any anomaly before the 
anomaly is done? I feel that this is part of the work of 
the COA; it is part of the duty mentioned by Commis- 
sioner Ople for them to look into this so that the 
people’s money will be protected. I agree with Commis- 
sioner Monsod that when the amount is insignificant or 
small, we do not go into the trouble of looking into the 
accounts, but not when the money involved is big, 
because some of these entities are subsidized up to 1 00 
percent, even though they are called banks or non- 
governmental entities. For all practical purposes, they 
are already government corporations because they are 
using 100 percent of government money, the people s 
money. 

MR. MQNSOD. May we ask the honorable Commis- 
sioner what he considers as a minimum size. Is it a 
percentage or an amount? 

MR. GUINGONA. If the sponsor wishes to put it in 
percentage, I can amend my proposed provision to 60 
percent. 

MR. MQNSOD. No, I am just asking a question. 

MR. GUINGONA. I am answering it. 

MR. MONSOD. I see. So, it can be an institution or a 
group or an organization with a PI 5,000 asset or equity 
and the government has P9,000 in it or 60 percent, and 
the government would, under the proposal, be able to 
have preaudit rights. Preaudit means that a COA auditor 
has to be a resident in the company. 

MR. GUINGONA. No, I was talking of temporary or 
special audit. 


616 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


MR. MONSOD. A special preaudit. 

MR. GUINGONA. And as we have discusser! yester- 
day, temporary or special preaudit will not require a 
resident auditor. May I explain what I mean by tempo- 
rary? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just say that 
earlier we had an amendment on Section 2 1 in which we 
sat down and worked out an amendment which includes 
the subject matter that the Commissioner is now pro- 
posing to be covered by another section. May I ask if he 
is now proposing an amendment to the amendment that 
was agreed upon between him and the Committee? 

MR. GUINGONA. No, I made a reservation. I said I 
will propose a provision. That was, in effect, what I was 
saying in order for us to be finished, because it was 
taking us such a long time. We did not want to delay our 
proceedings. I accepted all that the Committee wanted, 
but I also wanted to bring to the floor of this body my 
proposals and I leave it to the wisdom of our Commis- 
sioners whether they will accept it or not. 

I still insist. Madam President. If the honorable 
members of the Committee would like to change the 
percentage, I am willing. We can say 70 percent or 80 
percent, but obviously, when a governmental entity is 
100 percent subsidized, as in the case of these cooper- 
atives, I do not see why there wUl be a problem about 
temporary preaudit. They will only be concerned if they 
have something to hide. We do not have anything to 
hide that is why this Commission has a resident auditor. 

1 do not see why the business people are so afraid of 
being audited, if they have nothing to hide, especially if 
they are using government money, say up to 100 per- 
cent. There is no justification to my mind. Why? This 
could lead to anomalies. In order to escape the auditing 
by the government, these government entities like the 
banks can channel their money into a nongovernmental 
entity which will do the anomaly that they cannot or 
are afraid to do. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is seek- 
ing recognition; he is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Madam President. 

Will the Gentleman yield to a few questions? 

MR. GUINGONA. Willingly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. My impression is that, as a general 
rule, we have postaudits. Is that correct? 

MR. GUINGONA. That is right. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. In the amendment, we find that 
the Commissioner is proposing preaudits in certain 
cases. 


MR. GUINGONA. In certain cases only, not in the 
strict sense of the word that there will be a resident 
auditor. No, I am only suggesting a temporary or special 
preaudit. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, but what is the basis? Is it 
because of the exposure of the government in that 
agency such as equity or is it because of indications 
that there are irregularities that he shifts from postaudit 
to preaudit or have both? I want to clarify this. What 
makes the Commissioner shift to a temporary preaudit? 
Is it the equity of the government or is it the probability 
of irregularity? 

MR. GUINGONA. There are two requirements under 
my proposed provision. First is that we have a sub- 
stantial amount. I say 60 percent. Some people may say 
70 percent, 80 percent, or even 100 percent. The second 
requirement is that the internal control system of that 
agency is inadequate. In other words, it is established 
that there is an irregularity. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The COA will make the conclu- 
sion that the internal control is weak. Is that right? 

MR. GUINGONA. The COA will have the discretion 
but this could be challenged in court. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. But the proponent has said 
that one of the bases for shifting to preaudit is that the 
internal control is weak. Is that right? 

MR. GUINGONA. I beg your pardon? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The internal control is weak. 

MR. GUINGONA. It is inadequate. By this, I mean, 
for example in the case of the COMELEC, before the 
present administration, there have been cases actually 
documented where there had been overpricing in the 
acquisition of ballots up to 50 percent of the actual 
purchase price. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Then what exactly is the basis for 
imposing preaudit? 

MR. GUINGONA. It is to prevent the money from 
being diverted because once it is diverted, it is very hard 
to run after that money. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, we realize that is the objec- 
tive. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am asking at what point in time 
and what the reason is for imposing preaudit, because 
the general principle is postaudit. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


617 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. All of a sudden, the proponent 
says it is now preaudit. I would like to clarify in my 
mind why from now on, we will adopt preaudit in this 
agency? What is the reason? 

MR. GUINGONA. If the Commissioner will allow me, 
there are two controls here: first, as 1 said a while ago, 
the decision could be challenged in court; and, secondly, 
this inadequacy is not only a suspected inadequacy in 
the sense that the inadequacy is something that is 
already known in effect. We are aware of the fact that 
there were many irregularities but we cannot do any- 
thing about them because our Commission on Audit was 
being dictated not to inquire into the accounts. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. What is the concept of “tempo- 
rary” here? 

MR. GUINGONA. This would mean that there will be 
some kind of a spot auditing. It will only be for a 
temporary period. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. In terms of period of time, does 
the Commissioner have any perception on how long it 
will stay because we have a little worry about the word 
“temporary.” Sometimes temporary is the most per- 
manent thing that comes around. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair interrupt the two 
Gentlemen. I would like to inquire from the Committee. 
Would the Committee need some time to go over the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Guingona? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we just want to 
mention that the provision, as now worded, already 
allows for the National Assembly on the granting insti- 
tution to provide the details and conditions to govern 
the situation being discussed. But we find it difficult to 
accept a provision like this in the Constitution because 
many of these cooperatives may only have PI 0,000. So, 
P6,000 is 60 percent of the capital and we do not want 
to get involved in the details of this kind of classifica- 
tion since that can be provided in the law anyway. The 
law may require that all of these institutions, organiza- 
tions and so on, may submit to audit as it deems fit. We 
feel that this is properly a case for legislation by the 
National Assembly. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, can I move for a 
vote? There has been sufficient discussions. We have 
three more speakers for the other amendments. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us then put the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Guingona to a vote. 


As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Guingona, please raise their hand. 

Does the Commissioner want to read the proposed 
section? 

MR. GUINGONA. The proposed amendment reads: 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES RECEIVING SUB- 
SIDY OR EQUITY EQUIVALENT TO SIXTY PER- 
CENT OF THEIR PAID-UP CAPITAL PROVIDED 
THAT THE AMOUNT INVOLVED IS NOT LESS 
THAN ONE MILLION, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, 
SHALL BE REQUIRED TQ BE SUBJECT TO TEMPO- 
RARY OR SPECIAL PREAUDIT WHERE THE IN- 
TERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM OF SUCH ENTITIES IS 
INADEQUATE. 

Madam President, I have added the phrase PRO- 
VIDED THE AMOUNT INVOLVED IS ONE MILLION 
OR MORE. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Gascon seeking 
recognition? 

MR. GASCON. Basically, I wonder if we can suspend 
the session so we can consider this more seriously. 

MR. ROMULO. There is a motion to vote on the 
floor. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a motion to vote; I am 
sorry. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it seems that the 
proposal is being amended by instinct. We are talking 
about the Constitution. 

May we submit to a vote? 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment which has been read by Commis- 
sioner Guingona, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 6 votes in favor and 25 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we hear a motion to suspend 
because there will be a mass? 

MR. ROMULO. There are only two more speakers 
with very short amendments and the pangs of hunger 
make one brief. So, may 1 suggest that we continue. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


618 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


MR. ROMULO. Just two more amendments. They 
will be very brief, I assure everybody. 

May I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Since the President kept us here late 
last night, I am exercising the same privilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. I agree. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I will withdraw 
my amendment and reserve it this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other amendment? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move to suspend 
the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 11:59 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:48 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I request that 
Commissioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to make two amendments? Lines 37 to 38, 
Section 2 of Article XII, reads: “of the Government and, 
for the period as may be provided by law, preserve the 
vouchers pertaining thereto.” May I make an amend- 
ment by adding the words AND OTHER EVIDENCE 
SUPPORTING EVERY FINANCIAL TRANSACTION 
OF THE GOVERNMENT INCLUDING THE ACQUISI- 
TION AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTIES. I am pro- 
posing this amendment because the word “vouchers” 
is too limited. I think there are other documentary 
evidences other than vouchers which are to be preserved 
by the government, so I am suggesting the addition of 
the words I mentioned. Will the Committee agree? 

THE PRESIDENT. May I have that again? What 
line? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Line 38, Madam President, reads: 
“by law, preserve the vouchers pertaining thereto.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. After the word “thereto,” I ask 
that the following words be added: AND OTHER 
EVIDENCE SUPPORTING EVERY FINANCIAL 
TRANSACTION OF THE GOVERNMENT INCLUD- 
ING THE ACQUISITION AND DISPOSITION OF 
PROPERTIES. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. SARMIENTO. It will support every financial 
transaction of the government including the acquisition 
and disposition of properties. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I propose an 
amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just 
answer the proponent of the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. We will just wait for the action of 
the Committee. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, this is the proposed amendment 
to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Would the proponent consider the insertion of the 
words AND OTHER SUPPORTING PAPERS between 
“vouchers” and “pertaining”? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I will accept the amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So that line 38 will read now . . . 

MR. SARMIENTO. It will read: “by law, preserve the 
vouchers AND OTHER SUPPORTING PAPERS pertain- 
ing thereto.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. MONSOD. So, it will just be that? We accept 
the amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. We have one last amendment. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute, has the Committee 
accepted? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


619 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted; let 
us put it first to a vote before we proceed to the next 
amendment. 

Is there any objection to the amendment proposed 
by Commissioners Sarmiento and Suarez? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My second amendment, Madam 
President, is on page 2, line 9. After the word “pro- 
perties,” may I suggest that we add the following words: 
THE COMMISSION SHALL BE EMPOWERED TO IS- 
SUE SUCH OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS IN 
PURSUANCE OF ITS OBJECTIVES AND TO IMPOSE 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW, REASONABLE 
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF. 

It will be noted that line 5 refers to the promulgation 
of accounting and auditing rules and regulations includ- 
ing those for the prevention or disallowance of irregular, 
unnecessary, excessive, extravagant or unconscionable 
expenditures. I suggest that we add the provision that I 
just read. 

Will the Committee accept the amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, when Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento speaks of sanctions that may be im- 
posed in accordance with law by the Commission, is he 
including penal sanctions or purely administrative 
sanctions? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Purely administrative sanctions. 

MR. REGALADO. Unless otherwise, we might run 
afoul of the rules of the Judiciary. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, can we not assume 
that the powers are inherent since COA can promulgate 
the rules necessary for it to meet its objectives or fulfill 
its task? Does that not come with the granting of the 
power? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The sponsor is referring to the 
power to promulgate accounting and auditing rules to 
embrace this other . . . 

MR. MONSOD. No, such other rules and regulations 
that are necessary for it to accomplish its purpose. Is 
that not inherent in the commission? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Then I submit, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. And, besides, under the election 
laws, there are already both penal and administrative 
sanctions. We might have two sets of rules and laws 
imposing different sanctions. Why do we not just leave 
it to the Election Code? No, no. We leave it to the law 
itself. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, with that explanation. 
Madam President, I withdraw my amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment is with- 
drawn. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Actually, I have two proposed amendments, but if I 
secure the necessary clarification from the sponsors, I 
may desist from pressing the proposed amendments, 
so may I address some clarificatory questions to the 
distinguished sponsors? 

May I call the sponsor’s attention to Section 2, para- 
graph 1, line 22, wherein the word “audit” was used; 
and on line 27, the phrase “including, on a postaudit 
basis” was used. 

Is my understanding correct that the postaudit basis 
for the constitutional commissions, autonomous educa- 
tional institutions, government-owned or controlled 
corporations and their subsidiaries or such nongovern- 
mental entities receiving subsidy or equity, etcetera, 
would preclude a regular audit like a preaudit? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the enumeration 
is for institutions that will be subject to postaudit but 
would not include preaudit except for the amendment 
that we accepted this morning, which was discussed 
with Chairman Teofisto Guingona of the COA and 
presented by Commissioner Serafin Guingona, where 
the internal control system of the audited agencies is 
inadequate, referring to all of the enumerated agencies. 
Then, the COA may adopt such measures including 
temporary or special preaudit as are necessary and 
appropriate to correct the deficiency. Precisely, we 
accept the fact that there are situations in which the 
COA must be allowed to enter any audited agency and 
implement measures to make sure that the deficiencies 
are corrected. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, if we exempt these 
enumerated bodies from the regular audit, are we not 
legislating on a class basis? Are we not indulging in class 
legislation? 

MR. MONSOD. A postaudit is also a regular audit. We 
are not engaging in class legislation because we are 
merely acknowledging certain distinctions with respect 
to these bodies which would make it difficult for them 
to operate normally if a preaudit procedure were to be 
applied to them, but subject, however, to that exception 
that we accepted this morning which we felt was well 
made. 

MR. SUAREZ. Why should the sponsor venture a 
supposition that conducting a preaudit, insofar as these 


620 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


bodies enumerated here are concerned, would hamper 
their respective efficiencies? 

MR. MONSOD. This morning, we tried to explain the 
reasons why the committee report contained this recom- 
mendation. In the case of the constitutional bodies 
which have been accorded fiscal autonomy, it would 
defeat the purpose of the fiscal autonomy if these were 
allowed. In the case of the government or state educa- 
tional institutions, in our opinion, it is also a case where 
a postaudit would be sufficient but a preaudit, as we 
have seen in many cases, would hamper the operations 
in the education system. This is very important because 
sometimes the disbursements are not made on time, as 
has happened in the past, and there is enough safeguard 
anyway when the auditor conducts a postaudit. By the 
way, postaudit does not mean that it happens only once 
a year. We can have postaudit system regularly and we 
can have a resident auditor conducting a postaudit. 

With respect to the government-owned or controlled 
corporations and their subsidiaries, we took cognizance 
of the fact that in these institutions, the normal opera- 
tions involve amounts in excess of P5 00,000 which are 
exempt from preaudit. And as we said early this 
morning, there are instances where the expenditure may 
may be completely regular. In other words, these are 
regular expenditures and a mere delay is enough to cost 
a lot of money. 

On instances where the regular board has already 
approved an expenditure — and we have many examples 
of that — we are afraid of COA instituting as a super- 
board that has the right to pass on disbursements that 
have gone through the normal board procedures a pur- 
chase which is above P500,000 by corporations that 
have a turnover of P2 billion or PI billion a year. The 
presence of the postaudit is a deterrent by itself and the 
reason why this was abused during the past years was 
not because there was no right of pre-or postaudit As a 
matter of fact, preaudit and postaudit were there, but 
the system was not allowed to operate normally. It is 
not a question of the function that is available, but that 
it was not allowed to operate normally. And our as- 
sumption was, if the COA can go in there at any time 
and correct deficiencies and have all the measures avail- 
able in order to make sure that it functions normally, 
then we can have a safeguard; at the same time, we are 
not opening up the possibility of an arbitrary auditor in 
a corporation that could hamper its normal operations. 

MR. SUAREZ. One final clarificatory question. 
Madam President. Does the sponsor have any objection 
in constitutionalizing the phrase “postaudit basis” under 
this proposed section? 

MR. MONSOD. We had thought and discussed that, 
and with the proviso where we allow the COA to come 
in when necessary, we feel that there are enough safe- 
guards and powers given to the COA to fulfill its duty 
and obligation. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you; and with those clarifica- 
tions on record, we will refrain from submitting the two 
proposed amendments we have in mind. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I move that we close the period of 
amendments on the Article on the Commission on 
Audit. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 469 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Commission on Audit) 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I propose that 
we vote on Second Reading on Proposed Resolution 
No. 469, the Article on the Commission on Audit, as 
amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Pro- 
posed Resolution No. 469, as amended, on the Commis- 
sion on Audit, please raise their hand. (All Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and none against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 469 on the Commission on 
Audit is approved, as amended, on Second Reading. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, in the Calendar of 
Business today, on page 6, Committee Report No. 27 is 
the proposed resolution on the subsection on the Article 
on Constitutional Commissions with respect to the 
Commission on Elections. Each Commissioner has 
already been furnished a copy of Committee Report 
No. 27. 

I move that Committee Report No. 27 be moved into 
the item under the Business for the Day which will be 
the next report that will be taken up by the Committee 
on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


621 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, before we con- 
sider this, may I just call attention to a typographical 
error which might mislead the Commissioners in the 
consideration thereof. On page 4, line 21, on the words 
“Commission on Election contests,” the letter “E” in 
“Election” should be in the lower case. But we will 
amend that also. So it should read; “Final decisions, 
orders or rulings of the Commission on election con- 
tests” — with a small e. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 521 
(Article on the Commission on Elections) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move that we 
consider Committee Report No. 27 on Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 521 as reported out by the Committee on 
Constitutional Commissions and Agencies. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 521 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read the title of the resolution without 
prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole text 
thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 521, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution 
perC.R. No. 27.) 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 27 

The Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies 
to which were referred: 

Proposed Resolution No. 57, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION WHICH REQUIRES POLITICAL 
PARTIES TO CONFORM THEIR INTERNAL ORGANI- 
ZATION TO DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLES AND TO 
PUBLICLY ACCOUNT FOR THE SOURCES OF THEIR 
FUNDS. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 60, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF A PROVISION IN 
THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 


PROHIBITING “BLOCK VOTING” IN ALL ELECTORAL 
EXERCISES. 

Introduced by Hon. Alberto Jamir, Jose Suarez, Jaime Tadeo, 
and Adolfo Azcuna. 

Proposed Resolution No. 62, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT SERIOUS ELECTION OFFENSES, AS DEFINED 
BY LAW, SHALL BE PUNISHABLE BY DEATH. 

Introduced by Hon. Jose Nolledo. 

Proposed Resolution No. 68, entitled; 

RESOLUTION AMENDING SECTION 10, ARTICLE XII (C) 
OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION, AS AMENDED. 

Introduced by Hon. Vicente Foz. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 10, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AMENDING SECTION 1(1) AND (2), ARTI- 
CLE XII (C) OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION BY RE- 
DUCING THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF THE COM- 
MISSION ON ELECTIONS FROM NINE TO SEVEN, AND 
PROVIDING THAT AT THE TIME OF THEIR APPOINT- 
MENT THEY SHALL BE AT LEAST FORTY YEARS OF 
AGE AND A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS INCLUD- 
ING THE CHAIRMAN, SHALL BE MEMBERS OF THE 
PHILIPPINE BAR WITH AT LEAST TEN YEARS OF 
PRACTICE AND THAT IN CASE AN INCUMBENT COM- 
MISSIONER IS APPOINTED CHAIRMAN, HIS AGGRE- 
GATE TENURE SHALL NOT EXCEED SEVEN YEARS. 

Introduced by Hon. Vicente Foz and Christian Monsod. 

Proposed Resolution No. 193, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS BY INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION PROVISIONS REQUIRING THAT APPOINT- 
MENTS THERETO SHALL BE MADE FROM A LIST OF 
NOMINEES SUBMITTED BY VARIOUS SECTORS AND 
INCREASING THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR APPOINT- 
MENT AS COMMISSIONER. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 195, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO GUARANTEE THE RIGHT OF CIVIC 
ORGANIZATIONS TO BE ACCREDITED AS CITIZEN 
ARM OF THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS AND TO 
BE AFFORDED PROTECTION BY MAKING ITS MEM- 
BERS WHILE IN THE PERFORMANCE OF DUTY AS 
AGENTS OF PERSONS IN AUTHORITY. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 225, entitled; 

RESOLUTION TO STRENGTHEN FURTHER THE COM- 
MISSION ON ELECTIONS BY GRANTING IT EXCLU- 
SIVE AUTHORITY TO DEPUTIZE LAW ENFORCE- 
MENT AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES AND 


622 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


THE ARMED FORCES, IF NECESSARY. FOR THE PUR- 
POSE OF ENSURING FREE, ORDERLY, HONEST, AND 
CLEAN ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 244, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ESTABLISHING THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS, 
TEMPORARILY OUT OF THE COUNTRY, TO VOTE. 

Introduced by Hon. Teodulo Natividad, Bias Ople, Rustico 
de los Reyes, and Regalado Maambong. 

Proposed Resolution No. 284, entitled: 

RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING APPEALS ON QUESTIONS 
OF FACT FROM DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 305, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING THE REGISTRATION OF 
POLITICAL PARTIES UNLESS THEY PUBLISH AND 
SUBMIT THEIR PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT OR 
PLATFORMS AND THEIR CONSTITUTION AND BY- 
LAWS AND PROCLAIM THEIR ADHERENCE TO AND 
SUPPORT OF THE CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 308, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CON- 
STITUTION A PROVISION PROHIBITING ANY RE- 
LIGIOUS SECT AND ANY PARTY, AGGROUPMENT, 
ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION WHICH SEEKS 
DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY TO ACHIEVE ITS GOAL 
THROUGH VIOLENCE OR ARMED STRUGGLE FROM 
BEING REGISTERED OR ACCREDITED AS A POLIT- 
ICAL PARTY. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 312, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE A PROVISION IN THE NEW 
CONSTITUTION THAT ALL CANDIDATES FOR ELEC- 
TION OR REFLECTION SHALL AUTOMATICALLY 
VACATE THEIR POSITION UPON THE FILING OF 
THEIR CERTIFICATES OF CANDIDACY. 

Introduced by Hon. Jose Suarez and Alberto Jamir. 

Proposed Resolution No. 349, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION CERTAIN GUARANTEES TO BONA FIDE 
CANDIDATES FOR ANY PUBLIC OFFICE. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 350, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE CONSTITU- 
TION A PROVISION THAT ONLY POLITICAL PAR- 
TIES, AGGROUPMENT, ORGANIZATION OR MOVE- 


MENT WHICH HAVE OBTAINED AT LEAST FIFTEEN 
PERCENT OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF VOTES CAST 
IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING ELECTION IN 
THE CONSTITUENCY TO WHICH IT SEEKS ACCREDI- 
TATION SHALL BE ACCREDITED BY THE COMMIS- 
SION ON ELECTIONS. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 358, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT NO PARTY OR CANDI- 
DATE SHALL HAVE MEMBERSHIP IN THE REGISTRA- 
TION BOARDS, BOARD OF ELECTION INSPECTORS 
AND BOARD OF CANVASSERS BUT SHALL BE EN- 
TITLED TO APPOINT WATCHERS. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 380, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION THE FIXING OF THE MINIMUM ELECTION 
PERIOD. 

Introduced by Hon. Efrain Trenas. 

Proposed Resolution No. 410, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MAKING THE COMMISSION ON ELEC- 
TIONS THE SOLE JUDGE OF ELECTION RETURNS 
AND QUALIFICATIONS OF ALL ELECTIVE LOCAL 
OFFICIALS. 

Introduced by Hon. Hilario Davide, Jr. 

has considered said resolutions and has the honor to report it 
back to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recom- 
mendation that Proposed Resolution No. 521 prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 57, 60, 
62, 68, 1 10, 193, 195, 225, 244, 284, 305, 308, 312, 349, 350, 
358, 380 and 410, with the members of the Committee on Con- 
stitutional Commissions and Agencies and Hon. Davide, Suarez, 
Tadeo, Azeuna, Nolledo, Natividad, Ople, Maambong and Trenas 
as authors thereof. 

(Sgd.) Vicente B. Foz 
Chairman 

Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 521 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
ELECTIONS 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


623 


Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled to incorporate in Article XII of 
the new Constitution, the following provisions: 

C. THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS 

Section 1.(1) There shall be an independent Commission on 
Elections composed of a Chairman and six (6) Commissioners 
who shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines and, at the 
time of their appointment, at least thirty-five years of age and 
holders of a college degree. However, a majority thereof, includ- 
ing the Chairman, shall be members of the Philippine Bar who 
have been engaged in the practice of law for at least ten (10) 
years. 

(2) The Chairman and the Commissioners shall be appointed 
by the President for a term of seven (7) years without reap- 
pointment. Appointments to the Commission need no confirma- 
tion. Of those first appointed, three (3) Members shall hold office 
for seven (7) years, two (2) Members for five (5) years and the 
last Members for three (3) years, without reappointment. Ap- 
pointment to any vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion 
of the term of the predecessor. In no case shall any Member be 
appointed in a temporary or acting capacity. 

Sec. 2. The Commission on Elections shall exercise the follow- 
ing powers and functions: 

(1) Enforce and administer all laws and regulations relative to 
the conduct of elections, plebiscites, recalls, initiatives and 
referenda; 

(2) Be the sole judge of all contests relating to the elections, 
returns and qualifications of all elective provincial, city, munic- 
ipal and barangay officials; 

(3) Decide, except those involving the right to vote, all ques- 
tions affecting elections, including detemiination of the number 
and location of polling places, appointment of election officials 
and inspectors, and registration of voters; 

(4) Deputize, with notice to the President, law enforcement 
agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including the 
Armed Forces of the Philippines, for the exclusive purpose of 
ensuring free, orderly, honest and peaceful elections; 

(5) Register after sufficient publication, political parties, 
organizations or coalitions and accredit citizens arms of the 
Commission, except that religious sects, or those which seek to 
achieve their goals through violence and refuse to uphold this 
Constitution, shall not be registered; 

(6) On a verified complaint or on its own, file petitions in 
court for inclusion or exclusion of voters from the registry of 
qualified voters; investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute 
cases of violations of election laws, including acts or omissions 
constituting election fraud, offenses and malpractices; 

(7) Recommend to the legislature effective measures to 
minimize election spending and prevent and/or penalize all forms 
of election frauds, offenses and malpractices, nuisance candidacy 
or other similar acts; 

(8) Recommend to the President the removal of, or any other 
disciplinary action against, any officer or employee it has de- 


putized, for violation or disregard of or disobedience to its 
directive, order or decision; 

(9) Submit to the President and the Batasang Pambansa a 
comprehensive report on the conduct and manner of each elec- 
tion, plebiscite, and referendum; and 

(10) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law. 

Sec. 3. No votes cast in favor of a political party, organization 
or coalition shall be valid, except as may be provided in this 
Constitution under the party-list system. 

Sec. 4. Bona fide candidates for any public office shall be free 
from any form of harassment and discrimination. 

Sec. 5. Political parties or organizations or coalitions registered 
under the party-list system shall not be represented in the voters’ 
registration boards, boards of election inspectors, boards of can- 
vassers or other similar bodies. However, they shall be entitled 
to appoint poll watchers in accordance with law. 

Sec. 6. The Commission on Elections may sit en banc or in 
two divisions, and shall promulgate its rules of procedures in 
order to expedite disposition of election cases, including pre- 
proclamation controversies. All such election cases shall be heard 
and decided in division, provided that motions for reconsidera- 
tion of decisions shall be decided by the Commission en banc. 

Sec. 7. The enjoyment or utilization of all franchises or 
permits for the operation of transportation and other public 
utilities, media of communication or information, all grants, 
special privileges or concessions granted by the Government or 
any subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof, including any 
government-owned or controlled corporation, may be supervised 
or regulated by the Commission during the election period, 
including rates, reasonable free space, and time allotments for 
public information campaigns and forums among candidates for 
the purpose of ensuring free, orderly, honest and peaceful 
elections. 

Sec. 8. Unless otherwise fixed by the Commission in special 
casesi the election period shall commence ninety days before the 
day of election and shall end thirty days thereafter. 

Sec. 9. No pardon, amnesty, parole or suspension of sentence 
for violation of election laws, rules and regulations shall be 
granted by the President without the favorable recommendation 
of the Commission. 

Sec. 10. Final decisions, orders or rulings of the Commission 
on Election contests involving elective municipal and barangay 
offices shall be final, inappealable and executory. 

Sec. 11. Funds certified by the Commission as necessary to 
defray the expenses for holding regular and special elections, re- 
ferenda and plebiscites shall be provided in the regular or special 
appropriations and, once approved, shall be released automatical- 
ly upon certification by the Chairman of the Commission. 


THE PRESIDENT. The sponsor, Commissioner Foz, 
is recognized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER FOZ 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in connection with 
Proposed Resolution No. 521 which has to do with the 


624 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


provisions on the Commission on Elections, we would 
like to point out the highlights of the provisions with 
regard to the basic changes that we have introduced in 
the Committee — the changes numbering to nine and 
some of them involve some basic provisions affecting 
the Commission on Elections. 

We have already known in our discussion on the 
Common Provisions for the three constitutional 
commissions that fiscal autonomy has been granted to 
the three commissions, including the Commission on 
Elections. We said that by fiscal autonomy, we mean, as 
provided expressly in the provisions of the Common 
Provisions, that the annual appropriations of the com- 
mission shall be released automatically and regularly 
to the commission concerned. 

We go to the other changes now. On the powers and 
functions of the Commission on Elections, there is a 
change in that the commission is made the sole judge of 
all contests relating to the election returns and qualifi- 
cations of all elective provincial, city, municipal and 
barangay officials. In other words, the commission has 
lost its jurisdiction over election contests involving the 
members of the legislature, and this is only in conjunc- 
tion with the report of the Committee on the Legislative 
which seeks to recreate the Electoral Tribunal in the 
legislature. Also, this provision would vest the Commis- 
sion on Elections with competence to decide controver- 
sies on the election returns and qualifications of 
municipal and barangay officials because at present 
under the existing provision of the 1973 Constitution, 
the commission has jurisdiction only over cases involv- 
ing elective provincial and city officials, but not the 

municipal and barangay officials. That is one basic 
change. 

Concerning the power of the commission to deputize 
law enforcenient agencies and instrumentalities of the 
government, including the Armed Forces of the Philip- 
pines, for the purpose of ensuring free and honest 
elections, the Committee has decided to empower the 
commission to deputize, only with notice to the Pres- 
ident, law enforcement agencies and instrumentalities 
of the government, including the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines. 

The third major change has to do with the registra- 
tion of political parties, organizations or coalitions and 
the accreditation of a citizens arm of the Commission. 
Parties which seek to achieve their goals through 
violence and refuse to uphold this Constitution shall not 
be registered. In other words, we have decided to do 
away with the two-party system which has been in- 
stalled by the 1973 Constitution. We have also, of 
course, reenacted the prohibition on religious acts being 
registered as a political party. 

Another significant change is the provision em- 
powering the Commission on Elections, on a verified 
complaint or on its own, to file petitions in court for 
inclusion or exclusion of voters from the registry of 
qualified voters; and also, not only to investigate but. 


where appropriate, prosecute cases of violations of 
election laws. 

Another change is the provision allowing partial block 
voting. The provision reads: 

No votes cast in favor of a political party, organization 
or coalition shall be valid, except as may be provided in this 
Constitution under the party-list system. 

The meaning of a party-list system will be explained 
later on. 

Another provision reads: 

Political parties or organizations or coalitions registered 
under the party-list system shall not be represented in the 
voters’ registration boards, boards of election inspectors, 
boards of canvassers or other similar bodies. However, they 
shall be entitled to appoint poll watchers in accordance 
with law. 

Regarding the regulation by the Commission of the 
enjoyment or utilization of franchises or permits for the 
operation of transportation and other public utilities, 
media of communication or information, all grants, 
special privileges or concessions granted by the Govern- 
ment, there is a provision that during the election 
period, the Commission may regulate, among other 
things, the rates, reasonable free space, and time allot- 
ments for public information campaigns and forums 
among candidates for the purpose of ensuring free, 
orderly, honest and peaceful elections. This has to do 
with the media of communication or information. 

Finally, there is a provision that funds certified by 
the Commission as necessary to defray the expenses for 
holding regular and special elections, referenda and 
plebiscites shall be provided in the regular or special 
appropriations and, once approved, shall be released 
automatically upon certification by the Chairman of the 
Commission. 

Madam President, we are ready to answer any ques- 
tions from the floor in connection with our report. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I request that 
Commissioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President and members of 
the Committee, I understand from the sponsorship 
speech that in matters of contests of barangay, munici- 
pal and provincial officials, the jurisdiction is all ex- 
clusive to the Commission on Elections. Under the 
present law that we have, cases involving election con- 
tests of barangay officials are initiated in the municipal 
trial court or metropolitan trial court, subject to appeal 
to the Regional Trial Court whose decision is final. In 
other words, when it comes to barangay officials, the 
COMELEC has nothing to do at all with the election 
contest. In the case, however, of municipal officials, 
under the present law, the Omnibus Election Code, the 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


625 


original jurisdiction is with the Regional Trial Court, 
and the decision is appealable to the Commission on 
Elections. We are suggesting — and we would like the 
Committee to take note of this that while we admit that 
in all contests, whether it be barangay, municipal, 
provincial or city officials, the sole authority should be 
the Commission on Elections — that there should be a 
two-tiered resolution of cases in the sense that when it 
comes to barangay officials, the municipal trial court or 
the metropolitan trial court should have jurisdiction 
first, then it is appealable to the COMELEC. 

In the case of municipal officials, we are thinking that 
the regional trial court should have jurisdiction, and 
then it is appealable to the COMELEC. And in the case 
of provincial or city officials, the first jurisdiction, 
which is exclusive, would be the COMELEC. I wonder if 
the Committee would take that into consideration con- 
sidering these facts. If we will allow the COMELEC to 
have executive jurisdiction over cases involving barangay 
and municipal officials, one can just imagine the diffi- 
culty of the COMELEC, considering that we have 
thousands of barangay and municipal officials. And as I 
understand from my private conversation with the 
Chairman of the COMELEC, the Honorable Ramon 
Felipe, when it comes to contests involving barangay 
and municipal officials, the COMELEC may have to 
send hearing officers; whereas if we will allow the 
municipal trial court and the metropolitan trial court 
to have jurisdiction over these cases, they will be given 
the proper consideration by the court. In the case of 
contests involving municipal officials, the regional trial 
court, which is also a court, should have jurisdiction, 
not the hearing officers of the COMELEC. So, we have 
a two-tiered situation here which we lawyers think 
would be the best remedy considering again my allusion 
to the fact that there are so many barangays and munici- 
palities all over the country. 

That is just my suggestion. I do not know if the 
Committee could respond to it so that we could perhaps 
present some amendments. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, insofar as the 
appellate jurisdiction of the Commission on Elections 
is concerned, it is still preserved despite the fact that it 
involves barangay, municipal, city or provincial officials. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, we would rather insist on 
that because that is a constitutional mandate. 

MR. REGALADO. The Commissioner’s proposal is 
only with respect to the original jurisdiction; that is, 
insofar as election contests involving barangay officials 
are concerned, the municipal trial courts have the 
original jurisdiction; whereas in the case of city and 
provincial officials, the original jurisdiction is vested in 
the regional trial courts. 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, Madam President. In the case 
of provincial and city officials, the original and ex- 


clusive jurisdiction should be with the Commission on 
Elections. 

MR. REGALADO. In the case of municipal officials, 
then it will be the regional trial courts which will 
exercise original jurisdiction. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correctly put. Madam 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. But altogether, in the ultimate 
analysis on appellate jurisdiction, they will all have to go 
to the Commission on Elections eventually. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. They will 
still be the sole judge of all election contests. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, perhaps we can 
give the Commissioner a rationale of the pertinent 
provision. We started from the premise that if the 
COMELEC — and this was discussed with the Commis- 
sion on Elections quite extensively — has original juris- 
diction over provincial officials, then it should also be 
fit to handle lower officials. The only possible obstacle 
is the availability and the number of COMELEC officials. 

The COMELEC, however, in the review of its organi- 
zation, found that there were some redundancies within 
their system now, principally at the regional level. And 
the redundant personnel can really be reoriented or re- 
organized, which they are in the process of doing, to 
become regional election arbiters. In other words, the 
head office of the COMELEC does not have to send 
people out. First of all, they do not have that many, but 
they are going to set up and organize in order to handle 
precisely election contests in the barangays and the 
municipalities. The process of appeal from there is to 
the COMELEC itself. In other words, there would still 
be a two-step process. This is the procedure that is now 
envisaged by the COMELEC, if these procedures or 
provisions are approved by this body. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The thing is, we are not only 
concerned really with the lack of nersonnel of the 
COMELEC; we are more concerned with the importance 
that should be given to a barangay and a municipal 
election contest. It is our experience, considering that 
wc have gone to a series of political exercises, that 
normally the COMELEC, in order to supplement what- 
ever personnel we have in the regional level, usually 
send hearing officers. And we strongly feel that at the 
very first time that a case, whether it be a minor case of 
a barangay official or a municipal official, is brought 
before a tribunal, it should not be placed in the hands 
of merely hearing officers but of a court. That is really 
our intention because we are talking here of the sanctity 
of the right of a person to suffrage. If we assign it to 
hearing officers, we do not seem to give it that much 
importance. At any rate, we are still in agreement with 


626 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 1 6, 1 986 


the Committee that the Commission on Elections 
should be the sole judge. We are not deviating from that 
principle in any way. 

MR. MONSOD. When we posed that question to the 
COMELEC, they said that, precisely, they will reor- 
ganize in order to have their lawyers handle these 
questions. They also said that they have the experience 
in handling election contests, which probably has 
validity because they know the election laws. That is 
their expertise, that is why they feel that they are in a 
better position to make judgment on such contests. 
However, I think, the Commissioner also has some 
meritorious arguments, and perhaps we can deal with it 
at the proper time. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. I will not 
waste the time of the Committee anymore. 

MR. REGALADO. May I ask Commissioner Maam- 
bong a question? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Is it his concern that we vest in 
the municipal trial courts the matter of election contests 
for barangay officials and in the regional trial courts 
election contests involving municipal officials thereby 
requiring a judicial officer to handle these cases, height- 
ened by the fact that the decisions of the municipal 
trial court or the regional trial court in those election 
contests involving barangay and municipal officials 
are final and immediately executory? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Under the present law, when it 
comes to appeals from the municipal trial court to the 
regional trial court, these become final and executory, 
and we feel that in this regard, the jurisdiction of the 
COMELEC has been diluted. And we do not like that 
Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Bacani be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will the members of the Commit- 
tee yield to a few questions? 

MR. FOZ. With pleasure. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. On page 2, line 22, it says; 

XXX Register after sufficient publication, political 

parties, organizations or coalitions and accredit citizens’ 


arms of the Commission, except that religious sects, or 

those which seek to achieve. . . 

What is the meaning of the phrase “religious sects”? 
What is its coverage? What does the term “religious 
sects” mean? 

MR. FOZ. It means religious groups or even churches. 
The prohibition here is that religious groups or sects 
cannot be registered as political parties. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. The reason I ask is that the 
word “sects” may mean a minority group or a break- 
away group; and in common language, big religious 
organizations would not want to be included under the 
word “sect.” So, perhaps, we have to look for a major 
word for this or add a few more words, like “religious 
bodies, churches or denominations.” Besides the word 
“sects” very often has a pejorative sense. May I ask for 
the rationale of that provision? 

MR. FOZ. That is, I think, a takeoff from the consti- 
tutional injunction that the separation of church and 
state shall be inviolable. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask this: Will the sponsor be 
willing to include in this Constitution that atheistic 
groups, agnostic groups and groups dedicated to the 
abolition of religion shall not be accredited and regis- 
tered? 

MR. FOZ. We have not considered an idea like that, 
but we would be willing to discuss the matter at the 
proper time. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, because if the Committee 
will not include such groups, then we will be putting 
religious sects in a lesser and disadvantageous position in 
relation to atheistic groups, agnostic groups or groups 
dedicated to the abolition of religion. So, it would seem 
that we would have to include those groups in order to 
have parity. 

MR. FOZ. Groups like those which the Commissioner 
has mentioned would partake of — although these are 
antireligion — a kind of religion in that sense, I would 
suppose. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. They would not claim to be; 
they would claim that there is no religion at all. They 
may be ideological groups. I would just like to point 
that out. There may be some amendments in that regard 
that may have to be introduced when the proper time 
comes. 

Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 1 6, 1 986 


627 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Although I am a member of the 
Committee, I would like to ask some questions for 
clarification. 

On page 2, Section 2, subparagraph 2, the provision 
reads: 

XXX the sole judge of all contests relating to the elec- 
tions, returns and qualifications of all elective provincial, 
city, municipal and barangay officials. 

So, the COMELEC will be the sole judge of contests 
involving provincial, city, municipal and barangay 
officials. 

In Section 10, it reads: 

Final decisions, orders or rulings of the Commission on 
election contests involving elective municipal and baran- 
gay offices shall be final, unappealable xxx 

I think that should be “unappealable and executory.” 
Is there no inconsistency between the two? While 
Section 2, subparagraph 2 embraces provincial, city, 
municipal and barangay officials. Section 10 embraces 
only municipal and barangay officials. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, this Section 10 
was originally in the Common Provisions which, on 
motion, was transposed, to be placed strictly under the 
Commission on Elections. But as transposed, the correc- 
tions should not appear. As already corrected, it should 
properly read: “Decisions, FINAL orders or rulings of 
the Commission on election contests involving elective 
municipal and barangay offices shall be final and IMME- 
DIATELY executory.” The word “unappealable” was 
stricken off. 

MR. RODRIGO. No. My point there is not on the 
word “unappealable.” 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, I just wanted to put the word- 
ings properly. It was the sense of the Committee that 
with respect to municipal and barangay officials in 
election contests involving them, the decisions could be 
final and immediately executory. 

MR. RODRIGO. How about decisions in the case of 
provincial and city officials? 

MR. REGALADO. They made a distinction because 
the original jurisdiction as envisioned would be in the 
Commission on Elections itself and, of course, the 
appellate jurisdiction would be to the Supreme Court. 

MR. RODRIGO. But it says “shall be the sole judge.” 
That could connote finality. That is in Section 2, sub- 
paragraph 2. It would imply that it is final; it is the sole 
authority and no appeal or petition for certiorari will 
thereafter be allowed. 


MR. REGALADO. That was the observation of Com- 
missioner Maambong, and he said he will introduce an 
amendment at the proper time. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, what is the intention of the 
Committee then? Is it the intention that decisions of 
the COMELEC shall be final for provincial, city, munici- 
pal and barangay officials or only for municipal and 
barangay officials? 

MR. REGALADO. The thinking here is that it would 
only be for barangay and municipal officials. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, that would be amended accord- 
ingly. 

MR. REGALADO. And on the matter of the COM- 
ELEC being the sole judge, although there is a provision 
in certain instances for appeal by certiorari to the 
Supreme Court, that does not affect the constitutional 
provision that it be the sole judge because, after all, an 
appeal by certiorari to the Supreme Court from a 
decision of the COMELEC would merely involve the 
question of mistake of law and jurisdiction. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just another point. In Section 2, 
subparagraph 4 on page 2, it says, “Deputize, with 
notice to the President, law enforcement agencies and 
instrumentalities of the Government, including the 
Armed Forces of the Philippines xxx” In the present 
Constitution, the provision is: “Deputize, with the 
consent of the President xxx” Why was “consent” 
changed? So, whether the President consents or not, 
the Commission on Elections may deputize. 

MR. REGALADO. In the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention proceedings the phrase “with the consent 
of the President” was included. I understand from my 
reading of the records that the President would also 
share the blame in the event that he fails to deputize 
law enforcers, by reason of withholding his consent. On 
the other hand, we have to consider the situation where 
the President may delay the granting of his consent, so 
much so that it might be an exercise in futility. As a 
compromise, we decided that notice be given to the 
President to avoid delay in the deputation. But, at the 
same time, if he in any way obstructs the deputation, 
then not only the COMELEC will be blamed; he will be 
as much guilty. 

MR. RODRIGO. As we can see, the President is the 
Commander-in-Chicf of the Armed Forces. Would this 
not be a diminution of his power as Commander-in- 
Chief of the Armed Forces? 

MR. REGALADO. We do not believe so because if 
the President feels that the deputation is really merito- 
rious, he should not improvidently withhold his consent. 
On the other hand, if he does so despite the fact that 


628 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


the situation is patently one calling for a deputation, by 
hiding behind the Commander-in-Chief clause, that 
would in effect be a negative exercise of his duties as 
President, for he should see to it that all the laws are 
faithfully executed. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us see the practical application 
of this. In the present Constitution, the deputation 
takes effect after the consent of the President shall have 
been given. Under this proposal, the deputation takes 
effect even before the President gives his or her consent. 
But I suppose the President has the power to refuse. Let 
us say that two days later he says: “No, I do not want 
the deputation.” 


MR. REGALADO. Actually, the COMELEC there is 
not usurping the powers of the President because 
deputation would be done ostensibly with prior con- 
sultation. If the President is not available, however, the 
COMELEC should not exercise this power improvident- 
ly, but only to meet an urgent situation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Maybe that was the reason the 1971 
Constitutional Convention used the phrase “with the 
consent of the President.” So, that would not be a dimi- 
nution of the commander-in-chief powers of the 
President. 

Thank you very much. 


MR. REGALADO. I think the President has that 
power for which he has to answer before the people in 
the event that his negative exercise of his duty to faith- 
fully execute the laws turn out to be a reason for 
electoral frauds. 

MR. RODRIGO. But constitutionally, he has the 
power. The Commissioner just wants to place the 
President in a situation where it will not look good for 
him to refuse or to veto. But the veto power remains 
with the President. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tan be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I just want to ask a simple question on 
Section 1, subparagraph 2. Assuming we have the 
Commission on Appointments, why is there no need to 
confirm the appointments of commissioners of the 
Commission on Elections by the Commission on Ap- 
pointments? 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, that is correct; but at leasi 
with prior notice, the President is made aware thai 
deputation as recommended by the 
COMELEC Without prior notice, the President, even il 
he knows that there might be a need for deputation and 
or reasons of his own, may cause the transfer of a 
military contingent to another area on the pretext that 
it IS necessary for the anti-insurgency campaign. 

is at the same time, the President 

IS the Commander-m-Chief of the Armed Forces. As 
such he IS empowered to command the Armed Forces 
Under this provision, he will share this power tempora- 
rily with the Commission on Elections. 


MR. REGALADO. As we said, if the President insists 
on not giving the corresponding cooperation despite the 
need for deputation, then he . . . 


MR. RODRIGO. But there will be a lapse of time, let 
us say, a few days, before the President knows that’the 
Commission on Elections has “deputized the Armed 
Forces,” but before he or she can say “no I don’t like 
this,” the Armed Forces must obey the deputation 
order of the Commission on Elections. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 


MR. MONSOD. In view of the judgment of this body 
in the case of the Civil Service Commission and the 
Commission on Appointments, we are prepared to con- 
sider similar amendments only with the reminder that 
the COMELEC deals precisely with politicians. How- 
ever, we are prepared to entertain amendments at the 
proper time. 

SR. TAN. Thank you, Madam President. 

My second question: Is there a special reason for 
reducing the number of commissioners from nine to 
seven? In the 1973 Constitution, there were nine while 
in the proposed Constitution, there are only seven. 

MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact, in the 1935 
Constitution, there were only three — a chairman and 
two commissioners. Seven commissioners is the recom- 
mendation of the COMELEC itself, for it felt that there 
were too many members in the present Commission 
such that when they si+ en banc — I think they had the 
same problem that applied to the Judiciary in the case of 
the Supreme Court — they found it very difficult to 
rnake decisions. So, the COMELEC suggested that either 
five or seven commissioners will suffice. In a way, it was 
a bit arbitrary to choose between five or seven although 
it is difficult to have two divisions with five. But the 
Committee agreed to reduce the number from nine to 
seven. 


MR. RODRIGO. Is this not an invasion of the Com- 
mander-in-Chief’s power of the President? During those 
few days, at least, there are two commanders-in-chief. 


SR. TAN. Thank you, Madam President. 

So, it was the same reason we had in the case of the 
Supreme Court. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


629 


MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Nolledo be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

On page 3, lines 18 to 19. Section 4 reads and I 
quote: 

Bona fide candidates for any public office shall be free 

from any form of harassment and discrimination. 

Correct me if I am wrong, but it seems to me that 
since this was adopted by the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention, there has been no implementing statute on 
this provision in spite of the fact that this is a very basic 
provision. 

Ordinarily, in a heated campaign for public office, 
a candidate may be harassed, say, in the form of tax 
assessment, criminal suits or administrative charges, if he 
was a former public official. May I know from the Com- 
mittee, in order to help our future researchers, some 
examples of harassment and discrimination? May 
criminal suits be filed against the candidate during a 
political campaign? May administrative cases be filed 
against him, being a former public official? May tax 
assessments be made upon him? 

MR. FOZ. Will the Commissioner give his questions 
one by one so that we can answer them? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, my first question: May crimin- 
al or administrative suits be filed against a candidate 
while a political campaign is going on? 

MR. FOZ. It will depend on whether the evidence 
would warrant the filing of such a case and complaint. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would that not constitute harass- 
ment? 

MR. FOZ. If there is no evidence and considering 
other circumstances, obviously that would constitute 
harassment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would not the Committee agree 
with me that that would constitute harassment because 
it can obstruct the campaign of the candidate? Assum- 
ing that there is evidence that supports the criminal or 
administrative suit, the government may file the case 
later on. 

MR. MONSOD. We believe that at present the candi- 
dates do not enjoy any explicit immunity during the 
period of campaign and there are no legislation that we 
know of specifically to handle the situations that the 
Commissioner mentioned. So, that is a general response 
to the question. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Regalado would like 
to make some statements. 

MR. REGALADO. The Commissioner’s question is 
whether or not the government, for reason of its own, 
could file criminal suits against a candidate during the 
period of the campaign. We cannot prevent the govern- 
ment or a private party from filing such a criminal suit 
because there may be reasons of prescription of of- 
fenses. The party who files the suit may claim that there 
is danger of loss of evidence or, let us say, concealment 
of witnesses; however, the candidate will not necessarily 
be unduly concerned if he is really innocent because, 
after all, he still has further remedies if it turned out to 
be a false and malicious or groundless criminal case. The 
other party may be liable civilly for malicious prosecu- 
tion and criminally for peijury. Furthermore, we still 
have a safeguard of a criminal investigation and we 
proceed on the asssumption that our fiscals will exercise 
their duties under the rules on preliminary investigation. 

We do not feel that we can, by legislation, grant a 
sort of immunity against suit. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am not talking of immunity but of 
persecution. That is why I would like to ask the Com- 
mittee if we can add “persecution” after the word 
“harassment.” Cannot the government wait until the 
end of the election campaign before the suits are filed 
against him? 

MR. REGALADO. This is Just a general statement. 
We could possibly entertain during the period of amend- 
ments the matter of legislation on this point. The can- 
didate should not be subjected to harassment or 
discrimination. So, the Commissioner can suggest that 
the Congress should provide by legislation the corre- 
sponding protection and safeguards. 

MR. NOLLEDO. My last question since this has not 
been answered yet: Can the Commissioner give some 
examples of harassment or discrimination? 

MR. REGALADO. Discrimination could be in the 
matter of availment of media remedies from the COM- 
ELEC. 

Harassment includes the filing of criminal or adminis- 
trative actions and it may take as many forms as the 
imagination of the person seeking to harass can conceive. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Just a follow-up question, if the 
Commissioner does not mind. Therefore, discrimination 
should refer to his candidacy. Should discrimination 
in the grant of concessions not be included? 

MR. REGALADO. No, we are more concerned about 
his candidacy because we are on this provision. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President, and I 
also thank the Commissioner. 


630 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to ask one clarificatory question? 

Section 2, (2) provides that the COMELEC shall; 

Be the sole judge of all contests relating to the elections, 
returns and qualifications of all elective provincial, city, 
municipal and barangay officials. 

This provision is silent as to when the contest shall be 
filed, resolved and decided by the COMELEC. I am 
reminded of that provision in the Article on the Judi- 
ciary that the Supreme Court and other courts are 
mandated to resolve cases within a certain period of 
time so that violation of that mandate or requirement 
will constitute culpable violation of the Constitution. 
Does not the Commissioner think that we should 
specify the periods within which election contest shall 
be filed and resolved? 


MR. REGALADO. The same question was raised thi 
morning with respect to the other constitutional com 
missions and Commissioner Davide proposed th( 
adoption of a rule similar to that which we adopted fo 
the Judiciary as to when a case or matter is deemed sub 
mitted and within what period it should be decidei 
a constitutional commission is a collegial body 
although exercising quasi-judicial functions only But i 
was felt that since under Section 6, the Commission oi 
Elections shall promulgate its rules of procedure ii 
order to expedite disposition of election contests anc 
considering the fact that under the Article on th. 
Judiciaiy there is a provision that all rules of procedun 
of quasi-judicial bodies shall be approved and shall b( 
effective only until disapproval thereof by the Supremi 
Court, this matter should be left to the Commission oi 
Elections, to adopt their own rules subject to approva 
thereafter by the Supreme Court, just as the othe 
constitutional commissions do. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Does not the Commissioner think 
that we should include a provision on the period within 
which to resolve election cases, because election is vital 
to democracy? The COMELEC is separate and distinct 
from the other commissions. Here we are speaking of 
the right of the people to choose their officers. 


MR. REGALADO. That is precisely why they are 
given the rule-making power which the Supreme Court 
will oversee as to whether these rules will grant appro- 
priate relief and remedy. Section 5 under the Common 
Provisions states; 

Each Commission shall decide by a majority vote of all 
its members any case or matter brought before it within 
sixty days from the date of its submission for decision or 


resolution. Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution 
or by law, any decision, order, or ruling of each Commis- 
sion may be brought to the Supreme Court in certiorari 
by the aggrieved party within thirty days from receipt of a 
copy thereof. 

Now, to the other details; As to when the case should 
be filed, that depends on the initiative of the person 
filing the case; as to when the case shall be deemed sub- 
mitted for decision, that can be the subject of the rules 
of the Commission on Elections which, after all, have to 
be approved by the Supreme Court. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But can we not possibly specify 
the period within which the COMELEC has to resolve 
the case so that a violation of the same shall constitute 
a culpable violation of the Constitution? 

MR. REGALADO. It says here; “within sixty days 
from the date of its submission.” This applies to all the 
constitutional commissions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, will the 
sponsor yield to a few questions? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The first one has something 
to do with Section 1. In view of the experience during 
the last election, would the sponsors wish to add addi- 
tional criteria for COMELEC Commissioners, such as, 
independence, probity and moral character? 

MR. MONSOD. We had considered those. We felt that 
we could really say a lot of words as to unquestioned 
integrity, probity and so on. But, in the final analysis, 
we have to assume that the appointing power has to 
consider the reasons. Nevertheless, we would be pre- 
pared to discuss the matter at the appropriate time, 
maybe, on a uniform basis with the other commissions. 

Thank you. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. My second question is on 
Section 5, page 2. 

Again during the past few years, there has been a 
trend towards politics of issues rather than the politics 
of personalities. I would like to refer to the resolution 
submitted by Commissioner Davide, recommending the 
need for an additional criterion in the registration of 
political parties, which should include a well-defined 
government program or platform. 

Will the sponsor consider a provision to that effect? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


631 


MR. MONSOD. One of the problems of having a 
requirement like that is the assumption that the party 
applying for registration is a political party which takes 
into consideration the total programs of government. 
But the intent of the Committee is to open up the 
system so that even sectoral interests can register and 
field candidates. So, we are afraid that if we impose 
conditions that are really more applicable to a national 
political party, we might be frustrating precisely our 
intent to have a multiparty in the country. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I understand that but even 
citizens groups have clearly defined platforms or pro- 
grams like national development programs or philoso- 
phy of social and economic development. 

MR. MONSOD. I am not sure if all of them would 
have it, but in any case the Commission on Elections, in 
the process of registration, has certain criteria that 
would deal with such details. We were just afraid that if 
we assume and put in certain things, we might be ex- 
cluding organizations that deserve to be included in the 
party-list system. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. Madam President 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bennagen be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, I would like to 
ask the sponsors a clarificatory question. 

On page 3, line 4, something is mentioned about 
nuisance candidacy. In the deliberations of the Com- 
mittee may we know if this has been defined? What is 
a nuisance candidate? 

MR. FOZ. I think this is well taken care of in the 
Omnibus Election Code. 

MR. MONSOD. That is specifically defined and 
dealt with in the Omnibus Election Code. That has a 
meaning in jurisprudence based on the cases and the 
law. But we can look for it and maybe later on, we can 
show it to the Commissioner. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I ask that because in previous 
presidential elections, there have been accusations of a 
ruling party creating its own opposition candidate. 
Would that be considered a nuisance candidate? 

MR. FOZ. I suppose so. But then it would be really 
difficult to prove that an opposition candidate is really 
financed by the administration just to divide the opposi- 
tion votes. 


MR. MONSOD. May I read to the Commissioner the 
particular provision: 

The Commission may motu proprio or upon a verified 
petition of an interested party refuse to give due course to 
or cancel a certificate of candidacy if it is shown that such 
certificate has been filed to put tlie election process in 
mockery or disrepute or to cause confusion among the 
voters by the similarity of the names of the registered can- 
didates or by other circumstances or acts which clearly 
demonstrate that the candidate has no bona fide intention 
to run for the office for which a certificate of candidacy 
has been filed and thus prevent a faithful determination of 
the true will of the electorate. 

So it is actually broad enough to include the situation 
the Commissioner has in mind. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I suppose it would include exam- 
ination of program of government, proven capability or 
some kind of political track record and even financial 
capability. Would those be included in the examination 
of the nature of the candidacy? 

MR. MON SOD. In the situation that I have been 
familiar with, I do not think the availability of money 
was really a criterion. It was really the intent to confuse 
the voters or to frustrate the will of the people in some 
other way. But mere financial incapacity and even the 
lack of a broad program of government, as far as I 
know, have not been part of the criteria for declaring 
a nuisance candidacy. 

MR. BENNAGEN. But what is the basis for saying 
that there is an intent to confuse the electorate? 

MR. MONSOD. A very simple example would be 
somebody with a similar name. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President, Commis- 
sioner Padilla, is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Will the distinguished sponsor answer 
a few questions? 

MR. MONSOD. Willingly, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. PADILLA. 1 am referring to Section 7, page 4, 
which is not copied from Section 5 ui'the 1973 Consti- 
♦^ution. On line 3, it mentions here “media of com- 
munication or information” and on line 7, it states: 
“may be supervised or regulated by the Commission. 

I recall that during the 1984 elections, the COMELEC 
issued resolutions on equal time, ^qual space and equal 
opportunity when then Preside’ arcos used the entire 


632 


WEDNESDAY, J ULY 1 6, 1 986 


facilities of radio and television for his Pulong-Pulong 
program. He used the entire network of these stations 
three or four times. However, when the Opposition 
wanted to avail of its right for equal space in the news- 
papers, equal time in radio and television and equal 
opportunity, the COMELEC denied the request, ruling 
that the Pulong-Pulong was a privilege of the Chief 
Executive and that the opposition political party was 
not entitled thereto. We appealed this COMELEC de- 
cision to the Supreme Court, on which it ruled that the 
people should be entitled to know the issues and to be 
apprised of all the qualifications of candidates. In other 
words, there should be a general information of the 
people for an intelligent vote on the election. But 
despite those valid premises, the conclusion was illogical 
holding that the opposition party had no right to utilize 
the media even if it were only on Pulong-Pulong while 
then President Marcos had all the right to air his Pulong- 
Pulong three or four times. 

Will the Committee consider a proposed amendment 
to ensure equal space, equal time and equal opportunity 
during the period of election? The past provision, as 
well as the present one being proposed now says “may 
be supervised or regulated,” which to me is not strong 
enough to afford the opposition or the other candidates 
this very important principle of equal space, equal time 
and equal opportunity. 

Another point is: In many countries, especially in 
Latin America and Spain, I think they recognize what 
they call derecho de contestar, the right to reply. So, if 
there is a criticism or an attack against a candidate he 
has a right to reply. Not only that; if the criticism or the 

reply must also be 
published on page 1 - equal right to reply. Sometimes, 
the papers quote one’s reply on a small paragraph in the 
inner page while the criticism or the attack is pro- 
minently published in the headlines or on page 1 of the 
newspaper. Will the Committee consider these ideas? 

MR. MONSOD. We have inserted in the proposal at 
hand the phrase “including rates, reasonable free space 
and time allotments for public information campaigns 
and forums among candidates” hoping that this would 
clarify the responsibilities of the COMELEC under this 
section. Under the Omnibus Election Code, there are 
very specific provisions on equal time, free time, equal 
space and so on. If the honorable Commissioner would 
like to strengthen and clarify this provision in that 
regard, we would be happy to entertain such amend- 
ments. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

We want to strengthen this right. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

May we call the attention of the sponsors to page 2, 
lines 22 to 26 of the draft resolution. May we know if, 
by “register,” they mean “accreditation”? 

MR. MONSOD. The COMELEC tried to make a 
distinction between the two such that “accreditation” 
referred to certain rights, say, as poll watchers, while 
“registration” referred to identification of participants 
in the process. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the registration would be limited 
to political parties, organizations, or coalitions while the 
accreditation would be limited to citizens arm of the 
commission. 

MR. MONSOD. That is the recommendation of the 
COMELEC which we included here. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The registration would take place only “after suffi- 
cient publication.” 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. To complete the records, what exact- 
ly does the distinguished sponsor mean by “after suffi- 
cient publication”? 

MR. REGALADO. What would be sufficient will be 
provided for in the rules that the COMELEC is author- 
ized to adopt after taking into consideration not only 
geographic or demographic differences all over the 
country but the available print media not in the area. 

MR. SUAREZ. I take it that the registration would be 
effected only after sufficient publication shall have been 
implemented. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right; upon proof of the 
compliance with that publication requirement. 

MR. SUAREZ. So that means there is an affidavit of 
publication of some sort. Thereafter, the registered 
party, organization, or coalition would be entitled to 
equal privileges irrespective of the number of members 
of that party, organization, or coalition. 

MR. REGALADO. That is covered there. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is my understanding correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. They would be entitled to 
similar rights as any other registered organization. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is there no limitation in regard to the 
number of members of a political party, organization, or 
coalition in order to be entitled to registration? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


633 


MR. MONSOD. If we go back to the Omnibus Elec- 
tion Code, this might answer some other questions. It 
does say that the rules and regulations would be pro- 
mulgated by the Commission on Elections and there is 
a presumption here of reasonable rules and regulations. 
I would suppose that if there were only five members of 
an organization who want to register for participation 
in the elections, the Commission might say that they 
could not be considered a bona fide party for purposes 
of participating in the elections. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, we would leave the discretion of 
the matter of registration of these five persons who 
would form a political party to the Commission on 
Elections. 

MR. MONSOD. That would be a proper subject of 
legislation by the legislature because that is in the 
Omnibus Election Code and of the other rules and regu- 
lations the COMELEC may promulgate. 

MR. SUAREZ. Therefore, the Commissioner does not 
contemplate that this act of registration would be minis- 
terial in character on the part of the Commission on 
Elections because it is given the discretion of denying 
registration to an applicant political party, organization, 
or coalition? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. First of all, under the same 
provision there is a general prohibition for registration 
of organizations which seek to achieve their goals 
through violence or refuse to uphold this Constitution. 
In the interest of order there would be some criteria 
that the law and the COMELEC should adopt. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I call the Commissioner’s atten- 
tion to Batas Pambansa Big. 881, the Omnibus Election 
Code of the Philippines, particularly to Section 61 
thereof, which provides: 

Any organized group of persons seeking registration as 
a national or regional political party may file with the Com- 
mission a verified petition attaching thereto its Constitu- 
tion and by-laws, platform or program of government and 
such other relevant information as may be required by the 
Commission. The Commission shall, after due notice and 
hearing, resolve the petition within ten days from the date 
it is submitted for decision. 

There is this colatilla also: 

No religious sect shall be registered as a political party 
and no political party which seeks to achieve its goal 
through violence shall be entitled to accreditation. 

Did the Committee have that in mind when it drafted 
this paragraph (5) of Section 2? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, in addition to the two exceptions, 
meaning, religious sects and those which seek to achieve 


their goals through violence and refuse to uphold this 
Constitution, would the Commissioner admit other 
exceptions, vesting unto the Commission on Elections 
the right to deny the registration of the applicant? 

MR. REGALADO. As the wisdom of the legislature 
may arrive at and as the power is given to the COM- 
ELEC. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

We notice also that the Committee has changed the 
wording of Article XII of the 1973 Constitution be- 
cause this proposal says that religious sects or those 
which seek to achieve their goals through violence and 
refuse to uphold this Constitution shall not be regis- 
tered. The word “subversion” appearing in the 1973 
Constitution was omitted, and instead, the conjunction 
“and” and the phrase “refuse to uphold this Constitu- 
tion” were added. What is the compelling reason for 
that? 

MR. FOZ. The phrase, “refusal to uphold this Consti- 
tution,” would include more or less the advocacy of 
subversion as a means of gaining political power. So, we 
thought that by putting this provision disqualifying a 
party that would refuse to uphold this Constitution, it 
would cover a similar disqualification on subversion. 

MR. SUAREZ. So the Commissioner would equate 
refusal to uphold this Constitution with the crime of 
subversion? 

MR. FOZ. I did not get the question. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Commissioner equating the 
crime of subversion with an alleged refusal to uphold 
this Constitution for purposes of denying registration to 
an applicant political party? 

MR. FOZ. I would say that this refusal to uphold this 
Constitution has a broader extent than mere subversion. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under the Commissioner’s interpreta- 
tion, it would necessarily embrace the crime of sub- 
version? 

MR. FOZ. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. I notice that the conjunction “and” 
was used in the clause “which seek to achieve their goals 
through violence and refuse to uphold this Constitu- 
tion.” These are two different, essential and critical 
elements. So we joined them together and, therefore, it 
is imperative that these two elements must be together 
before denial of an application for registration. Is my 
understanding correct? 

MR. FOZ. As presently worded, that would seem to 
be so. 


634 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. So in addition to resorting through 
violence to achieve their ultimate goals, we would 
impose as an additional condition the refusal to uphold 
this Constitution. Is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. There must have been an oversight 
because when this was being discussed by the Commit- 
tee, it was our intent that the word should be “or.” We 
would entertain an amendment to that effect at the 
proper time. 

MR. SUAREZ. My final question is: In the 1935 
Constitution, for purposes of accreditation, there is no 
such prohibition against a religious sect or one advocat- 
ing change of government through violence. What com- 
pelling reasons motivated the sponsors to introduce this 
particular provision? 

MR. FOZ. This proposal aims to prevent the possi- 
bility of a religious group or sect from being registered 
and gaining political power. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. It is the sense of the Committee that 
perhaps it was not considered necessary at the time of 
the 1935 Constitution, but it was put into the 1973 
Constitution, so we believe that it should be restated in 
this Constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. Historically speaking, we remember 
that m the 1935 elections, a certain Monsignor Gregorio 
Aghpay, representing the Philippine Independent 
Church, actually ran for President of our country. 

MR. REGALADO. We are aware of that. 

MR. SUAREZ. That was allowed under the 1935 
Constitution. So, under this provision would the Com- 
missioner deny the possibility that a certain Archbishop 
Makarios of Cyprus, for instance, would run for Pres- 
ident of our country under the Cypriot Episcopalian 
Church? 

MR. REGALADO. That is theocracy. 

MR. SUAREZ. Can Jaime Cardinal Sin not run for 
President of our country under the imprimatur of the 
Catholic Church? 

MR. REGALADO. A theocracy may be adaptable 
in Cyprus, but I think, it cannot be acceptable in the 
Philippines. 

MR. SUAREZ. In the Omnibus Election Code, there 
is a provision about the accreditation of a dominant 
opposition party which is defined as a political party, 
group or organization or coalition of major national 
or regional political parties opposed to the majority 


party which has the capability to wage a bona fide 
nationwide campaign as shown by the extent of its 
organization. Is the Commissioner precluding the 
Catholic Church from indulging in the game of politics? 

MR. REGALADO. It is specific that the COMELEC 
cannot register religious sects. However, Bishop Bacani 
wanted to rephrase that to refer to religious denomina- 
tions or aggroupments as the case may be. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Commissioner is totally 
eliminating the possible existence of a dominant oppo- 
sition party, like conceivably, the Catholic Church. 

MR. MONSOD. If the Commissioner will notice in 
our draft, we have eliminated the concepts of majority 
party and dominant opposition party. But, I think, the 
prohibition is on any religious organization registering as 
a political party. I do not see any prohibition here 
against a priest running as a candidate. That is not pro- 
hibited here; it is the registration of a religious sect as a 
political party. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, we are trying to prohibit religious 
sects from being registered with the COMELEC? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, religious sects are prohibited 
from forming political parties and engaging in political 
activities. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Natividad be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the distinguished sponsor yield to a few ques- 
tions? 

MR. MONSOD. Willingly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. There are present rules on the 
functions of inspectors and poll watchers. What would 
be the function of the poll watchers under this con- 
cept? 

MR. MONSOD. Under our draft, the representatives 
of the political parties would be exercising the function 
of poll watchers under the Election Code. In other 
words, we are making a distinction between an inspector 
or a member of the board of election inspectors itself 
and a watcher. In the present report of the Committee, 
the representatives of the political parties would func- 
tion as watchers, but would be disqualified from serving 
in the board of election inspectors, board of canvassers 
and so forth. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


635 


MR. NATIVIDAD. There would be no more inspec- 
tors for political parties? 

MR. MONSOD. No more inspectors. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Is there any provision here on the 
registration of voters? 

MR. MONSOD. The only provision is on the powers 
and functions of the Commission on Elections under 
Section 2, paragraph 3, line 15, where we talk about the 
registration of voters. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. On page 3, paragraph 7, one of 
the functions of the COMELEC reads: 

Recommend to the legislature effective measures to 

minimize election spending and prevent and/or penalize 

all forms of election frauds, offenses and malpractices, 

nuisance candidacy or other similar acts. 

I would like to draw from my experience, from the 
five times that I was elected as a member of the legisla- 
ture. One provision in the old Election Code is the 
minimizing of election spending. But I think in every 
election, we are confronted with the scandalous situa- 
tion whereby candidates uncontrollably scatter then- 
propaganda materials everywhere, cluttering the streets 
and plazas of our country. Walls are plastered with no 
space anymore. The handsome and not too handsome 
faces of candidates stare at us wherever we go. Posters 
and banners of all sizes and shapes will be seen during 
elections. After the elections, it will be the duty of the 
community to get rid of the trash at the expense of 
government. 

The COMELEC has a rule on the size of banners and 
propaganda materials, but this is honored more in the 
breach than in the compliance. I used to ask myself 
then: “How could a poor man compete with a rich can- 
didate who plastered the whole province/district with 
his countless pictures? ” He had to try to survive as we 
had. 

So I think this recommendation to the legislature to 
enact effective measures to minimize election spending 
is another wishful thinking, because that has always 
been that way for as long as I can remember. Under 
both the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions, it has always 
been a postulate that the legislature shall enact measures 
to minimize election spending, but election spending 
was never minimized. I think the only way to minimize 
election spending — and I learned this from another 
country - is to exhibit propaganda materials at particu- 
lar sites designated by the COMELEC. For instance, if 
the designated place is the plaza, a COMELEC post or 
bulletin board shall be placed therein where candidates 
can paste their propaganda materials. In this way, even 
a very poor candidate can post a mimeographed copy 
of Ills biodata on that bulletin board. If we follow this 
practice, we will train and educate our people to look at 
the COMELEC bulletin board for the qualifications of 
candidates for various offices. 


However, with this provision, can we expect the 
legislature to control election spending? Madam Pres- 
ident, I dare say this will amount to nothing. We will 
again be confronted with the same problem during elec- 
tions where the whole country will be inundated and 
drowned by all kinds of propaganda materials which the 
people have to get rid of afterwards. But if we mandate 
that the COMELEC shall designate a specific place to 
exhibit these propaganda materials, perhaps this extra- 
vagant, unnecessary and whimsical propaganda — that 
the Filipinos have learned from their experience in 
politics — will be minimized. 

I am just thinking aloud. Is the Committee’s mind 
open in this regard? 

MR. MONSOD. One problem is that it seems to 
partake already of the nature of legislation, and it is 
useless putting it in the Constitution because we have 
found from past elections that our politicians were very 
creative. As a matter of fact, they could make the oppo- 
sition candidate a violator by posting his posters in 
prohibited places. There are other ways to violate these 
laws. 

In the final analysis, I think the best lesson in 
preventing overspending — unfortunately habits die 
hard — is to recall that in the past elections candidates 
who spent much money, in fact, lost. And this could be 
a deterrent in the future. 

We agree with the Commissioner that some laws are 
very difficult to implement. As a matter of fact, in the 
last elections, there was a very big KBL sign on top of 
the Manila Hotel and this was the subject of a petition 
to remove filed with the COMELEC. That sign was 
removed, but not those in other places. We agree with 
the Commissioner that it is very difficult to implement, 
but to be silent about it would not solve the problem 
either. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I realize that; legally speaking, 
when we look at it, maybe it should be in the law. But 
we have waited so long for the past legislature to enact 
such a law. This is our opportunity to make the legis- 
lature feel that there is a need for it. Why do we not just 
indicate that need, so that future candidates will not be 
placed in a situation where they have to outrival eac^h 
other in terms of propaganda materials. I think it is 
about time. 

I have been in politics since 1961, and based on my 
experience, it is now the right time to indicate in the 
Constitution a need for such a law. The law should 
indicate the particular place where these propaganda 
materials could be placed. The Commissioner cited the 
case of the Manila Hotel KBL signboard. Had there 
been a law to that effect, that would not have happened. 

MR. MONSOD. The Commissioner may submit his 
proposal at the proper time, and we can submit it to the 
body for consideration. 


636 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, I am just “testing the water,” 
if the Committee’s mind is open in this regard. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Ople be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I like to ask questions, if the sponsors would yield. 

MR. MONSOD. Willingly. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

My concerns for the moment have to do with the 
multiparty system, registration and deregistration, and 
the possibility of the utilization of elections to subvert 
national sovereignty through foreign contributions to 
political parties. 

So, may I start with Section 5 on page 3, which has 
already been the subject of a comment by Commis- 
sioner Suarez which states: 

Political parties or organizations or coalitions registered 
under the party-list system shall not be represented in the 
voters’ registration boards, boards of election inspectors, 
boards of canvassers or other similar bodies. 

Does this section contemplate a disengagement of 
the new Constitution from the two-party system in the 
Constitution of 1973? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Therefore, it is opening the constitutional 
political arena to any political party, so that in that 
sense a multiparty system, in lieu of a two-party system, 
is going to be installed under Section 5? 

MR. MONSOD. Section 5 recognizes the change in 
the principle here from a two-party system to a multi- 
party system, but the mere prohibition of representa- 
tion by political parties in the boards of election in- 
spectors and canvassers does not give birth to a multi- 
party system. 

MR. OPLE. In effect, it is removing the constraints 
on a freely evolved party system, the outcome of which 
is most probably a multiparty system. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. During the period of amendments, will 
the Committee consider amending this provision so that 
if the intendment is to promote a freely evolved and 
open party system which is, in effect, a multiparty 
system, it will come out with greater clarity? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, we would be happy to entertain 
the Commissioner’s proposal at the proper time. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

Paragraph (5) of Section 2 which concerns the regis- 
tration of political parties, organizations or coalitions, 
states that religious sects or those which seek to achieve 
their goals through violence and refuse to uphold this 
Constitution, shall not be registered. May I ask the 
Committee if this paragraph which empowers the 
COMELEC to register parties contemplates that this 
power also carries with it the power to deregister parties 
upon a determination of violations that they have 
committed? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Concerning religious sects which may not 
be registered at all, may I offer the example of political 
parties not really synonymous with religious sects but 
which derive their fundamental inspiration and philoso- 
phies from religious beliefs. Good examples are the 
Christian democratic parties of Europe. For the past 
200 years or so, they have been flourishing in that 
political climate of Europe. Other good examples are 
certain Catholic parties to be found in some places. 
There is in Japan a professedly Buddhist party profess- 
ing a belief in good government. I think this is the 
Sokka Gai. Are these political parties which derive their 
fundamental inspiration and political philosophies from 
certain religious faiths embraced within the prohibition 
of this Article for purposes of registration? A more 
specific example is the Christian Social Movement which 
I think our friend Raul Manglapus has announced he 
would like to revive. Is this not encompassed by this 
prohibition? 

MR. REGALADO. It is not, otherwise the present 
parties here which derive their faith from the Catholic 
religion will also be disqualified. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

In the event that a certain religious sect with nation- 
wide and even international networks of members and 
supporters, in order to circumvent this prohibition, 
decides to form its own political party in emulation of 
those parties I had mentioned earlier as deriving their 
inspiration and philosophies from well-established 
religious faiths, will that also not fall within this prohibi- 
tion? 

MR. MONSOD. If the evidence shows that the 
intention is to go around the prohibition, then certainly 
the COMELEC can pierce through the legal fiction. 

MR. OPLE. I thank the Commissioner for that 
answer. 

What about this clause prohibiting groups that seek to 
achieve their goals through violence and refuse to 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


637 


uphold this Constitution? How is the ground for denial 
of registration to be detennined? Is it on the basis of 
their platforms, overt acts or of court decisions? I do 
not think anyone will go to the COMELEC for registra- 
tion and profess belief in violence. I suppose the COM- 
ELEC will have its own mechanism for adjudicating this 
when a complaint arises. 

MR. REGALADO. The COMELEC will have to adopt 
certain criteria and guidelines for determination. That is 
why it is required that there be prior sufficient publica- 
tion before registration. 

MR. OPLE. I thank the sponsor for that partial 
answer. I will now go to hypothetical examples. The 
Communist Party of the Philippines — I am referring to 
the 1968 CPP not to the 1930 PKP — obviously does 
not subscribe to the Constitution whether it is the 1973 
Constitution or the current Freedom Constitution under 
Proclamation No. 3, and neither may it be reasonably 
expected to profess to uphold this new Constitution 
once it comes into force and effect. I think the proof 
should be self-evident in the sense that they have an 
army in the countryside which is actually waging an 
armed struggle against the state. However, the Partido 
ng Bayan is now being organized with Mr. Jose Maria 
Sison, the founder of the CPP of 1968, as the Chairman 
of the Preparatory Committee. As soon as the Prepara- 
tory Committee phases itself out and this becomes a 
full-fledged party, the new leader will be the former 
detainee, Horacio Morales, previously of the Develop- 
ment Academy of the Philippines. The Partido ng Bayan 
subscribes to the Constitution, and yet, from a certain 
ideological point of view, it will not be too dissimilar 
from the platform and program of the CPP, perhaps, 
with a certain overlap of membership in addition to 
overlapping philosophies. 

Under this paragraph 5 of Section 2, I suppose the 
Partido ng Bayan will qualify for registration. Madam 
President? 

MR. REGALADO. Can I answer? 

In the first place, we stated here that this conjunction 
“and” here should properly be “or.” There was a typo- 
graphical error. So, it would read; “those which seek to 
achieve their goals through violence OR refuse to up- 
hold this Constitution.” Thus, even if they ostensibly 
offer to uphold the Constitution but their program 
seeks to achieve their goals through violence, they 
would still be disqualified. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, of course, if there is a multiparty 
system and the parties subscribe to the Constitution, 
then, I suppose they are qualified for registration. The 
burden of proof that they are not qualified will have to 
rest on those who will file complaints. Is that a correct 
reading of the Commissioner’s intent? 


MR. REGALADO. They will have to file a verified 
statement. The same shall be checked, if necessary, by 
the military intelligence. People who have derogatory 
information about them can make the corresponding 
reports because there is prior publication, and that is 
without prejudice to the action of the commission itself. 

MR. OPLE. Assuming that these parties — I am not 
referring now to any specific party — are found later 
to have committed breaches of the Constitution, ap- 
pearing right here in paragraph 5 of Section 2, can the 
COMELEC then, under this provision, exercise its power 
to deregister such parties upon verification of the 
charges of violation against them, and following the 
observance of due process under the Bill of Rights? 

MR. REGALADO. We have to make a distinction 
first. If the breaches of the Constitution the Commis- 
sioner refers to were committed prior to registration — 
since what is referred to here as post registration is their 
affirmation of the desire to uphold the Constitution — 
we have to make a distinction as to whether those 
breaches were also in line with their attempt to achieve 
their goals through violence. If that is so, then the 
COMELEC can deregister them. 

MR. OPLE. I thank the Commissioner for that. 

My last question has to do with what I earlier said 
could be future attempts to subvert the national sover- 
eignty from overseas, through foreign contributions to 
our political parties. As we will recognize, contempora- 
ries are already replete with examples of such attempts 
at capturing governments through political parties with 
money. The most recent documented example of this 
was when US $8 million — this is according to the 
records of a U.S. Senate investigation group — was 
passed on from the United States through some Chris- 
tian democratic parties in Europe, to Chile, in order to 
help destabilize the Marxist government of Allende who, 
as we know, subsequently was assassinated after winning 
a presidential election in that country. 

I am not prepared to state that I have any reasonable 
evidence or that anybody else may have reasonable 
evidence about the uses of foreign funding to influence 
political parties in the Philippines. But I think we will 
have to admit that this is an ever present possibility. 

Does this draft Article of the Committee contain any 
safeguard against this risk and danger? 

MR. MONSOD. The constitutional provisions do not 
contain that although that is contained in the Omnibus 
Election Code. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

Will the Chairman then consider, at the proper time, 
a brief provision containing this concern that we have 
expressed somewhere in the draft Article on the Com- 
mission on Elections? 


638 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. We would be willing to entertain such 
an amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you so much. Madam President; I 
also thank the sponsors. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there are no fur- 
ther speakers registered. But before going to the period 
of amendments, may I move that we proceed to the 
additional Reference of Business? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the additional 
Reference of Business. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may I move for a 
suspension of the session and may I request that those 
interested in making amendments now confer with the 
Chairman of the Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:02 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 5:33 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


ADDITIONAL REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following additional 
Committee Reports, the President making the corre- 
sponding references: 


COMMITTEE REPORTS 


Committee Report No. 30 on Proposed Resolution 
P^'^Pared by the Committee on Citizenship 
Bill of Rights, Political Rights and Obligations and 
Human Rights, entitled: 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONST 

tution an article on suffrage, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Propose 
Resolution Nos: 8, 99, 161, 199, 246, 370 and 405. 

Colayco, Sarmiento, Tadeo, Garcia, Villegas, Rodrigi 
Bennagen, Lerum, Bacani, Padilla and Natividad. 

To the Steering Committee. 


Committee Report No. 31 on Proposed Resolutio 
No. 531, prepared by the Committee on General Prc 
visions, entitled: 


RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON GENERAL PRO- 
VISIONS AND A SECTION IN THE TRANSITORY 
PROVISIONS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 49, 80, 88, 95, 97, 133, 142 172 174 
200, 203, 215, 230, 243, 260, 267, 271, 306, 307^ 315' 
328, 341, 345, 351, 390, 395, 408, 420, 423, 436 and 
493. 


Sponsored by Hon. Rosario Braid, Bacani, Aquino, de 
Castro, Foz, Gascon, Maambong, Natividad, Nolledo, 
Rigos, Uka, Bennagen. Brocka, Davide, Jr., de los Reyes, 
Jr., Garcia, Guingona, Ople, Quesada, Sarmiento, 
Suarez, Tadeo, Tan, Trenas, Tingson and Villacorta. 

To the Steering Committee. 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 521 
(Article on the Commission on Elections) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I move that we 
close the period of sponsorship and debate on Proposed 
Resolution No. 521 and that we move to the period of 
amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask the proponents with 
possible amendments to register with me? 

Madam President, I ask that Commissioner Maam- 
bong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

I move to introduce an amendment on Section 1 of 
the Commission on Elections, line 14. After the word 
“years,” insert this sentence: ONE-THIRD OF THE 
COMMISSION SHALL BE APPOINTED FROM A LIST 
OF QUALIFIED PERSONS RECOMMENDED BY 
OPPOSITION PARTIES. 

I have explained this addition during the period of 
sponsorship and debate on the Common Provisions. I 
will not repeat what I have said. I will only add that the 
most serious attack against the previous administration 
was that the Commission on Elections was perceived to 
be manned by the Chairman and Commissioners who 
were beholden to the President. As a matter of fact, I 
am just surmising that because of that serious attack, 
there were members appointed to the Commission on 
Elections who were perceived to be independent- 
minded, and if I remember correctly, it was also the 
perception that when the present Chairman, the Honor- 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


639 


able Ramon Felipe, Jr., was appointed, he was speci- 
fically placed there in representation of the opposition. 
Of course, in fairness to the Chairman of the COMELEC, 
he is well-qualified for the job; he has been a Congress- 
man himself and he also claimed that he was not really 
appointed because he was an opposition member. 

However, in order to obviate these attacks against the 
integrity of the Commission on Elections, especially 
because it is involved in the election of officials all over 
the land, I now seek to introduce this amendment by 
addition. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
repeat the amendment on line 14? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The sentence would read: ONE- 
THIRD OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE AP- 
POINTED FROM A LIST OF QUALIFIED PERSONS 
RECOMMENDED BY OPPOSITION PARTIES. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee regrets that it cannot 
accept that amendment for the reason that as a neutral 
arbiter of the election process, we would like to insulate 
the Commission on Elections from politics. Just because 
there were abuses in the appointing power before, the 
solution is not to enshrine politics in the commission 
but to try to preserve and insulate it from such politics. 

So the Committee regrets that it cannot accept the 
proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Maambong 
insist on his amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would insist on putting the issue 
to a vote. Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will put the amendment to a 
vote. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Maambong on line 14 will please raise their 
hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment will please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 18 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

May we go section by section? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

Commissioner Maambong has another amendment on 
Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, this amend- 
ment is practically accepted by the Committee. On line 
16, Section 1 (2), after “President.” insert the words 
WITH THE CONSENT OF THE COMMISSION ON AP- 
POINTMENTS. As a consequence of that, on lines 17 
and 1 8, delete the sentence “Appointments to the Com- 
mission need no confirmation.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment of Commissioner Maambong? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I just wanted to 
make of record that the reason we put this provision is 
that we were precisely afraid that the COMELEC which 
deals with politics might now be beholden to politicians. 
That was the reason for this provision. However, we 
have accepted the amendment because we yield to the 
judgment of the body the need for checks and balances 
with respect to the constitutional commissions. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask that Commissioner Davide 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

The amendment will be on line 1 1 of the first para- 
graph of Section 1. After the word “degree,” add a 
comma (,) and the phrase AND MUST NOT HAVE 
BEEN CANDIDATES FOR ANY ELECTIVE POSI- 
TION IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING ELEC- 
TION. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. As a consequence of that, I would 
now seek to amend line 10 by deleting the word and 
before the word “holders” and substituting it with a 
comma (,) . 

THE PRESIDENT. How will that read? 


640 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. The provision will read: “least thirty- 
five years of age, holders of a college degree AND MUST 
NOT HAVE BEEN CANDIDATES FOR ANY ELEC- 
TIVE POSITION IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECED- 
ING ELECTION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on line 19, Section 
1 (2), after the word “Members,” add a comma (,) and 
the phrase INCLUDING THE CHAIRMAN, then ano- 
ther comma (,). 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, if we accept that 
amendment, then it may be, first of all, class legislation 
in favor of one person. 

Secondly, it would open the possibility of the present 
Chairman serving for more than seven years. It is the 
intent of this Committee that no Member of the Com- 
mission will serve for more than seven years. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the reason fc 
the proposal is that among the seven commissionei 
to be appointed, one has to be the chairman and th 

years. Of all the commissioners, the chairman mu: 
be given the priority for a term of seven years. It wi 
not apply to the incumbent chairman; the proposi 
has no reference whatsoever to the incumbent chai: 
man. Besides, the incumbent chairman cannot even b 
reappointed under the existing provision of the 197 
Constitution. 


FOZ. But for the information of the Gentleman, 
we intend to propose a provision in the Transitory 
Provisions to the effect that incumbent members of 
the constitutional commissions may be among those 
first appointed under this Constitution, in fairness to 
those who are now in office. Otherwise, they will be 
foreclosed from being appointed under this Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. But the Committee has not recom- 
mended a provision for the Article on Transitory 
Provisions. 


MR. DAVIDE. If the intention of the Committee is 
to have one provision in the Transitory Provisions to 
allow the incumbent chairman to continue serving such, 
it might destroy the “staggered” term provided for, 
insofar as the first commissioners appointed are con- 
cerned. 

MR. FOZ. No, but we take cognizance of the fact 
that if we apply this to the incumbents, we are not 
referring to Chairman Felipe alone but to the present 
members of the constitutional commissions; it would be 
quite unfair to those who are now holding the positions. 
In the case of the COMELEC, in view of the expecta- 
tions that some of the incumbents may be replaced 
before the holding of the plebiscite or before this 
Constitution takes effect after ratification, then those 
appointed before this Constitution is ratified will serve 
only for less than a year and the replacements will serve 
for only several years and they would be barred from 
being appointed under this Constitution. That is the 
unjust situation we are trying to avoid. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would have no quarrel with that but 
if that is the intention, that should also be applicable to 
the Civil Service Commission. 

MR. FOZ. That is applicable to all three commissions. 

MR. DAVIDE. In short, the staggered term provided 
for under the three subsections — Commission on Audit, 
Civil Service Commission and the Commission on 
Elections — will be destroyed. 

MR. FOZ. No. 

MR. MONSOD. Actually, it puts an obligation on 
the appointing power. For example, in the case of the 
COMELEC, should the appointing power decide to re- 
appoint the incumbent chairman, then the appointment 
must be for less than the seven years. In other words, 
the appointing power must count how many years the 
commissioners have served because they may be ap- 
pointed for three years only so that the seven years 
maximum aggregate tenure will not be violated. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would not the Commissioner believe 
that the appointing authority may immediately violate 
this particular provision on the staggered scheme, if he 
will be given the discretion to determine the term for 
the extension of the incumbents? 

FOZ. No, precisely; we are trying to put in that 
provision under the Article on Transitory Provisions for 
an orderly implemention of the staggered system. The 
staggered system will start with the first appointment 
under this new Constitution. 


MR. FOZ. I have submitted the proposed provision to 
the Committee and it is pending consideration in the 
Committee. 


MR. DAVIDE. What will happen if that proposal in 
the Transitory Provisions will not be approved by the 
Committee? 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


641 


MR. MONSOD. If the Gentleman takes a look at the 
first sentence of this provision, it says that the appoint- 
ment may be for a term of seven years without reap- 
pointment. We are only providing for such a move in the 
Transitory Provisions. We are hoping that the Transitory 
Provisions will be approved because it is in coordination 
with this one. 

MR. DA VIDE. I am willing to defer the presentation 
of my amendment and I would move. Madam President, 
that even if the entire subdivision on the COMELEC 
may be approved on Second Reading, it may be re- 
opened precisely to accommodate the possibility of an 
amendment on this particular paragraph in the event 
that the Committee on Transitory Provisions will not 
approve the resolution presented by Commissioner Foz 
on this matter. 

MR. MONSOD. We are amenable to that. 

THE PRESIDENT. The reservation is noted. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Rodrigo be 
recognized. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I propose the following amendment. 
On page 2, subparagraph 2, line 9. . . 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Anterior amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 

recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On line 3, page 2, between the 
words “appointed” and “in,” insert the phrase OR DE- 
SIGNATED. That has always been consistently accepted 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. On page 2, line 9 . . . 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am sorry to 
interrupt again but I have another anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong may 
proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. On page 2, line 7, I have the 
intention to delete the word “recalls” unless the Com- 
mittee can give the body the assurance that “recalls” 


will be instituted either in this Constitution or in laws 
passed by the legislature. 

MR. MONSOD. The right to recall is actually 
contained in the Local Government Code. So, we would 
prefer to leave this in case the COMELEC is called upon 
to administer such recall. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is indeed in the Local Govern- 
ment Code and with that statement, I withdraw my 
intention to delete the word “recalls.” 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Rodrigo now 
proceed and not be interrupted? 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask first: Is there any 
other anterior amendment? (Silence) 

As I was saying, on page 2, line 9, delete the words 
“be the sole,” capitalize the first letter of the word 
“judge,” and also delete the word “of’ between “judge” 
and “all.” So, the sentence will read: “Judge all con- 
tests relating to the elections, returns and qualifications 
of all elective provincial, city, municipal and barangay 
officials.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment? 

MR. FOZ. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may we 
offer an amendment to the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes may 
proceed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will the Commissioner please 
read again his amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. “Judge all contests relating to the 
elections, returns and qualifications of all elective 
provincial, city, municipal, and barangay officials.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The amendment will be on line 
1 1. After the word “provincial,” we add the words AND 
CITY OFFICIALS IN ITS ORIGINAL JURISDICTION, 
AND MUNICIPAL AND BARANGAY OFFICIALS, IN 
ITS APPELLATE JURISDICTION. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us first finish the amendment 
of Commissioner Rodrigo with respect to starting the 
sentence with the word “Judge.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I withdraw my amendment in 
the meantime. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


642 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


returns and qualifications of all elective provincial, city, 
municipal and barangay officials.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Will the proponent yield to some 
questions for clarification? 

MR. RODRIGO. Certainly. 

MR. DAVIDE. With the proposal of the Gentleman, 
would it mean that the National Assembly, by law, will 
provide for any other court to be vested with the autho- 
rity to decide cases relating to elections, returns and 
qualifications of the elective officials enumerated in the 
subparagraph? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, before we rule 
on that motion, I ask that I be allowed to expound my 
proposed amendment which could be affected also by 
the amendment proposed by Commissioner Rodrigo, 
considering that my proposed amendment has been 
lengthily discussed in the Committee, and the Commit- 
tee has acceded to this amendment. The amendment of 
Commissioner Rodrigo inserted on the first line of line 9 
would affect my proposed amendment. So, I move to 
defer consideration of the amendment proposed by 
Commissioner Rodrigo with the indulgence of the Chair. 


MR. RODRIGO. No, the reason I removed the words 
“sole judge” is that in Section 10, it is provided that 
final decisions, orders or rulings of the Commission on 
election contests involving elective municipal and 
barangay officials shall be final, unappealable and 
executory. So it is only in cases involving municipal and 
barangay officials that the rulings of the COMELEC 
are final and executory. 

When we say the COMELEC is the sole judge of all 
contests, even for elective provincial and city officials, 
it connotes that its decisions even in such cases are final 
and executory. That is why I would like to remove 
those words “sole judge.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I understand tha 
the phrase “sole judge” would refer to the exclusiv 
original jurisdiction of the COMELEC in these cases. M^ 
fear IS if we remove the word “sole,” it might open th‘ 
possibility of the National Assembly enacting a law vest 
mg another tribunal with the authority to decide on al 
these cases, making these cases cognizable by two enti 
ties with concurrent jurisdiction: one, the COMELEC 
and the other, possibly an ordinary court, which is no 
really the intention. 


MR. RODRIGO. Is the amendment of the Gentleman 
an anterior amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is not. Madam President. That is 
precisely why I am moving to defer consideration of the 
proposed amendment of the Gentleman. 

MR. RODRIGO. But why should the consideration of 
my amendment be dependent on the Gentleman’s subse- 
quent amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Because it would actually affect 
the whole jurisdictional process, and to obviate the 
possibility of going back to the Gentleman’s amendment 
if it will be approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. What line is the amendment of the 
Commissioner? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is on line 1 1. 

MR. RODRIGO. Line 1 1. But even if my amendment 
is anterior . . . For companerismo, I yield to the amend- 
ment of the Gentleman. 


MR. RODRIGO. I see the point of the Gentleman 
How about the phrase HAVE SOLE JURISDICTION 
OVER all contests or EXERCISE SOLE JURISDIC- 
TION of all contests? Would that satisfy the Gentle- 
man? 

MR. DAVIDE. Probably instead of “sole,” we use 
the word EXCLUSIVE. “EXERCISE EXCLUSIVE 
JURISDICTION.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I accept the amendment to the 
amendment. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please read 
the amendment now? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may we request a sus- 
pension of the session? Maybe we can resolve the 
problem. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 5:58 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:12 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. RODRIGO. “HAVE EXCLUSIVE JURISDIC- 
TION OVER all contests relating to the elections. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


643 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I yield to Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, there was an 
amendment proposed by Commissioner Rodrigo which 
has not yet been acted upon. I would rather ask Com- 
missioner Rodrigo to present that amendment before I 
present my own which has already been taken care of 
by the Committee anyway. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The amendment of Commissioner 
Maambong already includes my amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong will 
please proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, Madam President, 
may I proceed to propose this amendment in collabora- 
tion and with the advice and consent of Commissioner 
de los Reyes and Commissioner Rodrigo. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. On line 9, Section 2 (2), delete 
the words “Be the sole judge of” and in its stead insert 
the words EXERCISE EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION 
OVER. On line 1 1 , before the word “provincial,” insert 
the word REGIONAL and a comma (,). After the word 
“provincial” on line 1 1, insert the word AND. After the 
word “city,” delete the comma (,) and the words 
“municipal and barangay.” After the word “official,” 
place a comma (,) and insert the following: AND OF 
ALL CONTESTS INVOLVING MUNICIPAL AND 
BARANGAY OFFICIALS ON APPEAL FROM THE 
REGIONAL TRIAL COURTS AND FROM METRO- 
POLITAN OR MUNICIPAL TRIAL COURTS, RE- 
SPECTIVELY. 

I move for the approval of the amendment. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, this is an amendment Jointly 
submitted by Commissioners Rodrigo, Maambong and 
de los Reyes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment on Section 2 (2), lines 9 and 1 1? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, as a conse- 
quence of that approved amendment, if I may be 
allowed to jump to Section 10 so that we will not go 
back and forth later on, I would like to propose the 
following amendments on Section 1 0. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. On page 4, line 20, Section 10, 
delete the word “Final,” capitalize the “d” in the word 
“decisions” and insert the word FINAL before the word 
“orders.” On line 21, “Election” should have a small 
letter; on line 22, delete the word “inappealable” and 
after the word “and” on line 22, insert the word IMME- 
DIATELY. The final provision with this amendment 
would read: “DECISIONS, FINAL orders or rulings 
of the Commission on election contests involving 
elective municipal and barangay offices shall be final 
and IMMEDIATELY executory.” 

I move for the approval of the amendment. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment on 
Section 2 has been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection to the said amendment? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. There is just one point I would like to ask 
the proponent of the amendment. In his amendment, 
there is mention of the term “regional trial court.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is the Gentleman referring to 
Section 2 (2)? Yes, I did say “regional trial courts.” 

MR. REGALADO. On Section 2, he mentions 
Regional Trial Courts and Metropolitan and Municipal 
Trial Courts. 

MR. FOZ. Will there not be any basic objection to 
mentioning the terms “regional trial court” in the 
Constitution? 

MR. MAAMBONG. There is no objection to that; I 
do not think there is any objection to that. We are only 
trying to specify that when it comes to election contests 


644 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


involving municipal officials, the court of first jurisdic- THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
tion would be the regional trial court. The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. FOZ. Suppose there is a new reorganization in 
the judiciary and the term regional trial court is changed 
to another term, what would be the effect? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would rather that an authority 
on jurisdiction be asked. We have such an authority in 
the person of Commissioner Regalado. I hope he will 
reply to that. 

MR. REGALADO. Not an authority. It is just neces- 
sary at this stage because of the original jurisdiction 
being distinguished from the regional trial courts and 
the municipal or metropolitan trial courts. We have 
perforce to use the names as they are now under P.D. 
No. 1 29, otherwise we cannot make that distinction. To 
change the name from regional trial court, let us say, 
back to the court of first instance or municipal trial 
courts back to the old name, municipal courts, will 
necessarily involve legislation because this was created 
by P.D. No. 129. So, if a future legislation would change 
the names, it is understood that the new names will 
apply mutatis mutandis to the name of the court at the 
time of the adoption of the Constitution. 


MR. MAAMBONG. There is no substantial variance in 
the new proposed amendment except in the words I will 
now mention after the word “officials” on line 1 1, page 
2. After the word “officials,” put a comma (,) and in- 
sert the following amendment: AND OF ALL CON- 
TESTS INVOLVING MUNICIPAL OR BARANGAY 
OFFICIALS ON APPEAL FROM TRIAL COURTS OF 
GENERAL JURISDICTION AND FROM TRIAL 
COURTS OF LIMITED JURISDICTION, RESPEC- 
TIVELY. 

So, the whole provision would now read: “(2) Exer- 
cise exclusive jurisdiction over all contests relating to 
the elections, returns and qualifications of all elective 
regional, provincial and city officials, AND OF ALL 
CONTESTS INVOLVING MUNICIPAL OR BARAN- 
GAY OFFICIALS ON APPEAL FROM TRIAL 
COURTS OF GENERAL JURISDICTION AND FROM 
TRIAL COURTS OF LIMITED JURISDICTION, 
RESPECTIVELY.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 


MR. MAAMBONG. I would like to adopt that answer. 

the legislature is not 
prevented from changing the name of the regional trial 


MR REGALADO. Of course not; that is understood. 
How else can we distinguish? 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session for 
a few minutes. 

It was 6:22 p. m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President, it being 
understood that the trial courts of general jurisdiction 
referred to here are presently known as regional trial 
courts, formerly known as courts of first instance, and 
that the trial courts of limited jurisdiction refer to what 
are presently known as metropolitan trial courts, 
municipal trial courts, municipal circuit trial courts, 
formerly known as city courts or justice of the peace 
courts. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. Madam President, 
at the present setting. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized for some clarificatory questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Suarez is 
recognized. 


At 6:40 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. With the permission of the Com- 
mittee and of the body, I move fora reconsideration of 
the approval of the amendments which Commissioner 
Rodrigo, Commissioner de los Reyes and I proposed on 
Section 2 (2). 


MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman employed the word 
regional” anteceding the word “provincial.” Exactly 
what kind of elections does he have in mind when he 
was thinking in terms of a regional election? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I specifically inserted the word 
regional” with the consent of the Committee because, 
firstly, the Omnibus Election Code, specifically Articles 
249 and 250, speaks of regional elections. I understand 
that the word “regional” was inserted in the Omnibus 
Election Code because there are actually regional elec- 
tions in other areas of the country in the present 
regional autonomous regions. I also foresee the possibi- 
lity that if the legislature, using its power, will conduct 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


645 


or open up the avenue of regional elections in other 
regions, it may already be very hard to amend our 
Constitution to suit that purpose. So, in the event that 
there will be such regional elections not only in the 
regional autonomous regions at present but in other 
regions of the country, I saw fit to insert the word “re- 
gional.” At any rate, if there will be no other regional 
elections, it will not do harm to the Constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. In the event that a bicameral system 
of legislature would be established under this new 
Constitution, does the Gentleman also have in mind a 
regional election for members of the Senate? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Perhaps. Madam President, but 
that would be entirely a different concept because when 
we talk of Senate elections or Upper House elections on 
a regional level, that would not be local elections. That 
would partake of the nature of national elections and 
that would be governed by other provisions of law. 

MR. SUAREZ. A situation may arise where there is a 
vacancy in the Senate and a regional election may be 
called, assuming, of course, that the Senators would 
be elected on a regional basis. So, is the Gentleman 
precluding from the operation of this provision that 
possibility of a regional election for members of the 
Senate? 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, Madam President. What I am 
only trying to say is that the regional elections we 
envisioned in Section 2 (2) are actually local elections. 
What the Gentleman is referring to is a regional election 
which is classified properly as a national election 
because it is for positions in the national legislature. 
Although the election is in the regional level, that is 
actually classified as a national election and another law 
would have to apply, not Section 2 (2). 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification. 

The second point is about the election contests being 
decided by the courts mentioned in the Gentleman’s 
proposal. Do I take it that the jurisdiction that would be 
exercised over such situations or developments by the 
Commission on Elections will be in the nature of an 
appellate jurisdiction? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Gentleman would vest upon 
the Commission on Elections power superior to that ot 
the ordinary courts of justice in matters of election 
contests? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. In the ultimate analysis, would that 
preclude a resort to an appeal in the Supreme Court 
from a ruling or a decision in the exercise of the ap- 
pellate jurisdiction of the Commission on Elections? 


MR. MAAMBONG. We have to qualify that answer 
because it really depends on the level where the action 
is filed — if it is in the barangay level, municipal level or 
provincial level. There is a hierarchy of jurisdiction and 
appeals in those cases and it can be gleaned later on 
from the reading of our Section 10 which will be 
amended in a short while. So, to discuss whether the 
decision of the COMELEC is subject to appeal would 
take us a long time. I think it would be better to go over 
the law because there are several provisions there. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, if I will be clear about it the 
matter of election contests could emanate from the 
courts and could be appealed to the Commission on 
Elections and thereafter could be appealed further to 
the Supreme Court. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Since the question is specific, we 
might as well answer it in specific terms. If it is a 
barangay election contest which will be filed in what we 
call now as a trial court of limited jurisdiction — right 
now, it is the municipal trial court or the municipal 
circuit trial court or the metropolitan trial court — the 
decision is appealable to the COMELEC. As envisioned 
in Section 10, once the Commission on Elections de- 
cides on that barangay election contests, the decision 
would be final, executory and not appealable. 

That is also the same in the case of a municipal 
election contest which emanates from what is known as 
a court of general jurisdiction. When it is appealed to 
the Commission on Elections, under Section 10, the 
decision would be final, executory and not appealable. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the several clarifica- 
tions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall first put it to a vote. Is 
there any objection to this revised Section 2 (2), as 
read by Commissioner Maambong? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Will the Gentleman proceed to Section 10? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. This is 
related to Section 10. We started with our amendments 
a short while ago and we will now restate the amend- 
ment because it somehow got lost in the discussion. 
After the amendments, the final section. Section 10, 
on line 20 of page 4 would now read: “DECISIONS, 
FINAL orders or rulings of the Commission on election 
contests involving elective municipal and barangay 
offices shall be final, EXECUTORY AND NOT AP- 
PEALABLE.” 

I move for the approval of the amendment. Madam 
President. 


646 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. REGALADO. The Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The said amendment having been 
accepted by the Committee, is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 


BISHOP BACANI. I would like to accede to that but 
the text, “those which seek to achieve their goals 
through violence and refuse to uphold this Constitu- 
tion,” goes directly against the existence of the state. 
Hence, it seems that they cannot be accredited as 
political parties. 

The religions do not go directly contrary to the 
existence of the state, and there will be a fundamental 
difference. Hence, I am sorry to say that I will have to 
refuse the amendment. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. Madam President. 

First, I want to thank Commissioner Ople for giving 
way since I would like to be excused after this to 
celebrate mass for the family of Commissioner Rene 
Sarmiento. 

The amendment is on page 2, Section 2 (5), line 24. 
I propose an amendment by deletion: Delete the words 
religious sects, or” so that the provision says, “except 
that those which seek to achieve their goals through 
violence and refuse to uphold this Constitution shall 
not be registered.” 

Will you allow me to explain the reason for the 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. So we will just take the amend- 
ments by piece. May we have the amendment of Com- 
missioner Bacani first. 

BISHOP BACANI. So, the sentence will now read: 

“Register after sufficient publication, political parties, 
organizations or coalitions and accredit citizens 
arms of the Commission, except that those which seek 
to achieve their goals through violence and refuse to 
uphold this Constitution, shall not be registered.” 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know the position of the 
Committee on the proposed amendment to delete the 
words “religious sects” on line 24? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissiner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

the amendment i: 

this. There may be a religion that may arise in oui 
country whose aim is precisely to seek tempora 
reforms and will want to use a strategy to enter into th< 
political arena. Hence, a discrimination against thi 
members of the religious sect will mean a curtailment o 
their religious freedom. So, I suggest that this be deleter 
from this portion. 


MR. RODRIGO. The word “and” on line 25 between 
“violence” and “refuse” should be OR. I think Commis- 
sioner Bacani overlooked that. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, excuse me. It should be 
“OR.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, would Com- 
missioner Bacani accept an amendment by putting an 
apostrophe (’) after the word “citizens”? 


THE PRESIDENT. Is this acceptable to the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we be recog- 
nized for an amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment acceptable to 
the Committee? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. I sympathize with the sentiments of 
Monsignor Bacani regarding this matter. So, may I pro- 
pose an amendment to the amendment to delete the 
entire phrase beginning with the word “except” and 
ending in the word “registered, ” then put a period (.) 
after the word “Commission.” 


BISHOP BACANI. May I ask whether the Committee 
accepts the amendment? The amendment is to delete 
the words “religious sect, or.” 

MR. FOZ. I understand that the Committee would 
rather that this issue be decided by the body. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


647 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we ask that 
the body vote on this proposal of Commissioner 
Bacani? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to speak against the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I have nothing against any 
religious group or sect, but I believe that we should not 
allow any religious group or sect to be registered as a 
political party. Just imagine if we register the Iglesia ni 
Kristo as a political party or the Catholic Church as a 
political party or the Philippine Independent Church 
as a political party. 

I think there is the traditional separation of church 
and state so that there will be no state religion; so that 
there will be no instance where the dominance of a 
particular religious group will control the government 
and impose its religion. We will go back to those days 
when there is no separation of church and state. That is 
against what I have learned that we should give unto 
Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs 
to God. 

I, therefore, respectfully object to the proposed 
amendment. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I reply to 
the objection? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Gentleman may proceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. First of all, historically, never has 
it happened that the union of church and state has been 
effected through political parties. 

Second, any people’s organization which has an 
ideology can present itself as a political party. For all 
practical purposes, a people’s organization with an 
ideology is equivalent to a religious group which has its 
religious dogma, from the political point of view. Hence, 
while we allow an ideologically oriented political 
people’s organization, for example, to establish itself 
and be accredited as a political party, no religious sect 
which is a people’s organization sociologically is allowed 
that. There seems to be a discrimination. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I reply to that statement. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. On 
the other hand, if we allow, for example, a majority 
religious group and it gains control of the government, 
what happens to the minority religious group? That is 
all, Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Bacani to delete 
on line 24 the words “religious sects, or,” please raise 
their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 4 votes in favor and 22 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I propose 
another amendment by substitution? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. Instead of “religious sects, or” the 
amendment by substitution would say: CHURCHES, 
RELIGIOUS DENOMINATIONS, SECTS AND THEIR 
EQUIVALENT AS WELL AS ATHEISTIC OR 
AGNOSTIC GROUPS OR GROUPS DEDICATED TO 
THE ABOLITION OF RELIGION. Thus, the provision 
would read: “CHURCHES, RELIGIOUS DENOMINA- 
TIONS, SECTS AND THEIR EQUIVALENTS AS 
WELL AS ATHEISTIC OR AGNOSTIC GROUPS OR 
GROUPS DEDICATED TO THE ABOLITION OF 
RELIGION, those which seek to achieve their goals 
through violence OR refuse to uphold this Constitution, 
shall not be registered.” 

The reason I proposed this amendment is that other- 
wise, the last mentioned groups would have more rights 
under our Constitution than religious sects. For exam- 
ple, atheistic or agnostic groups or groups dedicated to 
the abolition of religion would, if they could be ac- 
credited as political parties, have more of the law in 
their favor than religious sects. 

THE PRESIDENT. That will be between lines 24 and 
25? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. Instead 
of “religious sects, or” it will be “CHURCHES, RE- 
LIGIOUS DENOMINATIONS, SECTS AND THEIR 
EQUIVALENT AS WELL AS ATHEISTIC OR AGNOS- 
TIC GROUPS OR GROUPS DEDICATED TO THE 
ABOLITION OF RELIGION.” 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Brocka? 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I ask a ques- 
tion of Bishop Bacani? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 


648 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. BROCKA. I think it is carrying it a little too far. 
I just want to be clarified on atheistic and agnostic 
groups. As far as I know, these are not organized groups. 
So, may I ask Bishop Bacani for an example of an 
organized atheistic or agnostic groups? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. First, the strictly communist 
group would be atheistic. A real communist group that 
adheres to the teachings of Marx and Lenin in then- 
strictness would be an atheistic group. 

MR. BROCKA. What about an agnostic group? I do 
not know of an organized agnostic group. 

BISHOP BACANI. Right now we may not have it 
here in the Philippines. But in Europe, for example, 
there have been associations, apart from the communist 
party of atheists, and it is not unforeseeable that there 
will be an association of agnostic groups. At any rate, if 
the Gentleman does not want the word AGNOSTIC 
“ATHEISTIC AND THOSE WHO ARE DEDICATED 
TO THE ABOLITION OF RELIGION” would be 
enough, and they exist. 

MR. BROCKA. I just feel that coming up with atheis- 
tic and agnostic groups is getting a little too far already. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Pardon me for causing this con- 
fusion. 

Let me first give the fundamental reason why I was 
objecting to this phrase. If we put a provision saying 
that women are not allowed to be registered, while at 
the same time criminals are also not allowed to be 
registered, the women will certainly feel offended. So, 
religious denominations, sects or groups dedicated 
to the abolition of religion shall not be registered; those 
which seek to achieve their goals through violence or 
refuse to uphold this Constitution shall also not be 
registered. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Vice-President is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Will the proponent accept an amend- 
ment to insert the word CHURCHES? When we men- 
tion denominations or sects only, sometimes it gives the 
impression that we are against the minority religious 
groups. If we include the word CHURCHES, that will 
also include in the prohibition for registration as a 
political party the Catholic Church or other churches. 
But if we limit it to denominations or sects, I am afraid 
that we are directing the prohibition only against the 
minority churches. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we ask th( 
proponent that we take the amendment by piece, rathe 
than by a whole phrase because it seems that there an 
two parts to it. The first part is an amplification of : 
religious sect and the second part is an extension tc 
atheistic or groups dedicated to the abolition of religion 
if I understand it correctly. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. 


MR. MONSOD. Is it possible to take it in two parts 
Madam President? ^ ’ 


BISHOP BACANI. I propose an amplification of sects 
to churches^ and religious denominations because the 
word “sects” is actually very restrictive. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 7:06 p.m. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, I want to 
clarify for the benefit of all the Commissioners the use 
of the term “churches” or “religious denomination.” You 
have your Filipino brothers in the South which consti- 
tute almost five million. They occupy a huge territory in 
Mindanao up to Sulu, an island close to Borneo. To 
them, especially among the less sophisticated and en- 
lightened, a church represents Christianity. And these 
five million Muslims would feel that the constitutional 
provision may encroach on their religious beliefs and 
rights. So, instead of using the word “church” which 
to them is the Catholic Church, why do we not use a 
phraseology acceptable to all sects in the Philippines, 
whether they are Catholic, atheist, Muslims, Hindus. 
There is another term which means orthodox? Why do 
we not generalize it? Let us use “religious denomina- 
tions” that would apply to the Christians, to Muslims, 
to the medium Muslims, and to the fanatical Muslims. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 7:25 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 


BISHOP BACANI. That was the original wording. 

MR. PADILLA. There it says “DENOMINATIONS, 
SECTS.” 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, but the Gentleman preceded 
it with the word “CHURCHES.” 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


649 


MR. PADILLA. That is only an enumeration. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Vice-President, both of us are 
educated and enlightened. To me, the phraseology does 
not matter. But we are concerned with the conservative 
group who will use the word “CHURCHES” imme- 
diately with Christianity. Therefore, let us not confuse 
them. If we want the whole Mindanao or at least the 
southern part of the Philippines, let us not use the word 
“CHURCHES”; otherwise, I would propose an amend- 
ment to use the word “mosque.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us listen to the Committee 
first. What is the position of the Committee on this 
matter? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts the original 
amendment of Commissioner Bacani. 

THE PRESIDENT. How is it worded? 

MR. MONSOD. I was going to suggest that the provi- 
sion read this way: “Register, after sufficient publica- 
tion, political parties, organizations or coalitions and 
accredit citizens’ arms of the Commission, RELIGIOUS 
DENOMINATIONS AND SECTS SHALL NOT BE 
REGISTERED. Those which seek to achieve their goals 
through violence OR refuse to uphold this Constitution 
shall LIKEWISE not be registered.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable. Commissioner 
Bacani? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, that is acceptable. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the Vice- 
President? 

MR. PADILLA. I have to yield to the proponent. 
Madam President, although I am not convinced. Com- 
missioner Ople suggested to me to use the word “faith” 
or “creeds.” But precisely, I want this prohibition to be 
general, comprehensive. If we limit it only to denomina- 
tions or sects, it can be criticized as particular to the 
minority religious groups. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the point of Com- 
missioner Padilla is that if we do not use the words “re- 
ligious church,” it might exclude even the Catholic 
church. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, precisely. Madam President. 
When we say “religious churches, denominations, sects,” 
that means the Catholic church cannot be accredited as 
a political party. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is right. 

MR. PADILLA. That is the meaning. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I just assure Commissioner 
Padilla that religious denominations, both from my 
point of view — and I am a Catholic — and from Commis- 
sioner Rigos’ point of view — and he belongs to the 
minority — include the churches. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. If we use the term “religious 
denominations,” that would also be acceptable to the 
Muslim group in the Philippines, especially in Mindanao. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I would like to 
introduce an amendment. Before “denominations,” 
insert the word ORGANIZATIONS and a comma (,) so 
that the phrase will read:“NO RELIGIOUS ORGANIZA- 
TIONS, DENOMINATIONS OR SECTS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

BISHOP BACANI. It is not acceptable because it will 
ban even lay religious organizations from participating 
although it does not fully represent the church. 

MR. DAVIDE. The intention of the proposal is to 
prevent the undue influence of any religion. So there 
may be an organization which is not really a sect but 
it is based on religion. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. But that 
would be carrying the matter a little too far. For 
example, even within the Catholic Church, there may be 
religious organizations which are not agreed on many 
points; nevertheless, they are Catholics. They may 
continue to act together as a group, without represent- 
ing the Catholic Church. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then, I will withdraw with that 
explanation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

The amendment has been accepted by the Commit- 
tee. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may we ask 
how the first sentence now reads. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


650 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. After “Commission” on line 24, put 
a period (.) and the phrase RELIGIOUS DENOMINA- 
TIONS AND SECTS SHALL NOT BE REGISTERED. 
That is acceptable to the Committee, Madam President. 
With respect to the second sentence, I believe Commis- 
sioner Regalado has some additions that he would like 
to put in before we accept. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. The second sentence will 
read; “those which seek to achieve their goals through 
violence, UNLAWFUL MEANS or refuse to uphold this 
Constitution, shall LIKEWISE not be registered.” In 
other words, we just insert “UNLAWFUL MEANS” 
because there are many unlawful means that do not 
usually involve violence, like fraud or deceit. 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall vote then on this amend- 
ment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Could Commissioner Regalado 
accept^ a suggestion? Instead of saying “not be regis- 
tered,^^ we use the term “BE REFUSED REGISTRA- 
because the Gentleman used the word “LIKE- 

WISE. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. REGALADO. We will leave it to the Style Com- 
mittee. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, please. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. On the same line as corrected by 
Commissioner Regalado, I will include the words “OR 
SUBVERSION” because violence and unlawful means 
are different from subversion. A group using violence 
may have a smaller group subverting the government. 
The word “subversion” was also included in Section 8 
of the 1973 Constitution: “through violence, SUB- 
VERSION or unlawful means . . .” 

MR. REGALADO. Commissioner de Castro, subver- 
sion is itself a crime; it is already included under unlaw- 
ful means. 

MR. DE CASTRO. But it is very, very difficult to 
prove subversion as a crime and subversion as wc know 
it. Unlawful means could easily be proven as unlawful 


means, but not in the case of subversion. One group 
may use violence and another group may use subversion 
although these two groups have the same aim. 

So, I propose to insert the word SUBVERSION after 
the word “violence” on line 25. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept this 
addition of the word “SUBVERSION”? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, although I 
believe that subversion is already included for specificity 
as desired by Commissioner de Castro, I will accept the 
insertion of the word. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. GASCON. May I ask the Committee to recon- 
sider the acceptance of the word “SUBVERSION” and 
instead retain unlawful because the term as posed 
by history during the Marcos regime was a very 
subjective term. I was considered a subversive during the 
Marcos regime but I did not consider myself being a 
subversive because I was fighting for truth, freedom and 
justice. So, could we please reconsider and just use the 
word “unlawful” instead? 

MR. REGALADO. “Unlawful means” as understood 
under the law, as I said, would already include it. So, 
the concept of subversion is spelled out in the law. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Subversion has its own definition. 
In fact, it has its own legal definition and used, in fact, 
in the 1973 Constitution. When we talk of subversion 
under the Marcos regime, the moment one is against 
Marcos, he is subversive. But subversion as defined in 
our existing laws and in jurisprudence is different from 
that interpretation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted? 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, may the Commit- 
tee request that we take a vote because there is an 
objection. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would like to be clari- 
fied first. Is the word “SUBVERSION” accepted by the 
Committee or not? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, because of the objec- 
tion, we are reconsidering and we are putting the issue 
of whether “SUBVERSION” should be included in the 
enumeration. 

MR. GASCON. May I suggest that we first vote on 
Commissioner Bacani’s proposal, as amended, and then 
go to Commissioner de Castro’s proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is precisely the ruling of the 
Chair. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


651 


The body will first vote on the amendment of Com- 
missioner Bacani, as modified by the Committee. I think 
the two sentences are clear. Do we have to repeat 
them? 

MR. FOZ. It will read this way; “RELIGIOUS DE- 
NOMINATIONS AND SECTS shall not be registered.” 

MR. REGALADO. We will first put that to a vote. 

MR. FOZ. Does the Chair want us to vote on that, 
first? 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will put this to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 26 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. What we accepted here in the 
second sentence is: “those which seek to achieve their 
goals through violence, UNLAWFUL MEANS OR refuse 
to uphold this Constitution shall LIKEWISE BE RE- 
FUSED REGISTRATION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, before we 
vote on it, may I just ask a question about that pro- 
posal? 

Would the term “unlawful means” include those 
groups that espouse statehood and double allegiance? 

MR. REGALADO. There is no law that considers that 
as a crime. 

MR. VILLACORTA. No, because we have approved 
the proposal of Commissioner Ople that makes double 
allegiance unlawful. Am I right? 

MR. REGALADO. What we approved was a constitu- 
tional guideline; Congress will still have to provide for 
that. 

MR. VILLACORTA. So, it is not assumed that 
espousing statehood is unlawful. 

MR. REGALADO. When you speak of unlawful 
means, we presuppose a law and a violation of that law. 
The double allegiance spoken of by Commissioner Ople 
was a declaration of policy which, if I recall, is subject 
to legislation. 


MR. VILLACORTA. In other words, political groups 
or parties that espouse statehood may be registered and 
are not inhibited under this proposal. Am I right? 

MR. REGALADO. Insofar as those who espouse it 
are concerned, that is an aspiration on their part. 

MR. VILLACORTA. So if they will not be disallowed, 
would they be allowed to register? 

MR. REGALADO. I do not see really how it will 
come under unlawful means. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I see. 

Thank you for the clarification 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Villacorta satis- 
fied? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I introduce 
an amendment to the amendment made by Commis- 
sioner Regalado when he said on line 25: “. . . those 
which seek to achieve their goals through violence 
and refuse to . . .” 

MR. REGALADO. “. . . to uphold this Constitu- 
tion . . .” 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I put an amendment to the 
amendment by stating “. . . those which seek to achieve 
their goals through violence, SUBVERSION, AND 
OTHER UNLAWFUL MEANS, AND THOSE WHO 
refuse to uphold this Constitution, shall not be regis- 
tered.” 

So the amendment now to the amendment is the 
insertion of the words “SUBVERSION, AND OTHER 
UNLAWFUL MEANS; AND THOSE WHO” between 
the words “violence” and “refuse.” 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the amendment to 
the amendment is to insert specifically the word “SUB- 
VERSION.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. We move that it be submitted to a 
vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair has already ruled that 
wc will vote on the second sentence without the word 
“SUBVERSION.” Afterwards, we will vote again if we 
would include the word “SUBVERSION.” 

As many as are in favor of the second sentence read 
by Commissioner Monsod without the word “SUB- 
VERSION,” please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 


652 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 23 votes in favor and no one 
against; the proposed amendment is approved. 

We shall now vote on the amendment of Commis- 
sioner de Castro to insert the words “SUBVERSION, 
AND OTHER UNLAWFUL MEANS AND THOSE 
WHO.” 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, may I say that the 
1973 Constitution mentions “to achieve its goals 
through violence or subversion.” And the amendment is 
to insert “subversion and other unlawful means” which 
I think is already accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
amendment to insert the word “SUBVERSION,” please 
raise their hand. (Two Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 2 votes in favor and 24 against; 
the proposed amendment is lost. 

Commissioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, as the Acting Floor 
Leader, may I respectfully call on Commissioner Ople 
for his proposed amendment to Section 2 (4). 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

This is actually an anterior amendment which had to 
give way to Commissioner Bacani because of his urgent 
engagement. I speak for Commissioners Rodrigo and 
Jamir in proposing an amendment to Section 2 (2), on 
page 2 which was previously discussed during the period 
of interpellations. Madam President, the amendment 
merely consists of saying; “Deputize, with THE CON- 
CURRENCE OF the President, law enforcement 
agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, in- 
cluding the Armed Forces of the Philippines, for’ the 
exclusive purpose of ensuring free, orderly, honest and 
peaceful elections.” The original provision of the 1973 
Constitution called for deputation at the instance or 
with the consent of the President, presumably as Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. Now, the provi- 
sion reads: “Deputize, with notice to the President.” 

This, in our opinion, must be seen in its close 
relationship with Section 2 (8) on page 3, line 5. Ac- 
cording to this, the Commission on Elections shall 
recommend to the President the removal of, or any 
other disciplinary action against, any officer or emplo- 
yee it has deputized, for violation or disregard of or 
disobedience to its directive, order or decision. 

So, in one part we are denying the President of the 
Philippines even a semblance of participation in the 


deputation. In another part, we are calling on him, that 
is to say, the COMELEC is calling on him to remove or 
to discipline any officer or employee it has deputized 
for violating the directives or orders of the Commission 
on Elections. That certainly lacks symmetry, not to 
mention the minimum courtesy owed to the Office of 
the President which has the jurisdiction over these agen- 
cies that are to be deputized. To accommodate some of 
the scruples of our colleagues about giving the President 
a superior role to the COMELEC with respect to deputa- 
tion, we have informed the Committee, chaired by Com- 
missioner Foz, that concurrence can be the compromise 
language here. You do not create potential conflicts 
between the President and the Commission on Elec- 
tions. You eliminate it right here simply by providing 
for concurrence of the President, not at the instance 
of or consent of the President, in which case, the 
COMELEC still has the primary initiating role. 

So, that is our proposed amendment. Madam Pres- 
ident. Again, I associate myself with Commissioners 
Rodrigo and Jamir in proposing this amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the position of the Com- 
mittee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, this was a decision 
of the Committee and not all of them are here. We 
would like to throw this to the body for decision. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask one question of the 
proponent^please? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissoner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What if the President is the can- 
didate? 

MR. OPLE. Even if the President is the candidate, his 
concurrence will be necessary. I do not recall any 
instance in the history of Philippine elections when the 
President of the Philippines did not give his consent to 
this deputation. 

MR. DE CASTRO. There can always be a precedence 
because if the President who is running for reelection 
feels that he can better use the armed forces, if they will 
not be deputized, then his consent will not be . . . 

MR. OPLE. If the President denies his concurrence, 
he will guarantee his defeat in that election. There are 
checks and balances involved here. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, Section 2 (4), 
line 17 would, therefore, read: “Deputize, with THE 
CONCURRENCE OF the President, law enforcement 
agencies and ...” 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


653 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. I move that we take a 
vote on the matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Cliair liears none; tlie motion is approved. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment on line 17 of page 2, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. fFew 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 17 votes in favor and 7 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we request that the Honorable 
Rosario Braid be recognized for an amendment to 
Section 2, paragraph 9. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I 
amend by addition of a phrase on page 2, Section 2 
(5), lines 22 and 23, which would read as follows: 
“Register, after sufficient publication, political parties, 
organizations or coalitions WHICH IN ADDITION TO 
OTHER REQUIREMENTS MUST PRESENT THEIR 
PLATFORM OR PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT. . .” 
The reason for this, as I explained earlier, is to insure 
that we make it mandatory for all parties and citizens’ 
groups to define and present a program of government 
before they are officially registered. I know this is 
included in the Omnibus Election Code, but, nonethe- 
less, we would like to see it in the fundamental law. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
feels that all the conditions for registration are really 
subject to legislation, but we suggest that it be thrown 
to the body for a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please read 
the amendment again. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The amendment reads: 
“Register after sufficient publication, political parties, 
organizations or coalitions WHICH IN ADDITION TO 
OTHER REQUIREMENTS MUST PRESENT THEIR 
PLATFORM OR PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT. . .” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Rosario Braid, please raise hand. ( Several Members 

raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 20 votes in favor and 3 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
that the Vice-President be recognized for an anterior 
amendment under Section 2 (4). 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I propose a very simple amendment 
on line 21 — change the word “peaceful” to CREDI- 
BLE. The reason is that if the elections are free and 
orderly, they are peaceful. The word CREDIBLE was in- 
serted by the Batasang Pambansa in the last Omnibus 
Election Code, and to me it was a good insertion. The 
words “free, orderly, honest” are the three adjectives 
used in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. Instead of 
the word “peaceful,” which is included in the phrase 
“free, orderly, honest,” I propose to insert the word 
CREDIBLE. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, may I make an 
amendment to the amendment? Would it be possible 
that instead of deleting the word “peaceful,” we simply 
add the word “CREDIBLE,” because I think the armed 
forces’ main task, aside from assuring that things are 
free, the people are free to do their voting and the 
election is orderly and honest, is to assure that there is 
peace. I think it is a very important term, so I have no 
objection to the word “CREDIBLE” so long as we do 
not delete the word “peaceful.” 

MR. PADILLA. I have no real objection to the word 
“peaceful.” I like elections to be peaceful but I will 
yield and accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment. Madam 
President, and we also like to refer it to the Style Com- 
mittee to align these enumerations wherever they appear 
in this Article. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how will the sentence now 
read? 

MR. MONSOD. Section 2 (4), lines 20 and 21, would 
now read; “. . . ensuring free, orderly, honest, peaceful 
and CREDIBLE elections.” 


654 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman’s amendment 
would simply insert the words “AND ADHERE TO.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Suarez is recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we want to know 
whether or not there is a difference. Is it necessary to 
add more words? Does it add to the meaning? 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
that Commissioner Davide be recognized for an amend- 
ment to Section 2 (5)? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

The amendment would be within the amendment of 
Commissioner Bacani: On line 26, after “Constitution” 
but before the words “SHALL LIKEWISE BE RE- 
FUSED REGISTRATION,” insert the following; OR 
WHOSE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DO 
NOT CONFORM TO DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLES 
OR WHICH ARE SUPPORTED BY ANY FOREIGN 
GOVERNMENT, INSTITUTION OR ORGANIZATION 
and place a comma (,). 

THE PRESIDENT. That would be on line 26? 

MR. GASCON. May I ask a question. Madam Pres- 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


^he Commissioner mean b 
DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLES”? 


MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, Madam President, because 
“upholding” may only be the state of the mind, but 
“adherence” would demand actual adherence to the 
Constitution. 

MR. FOZ. We accept. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
proposed amendment. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment 
which has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. The last portion of the amendment 
would read: OR WHICH ARE SUPPORTED BY ANY 
FOREIGN GOVERNMENT, INSTITUTION OR OR- 
GANIZATION. 

THE PRESIDENT. Where will that amendment come 


MR. DAVIDE. The phrase in Section 2 (5) will now 
read: “to uphold AND ADHERE TO this Constitution, 
OR WHICH ARE SUPPORTED BY ANY FOREIGN 
GOVERNMENT, INSTITUTION OR ORGANIZA- 
TION, . . .” 


MR. DAVIDE. This 
approved Preamble. 


is just to be in line with the 


MR. GASCON. I was thinking, if they will be accre- 
dited on the basis of their adherence to the Constitu- 
tion, will that not be a sufficient ground for maintain- 
ing that they have democratic principles? My problem 
is the definition of “democratic principles.” Let us say, 
a right-to-center or fascist party would define “de- 
mocracy” in one way or another; the communist party 
would define “democracy” in another way and yet 
maintain that they uphold democratic principles. This 
is very vague. If we just maintain that they adhere to 
the Constitution, would that not be sufficient? 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is the proposal, I am agreeable 
to it, provided that after the word “uphold” we insert 
the phrase AND ADHERE TO. The amended portion 
would read; “. . . refuse to uphold AND ADHERE TO 
this Constitution. . .” 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I ask a question of Commissioner 
Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. OPLE. I wanted to call Commissioner Davide’s 
attention and that of the Commission to a forthcoming 
proposed amendment already cleared with the Commit- 
tee which may rather be analogous to the last portion of 
his amendment. This deals with financial contributions 
to political parties and organization of candidates from 
foreign governments and institutions related to elec- 
tions. constituting an act of interferring in national 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


655 


affairs, and maybe an additional ground for the deregis- 
tration of a political party in addition to other penalties 
that maybe prescribed by law. This is, of course, an 
amendment proposed by Commissioners Garcia, Rosa- 
rio Braid, Natividad, de los Reyes, Jr., Regalado and 
Maambong. Can we ask that Commissioner Davide allow 
himself to be coopted as another coauthor of this 

proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would be very willing to be a 
coauthor of that, but that particular amendment would 
refer to deregistration. In my proposal, it is the registra- 
tion itself and that proposed amendment has relevance 
to contributions for election purposes. Here, it is 
support and aid, not only for election purposes proba- 
bly but even in the initiation, organization and the 
establishment of the party itself. So, both can be 
considered independently. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will support that proposal at the 
proper time. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Thank you very much. 

MR. GASCON. May I ask a question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Assuming that the Gentleman’s 
second proposal is approved, would it still be necessary 
to consider that amendment as . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. As I explained. Madam President, 
that amendment would refer to the act of deregistering 
or revoking a registration and only for acceptance of 
contributions for election purposes. 

MR. GASCON. Assuming it is approved, would the 
Gentleman’s amendment not already preclude that 
they would not be registered, in the first place, if they 
had accepted any form of contributions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. So, this is the first stage. 

MR. GASCON. Therefore, that instance may no 
longer happen since we have the first . . . 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because a political party which 
had been registered may accept contributions and, 
therefore, that could be a ground for the cancellation 
of the registration. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I ask the proponent if the phrase 
“for election or other purposes’’ was inserted in his 
amendment? Would it not make irrelevant the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Ople because in earlier interpola- 
tions we said that the act or the power to register 
includes the power to deregister? 

MR. DAVIDE. That can be accommodated in the 
proposal. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I ask 
a clarificatory question of Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would be willing to yield. Madam 
President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Would the Gentleman 
include also training and orientation programs for 
political parties in his category of assistance from 
foreign governments? 

MR. DAVIDE. If it is just preliminary to the registra- 
tion, it can be done, but that particular party which has 
undergone some training program, if supported by that 
particular group, may not be accepted for registration. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Would the Gentleman 
exempt from this category' international organizations 
like the UN, UNESCO, UNIDO, and other international 
organizations? 

MR. DAVIDE. It depends on the kind of training. If 
the training is really to influence that political party and 
for that trainor to interfere in the political affairs of the 
Philippines, that should really be banned. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will the proponent kindly read the 
proposed amendment again. 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment would read 
as follows, and this is after “Constitution” under the 
Bacani amendment: OR WHICH ARE SUPPORTED 
BY ANY FOREIGN GOVERNMENT, INSTITUTION 
OR ORGANIZATION. 

MR. RODRIGO. This question refers to the word 
“organization” — let us say, the Movement For Free 
Philippines in the United States whose members are 


656 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


mostly Filipinos (but I know that it has American mem- 
bers) and the NAM or the Ninoy Aquino Movement, 
composed of Filipinos, most of whom are American 
citizens but whose hearts still beat for our country. 
Suppose a political party here is supported by the NAM 
or the Movement for Free Philippines, would that come 
under that prohibition? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would not consider it to be within 
the prohibition because, if it is really for the Filipinos 
and this is an organization of Filipinos . . . 

MR. RODRIGO. Not exclusively Filipinos. 

MR. DAVIDE. The idea is, it is a foreign government, 
institution or organization, but that institution or 
organization is basically Filipino. 

MR. RODRIGO. So that would not come under. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will not be within the prohibition. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. GASCON. I would like to ask a question in the 
same regard. Would local political parties, say, a political 
party, a socialist party or social democratic party af- 
filiated with international organizations such as the 
Socialist Internationale or the Christian Democratic 

nternationale and, for that matter, receiving moral 
support, fellowships, etc., be disqualified? Or for that 
matter, may I add a political party which is initiating a 
cooperative movement and has sought foreign assistance 
through foundations outside, like the Konrad Adenauer 

foundation m Germany, would that preclude disqualifi- 
cation? ^ 

MR. DAVIDE. It all depends on how this aid was 
used. For instance, if it is for the cooperative move- 
ment, it is not really for a political purpose. 

MR. GASCON. What if it was for, let us say, training 
modules, etc., but the modules themselves —the training 
itself — were done by Filipinos, implemented by Fili- 
pinos, but there was a grant, let us say, to continue 
education like seminars, etc? 

MR. DAVIDE. If the purpose of the module or the 
training is not to influence politics, that can be an 
exception. So, it all depends now on the perception of 
the COMELEC. How was this aid received? Was it for 
political purposes? 

MR. GASCON. Let us say it is for political purposes 
in the sense that it is for recruitment, for training of 
new party members. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be political already. It is 
not for social or civic function. 


MR. GASCON. But the implementation of the 
program was done by Filipinos although the funding 
came from a foreign source, like comrades in a larger 
international organization. 

MR. DAVIDE. If it is related to the organization of 
that party as a political party and it is receiving aid from 
a foreign government or institution or organization in 
order to strengthen that political party, then that would 
be within the prohibition. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I be recognized 
for just a question or a manifestation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Before the Committee acts on the pro- 
posed amendment, may I have a final check with 
Commissioner Davide on the point he earlier made that 
there would be no incompatibility and no mutual 
exclusivity between this amendment and the collectively 
presented amendment that I had announced. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Subject, perhaps, to the action of the 
Committee on Style at a larger stage on how any kind of 
redundancy can be eliminated. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. GASCON. May I ask one final point. In the 
proposal, it would not only allow political parties per se, 
but even organizations, to register in a partyless system. 
What of, let us say, the various labor organizations at 
present which may wish to be registered and to compete 
in electoral process and, I think, it is of common know- 
ledge that they receive some form of foreign support 
from the various international labor federations? Would 
that, therefore, disqualify them as organizations which 
wish to participate? Perhaps Commissioner Lerum 
could also give us some verification whether it is true 
that some federations did not have direct support from 
outside. 

MR. DAVIDE. I do not have personal knowledge 
about labor organizations receiving support from 
the outside. But if these labor organizations receive 
support for labor purposes or for upgrading the organi- 
zation itself, for the benefit and advantage of its mem- 
bers, then I think it would not be covered by my pro- 
posal. 

MR. GASCON. But when they register as an organiza- 
tion, can they qualify for positions in the legislature, 
which is considered political but, technically, they are 
not a political party? But the provisions would allow 
for organizations to register as organizations. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


65'7 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, let us specifically 
examine and study the platforms of that political party, 
the programs of government, and relate them to the 
contributions given by a foreign government, a foreign 
organization or a foreign institution. If it could be per- 
ceived from an analysis of these facts that it is the 
intention of the foreign government or the institution or 
organization to promote the political aspirations of that 
party to be considered in the political field, then it is 
obvious that the contribution was not really to help it as 
a labor organization but as a political party. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that is suffi- 
cient. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Will the distinguished sponsor con- 
sider the elimination of the words “INSTITUTION OR 
ORGANIZATION” and just limit it to “SUPPORTED 
BY ANY FOREIGN GOVERNMENT”? 

May I explain briefly, Madam President. When 
Congress passed Republic Act No. 1700 on antisub- 
version, it mentioned the support of an alien power. 
When Mr. Marcos issued his Presidential Decree No. 885 
or the Revised Subversion Act, it was also limited to 
assistance, open or covert, and support of a foreign 
power. Thereafter, Mr. Marcos issued his Presidential 
Decree No. 1736 which included the open or covert 
support from a foreign source. I had occasion to 
criticize this decree because it would widen the grounds 
for subversion if there were some support from a foreign 
source, meaning, any institution or organization, some 
of which were mentioned by Commissioner Rodrigo, 
like the Ninoy Aquino Movement, the Movement for 
Free Philippines or any other private institution or 
organization. 

I think what we should be careful about is that no 
political party will be supported or will look for support 
from a foreign government. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I see the point. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Davide accept 
the proposal of Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. DAVIDE. I will accept the amendment of Com- 
missioner Padilla with the expectation that the Ople 
et al amendment alluded to earlier by Commissioner 
Ople regarding the grounds for their registration of 
political parties will be limited to a foreign government. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we would like the 
body to vote on the proposed amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide, as 
modified by Commissioner Padilla? ( Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, may we request 
that Commissioner Ople be recognized for an amend- 
ment to Section 2 (5). 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

I speak for the other proponents — Commissioners 
Garcia, Rosario Braid, Natividad, de los Reyes, Jr., and 
Maambong. The amendment consists of adding a new 
paragraph and inserting this immediately after para- 
graph 5 of Section 2, page 2, and shall read as follows: 
THE COMMISSION MAY DEREGISTER ANY POLIT- 
ICAL PARTY DETERMINED TO HAVE COMMITTED 
THE ACTS PROHIBITED IN THE IMMEDIATELY 
PRECEDING SECTION. If the Committee chooses 
merely to add this to the existing Section 2 (5) instead 
of creating a new section for economy of space, I think 
the proponents will not mind. 

MR. REGALADO. How would that go again. Com- 
missioner Ople? 

MR. OPLE. The additional paragraph shall read: 
THE COMMISSION MAY DEREGISTER ANY POLIT- 
ICAL PARTY DETERMINED TO HAVE COMMITTED 
THE ACTS PROHIBITED IN THE IMMEDIATELY 
PRECEDING SECTION. If it is not the immediately 
preceding section, then it should be the acts prohibited 
in this section. 

MR. REGALADO. May we seek a clarification from 
Commissioner Ople? In the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide, it was limited to support by any 
foreign government. In the proposed amendment which 
the Commissioner intended to be inserted as paragraphs 
6 and 7, he also mentioned financial support from 
foreign governments and institutions. 

MR. OPLE. May I read the whole section for greater 
clarity, Madam President. 

There is a slightly amended version. So, may I read it, 
with the leave of the Chair. The proposed Section 7 is: 
FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO POLITICAL 
PARTIES AND ORGANIZATIONS OR CANDIDATES 
FROM FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND INSTITU- 
TIONS RET ATED TO ELECTIONS CONSTITUTE AN 
ACT OF interference IN NATIONAL AFFAIRS 
AND MAY BE AN ADDITIONAL GROUND FOR THE 
DEREGISTRATION OF A POLITICAL PARTY IN 
ADDITION TO OTHER PENALTIES THAT MAY BE 
PRESCRIBED BY LAW. 


658 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. That is right. But the amendment 
of Commissioner Davide only speaks of political parties 
which are supported by any foreign government. The 
words “institutions or organizations” were deleted. 


MR. DAVIDE. I agree to that, and there is really no 
inconsistency even if we retain the word “INSTITU- 
TIONS” because this is in reference to the “deregistra- 
tion” not the “act of registration.” 


MR. OPLE. Yes, may I clarify that the institutions 
here should be read in the context of foreign govern- 
ments. But I think the commission should be informed 
that foreign governments in many situations, especially 
where malice is intended, do not contribute as such to 
political parties and candidates. That is what the jour- 
nahsts call a “laundering process.” After developing 
a country recipient of such contributions, the contribu- 
tions may not actually bear the stamp of the foreign 
government; there is an attempt to conceal it and to 
put it under the logos of institutions or organizations 
funded by these governments in sometimes open and at 
other times clandestine way. And so, just for purposes 
of determining the intent behind this new paragraph, 
the institutions should be seen in the context of foreign 
governments, as well. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

MR. OPLE. Except that various disguises are some- 
times attempted precisely to conceal the governmental 
source of such contributions. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Actually, the Chair does not see 
any inconsistency between the two amendments. 

MR. REGALADO. That is right. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment of Commissioner 
Davide prohibits the registration of such an organiza- 
tion, while that of Commissioner Ople refers to one that 
has already been registered but that now will be “de- 
registered” of these particular acts mentioned. Am I 
correct? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, there are now two 
proposed amendments. Can they be treated as a single 
amendment for purposes of the Committee’s action? 

MR. REGALADO. How will Commissioner Davide’s 
amendment now read? 


MR. REGALADO. In regard to the Commissioner’: 
position on “INSTITUTIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS’ 
in connection with foreign governments, and Commis 
sioner Davide s limiting it only to foreign governments 

^ reconcile his position with Commissionei 
Davide s with respect to the phraseology? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, this is a more explicit principle 
Madam President. It is being stated as an importan 
principle of national sovereignty and is incidentally 
being linked to the registration process. 


MR. DAVIDE. The same as approved. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have approved that, have we 
not? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are prepared to 
accept the amendment but can we take it one by one? 
May we suggest CANCEL REGISTRATION? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, this is very British. We “cancel 
registration,” that is the American-Filipino way, I think. 


MR. REGALADO. Before the Committee answers 
may we ask Commissioner Davide whether he would 
want the reinstatement of the words “INSTITUTIONS 
AND ORGANIZATIONS” after “FOREIGN GOVERN- 
MENTS” since the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Ople would like to refer to those acts. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think we are in a 
position now to effect some reconcilement. I would like 
to tell the Committee that instead of the words “FOR- 
EIGN GOVERNMENTS AND INSTITUTIONS” we 
will say FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND THEIR 
AGENCIES. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. We “cancel registration” of any 
political party determined to have committed the acts 
prohibited in this paragraph, because what we suggest 
is that we just add this to the sentence in Section 2 (5). 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, we agree to the Com- 
mittee’s formulation of the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. With respect to the second one, 
Madam President, may I be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would propose an amendment to the 
proposal by rewriting the original amendment. It will 
now read as follows: ACCEPTANCE OF FINANCIAL 
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR ELECTION PURPOSES 
FROM FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND INSTITU- 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


659 


TIONS BY POLITICAL PARTIES, ORGANIZATIONS 
OR CANDIDATES CONSTITUTES AN ACT OF IN- 
TERFERENCE IN NATIONAL AFFAIRS AND 
SHALL BE AN ADDITIONAL GROUND FOR THE 
CANCELLATION OF THE REGISTRATION IN ADDI- 
TION TO OTHER PENALTIES THAT MAY BE PRE- 
SCRIBED BY LAW. 

MR. OPLE. We could partially agree. Madam 
President, except tjiat the antecedent of the act of 
interference in Commissioner Davide’s version would 
be the acceptance by the Filipino political party or 
organization, so there is a synthetical problem there, but 
with respect to his proposal to change the registration 
into cancellation of registration to be consistent with 
the previous paragraph, we support that. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair desires to be clarified. 

Are we having just one consolidated amendment or 
are these two separate amendments? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, these are two separate 
paragraphs. 

THE PRESIDENT. So then let us take up, first, the 
amendment of Commissioner Ople. Where will this be? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. The first paragraph. Madam Pres- 
ident, is an additional sentence to Section 2 (5). 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the proponent please read 
it again so that we can vote on that? 

MR. OPLE. It will read: THE COMMISSION MAY 
CANCEL THE REGISTRATION OF ANY POLITICAL 
PARTY DETERMINED TO HAVE COMMITTED THE 
ACTS PROHIBITED IN THIS PARAGRAPH. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we suggest 
something. To be consistent with this paragraph, may 
we suggest that we also add POLITICAL PARTY OR 
ORGANIZATION. 

MR. OPLE. We agree. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople as modi- 
fied by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment, as modified, is approved. 

Let us now take up the amendment of Commissioner 
Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I proposed earlier 
to insert before the word “financial” the words AC- 
CEPTANCE OF because this is the very act which 
would constitute interference. If a financial contribu- 
tion is not accepted, the political party is not guilty 
of any offense. As a matter of fact, it is upholding the 
law. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, as I said I have no quarrel with that. 
My problem is one of syntax because the financial 
contributions to political parties and organizations of 
candidates from foreign governments and institutions 
related to elections are what constitute an act of inter- 
ference in national affairs, together with the acceptance, 
but it cannot be acceptance alone, because, then, who is 
interfering? It cannot be the acceptor. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the evil is the 
acceptance by the local political party organization. In 
other words, if it is just financial contributions, the 
mere offer of a financial contribution will not constitute 
an offense. So, what will happen here? Any political 
organization or party may be charged by anybody that 
there was an offer to it of a financial contribution which 
is a ground for the cancellation of the registration of 
that political party. Hence, for the consummation of the 
offense, the act of acceptance must be the qualifying 
element. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we suggest 
something. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. MONSOD. We were wondering if Commissioner 
Ople were willing to cancel the phrase “CONSTITUTE 
AN ACT OF INTERFERENCE IN NATIONAL AF- 
FAIRS AND.” If we cancel that phrase, we would have 
no syntax problems and we will just say: ACCEPT- 
ANCE OF FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS RELATED 
TO ELECTIONS FROM FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS 
AND INSTITUTIONS BY POLITICAL PARTIES, OR- 
GANIZATIONS OR CANDIDATES SHALL BE AN 
ADDITIONAL GROUND FOR THE CANCELLATION 
OF REGISTRATION OF A POLITICAL PARTY OR 
ORGANIZATION IN ADDITION TO OTHER . . . 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, that will settle the 
proDlem of syntax but it will take away a very im- 
portant principle embodied in this paragraph, which is 
that financial contributions of this nature constitute an 
act of interference in national affairs. I think this is a 
very important principle to enunciate in a Constitution, 
one of the strong features of which is a commitment to 
national sovereignty. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what would the Commissioner 
suggest? 

MR. OPLE. I am looking for a way of absorbing the 
word “ACCEPTANCE” of Commissioner Davide with- 
out destroying the syntax of this paragraph. Why do we 
not say: FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO POLIT- 
ICAL PARTIES AND ORGANIZATIONS OF CAN- 
DIDATES FROM FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND 
INSTITUTIONS RELATED TO ELECTIONS CONSTI- 


660 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


TUTE AN ACT OF INTERFERENCE IN NATIONAL 
AFFAIRS AND WHEN ACCEPTED MAY BE AN AD- 
DITIONAL GROUND FOR THE CANCELLATION OF 
A POLITICAL PARTY, IN ADDITION TO OTHER 
PENALTIES THAT MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY LAW. 
Will that meet the punctilious requirements of 
Commissioner Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. More than enough, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. If we just change the word “MAY” 
to SHALL, then it is acceptable to us. 

MR. OPLE. We accept, Madam President. 


AND OPEN MULTIPARTY SYSTEM SHOULD BE 
ALLOWED TO EVOLVE.” 

MR. OPLE. It does not sound very appropriate at 
that point. A free and open party system can become 
a two-party system in the end through the free choice 
of the people. But, maybe, that reservation can be met 
again, with the leave of the Chair, if we say: A FREE 
AND OPEN PARTY SYSTEM WITHOUT RESTRIC- 
TION ON THE NUMBER OF PARTIES SHALL BE 
ALLOWED TO EVOLVE. Will that meet the propo- 
nent’s requirement? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think we would like a 
multiparty system but a free and open party system 
could be a two-party system. 


MR. MONSOD. It is acceptable to the Committee, 
Madam President. It would be a new section. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, may I be clarified? 
Is it “INSTITUTIONS” or “AGENCIES”? 


MR. OPLE. We cannot presume what the people will 
choose in a free and open party system. They may want 
a two-party system later on. I think the principle of 
a multiparty system is very abundantly met by this 
definition of a free- and open-party system. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, it is “AGENCIES” to 
read: “GOVERNMENT AND THEIR AGENCIES.” 


THE PRESIDENT. May we have the proposed 
amendment again. Commissioner Ople? 


T ™^**^ESIDENT. It is “AND THEIR AGENCIES.’ 
Is the Gentleman satisfied? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT, Is there any objection to thi 

Ern^neTh <S»‘nce) The Chat 

hears none, the amendment, as amended, is approved 

of^iH' Floof I President, with the leav( 

denominated as SFCTTniJ*T^°*^ ^ section to b< 
uenominated as SECTION 4 on page 3 to read as fnl 

lows: A FREE AND OPEN PARTY SYSTCM SHOULE 

BE ALLOWED TO EVOLVE ACCORDING TO ™ 

FREE CHOICE OF THE PEOPLE, SUBJTCT ONL1 

TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLi ln Effect 

It means a disengagement from the sterile two-part^ 

system of the past and the multiparty system will b 

allowed to develop. Of course, later it can evolve in th^ 

same manner that this developed in the United States 

There is no mandate in the Constitution or law in th 

United States for a two-party system. But through th 

free choice of the American people over 200 years, the' 

evolved a two-party system which is so fitted and si 

appropriate to their own requirements. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. The amendment shall read: A FREE 
AND OPEN PARTY SYSTEM SHALL BE ALLOWED 
TO EVOLVE ACCORDING TO THE FREE CHOICE 
OF THE PEOPLE, SUBJECT ONLY TO THE PROVI- 
SIONS OF THIS ARTICLE. This is meant to precede 
Section 5 in the draft Article of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts that amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment, as amended? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
propose an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I propose to delete 
from that accepted amendment the word “and” be- 
tween “free” and “open,” and then to insert the words 
AND MULTI between “open” and “party.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is THE PRESIDENT. How would the proponent read 

recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will my coauthor be 
amenable to add the word MULTI which will make the 
proposal clearer? So the amendment will read: “A FREE 


MR. GASCON. It shall read: “free, open AND 
MULTI party system.” I would like that we decide on 
whether or not wc would agree on a multiparty system. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


661 


As Commissioner Ople has stated, the free- and open- 
party system may lead towards a two-party system. I 
hope we could emphasize our wish to lead towards a 
multiparty system which is why I would like to propose 
that we place the term MULTIPARTY. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee regrets it cannot 
accept the amendment because while we are for such an 
opening of the society, it is also wrong for us to man- 
date that it must be a multiparty system. It is a free 
system and can evolve into a two-party system. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I move that we 
vote on the proposed amendment. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Gascon, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Seve- 
ral Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 6 votes in favor and 13 votes 
against; the proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
that Commissioner Villacorta be recognized for an 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I would like 
to propose an amendment by addition. In Section 2 (5), 
besides those which were cited as grounds for disqualifi- 
cation for registration add: THOSE WHICH ESPOUSE 
ALLEGIANCE TO FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS. May 1 
explain the proposal. There are certain political groups 
that may not be receiving support from foreign govern- 
ments but on their own, espouse allegiance to foreign 
governments. We would like it to be very categorical 
that we shall be prohibiting these political organizations 
from registering. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Gascon is 
recognized. 

MR. GASCON. In the paragraph, there is reference 
to the phrase “uphold and adhere to the Constitution.’ 
If that is in the first premise, then the second point will 
not follow. If they adhere to the Constitution, they 
cannot adhere to any other country. My point is, the 
proposal may not be necessary since we uphold the 
first principle — that they should adhere and uphold 
the Philippine Constitution. 


MR. VILLACORTA. 1 understand that. Madam 
President. But we would like to be sure because there 
may be several interpretations to that provision. I know 
what the Gentleman is referring to — that dual alle- 
giance is inimical to national interest. But that in itself 
might be interpreted later on as insufficient reason for 
disallowing a political organization from registering. 
So, if we made it specific here that we are not allow- 
ing the registration of religious denominations and those 
that receive support from foreign governments, why 
should we not be equally clear in disallowing those 
that espouse allegiance to foreign governments? 

MR. GASCON. My point is, they should first uphold 
and espouse and adhere to the Philippine Constitution. 

If they do so, they cannot espouse allegiance to any 
other country. 

MR. VILLACORTA. But, Madam President, as I said, 
the stipulation about upholding and adhering is not 
categorical enough. Advocates of statehood, for exam- 
ple, can always say that consistent with the freedom of 
expression and freedom of belief guaranteed in the Bill 
of Rights, they may still espouse allegiance to foreign 
governments. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from the Commit- 
tee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we regret that we 
cannot accept the amendment but we also would like to 
say that our interpretation of the requirement that 
those who refuse to uphold or adhere are not qualified 
to be registered, also includes those who espouse alle- 
giance to another country. 

MR. VILLACORTA. May I just reply to that. If that 
is so, then we need not also mention espousal of vio- 
lence as a disqualification. 

MR. MONSOD. That is already a provision. Commis- 
sioner. I think we are dealing with the Gentleman’s 
amendment. Our response to the amendment is, we 
regret we cannot accept it for the reasons mentioned. 

MR. VILLACORTA. May I move that we vote on 
this issue. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Villacorta to 
add “THOSE WHICH ESPOUSE ALLEGIANCE TO 
FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS” as an additional ground 
for cancellation of registration, please raise their hand. 
( Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Seve- 
ral Members raised their hand.) 


662 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


The results show 8 votes in favor and 13 against; THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
the proposed amendment is lost. The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
that Commissioner Maambong be recognized for an 
amendment on Section 2 (6). 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is rec- 
ognized. 


MR. REGALADO. Before we go further, Madam 
President, may I just move backwards a little to lines 12 
and 13, Section 2(10) which says: “Perform such other 
functions as may be provided by law.” I move that this 
be deleted because it is already included in the Common 
Provisions. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I really wonder 
how the Chairman and the members of the Committee 
are able to stay as strong after all this time. I am rather 
tired and I can understand why some of our colleagues 
who insisted that we go on overtime are no longer with 
us. Nevertheless, we will just have to continue the march. 
So that the Committee will not feel threatened. Madam 
President, my amendment is not very consequential; it 
is only a perfecting amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we take the 
backward direction of Commissioner Regalado, and 
call on Commissioner de los Reyes for a proposed 
amendment to Section 2 (7) which we understand 

has already been approved and accepted by the Com- 
mittee. 


On page 2, line 27, Section 2 (6), this particulai 
provision reads: “On a verified complaint or on its own 
file petitions in court for inclusion or exclusion o 
voters from the registry of qualified voters.” 

The Chair will notice that there is an alternative use 
of the words “for inclusion or exclusion.” The problem 
Madam President, is that, if we read this individually 
using the words “for inclusion,” it would read “foi 
me usion of voters from,” and that is ungrammatical. 
We do not include voters “from” but we include voters 
’ A 1 * and I so move that on line 28 

“from”^n^ exclusion” and the word 

IN OR EXCTn^TOM'^^D^^’ substitute the phrase 
IN OR EXCLUSION FROM so that this provision 

would now read: “On a verified complaint or on r' 
?o^ers^’^^^^^*^^ qualified 

Preside°nT aPProval of this amendment. Madam 


MR. MONSOD. The amendment is accepted Mada 
President. ’ 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, this has 
been cleared with the Committee for acceptance. I 
would like to state that there are 10 authors of this 
amendment and, therefore, we have saved 50 minutes 
at the rate of five minutes per author of amendment, 
and they are: Commissioners Nolledo, Natividad, Sumu- 
long, Tadeo, Rosario Braid, Gascon, Garcia, Maambong, 
Ople and myself. 

On line 2, after the word “spending,” we include 
the phrase INCLUDING LIMITATIONS OF PLACES 
WHERE PROPAGANDA MATERIALS SHALL BE 
POSTED, and then proceed to “and prevent and/or 
penalize all forms of election frauds, offenses and mal- 
practices, nuisance candidacy or other similar cases.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, since this is a 
matter of perfecting amendments, I propose to add after 
the phrase “On a verified complaint or on its own” the 
word INITIATIVE and a comma (,) after, to make it 
more legalistic. The amendment would read: “On a 
verified complaint or on its own INITIATIVE, file. . .” 

MR. MONSOD. The amendment is accepted. Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Mr. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we call on the 
honorable Vice-President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you. Madam President. On 
Section 7, page 4, lines 8 and 9, in lieu of the phrase 
including rates, reasonable free space, and time allot- 
ments,” we insert the following: TO ENSURE EQUAL 
OPPORTUNITY, EQUAL TIME, EQUAL SPACE AND 
RIGHT TO REPLY INCLUDING REASONABLE 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


663 


EQUAL RATES THEREFOR, and then proceed to 
“for public information campaigns and forums among 
candidates for tlie purpose of ensuring free, orderly, 
honest, peaceful and CREDIBLE elections." 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
that Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

This would be on page 3, Section 2 (7). I propose 
to delete the word “legislature” and change it to NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee accepts. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on line 3, after the 
comma (,) following the word “malpractices,” 1 propose 
to add the words POLITICAL OPPORTUNISM. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment acceptable to 
the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Chair will 
notice that we took out from the entire Article refer- 
ences to turncoatism because we felt that in a real mul- 
tiparty system that is not really applicable. So, we 
regret that we cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, if that is also the 
reason, we should also delete “nuisance candidacy. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, there is a dif- 
ference between “political opportunism” and “nuisance 
candidacy.” As we have read in the records earlier 
today, “nuisance candidacy” includes just putting up 
somebody else with the same name. There is jurispru- 
dence on types of nuisance candidacy. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the proposal will not be accepted, 
may an individual then be a guest candidate of another 
political party, meaning to say that two or more poli- 
tical parties will nominate him? 


MR. MONSOD. That is not forbidden under this 
provision. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is not forbidden. I will not 
insist on “POLITICAL OPPORTUNISMS’ Madam Presi- 
dent, the proposal is withdrawn. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, instead of that term 
“turncoatism,” may I suggest “balimbing.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
that the final proponent. Honorable Maambong, be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I propose 
a perfecting amendment on page 3, Section 2 (9), line 
II, by deleting the word “and” before “referendum” 
and changing it to OR. 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, in the same 
subsection, I propose to change the words “Batasang 
Pambansa” starting on line 9 to NATIONAL ASSEM- 
BLY. 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is accepted. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, on page 4, 
Section 9, lines 17 and 18, I propose to delete the 
comma (,) and the words “rules and regulations.” I will 
just explain for a few seconds. 

If my memory of my principles on criminal law serves 
me right, no administrative body or department of the 
government can promulgate rules and regulations which 
imposes penalties. The only body which can promul- 
gate criminal laws is the legislative body and if other 
entities of the government promulgate rules and regu- 
lations which impose penalties, according to the Sup- 
reme Court, such would be unconstitutional and would 
constitute undue delegation of power. 

So I propose the deletion of “rules and regulations 
so that Section 9 would read: “No pardon, amnesty, 
parole or suspension of sentence for violation of elec- 
tion laws shall be granted by the President without the 
favorable recommendation of the Commission.” 

1 move for the approval of the amendment, Madam 
President. 


664 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. REGALADO. We regret. Madam President, that 
we cannot accept, because after all, rules and regulations 
which a legislature may authorize by law to be adopted 
by the Commission on Elections may also have some 
penal character if authorized by the legislature. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to say that that is 
not my understanding of the law. Madam President. I 
do not recall any decision of the Supreme Court which 
says that any entity, even a constitutional commission, 
can impose penalties which deprive people of liberty 
by such rules and regulations. It has to be by law. 

This is rather a legal matter. Madam President, and 
probably we can ask the Vice-President or Commis- 
sioner Concepcion for an extended opinion on this 
matter, because I do not see any reason why we should 
put it there, if it is actually not in consonance with the 
law. 


understanding. Madam President, 1 will withdraw my 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, there are no more 
proponents for amendments, so, can we move on to 
the voting on Second Reading? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, let us move first to close 
the period of amendments. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, before we move 
on to a vote on Second Reading, I recommend that we 
check whether we have a quorum or not. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there a quorum? 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Yes, Madam Pres- 
ident, we have a quorum. There are 25 Members present. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we request Commissioner 
Concepcion to enlighten Commissioner Maambong who 
is seeking enlightenment. 


MR. CONCEPCION. What has been done in the past 
IS to include in the law itself the authority to promul- 
gate rules and regulations, which violations shall be 
punished in accordance with the provisions of the law 
granting the authority. But the authority or the penal- 
les are prescribed in the law itself. Of course, the regu- 

L°r^v"H h' ™ "'‘“y "> ‘he penalties 

provided in the law or by those authorized in the 
issuance of the rules and regulations. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that satisfactory? Does Com- 
missioner Maambong still insist on deleting “rules and 
regulations ? 


MR. MAAMBONG. From my understanding, the 
rules and regulations practically copy the law. If that is 
so, then what is the use of putting there the penalty 
under the rules and regulations when actually it is a 
recopy of the law as delegated? 

MR. REGALADO. No. 


THE PRESIDENT. There is a quorum. 

Is there any objection to close the period of amend- 
ments? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion 
is approved. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 521 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Commission on Elections) 

MR. SUAREZ. I move that we vote on Proposed 
Resolution No. 521, as amended, on Second Reading. 


THE PRESIDENT. We will now proceed to vote on 
Proposed Resolution No. 521 regarding the Commis- 
sion on Elections, as amended. 

As many as are in favor, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and none against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 521 on the Commission on 
Elections, as amended, is approved on Second Reading. 
(Applause) 


THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Rega- 
lado say? 


MR. GASCON. Madam President. 


MR. REGALADO. It is not putting the penalty in 
the rules, but the law itself may provide the penalty. 
For instance, the law may say that any violation of this 
provision of law or of any rule or regulation promul- 
gated by the Commission pursuant to the authority 
herein conferred shall be punishable by 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the penalty itself 
is in the law, not in the rules and regulations. With that 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Gascon is 
recognized. 

MR. GASCON. Next in the agenda of the Unfinished 
Business is the continuation of the motion to reconsider 
approval on Second Reading of Proposed Resolution 
No. 322. 

I would like to request that we discuss this motion 
for reconsideration first thing tomorrow. 


WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1986 


665 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there a motion to adjourn? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, I move to adjourn 
until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 9:08 p.m. 


f.A'l 


T. i t I {/■/ /i r ’ 


M» *Mti, .11 } fhn^ 1 

*fl U »: 

.tu.V* ^ hi 


i<44n •♦»/(< 

1)1 'f , (i 

‘1 , *f| V* J ... 

i 

i . 1 * ‘.*ir Uir* 4 ,*l 


, *• i 1 f 

1 ^ * i 

V. 

* 1 V ^ * *4* 

; i»»’ t- tf If 



• .** • 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


667 


R.C.C. NO. 32 
Thursday, July 17, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:40 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Florenz D. Regalado. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. REGALADO. Almighty Father, You have called 
us to be one people, inhabitants of numerous islands, 
speaking diverse languages, heirs to various traditions, 
and yet sharing a common faith in You, the one God, 
creator of heaven and earth, and aspiring for a life of 
freedom, justice and peace. 

In this land You have so graciously blessed. You have 
brought together Christian and Muslim and others who 
also believe in Your divine presence and unfailing 
providence. 

We ask You to be with us in grace and power as we 
strive to forge the unity of our nation and create a new 
life for our people. 

Enlighten us with Your wisdom, strengthen us with 
Your power, purify us with Your grace, as we endeavor 
to set down in writing the basic law of our land, so that 
it may be a living sign of Your justice and righteousness 
among us, and a means for making Your salvation a 
reality for all our people. 

We make our prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

NoUedo .... 


Bacani 

. Present 

Ople 


Bengzon 

. Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Quesada .... 


Bernas 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 


Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 


Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present* 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present* 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Foz 


Suarez 


Garcia 


Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon 


Tadeo 

. . Present* 

Guingona . . . , 


Tan 

. . Present* 

Jamir 


Tingson .... 

. . Present* 

Laurel 


Trenas 

. . Present 

Lerum 


Uka 

. . Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 


Commissioner Villegas is on official mission. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 28 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that the reading of the 
Journal of the previous session be dispensed with. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 


*Appeared after the roll call 


668 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we proceed to the 
Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Commu- 
nications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines 
signed by Messrs. Jeremias U. Montemayor, Democrito 
T. Mendoza and Ernesto F. Herrera, submitting its 
“Position Paper on the Draft of the Philippine Constitu- 
tion, Part II.” 

(Communication No. 215 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Ramon R.J. Jamasali of Finance Minis- 
try Intelligence Bureau, proposing provisions on the civil 
service. 

(Communication No. 216 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Pedro O. Valdez, 1971 Constitutional 
Convention Delegate, reiterating his position on the 
superiority of the parliamentary system over the 
presidential system of constitutional government. 

(Communication No. 217 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 

Letter from Dr. Fe Canlas-Dizon of the Philippine 
Medical Association, submitting Resolution No. 04-86-7 
of the Board of Governors of the Association proposing 
provisions manifesting the state’s concern for the 
welfare of the children and the youth. 

(Communication No. 218 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Dr. Juanito Z. Obal of the Philippine Dental 
Association, submitting a resolution proposing the in- 


clusion of provisions for the protection of Filipino 
children, youth and mothers. 

(Communication No. 219 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Christian Estrada of 317 Taylo, Pasay 
City, opposing the principles of separation of church 
and state, and proposing the teaching of religion in 
schools. 

(Communication No. 220 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Msgr. Josefino Iledan, VC of Kabankalan, 
Negros Occidental, sending a resolution signed by more 
than two thousand residents of Negros Occidental pro- 
posing a provision that the .state acknowledge the 
importance of religion in character-building and shall 
allow religious instruction in all levels of education. 

(Communication No. 221 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Ms. Paula Carolina S. Malay and Mr. Romulo 
R. Intia of Salinlahi Foundation, Inc., 15 General de 
Jesus St., Heroes Hill, Quezon City, enclosing resolu- 
tions and related articles on the promotion of children’s 
rights and welfare. 

(Communication No. 222 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Nicolas L. Alonzo for the Barangay 
Council of Mangal, Sumisip, Basilan, suggesting provi- 
sions on autonomy of local governments (barangay). 

(Communication No. 223 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from the Kilusang Magbubukid ng Pilipinas 
signed by Mr. Rafael Mariano, submitting its position 
papers on agrarian reform and countryside development. 

(Communication No. 224 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the honorable Commissioner Cirilo A. 
Rigos transmitting a letter of Rev. Tito E. Paseo of the 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


669 


Philippine Independent Church stating his stand on the 
separation of church and state. 

(Communication No. 225 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the Equality for all Filipinos, Inc., (EQUA- 
FIL) signed by Mr. Wenceslao Vinzons Tan, proposing 
inclusion of provisions which would give substance to 
Filipinos and citizenship. 

(Communication No. 226 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Telibert C. Laoc, Project Director, 
Consultation on the Constitution, NAMFREL-Cebu, 
enclosing the results of the municipal and parochial 
consultations conducted by the Ateneo Center for 
Social Policy (ACSP), Lakas ng Sambayanan and 
NAMFREL-Cebu in the Province of Cebu. 

(Communication No. 227 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 9:49 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 9:50 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 486 
(Article on Bill of Rights) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 23 on Proposed Resolution No. 486 as 
repo*,:ea out by the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of 
Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 486 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secretary- 
General will read only the title of the proposed resolu- 


tion without prejudice to inserting in the Record the 
whole text thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 486, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS. 


(The following is the whole text of the substitute resolution 
per C.R. No. 23.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 23 

The Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights 
and Obligations and Human Rights to which were referred the 
following: 

Proposed Resolution No. 4, entitled: t 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON BILL OF RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: The Committee adopted P.R. No. 4 and P.R. No. 84 as 
its joint working drafts.* 

Proposed Resolution No. 84, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE WHOLE OF ARTICLE IV, 1973 CONSTI- 
TUTION, THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION OF 1986. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

Proposed Resolution No. 26, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO AMEND THE BILL OF RIGHTS BY 
PROVIDING THAT THERE IS NO DOUBLE JEOPARDY 
IN CASE OF MISTRIAL. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Considered unnecessary by the Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 28, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A TRIAL IN ABSENTIA 
OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS WHO HAVE MAL- 
VERSED PUBLIC FUNDS OR PLUNDERED THE NA- 
TIONAL TREASURY. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 19. 

Proposed Resolution No. 40, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE GOVERN- 
MENT TO COMPENSATE VICTIMS OF TORTURE OR 
SIMILAR PRACTICES AND THEIR FAMILIES FOR THE 
PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INJURIES IN- 
FLICTED UPON THEM, WHICH COMPENSATION 


♦See Appendix 


670 


THURSDAY, JULY 17. 1986 


SHALL LATER BE COLLECTED FROM THOSE GUILTY 
OF SUCH PRACTICES. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

Note: Substantially incorporated in Section 21. 

Proposed Resolution No. 45, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE GOVERN- 
MENT TO PROVIDE REDRESS AND PAYMENT OF 
COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES TO ANY PERSON 
FOR ACTS COMMITTED DURING THE DECLARATION 
OF STATE OF EMERGENCY. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 21. 

Proposed Resolution No. 48, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT THE GOVERNMENT 
SHALL REFRAIN FROM ENGAGING IN OR AUTHOR- 
IZING TORTURE, OTHER CRUEL AND DEGRADING 
TREATMENT OR PUNISHMENT, UNEXPLAINED DIS- 
APPEARANCE AND EXTRA-LEGAL EXECUTION, AND 
TO TAKE STEPS TO ELIMINATE SUCH PRACTICES BY 
OTHER. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 21. 

Proposed Resolution No. 58, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO BROADEN THE SCOPE OF THE CON- 
STITUTIONAL PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE BY 
PROHIBITING THE PASSAGE OF ANY LAW WHICH 
ESTABLISHES PRESUMPTION OF THE EXISTENCE OF 
PRIM A FACIE EVIDENCE. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: Voted down by the Committee. 

Proposed Resolution No. 65, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION A PROVISION THAT NO 
LAW SHALL BE PASSED ABRIDGING THE RIGHT OF 
PEACE-LOVING CITIZENS TO BEAR ARMS. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Referred to ordinary legislation. 

Proposed Resolution No. 94, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROVIDING COMPENSATION 
FOR LOSS OF TIME AND INCOME TO AN ACCUSED 
WHO IS DETAINED DURING THE PENDENCY OF A 
CASE EITHER BECAUSE OF THE UNBAILABILITY OF 
THE OFFENSE CHARGED OR FOR FAILURE TO PUT 
UP BAIL BY REASON OF POVERTY BUT IS ACQUIT- 
TED AFTER TRIAL OR RELEASED BY THE DISMIS- 
SAL OF THE CASE FOR CAUSES NOT ATTRIBUTABLE 
TO HIM. 


Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: Referred to ordinary legislation. 

Proposed Resolution No. 98, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION LIMITING THE SUSPENSION 
OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS BY THE PRES- 
IDENT TO THIRTY (30) DAYS ONLY. 

Introduced by Hon. Bengzon, Jr. 

Note: Considered in relation, to Section 15. 

Proposed Resolution No. 101, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A POLICY GOVERNING THE DETERMINA- 
TION OF JUST COMPENSATION IN THE EXPROPRIA- 
TION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY WHEN IT IS DONE 
BY THE GOVERNMENT AND WHEN IT IS DONE BY 
AUTHORIZED CORPORATIONS, FIRMS OR ASSOCIA- 
TIONS AND TO PROVIDE THAT IF IN THE LATTER 
CASE A WRIT OF POSSESSION IS SECURED, 
RENTALS, EXCLUSIVE OF THE COMPENSATION, 
SHALL BE PAID UP TO THE TIME THE CASE IS SUB- 
MITTED FOR DECISION. 

Introduced by Hon. Davide, Jr. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 2. 

Proposed Resolution No. 103, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT NO TEMPORARY DE- 
TENTION SHALL BE ALLOWED IN CASES WHERE 
THE OFFENSE CHARGED DOES NOT CARRY WITH 
IT THE PENALTY OF IMPRISONMENT. 

Introduced by Honorable Davide, Jr. 

Note: Referred to ordinary legislation/considered in relation 
to Section 18. 

Proposed Resolution No. 131 , entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE WHICH WOULD ENSHRINE 
THEREIN THE EXERCISE OF PEOPLE’S POWER. 

Introduced by Hon. Guingona. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 9. 

Proposed Resolution No. 154, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO LIMIT THE POWER TO ISSUE SEARCH 
AND ARREST WARRANTS TO JUDGES. 

Introduced by Hon. Romulo. 

Note: Substantially reproduced in Section 3. 

Proposed Resolution No. 160, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS CER- 
TAIN RIGHTS IN BEHALF OF VICTIMS AND CRIMES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

Note: Referred to ordinary legislation. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


671 


Proposed Resolution No. 165, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RECOGNITION OF 
THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE TO HAVE ACCESS TO IN- 
FORMATION OF PUBLIC CONCERN AS WELL AS TO 
UNFETTERED PARTICIPATION IN THE DISSEMINA- 
TION OF INFORMATION. 

Introduced by Hon. Rosario Braid. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 6. 

Proposed Resolution No. 169, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS 
TO THE CIVIL 'RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE 
GOVERNMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Tadeo and Tan. 

Note: Substantially incorporated in Sections 1,3,5, 14 and 21. 

Proposed Resolution No. 1 75, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE INTO THE BILL OF 
RIGHTS A PROVISION RECOGNIZING AND DEFEND- 
ING THE RIGHT TO LIFE OF THE UNBORN HUMAN 
EMBRYO. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada, Romulo, Sarmiento, Villegas, 
Colay CO and Bengzon, Jr. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 1. 

Proposed Resolution No. 184, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS 
THAT A FOREIGNER WHO IS PERSECUTED BY HIS 
COUNTRY BECAUSE OF HIS POLITICAL BELIEFS 
SHOULD BE GIVEN ASYLUM IN THE PHILIPPINES 
AND THAT EXTRADITION OF FOREIGNERS FOR 
POLITICAL OFFENSES SHALL NOT BE GRANTED. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Referred to the Committee on Preamble, National Terri- 
tory and Declaration of Principles. 

Proposed Resolution No. 191, entitled: 

resolution to provide in the bill of rights 

OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION THAT NO PERSON 
SHALL BE DETAINED BECAUSE OF HIS POLITICAL 

beliefs and aspirations. 

Introduced by Hon. Nolledo. 

Note: Considered in relation to Sections 1 and 3. 

Proposed Resolution No. 202, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT UNBORN CHILDREN 
SHALL BE POSSESSORS OF HUMAN RIGHTS FROM 
THE FIRST MOMENT OF CONCEPTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Bacani. 

Note: Substantially incorporated in Section 1. 

Proposed Resolution No. 209, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION RECOGNIZING AND SECUR- 


ING THE RIGHT OF A PERSON ARRESTED OR SUB- 
JECT TO CUSTODIAL OR TACTICAL INVESTIGATION 
OR INTERROGATION TO BE ADVISED OF HIS 
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 

Note: Substantially reproduced in Section 21. 

Proposed Resolution No. 210, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION LIMITING THE AUTHORITY 
TO ISSUE WARRANTS OF ARREST, SEARCHES AND 
SEIZURE TO JUDGES. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad. 

Note: Substantially reproduced in Section 3. 

Proposed Resolution No. 226, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ARRANGE THE PROVISIONS IN THE 
BILL OF RIGHTS IN LOGICAL SEQUENCE TO FACILI- 
TATE COMPREHENSION BY THE PEOPLE. 

Introduced by Hon. Villegas. 

Note: To be done after approval on Second Reading. 

Proposed Resolution No. 237, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO ESTABLISH FREEDOM PARKS IN ALL 
TOWNS, CITIES AND PROVINCES IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES. 

Introduced by Hon. de los Reyes, Jr. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 9/referred to ordinary 
legislation. 

Proposed Resolution No. 242, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THE DEATH PENALTY AS 
CRUEL AND UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT EXPRESSLY 
BANNED BY THE 1986 CONSTITUTION. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, Maambong, de los Reyes and 
Natividad. 

Note: Substantially reproduced in Section 22. 

Proposed Resolution No. 245, entitled: 

RESOLUTION ON THE INDIVIDUAL CITIZEN’S RIGHT 
TO GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT. 

Introduced by Hon. Ople, de los Reyes, Maambong and 
Natividad. 

Note: Referred to the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 250, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THE ABOLITION OF THE DEATH PENALTY. 

Introduced by Hon. Garcia. 

Note: Incorporated in Section 22. 


672 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


Proposed Resolution No. 258, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTION TWENTY, ARTICLE FOUR, OF THE 
1973 CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFICATION TO MAKE 
THE PROTECTION EFFECTIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

Note: Incorporated in Section 21. 

Proposed Resolution No. 261 , entitled: 


RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE PEACEABLY TO ASSEMBLE 
AND PETITION THE GOVERNMENT FOR REDRESS 
OF GRIEVANCES. 

Introduced by Hon. Foz. 

Note: Considered in relation to Section 6. 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission with the recommendation 
that Proposed Resolution No. 486, prepared by the Committee, 
entitled: 


RESOLUTION STRENGTHENING THE LIBERTY OF 
ABODE AND TRAVEL PROVISION OF THE BILL OF 
RIGHTS. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad, de los Reyes, Jr., Maam- 
bong and Ople. 

Note: Partially incorporated in Section 5. 


Proposed Resolution No. 274, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION SECTIONS THREE AND FOUR, ARTICLE 
FOUR, OF THE 1973 CONSTITUTION WITH MODIFI- 
CATION TO MAKE THE PROTECTION MORE EFFEC- 
TIVE. 

Introduced by Hon. Trenas. 

Note: Substantially reproduced in Sections 3 and 4. 

Proposed Resolution No. 287, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON THE CITIZENS’ RIGHTS 
AND DUTIES TO HEALTH. 

Introduced by Hon. Quesada and Suarez. 

Note: Referred to the Committee on Social Justice. 

Proposed Resolution No. 293, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF 
VICTIMS OF CRIMES. 

Introduced by Hon. Natividad. 

Note: Referred to ordinary legislation. 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 4, 84, 
26, 28, 40, 45, 48, 58,65,94, 98, 101, 103, 131, 154, 160, 165, 
169, 175, 184, 191, 202, 209, 210, 226, 237, 242, 245, 250, 
258, 261, 274, 287, 293, 297 and 314, with the Honorable 
Laurel, Jr., Bernas, Davide, Jr., Bengzon, Jr., Abubakar, Colayco, 
Sarmiento, Tadeo, Garcia, Villegas, Rodrigo, Bennagen, Lerum, 
Bacani, Padilla, Natividad, Nolledo, Guingona, Romulo, Rosario 
Braid, de los Reyes, Jr., Tan, Quesada, Ople, Maambong, Trenas, 
Suarez, Tingson and Foz as authors thereof. 

(Sgd.) J. B. Laurel, Jr. 

Chairman 

Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations 
and Human Rights 

(Sgd.) Yusup R. Abubakar 

(Sgd.) Rene V. Sarmiento 

(Sgd.) Edmundo G. Garcia 

(Sgd.) Francisco A. Rodrigo 
(with reservation) 
(Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum 

(Sgd.) Ambrosio B. Padilla 
(with reservation) 
(Sgd.) Teodulo C. Natividad 


(Sgd.) Joaquin G. Bernas 
(Sgd.) Jose C. Colayco 
(Sgd.) Jaime S. L. Tadeo 
(Sgd.) Bernardo M. Villegas 
(Sgd.) Ponciano L. Bennagen 
(Sgd.) Teodoro C. Bacani 


Proposed Resolution No. 297, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT IN THE CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE FOR THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF 
CITIZENS. 

Introduced by Hon. Tingson. 

Note: Substantially reproduced in the proposed Article on the 
Bill of Rights. 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 486 
(Substitute Resolution) 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS. 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled, To incorporate in the Bill of 
Rights of the new Constitution, the following provisions: 


Proposed Resolution No. 314, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROHIBITING THE STATE OR ANY OF ITS 
SUBDIVISIONS OR INSTRUMENTALITIES FROM RE- 
QUIRING A PERMIT FOR THE HOLDING OF RALLIES, 
DEMONSTRATIONS OR OTHER FORMS OF MASS OR 
CONCERTED ACTION IN THE EXERCISE OF THE 


ARTICLE 

BILL OF RIGHTS 

SECTION 1 . No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or 
property without due process of law, nor shall any person be 
denied the equal protection of the laws. The right to life extends 
to the fertilized ovum. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


673 


SEC. 2. Private property shall not be taken for public use 
without just compensation. 

SEC. 3. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and 
seizures of whatever nature and for any purpose shall be in- 
violable, and no search warrant or warrant of arrest shall issue 
except upon probable cause to be determined personally by the 
judge after examination under oath or affirmation of tlie com- 
plainant and the witnesses he may produce, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to 
be seized. 

SEC. 4. (1) The privacy of communication and correspond- 
ence shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the court 
when public safety or order requires otherwise. (2) Any evidence 
obtained in violation of this or the preceding section shall be 
inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding. 

SEC. 5. The liberty of abode and of changing the same and of 
travel, within the limits prescribed by law, shall not be impaired 
except upon lawful order of the court, or when necessary in the 
interest of national security, public safety, or public health. 

SEC. 6. The right of the people to information on matters of 
public concern shall be recognized. Access to official records, and 
to documents and papers pertaining to official acts, transactions, 
or decisions, shall be afforded the citizen subject to such limita- 
tions as may be provided by law. 

SEC. 7. The right of the people to form associations, unions, 
or societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be abridged. 

SEC. 8. No law shall be made respecting an establishment of 
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. The free exercise 
and enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without dis- 
crimination or preference, shall forever be allowed. No religious 
test shall be required for the exercise of civil or political rights. 

SEC. 9. No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of 
speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances. 

SEC. 10. No law granting a title of royalty or nobility shall be 
enacted. 

SEC. 1 1. No law impairing the obligation of contracts shall be 
passed. 

SEC. 12. No ex-post facto law or bill of attainder shall be 
enacted. 

SEC. 13. No person shall be imprisoned for debt or non- 
payment of a poll tax. 

SEC. 14. No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist 
except as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have 
been duly convicted. 

SEC. 15. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not 
be suspended except in cases of invasion or rebellion when the 
public safety requires it. 

SEC. 16. All persons shall have the right to a speedy dispo- 
sition of their cases before all judicial, quasi-judicial, or admin- 
istrative bodies. 

SEC. 17. No person shall be held to answer for a criminal 
offense without due process of law. 


SEC. 18. All persons shall, before conviction, be bailable by 
sufficient sureties, or may be released on recognizance as may be 
provided by law. Excessive bail shall not be required. 

SEC. 19. In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall be 
presumed innocent until the contrary is proved, and shall enjoy 
the right to be heard by himself and counsel, to be informed of 
the nature and cause of the accusation against him, to have a 
speedy, impartial, and public trial, to meet the witnesses face to 
face, and to have compulsory process to secure the attendance 
of witnesses and the production of evidence in his behalf. 
However, after arraignment, trial may proceed notwithstanding 
the absence of the accused provided that he has been duly 
notified and his failure to appear is unjustifiable. 

SEC. 20. No person shall be compelled to be a witness against 
himself. 

SEC. 21. It shall be the duty of every official investigating the 
Commission of an offense to inform the person under investiga- 
tion of his rights to remain silent and to have counsel. If the 
person cannot afford the services of counsel, he must be provided 
with one who is competent and independent. These rights cannot 
be waived except in writing and in the presence of counsel. No 
force, violence, threat or intimidation shall be used against him. 
Secret detention places and incommunicado detentions are 
prohibited. 

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of this or 
the preceding section shall be inadmissible for any purpose in any 
proceeding. 

The Legislature shall enact a law punishing any violation of 
this section. 

Compensation for and rehabilitation of victims of tortures or 
similar practices, and of their families, shall be provided by law. 

SEC. 22. Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel, de- 
grading or inhuman punishment, or the death penalty inflicted. 
Death penalty already imposed shall be commuted to reclusion 
perpetua. 

SEC. 23. No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punish- 
ment for the same offense. If an act is punished by a law and an 
ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either shall constitute a 
bar to another prosecution for the same act. 

SEC. 24. Free access to the courts and quasi-judicial bodies 
and adequate legal assistance shall not be denied to any person 
by reason of poverty. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the sponsor, 
Commissioner Bernas, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER BERNAS 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. Madam President. 

Madam President, I am taking up the sponsorship in 
the absence or in the lateness of our Chairman, Commis- 
sioner Laurel; but before I proceed, may I ask the other 


674 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


members of the Committee to come to my assistance. 
There are four empty seats here. I will feel free to 
call on the various members, if questions need to be 
answered by them. 


The resolution before the body is Proposed Resolu- 
tion No. 486. I hope everyone has a copy of it. It is on 
the Bill of Rights. I shall not attempt to explain every 
single section of the Bill of Rights, because each of them 
can be the subject of several full-dress lectures. Besides, 
no matter how lengthy the explanation will be, I am 
sure there will be other questions. We will reserve the 
details for these in the process of answering questions. 


I will, therefore, limit my sponsorship remarks, first, 
to some general reflections, and, second, to a brief 
explanation of the changes that have been introduced — 
changes, that is, over the 1935 and 1973 versions of the 
Bill of Rights. After these, we can proceed. 


First, the general reflections: The protection of 
fundamental liberties in the essence of constitutional 
democracy. Protection against whom? Protection 
against the state. The Bill of Rights governs the relation- 
ship between the individual and the state. Its concern is 
not the relation between individuals, between a private 
individual and other individuals. What the Bill of Rights 
does is to declare some forbidden zones in the private 
Sphere inaccessible to any power holder. 


It IS customary to distinguish three concepts: civil 
liberties, political freedoms and economic freedoms 
The dividing line between these is thin but the distinc- 
tion IS made nonetheless. What we propose contains all 
three concepts. 


To civil liberties belong freedom from arbitrar 
confineinent, inviolability of the domicile, freedor 
from arbitrary searches and seizures, privacy of coi 

mlSn ^aS’ movement, free exercise c 

SSl H . involving family relation: 

PohLcal freedoms mclude the freedoms involvin 

hiv anT " political process, freedom of assen 

bly and association, the right to vote, the right of equj 
access to office the freedom to participate in th 
formation of public opinion, and also nonestablishmer 
of re igion or what is popularly called separation c 
church and state. 


Economic freedom covers everything that comes 
under the heading of “economic self-determination ” 
free pursuit of economic activity; in general, free choice 
of profession, free competition and free disposal of 
property. 

It should be emphasized, however, that in the hierar- 
chy of freedom under existing jurisprudence, economic 
freedom ranks the lowest and it is the freedom whose 
reasonable invasion by the state is easily allowed. 

One might call what I have enumerated the tradi- 
tional freedoms of liberal constitutionalism. Their 
principal characteristic as declared in the Bill of Rights 
is that they guarantee freedoms from the state and 
protection against the state, and that as guarantee and 


protection, they do not need further implementing 
action by the legislature. They are limits on the legis- 
lature and on every other official person or body; they 
can stop official action dead. 

I mention this because in recent years, largely 
through the influence of socialism and with abundant 
help from the teachings of the Popes, there have arisen 
what are called social and economic rights. In the 
scheme of our work, I consider the social and economic 
rights principally the concern of the Committee on 
Social Justice. What distinguishes these new economic 
and social rights from the traditional liberties in the Bill 
of Rights is that in the strict sense the former are not 
rights which operate without implementing legislation, 
but rather they are more properly claims or demands on 
the state; they need implementing action by the state. 
Without the implementing action, they generally cannot 
be enforced against anybody by judicial action. 

So I repeat: these new social and economic rights 
are not the principal concern of the proposal of the 
Committee. We do not wish to steal the thunder of the 
Committee on Social Justice, although in certain 
instances where certain economic rights, claims on the 
state, are intimately related to strict rights, we put them 
in also. 

For a brief rundown of the innovations the Commit- 
tee proposes: On Section 1, the phrase “fertilized 
ovum” on line 10 — may I ask everyone to turn his 
report to the page with the numbered lines — might 
sound jarring to the legal ear. But if we explain the in- 
tent, one might be able to coin a more felicitous phrase 
than “fertilized ovum.” 

The intent of this addition is to preclude the Supreme 
Court from following the United States doctrine which 
does not begin to weigh the life of the unborn against 
that of the mother until the fetus has reached a viable 
stage of development. In American doctrine, during the 
first six months of pregnancy, the only requirement for 
allowing abortion is that it will not be harmful to the 
mother. It is only after the sixth month that the life of 
the fetus begins to be weighed against the life of the 
mother. 

The innovation does not say that from the first 
moment the sperm and the egg shake hands, human life 
is already present, much less does it say that at that 
moment, a soul is infused; nor does the innovation say 
that the right to life of the fertilized ovum must prevail 
over the life of the mother all the time. All that the 
innovation says is that from the moment of fertilization, 
the ovum should be treated as life whose worth must be 
weighed against the life of the woman, not necessarily 
saying that they are of equal worth. 

Section 2 is the same as the old Constitution. 

The provision on Section 3 reverts to the 1935 
formula by eliminating the 1973 phrase “or such other 
responsible officer as may be authorized by law,” and 
also adds the word PERSONALLY on line 18. In other 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


675 


words, warrants under this proposal can be issued only 
by judges. I think one effect of this would be that, as 
soon as the Constitution is approved, the PCGG will 
have no authority to issue warrants, search and seizure 
orders, because it is not a judicial body. So, proposals 
with respect to clipping the powers of the PCGG will be 
almost unnecessary if we approve this. We will need 
explicit provisions extending the power of the PCGG if 
it wants to survive. 

On Section 4, one will notice that by dropping the 
word “or” from the 1973 version, intrusion into com- 
munications and correspondence becomes allowable 
only upon order of a court and on stated grounds. We 
have removed the word “or.” 

Incidentally, it may be useful, for purposes of com- 
parison, if we use the version on page 6 of the report 
where there are indications of the changes made from 
the 1973 Constitution. 

On Section 5, in the explanation on page 6 of the 
annotated provisions, it says that the phrase “and 
changing the same” is taken from the 1935 version; that 
is, changing the abode. The addition of the phrase 
WITHIN THE LIMITS PRESCRIBED BY LAW ensures 
that, whether the rights be impaired on order of a court 
or without the order of a court, the impairment must be 
in accordance with the prescriptions of law; that is, it is 
not left to the discretion of any public officer. 

On Section 6 - the right of the people to informa- 
tion — the provision simply preserves the 1973 version. 

Section 7 preserves the old provision not because it is 
strictly needed but because its removal might be subject 
to misinterpretation. It reads: 

The right of the people to form associations, unions, or 
societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be 
abridged. 

It strictly does not prepare the old provision because 
it adds the word UNION, and in the explanation we re- 
ceived from Commissioner Lerum, the term envisions 
not just unions in private corporations but also in the 
government. This preserves our link with the Malolos 
Constitution as far as the right to form associations or 
societies for purposes not contrary to law is concerned. 

Sections 8 and 9 preserve the old formulas which 
already are subject to very rich jurisprudence. 

Sections 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 are old provisions of 
the Bill of Rights. 

Section 1 5 reads: 

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be 
suspended except in cases of invasion or rebellion when 
the public safety requires it. 

What this has done is to drop “insurrection” and 
“imminent danger of insurrection, invasion or rebellion” 
as grounds for the suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus. This is a harmonization with the 


report of the Committee on the Executive and said 
Committee goes into more details about this. 

Sections 1 6 and 1 7 preserve existing provisions. 

Section 1 8 reads: 

All persons shall, before conviction, be bailable by 
sufficient sureties, or may be released on recognizance as 
may be provided by law. Excessive bail shall not be re- 
quired. 

Since the report recommends that we drop the death 
penalty, this provision is harmonized with the dropping 
of the death penalty. In other words, all offenses are 
bailable now, before conviction, by sufficient sureties. 

In addition to bail, there is an explicit recognition 
here of recognizance as an instrument for temporary 
release as may be provided by law. The details on how 
recognizance can be obtained or when it is applicable 
can be provided by law. 

On Section 19, we have preserved the provision of the 
1973 Constitution. It allows trial in absentia but only 
on condition that the accused was present at arraign- 
ment. That is the absolute requirement. 

Section 20 provides that: “No person shall be com- 
pelled to be a witness against himself.” We decided to 
make the self-incrimination clause a section by itself, 
separate from the rest of the old Section 22. And the 
provision of the 1973 Constitution which incorporates 
the Miranda Doctrine has been reworded to make it 
speak in more positive terms. It says: 

It shall be the duty of every official investigating the com- 
mission of an offense to inform the person under investiga- 
tion of his rights to remain silent and to have counsel. 

The old provision merely declared that he has the 
right to be informed of the two rights. Now, a duty is 
imposed on the investigating officer. These rights can- 
not be waived, except in writing and in the presence of a 
counsel. 

Incidentally, we spent the most time perhaps on this 
Article because of reflections on the experience under 
martial law. And many of these reflections are an effort 
really to prevent the reoccurrence of things which 
happened during martial law. His rights cannot be 
waived, except in writing and in the presence of a 
counsel. No force, violence, threat or intimidation shall 
be used against him. Then, secret detention places and 
incommunicado detentions are prohibited. 

The second paragraph which reads: “Any confession 
or admission” — the word “admission” is added to 
“confession” — “obtained in violation of this or the 
preceding section shall be inadmissible for any purpose 
in any proceeding.” It is a repetition of the exclusionary 
rule: 

The legislature shall enact a law punishing violation of 
this section. Compensation for and rehabilitation of victims 
of tortures or similar practices, and of their families, shall 
be provided by law. 


676 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


As we can see, these last two sentences are not self- 
executory, but they are intimately related to the 
previous sentences. 

On Section 22, on penalties: 

Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel, degrad- 
ing or inhuman punishment, or the death penalty inflicted. 
Death penalty already imposed shall be commuted to 
reclusion perpetua. 


My recollection on this is that there was a division in 
the Committee not on whether the death penalty should 
be abolished or not, but rather on whether the abolition 
should be done by the Constitution - in which case it 
cannot be restored by the legislature - or left to the 
legislature. The majority voted for the constitutional 
abolition of the death penalty. And the reason is that 
capital punishment is inhuman for the convict and his 


family who are traumatized by the waiting, even if it is 
never carried out. There is no evidence that the death 
penalty deterred deadly criminals, hence, life should not 
be destroyed just in the hope that other lives might be 
saved. Assuming mastery over the life of another man is 
just too presumptuous for any man. The fact that the 
death penalty as an institution has been there from time 
^memorial should not deter us from reviewing it. 
Human life is more valuable than an institution intended 
precisely to serve human life. So, basically, this is the 
summary of the reasons which were presented in 
support of the constitutional abolition of the death 


jeopardy" the old provision on double 

Section 24 expands the 1973 provision by includinc 
quasi-judicial bodies - “Free access to the ^courts and 

LemT hai '”“7 “> Commissioner 

Lerum had m mmd, principally but not exclusively 

labor courts - and adequate legal assistance shall not 
be denied to any person by reason of poverty.” That 
aspect, the matter of giving adequate legal assistance, 
IS something which is not self-executory It needs 
implementing legislation. 


With these, I end my presentation of the report on 
Uie Bill of Rights. And I repeat my appeal to anybody 
in the Committee to come and join me here 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. For purposes of our interpellation and 
clarification on debates, perhaps it would be best to use 
the version which has numbered lines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. May I ask Chairman Laurel to come 
forward. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel and the 
other members of the Committee are requested by Com- 
missioner Bernas to come forward. 

FR. BERNAS. We are a committee of about 15, but 
even those who are not here should not feel safe. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like Father Bernas to an- 
swer personally my questions, unless it is absolutely 
necessary to delegate the same to another member of 
the Committee, if he does not mind. 

FR. BERNAS. We will make the effort to do that. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

With respect to Section 3, lines 13 up to 20, am I 
right if I say that there are actually two parts of the 
section: the first part refers to the right of the people 
against unreasonable searches and seizures; and then the 
second part refers to the authority who will issue the 
search warrant or warrant of arrest? 

FR. BERNAS. That is one way of putting it. Another 
way, the way I would put it is, the first part states what 
the right is and the second part states how the right is 
protected. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And so, it seems to me that both 
parts should be equated with each other for the ef- 
fective implementation of the section itself. I am asking 
this question in relation to what the sponsor stated that 
upon ratification of the Constitution, the PCGG will 
no longer issue a warrant. As I understand it, the mo- 
ment the PCGG has evidence, they do not issue — cor- 
rect me, if I am wrong — the search warrant but an 
order of seizure. So, if we consider the actuations of the 
PCGG as unreasonable, then we may apply the section. 
But if they claim that their acts are not unreasonable, 
it seerns to me that the second part may be interpreted 
in their favor, because we talk of search warrant, al- 
though the seizure is only a consequence thereof. So, 
the Committee has to determine two conditions: first, 
the seizure should be unreasonable, and, second, there 
should be a basis for a search warrant, which does not 
seem to apply because the PCGG immediately proceeds 
to issue the seizure order. 

FR. BERNAS. I am sure the Commissioner is very 
familiar with this question, having taught Constitution 
so often: “What is an unreasonable search? ” The initial 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


677 


answer is that a search is generally unreasonable if it 
is made without a warrant except in that instance 
when jurisprudence allows searches without a warrant. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And the second instance will be: 
even if there is a warrant but if it was executed with 
unnecessary force or anything similar to it? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Of course this can be qualified by a 
provision in the Transitory Provisions upholding, per- 
haps, the right of the PCGG. 

My next question is with respect to Section 5, lines 
8 to 1 2 of page 2. It says here that the liberty of abode 
shall not be impaired except upon lawful order of the 
court or — underscoring the word “or” — when neces- 
sary in the interest of national security, public safety 
or public health. So, in the first part, there is the word 
“court”; in the second part, it seems that the question 
arises as to who determines whether it is in the interest 
of national security, public safety, or public health. May 
it be determined merely by administrative authorities? 

FR. BERNAS. The understanding we have of this is 
that, yes, it may be determined by administrative 
authorities provided that they act, according to line 9, 
within the limits prescribed by law. For instance, when 
this thing came up, what was in mind 
were passport officers. If they want to deny a passport 
on the first instance, do they have to go to court? The 
position is, they may deny a passport provided that the 
denial is based on the limits prescribed by law. The 
phrase “within the limits prescribed by law” is some- 
thing which is added here. That did not exist in the old 
provision. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much for that well- 
taken answer. 

My next question is with respect to Section 6, lines 
13 to 18, with particular emphasis on the word “limita- 
tions.” May I, know if these limitations pertain only to 
the manner of the exercise of the right to information 
on matters of public concern or can it effect to some 
degree the substantial exercise of the right? 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding is that it can in- 
clude the substantial content of the information; but 
these limitations, whether or not we are talking about 
procedure or substance, must necessarily be reasonable 
limitations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Under the Corporation Code, I 
understand the right of every stockholder to inspect 
corporate books and records shall not be denied on 
matters that are formal in nature or nonsubstantial. I 
was thinking that the limitations should refer only to 
the manner of exercise; otherwise it may negate the 
right itself. 


FR. BERNAS. We would be amenable to a consi- 
deration of amendments on that. But we have in mind 
both substance and procedure, unless anybody in the 
Committee wants to add anything. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The pertinent authority, like the 
President, may say that the national interest demands 
that there should be no exercise of the right over 
records involving foreign loans as has been the case. It 
seems to me that the citizens are denied the right to 
know what are the real terms and conditions entered 
into by our authorities with foreign countries. So, I 
am thinking that if one interprets this as referring to 
limitations on the substance, the right will have no 
meaning. It would become practically useless. 

FR. BERNAS. Personally, I am not speaking for 
the Committee. I would have no serious objection to 
limiting this to procedure. But, perhaps, it is a matter 
which should be discussed at least on matters of na- 
tional security. But, of course, that phrase is used 
sometimes to cover a multitude of sins and abuses. 

MR. NOLLEDO. This is not actually a question. I 
am addressing this to all the members of the Commit- 
tee, including the venerable Chairman, because I had 
two resolutions and I felt aggrieved that the provisions 
do not appear for reasons that I think are inappropriate. 
And I would like the Committee to reconsider, if possi- 
ble, so that instead of reasoning out lengthily here for 
the inclusion of my resolution, the Committee may 
study these. The first resolution runs like this: No law 
shall be passed abridging the right of every peace-loving 
citizen to bear arms. This is similar to the Davide reso- 
lution because it seems to me that the reason is that we 
might be converted into Western cowboys in the coun- 
try. I think that is an insult to the Filipino capacity and 
intelligence. It seems to me that those who have arms 
are the criminals. 

FR. BERNAS. And I can assure the Commissioner 
that that is not my reason. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think it is the reason of the Chair- 
man according to the papers. 

And in the second resolution — I am just mentioning 
the resolution for reconsideration and Father Bernas 
might say that this pertains to the domain of legislation 
— I recommended the adoption of a provision that is 
found in the constitutions of most countries of Europe, 
particularly the West Germany Constitution and, correct 
me if I am wrong, the Constitution of Italy, that the 
state guarantees the right of asylum to foreigners who 
are denied basic freedoms in their countries and that 
these foreigners shall not be extradited. There are 
foreigners in countries with repressive regimes who are 
denied basic freedoms — the freedom of expression, 
the freedom of the press, et cetera — and if they ask for 
asylum in our country, the sponsor said that is only a 


678 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


matter of legislation and should not be included in the in the Constitution, thus shackle the hands of the legis- 
Constitution. lature? 


I beg to disagree because we have to sympathize with 
these people, we, having been victims of a repressive 
regime for about 14 years. These are the two resolutions 
I would like the Chairman and the members of the Com- 
mittee to please reconsider. 

Thank you very much. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I would like to ask 
the Vice-Chairman of the Committee some questions. 

I was listening to the sponsor’s arguments in favor 
of Section 22, particularly referring to the death 
penalty. In this particular section, excessive fine shall 
not be imposed nor cruel, degrading or inhuman punish- 
ment of the death penalty inflicted. Some of the argu- 
ments that Commissioner Bernas has set forth were 
a little sweeping and artful. For instance, he stated that 
the death penalty has not discouraged crime. May I 
know the basis for that statement? 

FR. BERNAS. When some experts appeared before us 
and we asked them if there was evidence to show that 
the death penalty had deterred the commission of dead- 
ly crimes, none of them was able to say that there was 
evidence, conclusive evidence, for that. 


MR. RAMA. I am curious. Who are these expert 
then social scientists or penologists or what? 

FR. BERNAS. Penologists. 

MR. RAMA. Of course, we are aware that there i 
also another school of thought here, another set o 
experts, who would swear that the death penalty 
discourages crimes or criminality. Of course. Com 
missioner Bernas knows that never in our histor 
has there been a higher incidence of crime. I say tha 
criminality was at its zenith during the last decade. 

FR. BERNAS. Correct, in spite of the existence o 
the death penalty. 


MR. RAMA. Yes, but not necessarily in spite of the 
existence of the death penalty. At any rate, does the 
sponsor think that in removing the death penalty, it 
would not affect, one way or another, the crime rate 
of the country? 

FR. BERNAS. The position taken by the majority 
of those who voted in favor of this provision is that 
means other than the death penalty should be used for 
the prevention of crime. 


FR. BERNAS. My own perception is that we should 
include this in the Constitution because my fear is, 
if we do not do anything about this in a constitution, the 
Legislature will not do anything about it either. 

MR. RAMA. For instance, in introducing this parti- 
cular section, did Commissioner Bernas consider the 
violence and the death penalties imposed by the past 
regime or the violation of human rights and this pro- 
bably influenced his thinking into abolishing the death 
penalty? 

FR. BERNAS. The main thing which persuades me is 
the respect which we must have for life. If I were a 
Justice of the Supreme Court who must affirm the 
death penalty, I would probably find it agonizing to be 
able to impose death, because I would see myself as 
too inadequate to be responsible for the total snuffing 
out of the life of an individual. 

MR. RAMA. But the sponsor agrees with me that 
death penalty here is imposed by constituted authority 
and, as a matter of fact, governments send people by 
the thousands to death. In war, for instance, they are 
justified. 

FR. BERNAS. War is a different thing from the 
execution of a death penalty, because war is a matter 
of defending the nation against people who are actually 
assaulting lives. In our particular case, we have the 
situation of a person who is already in custody and who 
is in no position to assault the life of anybody. The 
argument used is, his life is taken away precisely to 
prevent not him but others from assaulting the lives of 
citizens. But, as I said, there seems to be no adequate 
evidence that such a deterrent works. 

MR. RAMA. In stating that there is no evidence 
that the death penalty would discourage crime, would 
the sponsor agree with me that perhaps the perception 
of people is more important than the theories or the 
opinions of experts in the sense that it might have been 
necessary or more important for the Committee to find 
out or to get a survey of what the people really think 
about this death penalty, whether it is discouraging 
or encouraging people to commit crime? 

FR. BERNAS. I would agree with the Commissioner, 
if the theories were not based on perceptions, but the 
theories are themselves based on perceptions. 

MR. RAMA. But there has not been any survey that 
the sponsor knows of regarding the perception of peo- 
ple, whether this discourages or encourages crime. 


MR. RAMA. What about Commissioner Bernas? 
Does he feel very strongly that this should be included 


FR. BERNAS. Commissioner Garcia would like to 
say a few words on that. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


679 


MR. GARCIA. Actually, there has been authoritative 
studies done by Amnesty International and also by the 
United Nations in 1980. One source that I would like 
to quote is the study that Amnesty International pre- 
sented last year which states that the comparison of 
crime rates in different countries that have retained or 
abolished the death penalty does not indicate that the 
threat of execution has been effective in preventing 
capital crimes. Studies on the death penalty indicate 
that changes in crime rates depend on many factors, 
apart from the existence of use of the death penalty. 
In fact, this brings out the conditions in society which, 
very often, lead to the commission of the crime and, 
therefore, enables a more modern approach towards 
penology which realizes that one has to look into the 
conditions which breed the crime and, at the same time, 
look into the fact that a man who has committed a 
crime has to be reformed through a more humane penal 
system. And I think, therefore, the stress and the view 
that both the person in jail and those in society take 
about crime is, in a sense, changed. The approach 
toward this problem becomes more humane. 

MR. RAMA. In other words, we are really using 
theories to support this provision. 

Thank you. 

MR. LAUREL. Mga kasamahan, with the permission 
of my colleagues, I would like to express my support 
of the proposal to do away with the death penalty. In 
the same way, alam ninyo, hindi ako natutuwa sa dok- 
tor na ayaw ibigay sa Panginoong Diyos ang buhay ng 
isang pasyenteng gusto na Niyang kunin. They play God 
sometimes. I know of the case of a patient who could 
not hear, parang vegetable nang talaga, at dalawang 
taon na ay nasa hospital pa. Kinukuha na siya ng Pangi- 
noong Diyos, ngunit palibhasa ay may kaya iyong 
pamilya, kaya patuloy ang paggagamot sa Kanya. Ito 
namang dating sistema natin, ayaw pang kunin ng 
Panginoong Diyos ay gusto na nating ibigay. Sapagkat 
hindi pa kinukuha, hindi pa namamatay. Samakatuwid, 
Diyos ang nagbigay ng buhay, dapat Diyos ang kumuha. 
Hindi pa naman kinukuha ng Diyos, ibinibigay na natin 
kahit sa papaanong paraan. Bakit natin papatayin ang 
tao? Kung may konsensiya rin lamang ang tao ay hindi 
maaaring hindi siya magsisi. Ang tunay na paghiliirap 
ay maaaring panggalingan ng pagsisisi kung siya ay 
may ginawang masama. Di na siya dapat patayin kung 
talagang masama ang ginawa niya. Sa palagay ko, kapag 
pinatay ang tao, lalo lamang madadali ang kanyang 
paghihirap. Kapag under hard labor ang isang tao, 
mas lalo siyang mahiliu'apan. Para sa akin, ipaubaya 
na iyan sa Panginoong Diyos. 

Mayroon din tayong sinasabi sa report na “death 
penalty already imposed shall be commuted to reclusion 
perpetua. ” Patuloy ang paghihirap nitong tao msenten- 
ciada a muerte sapagkat buhay pa ay naghihirap na. 
At kung sakali namang talagang masama ang ginawa 
niya, huwag nating tapusin ang paghihirap sa pamama- 


gitan ng pagpatay sa tao sa oras na di pa kinukuha ng 
Panginoong Diyos. lyon naman ay sa aking palagay 
lamang. 

Iba’t iba ang ating palagay sa bagay na ito, kaya 
hirap na hirap tayong magpasiya. Pati ang Pangulo tuloy 
ay nakapagbibigay ng absolute pardon sapagkat naaawa 
rin naman. Kung minsan, maaaring magkamali ang tao in 
the imposition of the death penalty sapagkat kung 
maaaring magkamali sa pagaabswelto, maaari ring mag- 
kamali sa imposition ng kamatayan. Kung mamimili 
tayo sa dalawang nagkakamali, kung sino ang pahihin- 
tulutan natin, magaling pa iyong may kasalanan ang 
patatawarin natin kaysa walang kasalanan ang ating 
ipapapatay. Ito naman ay personal view ko lamang. 

By the way, noong pinag-uusapan itong Bill of Rights, 
ako ay under protracted treatment by my dentist. Hang- 
gang ngayon ay wala pa akong ngipin, kaya mahirap- 
hirap ang pagsasalita ko. Kaya ito ay pagkakataon ko 
naman to acknowledge publicly the splendid partici- 
pation of the members of this Committee under the 
leadership of our learned President of the Ateneo de 
Manila, our colleague, the Honorable J. G. Bemas, of 
the Society of Jesus. Kaya pinasasalamatan ko siya at 
ang aking mga kasama dahil noon ay hindi ako pinakina- 
bangang gasino at hindi ako nakialam dito sa Bill of 
Rights na ito. Nakasali lamang ako doon sa paggawa ng 
duties and obligations of the citizen na siya pa namang 
pinagkasunduan na huwag nang isama sa Saligang Ba- 
tas. Allow me now to talk briefly about this matter. 

Madam President, it is axiomatic that for every right 
there is a corresponding responsibility. This is a prin- 
ciple understood in every civilized society and embodied 
in Article V of the Constitution of 1973. Under the 
1935 charter, which had a bill of rights but no bill of 
responsibility, many people felt that they could enjoy 
their liberties without discharging the obligations that 
were part and parcel of such liberties. 

I imagine it was for the purpose of correcting that 
attitude that the framers of the 1973 Constitution saw 
fit to incorporate therein an enumeration of the duties 
and obligations of the citizens. The purpose, I suppose, 
was to impress upon the nation the undeniable fact that 
rights are inseparable from responsibilities. 

The trouble, however, is that in specifying such res- 
ponsibilities, the authors succeeded only in excluding 
many others no less important than those mentioned. 
Expressio unius est exclusio alterius, or to put it in more 
colloquial terms, the more particularized, the less said. 

After considering all these facts, your Committee has 
decided not to include Article V of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion in the fundamental law we are now framing. Per- 
haps we may incorporate elsewhere in the document the 
reminder that every right entails a concomitant respon- 
sibility to discharge it with due regard to the rights of 
others and subject to reasonable requirements and res- 
trictions in the common interest. This can be incor- 
porated in the Article on General Provisions. 


680 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


Our thinking is that a separate article on the duties 
and obligations of the citizen is not really necessary as 
long as it is emphasized somewhere and in general terms 
only that one’s rights can become more meaningful 
if they are enjoyed with a proper respect for the rights 
of others. We are therefore proposing the nonretention 
of Article V of the 1973 charter in the new Constitu- 
tion. 

MR. RAMA. I thank the Chairman of the Committee. 

Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rustico de los 
Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will the 
Committee yield to a few questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Willingly. And, incidentally, if Honor- 
able de los Reyes will allow me, babasahin ko ang mga 
pangalan ng makikisig na mga kasama natin. 

The Committee includes Commissioners Colayco 
Tadeo, Villegas, Bennagen, Bacani, Natividad, Padilla’ 
Lerum, Rodrigo, Garcia, Sarmiento and Abubakar. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, during the 
public hearings of the Committee, it was aid that at 
present here are 850 prisoners including women who 

iTth^tmeT ‘^Plen^entation of the death penalty. 

MR. SARMIENTO^ According to the Director of the 
Bureau of Prisons, there are at present 600 prisoners 


FR. BERNAS. It is a possibility which we must face 
and, as a matter of fact, revenge would also be possible 
even in cases of erroneous acquittals. So, these are 
things which we must face, I think. 

MR. GARCIA. Excuse me. In fact, the problem is 
a little different. In many countries of the Third World, 
specifically in Latin America, governments that have 
accepted the death penalty are, in fact, practicing what 
is now known as extrajudicial executions like disappear- 
ances and political murders. In Guatemala, for example, 
we now have 29,000. 

The fact is, the tendency to take away lives specifical- 
ly in its political context is taking a form of extra- 
judicial execution. I think that is more abhorrent, and 
we must avoid it. In Argentina, there were 30,000 dis- 
appearances. This mentality creates that kind of ap- 
proach in solving these problems. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Let us go to Section 1 . 

No, by the way, I understand that there are some 
countries who first abolished the death penalty but 
later on reverted to its retention. And so, the suggestion 
of some is that although we abolish the death penalty 
in the Constitution, we should afford some amount of 
flexibility to future legislation. According to Commis- 
sioner Bernas, if we leave that to the legislature, the 
legislature will not do anything about it. In other words, 
the legislature will not abolish the death penalty. But 
suppose we reverse the situation by abolishing the death 
penalty in the Constitution, unless otherwise provided 
by law, so as to afford the state some amount of flexi- 
bility in the event that its abolition does not prove suc- 
cessful insofar as the prevention of crimes is concerned? 

FR. BERNAS. I think that is a matter which can be 
considered during the period of amendments. But be- 
fore we leave the subject. Commissioner Colayco 
would like to say something. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Six hundred? 

MR. SARMIENTO . Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. And if the death penalty will 
be implemented, the state will practically be killing 
en masse 600 prisoners. Is that correct? 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. One of the reasons advanced 
by some of those who are against the abolition of death 
penalty is that some parties, the offended parties or 
families of the offended parties and even law-enforcing 
agencies, might just decide to take the law into their 
own hands and there could be more salvaging and law- 
lessness. What does the Committee say to that argu- 
ment? 


MR. COLAYCO. I would not like to embarrass our 
Committee, but I was one of the four who did not agree 
to the abolition of the death penalty. After the voting, 
I took a little time reading some books on the matter. 

One of the most important issues raised in consider- 
ing the matter of whether the death penalty should be 
abolished or not is whether the death penalty is a deter- 
rent. Some of the books I have read make a distinction, 
and they agree on one point. That the mere fact alone 
that the death penalty is in the law books is probably 
not a sufficient deterrent. I suppose we have that 
situation in the Philippines. But they have made studies 
showing by their statistics that the actual execution 
does act, at least for the time being, to diminish the 
commission of offenses especially against persons, like 
murder. 

I would like to read a short passage on that point. 
This is from the book of Mr. David P. Phillips, entitled: 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


681 


Strong and Weak Research Designs for Detecting the Im- 
pact of Capital Punishment on Homicide. 

As noted earlier, it is desirable to examine daily or 
weekly homicide statistics in order to detect sliort-term 
effects of capital punishment. 

He is referring to most statistics which cite only yearly 
figures. Now he continues; 

A search of the vital statistics collections of the library 
of Congress, the National Library of Medicine, and the 
British Museum revealed only one jurisdiction, England, 
that both practiced capital punishment and published 
weekly homicide statistics over a given period of time. 

The weekly homicide statistics for London from 1858 
to 1921 were available for study. 

A list of highly publicized English executions for the 
same period was generated from a standard encyclopedia 
of notorious murderers. Table 2 lists these executions, 
ranked by the amount of publicity each received, toge- 
ther with the number of homicides before, during, and 
after the week of its execution. The week in which the 
execution was publicized in the newspapers will henceforth 
be termed “the execution week” or “the experimental 
period.” The week just before the experimental period 
and the week just after will be termed “the control period.” 

It is evident that London in its control period is nearly 
identical to that of London in the corresponding experi- 
mental period, except for the presence of an execution 
in the experimental period. Thus, this procedure for choos- 
ing controls avoids the problem of dissimilar experimental 
and controlled periods encountered in other study designs. 

Starting on the hypothesis, Mr. Phillips concludes 
that publicized executions produced a brief decline in 
homicides, that the more publicity given to the execu- 
tion story, the more homicides decline. However, after 
graphing his findings, Mr. Phillips found that the dip 
in homicides Just after execution is cancelled out by an 
equally large rise in homicides soon afterwards. 

Mr. Ernest Van Den Haag, however, gives us a new 
evidence on the deterrent effect of capital punishment. 
In his article, Mr. Van Den Haag cited the statistical 
study of Stephen K. Layson on the effects of executions 
on the murder rate. This 1985 study concluded that 
every execution of the murderers deters, on the average, 
1 8 murderers that would have occurred without it. 

Of course, these opinions are merely opinions and we 
will find probably in other books a contrary conclusion. 

But I am calling the Commissioners’ attention to the 
recent execution of two Australians who smuggled 
drugs into Malaysia. I think this is one area of criminal- 
ity where an actual execution can deter the repetition 
of the same crime. I doubt if anyone would disagree 
that for now at least no one would think of doing what 
those two .Australians did. 

There are certain crimes which I think would require 
a deterrent like the death penalty; for instance, drug 


addiction. A drug distributor does not kill only one, but 
probably hundreds of people who fall and become ad- 
dicted to the vice. This is something that nobody can 
deny. Our youth has increasingly become addicted to 
this. I am citing only one particular offense. So, I think 
the Malaysian experience is one evidence that, at least, 
in certain areas of criminality we should keep the death 
penalty. 

During our discussions in the Committee, four of us 
suggested the idea of Commissioner de los Reyes which 
was: to limit as it is so that the legislature can study the 
question further. 

I came across a study or a report of the discussion in 
the English Parliament for about ten years in the 1950’s 
and the suggestion was to suspend the death penalty for 
a certain period during which the legislature or parlia- 
ment would make its own studies whether to finally 
abolish it or keep it in the books. 

I thank you. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you for that very 
informative dissertation, Commissioner Colayco. 

During the past regime, one of the problems raised 
was, when the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
was suspended, some persons were denied bail. Is there 
anything in the report of the Committee which states 
that even if the writ of habeas corpus was suspended, a 
person can still be entitled to bail? 

FR. BERNAS. There is nothing in the committee 
report to that effect, but if I remember correctly, in 
the report of the Committee on the Executive, one of 
the provisions is that the suspension of the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus does not suspend the right to 
bail. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, the Committee will have 
no serious objection if we incorporate the same concept 
in the Article on the Bill of Rights because I think it 
should properly be placed here rather than in the provi- 
sions on the Executive? 

FR. BERNAS. I personally would have no objection 
to that, so that then we could relinquish it or take it 
away from that Article. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

I notice that Section 22 of the committee report 
speaks of excessive fines, cruel, degrading or inhuman 
punishment, et cetera. This provision refers to punish- 
ment after conviction. May I know why there is no 
provision for inhuman, degrading and cruel treatment 
before conviction and during detention since that is one 
of the problems of prisoners? They are already prac- 
tically being punished inhumanly while under detention. 
Would the Commissioner consider an amendment in 
the future that will cover such matter? 


682 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Commissioner Sarmiento would like 
to say something. We consider that adequately covered 
in Section 22. We are talking about penalties which 
presuppose conviction. But Section 21 deals with 
situations before a penalty is imposed, even before a 
trial begins, or even before charges are filed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES: Yes, but there is nothing in 
Section 21 which says that detention prisoners shall 
not be subjected to cruel, degrading or inhuman treat- 
ment. 


FR. BERNAS. Lines 15, 16 and 17 state: “No force, 
violence, threat or intimidation shall be used against 
him.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Is this already covered or does 
that refer only to obtaining confession? 


FR. BERNAS. The reason we separated Section 20 
from Section 21 is that we want Section 21 to be more 
general than just for the purpose of preventing involun- 
tary confessions. The Commissioner will notice that 
Section 20 is the general statement against self-incrimi- 
nation. We have separated it as an article by itself so as 
to prevent the impression that those matters mentioned 
m Section 21 are only for the purpose of preventing 
self-mcnramation. It is for the general purpose of more 
humane treatment. 


thinlf ^ ask this is that 

nation u ° violence, threat or intim 

dation refers to the physical infliction of injury to 

person but does not cover matters involving inhuma 
conditions m prison and psychological torture. Ther 
are ^any instances where, because a prisoner ha 
already been staymg in jail or in a congested prison, h 
IS forced to admit his guilt even if he is not guilty. 


FR. BERNAS. I think the Committee will glad 
entertain well-worded amendments to implement pi 
cisely that idea, if this is found to be unsatisfactory b 
certainly it is the intention of the Committee to extei 
protection to people thus situated. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. It says here: “These rights 
cannot be waived except in writing and in the presence 
of counsel.” That means that before an accused or a 
suspect waives his right to counsel, that waiver itself 
must be with the assistance of counsel. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That could be implemented in 
Metro Manila where there are several lawyers but there 
are several towns in our province, particularly those near 
the mountains, where one cannot find any lawyer. The 
lawyers are concentrated in the capital of the province. 


Will the Committee please inform us how we will go 
about the implementation of this provision in those 
cases? 

FR. BERNAS. Commissioner Colayco will answer. 

MR. COLAYCO. That particular problem was raised 
during our discussion of this section. It is true that in 
the provinces, especially those in the hinterlands, the 
problem of enforcing these protective measures that 
are provided for in Section 21 may appear to be diffi- 
cult. But we must remember that under our present 
system of administration, there are executive judges, 
even executive municipal judges, who can easily take 
care of this problem in the barrios because under our 
law now we have municipal judges who are attending 
to several small towns at the same time. Also, there will 
be no problem in the capital because we have the 
Regional Trial Court’s executive judge. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, does the Commissioner 
mean that the judge himself in that town, where there 
are no practicing lawyers, will assist the accused in 
waiving his right to confess? 

MR. COLAYCO. No. What I mean is that the judge 
can take care of appointing an attorney de officio. 
Surely, he knows who are the practicing lawyers in the 
area and, of course, the national government really will 
have to pay more attention to this particular problem. 
In the meantime, we believe that this is a necessary pro- 
tection for the accused since the Commissioner men- 
tioned the bad practice of the local peace enforcement 
officers, including the PC people, of abusing the rights 
of the suspects during detention. Besides, we have to 
do something about this even if it may be difficult to 
implement this in the remote areas. 

FR. BERNAS. I might add that implicit in this pro- 
vision is a command to the state that, in a locality where 
it is really impossible to have a lawyer, the state is 
obliged to bring the person detained to some other 
place where there is a lawyer. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I add something to that. 
When we included this provision, we were thinking of 
two Supreme Court decisions; namely, on People vs. 
Galit and Moncupa V5. Morales. In those two cases, the 
Supreme Court ruled that before an accused can waive 
his rights, he should be assisted by a lawyer. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I read some observations and 
recommendations by Commissioner J.B. Laurel, Jr. 
which says that there should be some rearrangements of 
the articles. This could be taken care of by the Commit- 
tee on Style such that the provision where the ac- 
cused is still under custodial investigation should be 
placed ahead of that provision where the accused is 
already undergoing criminal prosecution. I have just 
called the attention of the honorable Commissioner 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


683 


that that observation of Commissioner Laurel could be 
taken into account. 

My last question is about the right to exercise the 
power of imminent domain, Section 2, lines 1 1 and 12. 
Under the present law, upon deposit of the government 
of 10 percent of the assessed value, it can take over the 
property of a private individual and the private owner 
has practically no right to place the accurate value of 
his property, if he places an amount considered by the 
state in expropriating the property. On the other hand, 
if he places the correct amount, the state makes its own 
assessment. 

Section 2 states that private property shall not be 
taken for public use without just compensation. What 
does the Committee have in mind as to the meaning 
of “just compensation”? 

FR. BERNAS. In restating this, the Committee 
precisely intends to rely on existing jurisprudence on 
this. “Just compensation” is a concept which is not 
easily defined. Generally, jurisprudence defines it as 
the market value of the property; that is, the price 
which the property will command if the seller is not 
bound to sell and the buyer is not bound to buy. So, 
necessarily, it is a very flexible concept. It is a question 
of fact which alternately must be decided by a court. 

My own opinion on this is that, even if the law makes 
a preliminary assessment of what a just compensation is 
- for instance, that law which uses as a norm the 
amount in the tax declaration or the assessment, which- 
ever is lower — that is only a prima facie assessment. In 
the end, the final determination of whether or not the 
compensation is just will have to be made by the court. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Not in accordance with the 
existing presidential decree on the matter, which is 
oppressive and arbitrary? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely. What I am saying is that the 
existing presidential decree is not binding on the courts 
as far as the fixing of the just compensation is con- 
cerned because it is a question of fact which is always 
subject to review by the courts. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. Madam President; 
and I also thank the Commissioner. 

MR. LAUREL. Commissioner Bernas is correct; 
just compensation is determined by the court. It is the 
fair and full equivalent of the sustained loss. As the 
Reverend Father said, it would be the cost to one who 
would sell it, and also, we have to take into account 
the cost it has to one who is under no obligation to sell 
it. But that is a question of fact which has to be deter- 
mined on a case-to-case basis. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Regalado be 
recognized for his speech en contra. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

TURNO EN CONTRA 
OF COMMISSIONER REGALADO 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I wish to speak against Section 22 of the committee 
report on the abolition of the death penalty. 

Madam President, in 1 949 the British Royal Commis- 
sion on Capital Punishment was created only to recom- 
mend to the Parliament whether or not the death 
penalty should be abolished. It took four years for the 
commission to submit its report in 1953. In 1957, a 
special commission on the death penalty was created by 
the State of Massachusetts only to submit a recom- 
mendation to the State Legislature on whether or not 
such a penalty should be abolished. It took two years 
for that special commission to submit a majority and a 
minority report. In this honorable Commission, it took 
only a few committee meetings to recommend the 
abolition of the capital punishment; and if approved by 
this Commission, it would have taken less than two 
months to enshrine that policy, not only in an ordinary 
statute but in the very fundamental law of the land. 

It is, therefore, my respectful submission that this 
highly controversial issue which has been debated on for 
centuries in different fora and sectors, should merit a 
more prudent and cautious treatment. Since the vagaries 
of thought, the challenges of change and the unpre- 
dictability of socioeconomic and political ambiance 
would require more flexibility in governmental response 
to this problem, this matter should be addressed to the 
legislature and not to this Constitutional Commission. 

I need not point out the obvious advantages of a 
recourse to the former. 

At any rate, since we are expected to vote on the 
resolution on the floor, I am constrained to explain my 
opposition to the proposed abolition of the death 
penalty which would result in life imprisonment as the 
maximum penalty that can be meted out in our criminal 
justice system. 

Parenthetically, even the term “life imprisonment ” 
or reclusion perpetua is in itself a misnomer and is de- 
ceptive to the public. Such a penalty has a duration of 
only 30 years, and with the grant of good conduct 
allowances under Article 97 of the Revised Penal Code, 
the total service of sentence, despite the death penalty 
having been imposed, would actually entail only 18 
years, 2 months and 12 days, which is much less than 
the duration for reclusion temporal 

If we were to consider the special time allowances for 
loyalty and the special workmanship allowances and 


684 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


commutation of sentence, the time to be served would 
be further substantially reduced. 


Allow me now to state the reasons for my objection, 
for which I do not claim responsibility but are culled 
from my own researches, specifically on the articles 
written by the Rev. S. Otley Reyes of the Society of 
Jesus; Dr. Robert Oswald, psychiatrist of Frankfurt 
University; Mr. Thomas McHugh, New York State Com- 
missioner of Correction; and the Most Rev. Thomas 
Riley, Auxiliary Bishop of Boston. 


First, on the aspect of deterrence: Current empirical 
data are inconclusive as to the deterrent effect of capital 
punishment, although it has been shown that the death 
penalty, if properly imposed and properly executed, can 
be an effective deterrent under certain conditions. On 
the other hand, there is likewise no empirical evidence 
as to the deterrent effect of life imprisonment which is 
now being advanced as the acceptable alternative to the 
death penalty. 


Does the death penalty really serve as a deterrent? 
According to the Most Rev. Thomas Riley, whom I have 
quoted, all human beings, including those suffering from 
some mental aberrations fear the loss of their lives. The 
instinct of self-preservation is so fundamental that the 
death penalty cannot but have a powerful determining 
inOuence on the voluntary direction of human activity. 


Second, on the theory of rehabilitation propose 
by some m favor of only imprisonment: There is stati 
ical evidence to prove that punishment by imprisoi 
ncS* S?"® achieve the purpose for which 

for numn P^^^i^hments are never effecth 

IctuaU?^ hen.?^ Few individuals, if an^ 

penal confinement. Correction; 
institutions are merely relics of the thinking of the pos 
Newgate era m the 19th century, when it was postufa^e 
that confinement would automatically produce reform; 
tion. Our ideas have changed over the years but oi 
prisons have not. The subhuman conditions in our pen 
institutions have repeatedly been taken judicial notic 
of by our own Supreme Court. 


Third, on the theory that only God, who created 
human life, has the right to take it away: Bishop Riley 
says that the state derives its authority ultimately from 
God and such authority is exercised in His name. It is 
not inconsistent to hold that the state claims such right 
in circumstances in which this would clearly appear to 
be in accord with God’s own will. 


Fourth, on the contention that it is beyond the 
authority of the state to take the life of a human being: 
The right of each man to his life is anterior to the 
existence of the state. Where, however, a man through 
his own fault has endangered the right of the state to 
carry on its divinely appointed function, he has for- 
feited his God-given right to life, and the state should 
likewise not be deprived of an indispensable means of 
protecting society from further and more serious harm. 


Fifth, on the danger of abuse or error in imposing the 
death sentence: We should not allow some abuses con- 
nected with the imposition of capital punishment to 
obscure our understanding of the considerations which 
justify this right in principle. We should not argue that 
because the death penalty has sometimes been imposed 
for minor crimes, there can never be crimes of major 
proportions for which it would not be a necessary and 
indispensable means for the protection of society. 

There is such a thing today as organized crime; it is 
a big business. Those who are engaged in it are highly 
intelligent, with highly competent counsel, and they are 
completely unscrupulous. They do not hesitate to plan 
and commit murder in cold blood when the need arises. 
We should not identify the death penalty with the 
gruesome methods which have been employed in 
particular situations or by individual executioners in 
other countries, because that is not true in the Philip- 
pines. The only way the death penalty can be carried 
out in the Philippines, by the fiat of the court and as 
provided by law, is by electrocution. 

We should not infer from the fact that hatred or 
vengeance is sometimes associated with the infliction of 
capital punishment, that such motive constitutes the 
only reason for which the death penalty could be 
demanded or justified. The supreme authority of the 
state carries the right to inflict the death penalty when 
it can be shown to be a necessary means for protecting 
society against crimes which endanger its very founda- 
tion. 

Sixth, on whether life imprisonment can afford 
sufficient protection to society: crimes of all descrip- 
tions are increasing numerically, and with greater 
efficiency of methods by which these are perpetuated. 
Respect for the moral law is diminishing; we have not 
yet reached the stage of moral development at which it 
would be prudent to remove a safeguard judged to be 
necessary by so many who are charged with the heavy 
responsibility of protecting human life against criminal 
attack. 

Seventh, on whether capital punishment is wrong, 
because the death penalty is irrevocable and thus it is 
possible that a miscarriage of justice may send an inno- 
cent man to jail: The danger of convicting a person for 
a crime which he did not commit, while not absolutely 
improbable is, under existing circumstances, extremely 
remote. We have enough safeguards in our substantive 
and procedural laws applied by the judiciary, aside from 
the power of the Chief Executive to grant pardons, 
reprieves and commutations. 

There is far greater danger that a person who is really 
guilty of murder or some other equivalent heinous 
crime may escape the punishment which the law de- 
creed for him. The mere possibility of error cannot be 
urged as a reason against the right of the state to inflict 
the capital punishment. If errors are ever made, this is 
the necessary price to pay within a society which is 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


685 


made up of human beings and in which authority is 
exercised not by angels but by men. It is not brutal or 
unfeeling to suggest that the danger of miscarriage of 
justice must be weighed against the far greater evils for 
which the death penalty aims to provide an effective 
remedy. 

As of 1959, there were only some States in the 
United States which did not provide for the death 
penalty: Alaska, Delaware, Maine, Minnesota, and 

Wisconsin. Michigan, originally had no capital punish- 
ment since it was incorporated in the Union in 1847, 
but it provided for the capital punishment in 1959. 

In the Philippines, and I am proud of our law on this 
matter, we provide for the death penalty only in certain 
extreme situations and for very serious cases. Under the 
Revised Penal Code, specifically before martial law, we 
had only 10 felonies punishable by the death penalty; 
namely, treason, correspondence with the enemy during 
times of war, qualified piracy, parricide, murder, infanti- 
cide, kidnapping, robbery with homicide, rape with 
homicide or with the use of deadly weapon or rape by 
two or more persons resulting in insanity (which fall 
under qualified rape), and finally arson resulting in 
death. 

Under special laws, we only have five capital offenses; 
namely, espionage, certain subversive acts, certain acts 
regarding narcotics, certain acts inimical to civil avia- 
tion, and carnapping coupled with the killing of the 
owner, the driver or an occupant of the vehicle. 

Of course, it is true that under the former regime, so 
many acts were considered criminal and the death 
penalty was imposed even for minor offenses, but that 
was the fault of the times, not the fault of the law. That 
was spawned by a period when so many acts were con- 
sidered criminal with the hope that the death penalty 
would deter the commission of offenses against the 
powers that were. Under such situations, capital punish- 
ment could not be a deterrent, because it was not com- 
mensurate to the crime involved; it was politically 
inspired, or at times not carried out for political con- 
siderations. That is why some say that considering the 
proliferation of crimes during martial law, which was 
sought to be avoided or minimized by the imposition 
of the death penalty even for minor offenses, the capital 
punishment was not a sufficient deterrent. No, those 
were abnormal times, because if people are pushed 
against the wall by unreasonable and Draconian laws, 
the death penalty would not be an effective deterrent. 
But, if the death penalty were to be imposed and 
properly executed for serious crimes with all the safe- 
guards as they do it in Thailand where the criminal 
sentenced to death is brought back to the very place 
where the crime was committed, and is executed there, I 
am almost sure that while the death penalty will not be 
a complete deterrent, it will have very substantial 
deterrent effects. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Trenas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, will the honorable 
Commissioner Bernas answer a few question? 

FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 

MR. TRENAS. Section 21, line 19 on page 4 provides 
and I quote: 

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of 

this or the preceding section shall be inadmissible for any 

purpose in any proceeding. 

Is this rule absolute? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, the way it is worded. 

MR. TRENAS. Therefore, the confession or ad- 
mission obtained in violation of this rule cannot be 
presented in any kind of proceeding. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. TRENAS. How about in a proceeding against the 
person who violated this rule? 

FR. BERNAS. Give us a little time to think on that, 
because the intention here is to protect the accused. So, 
as far as using it against the accused is concerned, it is 
absolute. 

MR. TRENAS. No question? 

FR. BERNAS. None. Now, can it be used against the 
person who violated the provision . . . 

MR. TRENAS. Because the wording seems very clear 
and admits no exception. And, therefore, if it is used 
against the person who violated the rule, he can raise 
the prohibition under this provision. 

FR. BERNAS. What can be used against the person 
who violated the rule is not the substance of the con- 
fession but the manner of obtaining the confession. 

MR. TRENAS. But the confession must still be used 
to prove the violation. 

FR. BERNAS. The important thing is the manner the 
violator of this provision did it. What is important is the 


686 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


manner of obtaining the confession, not the content of 
the confession or admission. 

MR. TRENAS. Yes, but in proving the manner, 
necessarily we must prove the confession which was 
secured in violation of the rule. 


FR. BERNAS. We consider “just compensation” to 
be the market value of the property; that is, the value 
which the property will command in the open market, 
or the price which the property will command when the 
seller is not bound to sell and the buyer is not bound to 
buy. Both of them are free. 


FR. BERNAS. What is admissible in evidence is that 
the person did something in violation of this provision. 
What is not admissible is the content of what he said. 

MR. TRENAS. Can we clarify this during the period 
of amendments? 

FR. BERNAS. We will entertain amendments at the 
proper time. 


MR. TRENAS. With that interpretation, is there any 
need to explain, even briefly, the meaning of “just 
compensation” in Section 2 to guide courts in the 
future? 

FR. BERNAS. I think the guidance of the courts can 
be done in law schools and decisions. In my judgment, a 
constitutional provision is not necessary. 


MR. TRENAS. Just one more question on Section 2, 
page 1 , lines 1 1 and 1 2. The term “just compensation” 
was already discussed. Unfortunately, I was out during 
the discussion. The term has been interrupted by trial 
courts in relation to the presidential decree mentioned 
by the Commissioner. May I know the interpretation of 
the Committee of “just compensation,” taking into 
account that this is the same provision in both the 1935 
and the 1973 Constitutions which have been modified 
by that presidential decree? 


MR. TRENAS. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, will the 
sponsors yield to a few questions? 


tinn!^ SERNAS. I go on the principle that constit 
tronal principles are not modified by decrees. Deere 

orincin^pr^^^ u conformity with constitution 

or in a statute’ ^ presidential decre 

against the en ° t t +• ^^^ust always be measun 

statute i?^n principle. If a decree or 

then the H the constitutional principk 

tnen the decree is invalid T ^ • 

explanation, the decree defines “just compmsation’” 

stated in the tax declaration, whichever is lower 
other words, the presidential decree made ^primafac 
determination of what “just compensation” te, but th 
IS subject to review by the courts according to existi 
principles on the matter. 


MR. TRENAS. But the courts have uniformly taken 
that as the guide to determine “just compensation.” So, 
for the record, insofar as our proceedings are concerned 
since we are enacting or promulgating this new Consti- 
tution, may we hear from the Committee its interpreta- 
tion of “just compensation”? 


FR. BERNAS. Anybody can contradict me if I am 
wrong. I think I will be speaking for the Committee 
when I say that whatever determination there may be in 
a decree or a law of what just compensation is, is always 
subject to review by the courts. 

MR. TRENAS. So, what should be the interpretation 
of “just compensation”? 


FR. BERNAS. Willingly. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. On page 2, Section 6, lines 
13 to 18, what does the phrase “the right of the people 
to information on matters of public concern” mean? 
What does this include? 

FR. BERNAS. Anything that affects public interest. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. My concern is that in the 
past this concept was not clearly understood as 
evidenced by ^re fact that most of our information 
systems have not attended to what we call the right of 
people to information on matters of public interest. 
And I refer to information needed for survival, in- 
formation to serve basic needs, for productivity, agri- 
culture, industry, health and education which is woe- 
fully inadequate particularly in the electronic media. So, 
I would like to expand this concept to include the right 
to communicate and the need for adequate, accurate 
and balanced information. I feel that we are suffering 
from very great disparities in information and knowl- 
edge where so much information is concentrated in the 
center while the rest of the country is suffering from 
information deprivation. The other concept is the “right 
to communicate” which does not seem to be included 
here. 

As we all know, during the past decade, there has 
been a clamor among developing countries for a new 
information order. This concerns the rights of people, 
particularly those who are left out to demand the kinds 
of information they need. The present provision pro- 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


687 


tects people’s right to receive but not to initiate com- 
munication. Hence, in the spirit of a participatory 
democracy, we would like to reinforce this concept 
by including two-way communication or two-way 
interaction. 

We now go to Section 9 which states: “No law shall 
be passed abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
press,” et cetera. I would submit that this section has 
evolved out of our libertarian concept of the press based 
on liberal democracy. Would the sponsor agree that this 
provision protects the rights of a small minority, those 
who are already well-informed, the elite who live in 
urban areas and who have access to newspapers, tele- 
vision and other media? But we also know that we have 
a society where 70 percent of our population is not only 
below poverty line but also information-deprived. We, 
therefore, seek for a new provision which would recog- 
nize the need to lessen these information disparities 
which would mean new structures favorable to the poor 
and the disadvantaged. 

I would also like to comment on all the provisions 
because I feel that most of these are on political rights 
and are not specifically skewed to the needs of the large 
majority who needs protection and adequate opportuni- 
ties for active participation. I know that the sponsor 
may probably think that this should be contained in 
the Article on Social Justice, but I hope some of these 
rights of the poor and the disadvantaged would also be 
contained in the Bill of Rights, such as the rights to 
education, food, sound and clean environment and 
health. 

Thank you very much. 

FR. BERNAS. Let me just comment on that. As I 
said in my sponsorship remarks, the principal concern 
of the Bill of Rights is strictly on the traditional free- 
doms of liberal constitutionalism. The principal charac- 
teristic of these traditional freedoms is that they 
guarantee freedom from the state and protection against 
the state, and they do not need any further implement- 
ing action by the legislature. They are limits on the 
legislature and every other official person or body. I 
mentioned this because in recent years, largely through 
the influence of socialism and with the abundant help 
from the Popes and from communicators like us and so 
forth, there have arisen what are called social and 
economic rights. In the scheme of our work, I consider 
these social and economic rights as principally the con- 
cern of other committees, particularly of the Committee 
on Social Justice. What distinguishes these new rights 
from the traditional liberties in the Bill of Rights is that, 
in the strict sense, they are not rights which operate 
without implementing legislation, but rather they are 
more properly “claims” or “demands” on the state. 
They need implementing action by the state. Without 
implementing action, they generally cannot be enforced 
against anybody by judicial action. So, what we are 
dealing with are those which are operative by themselves 


and do not need implementing action. We do not wish 
to steal the thunder of our other committees. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. But is the Commissioner 
willing to expand this concept? We did not include this 
concept in the General Provisions because we thought it 
would be better to expand the concept in this particular 
provision. 

FR. BERNAS. My own thinking is that those affirma- 
tive commands of the state to do something are better 
placed elsewhere. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. .Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, there is still a long 
list of those who want to interpellate, and so I shall 
limit myself to just one point and that is on Section 4, 
page 2. This is a reproduction of the provision of the 
1973 Constitution except for the deletion of the word 
“or” on line 4 between the words “court” and “when.” 
So, the 1973 Constitution provides: 

The privacy of communication and correspondence shall 

be inviolable except upon lawful order of the court or when 

public safety and order require it. 

The word “or” has been deleted, so the proposed 
section reads, “lawful order of the court when public 
safety or order requires otherwise.” 

So, under the 1973 Constitution, an intelligence 
agency of the army can bug a telephone without violat- 
ing that provision? 

FR. BERNAS. Under the 1973 provision, yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. But under the proposed Constitu- 
tion that cannot be done. 

FR. BERNAS. It cannot be done. 

MR. RODRIGO. It can be done only upon a previous 
order of the court. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Regarding that mini coup d’ etat, 
or, more accurately the coup d’ hotel at the Manila 
Hotel, I read in the papers about a certain telephone 
call from Hawaii and it seems somebody listened to 
the telephone conversation. I do not know what the 
message was. 

Under the 1973 Constitution, if that telephone con- 
versation were recorded, the tape could be used as 
evidence. 


688 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. If this proposed provision in the 
proposed Constitution were approved and would be in 
effect, that conversation could not be used as evidence. 

FR. BERNAS. It cannot be used. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will this not hamper the intelligence 
work of our Armed Forces and of our government to 
ward off subversion and rebellious plots against the 
government? 

FR. BERNAS. I think that the matter can be handled 
within the limits of this provision. For instance, in the 
United States where there is an Anti-Wiretapping Act, it 
is possible to obtain authorization to tap conversations, 
but the requirements of probable cause and particularity 
of description are modified to suit the circumstances. 


MR. RODRIGO. Can our legislature not depart from 
this? In certain cases, say, for example, the intelligence 
officers of the Armed Forces, can they wiretap without 
a court order? 

FR. BERNAS. Under this provision, no, and this 
modification of dropping the two-letter word “or” was 
precisely put in there because of our experience of the 
past 1 2 years where this was so easily abused. 

MR. RODRIGO. In matters involving national 
security or public order, sometimes things happen very 
fast, like the coup d’ hotel. There was no more time 
to go to a judge to ask for an order. In the case of the 
telephone call from Hawaii, somebody happened to 
listen in, and if what was said was something seditious, 
this fellow who listened in and heard what was said 
could not testify in court. Is that it? He could not 
testify because he did not first obtain a court order 
before he listened in? 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes, the Commissioner is referring 
to the Anti-Wiretapping Act of the Congress of the 
United States. But if the United States Constitution had 
a provision like the proposed provision, said Congress 
could not have enacted an Anti-Wiretapping Act which 
authorizes wiretapping in certain cases, except with 
court authorization. 


i BERNAS. No. What I am saying is, for instanc 
n the case of United States v. United States Distri 
ur of Eastern Michigan, the question was: “Sin 
prohibited, under what circumstanc 

given wa 
'Vhat are the requii 
ents of the court for the issuance of an order‘d T1 

probable cause and some particularity of description. 

Let us take the residences of known gamblers as ; 
example. It is possible to obtain an order for the tappii 
of their telephone conversation. So, the problem 
How do we solve the problem of particularity 
description when we do not know what will go throu 
the wire? According to the last American case I rea 
the court specified the subject matters which may 
tapped. 


In our particular case, for instance, if there is a 
reasonable ground to believe that General So-and-So is 
in touch with agents abroad, it would be possible to 
obtain an order under this provision for authority to tap 
the telephone of an individual and to record and use in 
court matters transpiring on a particular subject like 
coup plots and similarly related things. 


FR. BERNAS. The matter cannot be used in court 
against the persons who may be involved in the coup, 
but it may be used by the security forces so they can act 
upon it, and take the necessary preventive measures. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just one more question. In Section 
4, the Committee removed the word “or” before the 
phrase “when public safety or order requires.” Is that 
regarding privacy of communication and correspond- 
ence? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. On the other hand. Section 5 states: 

The liberty of abode and of changing the same and of 
travel, within the limits prescribed by law, shall not be 
impaired except upon lawful order of the court, or when 
necessary in the interest of national security, public safety, 
or public health. 

A portion of this Section 5 uses a very similar phras- 
ing as in Section 4. Why did the Committee not remove 
the word “or” before “when”? 

FR. BERNAS. I am glad the Commissioner asked that 
question. As I recall, he was the one who recommended 
that we should not change it. So, perhaps he is in the 
best position to explain this. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. As a matter of fact, I was 
unhappy even about the removal of the word “or” in 
Section 4. That is why I recommended not to remove 
“or” in Section 5. But by that time the word “or” in 
Section 4 was already removed. 


MR. RODRIGO. But is a court order necessary all the 
time? 

FR. BERNAS. Under this provision, yes. 


FR. BERNAS. I might say that the subject matter 
is different. Section 4 deals with communication, speech 
and so forth, whereas the other section deals with 
physical movement. So, there is a difference there. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


689 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is still on page 4, Section 22, on the death penal- 
ty. With the complete dissertation made by Commis- 
sioner Regalado, I cannot add anything more except a 
few experiences which I would like to convey to the 
honorable Members of the Commission. To me, this is 
a very vital subject matter which involves those who 
commit crimes and those who enforce the law. 

Ako ay natuto ng ilang pananalita kay Speaker Laurel 
na aking kaibigan. Una, ang sabi niya, “Kinukuha na nga 
ng Panginoong Diyos itong lubhang mga mahihinang 
may sakit, ayaw pang ibigay nitong magagaling na dok- 
tor.” Then he said, “Ayaw pang kunin ng Panginoong 
Diyos, ibinibigay na ng estado,” referring to those who 
are to suffer the death penalty. Ang sabi ko naman, 
“Ayaw pa namang ibigay ng tao iyong buhay niya 
(the victim), bakit naman kinukuha noong isa (the 
criminal)”? 

I had a very bad experience during my early teens. 
My neighbor, a widower, was robbed and murdered 
after winning a few pesos from gambling the night 
before. He had two children — a small boy and a small 
girl. The suspect was tried for robbery with homicide 
and was sentenced to death by the lower court. The 
Supreme Court, on review, reduced the penalty to 
reclusion perpetua. As Commissioner Regalado said, 
reclusion perpetua is not forever; it is for about 30 
years. This man was given a pardon after 25 years. By 
that time, the boy and the girl were already in their 
mature age, about 30 to 32 years old. The son of the 
victim attempted to kill the murderer of his father. 
But he failed, and was caught; he was put to jail. The 
girl, who was already full-grown, saw her brother in jail. 
She also attempted to kill the murderer of her father 
but again, was unsuccessful. She was put to jail for 
several years. Talagang hindi pa mamamatay iyang 
murderer na iyan. Ayaw pa siyang kunin. I asked myself 
where justice is in this case. 

During my few years in the National Police Commis- 
sion, I travelled and visited many police agencies all over 
the world, in Europe, particularly in England, and also 
those in the United States. I talked to many penologists 
on whether or not there should be a death penalty. 
They were divided on this; some disagreed; some agreed. 
And as Commissioner Regalado said, it took a Massa- 
chusetts Commission two years to study this matter. 

I am hoping that this Commission will not take three 
session days to decide whether or not to abolish the 
death penalty. I would request my fellow Members of 
the Commission to think over this question very well 
because it involves many things. I will still go for the 
recommendation of Commissioners de los Reyes and 


Regalado that this matter be referred to the National 
Assembly for further study. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

I was jarred the moment I read Commissioner Bernas’ 
Section 1. He used a very descriptive phrase which is 
grating to lawyers. I am referring to the phrase: “The 
right to life extends to the fertilized ovum.” I really do 
not know the meaning of “fertilized ovum.” Will the 
Commissioner be kind enough to explain this par- 
ticular phrase to us since it relates to the word “person” 
under Section 1 of the Article on the Bill of Rights? 

FR. BERNAS. The question really contains two 
questions: (1) What is the meaning of a fertilized 
ovum? (2) Is the fertilized ovum — whatever it is — a 
person which is a subject of rights? How do we describe 
a fertilized ovum? I wish we had a physician here; 
I, myself, am not happy using this phrase. 

MR. SUAREZ. If the Commissioner is not happy 
using this phrase, will he join me in seeking the deletion 
of that phrase “fertilized ovum” at the proper time? 

FR. BERNAS. I will join efforts to find a more feli- 
citous phrase. 

As I said, the main idea here is that we want to stop 
the Philippine Supreme Court from adopting the 
American doctrine on abortion. This American doctrine 
on abortion is based on a similar constitutional provi- 
sion on due process, and, as the doctrine now exists in 
the case of Roe v. Wade, it, in effect, says that during 
the first two trimesters or the first six months of con- 
ception, abortion can be allowed anytime, provided that 
the method used will not endanger the mother. 
Abortion can be allowed, anytime, even if it is not 
medically needed for the mother. The only condition is 
that it should not endanger the life of the mother. It is 
only after the second trimester that the life of the fetus 
begins to be considered as against the life of the mother. 
That is the whole purpose of this. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, it is anticipatory in 
character. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. But does the term “fertilized ovum” 
with reference to the first sentence of Section 1 refer to 
a person? In other words, is the fertilized ovum already 
elevated to the category of a person as to enjoy a 
constitutional right? Is that the meaning? 


690 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. My own thinking would be that it is 
not a person yet. That is my own thinking, so that per- 
haps this whole sentence must be modified to express it 
in such a way that it is not an assertion that this begins 
to become a person from the very first moment or nine 
months before birth. As I said, I am in search of a 
proper way of expressing this. Perhaps you could say 
“protection of life should extend to the fertilized 
ovum.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Be that as it may, when we give unto 
the fertilized ovum the right to life and that life is 
killed, would the Gentleman consider the perpetrator an 
offender susceptible to the crime of murder? 

FR. BERNAS. If the Gentleman asks me, even under 
the Penal Code, that would not be murder but abortion. 


MR. SUAREZ. Because when one deprives a person 
of his or her life in a deliberate malicious way, he would 
be charged with the crime of murder. 


FR. BERNAS. My understanding of the law on 
homicide and murder is that if one deprives a person 
who is already outside the womb of life, that is when 
there is murder or homicide. But if one deprives some- 
body of life who is still in the womb, it would be 
abortion. Perhaps Commissioner Padilla could help me 
out on this. 


MR. SUAREZ. That is from the criminal aspect- 1 
me go to the civil aspect. Would the Gentleman give 
fertilized ovum the right to succession*> 


FR. BERNAS. No, that is not covered here. 


BISHOP BACANI. The formulation reached by the 
Committee was “fertilized ovum,” to precisely define 
what we meant. And it will be brought forward in ano- 
ther committee report that the right to life begins with 
conception. That is meant to explain what is under- 
stood on the committee report by the word “con- 
ception.” The Gentleman was asking whether this is a 
human person. That is not the assertion yet of this 
section. But what we do assert is this, that this is human 
life already. If I may be allowed to read the results of 
the report by Fr. Robert Henley, who is also a Jesuit 
like Fr. Bernas, it seems they are in all camps. Let me 
just read this into the record. He says: 

Specializing as it does in fetal physiology, Georgetown 
University, probably more than almost any other univer- 
sity, is aware of the biological facts regarding the begin- 
nings of human life. 

From the moment of conception a new biological entity 
exists. The entity cannot be considered as physically iden- 
tical with the mother’s body. To consider the matter 
broadly, there is no essential difference between an ovum 
fertilized within the body and an ovum fertilized outside 
the parent’s body or rejected in an egg or emerging unde- 
veloped, as in marsupials, in an external pouch. To destroy 
this entity is to destroy an existing life. Since this life entity 
is clearly within the development of the human species, 
there is obviously nothing added on a human being. Its 
destruction is the destruction of human life. Murder cannot 
be justified by a legal fiction. 

So, I just want to read that into the record. 

FR. BERNAS. I think Commissioner Padilla wants to 
say something. 


MR. SUAREZ. Because the word “person” here MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

refers to life, liberty or property, and so the Gentleman „ t> • 

would deny unto this fertilized ovum the rieht tn lihprtv THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Padilla is 
and the right to property? ^ recognized. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, it cannot do much as far as 
physical liberty is concerned because wherever his 
mother goes . . . 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman would not be dis- 
criminating against the fertilized ovum? 

FR. BERNAS. I would be; but the law against dis- 
crimination recognizes real differences, and I think there 
is a very real difference between an unborn child and a 
born child. 

MR. SUAREZ. I have a number of questions more to 
address, but may I reserve these at the proper time. 

FR. BERNAS. Since I do not want to monopolize 
this, I think Bishop Bacani, member of the Committee, 
would like to say something about the original proposal. 


MR. PADILLA. My humble name was mentioned and 
I would like to state that under the Civil Code, a fer- 
tilized ovum is not yet a person. However, a fertilized 
ovum may have the right to life. That is the reason why 
the Revised Penal Code penalizes the crime of abortion. 
The Penal Code is quite strict because even if the 
abortion is not through violence, even if it is with the 
consent of the mother or the grandparents, it is still 
penalized. Even if the intention or the purpose is to 
conceal the dishonor of the mother because she has 
become pregnant without the identity or much less the 
marriage of the father, that circumstance is only mitigat- 
ing. So this matter is fully covered by the Civil Code, 
not only the crime but also the penalty of punishment 
of it as a crime against persons, and also includes infanti- 
cide, in case the baby is born but is killed within three 
days. These are all penalized and are covered already by 
the Civil Code and the Penal Code. There seems to be no 
need to place it in the Constitution. Many a time Com- 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


691 


missioner Bernas has said that is proper in legislation. 
So, why should we make any exception to fertilized 
ovum? Even the controversial issue of the death 
penalty, is the proper domain of legislation. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, just a question to 
Commissioner Padilla. 

Suppose a fertilized ovum is done outside the womb, 
that is, on a test tu.be and the nurse should accidentally 
spill it, is she guilty of abortion? 

MR. PADILLA. The Gentleman used the word “ac- 
cidentally” that is recognized as an exempting circum- 
stance. 

MR. ROMULO. I will amend it to purposely. 

MR. PADILLA. Provided the four requisites are 
present such as lawful act, with due care, cause injury to 
another without fault or intention of causing it. Those 
are some of the exempting circumstances provided in 
Article 1 2 of the Revised Penal Code. 

If it is intentional, so long as it is an unlawful act, 
it is punishable, even if the act done be different from 
that which he intended. Under Article 4 of the Revised 
Penal Code, criminal liability arises not only when there 
is dolus or criminal intent but also when there is culpa 
or negligence, lack of diligence, lack of care, lack of 
skill, etc. 

FR. BERNAS. While Commissioner Padilla is on the 
floor, may I just ask one clarificatory question? Sup- 
pose our Supreme Court were to adopt the American 
Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade, would that 
do away with many of our abortion laws? 

MR. PADILLA. No, I do not believe so because the 
Supreme Court cannot legislate and our laws are very 
clear, that abortion in whatever form is always 
penalized. . . 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, the decision in Roe v. 
Wade said that the state cannot prohibit abortion during 
the first two trimesters if the abortion can be done 
without damage to the health or life of the mother. 

MR. PADILLA. But that is not our law. 

FR. BERNAS. That is why my question is hypothe- 
tical. If our Supreme Court were to follow that lead, 
would that do away with much of our abortion laws? 

MR. PADILLA. No, I do not believe the Supreme 
Court can amend our law. So abortion is penalized and 
our law does not provide “unless it be without danger to 
the life of the mother,” and the Supreme Court cannot 
adopt such foreign element. 

FR. BERNAS. Suppose our Supreme Court were to 
say that existing abortion laws in the Philippines are 


unconstitutional because they violate the right of 
privacy of the mother, which was the reasoning in the 
American Supreme Court. 

MR. PADILLA. The Supreme Court will have to hold 
that our laws on abortion are unconstitutional. 

FR. BERNAS. Correct, this is precisely to prevent 
the Supreme Court from arriving at a similar conclusion. 

MR. PADILLA. I believe that is going too far, that 
the legislature should first amend the Revised Penal 
Code before the Supreme Court can assume the pre- 
rogative of reversing or repealing our law on abortion, 
because that matter is essentially legislative. 

FR. BERNAS. But suppose the person is accused of 
abortion and his defense is that our abortion law is 
unconstitutional and , there fore, he should not be con- 
victed. 

MR. PADILLA. If the Supreme Court should make 
the mistake of legislating and of ignoring our present 
law on abortion as unconstitutional, that is a possibility 
that I would not even consider. 

FR. BERNAS. So, it is the position of the Gentleman 
that the Supreme Court cannot declare laws unconstitu- 
tional. 

MR. PADILLA. No, precisely, I do not believe that 
our penal law on abortion is unconstitutional. The 
Supreme Court may declare a law unconstitutional if 
it is clearly against the Constitution, or if it is a violation 
of the Constitution, especially of the fundamental rights 
of citizens or persons. We all accept that the Supreme 
Court, which is said to be the weakest department of 
government, is in a sense the strongest because it has the 
prerogative of declaring a legislative act or an executive 
order invalid and illegal if it violates or contravenes the 
Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. In the same way, for instance, that in 
Roe V. Wade, the American Supreme Court declared 
abortion laws unconstitutional because the American 
Supreme Court considered them violations of the right 
of privacy. 

MR. PADILLA. It is all hypothetical. 

FR. BERNAS. It is not hypothetical, it is in 410 
U.S. 113. 

MR. PADILLA. What I mean by hypothetical is 
that which is invoking the U.S. decision, and yet our 
own Supreme Court will follow it on a particular case 
involving abortion. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Brocka be recognized. 


692 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Some of the questions I wanted to ask have already 
been asked. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please talk 
louder. I have been requested by the people in the 
gallery; they cannot hear. They think we are just 
whispering among ourselves. 


MR. BROCKA. Thank you; I am sorry. 

Some of the questions I wanted to ask have been 
asked by Commissioner Suarez but I would still like to 
ask some of these questions for clarification because I 
feel very strongly that that particular line on Section 1 
of the Bill of Rights — ’’The right to life extends to the 
fertilized ovum’.' - should be deleted. I feel that this 
sort of thing, like “love”, is frighteningly catholic and is 
difficult to argue against. I just want to ask a few 
questions. Does this mean that abortion under any and 

all circumstances is a crime or violation of human 
rights : 


FR. BERNAS. No. It does not mean that. 

^ situation where 

continue^^^Hn K pregnancy is allowed to 

fr ihal'm^tt situation 

well-being of Physical or psychological 

Ihftlf ob'Je'^ct ‘‘f thf/rtoTar 

liberty Of a woman to get rid of tLTeTus even Sdt 
no way endangers her health or her life. 

MR. BROCKA. So, is it possible then that the provi- 
sion is worded in such a way to make it very clearthat 
what IS banned is illegal abortion? 


that. In case the Gentleman cannot find the right 
phraseology, does this mean that the provision on the 
fertilized ovum will be placed in the Constitution with 
the original wording because it has sense of value? 

FR. BERNAS. If we are unable to find a better 
substitute and if the provision is approved, then the 
fertilized ovum will be implanted in the Constitution. 

(Laughter) 

MR. BROCKA. I do not think it should be imple- 
mented, for the simple reason that medically, there is no 
clear consensus that the fertilized ovum is considered 
human life. It may be a living thing and, for that matter, 
so is a tadpole. But there is no constitution in the world 
that gives right to life to tadpoles. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. One last question. Madam President. Has 
Father Bernas been an expert on fertilized ovum? If so, 
where did he get his expertise? (Laughter) 

FR. BERNAS. I refuse to answer the question on the 
ground that it may incriminate me. (Laughter) 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
suspend the session until two-thirty in the afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:14 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


PR^ BERNAS. That is why I made an appeal 
more felicitous expression. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MR. BROCKA. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. But certainly those matters the 
Gentleman is afraid of are something not intended at all 
by this provision. The argument in Roe v. Wade is that 
the important thing is the privacy of the mother’s 
womb. If she wants to get rid of that fetus anytime 
within the first six months, it is allowed provided it can 
be done safely, even if there is no medical reason for it. 
That is the only thing contemplated in this. 

MR. BROCKA. Then, I suppose, as the Gentleman 
said, he is looking for a more felicitous word to describe 


MR. MONSOD. May we continue the period of 
sponsorship and debate. May I call on Commissioner 
Rigos, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

May we request the other members of the Committee 
to please come forward and join Commissioner Bernas. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, my question is 
related to the first section of the proposed Bill of 
Rights. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


693 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

REV. RIGOS. The first sentence is the same sentence 
we find in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions; I have no 
difficulty with that. But like a few people who spoke 
this morning, I am a bit disturbed by the second 
sentence: “The right to life extends to the fertilized 
ovum.” 

In discussing this proposed sentence, did the Commit- 
tee consider the sensibilities of some religious groups 
which do not look at the fertilized ovum as having 
reached that stage that it can be described as human 
life? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, we used that word to try to 
avoid the debate on whether or not this is already 
human life. 

REV. RIGOS. I think the Commissioner will remem- 
ber that in the Protestant community, for instance, 
there are those who put very much emphasis on the dif- 
ference between abortion and miscarriage. This sentence 
tends to interpret abortion from the period of what we 
call fertilized ovum, and this can raise a lot of questions 
especially among the members of the religious minority. 
Does the Gentleman think it possible to abort this 
sentence at the proper time from this proposed Bill of 
Rights? 

FR. BERNAS. As I said before, the clear purpose of 
this — and so long as this is something understood by 
the Commission — is to avoid the over-liberal doctrine, 
the position taken by the American Supreme Court. As 
I said, the doctrine in the American Supreme Court is 
that during the first six months, the mother is abso- 
lutely free to abort or not to abort. And if the state 
were to pass a law prohibiting abortion, let us say in the 
second trimester, under that doctrine it would be 
unconstitutional because life is not a consideration but 
whether or not abortion or termination of the preg- 
nancy is needed medically. Under that doctrine, during 
the fifth month, termination of the pregnancy, whether 
or not needed for the health or for the life of a woman, 
cannot be prohibited by law. The only thing that the 
law can do is to prescribe that it be done in a manner 
safe for that woman. That is the only thing about this. 

REV. RIGOS. Can we not achieve such objective 
through legislation? 

FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, if the consensus 
comes out that this body rejects that over-liberal 
American doctrine, I think we can do away with this 
expression. 

REV. RIGOS. I hope it will be possible for us to go 
along that way. 


Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to express on behalf 
of others that the one important reason why I believe 
this cannot simply be left to legislation is this; We 
would like to have a constitutional damper already on 
the assault to human life at its early stages. And we 
realized that it can be possible to more easily change . . . 
easier to change legislation on abortion. Hence, we 
would like to be able to prevent those changes in the 
laws on abortion later. 

REV. RIGOS. But our religious authorities sharply 
differ in their opinions as to when human life can 
definitely be regarded to have commenced. If we consti- 
tutionalize the beginning of human life at a stage we call 
fertilized ovum, then we are putting a note of finality to 
the whole debate. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would just like to remind 
Reverend Rigos that when we talk about this, it is not a 
question of religious boundaries. In fact, let me just read 
what IS contained in an article given by one of my 
researchers. It says that many scholarly Protestant and 
Jewish leaders are prominent in the pro-light move- 
ment — and they are referring to the anti-abortion 
movement. I do not want to put this simply on the 
denominational plain, and it is misleading to put it at 
that level. 

REV. RIGOS. Yes. 

BISHOP BACANI. Because these are people who are 
not Catholics — who are Jewish, Protestants, even 
atheists — but who are against abortion. 

REV. RIGOS. I think the Gentleman is correct. On 
the whole, we can describe the Protestant church as 
against abortion. But there is a big segment in the 
Protestant church that wishes to make a clear distinc- 
tion between what we call abortion and miscarriage. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, there is nothing here against 
miscarriage. What I mean is that miscarriage is not being 
ruled out. In fact, miscarriage is an accident. 

REV. RIGOS. I thank the Commissioner. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I take this 
opportunity to ask the Gentleman his own assessment 
of the cultural values today. As I said, as far as I am con- 
cerned, my only purpose in trying to defend this is to 
prevent the Supreme Court from taking an over-libera 
approach to abortion. Is it the judgment of the Gent e- 
man that that is something that will not happen in the 
culture of our country? 


694 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


REV. RIGOS. It is rny judgment that such an objec- 
tive can be achieved through legislation. And if we were 
to do it through legislation, there is little leeway for the 
Congress to consider the various conflicting views on the 
subject. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Florenz D. Regalado. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I call on 
Commissioner Aquino? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
react to the position of Commissioner Bacani, if I may 
be allowed the liberty of treading into the domain of 
the celibates. I suppose I am entitled, I am unmarried 
anyway. 

BISHOP BACANI. The Commissioner is also a celi- 
bate up to now. 


MS. AQUINO. Yes. 


FR. BERNAS. She has admitted it. 


MS. AQUINO. Welcome to the club. 

It should be sufficient to note briefly the wav tl 

'hem isTwk 

ficulf question TV,^ sensitive and di 
fnr th ^ • u ^here has always been strong suppo 

r,ie bX Of If ™ 

Z Xr-"- - 

parents of a stillborn child to malntetaX"ff fron 
ful death arising from prenatal injuries. But this right 
in vindication of the personal interest of the oafent 
not the child. Civil law would likewLe re^ 
right of an unborn child, the inchoate right to futu 
inheritance But again that is contingent upon live birti 
which is the perfection of that inchoate right In othi 
words, law and jurisprudence are settled that the pe 
sonality and the right of a person do not ripen until or 
is born alive. 


Madam President, I would now like to react to Com- 
missioner Bacani - to say that life is present at con- 
ception is to give recognition to the potential rather 
than the actual. And I believe that in the domain of the 
Constitution, it is not up for us to preempt the question. 
The unfertilized egg has life, and if fertilized, takes on 
human proportions. I am willing to concede to that, but 
the law and our Constitution should deal with reality 
not obscurity, the known rather than the unknown. We 


should deal with facts rather than conjecture. It may be 
true that when the sperm shakes hand with the egg, it 
may eventually live, but it may also die. The Constitu- 
tion should not deal with speculation. The phenomenon 
called life takes time to develop; in other words, a fetus 
represents nothing more than a potentiality for life. 
Conception is a process over time; it is not an event by 
itself. We do not have to resolve the question of when 
life begins now, when even those who are trained in 
their respective fields of medicine, philosophy or theo- 
logy are unable to arrive at any consensus. I would 
doubt very much — if this Commission mostly considers 
the predominant influence of celibates like us, at this 
point in the development of man’s knowledge — if we 
are in any position to prejudge this question. 

MR. OPLE. Why did the Commissioner not take a 
vow? 

MS. AQUINO. That does not preclude me from 
taking a vow later. 

On the point raised by Father Bernas, I think his fear 
is — as I would say it — more apparent than real. The 
Commissioner’s doubt about the possibility of the 
Supreme Court adopting the jurisprudence in Roe v. 
Wade is way off mark. Filipino culture would not 
allow abortion that is unqualified and unconditional. On 
this point, I would like to propose a felicitous formula- 
tion although I do not think this rightfully belongs in 
the Constitution. Generally, the laws in the United 
States would provide for stages in pregnancy and con- 
ception, like for the stage prior to approximately the 
end of the first trimester, the abortion decision and its 
effectuation must be left entirely to the medical judg- 
ment of the pregnant woman’s attending physician. For 
the stage subsequent to approximately the age of the 
first trimester, the state in promoting its interest in the 
health of the mother may, if it so chooses, regulate the 
abortion procedure in ways that are reasonably related 
to maternal health. And for the stage subsequent to 
viability, the state in promoting its interest in the 
potentiality of human life may, if it so chooses, regulate 
and even proscribe abortion. 

MR. NQLLEDO. Will the Commissioner please yield 
to interpellations? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, gladly. 

MR. NQLLEDO. Thank you. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

I would like to mention three terms in relation to 
the fertilized ovum: life, human and personality. 

Does the fertilized ovum have life? 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


695 


MS. AQUINO. That belongs to the field of medicine, 
but I believe that even an unfertilized egg, an egg that 
belongs to a man, has life itself. (Laughter) It takes 
human proportion only if it meets the sperm. 

The Gentleman was referring to the sperm or egg. 
Without prejudging medical science, I believe that 
unfertilized egg or sperm has life, but it begins to 
assume human proportion only if it meets the partner. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I remember Mr. Tolentino saying in 
his book that personality can also begin upon con- 
ception based on what is known as presumptive per- 
sonality. 

Second question: Can the fertilized ovum be con- 
sidered human? Is it a human being? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, in the sense that it begins to 
assume the proportions of a human person. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And while it is a fertilized ovum 
based on the Tolentino opinion, it has a presumptive 
personality because under the Civil Code of the Philip- 
pines, it is considered born for all purposes favorable to 
it. So it can inherit, it can be a recipient of a donation, 
it can be a recipient of any benefit. 

MS. AQUINO. Presumptive personality, yes; but this 
is conditional, meaning, the perfection of personality 
is contingent upon being born alive. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, the recommendation of the 
Committee is that the right to life extends to the fer- 
tilized ovum. Where is the speculation there? The 
Commissioner said that the Constitution should not 
deal on speculations. I do not see any speculation. 

MS. AQUINO. Speculation lies precisely on this: A 
fertilized egg or sperm or whatever is a fertilized egg or 
sperm, meaning, whether or not it will live or die is a 
matter of conjecture. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It can die any time in the same 
manner that we human beings do. It can die at any time. 
So, while the fertilized ovum remains as such and con- 
tinues in different stages, does the Commission agree 
with me, if I say that it has really the right to life? 

MS. AQUINO. I cannot. This is very instructive 
because as the Commissioner will note, even this Com- 
mission cannot settle the question of whether a fertil- 
ized egg has the right to life or not. Those experts in 
the field of medicine and theology cannot settle this 
question. It is bad enough for us to preempt this con- 
troversial issue by constitutionalizing the ovum; it 


would be doubly tragic for us to provide for ambiguities 
which may even disturb settled jurisprudence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think there is ambiguity 
because the fertilized egg, in the normal course of 
events, will be developed into a human being, a fetus, 
and as long as the normal course of events is followed. I 
think the right to life exists and the Constitution should 
recognize that right to life. We do not presume acci- 
dents; we do not presume ambiguities. We presume that 
as long as it is categorized as a fertilized ovum, it will 
ripen into human personality. 

MS. AQUINO. But does the Gentleman agree with me 
that the status of jurisprudence in civil law is that the 
right of a person is vested only upon a child when it is 
born alive? He begins to appropriate interest; he begins 
to lay claim to enforceable rights only when it is born 
alive. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That so-called settled rule is quali- 
fied by the express provision of the Civil Code that 
for all purposes the child is considered bom favorable 
to it, what is called as the presumptive personality. So, 
with due respect to my lady colleague, I think we 
should not be bound by settled jurisprudence. We are 
drafting the fundamental law of the land. In fact, we 
can even overrule the rulings of the Supreme Court, 
even opinions of recognized luminaries. The Constitu- 
tion should prevail over settled jurisprudence, even over 
existing laws. Does the Commissioner agree with me? 

MS. AQUINO. We submit. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I also add this comment? 
After the eighth week, there is no scientific doubt any 
more that we are dealing with a human being. So, that is 
not a matter of speculation. Whether it is a human 
person is another thing, but there is no doubt that it is 
a human being. 

May I just read into the record what an advocate of 
abortion wrote after his change of mind. This is from 
Dr. Bernard Nathanson. He said: 

In early 1969, I and a group of equally concerned and 
indignant citizens, who had been outspoken on the subject 
of legalized abortion, organized a political action unit 
known as NARL, then standing for National Abortion 
Rights Action League. We were outspokenly militant on 
this matter and enlisted the women’s movement and the 
protestant clergy into our ranks. We used every device avail- 
able to political action groups, such as pamphlet tearing, 
public demonstrations, exploitation of the media, and 
lobbying in the appropriate legislative chambers. In the late 
1969, we mounted a demonstration outside one of the 


696 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


major university hospitals in New York City that had re- 
fused to perform even therapeutic abortions. My wife was 
on that picket line and my three-year old son carried a 
placard urging legalized abortion for all. Largely because of 
this and a few similar groups, the monumental New York 
State Abortion Statute of 1970 was passed and signed into 
law by Governor Nelson Rockefeller. Our next goal was to 
assure ourselves that low cost, safe and humane abortions 
were available to all. And to that end, we estabhshed the 
Center for Reproductive and Sexual Health, which was the 
first and largest abortion clinic in the western world. 

Sometime ago, after a tenure of a year and a half, I 
resigned as Director of the Center for Reproductive and 
Sexual Health. The center had performed 60,000 abortions 
with no maternal death, an outstanding record of which we 
are proud. However, I am deeply troubled by my own in- 
creased uncertainty that I had, in fact, presided over 60,000 
deaths. There is no longer serious doubt in my mind that 
human life exists within the womb from the very onset of 
pregnancy, despite the fact that the nature of the intra- 
uterine line has been the subject of considerable dispute 
in the past. 

Electrocardiographic recordings of human brain activity 
had been noted in embryos at eight weeks. Our capacity to 
measure signs of life are stiU becoming more sophisticated 
and as time goes by, we will doubtless be able to isolate 
life s signs at earlier stages in fetal development. 

I can go on but I stop there. 


of individuals vis-a-vis the state; these are rights which 
cannot be violated by the state. What the Bill of Rights, 
therefore, tries to prevent is the violation of these rights 
by the state, and not by other individuals. For example, 
the provision “no person shall be deprived of life ” 
means nondeprivation of life by the state without due 
process of law. But if a person kills another person, that 
is a violation of the penal law, but not of the Bill of 
Rights. That is not a violation. 

“No person shall be deprived of property without due 
process of law” is aimed at the state. The government 
should not take my property without due process of 
law. But the government, by means of eminent domain, 
can take my property but pay me just compensation. 
My right here is protected by this Article on the Bill of 
Rights. But, if somebody steals from me, I am not pro- 
tected by this Bill of Rights which is aimed at prevent- 
ing the government from taking my property without 
due process of law. 

I raise these matters because abortion is not done by 
the state. It is done by individuals. So, does abortion 
have any relation to this particular provision in the Bill 
of Rights? 

FR. BERNAS. Do we have abortion laws in the 
country? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, in my ow 

sion'C"’ - that within this Comm^ 

Tbout^thaV'^th^.f^^^ hfe. I have no dout 

about that, that is the consensus. I also believe in th 

S? A°„d ‘the* is in in 

sailing, and speaWng as^oTeone^ro 
referred to as a constitutional lawyer, it is mv ne 
ception that a law which is subject to innumerable inte 
pretations and, therefore, likely to be misunderstoo. 
misinterpreted, is a bad law. The way the provision 
worded now confirms my belief that the phrase is m 
felicitous without making any reference to any celibai 
felicity here. That is my conviction at the momen 
Whether or not we delete this line, my only interest 
that there has been an expression of concern for lif 
but that this particular line 10 may not be the way 1 
express it. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe there 
is one more speaker who would like to make remarks on 
this section. May we call on Commissioner Rodrigo? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to ask a question basic to the Bill of Rights. As rightly 
stated by the sponsor, the Bill of Rights lists the rights 


FR. BERNAS. If the state were to say that abortion 
laws can cover only the period of the third trimester, 
from the sixth month on, then to that extent it is an 
assault of the state on the life of those below six 
months. 

MR. RODRIGO. But that is not an assault by the 
state itself. It only opens the door to assaults by in- 
dividuals. But, what the Bill of Rights tries to prevent 
are assaults by the state, by the government itself. What 
we are trying to prevent here is abortion from the 
moment of conception. The Bill of Rights might not be 
the right place for such a provision, unless abortion will 
be compulsorily done by the state. 

FR. BERNAS. I agree with the Gentleman that the 
Bill of Rights is generally a constitutional provision 
governing the relation between the state and the in- 
dividual. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. But as I said, the Bill of Rights also 
contains certain commands to the state and we put 
some of those commands in this Constitution, if they 
are intimately related to some other rights guaranteed 
by the Bill of Rights. 

For instance, on page 4, Section 21, lines 22 to 26 
are strictly not guarantees, but they are commands to 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


697 


the state flowing directly from the guarantees in the 
rest of the section. 

Similarly, I would consider Section 10 a command 
to the state insofar as this command is intimately 
related to the first three lines. 

MR. RODRIGO. However, this sentence is not 
worded as a command to the state, unlike the other 
provisions in the Bill of Rights. 

That is all, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call 
on Commissioner Quesada? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I was one 
of the proponents of Resolution No. 175 which sought 
for a section that would express the right to life of the 
human embryo, with due regard to the equal right to 
life of the mother, to be guaranteed by law. 

I wonder why it did not appear in this formulation 
in the Bill of Rights. May I know what was the thinking 
of the proponents who were present in the committee 
meeting? 

FR. BERNAS. Qne reason was the words “human 
embryo.” We got into a debate as to when an embryo 
begins to become human. We wanted to avoid that 
debate but, perhaps, not successfully. Certainly, as I 
said, if we must keep this provision, I am very open 
to a reformulation. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. But my main consideration 
here was the clause “with due regard to the equal 
right to life of the mother shall be guaranteed by 
law.” Earlier I think Commissioner Brocka also men- 
tioned something about this right that a mother should 
enjoy. 

FR. BERNAS. So, we would very happily enter- 
tain an amendment by substitution on that matter. 

MS. QUESADA. When the time comes. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. Still on the same section on the 
right to life, I am glad that Commissioner Rodrigo 
also mentioned something about this. I would like to 
get the opinion of the Committee on how an individual 
can invoke this particular right when a full-blown 
human being, not just an embryo nor a fertilized ovum, 
is deprived of life; a human being that would be denied 
the right to life because of the neglect or the absence 
of an important life-saving drug in a hospital. We have 
seen many of these individuals who lost their lives, 


practically “salvaged” by institutions pledged to pro- 
longing life because of the neglect of the state in pro- 
viding services. What provision of the law can these 
people invoke to protect their right to life? 

FR. BERNAS. The Commissioner is addressing her 
question to Commissioner Rodrigo? 

MS. QUESADA. No, I am asking the Committee be- 
cause earlier, I did ask the Commissioner where we 
would put this particular concern of ours, the health 
care delivery system, in this Constitution. I am a nurse, 
and many of the people I have worked with are now 
struggling to improve the health care delivery system 
because they have been witnesses to lives lost of persons 
being “salvaged” in hospitals. There are many com- 
petent doctors and nurses who are unable, powerless 
and helpless to prolong the lives of patients in spite of 
their expertise. 

We are talking about due process of law and the 
Gentleman said this due process of law would refer to 
people who have committed crimes against property, 
e.g. felony, or whatever. But when they go to a hospital 
or a clinic, they may not have access to an injection, 
an antibiotic, a blood transfusion or just a simple 
tablet, resulting in the denial of the right to life. No- 
body gets accused of any crime because there is no 
law that covers this particular situation in our society. 
Our respect for life is what makes us in the health sector 
work for justice in health. We have such respect for 
life, otherwise we would not be in this profession. 
And that is why I would like this particular body to 
respond to the need for our people to know that they 
have the right to protection under the law. We regret 
that many people outside health institutions enjoy 
civil and political rights, but once they enter a hospital, 
they cannot invoke the right to life and the due process 
of law. 

Would this particular provision which states: 

No person shall be deprived of life, without due process 
of law, nor shall any person be denied the equal protection 
of the laws . . . 

be applicable to the health situation described earlier? 

FR. BERNAS. My own thinking is that it would be 
better placed in the Declaration of Principles. If the 
Commission will recall, for instance, in the 1973 Con- 
stitution, Section 7 of Article II says: 

The State shall establish, maintain, and ensure adequate 
social services in the field of education, health . . . 

But as I said, this is not self-executory; it has to be 
carried out by legislation. 

MS. QUESADA. Should this not be enshrined in the 
Bill of Rights as a fundamental human right? Our per- 
sonal experience shows that because of inadequacy or 
lack of social services, like health service, many people 
have been denied this right to life. 


698 


THURSDAY,] ULY 17, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. As I was saying, my own general 
classification of what is in the Bill of Rights is that it is 
a list of those which the state may not do. It is not a 
list of those which the state must do. So, in the example 
of the Commissioner, what she is asking for is something 
which the state must do. 


MS. QUESADA. Yes. This brings me to a second 
issue which is the expansion of the Bill of Rights. The 
limitation of the present conceptualization of the Bill 
of Rights has contributed to the lack of respect for 
human life. There is no such strong guarantee in our 
Constitution that enables us to give due respect not 
just to a fertilized ovum but to a fully developed being 
who loses his life, for instance, in a hospital. We health 
workers feel so helpless and powerless to do something 
about this because there is no such provision in our law 
that makes it the state s responsibility to insure that 
nobody is denied this right to health and, in effect, right 
to life. Therefore, in addition to what the Committee 
has covered here, we would like that the Committee 
explore the possibility of expanding the Bill of Rights 
to cover all the fundamental rights that have been en- 
shnned m the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
anH r, Covenant of Economic, Social 

L 1976 Af government, 

Ss r u, socialjustice and human 

parhcularirt by the state. I think this is 

ofnes President of the Philip- 

pines, President Aquino, has mandated the teaching of 

human r.ghts in all schools. Is the Committee open Jo 
e suggestion that these rights be classified under eco- 
nomic, social and cultural rights? 


services in hospitals for as long as two years on the 
guise of training for their application for overseas em- 
ployment. But we know for a fact that these nurses 
are actually serving as volunteer workers without any 
pay to serve as cheap labor pool to maintain the neces- 
sary nursing services. So, we are asking what provision 
of the law could be invoked for this particular situation 
which some feel is like slavery. They are forced to work 
because there is no law that would be violated nor 
any legal provision that will prevent the management to 
just employ them on voluntary basis. Could this provi- 
sion be invoked? 

FR. BERNAS. From what the Commissioner has des- 
cribed, my initial reaction would be “no” because as 
she said, they are volunteer workers; their working is 
not involuntary. This provision covers any kind of 
involuntary service whether it be slavery, peonage, or 
what-have-you. But as I understand what she described, 
it seems to be voluntary and, perhaps, it should be 
covered more by labor legislation or social justice 
legislation. 

MS. QUESADA. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call on 
Commissioner Ople please? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

Will the sponsor yield to a few questions? 


FR. BERNAS. As I said, the reason we limited o 
selves to this ,s that there are other committees 
as t le Committee on Human Resources, the Commit 
on Social Justice and the Committee on General Pi 
ciples - working precisely on those topics. So we i 
not want to steal the work from them. We want to e 
them a little work also. ® 


MS. QUESADA. Would there be a possibility of 
harmonizing this with the other committees concerned? 

FR. BERNAS. That is certainly something I am not 
closed to. 


MS. QUESADA. Finally, I would like to seek clari- 
fication on page 3, Section 14, line 10, which states: 

No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist except 
as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have 
been duly convicted. 

Could this provision be invoked in the following situa- 
tion: Right now, we are witness to a situation where 
hundreds of nurses “volunteer” their professional 


FR. BERNAS. Very willingly. 

MR. QPLE. Thank you. 

The most recent preoccupation of the Committee and 
of the body has been the protection of human life, 
whether in nascent form or in a more developed form, 
and I think this is also related to an innovation in 
Section 22, according to which no death penalty shall 
be inflicted. I am one of the authors of Proposed Reso- 
lution No. 242 which considers the death penalty a 
cruel and inhuman punishment, and I am glad that this 
is now being incorporated, presumably, together with 
all the resolutions in Section 22. I was struck, however, 
in the debates this morning by the remarks of Commis- 
sioner Garcia concerning other more contemporary, 
more systematic, more irresistible and overpowering 
threats to human life and safety, and these take the 
form of extrajudicial execution. In our countryside, 
there are millions who live in terror for fear of their 
lives in a situation where the threat can come maybe in 
the middle of the night, whether from the military or 
their adversary forces, or other such contending forces 
in a situation of nascent civil war which we, of course, 
deplore. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


699 


The Bill of Rights, of course, provides for the pro- 
tection of life and liberty and presumably the pursuit 
of happiness as well, but should it not mirror these 
conditions to which human life is so exposed in an 
unsettled political, economic and social situation 
in many parts of the country? 

I do not know if Commissioner Garcia will agree that 
in the Escalante massacre, for example, some people 
were emboldened to shoot protesting citizens because 
of a perception that this kind of action was either part 
of a silent policy or it would be tolerated by their 
superiors as a necessary form of action in behalf of 
national security. 

Will the Committee at some point consider amend- 
ing the legislation that will give explicit recognition to 
this situation and provide that in the event members and 
agents of the military and of their adversary forces are 
determined to have committed flagrant abuses against 
the right to life, including extrajudicial executions and 
the mass deprivation of life, their superiors should be 
held equally accountable although there may be no 
written policy for judicial executions and salvages? 
Experience shows that men in uniform in the field are 
more likely to commit these crimes against life and 
against property, if they knew that these are sanctioned 
and tolerated, if not encouraged, by higher levels of 
authority. I do not know how an appropriate formu- 
lation for a bill of rights of this very rare problem 
of our times and of Third World countries in general 
can be introduced, but I suppose if the Committee 
is disposed to accept such a provision in the period 
of amendments, I will be happy to collaborate with 
the Committee on an appropriate formulation. Will 
the Committee consider that in due course? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would be happy to 
avail itself of the skillful pen of Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. GARCIA. Could I just add a brief comment? 
In fact, we could also add here the systematic “hamlet- 
ting” and prolong the zoning that we find in different 
rural areas in the countryside which definitely should 
also be addressed in this Bill of Rights. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call 
on Commissioner Uka. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. Mr. Presiding Officer, now that we are 
almost through with a lengthy discussion of the egg and 
the ovum, I would like to make a few comments on the 
abolition of the death penalty. 

After listening to our previous lengthy discussions 
on the subject and the propriety of putting in our new 


Constitution a provision abolishing the death penalty 
or capital punishment, I have now the impression that 
we are more concerned with the welfare of the culprit 
or the murderer. Many of us would say: “Kawawa 
naman siya (the murderer).” We never think of the poor 
victim and his family he has left behind. This, to me, is 
one-sided and is not fair. It is as simple as that. 

The victim of murder is more pitiful than the mur- 
derer. As a human being and a Muslim, I like to ponder 
on the words of Jesus when he said about 2,000 years 
ago: “Forgive them. Father, for they know not what 
they do.” Was Jesus referring to the sinners, like the 
murderers? Do these words apply to murderers whom 
we should forgive? To my simple mind, no. because 
murderers know what they do. They plan the murder 
— there is evident premeditation on their part before 
they commit murder. So, obviously, those sacred 
words of Jesus cannot apply to the murderers because 
they do not deserve forgiveness, since they know 
what they are doing. They have committed a grievous 
wrong. But then, on the other hand, is killing the 
murderer also a grievous wrong? If so, then we will 
have two wrongs already. According to the Old Testa- 
ment, justice meant “an eye for an eye, and a tooth 
for a tooth.” That is granting that he has a tooth. If 
he has no teeth, then wlsat are we going to remove? 
He has to go to the dentist in order to have a tooth 
removed. If killing the murderer is wrong, according 
to the Fifth of the Ten Commandments which says 
“Thou shalt not kill” — which is also found in other 
sacred books — then what should modern society do? 
We are in a dilemma. 

If the act of the murderer is wrong and killing the 
murderer or imposing a death penalty is also wrong, 
then what is proper? Can we then right a wrong by 
committing another wrong? One wrong plus one wrong 
equals two wrongs — very simple mathematics. What 
should society do? 

Let us ponder on this, my friends. What is the pro- 
per course of action to take? Let us relax and find the 
correct answer to this very important question. 

In countries like Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Malaysia 
and other countries in the Middle East, people are 
afraid to commit crimes, especially murder. Public 
executions and lashings are very common and these 
serve as deterrents to crime. The abolition of capital 
punishment or the death penalty is certainly a very 
vital issue. The right to life belongs to both the victim 
of murder and the murderer. If we abolish the death 
penalty in our land, we will be the only country in 
Southeast Asia that has done so. Our crime rate, espe- 
cially of capital crimes, like murder and salvaging, is 
very high in spite of the death penalty in our statutes. 
How much more if we abolish capital punishment or 
death penalty, with the existence of many so-called 
murder syndicates in our land? The penalty of reclusion 
perpetua or life punishment is not really a life sentence, 
as was very well explained by Commissioner Regalado, 


700 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


because there is always the pardon extended or given 
to those who are influential. 


How about the so-called recidivist? A recidivist is 
a person who has the habit of killing. He will keep on 
killing and killing until he dies. He might even kill us 
and if that happens, there will be no more new Consti- 
tution to make, and I shudder to think of such an 
event. The cream of our land, according to us, will 
all die because we abolished the death penalty. Why 
should we abolish the death penalty? 

Murderers, knowing that there is no death penalty, 
will keep on killing. The abolition of the death penalty 
will promote endless family feuds or strifes for many 
will take the law into their hands, as has been cited by 
the previous speakers, like Commissioners de Castro 
and Ople. 

In Southern Philippines, when a crime is committed 
against a member of a family and nothing has been done 
or the offender has been pardoned, the victim’s family 
or relatives will plant a bamboo tree which grows in any 
part of the land, even on rocky land. And as long as 
that bamboo tree is there, they will keep on killing a 
member of the murderer’s family. And this goes on and 
on. 


My friends, I really do not know what concrete 
suggestions I may give as to what course of action we 
should take because I do not know — and God, I know, 
will forgive me — what to do. It is safe to ask this simple 
question. Is it not more realistic and proper for us to 
have this matter of abolishing the death penalty left 
to our lawmakers or the legislature? So, instead of 
putting the issue on the abolition of the death penalty 
m our fundamental law or the Constitution, let us relax 

win hp7h ^ lawmakers. Anyway, most of us 
will be there in the legislature someday. 

May Almighty God guide us along this line. 

Thank you very much. 


Presiding Officer, could I make 
a very brief response? With all due respect to Commis- 
smner ka, precisely we have a unique opportunity 
right now after many years of authoritarian rule where 
a climate of resentment and hate has built up to move 
into a period where lasting peace, national unity and a 
climate of leconciliation can prevail. Precisely, the 
abolition of the death penalty is one of those steps that 
could create this situation. 

The Gentleman mentioned that he belongs to one of 
the cultural minority groups in the country. Historical- 
ly, the death penalty as a judicial punishment has been 
brought to bear unequally and unjustly on the poor, 
the minorities and the oppressed groups within the 
population. That is a fact not only in this country but 
in many parts of the world. The wealthy, the political- 
ly well-connected and members of dominant racial and 
religious groups are far less likely to be sentenced to 
death and even less likely to be executed for offenses 


of comparable severity than are the poor, the supporters 
of the political opposition and members of unpopular 
racial or religious groups. Finally, as a method of 
attempting to eliminate political dissent, the use of 
the death penalty is apparent. 

As a method of protecting society from crime, it has 
nowhere been shown to have a special deterrent effect. 
The brutal suppression of minority groups or social or 
political movements, like those that I have mentioned 
in Latin America, frequently contributes to political 
instability with both government and opposition re- 
sorting to violence in order to achieve their objectives 
or assert their control. In this context, both judicial 
executions and arbitrary killings often precipitate 
reprisals and add to a legacy of resentment, intolerance 
and social conflict. 

This is an important issue because it will determine 
our state of mind and the national atmosphere, just as 
in the international order, there is the theory of mutual 
assured destruction, which relies on the balance of 
terror. In this country also, the climate of fear and 
terror should as much as possible be eliminated. We 
should try to strive for something different, for with 
trust and faith we can reform even a man who has 
committed a crime. 

It is not a discrimination against the victims, but 
an effort to recognize that the roots and factors, which 
lead to crime and far deeper, are far more complex than 
just individual guilt. And, therefore, this requires a 
new attitude, a new approach, and this, I believe, is 
what we are trying to reach — from the old to the new, 
from a captive to a critical consciousness — the creation 
of something different. I think we should not be afraid 
to be bold and daring, creative, imaginative, and I think 
this is where we are going. 

MR. UKA. Thank you very much for the explanation. 
I hope it will guide me to the course of action I may 
take, but offhand now, I can never forgive those who 
killed Jesus for no apparent reason whatsoever. He is 
my Guide also. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call on 
Commissioner Natividad. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer, will the 
Committee yield to a few more questions? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, the Committee will gladly yield. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am referring to Section 21 on 
page 4. This is called the rights of the accused. This, to 
my knowledge, was lifted from the Miranda ruling by 
a five-four decision of the U.S. Supreme Court and 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


701 


adopted almost verbatim in the 1973 Constitution. Am 
I right, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. It has its origins in the Miranda doc- 
trine but it is not a verbatim reproduction. 


ing to this provision. Would any other member of the 
Committee answer that? But my own reading is that 
the question must be repeated before counsel because 
a situation of hot pursuit is already a situation of 
pressure. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. It is not verbatim but essentially, 
substantially, it is. In the Miranda ruling, if I remember 
right, the duty of every official investigating the com- 
mission of an offense is to inform the person under 
investigation before the start of the investigation and this 
is the practice in the United States and in the Philip- 
pines. Although these provisions are silent, may I clarify 
for purposes of record and for the guidance of law en- 
forcement later on, that this is the concept that we are 
adopting in Section 21, are we not? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So that it should be understood 
that this duty to inform the offender or the suspect of 
his constitutional rights should be done before the 
investigation. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Still in Section 21, with regard to 
the requirement for counsel, let riTe clarify a possible 
incident in the light of an actual law enforcement work. 

Suppose the police is chasing a criminal who was 
just actually seen or witnessed as having committed 
a murder, or similarly was caught in flagrante delicto 
or “having killed the person.” When he was caught, 
the criminal said: “I admit everything. I will confess 
everything because I hate this man. I would like to sign 
my confession now.” Could he sign a confession? And 
if he signed a confession, would it be admissible in 
evidence? 

FR. BERNAS. In other words, even before he was 
asked any question? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Suppose it is not a situation of 
hot pursuit or being caught in flagrante delicto, but the 
criminal has just committed a crime and the police came 
on time. He is arrested. 

FR. BERNAS. I would say that the way this is 
worded, it still would be covered by this provision. I do 
not know if any other member of the Committee would 
like to add something. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If, as a consequence of this 
voluntary confession, physical evidence is recovered, 
such as a death gun, which is what usually happens in 
law enforcement work, will physical evidence recovered 
be admissible in evidence? 

FR. BERNAS. If, as a consequence of the spon- 
taneous outburst of the individual, physical evidence is 
found, my own thinking would be “yes,” it would be 
admissible. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Admissible? 

FR. BERNAS. That is my own answer. I am looking 
around at my other committee members to see if any- 
body would disagree with me. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. We are now referring to the phy- 
sical evidence, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. I beg the Gentleman’s pardon. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. We are now referring to the phy- 
sical evidence — the gun. The Gentleman said it is 
admissible. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. That is the situation. There are 
two elements there that are lacking: First, he has not 
been informed of his rights; and second, the presence of 
counsel. 

FR. BERNAS. And not only that. Nobody asked him 
anything. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, he came forward. 

The man says: “I admit everything. You have seen me 
do it. I confess.” These are the realities of law enforce- 
ment. If he gives a voluntary confession in that manner, 
will his confession be admissible in evidence under 
Section 21? 

FR. BERNAS. My initial reaction would be “no.” It 
should be asked again in the presence of counsel accord- 


FR. BERNAS. My own thinking would be “yes.” Do 
I hear any of my committee members disagree? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. I just want to make it of record 
because this section is studied closely by law enforcers 
and our debates here will guide their proceedings. This 
is very ticklish, because this will either facilitate the 
investigation of criminal offenses, or if not properly 
interpreted, will hamper the efficient conduct of 
criminal investigations. 


Let me go to the next question, still on Section 21, 
line 24, page 4 which says: “Compensation for and 
rehabilitation of victims of tortures or similar practices, 
and of their families, shall be provided by law.” I 
welcome this provision because nobody takes care of 
these victims, and this is a matter that should be at- 
tended to. I am referring to this because in other coun- 


702 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


tries, like the United States, England, New Zealand and 
others, they have what they call a victim compensation 
system or laws. The concept here is that the victims of 
violent crimes are compensated in accordance with law. 
There is a careful graduation of offenses; a limit to the 
amount that can be paid; a time limit within which the 
application for compensation is to be made, as well as a 
provision that any money paid to the victims can be 
later on recovered from the accused. If insurance is 
collected, it will be deducted. But the version in other 
countries includes victims of violent crimes, not just 
crimes; however, it does not include crimes against 
property. 

Commissioner Uka has complained that in our 
criminal justice system, the victim is the forgotten 
orphan. This easily is an opportunity for this Commis- 
sion to focus attention and help to the victims of 
crime — in a modest way, because we are only going 
to help those who are victims of torture and victims of 
violent offenses, for it is very hard to fund this if we go 
beyond that. So during the period of amendments, will 
the Committee consider a proposed amendment to 
include the phrase VICTIMS OF VIOLENT CRIMES? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would certainly leave 
it to the body whether or not to consider such an 
amendment in here because Section 21 has reference 
to acts of public officers. But I think, what the Com- 
missioner is proposing to present would refer to victims 
of crimes committed by anybody. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The usual scenario here is that of 
an encounter between the police and the criminal ele- 
ments with a bystander — that is what happens in Min- 
danao or the Visayas or even in Metro Manila. In the 
cross fire, somebody gets seriously injured or killed. 
Who helps the victim pay for his hospitalization or 
burial? Nobody. But the man is an innocent bystander 
— he has nothing to do with the events. 

This is not exactly a crime perpetuated by private 
parties against each other. Government forces are in- 
volved here and in the state of affairs of our country 
today, this is a common happening, but what can we 
do? 

Another case in point is a demonstration. I remember 
before the advent of martial law, there were eight young 
men who lost consciousness because some people hit 
them on the head during the darkness of the rallies in 
those times. The parents came to me because nobody 
attended to their hospitalization. They were rendered 
unconscious, and had lost all opportunities for school- 
ing. Who will help them pay for their hospitalization, 
and if they recover from their disabilities, who will help 
them get back on their feet? 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not actually limiting 
myself to the poor victims of violent offenses, although 
they are also entitled to help from the state as in other 
countries for their funding can easily be raised, if the 


justice of their cause can reach the ears and hearts of 
our countrymen. But we are only giving priority, of 
course, to the victims of government forces in the fight 
against criminal elements. I am also trying to move 
farther a little bit to include also the hapless victims of 
violent crimes where the boundary is vague, but, never- 
theless, the need is very clear. 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, we will present that to the 
body for a vote. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. May I go on to Section 22 which 
says: “Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel, 
degrading or inhuman punishment, or the death penalty 
inflicted.” I will not deal with the death penalty because 
it has already been belabored in many remarks. In due 
time, perhaps I will be given a chance to say a few words 
on that, too. But I am referring to cruel, degrading and 
inhuman punishment. I am drawing upon my experience 
as the Chairman of the National Police Commission for 
many years. As Chairman of the National Police Com- 
mission, the same way that General de Castro here was, 
one of my duties was to effect the inspection of jails all 
over the country. We must admit that our jails are a 
shame to our race. Once we were invited by the United 
Nations’ expert on penology — I do not remember his 
name, but he is a doctor friend of mine — and he 
reported back to us that our jails are penological 
monstrosities. 

Here in the cities, 85 percent are detention prisoners 
and only 15 percent are convicted prisoners. But if we 
visit the jails, they are so crowded and the conditions 
are so subhuman that one-half of the inmates lie down 
on the cold cement floor which is usually wet, even in 
summer. One-half of them sleep while the other half sit 
up to wait, until the other half wake up, so that they 
can also sleep. In the toilets, right beside the bowl, there 
are people sleeping. I visited the prisons and that was 
the time I fought for the Adult Probation Law because 
I remember what Winston Churchill and the crimino- 
logist Dostoevski said: “If you want to know the level 
of civilization of a country, all you have to do is visit 
their jails.” In jurisprudence, the interpretation of . 
and unusual punishment” in the United States Consf 
tution was made by the Supreme Court when it sa d' 
and I quote: “Interpretation of the Eight Amendment 
in the phrase ‘cruel and unusual punishment,’ must draw 
its meaning from the evolving standards of decency that 
mark the progress of a maturing society.” Courts in the 
United States in 10 landmark cases - some of these I 
would like to mention in passing: Halt v. Sarver, 
Jackson v. Bishop, Jackson v. Handrick, Jordan v[ 
Fitzharris and Rockly v. Stanley — stated that sub- 
human conditions in a prison is an unconstitutional 
imposition of cruel and unusual punishment. 

I would just like to — even without an amendment — 
convince tire Committee that if a prison is subhuman 
and it practices beatings and extended isolation of 
prisoners, and has sleeping cells which are extremely 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


703 


filthy and unsanitary, these conditions should be in- 
cluded in the concept of “cruel and inhuman punish- 
ment.” Even without amendment but with this concept, 
I would like to encourage the legislature to give higher 
priority to the upliftment of our jails and for the judi- 
ciary to act because the judiciary in habeas corpus 
proceedings freed some prisoners. So, by means of in- 
junction, the courts stopped these practices which are 
inimical to the constitutional rights of inmates. On the 
part of the executive, it initiated reforms in order that 
the jails can be more humane and fair. If this concept 
of “cruel and inhuman punishment” can be accepted, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, I may not even ask for an amend- 
ment so that in the future, the judiciary, the executive 
and the legislative can give more remedial measures 
to this festering problem of subhuman conditions in our 
jails and prisons. 

I submit, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, although I 
would say that the description of the situation is some- 
thing that is inhuman, I wonder if it fits into the pur- 
pose of Section 22. The purpose of Section 22 is to 
provide a norm for invalidating a penalty that is im- 
posed by law. Let us say that thieves should be punished 
by imprisonment in a filthy prison, that would be “cruel 
and unusual punishment.” But if the law simply say that 
thieves should be punished by imprisonment, that by 
itself does not say that it is cruel. So, it does not in- 
validate the penal law. So my own thinking is that what 
the Gentleman has in mind would be something more 
proper, even for ordinary legislation or, if at all, for 
Section 21. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The Gentleman said that he is not 
going to sentence him in a filthy prison. Of course not. 
But this is brought out in the petition fox habeas corpus 
or for injunction. This is revealed in a proper petition. 

FR. BERNAS. I agree with the Commissioner, but as 
I said, the purpose of Section 22 is to invalidate the law 
itself which imposes a penalty that is cruel, degrading or 
inhuman. That is the purpose of this law. The Commis- 
sioner’s purpose is different. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. My purpose is to abate the 
inhuman treatment, and thus give spirit and meaning to 
the banning of cruel and inhuman punishment. In the 
United States, if the prison is declared unconstitutional, 
and what is enforced is an unconstitutional punishment, 
the courts, because of that interpretation of what is 
cruel and inhuman, may impose conditions to improve 
the prison; free the prisoners from jail; transfer all 
prisoners; close the prison; or may refuse to send 
prisoners to the jail. 

FR. BERNAS. We would await the formulation of 
the Commissioner’s amendment. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. So, in effect, it is abating the 
continuance of the imposition of a cruel and inhuman 
punishment. I believe we have to start somewhere in 
giving hope to a big segment of our population who are 
helplessly caught in a trap. Even the detention prisoners, 
85 percent of whom are jailed in the metropolitan area, 
are not convicted prisoners, and yet although not con- 
victed in court, they are being made to suffer this cruel 
and inhuman punishment. I am saying this in their 
behalf, because as Chairman of the National Police Com- 
mission for so many years, it was my duty to send my 
investigators to chronicle the conditions in these jails day 
by day. I wrote letters to the President asking for his 
help, as well as to the Batasan, but there was no reply. 

Finally, I am now here in this Commission, and I am 
writing this letter through the Chairman of this Commit- 
tee. I hope it will be answered. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, as I said, we 
have no quarrel whatsoever with the objective. We will 
await the formulation of the amendment. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, further to the 
same point, can we call on Commissioner Padilla. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The first point raised by Commissioner Natividad 
was a situation where a person is caught in flagrante 
delicto or in the presence of other persons, and he 
voluntarily confesses his guilt. The question is whether 
that would be admissible in evidence or not. 

In my opinion, under Rule 130, Section 29 of the 
Rules of Court on confession, so long as a confession 
is made voluntarily by a person, and he admits 
his guilt as to the commission of a crime, that ad- 
mission or confession is admissible in evidence. I believe 
what is prohibited is when a suspect is arrested or 
detained and he is placed under custodial investigation 
or interrogation by the police or the military. Under 
such circumstance, he should be protected from any 
threat, force, violence or intimidation, because once 
arrested under custodial investigation, his statements 
may not be truly voluntary. And so in Section 21, based 
on the Miranda decision, I would not want to say or 
stress the duty of the investigating officer. I think we 
should stress the right of a person subject to investiga- 
tion under custodial interrogation. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, on the same 
Section 21,1 would like to call Commissioner Tan. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Tan is recognized. 


704 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


SR. TAN. Mr. Presiding Officer and members of the 
Committee, I am referring to Section 21, lines 12 to 14 
which says: 

If the person cannot afford the services of counsel, he must 
be provided with one who is competent and independent. 

During martial law, many of those who were arbitra- 
rily arrested and who did not know the law nor their 
rights, were given lawyers who were sometimes com- 
petent but not independent. And so they had no choice 
but to go on with the charges. So, what recourse do we 
have to prove that the lawyer is not independent? And 
if it can be proven that he is not independent, I was 
wondering, whether line 22 would be applicable. 


FR. BERNAS. My own personal stand is: we could 
dispense with this but we would, perhaps, lose the 
emphasis that is placed on the importance of protecting 
the rights of the accused, and it is something which may 
be missed by the legislature. 

MR. SUAREZ. Assuming, hypothetically, that this 
particular provision will remain as proposed in the draft 
resolution, are these the violations that are to be con- 
sidered: First, the failure of the official investigating 
to inform the person under investigation of his rights to 
remain silent and to have counsel, and second, the 
failure to provide the one under custodial investigation 
with a counsel who is competent and independent? 


FR. BERNAS. First of all, if it is proved that the 
lawyer is not independent but taking orders from 
authorities and does not take into consideration the 
welfare of his assigned client, then whatever confession 
or admission is obtained by him would not be admissi- 
ble as evidence under lines 19, 20 and 21. 

SR. TAN. But we have to prove that he is not in- 
dependent. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

SR. TAN. But how do we do that? 

FR. BERNAS. It is a question of evidence. 

SR. TAN. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, further still on 
Section 21, may we caU on Commissioner Suarez. 


FR. BERNAS. That may be a little different because 
providing counsel — I am not too sure about this — is 
more of a command to the state to make free legal 
counsel available. Besides, the investigator himself can- 
not take upon himself the responsibility of looking for 
counsel for the individual, unless the state has made 
counsel available. 

MR. SUAREZ. Then what is the legislative com- 
pulsion that will require compliance with this particular 
mandate, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. I guess this needs implementing 
legislation. 

MR. SUAREZ. And if there is an implementing 
legislation, there must be somebody who should be held 
as the violator of that provision and against whom 
sanction should be imposed? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Cor 

missioner Suarez is recognized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Distinguished sponsors, in Section 21, there is a 
sentence here which reads: “The legislature shall enact a 
law punishing any violation of this section.” Do the 
sponsors consider that relevant in the Article on the Bill 
of Rights, Mr. Presiding Officer? 


FR. BERNAS. Is the Gentleman asking my personal 
opinion? 


MR. SUAREZ. No, what is the Committee’s stand on 
this, Mr. Presiding Officer? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. Let us suppose that there is, in 
fact, a defender officially appointed in a municipality 
but the investigator neglects to contact that defender. 

MR. SUAREZ. And the third possible violation 
would be the exercise or the use of force, violence, 
threat or intimidation against the supposed offender. 
That is also one of the violations that should be 
punished by the legislator. 

FR. BERNAS. The use of force against the subject 
of the investigation? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is the third violation. That is 
contemplated under this section, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


FR. BERNAS. The Committee has decided to keep it 
there. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I know the personal stand of the 
Gentleman regarding the insertion of this particular 
provision. 


MR. SUAREZ. The fourth one would be the esta- 
blishment of secret detention places and incommuni- 
cado detentions. 

FR. BERNAS. That would be another ground for 
creating a penal offense. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


705 


MR. SUAREZ. And the fifth one, I suppose, is 
placing these offenders in those so-called secret deten- 
tion places and incommunicado detentions, if these had 
been established. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. And, in fact, I would say that the 
legislature may even add related matters. In other 
words, when we say that the legislature shall enact a law 
punishing any violation of this section, we are not 
limiting the legislature only to what are mentioned in 
these sections. 

MR. SUAREZ. Another point, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
is the provision on the compensation for and rehabilita- 
tion of victims of tortures or similar practices and of 
their families which must be provided by law. Does the 
Gentleman feel that this is also proper or relevant in 
drafting the Article on the Bill of Rights or should it 
pertain to some other place? 

FR. BERNAS. To the extent that it is intimately 
related to Section 21, there is some justification for 
putting it there. 

MR. SUAREZ. So the victims of tortures can now 
demand-, as a matter of right, compensation for and 
their corresponding rehabilitation, if necessary? 

FR. BERNAS. As provided by law. This is not an 
automatic grant to victims. In other words, this also 
needs implementing legislation. 

MR. SUAREZ. But, basically, is the right of these 
victims to demand compensation or rehabilitation 
constitutionally provided? 

FR. BERNAS. This is more of a command to the 
legislature. This is the way I read this. 

MR. SUAREZ. So if the legislature will sleep on this 
provision, then no compensation or rehabilitation could 
be demanded by the citizen whose rights had been 
violated. Is that the meaning of this particular provision, 
Mr. Presiding Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. As I see it, if the legislature does not 
pass a law implementing this, the provision by itself will 
not enable the victims to obtain compensation. This is 
again a reminder to the legislature to do something 
about this. 

MR. SUAREZ. I remember that one of our dis- 
tinguished colleagues. Commissioner Azcuna, precisely 
submitted for the consideration of the Committee on 
the Judiciary the consideration of the so-called writ 
of amparo, meaning, that one has the right to demand 
the enforcement of a constitutional right. This is now a 
constitutional right. So, would the Gentleman think 
that without the legislative enactment, this is not an 
enforceable right? 


FR. BERNAS. We were talking here, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, of compensation and a system of rehabilitation. 
We envision here compensation by the state and rehabi- 
litation under state auspices. 

MR. SUAREZ. And, therefore, this is a demandable 
or enforceable constitutional right? That is what I am 
trying to clear up, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. It is demandable in the sense that, if 
there is a law providing for this compensation and pro- 
viding for a system of rehabilitation, then the victim can 
demand compensation and rehabilitation. But, as I say, 
unless this is implemented by the legislature, by itself 
it does not accomplish much. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. MONSOD. May we call Commissioner Maam- 
bong? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer and mem- 
bers of the Committee, I was really half-expecting that 
in order that we could understand the Bill of Rights 
properly, perhaps. Commissioner Bernas could furnish 
us his book on The Historical and Juridical Study of the 
Philippine Bill of Rights, which I understand was fur- 
nished to all the Members of the Constitutional Con- 
vention of 1971. But I also understand that there are 
financial constraints, and the copies of the book are 
actually out-of-stock. It is a rare collection actually. I 
am privileged to have one copy, though. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not going to ask questions 
on the substantive aspect of the Bill of Rights. By way 
of a general statement, I would rather say that the 
Committee did a good job of it, one way or the other. 
What I am really concerned about is that, in the 
previous interpellations. Commissioners Quesada and 
Rosario Braid, particularly, found difficulty in classify- 
ing the rights which they intend to be put into the 
Constitution. As a student of constitutional law, I 
myself find that kind of difficulty. So, perhaps, with 
the indulgence of the members of the Committee, it 
could really make my day, if I could put forth my own 
type of classification of rights which the Committee can 
feel free to reject or not, for the proper understanding 
of the rights that we are talking about. 

I find three classifications of rights. One is a right 
which protects the citizens against the government. 
Would Commissioner Bernas agree that one classifica- 
tion of rights would be that which provides protection 
of the citizen against the government itself? 

FR. BERNAS. One classification of the rights in a 
Bill of Rights? 


706 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


MR. MAAMBONG. Rights in their totality under the 
Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. I would say that the rights in a Consti- 
tution are protection against the government. 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, that is settled then. On that 
score, and inspired by one of our colleagues in the Bata- 
sang Pambansa, former Assemblyman Zosimo Paredes, 
Jr., we filed under this category a resolution on the right 
to revolt. But we have it from good authority that that 
is an inherent right of the government and it is not 
actually necessary. Could the Commissioner comment 
on that? 

FR. BERNAS. I would say that the right to revolt is 
something that is inherent in the people. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. Probably, the right to bear 
arms would fall under that category. Would the Com- 
missioner say that? 

FR. BERNAS. I would not put it under that cate- 
gory. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The second category I was think- 
ing of is rights which protect the citizens against other 
private citizens. Would the Commissioner consider that 
as a valid classification? 

FR. BERNAS. I would not put that under the Consti- 
^tion. That would be more of a matter for the Civil 
Code and the Penal Code. 

MAAMBONG. I was Ustening to Commissioner 
Rodrigo, and if I got the answer of the Committee 
correctly, Commissioner Rodrigo was envisioning a 
situahon where a private individual injures another 
individual. And if I got the answer of the Committee 
correctly, the answer was, that is not covered by the 
Bill of Rights. Did I get that correctly, Mr. Presiding 
Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. Correct. That is covered more by 
civil law and criminal law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I see. The third classification 
which I was trying to propose is the area where the 
rights envisioned by Commissioners Quesada and 
Rosario Braid would probably fall. I understand that 
there are such constitutional rights which protect 
citizens against almost every kind of enemy, whether it 
be human or inhuman, like common disasters, invasion, 
unemployment, starvation, pestilence, fire, flood, 
ignorance, poverty and diseases. Would the Commis- 
sioner agree to that as a valid classification, considering 
that there is indeed a proliferation of rights which fall 
under a very gray area of classification? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. As I said in my opening state- 
ments, there have arisen in recent years, particularly 
under the influence of socialist teachings and also of the 
teachings of the Pope, certain economic and social rights 
which strictly are not on the same level as the tradition- 
al political and civil liberties we have in the Bill of 
Rights because they are not self-executory. They are 
more in the nature of claims or demands which the 
citizen may make of the state, or claims or demands 
made by the people in general. The provision on social 
justice, for instance, says that the state shall insure good 
working conditions for laborers. Strictly speaking, that 
is not one of the traditional rights under the Bill of 
Rights. It is more of a command to the state — “Look, 
you better take care of that.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, while that is a valid classifica- 
tion, I take it to mean, Mr. Presiding Officer, that in 
contradistinction with the other rights which we men- 
tioned, this type of right is a gray area because it is not 
strictly enforceable in court. It is more of an obligation 
on the part of the government which the government 
may or may not do. Would that be a correct statement 
Mr. Presiding Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, and that is why if we have to be 
very puristic about the Bill of Rights, we would excise 
from it those which need further action by the legisla- 
ture. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I consider this classification very 
important because I notice from the index of the reso- 
lutions that we have that this is the area where most 
resolutions are directed to — for instance, the right to 
information and we also have rights mentioned by 
Commissioner Quesada, and I think this is important 
for our purpose. Would the Commissioner also agree 
with the statement that even though we put in clear 
terms the Bill of Rights, there is no such thing as 
absolute perfection in cases of the Bill of Rights in any 
Constitution? 

FR. BERNAS. I could not agree less with the Gentle- 
man. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would try to direct my atten- 
tion to the present Constitution that we are talking 
about in relation to the 1973 Constitution. I find three 
classifications of rights in our Constitution. The first 
classification would be the general provisions on liberty 
and property, and this takes care of due process, equal 
protection, obligation of contract clauses, limitations 
of police power, eminent domain, taxation. Would that 
be a valid classification? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. Classifications are classifications, 
and I would rather not talk about them as valid or 
invalid. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


707 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. Anyway, the other kind of 
rights are those under the equal protection of the laws; 
and the third one would be the specific individual rights 
affecting the liberty of the individuals like protection 
from arrests and seizures and all that. My point is this; 
in the equal protection clause, we have already civil, 
political, social, cultural and economic rights. But I 
notice that the economic rights are not in the Bill of 
Rights which we are now talking about. The economic 
rights are actually found in other parts of the Constitu- 
tion. Is that correct, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

FR. BERNAS. I would consider some of the provi- 
sions of the Bill of Rights as economic rights; for 
instance, the due process protection for property. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but we also say that as far 
as economic equality is concerned, for example, pro- 
tection to labor, that is not found in our Bill of Rights 
that we are talking about right now. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. We can make any number of 
classifications, and if we look at the commentaries on 
the Constitution, every commentator makes his own 
classification according to his purpose. So, classifica- 
tions are mainly a pedagogical instrument, I think. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just by way of general statement, 
it is, therefore, very clear that when we are talking of 
the Bill of Rights, we are not limiting the people to the 
rights as stated in the Bill of Rights under Article 4 
which we are talking about. We can still consult other 
portions of the Constitution. For example, with regard 
to political equality, we have to go to the provisions on 
the Commission on Elections, and for social and cultural 
equality, we have to go to other provisions of the 
Constitution. But that does not make it any less a right 
of a citizen. 

FR. BERNAS. Definitely. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one more point on this, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. I am very fond of the Commis- 
sioner. I have here his lecture on political rights found in 
the New Constitution, by Joaquin G. Bernas S.J. I 
think this is his, which he made in UP sometime ago. 
And I think we should put this on record for the 
purpose of putting in a premise to my next question. 

The Commissioner said in his lecture: 

A Constitution as we understand it is a written instru- 
ment by which the powers of government are established, 
limited and defined and by which these same powers are 
distributed among the various departments for their safe 
and useful exercise for the benefit of the body politic. 
Constitutional law, on the other hand, is broader than just 
the written instrument. It is a body of rules resulting from 
the interpretation of the Constitution, interpretation arising 
from actual conflicts that are brought before the courts. In- 


cluded in constitutional law also are the contemporary 

constructions which the executive department gives to the 

written instrument. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, is it possible that rights are not 
clearly set out in any page of the Constitution but are 
interpreted by the Supreme Court or interpreted by the 
executive department? As the Commissioner mentioned 
in his lecture, those rights could be availed of by the 
citizen even though it is not found in the Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
The main thing in the Constitution is the text, the letter. 
Constitutional law, however, is the whole body of law 
built around that letter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the Supreme 
Court or the executive department in the performance 
of their respective functions can actually grant rights 
not found in the Constitution to people. 

FR. BERNAS. I would say that the executive depart- 
ment and the judicial department can make their read- 
ings of the meaning of the Constitution and determine, 
therefore, the scope of the letter. But what the Gentle- 
man wants to know is whether they create rights, or 
they legislate therefor. My answer would be, in my 
opinion, “no.” But whatever they say must be some- 
thing which they can deduce from the Constitution. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will just ask one more question, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. On Section 22, the original phrase 
used in the 1935 Constitution was “cruel and unusual 
punishment.” 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the configuration of the 1973 
Constitution, the phrase became “cruel or unusual 
punishment.” 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the United States Constitution 
as it stands now, it is still “cruel and unusual punish- 
ment.” But now in the present submission that we are 
going over, it is “cruel or inhuman.” 

FR. BERNAS. “Cruel, degrading or inhuman.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to find out, Mr. 
Presiding Officer, why the Committee changed the word 
“unusual” to “inhuman.” 

FR. BERNAS. The reason for the change, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer, is this: We avoided the use of the word 
“unusual” because it tended to give the interpretation 
that one cannot innovate therefore as far as penology is 
concerned — that, if a penalty is something that was 
never used before, then it would be invalid. So, in order 


708 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


to allow for the development of penology we decided 
that we should not prohibit unusual punishments in the 
sense that they are new or novel. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

One last question. With regard to the third kind of 
right which we mentioned and which we agreed on but 
is not actually enforceable in court but is more of the 
duty on the part of the government, would the follow- 
ing fall under that kind of classification; unemployment 
provisions of the law, public assistance for the disabled 
and public assistance for old age? I am particularly 
concerned about this because one of our colleagues. 
Commissioner de los Reyes, actually filed Resolution 
No. 413 directed at the disabled. Would it fall under this 
kind of right? 


of the press that is being granted or stressed, but we 
know very well that this is not so. As a matter of fact, 
in our Revised Penal Code, we know there are provi- 
sions, particularly on libel and inciting to rebellion, 
which are, in fact, legal provisions which abridge free- 
dom of expression and of the press. The question is: 
Has the Committee ever tried defining freedom of 
expression, freedom of speech and of the press? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee did not think it 
necessary or advisable to try to define these freedoms; 
rather, it would prefer to keep the original language 
which has been enriched by a large body of juris- 
prudence. It is a dynamic right which is very difficult 
to put into simple formulas, and we prefer to leave the 
formula this way. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, they are the ones that should 
need implementing legislation. They would fall under 
that category. 

MR. MAAMBONG. But, again, are these not strictly 
enforceable rights? 


MR. FOZ. But the sponsor says there has been a lot 
of judicial decisions which define the extent or the 
boundaries of freedom of speech and of the press, and 
our courts are, in turn, influenced particularly by 
American decisions or rulings on these twin freedoms. 


FR. BERNAS. Not until the legislature passes a law 
making them demandable rights. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

Com^S?oz 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. Has the Committee ever given any thought 
to rewriting this provision on freedom of speech and of 
the press? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee did not, but if the 
Commissioner is prepared to do it, we would entertain 
it. We would, however, prefer to keep the original 
provision. 


Presiding Officer, in the explanation c 
Section 9 of the draft about freedom of speech and c 
le pr^ss, ere is the statement that the provision pn 
serves the consecrated language of the old version, an 
this IS only very true, because even our 1973 Constiti 
tion speaks m the following manner: “No law shall b 
passed abridging the freedom of speech, or of the pres 
etc., and the same language is found in our 193 
Constitution. Now, this provision is traceable to tb 
First Amendment of the US Constitution which hi 
words to the same effect. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 


MR. FOZ. And, in turn, this provision of the Ame- 
rican Constitution was influenced by what happened in 
England or the experience of the 13 colonies, and 
which, in turn, was influenced by what happened in 
England sometime before, especially during the time 
of John Milton, the famous English poet who rebelled 
against a law at the time, which would license printing 
and publishing. As presently worded in our Constitu- 
tion and even in the American Constitution, the 
impression is that it is absolute freedom of speech and 


MR. FOZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Commissioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is in 
reference to Section 6, lines 15 to 17. I had earlier 
addressed this clarificatory question of Commissioner 
Bernas who suggested that I raise it on the floor in order 
to generate discussion. I would like to inquire from the 
Committee whether or not the provision includes access 
to data of government research projects and whether or 
not the phrase “official records, and to documents and 
papers pertaining to official acts, transactions, or de- 
cisions” includes findings of government research. I have 
my doubts whether it covers results of government 
research, since such studies do not always pertain to 
official acts, transactions or decisions. Their subjects 
usually include popular attitudes, livelihood problems 
and manpower development, all of which do not 
comprise official acts or transactions. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


709 


FR. BERNAS. The access to official records is subject 
to reasonable limitations. It was earlier asked whether 
the limitations envisioned are purely procedural or 
also substantive; in other words, can the government 
prohibit access to certain types of information? 

I hesitate to state a general rule on this because, as I 
said, when we were talking about this outside the 
session, for instance, I would have no difficulty if, say, 
the DAP were to conduct an opinion poll about the 
present government, and we were to give to the public 
access to the results of that opinion poll. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I think so. 

FR. BERNAS. My judgment would be “yes.” 

But suppose the government entered into a contract, 
let us say, with a drug company to do funded research 
on a particular kind of drug, will the public have a right 
of access to information about the findings of that 
research? I think there may be proprietary rights 
involved here. 

MR. VILLACORTA. My point here, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, is that the public should be more than just 
informed about official transactions. I think they have 
the right to know data that concern them especially if 
they themselves are the subject of surveys. The 
experience during the past dispensation was that state- 
sponsored research was manipulated to serve the inte- 
rests of the regime, to legitimize its policies and per- 
petuate the power of its leaders. And since its think 
tanks conduct research to have an empirical basis for 
policy formulation, the public has the right to have 
access to these research findings. 

FR. BERNAS. On those things, as I said, I have no 
difficulty making a rule. I only have on those areas 
where there may be proprietary rights involved. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Should not the popular sover- 
eignty and popular interest prevail over proprietary 
rights of research? 

FR. BERNAS. They should. 

MR. VILLACORTA. The data will not be reproduced 
anyway, Mr. Presiding Officer. There will be no viola- 
tion of copyright in this case, but we are simply guaran- 
teeing that the people will know what the findings are 
all about. 

FR. BERNAS. Perhaps, we are not clear on what we 
mean by proprietary rights. Perhaps, it would be better 
if the Commissioner gave examples of what he has in 
mind so it will be easier to answer. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I have in mind, for example, 
the research findings on nutrition which the previous 
government suppressed because they proved that we are 


among the most malnourished countries in the world. 
Researchers from universities were refused access to 
data, for obvious political reasons. Since the intent of 
this Section 6 is to adequately inform the public so that 
nothing vital in state affairs is kept from them, then we 
should add to this provision access to the results of 
government research. 

FR. BERNAS. In that particular example, I would 
have no hesitation in saying that that is something 
which should be made accessible. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Would the Committee entertain 
an amendment I will propose at the proper time on this 
subject? 

FR. BERNAS. I would say that we would have to 
wait for the wording, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Just a short clarificatory question 
from Commissioner Foz. 

MR. FOZ. Under the same provision, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, would a regulation, let us say, by the Securities 
and Exchange Commission, classifying as confidential 
the financial reports of certain corporations, such as 
multinational drug corporations, be covered by the 
provision, so that the SEC would have no legal basis, 
constitutional basis, for so prohibiting or not making 
this financial report available to those who may be 
interested in taking a look at it? 

FR. BERNAS. Perhaps, I should ask somebody who 
has more familiarity with concrete circumstances on this 
matter. 

MR. FOZ. Financial reports are required of corpora- 
tions by the SEC, but these are considered classified 
matters not available for inspection by interested 
parties. 

FR. BERNAS. I would ask for the reason why they 
are made classified matters. 

MR. FOZ. This is an actual case of a researcher at the 
UP Law Center who was making a research on data on 
the financial operations of multinational drug com- 
panies. But when he went to the SEC to take a look at 
the financial records — data which are filed as a matter 
of course by these corporations as required by the 
Corporation Code — he was barred from taking a look 
at them. 

FR. BERNAS. My initial reaction, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, is that that would be an unreasonable limitation 
which is against the interest of the public. 


710 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


MR. FOZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS. QUESADA. Just to follow up the inquiry about 
the right of the people to information on matters of 
public concern, would this particular instance be 
covered by this particular section? The University of 
the Philippines was commissioned by one ministry of 
the government to conduct a research on the nationwide 
implementation of primary health care. The findings 
were derogatory to the official pronouncement, and no 
amount of request or appeal to this research body 
would make it reveal the results of such study because 
this body said the study was commissioned by a govern- 
ment agency. Will the research group violate any rule if 
it revealed the results of its study? 

FR. BERNAS. In my judgment, no, because this is a 
matter of public concern. Precisely, it was commissioned 
by the government to discover what is good for the 
nation, and I think it is something about which the 
public has a right to know. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 


1 Presiding Officer, we have the 

last three speakers. May we call on the Vice-President 
betore we suspend our session 


the removal or deletion of the words “or imminent 
danger thereof.” 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, they also do. As a matter of fact, 
they did it ahead of us and we merely harmonized it. 
Perhaps, the better place to discuss this is when we are 
in the Article on the Executive, particularly on the 
provision on the commander-in-chief. 

MR. PADILLA. No, this is a very important provision 
in the Bill of Rights. I feel that if we delete the words 
“or imminent danger thereof,” the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus may not be suspended until there is an 
actual rebellion, actual armed public uprising against the 
government for any of the purposes mentioned in 
Article 134 of the Revised Penal Code. 

If we will have to wait for the actual invasion or 
actual armed public uprising, does not the sponsor 
believe that this might render the powers of the Pres- 
ident in the commander-in-chief provision, as well as in 
the Bill of Rights, inutile, making it very difficult, if not 
too late, for the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, 
especially when we consider that contrary to some 
decisions of the Supreme Court during martial law, we 
agree that even if it is suspended, it does not necessarily 
carry with it the denial of the right to bail? Will not the 
Committee consider the reinstatement of the phrase “or 
imminent danger thereof”? 


OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Th 
Vice-President is recognized. 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer 

ask Tfew Conmrittee, but I would like to 

with reaard to wading to possible amendments 

with regard to habeas corpus; that is, Section 1 5 page 3 

I agree with the deletion of the word “insurrection” 
because under the Penal Code it is rebellion. In fact it 
says rebellion or insurrection.” I notice that the phrLse 
or imminent danger thereof’ which refers to invasion 
and rebellion which is provided in the 1935 and 1973 
Constitutions is proposed to be deleted. I suppose that 
invasion refers to entry or actual invasion by a foreign 
power while rebellion is an actual armed and public 
uprising. For example, in the Manila Hotel incident 
even if there were armed men or soldiers present when 
the Vice-President took his oath of office, in my 
opinion, there was no rebellion. At most, I believe the 
crime was a conspiracy to commit rebellion. Considering 
the fact that rebellion does not arise until there is an 
actual armed public uprising against the government, 
does not the sponsor believe we should not delete the 
words “or imminent danger thereof’ that were already 
in our Constitution? 


Likewise, I do not know what the report of the 
Committee on the Executive is on the provision on the 
commander-in-chief, whether they also recommended 


FR. BERNAS. The reason for the deletion of the 
phrase “or imminent danger thereof ” is that it is such 
a vague concept which is very difficult to evaluate and, 
therefore, is open to abuse by the Executive. So follow- 
ing the lead of the Committee on the Executive, our 
Committee preferred to limit the grounds for the 
suspension of the privilege to actual invasion and actual 
rebellion. 

MR. PADILLA. The phrase “or imminent danger 
thereof” contemplates not only the danger of invasion 
or rebellion but that the danger is imminent. Of course, 
we cannot specify every instance that would constitute 
imminent danger of invasion or imminent danger of 
rebellion. But a suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, 
which, in a way, is precautionary, and although it might 
entail certain rights of individuals, is for the purpose of 
defending and protecting the security of the state or the 
entire country and our sovereign people. 

The phrase “or imminent danger thereoT’ may not 
be precise nor specific, but is somewhat vague. But is 
there a better way of expressing it? In my opinion, if 
there is real danger and it is imminent, it should cover 
the situation. 

FR. BERNAS. In the judgment of the Committee, 
putting that in as a ground would not be necessary for 
the protection of the security of the nation. If the 
amendment is proposed, we certainly will present it to 
the floor for a vote. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


711 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

This provision based on the Miranda decision was 
suggested to be transposed to make it follow the pro- 
vision on warrant of arrest or unreasonable search and 
seizure. 

FR. BERNAS. I would agree with that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

But as I mentioned earlier, I would not stress the 
element of duty of the investigating officer. I prefer to 
stress the right of the arrested person. In other words, 
the original text of the 1973 Constitution, in my 
opinion, is better worded than the proposed provision. 

FR. BERNAS. Again, we will entertain amendments 
on that. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

On Section 23, on double jeopardy, there was a 
Davide resolution which allowed an appeal in a judg- 
ment of acquittal in a criminal case that states; 

An acquittal by a trial court is, however, appealable 

provided that in such event the accused shall not be de- 
tained or required to put up bail. 

This has been deleted by the Committee because it 
adheres to the existing provision on double jeopardy. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. I recall that when this same idea, but 
in different phraseology, was presented and approved 
by the Committee on the Judiciary, the great objection 
was that it would violate the immunity against double 
jeopardy. But I recall, the sponsor admitted, after I had 
explained the day before, that it did not violate double 
jeopardy but that it was unnecessary and harmful. What 
is the real position, Mr. Presiding Officer? Is it in 
violation of double jeopardy or is it just because it need 
not be stated in the Bill of Rights nor in the Article on 
the Judiciary? 

FR. BERNAS. I explained my position on that, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, when we considered the matter 
in the Article on the Judiciary. The position I took was 
that it was not a departure from existing jurisprudence. 
In fact, it was more strict than existing jurisprudence 
in that it required not just abuse of discretion but it also 
required that the judgment be clearly against the 
evidence. 

MR. PADILLA. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
because we want to make the exercise of that right by 
the state or the offended party restrictive not only 
through a petition for a review on certiorari in the dis- 


cretion of the Supreme Court which may dismiss it 
outright, but also on certain grounds that are really 
covered by “in excess or lack of jurisdiction.” 

But my common impression, Mr. Presiding Officer, is 
that most lawyers are of the opinion that when a judg- 
ment of acquittal is rendered by a trial court, that is 
final, executory and not appealable. And that common 
impression is general. 

Does not the sponsor think, Mr. Presiding Officer, an 
appeal from an arbitrary judgment of acquittal rendered 
by a few corrupt judges of the offended party or the 
state will improve the administration of justice? 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have expressed 
my position on this when we voted on Third Reading on 
the Article on the Judiciary. But if the Commissioner 
wants to raise the matter for reconsideration, he can 
present a motion on the floor. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I remember a memorandum of honorable Commis- 
sioner Laurel, Chairman of the Committee, saying that 
if there was an appeal by the accused, why not include 
the fiscal. 

I now go to this very far-reaching classification of the 
death penalty as cruel, degrading or inhuman. 

Regarding the right to bail, both the 1935 and the 
1973 Constitutions provide for an exception of those 
charged with capital offense where the evidence of guilt 
is strong, but this was deleted in this Section 1 8. 

FR. BERNAS. It was deleted, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
because of the abolition of capital punishment. Perhaps, 
for purposes of order, before we take up Section 1 8, we 
should take up the matter of capital punishment first. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, because 
capital punishment is prescribed by law only for very 
few capital offenses, and the court usually only imposes 
the penalty of reclusion perpetua to death when the 
commission of a capital offense is attended with qualify- 
ing and aggravating circumstances. In both Constitu- 
tions, that exception appears, that one is entitled to bail 
before conviction, but in a capital offense where the 
evidence of guilt is strong, the court may deny the right 
to bail. And as the sponsor said, this was deleted 
because under Section 21 of the 1973 Constitution’s 
Bill of Rights, it says: “Excessive fines shall not be 
imposed, nor cruel or unusual punishment inflicted.” 

The Committee suggested the change of the words 
“or unusual” to “degrading or inhuman punishment, or 
the death penalty inflicted.” I wish to make of record 
that I agree with the observations of Commissioners 
Colayco, Regalado and a few others who believe that 
capital punishment should be retained as it is provided 
for not only in the Revised Penal Code but also in the 
Rules of Court, including the 1985 Rules on Criminal 


712 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


Procedures. It was proposed that capital punishment be 
deleted because “only God who has given us life has the 
right to take it away.” To the proponents, therefore, 
the state, even in a delegated way, cannot or should not 
impose the death penalty. 


FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, that is one of 
the reasons given by the Committee, and I think the 
Committee has said everything it wants to say about it. 


BISHOP BACANI. Perhaps, I could just add that also 
right now, in an atmosphere of public opinion in the 
Philippines, we should take account of the fact that the 
Catholic bishops did oppose capital punishment. In 
1979 when this was discussed by the Batasang Pam- 
bansa. Bishop Legaspi stated the Catholic bishops’ 
stand, and I quote the final part of it: 


In the present stage of development of our people and 
conditions of our society, we refuse to take refuge in the 
death penalty as the only effective and moraUy possible 
means to safeguard the life and well-being of our com- 
munity and of our citizens. 


1 because it will influence the thinking of 

least 81 percent of our population 


r I am cognizant of that opinion of the 

fhP 4 ° "^ ^ Catholic and a Jesuit product of 

the Ateneo University, I would like to comply with and 

7eZltvlZn "^"tter of death 


mon good, but the issue at stake is whether or not under 
the present circumstances that will be for the common 
good. 

MR. PADILLA. But the delegated power of the state 
cannot be denied. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, the state can be delegated by 
God at a particular stage in history, but it is not clear 
whether or not that delegation is forever under all 
circumstances. 

MR. PADILLA. So this matter should be left to the 
legislature to determine, under certain specified condi- 
tions or circumstances, whether the retention of the 
death penalty or its abolition would be for the common 
good. I do not believe this Commission can a priori, and 
as was remarked within a few days or even a month, 
determine a positive provision in the Constitution that 
would prohibit even the legislature to prescribe the 
death penalty for the most heinous crimes, the most 
grievous offenses attended by many qualifying and 
aggravating circumstances. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would just like to say that 
precisely because this has been discussed for so long by 
other people and there has been so much work done 
before, we can stand on their shoulders. We have bene- 
fitted from so much discussion of it and our long 
experience with it in the past. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, let me clarify that they we 
making a pastoral decision for the situation of tl 
Philippines, and that that was an actual proposal I 
the Batasang Pambansa at that time. At present th( 
explicitly make it clear that the churfh has nev 

run“t. -Pit 


MR. PADILLA. Yes. With regard to the Batasa 
Pambansa I remember that there was a parliamenta 
bill for the abolition of the death penalty, and I 2 
peared before its committee and opposed that bill. ; 
it is granted that the state is not deprived of the rig 
even from a moral standpoint of imposing or prescr 
ing capital punishment. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes. What I am saying is that 
from the Catholic point of view, that right of the state 
is not forbidden. 


MR. PADILLA. In fact, not only forbidden, "but we 
have to accept that the state has the delegated authority 
from the Creator to impose the death penalty under 
certain circumstances. 


MR. PADILLA. Yes, but this is not an absolute 
truism. It is not a matter of faith or morals, but is more 
of law and, as I mentioned before, of retributive justice. 
I do not believe it is wise to impose an absolute prohibi- 
tion in the Constitution regardless of the legislative 
power and to depend upon the prevailing circumstances. 

BISHOP BACANI. I think the sense of the Commit- 
tee is that given the development of the moral sense of 
the people, it is now right and the time for such a 
prohibition in our Constitution. 


MR. PADILLA. We have to distinguish among the 
penalty prescribed by law, the penalty imposed by a 
court after due trial, the necessary provisions for safe- 
guards, the automatic review by the Supreme Court and 
also the question of imposition and execution of the 
penalty. 

Will the sponsor believe that even the prescription for 
the provision of this capital punishment should be 
prohibited because under the criminal law there should 
be no penalty unless prescribed by law, nulla pena sine 
lege, for the impression or the recommendation is 
against the execution of the death penalty? 


BISHOP BACANI. The state has the delegation from 
God for it to do what is needed for the sake of the com- 


FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
recommends the prohibition of the imposition of the 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


713 


death penalty, and it is our position that this be given to 
the floor for decision. 

MR. PADILLA. I notice the remarks of Commis- 
sioner Garcia regarding extrajudicial executions in Latin 
America. And I suppose also during the martial law in 
the Philippines there were so many extrajudicial execu- 
tions which had been termed “salvaging,” which means 
that people were just unheard from. Sometimes their 
bodies are seen floating on the Pasig River. Of course, 
extrajudicial execution is abhorrent to orderly society. 
But does the sponsor not think that precisely to avoid 
extrajudicial executions, this punishment which is 
reserved only for very few capital offenses and when 
attended by qualifying circumstances, should be re- 
tained to avoid retaliation or revenge, meaning, the 
victims or the relatives take the law into their own 
hands as was mentioned in one example by Commis- 
sioner de Castro? These are arbitrary and outside the 
process of the law. Does the sponsor not think that the 
fact that there were extrajudicial executions, especially 
in Latin America and also here during the martial law, 
that that is not an argument against but in favor of 
capital punishment? 

MR. GARCIA. No, precisely, it is these governments 
which tolerate or even perpetrate extrajudicial execu- 
tions because of a sense of overpowering inability or 
capability to snuff out the life of any man, and because 
of this atmosphere or climate of power and terror which 
they perpetrate, they are able to do this with impunity 
in a much more massive scale by means of extrajudicial 
execution without having to go through due process. 
What I am trying to precisely point out is the climate 
and the thinking of the overpowering capability of the 
state to impose this kind of authority over its citizens 
without respect of due process, without respect for 
dissent. If we notice, in the countries where this hap- 
pened, like in Guatemala, Chile, Uruguay, Paraguay 
and Argentina, before the changes took place in these 
countries, they were in an atmosphere of authoritarian 
rule where the death penalty was present. 

MR. PADILLA. Precisely, we condemn these extra- 
judicial executions. We cannot use even a stronger 
language than “condemn” because these executions are 
done arbitrarily by abuse of power without hearing, 
without trial, without due process. But the provision on 
capital punishment under our Revised Penal Code and 
the Rules of Court provides for even a very long proce- 
dure of trial and review, and in some cases may merit 
the exericse of executive clemency by commutation or 
by conditional pardon. If we delete this, I am afraid we 
might be increasing not only extrajudicial executions by 
arbitrary and dictatorial regimes but also private execu- 
tions by those aggrieved who might take the law into 
their own hands because they feel they did not receive 
retributive justice. In other words, the Commissioner’s 
comment on extrajudicial executions, in my opinion, is 
not an argument for abolition but for retention. 


MR. GARCIA. It is an argument for abolition 
precisely because it creates a climate of resentment and 
conflict due to a powerful state which stresses punish- 
ment rather than for the state to look into the factors or 
the root causes of why a crime is committed in society, 
why there is armed resistance, in fact, why there is 
injustice in society. It is a kind of philosophical outlook 
where one looks into the root causes, the conditions, 
the factors, rather than the crime itself. 

I believe we have argued this at length and, therefore, 
I would like to submit this now to the body. 

MR. PADILLA. The Commissioner’s statements seem 
to be in conformity with the so-called positivist theory 
of criminal law, not the classical or the accepted rule 
that criminal liability is based on intelligence and free 
will. The positivist theory even allows or recognizes the 
so-called socially dangerous person who may be re- 
pressed — this is the term used in the Code of Crimes, 
repressed instead of penalized — that, in a way, the 
society more than the individual is to blame, when defi- 
nitely criminal liability must be based on intelligence 
and free will of the actor, which is the recognized rule 
in criminal law. 

MR. GARCIA. There is also the progressive reform 
penology right now which tries to precisely have a new 
approach regarding the existence and the elimination of 
crimes. And it is moving away from the lethally archaic 
an eye-for-an-eye, a tooth-for-a-tooth concept into a 
more reformatory kind of condition where it is more 
holistic, and trying to see the entire context rather than 
simply the act itself. So I think it is an effort to move 
into a more modern, more multidisciplinary approach 
towards the elimination of crimes. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I believe we 
have been arguing on this point for so long and we may 
be going around the issue using the same arguments. 
May we request Commissioner Aquino to make one 
point regarding the Miranda case? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer, and 
I also thank the Committee sponsors. 

Does Section 21 contemplate both tactical and 
custodial interrogations? 

BISHOP BACANI. I think both of them are included. 

MS. AQUINO. The 1973 Constitution carries the 
same formulation; it does not distinguish between 
tactical and custodial investigations. But in practice, 
during the martial law period, military investigators 
would attempt to flout with impunity the provisions of 
Section 21 on the ground that Section 20 of the 1973 
Constitution did not provide that the same rights would 


714 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


be applicable to tactical interrogation, but only to 
custodial interrogation. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think Com- 
missioner Colayco would like to answer that point for 
the Committee. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 


entitled to remain silent, to have counsel and that if he 
does not have any, he could demand the service of one. 

So, in effect, the custodial theory was extended, and 
we will notice we did not use the word “custodial” any- 
more, so that the military investigators could not go 
around the provisions by saying that tactical interroga- 
tion was different from custodial interrogation; in other 
words, to avoid other interpretations. 


MR. TADEO. Mr. Presiding Officer, puwede po bang 
makasusog lang kay Commissioner Aquino? Kasi po 
iyong tinutukoy ng Commissioner ay isa rin sa aking 
itatanong dahil sa ang karamihang biktima ng tactical 
investigation ay mga magbubukid. Sinasabi po ng mga 
military investigators na ito ay routinary procedure at 
isang pag-iimbita lamang kaya po ang mga manananggol 
ng rnga magsasaka ay hindi makapasok. Ibig lang po 
naming linawin kung kasama ang custodial and tactical 
interrogations dito sa Section 2 1 . 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Has 
Commissioner Aquino completed her inquiry, and is she 
adopting the questions of Commissioner Tadeo? 

MS. AQUINO. I think we are raising the same ques- 
tion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, a follow-up 
question to that. Would this section proscribe detention 
preliminary to technical custody; that would mean in 
the nature of temporary detention before technical 
custody or maybe temporary detention incidental to 
preliminary interrogation? 

MR. COLAYCO. It depends on the situation. Under 
the rules, a person who is in the act of committing, who 
is about to commit or after committing an offense may 
be arrested without any warrant of arrest. Under the 
law, while he can be detained without a warrant of 
arrest, he must be released unless the case is brought 
to the court within the period prescribed by the 
Revised Penal Code. During that time when he is under 
custody even without a warrant of arrest, this Section 
21 definitely applies. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
missioner Colayco is recognized. 


(Mr. Regalado). Com- 


MR. COLAYCO. Seetion 21 is, we might say 
expansion of the provision in the 1973 Constituti 
which concerns the so-called custodial examinatic 
which was the result precisely of a complaint o? Co 
missioner Garcia that it has been the pracLe of rniUt 
investigators to prohibit the assistaLe of cou^ e ' 
persons suspected of being subversives on the g ou 
that custodial interrogation is different from tact 
interrogation. So the Vice-Chairman assigned us Cc 
missioners Sarmiento, Garcia and myself, to furti 
study the problem, and we have come up with this 


We will notice that under the old rule, the mantle of 
protection where the suspect or accused under investiga- 
tion could only claim the right against self-incrimination 
and the right to be informed of his right to have counsel 
and to remain silent was apparently limited to that 
portion of the investigation when he was already under 
the technical custody of the investigator. That is why it 
was referred to as custodial investigation. 


We went further by extending the mantle of pro- 
tection to the time immediately after the commission of 
any offense, whether the policeman or the person 
making the investigation has any suspect under custody. 
Thus, it is stated in Section 21 that it would be the duty 
of the investigating officer, when making preliminary 
investigation on the spot, on the place of the crime or 
elsewhere, to remind any person or suspect that he is 


MS. AQUINO. No. What I was contemplating is a 
situation which is not properly covered by appropriate 
warrants, but which may fall under the practice of 
tactical interrogation. So it will be a situation of tempo- 
rary detention incidental to preliminary interrogation. 
Does this Section 21 likewise proscribe that kind of a 
practice? 


MR. COLAYCO. Yes, because as I explained earlier, 
the wording does not make use anymore of the adjective 
“custodial.” 


MS. AQUINO. The same “custodial” was not also 
used in the 1973 Constitution. 

MR. COLAYCO. No, it was not, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. It mentioned only investigation. 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. I would like to invite the 
Commissioner’s attention to the last sentence of the 
first paragraph of Section 21, which states; “Secret 
detention places and incommunicado detentions are 
prohibited,” which amply covers the problem the 
Commissioner has voiced. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
Maybe, some amendments might be in order to precisely 
apply to custodial interrogation, temporary detention 
and preliminary technical custody. 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


715 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call on 
Commissioner Rosario Braid? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is 
on a different issue. Following my interpellation this 
morning, I would like to underscore the power of com- 
munication to shape opinions, to create divisiveness or, 
on the other hand, to build understanding between 
different groups. I refer to the regular occurrence of 
reports in the media on criminals who are often de- 
scribed according to ethnic origin, such as a Muslim 
thief, a Chinese estafador, an Ilocano killer and so forth. 
Often, these disparaging remarks tend to create stereo- 
types in the minds of the public. These also tend to 
create divisiveness among different groups. I wonder if 
the Bill of Rights could protect the rights of minorities 
and groups who seek redress for disparaging remarks 
from the media. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee will entertain amend- 
ments to that effect. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call on 
Commissioner Tadeo. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Tadeo is recognized. 

MR. TADEO. Tungkol po ito sa Section 5, page 2, 
lines 8 to 1 2 na nagsasaad; 

The liberty of abode and of changing the same and of 
travel, within the limits prescribed by law, shall not be im- 
paired except upon lawful order of the court, or when 
necessary in the interest of national security, public safety, 
or public health. 

Dito po sa Section 5 para kong nakikita na ang 
“hamletting” ay pinahihintulutan, which in the past 
regime of Mr. Marcos had been used in the name of 
national security. Ang limandaang-libung apektadong 
mga magbubukid ay inilagay sa isang relocation center 
na parang isang kural. Ang kanilang kabuhayan at 
kalusugan ay naapektuhan. Nakikita ko na itong Section 
5 ay bukas na naman sa “ hamletting.” Iminumungkahi ko 
na alisin natin iyon “or when necessary in the interest of 
national security, public safety, or public health” sapag- 
kat ang “in the interest of national security” ang siyang 
laging idinadahilan sa “hamletting.” I suggest that we 
leave this matter of liberty of abode to the court. 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, the intention of the Com- 
mittee in putting in “within the limits prescribed by 
law” was precisely against “hamletting.” But if the per- 
ception is that it is not clear enough, we will entertain 
amendments to make sure that “hamletting” is banned. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we call on 
the last speaker, Commissioner Suarez. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). May we 
know from the Acting Floor Leader how many more 
speakers have registered to interpellate? 

MR. MONSOD. This is the last one, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think the 
Acting Floor Leader is already exhausted. So I will 
get through with my questions very quickly. 

May I call the sponsor’s attention to Section 3, 
particularly on the use of the word “personally.” This, 

I assume, is on the assumption that the judge conduct- 
ing the examination must do it in person and not 
through a commissioner or a deputy clerk of court. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. The other point is that the Committee 
deleted the phrase “through searching questions” which 
was originally proposed after the word “affirmation.” 
May we know the reason for this, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. The sentiment of most of the mem- 
bers of the Committee was that it would still be under- 
stood even without that phrase. 

MR. SUAREZ. For purposes of record, does this 
envision a situation where the judge can conduct the 
examination personally even in his own residence or in 
a place outside of the court premises, say, in a restau- 
rant, bar or cocktail lounge? I ask this because I 
handled a case involving Judge Pio Marcos in connection 
with the Golden Buddha case, and I remember the 
search warrant was issued at 2:00 a.m. in his residence. 

FR. BERNAS. May I ask Commissioner Colayco to 
answer that question from his vast experience as judge? 

MR. COLAYCO. We have never come across an 
incident like that. But we always make sure that the ap- 
plication is filed in our court. It has to be done there 
because the application has to be registered, duly 
stamped and recorded in the book. 

MR. SUAREZ. So it is clear to everybody that when 
we said “it shall be determined personally by thejud';e 
after examination under oath or affirmation” that 
process must have to be conducted in the court pre- 
mises. 

MR. COLAYCO. Not only in the court premises but 
also in the courtroom itself. We do that at least in 
Manila. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


716 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


MR. COLAYCO. For the information of the body, 
the words “searching questions,” if I am not mistaken, 
are used in the Rules of Court. 

FR. BERNAS. The phrase is not yet used in the Rules 
of Court. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

May I now go to Section 19. It is stated here that a 
trial in absentia, so to speak, can be conducted after 
arraignment under the situation stated and outlined in 
this section, which means that the accused has been 
duly notified and that his failure to appear is unjusti- 
fiable. This can proceed up to a decision of conviction. 
Is that the meaning of this provision, Mr. Presiding 
Officer? 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
close the period of sponsorship and debate. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Just a moment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

May I just make a remark? 

MR. MONSOD. I ask that Commissioner Natividad 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Natividad is recognized. 


FR. BERNAS. No. Is there not something in the 
Rules of Court that at least provides that the accused 
must be present? 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, before the promulga- 
tion of the decision, a trial in absentia can be con- 
ducted. 


has reference to the period o 

part of the trial or not? I d 
not think it is part of the trial. 

May I ask Commissioner Colayco regarding this. 

recolLtion^t/tW ^ ^ hut m 

recollection is that m case of conviction, the presenc 

or the accused is required. ^ 

^ ^he word “trial ” I 

the old jurisprudence, under the “right to speedv trial 
I remember that the interpretation of the court of th 
word trial was that it covered the period of the tri! 
Itself, excluding the decision. So my understanding hei 
IS that the accused should be present at the promulg; 
tion of the sentence. ^ ® 


MR. NATIVIDAD. With regard to the remarks of 
Commissioners Tadeo and Aquino that there were two 
types of interrogations conducted during investigations 
in which they participated — the custodial and the 
tactical — I ask for tolerance to remark on this because 
this shows that the police organization or investigative 
bodies operating at that time were not truly police 
forces or civilian forces. They are military forces, and 
this is an argument for us to approve a civilian police. 
There is no such thing as tactical questioning in police 
work but custodial where the police engages in inter- 
rogations and interviews. When we question a suspect, it 
is interrogation; when we question a complainant or a 
witness, it is an interview, but this interrogation is 
subject to the rights of the accused. We cannot say that 
because a person is tactically interrogated, the constitu- 
tional rights of the suspect will not apply and cannot be 
respected. That is why we should, in this Constitution, 
approve the establishment of a really civilian police 
force to prevent the occurrence of such operation of 
police forces in the future. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. SUARp. So that development could exist only 
if the accused had been properly arraigned. 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. And, therefore, his failure to appear 
despite the service of notices to him is unjustifiable. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. And up to the point where the judge 
can render the decision on the basis of the trial con- 
ducted, he cannot promulgate the decision? 

FR. BERNAS. I think this covers the period until 
the prosecution rests the case. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

In reenforcement of what Commissioner Natividad 
has said, there is no such thing as tactical investigation 
by the police, but there is a tactical interrogation in 
times of war. The front line units, when they capture an 
enemy, are entitled to tactical interrogation of the 
prisoner and afterwards, the POWs are evacuated to the 
rear for further interrogation. What is this tactical inter- 
rogation of the front line units? This involves questions 
tike “Where are your other companions? ” “How many 
are they? ” “What unit are they in? ” and such other 
pertinent questions. That is what we call tactical inter- 
rogation. After that the prisoner is sent to the rear 
echelon for further investigation. So in police par- 


THURSDAY, JULY 17, 1986 


717 


lance, there is no such thing as tactical nor custodial 
investigation; it is just investigation period. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
close the period of sponsorship and debate. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). There is 
a motion to close the period of sponsorship and debate. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just want to 
make an announcement. 

Proposed Resolution No. 479, entitled: RESOLU- 
TION TO INCORPORATE IN THE DECLARATION 
OF PRINCIPLES THE RECOGNITION OF RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT AND AGRARIAN REFORM AS 
PRIORITIES OF THE STATE, AND COOPERATIVES 


AS AN ORGANIZING PRINCIPLE, has been referred 
by the Committee on Social Justice to the Committee 
on Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, it seems that 
our Members are valiantly carrying on despite ex- 
haustion, but in the interest of everybody’s health and 
the health of the Constitution we are trying to frame, I 
move that we adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty in 
the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning. 

It was 6:01 p.m. 




I 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


719 


R.C.C. NO. 33 
Friday, July 18, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:36 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Lord, we have here a gathering 
of women and men given the awesome task of writing 
a new constitution that will best serve the interests of 
our country now and in the years to come. We have 
had, so far, three Constitutions before, drafted by 
patriotic and brilliant Filipinos, who had invoked 
Your enlightenment and guidance. We are certain that 
they tried not to fail You and their people and that 
You had not denied them Your Divine Wisdom. But 
people are people, Almighty One, and their creations 
proved that only You are capable of perfection. 

Our faith in You, Almighty Father, gives us the 
courage to hope that while perfection cannot be ours. 
Your wisdom will enable us to approximate the per- 
fect Constitution needed by our country. 

Your wisdom is better than all the riches of the 
world. We pray that You cleanse our minds and hearts 
of greed and selfishness. Your wisdom is the wellspring 
of an insight that can only come from You. We pray 
that You open our minds to receive Your counsel. 

Lord Almighty, the events of the recent past in our 
country have left bitterness and deep hate in many of 
our people. Purge these bitterness and hate from their 
hearts because, as You have said, only those who are 
pure in heart can ever hope to receive You. 

We cannot hope to accomplish anything without 
You, Great Architect of the universe, Creator of heaven 


and earth. We pray — HELP US and stay with us every 
moment of the day and night that we spend in the 
performance of our sacred task. And when our work 
is done. Almighty One, breathe life into our new Consti- 
tution so that when we look back to this time, it will 
be not only with pride, but with profound gratitude 
to You who made it all possible. 

We give Thee thanks. Almighty God, for all Your 
blessings. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . 


Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Alonto .... 


Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Aquino .... 


Nieva 

. . Present* 

Azcuna 


Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Bacani 


Ople 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 


Padilla 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 


Quesada .... 

. . Present* 

Bernas 


Rama 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Brocka 


Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Calderon 


Rigos 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 


Romulo .... 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Davide 


Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Foz 


Suarez 

. . Present 

Garcia 


Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon 


Tadeo 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . . 


Tan 

. . Present 

Jamir 


Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. Present* 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Uka 

. . Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 


Commissioner Villegas is on official mission. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 33 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


720 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 


COMMUNICATIONS 


THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with 
the reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


Resolution of the Knight of Columbus Council 8134, 
Cotabato City, on the renegotiation and/or imple- 
mentation of the Tripoli Agreement suggesting that 
should any negotiation be held, it should be free from 
foreign intervention. 

(Communication No. 228 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move for the 
approval of the Journal of the previous session. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, just a slight 
correction on page 1 2, last paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes may 
proceed. 


MR.^^ DE LOS REYES. The sentence which starts 
with: “On Mr. de los Reyes’ suggestion that instead of 
abolishing the death penalty through the Constitution” 
should be changed. Because I am one of the authors for 
the abolition of the death penalty, I propose to change 
the words instead of’ to HE IS FOR, so that the cor- 
rected sentence should read: “On Mr. de los Reyes’ 

thfS° abolishing the death penalty 
through the Constitution, there should be a provision 
to allow future legislatures ...” 

That is all. 


Letter from Ms. Erna-Leah C. Orante of 9 Zone 5, 
Dayangdang, Naga City, suggesting provisions to stop 
the improper use of prime agricultural lands for resi- 
dential, commercial and industrial purposes. 

(Communication No. 229 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 


Letter from Mr. R.A.D. Baron of the United Christian 
Community Organization, UNICO, Manila, proposing 
a provision in the bill of rights on the right to bear arms. 

(Communication No. 230 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 


“-eco 

Woved ‘he motion 

Let the proper correction be made. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 
MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I now mo^ 


Ti^rn Is there any objection? (Silence) 

The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Commu- 
nications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


Letter from the Integrated Bar of the Philippines signed 
by Mr. Vicente D. Millora, forwarding proposals of the 
Council for the Welfare of Children underscoring the 
need for principles or policies protecting the rights of 
children, youth and mothers. 

(Communication No. 231 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Jose L. Moya of 17 Sunset Drive, 
Horseshoe Village, Quezon City, enclosing a paper, en- 
titled: “A Memorandum to the Constitutional Com- 
mission on the Essentials of Good Courts and Crime 
Prevention.” 

Communication No. 232 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Judiciary. 


Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Ponciano L. 
Bennagen, transmitting a resolution of the Mountain 
Province Agricultural Consultation for Con-Com to con- 
sider the indigenous Igorot concepts on land. 

(Communication No. 233 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


721 


Communication from Mr. Fulgencio S. Factoran, Jr., 
Deputy Executive Secretary, transmitting a letter of 
Mr. Dodong Proculo Samson of 166 Palaw Hills, Larena, 
Siquijor, suggesting a provision designating the two- 
meter radius around the flagpole of municipal and city 
halls as a place where any citizen may denounce graft 
and corruption and be immune from arrest. 

(Communication No. 234 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Poli- 
tical Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from the Honorable Commissioner Ponciano L. 
Bennagen, transmitting resolutions from the National 
Association of Retirees, Bontoc, Mountain Province, 
proposing automatic increase of monthly pensions of 
retirees and the adoption of the Jury system in our 
courts of law. 

(Communication No. 235 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 486 
(Article on the Bill of Rights) 

Continuation 


in order to avoid any confusion in the minds of the 
Commissioners and the cluttering of the calendar, I 
would like to move that these partial committee reports 
be taken out of the calendar because they are already 
included in the consolidated report. One partial commit- 
tee report is also for the Committee on the General 
Provisions. Both Committees have already submitted 
their consolidated report. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the number of the conso- 
lidated report of the Committee on the Executive? 

MR. BENGZON. The consolidated report of the 
Committee on the Executive is Committee Report No. 
26, which is already included in the Business for the 
Day. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the committee report 
on the General Provisions, what is the number? 

MR. BENGZON. It is Committee Report No. 31. 
Committee Report No. 15 has already been conso- 
lidated with Committee Report No. 31. So, I move 
that Committee Report No. 15 be removed from the 
Calendar of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Let the corresponding adjustments be made. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. Madam President. 


PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we con- 
tinue the consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 
486. 

We are still in the period of amendments. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Romulo be 
recognized to present an amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman and members of the Com- 
mittee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political Rights 
and Obligations and Human Rights are invited to come 
forward. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the Chair- 
man of the Steering Committee be recognized for some 
important information. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, in the past, the 
Committee on the Executive submitted partial commit- 
tee reports; namely. Committee Report Nos. 5, 6, 8, 
9 and 1 1. The consolidated report of the Committee 
on the Executive has already been submitted; therefore. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is rec- 
ognized. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I have an amend- 
ment on Section 1, line 10, which is both by way o 
substitution and transposition. I propose to delete the 
sentence “The right to life extends to the fertih^d 
ovum,” and in lieu thereof place a new senteiKe: THE 
STATE SHALL PROTECT HUMAN LIFE FROM THE 
MOMENT OF CONCEPTION. 


I suggest that this be adopted and transferred eit er 
to the Article on the Declaration of Principles or to la 
on Human Resources. 


The reasons for my amendment are as follows. First, 
I do not believe this original sentence belongs ° 
Article on the Bill of Rights. It is not only f bu 
also contradictory to the main purpose o ^ 
rights. The Bill of Rights is supposed 
individual from the state and the minon y r 


722 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


majority. This original proposal impinges on the right 
of minorities who do not believe in this Catholic con- 
cept. Thus, I think it is less objectionable and will 
accomplish the same purpose, if we transpose it to 
another article in the way that I have suggested. 

So again. Madam President, I will read my proposed 
amendment: THE STATE SHALL PROTECT HUMAN 
LIFE FROM THE MOMENT OF CONCEPTION. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished sponsor accept 
an amendment to the amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. With pleasure. 

"l^HE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may pro- 

proposed amendment would 

MR. ROMULO. I regret I cannot accept. I do not 

f tha^t^n^"^'^ *^y thinking 

we amnrthP^ and if 

Tn AnV^f P it must be a per- 

quenctsoffha °ther conse- 

quences ot that interpretation? 


MR. SUAREZ. May I suggest that we decide the first 
step to be taken, which is to delete this sentence “The 
right to life extends to the fertilized ovum,” insofar 
as Section 1 of the proposed Article is concerned. We 
are now practically debating on the merit of the trans- 
posed portion. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I realize the procedural pro- 
blem. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. I would agree with Commissioner 
Suarez’ proposal, provided the deletion will be accom- 
panied by a suggested transposition. 

MR. SUAREZ. I have no objection to the deletion. 
As a matter of fact, I was going to move for its dele- 
tion, but the fact that we are already discussing the 
merit of the transposed provision is somewhat not in 
order. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear the reaction of the 
Committee? 

FR. BERNAS. May I speak for the Committee and 
let any Committee member object if I am wrong. I 
personally would like to lay the ovum to rest 
(Laughter) and I would be willing to accept the dele- 
tion of this line on the understanding that later we 
will consider the proposal of Commissioner Romulo. 
I think I have expressed the sentiments of the Com- 
mittee as far as that sentence is concerned. 


MR. SUAREZ. Parliamenta 
dent. 


ry inquiry, Madam Presi- 


THE PRESIDENT. In other words, just to clarify: 
the position of the Committee is it offers no objection 
to its deletion. 


THE PRESIDENT, 
nized. 


Commissioner Suarez is recog- 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

I am addressing the inquiry to Commissioner Ro- 
mulo. The Commissioner is proposing that this particu- 
lar sentence be transposed to another portion of the 
draft. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, as an amendment. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, provided it will be considered 
later on. We are not binding any other committee, but 
certainly it will be considered later in another article. 

MR. ROMULO. So I will defer the second part of 
my motion and submit it again to the proper commit- 
tee. 

FR. BERNAS. That is perfectly acceptable. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. So there are practically two things 
that have to be accomplished: (1) we have to decide 
whether or not we will agree to transpose this portion; 
and (2) we have to discuss the merit of the Commis- 
sioner’s proposal as proposed to be amended by Com- 
missioner Davide. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on the same subject? 


MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 


MR. RAMA. It is on the same subject and section. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


723 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I was also intending 
to move for the deletion of the same sentence in Section 
1 , but if the Committee has already accepted the 
amendment, then my amendment may not be necessary. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will put to a vote the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Romulo to delete 
line 10 of Section 1 and that the same be considered in 
another part of the draft of the Constitution. 

Those in favor of this particular amendment will 
please raise their hand. ( All Members raised their hand.) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (No Mem- 
ber raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Trenas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President and members of 
the Committee, on Section 2, lines 11 to 1 2, I propose 
to add the clause AS DETERMINED BY THE PROPER 
COURT after the word “compensation,” so, it will 
read as follows: “Private property shall not be taken for 
public use without just compensation AS DETER- 
MINED BY THE PROPER COURT.” 

The purpose of this amendment is that while it is true 
that an expropriation proceeding is a judicial proceed- 
ing, nevertheless, because of the existence of a certain 
presidential decree regarding the interpretation of 
“just compensation,” courts have invariably followed 
that presidential decree. While yesterday. Commissioner 
Bernas stated that that presidential decree is unconstitu- 
tional, nevertheless, I do not believe so, and if the Com- 
missioner can point at a specific provision which violates 
the Constitution, I would be willing to withdraw my 
proposed amendment. 

The point is, that decree is merely an interpretation 
of the phrase “just compensation.” The purpose of 
my amendment is to allow a strictly judicial proceeding 
in the determination of just compensation in an expro- 
priation case. This would make matters clearer. Due 
to the existence of that presidential decree, a lot of 
Filipinos have suffered; their properties have been ex- 
propriated and they were paid only according to the 
amounts in their tax declarations. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, let me just say one 
thing. I did not say that that presidential decree is un- 
constitutional. All I said was that the definition of the 


term “just compensation” as contained in that pre- 
sidential decree, is only prima facie and it is always 
subject to review by the court. So, in essence, we are 
in agreement. 

As far as the Commissioner’s proposed amendment 
is concerned, I do not disagree with the meaning he puts 
into it. I would just leave the matter to the body. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I think the 
amendment is to add the clause “AS DETERMINED 
BY THE PROPER COURT.” The provision as proposed 
by the Committee is just an exact reiteration of the 
same provision in both the 1935 and 1973 Constitu- 
tions. 

Section 2, as amended, reads: “Private property 
shall not be taken for public use without just compen- 
sation AS DETERMINED BY THE PROPER COURT.” 
Suppose there is an agreement between the owner and 
the government on the compensation, and that is not 
determined by the court, then this provision might 
forfeit the private negotiation between the government 
and the owner of the property. 

I think this provision, without the amendment, is 
good enough. This has been a satisfactory provision in 
the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. So, may I suggest that 
we leave the matter alone. 

MR. TRENAS. May I answer. Madam President? Cer- 
tainly, if there is an agreement between the parties — 
the state expropriating the property and the person 
whose property is sought to be expropriated — there is 
no more need for an expropriation proceeding and the 
provision of Section 2 will no longer apply. 

MR. RODRIGO. Section 2 does not speak of ex- 
propriation proceedings yet; it just says, Private 
property shall not be taken for public use without just 
compensation.” 

MR. TRENAS. But the effect is that once we take 
private property, there will be an expropriation pro- 
ceeding. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is, if there is no amicable 
settlement; but if there is an understanding or a meet- 
ing of the minds regarding the compensation for the 
property, then there is no need for an expropriation 
proceeding. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Rodrigo ob- 
jecting to the proposed amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would prefer to leave 
the provision as it is. The point raised by Commissioner 


724 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


Trenas is adequately covered by the understanding of 
the meaning of the phrase “just compensation” in juris- 
prudence. 

So, we submit it to the body for a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Trenas insist 
on his amendment? 

MR. TRENAS. Precisely. The purpose of my amend- 
ment is, in case there is a disagreement between the two 
parties the matter of “just compensation” should be 
decided by the Supreme Court. I just want to clarify 
the purpose of Section 2, which is the proper inter- 
pretation and application of the phrase, especially with 
the existence of that presidential decree limiting its 
interpretation to the assessed value which has been 
invariably followed by all the courts. Unless we make 
a clearer provision, certainly the practice will continue. 

May I request a vote on my amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. Before we vote, I believe the purpos 
of this proposed amendment is to leave the dete 
mination of “just compensation” to the proper coui 
If the parties do not agree on the amount. This is du 
to the claim of many that presidential decrees form pai 
of the law of the land, and the decree we are talkin 
about provides that “just compensation” is limited t 
the declaration of the owner or of the assessor of th 
va ue of he property, whichever is lower. Since thi 
in erpretation remains, I believe the amendment is 
clear and reasonable proposal. To obviate the objectio 
of Commissioner Rodrigo, if the distinguished sponsc 
would agree o my amendment, I propose that on Se, 
fion 2 hues 11 to 1 2. page 1 . after the word “compe, 
sation and the period (.), add the following- IN CAS 
OF DISAGREEMENT AS TO THE AMOUNT OF JUS 
COMPENSATION, THE ISSUE SHALL BE DETEF 
MINED BY THE PROPER COURT. ^ 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Tren: 

accept? 

Will the Vice-President read the whole section agai 
as proposed? 

MR. PADILLA. The whole Section 2 will now rea 
as follows: “Private property shall not be taken fc 
public use without just compensation. IN CASE O 
DISAGREEMENT AS TO THE AMOUNT OF JUS 
COMPENSATION, THE ISSUE SHALL BE DETEF 
mined by THE PROPER COURT.” 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I just say that as formulated, the amendment be- 
comes even more unnecessary. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we then proceed to a vote? 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment submitted 
by Commissioners Trenas and Padilla will please raise 
their hand. fFew Members raised their hand.) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 8 votes in favor and 17 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. On page 2, Section 4, line 4, be- 
tween the words “court” and “when,” I propose to 
reinstate the word OR so that this sentence will read: 
“The privacy of communication and correspondence 
shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the court 
OR when public safety or order requires otherwise.” 

May I explain? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo may 
proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. In both the 1935 and the 1973 Con- 
stitutions, the word “or” appears in that particular 
Section 4. 

We must not hamper the activities of the intelligence 
service of our government. This is especially true now 
that there are threats to the stability of the government; 
for example, there is the criticism on why the Armed 
Forces seemed not to have known beforehand about 
the aborted coup d’ hotel that happened a few Sundays 
ago. So, if that word “or” is eliminated, then it will 
hamper, it will tie the hands of the intelligence service 
of the Armed Forces, because before it can open any 
correspondence or before it can tap a telephone call, 
let us say from Hawaii to Manila, it will have to secure 
a prior order from the court. While I myself would 
want all my communications and correspondence ab- 
solutely untampered with, the need for preserving 
public safety, security of the state and stability of 
the government especially these days when there are 
threats, schemes and plots against the government, 
should not be hampered. We should not tie the hands 
of our intelligence service. So I would be willing to 
subordinate my personal privacy to public safety. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know the position of the 
Committee? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would like to leave 
the matter as it is. It is correct to say that the word 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


725 


“or” is found both in the 1935 and 1973 Constitu- 
tions, but one important difference between the two is 
the second paragraph of Section 4 (same Article) of 
the 1 973 Constitution which states: 

Any evidence obtained in violation of tliis or the pre- 
ceding section shall be inadmissible for any purpose in any 

proceeding. 

That is an added precaution for the protection of 
citizens precisely when governments tend to be abusive. 
So, if we add OR and leave to the government the 
general discretion to decide when public safety or order 
requires it, like when to allow wiretapping and so forth, 
then this can be rather oppressive and can be a source of 
great abuse against the citizenry. As to the matter of 
national security, I think these matters can be handled 
by more advance systems of surveillance which can be 
done under the present state of communications 
science. So, with this point, the position of the Com- 
mittee is to leave the matter to the body for decision. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I would like 
to say something before we put the matter to a vote. 

Under the 1935 Constitution the word “or” also 
appears, meaning, that this intrusion into the privacy 
of communications, say by wiretapping or by inter- 
ception of mail matter, could be made with or without 
an order of the court when public safety or order 
requires it. I do not think there would be any abuse, 
because while under, the 1935 Constitution the word 
“or” appeared, there were enough safeguards. In 1965, 
the Congress passed RA 4200 which requires a court 
order even in matters involving public order and safety. 
Wiretapping was allowed, with sufficient safeguards, 
but only in certain cases including treason, rebellion, 
inciting to rebellion, sedition or espionage. Under this 
law, while the government could have proceeded with- 
out a court order, RA 4200, nevertheless, required such 
a court order, which was not violative of the Constitu- 
tion, and with sufficient safeguards. The application for 
a court order was just like an application for the is- 
suance of a search warrant. The corresponding docu- 
ments were required to be presented and personally 
examined by the judge and all communications thus 
intercepted had to be deposited in court within 24 
hours with the proper certification. Failure to follow 
this would make the intercepted document, say, a tape- 
recorded evidence or mail matter, inadmissible as 
evidence in court. Making this requirement for a court 
order, in all instances, does not consider that remote 
possibility of an urgent need for intrusion into the 
privacy of communication, thus hamstringing the 
government. Yet, as I pointed out, despite the alter- 
native word “or” in the 1935 Constitution, the old 


Congress still provided the corresponding protection 
just the same. So, I am for maintaining the provision 
in the 1935 Constitution which gives the alternative 
“or” to be resorted to only in extreme cases. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Suarez be recognized to interpellate the pro- 
ponent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will Commissioner Rodrigo answer a few questions 
for clarification? 

MR. ROMULO. Very gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is suggesting that 
there should be two methods here; First, upon lawful 
order of the court; and, second, when public safety 
and order require otherwise, because that was provided 
both in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. I think the 
reason is not only because that was provided in both 
Constitutions, but also because it is a wise provision. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is, of course, 
aware of the fact that when he speaks of communi- 
cations and correspondence, substantially, he is referring 
to letters and messages. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, to letters, wireless telegrams 
and messages. 

MR. SUAREZ. And the couriers of these letters and 
messages, whether wireless or through the wires, are 
usually agencies of the government? 

MR. RODRIGO. There are some private wireless 
telegraph companies like the RCA. 

MR. SUAREZ. But with respect to delivery of letters, 
that is essentially a government function. 

MR. RODRIGO. There are some private firms which 
are in the business of delivering letters. 

MR. SUAREZ. Principally, that occurs only within 
Metro Manila; but in the rural areas, the letters are 
usually carried through the Post Office which is a 
government entity. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Therefore, it is well within the hands 
of the government to take advantage of the constitu- 


726 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


tional provision securing or guaranteeing privacy of 
communications and correspondence. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, if it is within the power of the 
government, it can be abused . . . 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. Before we take the vote, the Chair 
suspends the session. 

It was 10:22 a.m. 


MR. SUAREZ. And under the guise of public safety 
and order, the government can very well open, for 
instance, the Commissioner’s correspondence addressed 
to his clients in the rural areas. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:38 a.m., the session was resumed. 


MR. RODRIGO. But there is that piece of legislation 
mentioned by Commissioner Regalado precisely to safe- 
guard that right and to prevent the abuses of the govern- 
ment. But if we remove that word “or,” even the legis- 
lature will be prevented from enacting laws safeguarding 
the rare cases, but with safeguards, when the govern- 
ment can look into private communications for public 
safety and national security. 


MR. SUAREZ. Does not the Commissioner believe 
that the privacy of communications must be preserved 
as a sacred principle in the Constitution and that if that 
is violated, it may infiict great harm upon private 
Citizens, like the Cominissioner and myself7 


MR RODRIGO. Yes, but over and above our privat 
mterest is the security of the state. 

MR. SUAREZ. Can the state save me? 

MR. RODRIGO. We have to sacrifice certain person' 
conveniences for our national security. 

MR. SUAREZ. Can the state not go to court an 
secure a lawful order? ® t-ouri an 

MR. RODRIGO. It will take time. During the perio 
of interpellations. I gave as an example tLt coup e 
hotel which happened so fast. Suppose the army con 
mand suspected that some officers of the army wei 
plotting and communicating with each other by th 
telephone, and the Army Intelligence Service wanted t 
listen in order to know what the plot was about. Sut 
pose there was also a telephone call from Honolulu t 
Manila, which they consider serious. If the authoritk 
chose to go to court to get a lawful order, then it woul 
have taken time and would have been ineffective. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Will Commissioner Rodrigo please restate his pro- 
posed amendment to Section 4. 

MR. RODRIGO. On page 2, line 4, between the 
words “court” and “when,” add the word OR, so that it 
will read: “The privacy of communication and corres- 
pondence shall be inviolable except upon lawful order 
of the court OR when public safety or order requires 
otherwise.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We will put Commissioner Ro- 
drigo’s proposed amendment to a vote. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment will 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor and 1 1 votes 
against; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Still on page 2, Section 4, paragraph 1, line 4, place 
a comma (,) after the word “court,” and on line 5, 
add the words AS PRESCRIBED BY LAW after “other- 
wise.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 


FR. BERNAS. I accept the amendment. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rodrigo insist 
on a vote? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee accepts. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo be recognized. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


727 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I propose to add a new provision after Section 9, 
and should this provision be approved, the Committee 
has to renumber it as Section 10 in the original report. 
The proposed provision reads: SECTION 10. FO- 
REIGNERS PERSECUTED BECAUSE OF THEIR 
STRUGGLE IN DEFENSE OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN 
THE LIBERATION OF THEIR COUNTRY SHALL 
BE GIVEN ASYLUM IN THE PHILIPPINES AND 
THEIR EXTRADITION SHALL NOT BE ALLOWED. 

Before the Committee decides whether or not to 
accept, may I explain this proposal? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has five 
minutes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

I would like to read before this honorable Commis- 
sion similar provisions in other constitutions. 

In the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Ger- 
many, Article XVI, subsection (2) states: 

No German may be extradited to a foreign country. 
The politically persecuted shall enjoy the right of asylum. 

In the Constitution of Italy, Article X provides: 

The foreigner who is denied in his own country tire 
effective exercise of democratic freedom provided for by 
the Italian Constitution has a right to asylum in the terri- 
tory of the Republic in accordance with the provisions of 
law. Extradition of foreigners for political offenses shall not 
be granted. 

In the Constitution of Mexico, Article XV provides: 

No treaty shall be authorized for the extradition of 
political offenders or of offenders of the common order 
who have been slaves in the country where the offense was 
committed, nor shall any agreement or treaty be entered 
into which restricts or modifies the guarantees and rights 
which this Constitution grants to the individual and to the 
citizen. 

Madam President, the purpose of this new provision 
proposed to be Section 10 is to show our solidarity with 
freedom fighters who were persecuted in their countries 
and denied the basic freedoms guaranteed by our Bill of 
Rights. 

Senator Lorenzo Tanada, true lover of liberty and 
staunch defender of human rights, sent us a letter urging 
the Members of this Constitutional Commission to 
embody this provision in our Bill of Rights. By approv- 
ing this provision, we manifest our firm belief that the 
freedoms guaranteed by our Bill of Rights are universal 
in nature and that we condemn violations of human 
rights everywhere in the world. Commissioners Fran- 
cisco “Soc” Rodrigo, Napoleon Rama, Jose Calderon 


and I were political victims of the repressive regime of 
Mr. Marcos. We have actually experienced how bitter it 
is to be denied the freedoms we used to enjoy. Our 
hearts now beat for freedom fighters everywhere in the 
world, and so I say to my dear colleagues in the Com- 
mission “Let your hearts beat for them also.” 

Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Honorable Nolledo mentioned the provisions existing 
in the German Constitution regarding the right of 
asylum. 

May I call his attention to Article 13, paragraph (2) 
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which 
reads: “Everyone has the right to leave any country, 
including his own, and to return to his country.” 

Did the Commissioner take this into account in sub- 
mitting his proposal to enjoy the right of asylum? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, but I have a working know- 
ledge of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
where our country is a party. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Let me call the Commissioner’s attention more 
particularly to paragraph 1 of Article 14 of the same 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which reads: 
“Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy m other 
countries asylum from persecution. 

Does this harmonize with what the Commissioner 
has in mind? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. But there is this qualification - 
because we want to be reasonable in the exercise of 
the right of asylum - as reflected in paragraph 2 ot 
Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights which reads: 

This right may not be invoked in tlie case of prosecu- 
tions genuinely arising from nonpolitical crimes or from 

acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United 

Nations. 

Would the Commissioner accept, at the proper time, 
an amendment to his amendment in order to exclude 
this crime regarding prosecutions genuinely arising rom 
nonpolitical crimes, such as murder? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the Commissioner, being 
a lawyer, is aware that even without any treaty, it is 
a basic principle in public international law that t le 


728 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


right of asylum refers only to political offenses. He will 
notice that in my proposal I used the words: PER- 

SECUTED BECAUSE OF THEIR STRUGGLE IN DE- 
FENSE OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE LIBERATION 
OF THEIR COUNTRY, which sufficiently refer to 
political offenses. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

With that clarification, I would not press an amend- 
ment to the Commissioner’s amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

Will the distinguished Commissioner yield to a 
question or two on the point of asylum? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Very gladly. 

MR. OPLE. Being a person of such distinguished 
erudition, would the Commissioner recall the events 
sonietime m the early 1960’s during the administration 
of President Macapagal, when the leader of the Brunei 
revolt, Azahari, was accorded the hospitality of the 
Philippines? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


leaders of the Islamic faith — and. of course, 95 percent 
of about 200 million Indonesians belong to the faith — 
should refrain from causing any excitement about 
the Mindanao question as an act of superb cooperation 
with the Philippine Government. I was just beginning 
to imagine the implications on our bilateral relations 
with Indonesia if, let us say, the survivors of the Partai 
Komunis, Indonesia, the new heir to Mr. Aidit who is 
the old leader of the PKI, applied for asylum in the 
Philippines under this proposed amendment. Would 
they be eligible for our hospitality even to the point 
that we might invite reprisals from such a highly co- 
operative, friendly government in Jakarta? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As long as those who are seeking 
asylum are freedom fighters, I think, our President 
should not hesitate to apply even the provisions of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Even without 
this, the President may be bound by those provisions 
in giving protection to freedom fighters to show to all 
and sundry, to the entire world, that we also value our 
own freedoms which are violated in foreign countries. 

MR. OPLE. I am not opposed to the resolution of 
Commissioner Nolledo, but it is the responsibility of 
the Constitutional Commission to look into the possi- 
bility of serious consequences arising from our actions 
here. Would the Commissioner, right now or later, 
consider some flexibility for the Philippine govern- 
ment in the implementation of this policy, whether 
pertaining to the legislature or to the office of the 
President which executes foreign policies? 


MR. OPLE. He might also recall that there was 
failed revolution in Brunei against the Sultanate ai 
this took place against the broader backdrop of tl 
tensions between Indonesia and the Philippines on oi 
hand, and Malaysia, on the other, and that Azahe 
became the focus of international attention while sta 
ing here, causing very deep resentment both in Brur 
and in Malaysia but equally causing jubilation in Ind 
nesia. Would this amendment presented by the d 
tinguished Commissioner legitimize in the future tl 
extension of Philippine hospitality to leaders of fail( 
revolutions whose asylum in the Philippines would : 
capable of arousing indignation and, perhaps, reprisi 
in friendly countries in the region? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I think the possibility of reprisals 
should be considered incidental and unimportant in 
relation to the constitutional mandate upon the Pres- 
ident of the country to grant the right of asylum to such 
kind of foreigners assuming and admitting that they 
are guilty of struggle in defense of human rights in the 
liberation of their country. 


MR. OPLE. The Commissioner is also undoubtedly 
aware that in Indonesia there is an unwritten policy 
of the government of President Suharto that religious 


MR. NOLLEDO. I will consider. The Commissioner, 
for example, may place there, “under the conditions 
laid down by law.” He can present an amendment, but 
I have to consult my coauthor. Commissioner Edmundo 
Garcia, as a matter of courtesy, if he is amenable to it. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, those are the 
points I wanted to raise. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Just a short observation. I agree with the proposal, 
but I wonder if the Bill of Rights is the proper place for 
it. 

The Bill of Rights refers to prevention of abuses of 
the government against people’s rights. The statements 
are usually in the negative. I do not know, if this pro- 
posal is not better placed in the Declaration of Prin- 
ciples. 

MR. NOLLEDO. A similar provision appears in the 
Bill of Rights of other constitutions of the world. The 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


729 


Commissioner will notice that I placed this as Section 
1 0 after the provisions on freedoms of our citizens. The 
purpose here is to show that while we value our free- 
doms here, we also value the freedoms of other free- 
dom-loving countries. 

MR. RODRIGO. What country, for example, has it 
in the Bill of Rights? It is possible that this is in the 
Constitution of other countries but not in the Bill of 
Rights but in the Declaration of Principles. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Federal Republic of Germany, 
Italy and Mexico. 

MR. RODRIGO. My concept of the Bill of Rights 
is to protect the rights of those who reside in the 
Philippines but not of the few who might land on our 
shores and seek asylum. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, I would qualify my 
answer because while I generally agree with the appli- 
cation of the principle of reciprocity, naturally it will 
be nullified by the President of the foreign country 
to which the foreigner belongs, if he is a dictator. So, 
if we adopt the principle of reciprocity in this case, 
then we also nullify this provision. 

MR. AZCUNA. And, lastly, this would, in effect, 
also constitutionalize the rule of international law that 
we should not carry back refugees to the borders or 
return them to their shores where such refugees are 
in danger of their lives - the principle of nonrefoule- 
ment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner’s interpellations 
strengthened my proposal. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, just a brief ob- 
servation, if I may. 


MR. AZCUNA. Will the distinguished Commissioner THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo m y 
yield to a few questions? proceed. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Very gladly. 

Mr. AZCUNA. The honorable Commissioner is, 
therefore, proposing the right of asylum to be given 
to all who would like to seek shelter in the Philippines 
from political persecution in their country. Is that 
correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 

Mr. AZCUNA. Would this asylum consist in giving 
temporary shelter like the one in the Commissioner’s 
home province of Palawan, or would it include the 
right of becoming part of our society including the right 
to education and to work? 

Mr. NOLLEDO. No. It contemplates temporary 
shelter. 

MR. AZCUNA. And once we provide temporary 
shelter until such time as other states may receive 
them permanently, we will have satisfied the right of 
asylum as contemplated in this provision? 

Mr. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. I see. Is there no limitation on 
reciprocity in this provision? Would it be accorded 
to all regardless of whether or not the countries from 
where they come would accord it to Filipinos under 
similar circumstances? 


MR. ROMULO. Firstly, whether someone is a free- 
dom fighter or not in his own country is never a blac ' 
and-white question. Secondly, I 

suggestion that someone seeking asylum will override 
the national interest. 


Thank you. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

Would the proponent please yield to a few questions? 

I take no issue with the merits of the right of asylum, 
but I would have difficulty in accepting the proponent s 
proposal of placing it in the Bill of Rights. Woul e 
be agreeable to considering it in some other pertinent 
provisions of the Constitution and that the deliberations 
on the merits of his proposal might as well be under- 
taken thereat? 

MR NOLLEDO. As far as I am concerned, this 
should really appear in the Bill of Rights but Commis- 
sioner Garcia has something to say. 

MR. GARCIA. I believe that this proposal could 
very well be placed in the Declaration of Principles, it 
it is an important and universally accepted princip e 
of international law. 


730 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, we will defer action 
on this, and I will present it to the Committee on 
Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles. Madam President, if there is no anterior 
amendment, I would like to present another amend- 
ment. 


bodied in that historic document. The moral force of the 
Declaration is considerably enhanced by the fact that it 
was adopted unanimously, without a dissenting vote. It 
should, therefore, be regarded as an authoritative inter- 
pretation of the Charter and to the extent that the Decla- 
ration makes the intent and meaning of the Charter’s 
human rights provisions more precise, it strengthens the 
obligations assumed by member States. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify. Do I understand 
that Commissioner Nolledo’s proposed amendment is 
being withdrawn for the time being? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President, because my 
coauthor states that this should appear in the Decla- 
ration of Principles and I yield to him. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the same is withdrawn for 
the time being. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is rec- 
ognized. 


M ^^^^BONG. I understand from Commissionei 
Nolledo that he is withdrawing that amendment in the 
meantime for possible transfer to the Declaration ol 
rinciples but I consider it timely at this point in time, 
considering that he was mentioning the Universal 
Decoration of Human Rights, to clarify this point, 
It the Co^mmissioner is willing to yield to a few ques- 
tions, I think we should enrich our record as far as thi' 
matter is concerned. 


I will continue with one paragraph which is my 
primary concern, and it reads: 

In 1951, it was decided to have two Covenants instead 
of one — a Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and 
a Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
but on the understanding that the two Covenants would 
be simultaneously submitted for approval. The General 
Assembly started consideration of the two Covenants in 
1955 and adopted both of them as well as an Optional 
Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
in 1966. The Philippines ratified the Covenant on Econo- 
mic, Social and Cultural Rights in 1974, but it has so far 
not ratified the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The 
obvious explanation is that while the martial law regime 
would have no difficulty in complying with the obligations 
of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
it would not be able to accept the obligations of the Cove- 
nant on Civil and Political Rights, the effectivity of which 
it would not have the power to suspend even as it has sus- 
pended that of the Bill of Rights of the Philippine Consti- 
tution. It is presumed that the Philippines will ratify the 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as soon as martial 
rule comes to an end. 

My first question: To the Commissioner’s knowledge, 
up to the present time, has the Philippines not ratified 
this Covenant on Civil and Political Rights? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I am not aware. 


MR. MAAMBONG. To clarify this Universal Decla- 
ration of Human Rights which I myself am not very 
clear about, let me read to the body page 124 of a book 
of the UP Law Center entitled: The New Constitution 
and Human Rights, afterwards I want to find out from 
the Commissioner, if this is still true in the present 
setting: 

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not a 
treaty but a resolution approved by the General Assembly 
on December 10, 1948. As such, it imposes no legal obliga- 
tions on member States; it merely serves as a “common 
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations” 
in promoting respect for, and observance of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms. The Philippines, as one of the 
5 1 founding members of the United Nations that helped 
to draft the Charter in San Francisco, as a member of the 
Commission on Human Rights that drafted the Universal 
Declaration itself, and as one of the 48 members of the 
General Assembly that voted to adopt the Declaration, 
has a special moral obligation to observe the precepts em- 


MR. SARMIENTO. It has been ratified. 

MR. GUINGONA. Point of order. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Nolledo has already been withdrawn 
and has been scheduled to be discussed at some other 
future time. Therefore, there is no need for the body 
to proceed in discussing this matter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I ask for the ruling of the 
Chair? With due respect to the distinguished Commis- 
sioner, I think the discussions on this matter can be 
resumed when we take up the Article on the Decla- 
ration of Principles. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is understood. Commis- 
sioner Guingona. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


731 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes, thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Nolledo is 
recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Unless there is an anterior amend- 
ment, I would like to present another amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chairman of the sponsoring 
Committee is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, there is a special 
request that we move to Section 21 which is of special 
interest to Commissioner Sarmiento. Because of the 
death of his father, he will have to leave the hall in a 
short while. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo will please 
give way. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento may 
now proceed. 

FR. BERNAS. In case there is any amendment pro- 
posed to Sections 21 and 22, we would request that 
they be considered while Commissioner Sarmiento 
is still here. He will leave the hall for the funeral of 
his father. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I have amend- 
ments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recog- 
nized. 

MS. NIEVA. Commissioner Tingson has already 
registered his amendment to Section 21. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, on Section 21, 
lines 12 to 14, on page 4, 1 propose to delete the second 
sentence which reads: “If the person cannot afford the 
services of counsel, he must be provided with one who 
is competent and independent. 

I would like to have that deleted because Section 24 
already states: “Free access to the courts and quasi- 
judicial bodies and adequate legal assistance shall not 
be denied to any person by reason of poverty.” 


We should eliminate that sentence in order for our 
Constitution to be less wordy. Madam President, the 
description here of “counsel” — one who is competent 
and independent — does not seem appropriate in a 
Constitution. We need not describe what a counsel is. 
Besides, the first sentence in Section 21 is very clear 
already: “It shall be the duty of every official investi- 
gating the commission of an offense to inform the 
person under investigation of his rights to remain silent 
and to have counsel. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, this provision is 
inserted here largely through the persuasive arguments 
of those who have been engaged in human rights cases 
for the strengthening of the position of those who are 
victims of human rights violations. So, it strengthens 
the provision and, for that reason, the Committee does 
not accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee does not accept 
the amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just make a brief addition 
to the explanation made by Commissioner Beinas. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. This provision is based on our 
experience in handling human rights cases. I could 
mention one example — the case of Carl Gaspar. Of 
course, there are other cases. Carl Gaspar was given 
a counsel, who was their own, by the military. He was 
asking for one particular lawyer, but the military 
refused to provide him the assistance of that lawyer. 
Instead, the military gave Carl Gaspar while in deten- 
tion a lawyer who was their own; who was not in- 
dependent, who was not competent, who simply fol- 
lowed the wishes of the military. 

So, based on that experience and other experiences 
encountered during the past regime, we have asked the 
Committee for the inclusion of this provision. 

MR. TINGSON. Is that not an exception to the gen- 
eral rule, and must we always mention in the Constitu- 
tion a detailed explanation like that? I am referring to 
the phrase “one who is competent and independent.” It 
seems to me that it does not need to be spelled out 
in the Constitution. 

The fact that he is given counsel means it is under- 
stood that that counsel is competent and independent, 
otherwise the other provisions of a similar nature would 
also insist on stating what should be in describing 
whatever is given to a particular right. 

MR. SARMIENTO. If we will not place the words 
“competent and independent” and simply state “If 
the person cannot afford the services of a counsel, he 


732 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


must be provided with one,” then this will be subject 
to abuse. The military or other law-enforcement officers 
may simply say: “We are not mandated to provide you 
with competent and independent counsel, just provide 
you with one as the Constitution states.” 

It is to prevent that abuse that we are stating clearly 
and in specific terms the words “competent and in- 
dependent.” 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, may I propose 
a compromise for this impasse. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


“. . . to have EFFECTIVE counsel OF HIS OWN 
CHOICE.” 

This would effectively approximate the essence of 
the sentence on lines 1 2 to 14. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a 
few minutes to afford opportunity to the Commissioner 
to confer. 

It was 11:15 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


MR. REGALADO. The Honorable Tingson objects 
to the description of an independent and competent 
counsel. I personally find that also a little inadequate, 
even if it is there because the counsel may be com- 
petent, he may be independent, but he may not per- 
form his duties. 


At 1 1:20 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MS. NIEVA. Commissioner Tingson is now ready 
for his amended amendment. 


As early as the case of US vs. Gimeno, which is ii 

Volume I of the Philippine Reports, and a plethora o 

decisions thereafter, the Supreme Court stated that thi 

right to counsel means the right to an effective counsel 

The word effective” there embraces independence 

r’ one who will work for the right 

ot nis clients. ^ 

Committee would agree 

finds Commissioner Tingsoi 

oertos aflr 1 r “ constitution, tha 

perhaps after the fust sentence on line 12 we can jus 

tte wav the s effective counsel.” That i 

mean"S o? the described th. 

meaning of the right to counsel. That already include 

independence of mind and integrity He may haw 

integrity and independence, and yet if he does no 

move, he IS not an effective counsel ° 


Pre“denr"°'°''' ' observation. Madam 

If that is an amendment to my amendment, then 
I accept it. 


MR. REGALADO. “. . . and to have EFFECTIVE 
counsel” and then we delete that second sentence which 
we find out of place in a constitution. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. May I propose an amendment to the 
amendment being introduced by Commissioner Rega- 
lado. On line 1 2, I propose the addition of the phrase 
OF HIS OWN CHOICE so that the line would read: 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. The three Commissioners, including 
this Representation, have agreed that Section 21, line 9, 
would read: “It shall be the duty of every official in- 
vestigating the commission of an offense to inform 
the person under investigation of his rights to remain 
silent and to have counsel PREFERABLY OF HIS 
CHOICE. These rights cannot be waived except in 
writing and in the presence of counsel.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I be allowed to make my 
comments? I conferred with some of our fellow Com- 
missioners, after the Gentleman conferred with me. I 
would like to express my reservations on that proposal. 

One who is in detention is subjected to mental 
torture, harassment and anything. Under that situation, 
that detainee cannot think clearly and independently. 
We have many cases of detainees who, because of pro- 
longed tension, could not think clearly and independent- 
ly. If we state “PREFERABLY OF HIS OWN CHOICE,” 
the detainee could not make an independent choice 
because of the prison conditions under an atmosphere 
of coercion and harassment. So, with due respect to the 
Gentleman’s suggestion, I will still maintain the words 
‘competent and independent.” These words were ex- 
tracted from bitter and painful experiences, using the 
words of Commissioner Nolledo. I still appeal to the 
Commissioners to maintain the words “competent 
and independent.” 

Another thing, it is possible that the detainee might 
request for a very good counsel, a member of a presti- 
gious law firm. But if the detainee is in Davao or in a 


FRIDAY, JULY 18. 1986 


733 


very remote area of Baler, Aurora, I think the counsel 
would refuse. So, I still would request for the retention 
of the words “competent and independent.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I would like to offer my objection 
to the general statement of Commissioner Sarmiento — 
that a detained person is under harassment, under very 
bad treatment, and that he cannot think. This is an 
accusation to all police agencies and to all people con- 
ducting the investigations. I do not believe that in the 
questioning of suspects our police agencies nor the 
armed forces have such suspects under extreme harass- 
ment or torture. I regret to oppose the Gentleman’s 
statement on the matter because it is a general accusa- 
tion to our police agencies who are, in fact, offering 
their lives in the performance of their duties. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I be allowed to make a brief 
rejoinder? I think my best evidence would be Commis- 
sioner Nolledo who was a victim of repression during 
the Marcos regime. Commissioner Nolledo would be 
willing to reply to that briefly. 

MR. DE CASTRO. There may be instances of this 
harassment under the past regime. But the general 
accusation on our law enforcement agencies would be 
very unfair because our law enforcement agencies even 
offer their lives everyday in the performance of their 
duties. It is not correct to accuse them in a general 
manner that they harass and torture and give all the 
punishments that can be given to persons who are 
detained. My stand here is to protect the integrity of 
police agencies, not only in exceptional cases, during 
the past regime. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I just say 
one word and then I will be through. 

This is no big deal to me because I am in f^vor of 
the phrase “competent and independent counsel. ’ I just 
do not like the idea of insinuating that there are in- 
competent and nonindependent lawyers because all 
lawyers are supposed to take the lawyer’s oath just like 
doctors. Therefore, they are supposed to be competent 
and independent. Besides, in answer to Commissioner 
Sarmiento, when a prisoner is not capable of selecting 
his own counsel, he always has his family, his relatives 
and friends who will help him select a counsel prefer- 
ably of his and their choice. 

I will now ask for a vote. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. May I be clarified on the status of 
the amendment being proposed by Commissioner Ting- 
son. Is he withdrawing his amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. No, he is not. I have not heard 
him withdraw. He is explaining his amendment. Is 
Commissioner Tingson withdrawing? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I just do not 
want to be misunderstood. I want competence and I 
want independence, but if the Commissioner would 
improve my amendment, I will go along for a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Aquino? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I request a 
suspension of the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:27 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:31 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MS. NIEVA. Commissioner Tingson seeks recog- 
nition, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, we are sorry for 
taking a little more time than it should really take, 
but we have decided on the following, which has re- 
ceived the sympathy of the Committee; “It shall be the 
duty of every official investigating the commission of 
an offense to inform the person under investigation of 
his rights to remain silent and to have COMPETENT 
AND INDEPENDENT counsel PREFERABLY OF 
HIS OWN CHOICE. These rights cannot be waived 
except in writing and in the presence of counsel.” The 
rest of the sentence on lines 13 and 14 are deleted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this acceptable to the Com- 
mittee? 

FR. BERNAS. No, we would not accept the deletion 
of the phrase “If the person cannot afford the services 
of counsel, he must be provided with one.” 

THE PRESIDENT. A period after that? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President, provided the 
other insertions are put as suggested. 


734 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. TINGSON. Then, will the Gentleman accept 
our putting the word FREE before “counsel,” so 
that the line will read: “FREE, COMPETENT AND 
INDEPENDENT counsel PREFERABLY OF HIS 
OWN CHOICE”? 

FR. BERNAS. What we would like to emphasize 
here is the obligation on the part of the state to provide 
him with one. It is true that it is a free counsel, but 
we would like to emphasize the phrase “he must be 
provided with one.” The state has the duty to provide 
a person with one. 

MR. TINGSON. I would like to add that under the 
Rules of Court, in criminal procedure, this is one of the 
duties of the court — to provide him with one. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. As to the next sentence, we are willing 
to amend this to read: “If a person cannot afford the 
services of counsel, he must be provided with one.” 
We oppose the deletion of this provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the words “who is 
competent and independent” will be necessarily deleted. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, because they are already in the 
previous sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
second part of the amendment? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Is there any other amendment on Section 21? 

MS. NIEVA. Commissioner Trenas is seeking recog- 
nition. 


MS. AQUINO. I would address the reluctance ol 
Father Bernas and Commissioner Sarmiento by sayinc 
that m the amended version, as proposed by Com 
missioner Tingson, it does not distinguish between £ 
I It is considerec 

counsel. But with this new amendment, it does nol 
between de parte and de officio counsel, 
though It even ensures that he shall be entitled to a 

“PRFFFr amendment of incorporating 

tha^ CHOICE” J^^asserh 

that the freedom to choose and the freedom to refuse 

mlsHp detainee. If the intention is to give 

riehtfullv hpln ^ t state, maybe the amendment 

rightfully belongs to Section 24. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I think 
adequately discussed this. May I suggest that 
on this now and do it one by one? 


we have 
we vote 


As far as the Committee is concerned, we are accept- 
ing the modification on line 12, to read: “to remain 
silent and to have COMPETENT AND INDEPENDENT 
counsel PREFERABLY OF HIS OWN CHOICE.” But 
we oppose the deletion of the next sentence: “If the 
person cannot afford the services of counsel, he must 
be provided with one.” We oppose the total deletion of 
this sentence. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, members of the 
Committee, may I propose an amendment on the same 
Section 21, lines 19 to 21, for the purpose of clarifi- 
cation? I quote this particular paragraph: “Any con- 
fession or admission obtained in violation of this or the 
preceding section shall be inadmissible for any purpose 
in any proceeding.” I then propose to add the phrase 
AGAINST THE PARTY WHOSE RIGHTS WERE 
VIOLATED. 

The purpose of the amendment is just to clarify 
because reading this particular paragraph does not seem 
to allow any exception. So, the purpose here is that the 
confession secured in violation of this section can still 
be admissible against the person who violated the right. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, will the Gentleman please 
state his amendment again? 

MR. TRENAS. It will read: AGAINST THE PARTY 
WHOSE RIGHTS WERE VIOLATED. Therefore, the 
confession is inadmissible insofar as the proceedings 
against the party whose rights were violated are con- 
cerned, but admissible against the person who violated 
the right. That is only the purpose there. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, to make it clear, the first 
portion of the amendment has been accepted by the 
Committee. 


Mr. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted by the Committee. 


MR. SUAREZ. Will the Gentleman yield to one or 
two questions? 

MR. TRENAS. Certainly. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


735 


MR. SUAREZ. Let us say Juan de la Cruz, in his 
admission or confession, implicates 10 persons. Under 
the Gentleman’s proposal, that confession or admission 
may not be admissible against the confessant or the 
one making the admission but can be utilized as evi- 
dence against those other 1 0 persons implicated in that 
confession. Is that the thrust of his proposal? 

MR. TREf^AS. Certainly, it cannot be utilized against 
the 10 persons implicated because that is against the 
rule of evidence of res inter alios acta. Unless the 
qualifications or requisites for admissibility against 
other persons are proved, the confession cannot be 
admissible. We have a general principle in evidence that 
confession or admission is admissible only against the 
party who made the confession or admission and not 
against third persons. 

MR. SUAREZ. We do respect the proposed addition, 
but that is what we are precisely trying to avoid. 

MR. TRERAS. But you must prove their conspiracy, 
that he was part of the scheme. 

MR. SUAREZ. But that could be a fabricated con- 
fession in order to implicate the alleged coconspirators. 

MR. TRE5IAS. Precisely, the purpose of my proposed 
amendment is to limit it because the rule says it is not 
admissible in any proceeding. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does not the Gentleman believe that, 
as stated, it is adequate, sufficient and will not un- 
necessarily complicate the situation? 

MR. TRE55AS. Precisely, my purpose is to make it 
not admissible against the party whose right was vio- 
lated, but could be admissible against the person who 
violated his right. 

MR. SUAREZ. As I said, the consequences are rather 
horrible from the point of view of those who would be 
implicated unnecessarily. 

MR. TRE5IAS. Precisely, insofar as those persons are 
concerned, we have the rules on evidence protecting 
them. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Gentleman not consider 
withdrawing his proposal so as not to complicate the 
situation? I find this particular provision already 
adequate. Madam President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from the Committee 
first. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, in the light of the 
objections that have been raised, the Committee would 
leave this issue to the body for discussion. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Could we just say, “shall be inad- 
missible IN EVIDENCE AGAINST HIM” and eliminate 
“for any purpose in any proceeding”? 

Under the Rules on Evidence, Rule 130, Section 22, 
any act, declaration or omission of a party as to irrele- 
vant facts may be taken in evidence against him. Under 
the same rule. Section 25 on admission of a third party, 
that is not admissible against others unless it would fall 
under the exceptions on conspiracy, privity and holding 
title of a predecessor. 

In other words, one who makes an admission or a 
confession is only admissible against him. If he impli- 
cates others, that is not admissible to the others because 
as correctly stated by Commissioner Trenas, that would 
violate the rule of res inter alios acta except for a few 
exceptions. 

So, to make it simple and to follow the language of 
the Rules of Court, we just say, “Any confession or 
admission obtained in violation of this section” — I do 
not know why “the preceding section” is mentioned; 
that is against self-incrimination — “shall be inad- 
missible IN EVIDENCE AGAINST HIM.” We are refer- 
ring to the person whose confession has been extracted 
by force, violence, threat, intimidation. I was going to 
ask why they eliminated what already appears, “or in 
any other means which vitiate the free will.” But that 
is another matter. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, in the light of the 
explanation given by Commissioner Trenas regarding the 
admissibility of evidence with respect to other parties 
that will be governed by existing rules on evidence, then 
the amendment seems unnecessary. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the suggestion of 
Commissioner Padilla? 

FR. BERNAS. I think it is also unnecessary in the 
light of the explanation already given — that if we are 
seeking to protect the person who made the confession 
or who made the admission and whose rights were vio- 
lated, by this provision, as far as the usefulness of the 
evidence is concerned with respect to others, it is already 
governed by the Rules on Evidence. At least that is the 
way I see Commissioner Treflas’ explanation, in which 
case, this addition is really not necessary. 

MR. PADILLA. It is preferably clearer and necessary 
to clarify that it is only inadmissible against the person 
whose confession was extracted by force. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Treflas insist 
on his proposed amendment or shall we submit it to 
a vote? 


736 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Would Commissioner Trenas con- 
sider an amendment to his amendment to clarify this, 
and to read as follows: “Any confession or admission 
obtained in violation of this or the preceding section 
shall be inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding 
EXCEPT TO PUNISH ANY VIOLATION OF THIS 
SECTION AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Trenas 
say? 


FR. BERNAS. I think I understand what is meant, 
but the language — “IMPOSED BY LAW” — seems to 
me a bill of attainder. May I amend it to read: “SHALL 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. DAVIDE. I agree, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. “PENAL AND CIVIL SANCTIONS 
FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW.” I think the amendment is 
acceptable. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


MR. TRE5JAS. I feel it may still complicate the 
section. However, I accept the amendment proposed by 
Commissioner Padilla in the sense that it is simpler, and 
it may give the proper meaning to the Article. I still 
request a vote, if it is not accepted by the Committee 

At any rate, the purpose here is only to clarify this 
section. ^ 

avotl' President, we submit it to 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. We would like to seek clarification 
of the definition of “CIVIL SANCTIONS.” What exactly 
does the Gentleman have in mind? 

MR. DAVIDE. This would include the imposition 
of damages — moral, exemplary and others — as well as 
administrative penalties on the violator. 


because ^ amendi 

ameS,e«. Commissioner, are asking for 


MR. SUAREZ. That is independent of the compen- 
sation for a rehabilitation of victims provided under 
the succeeding paragraph. 


THE president. The Gentleman may procee 

tained’in™iat1f’ confession or admission o 

be inadmissible AGAINST HIm!” section shi 


MR. DAVIDE. That would be entirely different. 
Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


vUlING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of t 
proposed amendment of Commissioner freSaf a, 
Commissioner Padilla, please raise their hand T&n-e 
Members raised their hand.) 

please raise their har 
( Few Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 20 votes in favor and 17 again 
the amendment is approved. ® 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Padilla is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. PADILLA. My personal reaction is that this 
sentence should not appear in the Bill of Rights. It may 
be provided in some other provision, say, on Social 
Justice or Human Resources, but not in the Bill of 
Rights. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that all? Are we ready to 
vote? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This will affect lines 22 and 23, 
Section 21. This is an amendment by substitution! 
The substitute amendment will read as follows: PENAL 
AND CIVIL SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS OF 
THE SECTION SHALL BE IMPOSED BY LAW. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just one word. 
Since this matter is intimately related with the rest 
of Section 21, although, strictly speaking, it does not 
belong to the Bill of Rights, it is better placed here in 
order to establish the connection between the two. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us submit it then to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


737 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, what are we voting 
on? Are we voting on the Davide amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Davide amendment which 
has been accepted by the Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. What are we voting on then, on the 
deletion? 

THE PRESIDENT. On the amendment by substitu- 
tion. Will Commissioner Davide please repeat his amend- 
ment. 

MR. DAVIDE. In lieu of the wordings found on 
lines 22 and 23 which read; “The Legislature shall 
enact a law punishing any violation of this section,” 
the following is sought to replace the same: “PENAL 
AND CIVIL SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS OF 
THIS SECTION SHALL BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular proposed amendment, please raise their hand, 
f Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. [Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 26 votes in favor and 3 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MS. NIEVA. Commissioner de los Reyes has made a 
reservation to speak. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, on lines 17 
and 1 8, I propose that after the word “Secret,” we put 
a comma (,) then insert the word SOLITARY; delete 
the words “detention places and” and then insert the 
word OR before the word “incommunicado.” After 
“incommunicado,” insert AND OTHER SIMILAR 
forms of so that the sentence will read: “Secret, 
SOLITARY OR incommunicado AND OTHER SIML 
LAR forms of detentions are prohibited.” That is 
my first amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SARMIENTO. We will have a redundance, if 
we use “Secret, SOLITARY OR incommunicado. . .”; 
“incommunicado” already refers to secret and solitary 
detentions. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But that is in the original 
proposal: “Secret detention places and incommuni- 
cado ...” and that is more redundant. Detentions al- 
ready embrace places. Precisely I am trying to avoid the 
redundancy of the word “detentions.” 


FR. BERNAS. I think the amendment eliminates 
“Secret detention places.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It is already embraced within 
the word “detentions.” 

FR. BERNAS. No, the detention place might be 
known but the detention itself could be secret, like 
safehouses, for instance. We do not know where they 
are but one could also be secretly detained in a munic- 
ipal jail and nobody will know he is there. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That already covers secret 
safehouses because they are secret. But why specify 
detention? 

FR. BERNAS. But the Gentleman eliminated the 
word “places.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The word “places” is already 
embraced in the word “detention.” Detention is a place. 
We cannot detain anybody except in a place. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, and the place could either be 
known or secret. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Correct. So, a secret detention 
— secret, solitary or incommunicado or other similar 
forms of detentions — is prohibited. That already 
includes safehouses because we have to word the Consti- 
tution in a manner that partakes of the nature of a 
constitution and not of an ordinary legislation. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, to word it to the extent that it 
eliminates “secret detention places,” which has a de- 
finite meaning. It is the place itself that is secret, not 
just the fact of detention. We oppose the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the distinguished proponent 
accept an amendment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Let us hear the amendment to 
the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment will now 
read as follows: “Secret detention places, SOLITARY, 
incommunicado, OR OTHER SIMILAR FORMS OF 
detentions are prohibited.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. In view of the tenacity of the 
Gentleman’s opposition for the elimination of the word 
“detention places,” I accept the amendment. 


738 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. The amendment of Commissioner 
Davide, as far as we are concerned, is acceptable because 
precisely it preserves “detention places.” 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, for the record, I will repeat the 
proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 

MR. DAVIDE. “Secret detention places, SOLITARY, 
incommunicado, OR OTHER SIMILAR FORMS OF 
detentions are prohibited.” 

THE PRESIDENT. This has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

DAVIDE. I think it should be “detention” 
again; “Secret detention places, 
5.11’ incommunicado, OR OTHER SIMILAR 
FORMS OF detention are prohibited.” 

one clarifi- 

rec™ Commissioner Nativ.dad is 


houses and the solitary confinements, not the solitary 
confinements necessary to save lives in case of a riot. 

MR. DAVIDE. That may be taken up when amend- 
ments are introduced to Section 22, not to 21, where 
you have a detained person who is still presumed to 
be innocent because he had not even undergone trial 
in court. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, my observation 
is regarding the use of the phrase “AND OTHER SIMI- 
LAR FORMS OF detention.” 

“Incommunicado” and “solitary” have a specific 
meaning. Why enlarge that by saying, “AND OTHER 
SIMILAR FORMS OF detention”? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, it is not “AND OTHER.” 

MR. RODRIGO. What detention is similar to incom- 
municado? What detention is similar to solitary? It is 
either incommunicado or not incommunicado. It is 
either solitary or not solitary. But what is the meaning 
of “AND OTHER SIMILAR FORMS OF detention”? 
Will the Gentleman give an example? 


ficfnce ~„n„eme„. has a sig, 

rights In nrisn the violation of hum. 

dangers the"^^^^^^^ or e 

Gangers the staff, he is put m solitary confinement. 

confiLm"nt‘'mav* 8/7™' 

other 

junsprudence being followed there. But they do m 

remove solitary confinement. What is prohfbhed I ? 

maltreatment during solitary conf.nement Td extern 

solitary confinement. But suppose there is a riot ta tl 

prisons, to save the lives of prisoners and staff 

amucks are separated from the rest of the inmates 
am just clarifying it. uiaicb. 

solitary confinement should 1 
prohibited because in case of riots and disorders 
prison, that word •'SOLITARY” has a significance 
penology. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I think we have to 
distinguish between Section 21 and Section 22. 

In Section 22, solitary confinement may be allowed 
in the execution of a sentence. But Section 21 pre- 
supposes a situation where there is no conviction yet. 
He is still presumed to be innocent. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am glad about that, so that in 
case somebody checks the record of these debates, we 
are certain that what we are prescribing are the safe- 


MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain? 

In the first place, we did not use the word “AND.” 
It is “OR OTHER SIMILAR FORMS.” 

The military or the police may be very imaginative 
and creative. They can think of several ways of violating 
or circumventing a particular prohibition. 

So, we are now looking toward the future, the 
possibility of another creation of a form similar to 
incommunicado or secret detention. Science is always 
in progress and they might think of other modes of 
detention later. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us use our imagination also 
like the police. What would then be similar to incom- 
municado detention? 

MR. GARCIA. May I answer that? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. GARCIA. Sensory deprivation. 

Mr. RODRIGO. How is that? 

MR. GARCIA. In Colombia I remember seeing people 
blindfolded for days until they no longer have any 
sensory perception of what is going on around. 

MR. RODRIGO. So the Gentleman agrees to the 
amendment. But in the committee report, there is no 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


739 


such phrase “AND OTHER SIMILAR FORMS OF 
detention.” I would be commending the Committee 
as a matter of fact. 

MR. GARCIA. I think it is a good amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Committee thinks it is a good 
amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, another 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us go back. This was original- 
ly the amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes, then 
amended by Commissioner Davide, which amendment 
to the amendment was accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I have no objection to the substance, 
but I object to putting it in the Bill of Rights. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment, as amended, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 38 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
reocgnized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My amendment is still on 
Section 21. With the acceptance of this amendment, 
I move that the sentence which has just been approved 
be transferred to another section because it seems to 
be out of place in this section which refers to “obtaining 
confession.” In other words, the sentence “No force, 
violence, threat or intimidation shall be used against 
him” should be followed by ANY CONFESSION OR 
ADMISSION OBTAINED IN VIOLATION OF THIS 
OR THE PRECEDING SECTION SHALL BE INAD- 
MISSIBLE AGAINST HIM because the words “Secret 
detention” which we have approved seems to disrupt 
the flow of the letter and spirit of the provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, where would the Gentleman 
place that sentence of “secret detention places,” et 
cetera? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I intend to introduce another 
section between lines 23 and 24 which will read: NO 
PERSON SHALL BE SUBJECTED TO TORTURE OR 
TO CRUEL, DEGRADING OR INHUMAN TREAT- 
MENT, then “Secret detention places, solitary, incom- 
municado or similar forms of detention are prohibited.” 

MR. RODRIGO. That is where that should be placed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, Section 22 refers to 
punishment after conviction, but this refers to the in- 
human condition before conviction while the prisoner 
is under investigation or detention, the one which I 
am introducing. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can that be just a separate para- 
graph? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Precisely, I was saying that 
between lines 23 and 24, I will introduce a new section 
which reads: NO PERSON SHALL BE SUBJECTED 
TO TORTURE OR TO CRUEL, DEGRADING OR IN- 
HUMAN TREATMENT. This will be followed by the 
one we have just approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I suggest that it should be in- 
serted after “prohibited.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. How? 

MR. DAVIDE: It will read: NOR SHALL ANY 
CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING TREATMENT 
BE INFLICTED. 

THE PRESIDENT. Would that be a substitution of 
Section 22? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, still Section 21, because the 
proposal is under Section 21. So, it should be linked 
to what was just approved. There is a prohibition in 
the manner of detention and it should be followed 
by how the accused or the detained individual must be 
treated, instead of putting it as another section. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 12:10 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 12:12 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


740 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee is accepting the fol- 
lowing modification: On line 15 towards the end, after 
the word “counsel” and the period (.), start a new 
paragraph to read: “No TORTURE, force, violence, 
threat ...” 

In other words, we add TORTURE after “No” and 
this is made a new paragraph for emphasis. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I accept the amendment to 
my amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that a paragraph? 

FR. BERNAS. That is a paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the secret detention 
places? 

FR. BERNAS. They go together. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

How about the sentence on secret detention places? 

FR. BERNAS. It remains. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, there is no other amendment 
to Section 21. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. One last minor amendment. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The approved Davide amend- 
ment reads: “Penal and civil sanctions or violation 
of this section shall be provided by law.” 

With the permission of Commissioner Davide, my 
amendment is: “Penal and civil sanctions or violation 
of this section AS WELL AS COMPENSATION FOR 
AND REHABILITATION OF VICTIMS OF TOR- 
TURES OR SIMILAR PRACTICES, AND OF THEIR 
FAMILIES, shall be provided by law.” 

FR. BERNAS. The amendment is accepted. 

MR. SUAREZ. Point of clarification, Madam Pres- 
ident. 


of the suggests 

to , 7 °"°’’^hle Bernas, I would like to amend lines 1 
to 17 by putting m what the 1973 Constitution state 

No force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any other 
m^ans which vitiates, the free will shall be used against 

My reason is that other means which vitiates the fn 
will of t^he detainee may be used outside of the enum 
ration. So, I feel that the provision in the 1973 Const 
tution is more embracing than a mere narration of fore 
violence, threat and/or intimidation. So, lines 15 to 1 
will read: “No force, violence, threat, intimidation O 
ANY OTHER MEANS WHICH VITIATES THE F RE 
WILL shall be used against him.” 


FR. BERNAS. The additional “OR ANY OTHER 
MEANS WHICH VITIATES THE FREE WILL” is 
acceptable but we would also like to add TORTURE. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. When the Committee speaks of vic- 
tims of tortures or similar practices, who would be 
the offenders or perpetrators of these? Is it limited to 
government or public officials and not to private indi- 
viduals? 

Is that the meaning of this provision? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

Mr. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. DE CASTRO. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Bernas please 
read the sentence with all the amendments. 

FR. BERNAS. “No TORTURE, force, violence, 
threat, intimidation OR ANY OTHER MEANS WHICH 
VITIATES THE FREE WILL shall be used against 
him.” 


THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I had a proposal during my inter- 
pellations on the Article on the Bill of Rights yester- 
day, which the Committee said it would be willing to 
consider; that is, lam objecting to Section 21 which 
states: “It shall be the duty of every official investi- 
gating. . .” This is the Bill of Rights. So, we should not 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


741 


stress the duty of officials but rather stress the rights of 
the persons arrested or detained under custodial investi- 
gation. 

With the permission of the Committee, I believe 
that the statement in the 1973 Constitution is pre- 
ferable and more in accordance with the Bill of Rights. 
The section as appearing in the 1973 Constitution 
states: 

Any person under investigation for the commission 

of an offense shall have the right to remain silent and to 

counsel, and to be informed of such right. 

It has the same substance, Madam President, but 
instead of stressing the duty of the investigating official, 
we stress the right of the person arrested or detained. 

MR. COLAYCO. I would like to comment on that 
because I was the one responsible for this change. We 
had that statement on the right of the accused in the 
1935 Constitution. We found from experience that this 
was ignored probably because of the ignorance of the 
persons or officials who were supposed to honor that. 
So, we felt that by making it a duty on the part of the 
investigator to inform the accused or suspect of his 
rights, we made it a more explicit, emphatic statement 
of the right of the accused. As the Gentleman said, the 
substance is there but the form of stating the right be- 
came a positive obligation. 

MR. PADILLA. When we speak of a right — and the 
provision in the 1973 Constitution is clear when it 
stated: “shall have the right” — necessarily, if the de- 
tainee or the arrested person has a right, that imposes 
a duty on the official to inform him of that right of 
the detainee to remain silent and to have counsel. Right 
and duty are correlative — when one person has a right, 
there must be a corresponding duty on another. 

What I am proposing is that as this is the Bill of 
Rights, therefore, we must stress the rights. When we 
say, “shall have the right,” that is mandatory. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is not how the peace enforce- 
ment officers understand it. May we ask that the matter 
be subjected to a vote. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Aquino is 
recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Supplementary to the point raised by 
the Vice-President, it is my apprehension that the way 
it is formulated would be susceptible of a possible 
loophole. For example, in terms of personalizing duty, 
it is susceptible to a possible defense — I am not the 
person who has the duty, so the positive obligation is 
not on me. 


I would conform more with the position of the Vice- 
President that a positive statement of a right necessarily 
carries with it the duty. I would point to the conse- 
quences of personalizing this duty. 

MR. COLAYCO. The trouble is that citizens have 
many rights which are ignored by the government. So 
we felt that there was a necessity of emphasizing more 
the duty than the right. That is why since we made it a 
duty, we imposed the corresponding sanction. 

MS. AQUINO. In that case, it would be more of an 
educational problem rather than anything else. 

MR. COLAYCO. The Committee would rather that 
this be voted upon. 

THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair be informed if the 
Vice-President was proposing an amendment or just 
making an observation? 

MR. PADILLA. No, I am making the suggestion and 
proposing an amendment to adopt the language of the 
1973 Constitution, with a httle modification, to read 
as follows: “ANY PERSON UNDER INVESTIGATION 
FOR THE commission of an offense SHALL HAVE 
THE RIGHT TO BE INFORMED of his rights to remam 
silent and to have counsel.” That would take the place 
of the first sentence of Section 2 1 , lines 9 to 1 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee, as explained by 
Commissioner Colayco, does not accept it. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall then put it to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Vice-President Padilla, please raise their hand. (Seve- 
ral Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 22 votes in favor and 14 against, 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, with the approval 
of that amendment, the rest of the section will have to 
be reworded. I suppose the Style Committee can take 
care of that later. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MS. NIEVA. I would like to call on Commissioner 
Monsod. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


742 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I am sure there is 
going to be a lot of discussions on Section 22. May I 
suggest that we suspend the session for lunch and 
continue after? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I am in favor of 
lunch also, but to facilitate the discussion of amend- 
ments on Section 22, if at all possible, may I request 
those who intend to propose amendments to let us 
know in writing what the amendments are so we can, if 
possible, consolidate them ahead of time. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I am willing to state my amendment 
and reasons therefor. 

THE PRESIDENT. When we resume our session after 
lunch. 

MR. MONSOD. That is accepted. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

I ^^^^^DENT. The session is suspended for our 

lunch break. 

It was 12:28 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:47p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. We will take up the continuation of the 
period of amendments on the Bill of Rights. 

May I now call on the sponsor, and may I ask that 
Commissioner Monsod be recognized to continue his 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The members of the Committee 
will kindly join Commissioner Bernas. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment to Section 22 on line 29, after the word “in- 
flicted,” change the period (.) to a comma (,) and add 
the following: UNLESS FOR COMPELLING REA- 
SONS INVOLVING HEINOUS CRIMES, THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY PROVIDES OTHERWISE. 

THE PRESIDENT. That would be referring to the 
death penalty? 


MR . MONSOD. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Committee ready to give 
its position on this proposed amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may we hear 
the amendment again? 

MR. MONSOD. May I repeat with a minor modi- 
fication. On line 29, after the word “inflicted,” change 
the period (.) to a comma (,) and add the following: UN- 
LESS FOR COMPELLING REASONS INVOLVING 
HEINOUS CRIMES, THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
IMPOSES THE DEATH PENALTY. If we do not 
specifically mention “death penalty,” it might refer 
to the entire enumeration. 

MR. ROMULO. I would like to briefly support the 
amendment. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Romulo is 
recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

I would like to support it by giving the example of 
California. California had abolished the death penalty 
but the people, by initiative, returned the death penalty 
just last May, and the Supreme Court of California 
somehow found a technicality to declare the initiative 
unconstitutional. So, the people of California filed a 
recall against four of the Justices of the California 
Supreme Court — that case is pending and I do not 
know its outcome. But that is just to illustrate that at 
some point the people, as a rule, should govern in this 
matter. They may wish to return the “death penalty.” 
That is why I support the Monsod amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized for a few interpellations? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I think the Honorable Monsod is still busy con- 
ferring. 

MR. MONSOD. Excuse me, I am sorry. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman may finish his con- 
ference with the Honorable Rodrigo; I am willing to 
wait. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman advisedly used the 
words “heinous crimes”, whatever is the pronuncia- 
tion. Will the Gentleman give examples of “heinous 
crimes”? For example, would the head of an organized 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


743 


syndicate in dope distribution or dope smuggling fall 
within the qualification of a heinous offender such as 
to preclude the application of the principle of abolition 
of death penalty? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. That is one 
of the possible crimes that would qualify for a heinous 
crime. Another would be organized murder. In other 
words, yesterday there were many arguments for and 
against, and they all had merit. But in the contemporary 
society, we recognize the sacredness of human life 
and — I think it was Honorable Laurel who said this 
yesterday — it is only God who gives and takes life. 
However, the voice of the people is also the voice 
of God, and we cannot presume to have the wisdom 
of the ages. Therefore, it is entirely possible in the 
future that circumstances may arise which we should 
not preclude today. We know that this is a very difficult 
question. The fact that the arguments yesterday were 
quite impassioned and meritorious merely tell us that 
this is far from a well-settled issue. At least in my 
personal opinion, we would like the death penalty 
to be abolished. However, in the future we should 
allow the National Assembly, in its wisdom and as 
representatives of the people, to still impose the death 
penalty for the common good, in specific cases. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I would like to pursue some more the Gentleman’s 
definition of “heinous crimes.” Would the brutal mur- 
der of a rape victim be considered as falling within that 
classification? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, yes, particularly, 
if it is a person in authority. He would, therefore, add 
as an aggravating circumstance to the crime the abuse 
of his position in authority. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just a few clarifi- 
catory questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Is it the purpose of the proponent 
that upon the adoption of this provision of this Consti- 
tution, existing death penalties in the statute books are 
to be abolished? 

MR. MONSOD. The death penalty would be abo- 
lished upon the ratification of the Constitution, and I 
am not proposing, for example, that the next sentence 
be deleted because a favorable law that is passed should 
benefit those that now have a death penalty on their 
head. If the National Assembly so decides to reimpose 
it in specific cases, then it is prospective. 


FR. BERNAS. So, the Gentleman says that he is not 
asking for the deletion of lines 29 to 30 on the death 
penalty? Is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. No, I am not asking for its deletion. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Natividad would like 
to speak. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad will 
please proceed. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I ask the proponent of the amendment just a 
few questions? Are we going to impose the death 
penalty for a heinous crime, if we have agreed on a 
concept of heinous crimes, is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. We are giving the National Assembly 
that power. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But the concept is, because of a 
heinous crime, the death penalty is going to be imposed. 
That is correct, is it not? 

MR. MONSOD. It will apply to a heinous crime. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, but because of a heinous 
crime, the death penalty is being imposed, but the 
death penalty is a heinous crime. To many, this is the 
perception. 

We have just banned torture and when we ban tor- 
ture, I think we should consider the fact that death or 
execution is the highest form of torture. If we disagree 
and we are outraged by torture, I think we will have 
to consider death as more outrageous than torture, 
because torture is even less than death. I am just ex- 
pressing my point of view because the ultimate torture 
is the total extinction of human personality, and that is 
the ultimate in torture. When we say we are punished 
with death because of a heinous crime, the penalty is 
another heinous crime, to my mind. 

Before, I was an advocate of the death penalty be- 
cause of my career in law enforcement. As a Congress- 
man, I wrote the Dangerous Drugs Act, and I placed in 
that law that anyone manufacturing heroin should be 
punished with the death penalty, and indeed there was 
somebody who got the death penalty. The purpose of 
that death penalty. Madam President, is to serve as a 
deterrent of drug addiction. From the time the offender 
was executed up to this day, instead of being deterred 
in the commission of drug addiction or caught in 
crimes, violators increased by the hundredfold, by the 


744 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


thousandfold to the extent that there is an entire com- 
mand in the Constabulary to deal with drug addiction. 

I would like to say that 150 years ago, today, to be 
exact, 200 offenses were punishable by death in Eng- 
land, in order to bring home the point that death 
penalty is supposed to be a deterrent. But in the books, 
when a pickpocket — because pickpockets then were 
punished by the death penalty — was being hanged, the 
audience watching the hanging were being snitched. 
That is how far the deterrents of death penalty had 
gone. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe the argu- 
ments for and against were discussed very thoroughly 
yesterday, including those of the Commissioner, and we 
do not want to revive all the arguments at this time. I 
think all of us have had time to reflect on this issue, and 
there is no conclusion that it is a heinous crime or that 
it can be the most heinous crime of all. All we are saying 
is, we would agree that, as of today, it should be abo- 
lished, precisely because, at least in my mind, there is 
a preponderance of reasons at this time to abolish it 
But what we are saying is, perhaps, we should not com- 
pletely foreclose the possibility that the conditions and 
tf e situations might change for very specific reasons. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I propose an 
amendment to the amendment. 

Rodrigo is 


. , RODRIGO. The amendment to the amendm. 

detete “Ponishmen 
aeiete tne comma (,), insert the word INFLICTED to 

followed by a period (.) and delete the rest of the , 

tion so that Section 22 will read: “Excessive fines st 

p"uLhLm^NFLiCTED.-™='’ 

May I give the reasons to my amendment to 
amendment? 


THE PRESIDENT, 
proceed. 


The Commissioner will please 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, it was rightly 
stated by the sponsor. Commissioner Bernas, that the 
issue here is whether or not we should provide this 
matter in the Constitution or leave it to the discretion 
of our legislature. Arguments pro and con have been 
given - there were arguments in favor of the death 
penalty, and arguments in favor of abolishing death 
penalty. But my stand is, we should leave this to the 
discretion of the legislature. 


The proposed amendment is halfhearted. It is awk- 
ward because we will, in effect, repeal by our Constitu- 
tion a piece of legislation and after repealing this piece 
of legislation, tell the legislature that we have repealed 


the law and that the legislature can go ahead and enact 
it again. I think this is not worthy of a constitutional 
body like ours. If we will leave the matter of the death 
penalty to the legislature, let us leave it completely to 
the discretion of the legislature, but let us not have this 
half-baked provision. We have many provisions in the 
Revised Penal Code imposing the death penalty. We will 
now revoke or repeal these pieces of legislation by 
means of the Constitution, but at the same time say that 
it is up to the legislature to impose this again. 

Madam President, as I said, all the arguments have 
already been given. I just want to say something on the 
statement of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of the 
Philippines on death penalty, which was mentioned 
here. I do not have a copy of it but I remember having 
read this some time ago. That statement was made in 
connection with the proposed bill at the Batasan. It 
was not in connection with a constitutional provision; 
it was in connection with a bill, an ordinary proposed 
statute at the Batasan. If I remember right, the sub- 
stance of that statement was this: They said that the 
Church does not have an official stand on whether it is 
against or in favor of the death penalty. As a matter of 
fact, one thing I remember is the statement that the 
two St. Thomases were not in agreement. St. Thomas 
Aquinas, I think, was in favor of the death penalty; 
St. Thomas Moore was against it. And if I also remem- 
ber right, there were some Popes who were in favor of 
the death penalty and some Popes who were against. 
But the substance of the statement was that, consider- 
ing the circumstances of the times, the Bishops be- 
lieved that a legislation abolishing the death penalty 
was timely, but not that the Bishops based their re- 
commendation on the nature, the temper of the 
times. The temper and condition of the times change. 
Madam President, and so, I think we should leave this 
matter to the legislature to enact statutes depending 
on the changing needs of the times. Let us entrust 
this completely to the legislature composed of repre- 
sentatives elected by the people. 

I do not say that we are not competent. But we have 
to admit the fact that we are not elected by the people, 
and if we are going to entrust this to the legislature, let 
us not be half-baked nor halfhearted about it. Let us 
entrust it to the legislature 1 00 percent. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I just reply 
briefly to what Commissioner Rodrigo said. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I just like to say 
something regarding the intervention of the Catholic 
Bishops’ Conference of the Philippines in the Batasang 
Pambansa in 1979, the tenor of which is this: Yes, it 
was correctly put that they proposed the abolition of 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


745 


the death penalty, considering the moral development 
that we have reached at present, the culture of our 
people and the tenor of the times'. But we are not alone 
in that. The entire American Episcopate also moved 
for the abolition of the death penalty. That is why, 1 
think the formulation of Commissioner Monsod would 
be more in accordance with such a stand. I just like to 
bring that before the body. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to ask that Commissioner 
Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe I have 
to respond to the proposal to amend the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. In fact, the Chair, first, 
would like to know from the proponent, Commissioner 
Monsod, if he accepts the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I regret I cannot 
accept the amendment to my amendment. I suggest 
that we vote first on the proposal of Commissioner 
Rodrigo which, in effect, is an amendment by deletion, 
because if his proposal is carried, my amendment be- 
comes academic. If his proposal is lost, then we can 
reconsider and go back to my amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Rega- 
lado say? 

MR. REGALADO. May I be permitted, Madam 
President, to give some further arguments in support 
of the amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo, which 
yesterday for lack of material time I was not able to 
present, plus the statistical data in support thereof. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. REGALADO. I have already given my reasons, 
but I am aware that there are a number of us here in the 
Commission who, not being lawyers, may not have ade- 
quately appreciated what I stated yesterday when I said 
that there are those who fear that capital punishment, 
if maintained is irrevocable. I say that fear is unfounded 
because there are enough safeguards. I did not elabo- 
rate on that yesterday but I will do so now just for clari- 
fication. 

There are enough procedural safeguards in our law 
against an unjust or an improvident imposition of the 


death penalty. Procedurally, the accused always enjoys 
the presumption of innocence. Second, he is always 
entitled to a counsel de officio, both in the trial and in 
the appellate stages, and the court does not just appoint 
a run-of-the-mill lawyer as counsel de officio. Third, in 
the imposition of the death penalty, the court still 
requires that evidence be presented; although the 
accused has pleaded guilty. The court still requires the 
prosecution to introduce sufficient evidence beyond 
reasonable doubt to justify the imposition of the death 
penalty. Fourth, there is automatic review of the death 
penalty imposed by the trial courts. 

Substantive safeguards are also provided by law. 
The death penalty cannot be imposed if the accused at 
the time of the imposition of the death sentence is over 
70 years of age. As of now, the vote of 10 justices of 
the Supreme Court is required and, if it cannot be 
obtained, life imprisonment or reclusion perpetua 
shall be the penalty; a minor below 18 at the time of 
the commission of the offense cannot be punished 
with the death penalty unlike what happened in Malay- 
sia or what we have read about that 16-year-old girl in 
the United States. In the Philippines, no minor below 18 
years of age can ever be imposed the death penalty be- 
cause he is entitled to a privileged mitigating circum- 
stance which lowers the penalty by one or two degrees 
or even more. 

Secondly, even if the Supreme Court itself imposes 
the death penalty, the death penalty cannot be carried 
out permanently, first, if the accused is o"ver 70 years 
of age at the time the sentence is to be carried out, and 
second, where the President grants amnesty, pardon 
or commutation. Of course, there are other instances 
where a woman, on whom the death penalty was im- 
posed^ cannot be executed until after the lapse of three 
years from the finality of the judgment. A woman while 
pregnant can never be executed and as long as she 
manages to get pregnant, she will forever not be exe- 
cuted. Third, if the accused is insane at the time the 
death penalty is to be carried out, again the death 
penalty cannot be executed. Fourth, it is not correct 
to assume that because the Supreme Court imposed the 
death penalty, execution immediately follows. No. 
The records of the case will have to be remanded to the 
court a quo or the court of origin and such trial court, 
for valid reasons, can order that the death penalty 
should not be carried out in the meantime. 

In the case of the Director of Prisons w. the Judge 
of the Court of First Instance of Cavite, it was held 
that although the Supreme Court had already affirmed 
the death sentence and remanded the records to the 
trial court for the issuance of the mittimus, the trial 
court had the power to suspend the carrying out of 
the death sentence in order to conserve the legal rights 
of the accused, or whenever there is a question about 
the identity of the accused, or to grant him the oppor- 
tunity to seek executive clemency. This is, as I have 


746 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


said, aside from the power of the President to grant 
reprieves, commutations or pardons. 


I checked the records yesterday about the cases 
decided by the Supreme Court involving the capital 
punishment. From 1972 up to March 25, 1985, the 
record discloses that the Supreme Court passed upon 
515 cases. The number of accused involved therein who 
were given the death penalty by the trial court totalled 
794. In the Supreme Court, the number of affirmations 
involve 226 persons or 28 percent of those who were 
convicted by the trial court. Also, of the total number 
of 794 persons sentenced to death by the trial court, 
the Supreme Court modified the death sentences and 
lowered them to lesser penalties to the benefit of 548 
of the accused. In other words, in 69 percent of the 
cases where the accused was sentenced to death by the 
trial courts, the Supreme Court lowered the penalty 
to either reclusion perpetua or reclusion temporal and, 
in some instances, prision mayor. The number of 
accused who were acquitted despite the death sentence 
imposed by the trial court was 75. 


So, this goes to show that the imposition of capita 
punishment goes through all the stages of screening anc 
processing to avoid the possibility of error. Why an 
those who seek the abolition of the death penalty sc 
much m mortal fear of the possibility of error? Wc 
are only human. I remember Commissioner Ople at one 
tme stated that those who voted for the waiver of the 

inS patriotic than those whe 

insisted on maintaining the claim. Along this same 
vein but without the benefit of this rhetorical flourisi 
and the inevitable body English, I will also say thai 
those of us who stand for the retention of the^deatl 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, the issue was inter- 
minably discussed yesterday. Since we have some affair 
this afternoon, I move that we take a vote on the 
amendment of Senator Rodrigo. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair just wants to be clari- 
fied. The thrust of the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is that the issue be left to the legis- 
lature rather than it be included in the Constitution. 
Is that correct? 

MR. RODRIGO. Completely, because the amend- 
ment which I seek to amend also gives power to the 
legislature, but halfway. In my case, I would like to 
leave it to the legislature completely and not halfway. 

I think some Members arrived late, so, 1 will restate 
my amendment. On page 4, Section 22, line 28, I pro- 
pose to remove the comma (,) after the word “punish- 
ment” and to insert the word INFLICTED followed 
by a period (.) and then to delete the rest of the section. 
The amended phrase will read: “Excessive fines shall 
not be imposed, nor cruel, degrading or inhuman 
punishment INFLICTED.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Rodrigo, please 
raise their hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 18 votes in favor and 19 votes 
against; the amendment is lost. 


NOMINAL VOTING 


nizif Commissioner Bernas is recog- 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I am very happy 
about the intervention made by Commissioner Regalado 
because it shows the tremendous reluctance of Philip- 
pine society to impose the death penalty. The re- 
luctance is so grave that so m,any obstacles are put up 
against the execution of the death penalty and judges 
agonize whether they have to impose a death penalty 
or not. Legislators have made it more difficult for the 
death penalty to be imposed. Thus, this total abolition 
of the death penalty by the Constitution facilitates 
everything for the judges and for the legislators. It 
removes the agonizing process of having to decide 
whether the death penalty should be imposed by them 
or not. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, just a short 
rejoinder. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, in order to be 
very sure, I ask for a nominal voting. Since it is a very 
close vote, I move for a nominal voting but without 
the explanation of votes anymore. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Nominal voting on the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Rodrigo is, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the amendment. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Section 22 will read 
as follows: “Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor 
cruel, degrading or inhuman punishment INFLICTED.” 

FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on the 
amendment, and the Secretary-General will call the 
roll. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


747 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. No 

Jamir 

. . Yes 

Alonto 


Laurel 

. . No 

Aquino 

. No 

Lerum 

. . No 

Azcuna 

. Yes 

Maambong . . 

. . No 

Bacani 

. No 

Monsod .... 

. . No 

Bengzon 

.Yes 

Natividad . . . 

. . No 

Bennagen . . . . 


Nieva 

. . Yes 

Bernas 

. No 

Nolledo .... 

. . No 

Rosario Braid . . 

. No 

Ople 

. . No 

Brocka 

. No 

Padilla 

. . Yes 

Calderon 


Quesada .... 

. . No 

Castro de . . . . 

. Yes 

Rama 

. . Yes 

Colayco 


Regalado .... 

. . Yes 

Concepcion . . . 

. Abstain 

Reyes de los . 

. . No 

Davide 

. No 

Rigos 

. . Yes 

Foz 

. No 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Yes 

Garcia 

. No 

Romulo .... 

. . Yes 

Gascon 

. No 

Rosales 


Guingona . . . . 

. Yes 

Sarmiento . . . 


We have a letter here. Commissioner Sarmiento’s vote 

no for the death penalty. 



Suarez 


Trenas 

. . Yes 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Yes 

Uka 

. . Yes 

Tadeo 


Villacorta . . . 


Tan 

. . No 

Villegas 


Tingson .... 

. . Yes 




THE PRESIDENT. I want to cast my vote. I am 
voting ves. 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Alonto Colayco 

Bennagen Rosales 

Calderon Suarez 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, my vote is no, 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tadeo Villegas 

Villacorta 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 17 votes in 
favor, 22 against and 1 abstention; the amendment is 
lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a pending motion by 
Commissioner Monsod. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Monsod 
repeat his amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, my amendment 
is to add after the word “inflicted” on line 29 the clause 
UNLESS FOR COMPELLING REASONS INVOLVING 
HEINOUS CRIMES THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
PROVIDES FOR THE DEATH PENALTY. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the position of the Com- 
mittee on this proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod? 

FR. BERNAS. We will put the amendment to a 
vote. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask the sponsor a few 
questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The proponent’s amendment is a 
comma (,) after “inflicted” on line 29 to be followed 
by the clause “UNLESS FOR COMPELLING REA- 
SONS INVOLVING HEINOUS CRIMES THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY PROVIDES FOR THE DEATH 
PENALTY.” In this proposed amendment, there will 
still be a need for the National Assembly to pass a law 
providing the death penalty. Is that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What happens to those awaiting 
execution, having already the death penalty on their 
heads, but there is no law yet passed by the National 
Assembly? 

MR. MONSOD. Then the next sentence would apply: 
“Death penalty already imposed shall be commuted to 
reclusion perpetua. ” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


748 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


What happens if the National Assembly does not pass 
any law concerning death penalty, such as on heinous 
crimes? 

MR. MONSOD. Then there is no death penalty. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is the effect of the amend- 
ment? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


MR. REGALADO. That was the answer of the Gen- 
tleman in response to the inquiry of Commissioner 
Bengzon. 

MR. MONSOD. My answer is reflective of what the 
Committee had answered before. And since that has 
not been changed, I suppose the answer would be the 
same. But if the Committee would like to answer it 
in more detail, perhaps it should be the one to answer 
that. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. I also have a question. Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. If the amendment of Commissioner 
Monsod is passed, the death penalties already imposed 
will be commuted to reclusion perpetua, will it not? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


MR. REGALADO. No, my position is this. This 
appears to be a mandatory commutation and we know 
that commutations can be made only by the President. 

FR. BERNAS. The intention of the provision here 
is, upon the ratification of this Constitution, the death 
penalty already imposed is automatically — without 
need for any action by the President — commuted. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, because the wording here is: 
“Death penalty air ady imposed shall be commuted to 
reclusion perpetua. ” The power of commutation is a 
presidential prerogative. 


pasts' Congre 

passes a law imposing the death penalty on tho 

‘hose that were co 

cSimuted t *h‘oh penalty has bet 

commuted to reclusion perpetua. will they go back 

MR. MONSOD. No. 


FR. BERNAS. Or we can say “ARE HEREBY com- 
muted,” if that is clearer. But that is the intention. 

MR. REGALADO. Does the Comm.issioner mean 
“are hereby reduced”? 

FR. BERNAS. Commuted to the death penalty. 


MR. BENGZON. Not anymore? 


As^mbl^ wouM^b National 

Assembly would be prospective in character. 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 


MR. REGALADO. May I ask Commissioner Monsod 
about this second sentence, “Death penalty already im- 
posed shall be commuted to reclusion perpetua. ” 

When we say commuted to reclusion perpetua, I 
think we refer to the power of the President to effect 
commutations because only the President can commute 
sentences already final and imposed by the courts. Is 
that correct? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I am not the pro- 
ponent of that sentence. Perhaps the Committee should 
answer that. 


MR. REGALADO. It “shall be REDUCED to reclu- 
sion perpetua”? 

FR. BERNAS. To reclusion perpetua, yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Maybe the Commissioner should 
eliminate the word “commute” because we are invading 
the presidential prerogative. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman proposing an 
amendment to the amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is rec- 
ognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one clarificatory question. 

On the assumption that this proposed amendment 
will be granted, what would happen to the laws which 
presently punish certain penal offenses by death, be- 
cause those laws may have to be repealed later by the 
National Assembly? But as of this moment, there are 
so many penal offenses which are punishable by death. 
What would be the effect of the grant of these amend- 
ments? 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


749 


FR. BERNAS. The effect is the abolition of the death 
penalty from those statutes — only the death penalty. 
The statute is not abolished, but the penalty is abo- 
lished. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is what I am worried about, 
because the statutes, especially in the General Criminal 
Law, which is the Revised Penal Code, do not neces- 
sarily punish directly with death. Sometimes it has a 
range of reclusion temporal to death or reclusion per- 
petua to death. And what would be the effect on the 
judges, for example, if the range \s reclusion temporal to 
death and he can no longer impose the death penalty? 
He will have difficulty in commuting the degrees. 

Could the Committee enlighten us on how the judge 
will look at the specific situation. 

FR. BERNAS. I grant that the judges will have dif- 
ficulty, but I suppose that the judges will be equal to 
their tasks. The only thing is, if there is a range, the 
range cannot go as far as death. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the same proposed amend- 
ment, the national legislature, for compelling reasons, 
may pass a law imposing death. In the present configu- 
ration of our laws which punish with death, could we 
not interpret it in this manner — that since the death 
penalty is imposed at present on those penal offenses, 
then the intent of the legislature previously made in the 
formulation of those laws remains and those laws will 
remain with the penalty of death because of the com- 
pelling reasons then in the mind of the legislators? 

FR. BERNAS. The sense of this proposal is that upon 
the ratification of this Constitution, the legislature, if it 
wants to reimpose the death penalty, must repeat the 
act. In other words, the penalty disappears and there is 
need of a new act of the legislature to put it back. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Could we put it more simply. 
Madam President? Could we say that once this amend- 
ment is accepted, all penal offenses punishable by death 
will no longer carry the death penalty? 

FR. BERNAS. That is correct. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Unless it is reenacted by the 
legislature, would that be a correct statement? 

FR. BERNAS. I suppose that is now addressed to 
the amendment and Commissioner Monsod will pro- 
bably answer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Tingson be recognized for one question. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, my question is 
on the metaphysical, moral aspect. In the Book of 
Exodus, Chapter 20, we read: “Thou shalt not kill.” Is 
it because we, belonging to the Christian dispensation 
and grace, believe that God gives life and only God can 
take away that life? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, I believe I mentioned that 
earlier, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. I am sorry I missed that. And so, 
why should the Gentleman make exception even though 
how heinous the crime may be? God is still a forgiving 
God, and God would not take away the life of even the 
most despicable criminal in the world. 

MR. MONSOD. I am not a theologian but I believe 
that even natural laws and moral laws admit of certain 
exceptions, and this would be the people acting in the 
name of God. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. Commissioner. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I move that we 
take a vote on the amendment of Commissioner Mon- 
sod. 

MR. REGALADO. Before we take a vote. Madam 
President, may I just ask a follow-up question by way 
of clarifying the point raised by Commissioner Maam- 
bong. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Commissioner Maambong was 
contemplating on the situation where, if this amend- 
ment is eventually enshrined in the Constitution, there 
will be a need later for congressional action. I am more 
concerned about the period of the interregnum. Let 
us take the case, for instance, of the more common 
crime involving capital punishment — the crime of 
murder. The penalty for the crime of murder is reclu- 
sion temporal, in its maximum period to death — in 
other words, a range of 1 7 years, four months and one 
day to 20 years up to the death penalty. The Revised 
Penal Code specifically provides what should be, in such 
a situation, the maximum period, the medium period 
and the minimum period. Under the present state of the 
law, the minimum period is 17 years, four months and 
one day to 20 years; the medium period is life imprison- 
ment or reclusion perpetua; the maximum period is 
death. We take away the death penalty and here is an 
accused charged with the crime of murder. There are no 
mitigating circumstances; there is no aggravating cir- 
cumstance, and, therefore, he should get the medium 


750 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


period. What would now be the medium period during 
the interregnum until Congress shall have provided a 
law which would implement this new provision? 

FR. BERNAS. We admit that the abolition of the 
death penalty creates a problem for judges and legis- 
lators; but I am sure they will be equal to the problem. 

MR. REGALADO. I have no quarrel about that but 
we will have to await creation of a legislature. Perhaps, 
the elections will be in the month of May. Perhaps, 
they will get around to passing that enabling law accom- 
modating these changes a few years later. During that 
interregnum, what law will be appUed? 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, the penalties lower than 
death remain. 


As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 23 votes in favor and 12 votes 
against; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 


MR. REGALADO. That would be reclusion perpetua. 
But the range of the penalty for murder consists of 
three periods. The maximum period of reclusion tem- 
poral under the present status is the minimum period 
for the penalty for murder. The medium period is reclu- 
sion perpetua. The maximum period is death. If we 
now remove the death penalty, we will, therefore, have 
a range of penalty of 17 years, 4 months and 1 day to 
years of reclusion temporal up to reclusion perpetua. 
You cannot divide reclusion perpetua into two. While 
li/h ^ of 30 years, it is an indivisible penalty. 

medium period now until such 
amendnfent?°^^^^^^ around to accommodate this 


yers can^frm^^’ ^ ^ 

® ^ ^ All we are saying 

the judges cannot impose the death penalty ^ ® 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

I speak in behalf of several proponents of this pro- 
posed amendment; namely. Commissioners Ricardo 
Romulo, Wilfrido Villacorta, Edmundo Garcia, Lino 
Brocka, Regalado Maambong, Rustico de los Reyes, 
Cirilo Rigos and Teodulo Natividad. 

We suggest a new section immediately following 
Section 22, the one that abolishes the death penalty 
with amendments, as amended, to read as follows: IN 
THE CASE OF GRAVE ABUSE COMMITTED 
AGAINST THE RIGHT TO LIFE WHETHER BY 
MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY OR POLICE OR 
THEIR ADVERSARY, THE PRINCIPLE OF COM- 
MAND RESPONSIBILITY SHALL APPLY AND THE 
STATE MUST COMPENSATE THE VICTIMS. 

May I give a brief explanation of the reason behind 
this proposal. Madam President. 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, 
nize™ Commissioner Davide is recog- 

MR. DAVIDE. I think the Committee can suggest a 
transitory provision for this. We will have no quarrel 
about this, if there is a corresponding transitory provi- 
sion. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, before the vote 
may I just mention an oversight - that this amend- 
ment is a consolidation of the proposals of Commis- 
sioners de los Reyes, Suarez and this Representation. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will proceed to vote on 
this proposed amendment of Commissioners Monsod, 
Suarez and de los Reyes. The Chair believes that the 
amendment is clear enough and there is no need to 
repeat the same. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople has five 
minutes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

We are right now engaged in a very historic deli- 
beration of the abolition of the death penalty. But 
there are more eminent forms of the death penalty 
experienced in the lives of millions of our people today 
for whom, probably, even this momentous subject of 
the abolition will be one of mere academic interest. 
The threats to their lives, in many embattled areas of 
the country, are very real in the form of institutional- 
ized brutality, whether this comes from the military 
or their adversaries in the field. The people can see a 
larger and overriding issue in terms of the perceived 
threats to human life that now hover like a spectre 
over millions of our countrymen, especially in areas 
contested by rival armed forces. Even the spectacle 
of mass disappearances, “salvagings” and extrajudicial 
executions has become so routine as no longer to excite 
the public. Both the military and the rebels they have 
to contend with, for these are known to have resorted 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


751 


to such crimes under the pressure of their respective 
circumstances. 

There is a great clamor, Madam President, for the 
Constitutional Commission to address this issue, which 
is also endemic, to much of the Third World with their 
alternating police states and democratic regimes. And 
may I tell this Commission that such abuses against 
human lives of the ordinary citizens occur because the 
troops who commit them are convinced that this is 
an approach sanctioned by their respective superiors 
or is part of an unwritten policy. The pressure of legal 
reform must, therefore, be directed to the officers who 
command these troops — in the case of the AFP, the 
appropriate levels in the chain of command; in the case 
of the NPA, the commanders under the military depart- 
ment and even the central committee of the CPP. Such 
a provision in the Bill of Rights would insert a solid 
protection between the sword of the State and the 
people who are exposed to conditions of political 
terror especially in areas contested by rival arms. 

This will also be the first time. Madam President, if 
the Committee and the Commission decide to adopt 
this amendment, that the responsibility of the armed 
rebels or of their commanders is acknowledged on the 
same plane as their AFP or government counterparts 
where their own men resort to systematic killings and 
other forms of mass terror. Their legal accountability 
cannot be excused on the basis of revolutionary exigen- 
cies alone. The victims and the State can run after them 
when times become more propitious. And such a provi- 
sion will also provide a basis of legal symmetry in the 
approach of the Presidential Commission on Human 
Rights to human rights violations, regardless of who 
commits them instead of permitting a situation now 
much criticized where only brutalities committed by 
the government are subject to inquiry, and brutalities 
outside the purview of the government and of the courts 
are, in effect, allowed to remain unexamined. 

And so. Madam President, we would like to seek the 
kind consideration of the Committee and of the Com- 
mission for this amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. May I ask a question. Madam 

President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, those victims 
of the adversary forces of the military or the police 
I suppose mean the rebels, NPAs, etc. 

MR. OPLE. They can pertain to the NPA, the Moro 
National Liberation Front and its various subdivisions, 
or even to the Lost Command of Colonel Rodrigo 
Mora. 

MR. BENGZON. The proponent would make the 
Philippine government pay or compensate the families 


of the victims of these people also. Is that the inten- 
tion? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President, to maintain the 
symmetry that we are concerned to build into this 
amendment. Why should the Philippine government be 
made to pay compensation to the victims of NPA 
atrocities, intended or unintended atrocities? Is that the 
burden of the question? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, I am asking whether the 
Philippine government will be made to pay the families 
of the victims of these atrocities and killings of the NPA 
and related agencies. 

MR. OPLE. But does the Commissioner see nothing 
unusual in asking that the state compensate the victims 
of AFP brutalities? 

MR. BENGZON. Because they are agencies of the 
government; they represent the government. But what I 
cannot understand, if it is the intention of this amend- 
rnent, is to also make the state pay the families of the 
victims of the adversaries. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I must admit some difficulty in 
justifying state compensation for the victims of non- 
governmental institutionalized brutality, except that 
perhaps we can go back to the fundamental question of 
the responsibility of the state for the protection of life 
and property, which in this case has not been extended 
to the victims. That is the reason they were killed — 
there was no shield of state protection. At some point, a 
great negligence occurred on the part of the state, so 
that these people are left bereft without the means of 
state protection. 

MR. BENGZON. But that argument limps. Madam 
President, because we cannot just summarily accuse the 
government of negligence in the protection of the life, 
limb and properties of its citizens because it is the in- 
tendment and the intention of these forces; it is part of 
their tactic to harm the citizens of this country, to 
overthrow the government. They do not care whether 
they kill citizens, civilians, military. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think what it all adds 
up to is that the state, according to any constitution, is 
responsible for the protection of its own citizens, and 
that is the reason why the citizens pay taxes, looking to 
fundamental protection of this nature. And when it is 
withdrawn or it ceases to be extended, are we going to 
excuse the state for this default of a major responsibility 
to its citizens under a constitution? 

Anyway, Madam President, this is subject to the 
availability of funds, both ways. 

MR. BENGZON. It is the principle of the whole 
thing. Madam President. It is really quite unjust and 


752 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


unfair to make the state liable for the victims of the 
adversaries, the very adversaries of the state. I do not 
know how we are going to treat this; perhaps those who 
are the victims of the military or the police, yes, I will 
agree. But for those who are the victims of the adversa- 
ries of the state itself, it is really quite unfair. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 3:56 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


At 4:05 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


MR. GUINGONA. May I ask the honorable propo- 
nent whether the use of presumption could be assumed 
to mean disputable and not conclusive? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. In this case. Madam President, may I 
call the attention of Commissioner Guingona to the fact 
that there has been some slight change in the text. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Guingona be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. I see. 

longer speak of presumption o 
responsibility but of the application of the principle o 
comniand responsibility because of some legal advice 
a had been furnished the sponsors, especially fron 
Commissioner Romulo, to the effect that the principb 
ot command responsibility is already supported by th( 
military rules and regulations and adminis 
anniiraf^ jurisprudence pertaining to th( 

con fu responsibility in situation 

contemplated by this proposed amendment. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I am presenting 
a reworded amendment to the amendment of Commis- 
sioner OpIe, and my amendment to his amendment will 
be as follows: IN THE CASE OF GRAVE ABUSES 
COMMITTED AGAINST THE RIGHT TO LIFE BY 
MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY OR POLICE FORCES 
OR THEIR ADVERSARY, THE PRESUMPTION OF 
COMMAND RESPONSIBILITY SHALL APPLY, AND 
THE STATE MUST COMPENSATE THE VICTIMS OF 
GOVERNMENT FORCES. May I just clarify. Madam 
President, that the use of the word “presumption” here 
is meant to be disputable presumption. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

Would the honorable Commissioner accept tl 

r^FF^OF “victims” ar 

add. OF GOVERNMENT FORCES OR OF MILITAR 

OR POLICE FORCES OF THE GOVERNMENT. 


THE PRESIDENT. May the Chair be clarified on the 
last sentence? 

MR. GUINGONA. I will restate the proposed amend- 
ment, Madam President. 


MR. OPLE^ So that, in effect, the Gentleman wil 
remove the obligation of compensation to the victim 
of nongovernmental forces? 


MR. GUINGONA. Of the adversary forces. 
MR. OPLE. Adversary forces. 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes, this is an amendment to the 
amendment. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. IN THE CASE OF GRAVE 
ABUSES COMMITTED AGAINST THE RIGHT TO 
LIFE BY MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY OR POLICE 
FORCES OR THEIR ADVERSARY, THE PRESUMP- 
TION OF COMMAND RESPONSIBILITY SHALL 
APPLY, AND THE STATE MUST COMPENSATE THE 
VICTIMS OF GOVERNMENT FORCES. 

Will the honorable Commissioner accept the amend- 
ment? 


MR. OPLE. We will, therefore, leave completely 
uncompensated the victims of nongovernmental institu- 
tionalized brutalities. 

MR. GUINGONA. Yes, Madam President, under 
my proposed amendment to the amendment of the 
Commissioner. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

MR. OPLE. The amendment is accepted. Madam 
President. May I also note that Commissioners Bengzon 
and Regalado contributed to this amendment and, 
therefore, they have become coauthors, together with 
Commissioner Guingona. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


753 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I wonder why we 
are already in the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are in the period of amend- 
ments. 

MR. PADILLA. Why are we in the period of amend- 
ments when there has been no interpellation and debate? 
Precisely, I want to speak against this proposed amend- 
ment because this is contrary to old principles of 
criminal law. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Padilla is seek- 
ing recognition to speak against the Ople.eta/ amend- 
ment. 

Commissioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I do not know 
about presumption or the principle of command 
responsibility. I do not know whether that is recognized 
under military law, but I am certain that under the Re- 
vised Penal Code, we do not recognize criminal liability 
based on so-called command responsibility unless that 
command responsibility would fall under Article 1 7 as 
to who are the principals - those who directly force or 
induce others to commit the crime. “Responsibility” 
under the Penal Code would refer to the principals, 
accomplices and accessories as enumerated under Article 
16. Article 17 provides for three kinds of principals; 
by direct participation, by direct inducement and by 
indispensable cooperation. Should there be conspiracy 
among several accused and such conspiracy is established, 
then there will be collective responsibility, otherwise, 
there is only individual or separate responsibility. 

Madam President, compensation would be in the 
nature of a civil liability. Under the Penal Code, a 
person criminally liable is also civilly liable, but the 
person who is liable civilly is the person who is accused 
and convicted as principal. Here we make the state com- 
pensate, but the state is not the accused. Maybe higher 
officers in the military, if they are specifically charged 
and are convicted, will be civilly liable, but not the state 
for the crimes committed by others even if they are 
public officers. 

Moreover, this speaks of flagrant and systematic 
abuses. Today this really amounts to crimes against 
persons, particularly murder. What about other crimes of 
the Penal Code like rape, crime against chastity, or kid- 
napping with ransom, crime against personal liberty and 
security? Will this be limited only to abuses against 
life? It is not even clear whether the victim has actually 
died as a consequence or as a causal effect of the 
criminal acts of the accused. 

With regard to presumption, there are legal presump- 
tions in law, but they must be based on facts from 
which the law infers or deduces a legal presumption. 
There can be no presumption of liability because that 
would be contrary to the presumption of innocence. 


And so, Madam President, I believe that this proposed 
new section should not be included, even if it be 
amended by corrective or perfectionary suggestions 
because it violates the fundamental principles of crimi- 
nal responsibility and civil liability under the Penal 
Code. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro seeks 
recognition. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

May I ask the proponent of this provision some 
questions, please. 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What does the Gentleman mean 
by command responsibility when he speaks of command 
responsibility for those in higher authority? 

MR. RODRIGO. Parliamentary inquiry. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. What are we discussing now? Is it 
the original proposed amendment to the amendment as 
amended? 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment of Commissioner 
Guingona has been accepted by Commissioner Ople. 
That is what the Chair understands. 

MR. RODRIGO. Which are we discussing now? Is it 
the amendment of Commissioner Ople, as amended, as 
agreed upon by the three Commissioners? I just want to 
ask questions also, and I want to know what the basis of 
my questions will be. Is it the original or the original 
as amended? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, we are now discussing 
the original as amended, and may I restate it in its latest 
permutation as a result of the consultations on the 
floor: IN THE CASE OF GRAVE ABUSES COMMIT- 
TED AGAINST THE RIGHT TO LIFE BY MEMBERS 
OF THE MILITARY OR POLICE FORCES AND 
THEIR ADVERSARY, THERE SHALL BE A PRE- 
SUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THOSE IN 
HIGHER AUTHORITY AND THE STATE MUST 
COMPENSATE THE VICTIMS OF THE GOVERN- 
MENT FORCES. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, that will be the basis of our 
discussion. 


754 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. So the command responsibility is 
not there anymore. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that satisfactory? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it has disappeared in the latest per- 
mutation, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I continue. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner de Castro may 
continue. 


even in military books, we do not read about command 
responsibility. The military books state something like 
this: “The commander is responsible for what his unit 
does or fails to do.” That is why when the amendment 
here speaks of command responsibility for those in 
higher authority, I will presume this will refer even to 
the President because the President is the Commander- 
in-Chief of the Armed Forces and the police. 

MR. OPLE. The word “command” preceding 
“responsibility” has already been eliminated, Madam 
President. 


MR. DE CASTRO. As I read it, there shall be a pre- 
sumption of responsibility for those in higher authority. 
Is that correct? 


MR. DE CASTRO. So that in the last statement, if 
the higher authority will not accept responsibility, there 
will be no compensation for the victims. Am I correct? 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. DE CASTRO. This refers to the apparent abuses 
of the military and police forces, and responsibility for 
those in higher authority. How high will the authority 
be which will be responsible for the abuses? 


MR OPLE. Madam President, this will depend on the 
f'h-* u ^ ®'^**^®nce, and this is a disputable presumption 
hich means that the higher authority can overthrow it 
by demonstrating lack of responsibility. 

resDonsihf if that is so, nobody will be 

th . compensate the victims because the 

thSihtf ^ responsibility. Is 


resmmsihni^w overthrow the presumption c 

Escalante mas Vu* regard, recall the recer 
scalante massacre. There was a board of inquir 

created^ A minonty in that board held the Chief of Stal 

of e Armed Forces of the Philippines responsible. 

•If !h’ command responsibility, 

said the board, I read it in the newspaper. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, but the majority held that General 
Ramos was not responsible. And I think there is enough 
administrative jurisprudence in the military organiza- 
tion, if not in other responsible bodies of the govern- 
ment to support this line about the presumption of 
responsibility for those in higher authority to which we 
refer in this proposed amendment. 


MR. OPLE. I am afraid it is not so. Madam President, 
because according to this proposed amendment, the 
state must compensate the victims of the government 
forces, and the state is, presumably, distinct and apart 
from the higher authority. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The state shall compensate the 
victims only, according to the proposition here, if the 
higher authority accepts the responsibility. There shall 
be a presumption of responsibility for those in higher 
authority. Only then shall the state be responsible to 
compensate the victims. Am I right in my interpreta- 
tion, Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. If we put a comma (,) after AUTHOR- 
ITY, I think that will be sufficient notice of the separate* 
ness of the last cause. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just a few questions. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

Does the proponent not believe that this is more 
appropriately included in the Declaration of Principles 
than in the Bill of Rights? 


MR. DE CASTRO. With regard to the Escalante 
incident, the report of the minority as I read it in the 
paper — I did not read the whole case - was that 
General Ramos was responsible under the theory of 
command responsibility. Am I correct? That was the 
report of the members of the minority group then. 

My question is, what is command responsibility? 
This is apparently being used for military reasons, and 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, we feel strongly that 
the proper, logical and necessary place for this is in the 
Bill of Rights, immediately following Section 22 which 
precisely exalts to a paramount level the value of human 
life by abolishing the death penalty under certain 
exceptions. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is all right. This presumption 
of command responsibility will be made to apply both 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


755 


to the military or police and their adversary. Is that 
correct? Is this not unfair to the military since it is very 
easy to identify the commanders in the military or 
police, while it is very difficult, almost impossible, at 
times, to identify the commanders of the adversary? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I cannot agree more 
with this astute observation of Commissioner Rodrigo. 
We have to admit that at this time, the courts of the 
Philippines, as well as the administrative authorities, 
can have no direct access, let us say, to rebel forces that 
commit the brutalities covered by this section. But there 
will be a more propitious time and they can be accessed 
to our courts. In the meantime, the constitutional right 
of those aggrieved, the victims or their heirs and their 
families will remain intact. And this is also a strong 
notice. Madam President, to the commanders on the 
other side that the Constitution is not insensitive to the 
violations that they themselves will commit under this 
amendment except that because of the existing exigen- 
cies they cannot yet be directly accessed through our 
courts. 

MR. RODRIGO. One of the provisions of the Bill of 
Rights, as a matter of fact, is the guarantee of equal 
protection of the laws. Considering that we have admit- 
ted that the treatment here of the commander of the 
army would not be the same, in effect, as the com- 
mander of the adversary, would this not be inconsistent 
with the provision on equal protection of the laws? 
They are not equal with regard to the commander of the 
military or police vis-a-vis the commander of the 
adversary. 

MR. OPLE. In the original version, there was a 
complete symmetry of responsibility, Madam President. 
I can agree with Commissioner Rodrigo that as now 
reformulated through the importuning of various 
Members of the Commission on the floor, it looks like 
that symmetry has been disturbed. And so, in order 
to restore that symmetry, what does the Commissioner 
propose? 

MR. RODRIGO. I have no proposal. I am just point- 
ing out certain matters. 

MR OPLE. Maybe, we can rephrase it this way: IN 
THE CASE OF GRAVE ABUSES COMMITTED 
AGAINST THE RIGHT TO LIFE BY MEMBERS OF 
THE MILITARY OR POLICE FORCES OR THEIR 
ADVERSARY, THERE SHALL BE A PRESUMPTION 
OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THOSE IN HIGHER 
AUTHORITY. THE STATE MUST COMPENSATE 
THE VICTIMS OF THE GOVERNMENT FORCES. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have one last question. Madam 
President. Who will decide who are the victims to be 
compensated? Which agency of the government will 
decide? 


MR. OPLE. We refer to the higher courts without 
prejudice to the administrative agencies of the govern- 
ment taking part. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the victims will have to file a 
complaint in court. Will it be a civil complaint? 

MR. OPLE. Or the state can represent them in court. 

MR. RODRIGO. But the state will be the one to pay. 
Why will the state file the case when it is the one that 
will be made to pay? 

MR. OPLE. Because these are crimes now against the 
Constitution and, although the state can be in the role 
of a benevolent father capable of protecting its children, 
it has another responsibility of standing as a bulwark of 
justice and protection for the rights of the people. 

MR. RODRIGO. There are other speakers waiting, 
so thank you very much, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized to speak against the proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. I will 
speak against this proposal very briefly. 

While the objective is ideal, the ramifications are 
appalling because, first, it infringes upon the well-settled 
principle of nonsuability of the state. If we approve this 
proposal, our courts will be filled with cases demanding 
compensation from the state and, therefore, they will 
not be able to attend to vital functions of government. 

Second, the proposal will enthrone a presumption of 
guilt which, therefore, runs counter to the sacred right 
which is also enshrined in the Bill of Rights — the 
presumption of innocence. 

Third, we, in effect, would punish the state and its 
forces for protecting the people against atrocities com- 
mitted by adversary forces and, in effect, reward the 
adversary forces for acts committed against the state. 
Under the proposal on deaths of adversary forces or 
their supporters in case of rebellion or insurrection, the 
state shall now be under obligation to compensate for 
them. In short, the state will now compensate the very 
persons who seek to overthrow the government. Because 
we allow compensation only for the victims of govern- 
ment forces — who are usually the adversary forces or 
their supporters — for the death of a rebel or for those 


756 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


who fight the government to overthrow it in cases of 
invasion or insurrection, they can later on claim 
compensation from the state. 

Finally, the recognition of command responsibility 
as correctly pointed out by Commissioner de Castro can 
go up to the President being the Commander-in-Chief of 
the Armed Forces of the Philippines. 

Suppose all of these were committed in times of 
invasion and insurrection where there was a prior pro- 
clamation of martial law with the concurrence of the 
legislature, therefore, the legislature would also be 
responsible for that. So, for all the deaths and abuses 
against life occurring during such times, even the 
Members of the National Assembly are responsible for 
it because they imposed martial law. 

Madam President, while the objective is really very 
good, it will endanger the stability of the state and 
society. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe th 
Members of this Commission are all concerned abou 
human rights, but we can put one safeguard on top o 
another. Every little thing we are trying to cover unt 
what we have created is a ponderous Constitution that i 
pro-human rights but anti-state. I have t^ 

President. Besides, as foi 
mulated all victims - whether of “lost commands” o 

arrvfct^\°n^^ of plain bandits - can claim that the 
hprp TV °^.S°^®>^ment forces. So, there is no balanc 
here. This wil destabilize our country; there will b 
suits and all kinds of claims; and there is no way b 
which we can really arrive at the truth 

Thank you, Madam President. 


The Bill of Rights, as we know and as many other 
countries know it today, has largely been unchanged in 
its general frame from 1791 when the first set of amend- 
ments to the American Constitution was ratified by the 
American people. It was a bill of rights intended mainly 
to shield the generation of Americans and their posteri- 
ty from possibilities of abuse in the conditions of that 
society which has now become the most prosperous on 
the face of the earth. But in the Bill of Rights, when 
today we are privileged to draft a Constitution for the 
Filipino people, we cannot be insensitive to the palpable 
realities of our own time. And as I said earlier, although 
the death penalty is abolished under this new draft 
Constitution, there are grosser forms of death penalty 
that are being experienced by many thousands of our 
people in the countryside — extrajudicial dealings, like 
salvagings and massacres. And if we do not take cogni- 
zance of these realities in this Constitutional Commis- 
sion, I am afraid we are not living up to our historic 
mission. Moreover, Madam President, the concern about 
the determination of the truth, the abuse of the pre- 
sumption of responsibility, the compensation for 
victims, all of these will be subject to standards of rigor 
that the future legislature will establish under this 
Constitution. We cannot settle all foreseen consequences 
right here on this floor. But with this amendment, we, 
as I said in the beginning, will insert a shield of protec- 
tion between the sword of the state which sometimes 
goes amuck and the right to life of many thousands of 
our people who experience this menace, so that when 
they go to bed at night, they know they will wake up in 
the morning. This is a shield of protection for them. 
Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we vote 
on the amendment of Commissioner Ople. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is a clamor that 
we vote on this amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. We have not yet heard from the 
Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee submits this to resolu- 
tion by the body. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I request a minute for a brief re- 
joinder to the arguments of those who have spoken 
against this proposed amendment. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the proponent accept an amendment to his 
proposed amendment? 

MR. OPLE. May I hear the amendment. Madam 
President? 


MR. SUAREZ. The amendment is to delete the first 
sentence of the proposed amendment, so that the pro- 
posed amendment, as amended, will now read: THE 

STATE SHALL COMPENSATE THE VICTIMS OF 
MILITARY ATROCITIES IN THE MANNER PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


757 


MR. OPLE. I am afraid I cannot accept the proposed 
amendment to the amendment, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will not insist on the amendment 
to the amendment. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we can now proceed to the 
voting. 

Will the Secretary-General or Commissioner Ople 
restate the proposed amendment. 

MR. OPLE. I might be in a better position to comply, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please proceed. Commis- 
sioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. The proposed amendment would read: 
IN THE CASE OF GRAVE ABUSES COMMITTED 
AGAINST THE RIGHT TO LIFE BY MEMBERS OF 
THE MILITARY OR POLICE FORCES OR THEIR 
ADVERSARY, THERE SHALL BE A PRESUMPTION 
OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THOSE IN HIGHER 
AUTHORITY. THE STATE MUST COMPENSATE 
THE VICTIMS OF THE GOVERNMENT FORCES. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 9 votes in favor and 22 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rosario Braid 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I have 
three anterior amendments. The first one is on Section 
22, page 4, line 30, which is the substitution of the 
words ‘‘reclusion perpetua” to LIFE IMPRISONMENT. 
For laymen like me and others, perhaps this is more 
understood, more readable. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment seeks to change 
the words “reclusion perpetua” to LIFE IMPRISON- 
MENT. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, to LIFE IMPRISON- 
MENT, so it shall read: “shall be commuted to LIFE 
IMPRISONMENT.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Since the Constitution is a legal docu- 
ment, the Committee prefers to use the technical term 
“reclusion perpetua. ” It is well understood in Philippine 
jurisprudence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rosario Braid 
insist on her amendment? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I will not insist on my 
amendment. 

May I propose amendments to Sections 6 and 9, page 
2, lines 13 to 18 and lines 28 to 30. The background of 
these proposals by myself and Commissioner Foz is that 
during the past decade these claims of individuals to 
certain social and economic rights have crystallized in 
more specific charters based on the Universal Declara- 
tion of Human Rights, such as the Mass Media Declara- 
tion and the New International Information Order 
which have embodied the right of people to com- 
municate or to initiate communications, the right to 
vitally needed information and to information on basic 
needs. So our proposal would amend Section 6 to read 
as follows: “The right of the people to ADEQUATE 
AND BALANCED information on BASIC NEEDS shall 
be recognized.” 

I introduce here the concept of adequate and 
balanced information on basic needs. By the way, I 
introduced amendments this morning that would be 
found in Section 6. Also, I propose to add a new line 
after “law,” which reads: THE RIGHT TO COMMUNI- 
CATE SHALL BE PROTECTED AT ALL TIMES. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we deal with the first 
amendment on Section 6? May we have the reaction of 
the Committee? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee prefers to keep the 
provision as it is: “The right of the people to informa- 
tion on matters of public concern shall be recognized.” 
The proposed amendment uses the expression “ADE- 
QUATE AND BALANCED information on BASIC 
NEEDS,” which is very difficult to define. So we prefer 
not to accept that and besides, these matters are already 
covered by the broad expression “matters of public 
concern.” 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I request 
that this be put to a vote. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 


758 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote on this 
proposed amendment, copies of which have been dis- 
tributed, I understand, to all the Commissioners? 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioners Rosario Braid and Foz on Section 6, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 7 votes in favor and 17 against; the 
proposed amendment on Section 6 is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is another amendment by 
Commissioner Rosario Braid. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The amendment is on 
Section 9, and the background of this is that we would 
like to give the people the basic rights. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, with the permission of 
the proponent of the amendment, actually, it is my 
proposal, so I would like to be given the right to explain 
the proposed amendment. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I will leave the first part o 
the amendment to Commissioner Foz. 

MR. FOZ. The existing provision of Section 9 states 

No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech 
or of he press, or the right of the people peaceably to 

assemble and petition the government for redress of griev- 
anc6s. 

We propose to amend this by rewriting the provisio 
in this manner: THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE TO Fb 
JOY FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND PrSs aSd 
PEACEABLY ASSEMBLE AND PETITON TH 
GOVERNMENT FOR REDRESS OF GRIEVANCE 
SHALL NOT BE ABRIDGED. May I explar„; Mada, 
President? 


common good or the interest of the community as the 
ultimate end or objective. It emphasizes that press free- 
dom belongs not only to the publishers, the owners 
or editors of the newspapers or the managers or the 
owners of other forms of mass media, but also more 
importantly to the people and the community. 

The important implication of the amendment, there- 
fore, is that there must be a responsible exercise of the 
freedom — that this freedom is not a value or an end by 
itself, but that more importantly it has a social dimen- 
sion. It also means that the people must be given access 
to all forms of media, which necessarily and clearly 
implies, among others, that not only must there be no 
precensorship or prior restraint by government, but 
there must also be no precensorship by the press itself in 
the free exchange of ideas and comments in the press so 
necessary in our democratic society. 

The reorientation is a response to developments in 
the last few years in the press. 

The age of romanticism in the press is long past. The 
press no longer refers to newspapers alone but also to 
other forms of media such as television, radio and 
others. It has metamorphosed into business, even big 
business, dependent on advertising and sometimes or 
oftentimes on the patronage of political and economic 
quarters, if not on their active participation and owner- 
ship resulting in the monopoly of media. Competing, 
novel and unpopular ideas should be assured of a forum. 
Unorthodox views, which have no claim on broadcast 
time or newspaper space as a matter of right, are in a 
poor position to compete with those aired or printed as 
a matter of grace. 

Madam President, the proposed amendment means 
that we shall wean away our provision from the Ameri- 
can formulation without, however, preventing us from 
availing of the various interpretations given by U.S. 
decisions which keep on changing over the years. It is 
our hope that our own courts will try to discern, on its 
own, the meaning and extent of the free expression 
and press provision of our Constitution and will not be 
slavish to American interpretations. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. He has five minutes. 

MR. FOZ. The amendment seeks to reorient our 
traditional provision on press freedom and the right of 
expression. It makes for a more realistic phraseology to 
reflect the truth that it is not an absolute freedom just 
like all the civil rights under our Bill of Rights. But the 
more important thing. Madam President, is the emphasis 
on the word “people” which is not found in the tradi- 
tional provision on freedom of expression and of the 
press. Under our amendment, individuals and groups 
may exercise the freedom of expression and of the 
press, but such assertion of the freedom must have the 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the Committee does 
not accept the amendment. 

It is the position of the Committee that absolutely 
nothing that is sought to be protected by the amend- 
ment is not already protected by the present provision. 

The present provision is a provision found in the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions. It has been a subject of 
extensive jurisprudence explaining what it means, what 
its limitations are. Certainly, it does not suggest that 
freedom is absolute. Certainly, it prohibits prior re- 
straints. Certainly, it prohibits subsequent punishment. 
There is really nothing in the proposed amendment 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


759 


which reflects anything that is not already reflected in 
the old provision. In the explanation of Commissioner 
Foz, he said that his formulation suggests that freedom is 
a social responsibility, but there is nothing in his provi- 
sion which explicitly says more than what is already said 
in the old provision. And when we speak of the right of 
the people, we are actually cutting down the rights 
guaranteed by this provision because people are human 
persons. By limiting that protection to the right of the 
people, we are removing the protection for corporate 
entities like publishers, publishing companies, news- 
paper companies, and so forth. Because of all these and 
because the new formulation really adds nothing and, in 
fact, debilitates the old provision, the Committee does 
not accept the amendment. 

MR. FOZ. May I respond to what Father Bernas has 
said. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. FOZ. Precisely, the intention of including the 
word “people” is to give the provision on freedom of 
expression and of the press a social dimension. We know 
very well that this freedom is, in the first instance, 
exercised by editors, publishers and owners of print and 
broadcast media. But in exercising this freedom, there is 
the general tendency to think that it is a freedom of the 
editors, publishers and managers of print and broadcast 
media. We are trying here to emphasize and drive home 
the point that the exercise of freedom should have a 
relation to the common good. This is a reminder to 
them that whenever they write or express an opinion, it 
is to be so expressed so that the public good is achieved 
in the end. That is the purpose of putting emphasis on 
the word “people” in this provision which does not 
appear in the traditional provision on freedom of the 
press and of expression. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Rosario Braid 
is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. May I be allowed also 
to add to that. Commissioner Foz has explained the 
first part of the amendment and the second part of 
that amendment follows that first sentence, which says. 
THE STATE SHALL PROTECT THIS FREEDOM 
THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF STRUC- 
TURES THAT ENABLE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
WHICH PROMOTES SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PAR- 
TICIPATION. I admit that during the past years, free- 
dom of the press and of expression were enjoyed only 
by a few, by those who had access to information and 
knowledge. This concept of freedom has come out of 
the liberal democracies where there was very little 
information disparity between the center and the 


periphery. But in developing countries like the Philip- 
pines where 70 percent of the people have little access 
to knowledge and information, there is little social and 
political awareness. Many are not able to exercise this 
freedom to the maximum. So I submit that the state 
should protect the right to freedom of information by 
building the necessary structures to enable the people 
to truly participate. 

The old traditional concept of freedom did not help 
the majority of our people. It was enjoyed by a few who 
have access to information. Our amendment is to locate 
freedom in a different context, in the social context of 
the developing country like the Philippines. So, I 
request that this proposal be submitted to the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the position of the Com- 
mittee with respect to the second part of the amend- 
ment? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee does not accept the 
second part of the amendment either. 

MR. FOZ. I suggest that we vote first on the first 
part of the amendment which I presented, and then we 
proceed to the second part of it. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, may I be permit- 
ted to say a few words? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Padilla is 
recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I would like to say that the present 
provision, which states: “No law shall be passed abridg- 
ing the freedom of speech, or of the press ...” is ex- 
pressed in the negative, which is stronger than a positive 
statement that there be a guarantee of the right to free- 
dom of speech and of the press. The negative phrase 
“No law” is not only prohibitive but also more 
emphatic than a positive statement of the same concept. 
For example, under Section 1, it says: “No person shall 
be deprived of life, liberty or property without due 
process of law.” That, Madam President, is stronger than 
“Every person is entitled to life, liberty and property.” 

With regard to the mention of the people, the present 
provision mentions the people but only in relation, speci- 
fically, to the right to peaceably assemble and petition 
for redress of grievances. There is no mention of the 
people in the first part because, as stated by Commis- 
sioner Bernas, that is not only limited to the people; it 
is very extensive. What I want to stress is that the 
present provision better expresses, with more emphasis, 
the right or the freedom of speech and of the press. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will then proceed to vote on 
the first part of the amendment as proposed by Com- 
missioner Foz. 

Those in favor of the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Foz, please raise their hand. 


760 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. LAUREL. Madam President, I would like to say 
that there is no need of dividing the two proposals read 
by the two coauthors. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is the request of Commis- 
sioner Foz and, therefore, we will agree to it. 

MR. LAUREL. I think there seems to be no disagree- 
ment among all the Members of this body regarding the 
motives of the two coauthors. Actually, I agree with 
everything that they said, but it so only happens that 
what they seek is already here in the provision. There is 
nothing to add to it. As a matter of fact, it is well-under- 
stood not only in American jurisprudence but also in 
Philippine jurisprudence. So what they want is already 
here and the language has been so interpreted and so 
emphasized in court rulings. I do not think there can be 
any misunderstanding as to what the provision reads. As 
a matter of fact, I like it very much when our dis- 
tinguished friend and colleague, Commissioner Foz, 
referred to traditional provisions and also to what is 
kriown in political law as freedom of expression which 
refers, m brief, to all that is provided for - freedom of 
speech and of the press and the right of the people to 
re'dr,? “‘"'I petltion the government for 

SreTwith said, we all 

agree with. That is so because there is nothing that we 

that is 

not understood by everyone else, and I do not see any 
reason why there should be any changes. ^ 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, 
nizl™ Commissioner de Castro is recog- 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I believe it is not wise to vote separately on these 
two sentences, because if the first sentence loLs and the 
second sentence wins, the second sentence refers to the 
freedoms which are contained in the first sentence so 
the second sentence cannot stand. I suggest that we vote 
on the whole proposed amendment. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, what is the pleasure of 
Commissioner Foz? 

MR. FOZ. In response to what has been said, I still 
insist that the first amendment be treated separately. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. The Chair rules in favor 
of Commissioner Foz. 

As many as are in favor of the first part of the amend- 
ment to Section 9, please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand. ) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 10 votes in favor and 1 5 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

Let us proceed to vote on the second part of the pro- 
posed amendment, that of Commissioner Rosario Braid. 

As many as are in favor, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 1 1 votes in favor and 1 7 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Villacorta be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I would like 
to propose an amendment, by addition, on Section 6, 
on the second sentence which states: 

. . . access to official records and to documents and 

papers pertaining to official acts, transactions, or decisions. 

The amendment is to add after “decisions” the 
phrase: AS WELL AS GOVERNMENT RESEARCH 
DATA USED AS BASIS FOR POLICY DEVELOP- 
MENT. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. Will the Commissioner kindly restate the 
amendment? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, Madam President. It is: AS 
WELL AS GOVERNMENT RESEARCH DATA USED 
AS BASIS FOR POLICY DEVELOPMENT. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes be recognized for some amend- 
ments. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


761 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My proposed amendment. 
Madam President, is to delete Section 10, that reads: 
“No law granting a title of royalty or nobility shall be 
enacted,” because it is out of place in the Bill of Rights. 
It should be relocated to the provisions on the Legisla- 
ture or on the General Provisions. Therefore, it should 
be deleted from the enumeration of the Bill of Rights, 
which is in accordance with the observation of Commis- 
sioner Jose B. Laurel, Jr. on the matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the reaction of the 
Committee. 

FR. BERNAS. We have no objection to transferring 
that provision to the General Provisions, which speaks 
of our republican form of government. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection to the proposed deletion of 
Section 10? The Chair hears none; the motion 

is approved. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Is the Committee ready to 
entertain an amendment on Section 1 7? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I have an 
anterior amendment on Section 16, page 3. 

THE PRESIDENT. Section 16, page 3. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, anterior amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. My amendment is on Section 7, page 2, 
line 19, which is to insert between the words “people” 
and “to” the following: WHETHER EMPLOYED BY 
THE STATE OR PRIVATE ESTABLISHMENTS. In 
other words, the section will now read as follows: ‘ The 
right of the people WHETHER EMPLOYED BY THE 
STATE OR PRIVATE ESTABLISHMENTS to form 
associations, unions, or societies for purposes not 
contrary to law shall not be abridged.” 

May I explain. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
make a comment on that. The way it is worded now, this 
right belongs to all people, whether employed or not. 
But if we modify it to people whether employed by the 
government or private establishments, we limit it to 
people employed. How about the unemployed, the 
children? 


MR. LERUM. I understand that. Madam President, 
that is why I request that I be allowed to explain the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has five 
minutes to explain his proposed amendment. 

MR. LERUM. Under the 1935 Bill of Rights, the 
right to form associations is granted to all persons 
whether or not they are employed in the government. 
Under that provision, we allow unions in the govern- 
ment, in government-owned and controlled corporations 
and in other industries in the private sector, such as 
the Philippine Government Employees’ Association, 
unions in the GSIS, the SSS, the DBP and other govern- 
ment-owned and controlled corporations. Also, we have 
unions of supervisory employees and of security guards. 
But what is tragic about this is that after the 1973 
Constitution was approved and in spite of an express 
recognition of the right to organize in P.D. No. 442, 
known as the Labor Code, the right of government 
workers, supervisory employees and security guards to 
form unions was abolished. 

And we have been fighting against this abolition. In 
every tripartite conference attended by the government, 
management and workers, we have always been insisting 
on the return of these rights. However, both the govern- 
ment and employers opposed our proposal, so nothing 
came out of this until this week when we approved a 
provision which states: 

Notwithstanding any provision of this article, the right 

to self-organization shall not be denied to government 

employees. 

We are afraid that without any corresponding provi- 
sion covering the private sector, the security guards, the 
supervisory employees or majority employees will still 
be excluded, and that is the purpose of this amendment. 

I will be very glad to accept any kind of wording as 
long as it will amount to absolute recognition of private 
sector employees, without exception, to organize. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Certainly, the sense is very acceptable, 
but the point raised by Commissioner Rodrigo is well- 
taken. Perhaps, we can lengthen this a little bit more to 
read: “The right of the people WHETHER UNEM- 
PLOYED OR EMPLOYED BY STATE OR PRIVATE 
ESTABLISHMENTS.” 

I want to avoid also the possibility of having this 
interpreted as applicable only to the employed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will the proponent accept an 
amendment to the amendment. Madam President? 

MR. LERUM. Yes, as long as it will carry the idea 
that the right of the employees in the private sector is 
recognized. 


762 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. The amendment is to insert 
the phrase INCLUDING THOSE EMPLOYED IN 
GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE FIRMS, so the section 
shall read: “The right of the people INCLUDING 
THOSE EMPLOYED IN GOVERNMENT AND 
PRIVATE FIRMS to form associations, unions . . .” 

MR. LERUM. I think using the word “INCLUDING” 
will improve the provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by Commissioner 
Lerum? 

MR. LERUM. I accept, Madam President. 


law shall not be abridged.” In proposing that amend- 
ment I ask to make of record that I want the following 
provisions of the Labor Code to be automatically 
abolished, which read: 

ART. 245. Security guards and other personnel em- 
ployed for the protection and security of the person, pro- 
perties and premises of the employers shall not be eligible 
for membership in a labor organization. 

ART. 246. Managerial employees are not eligible to 
Join, assist, and form any labor organization. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 


MR. RODRIGO. Is Commissioner Foz here? Because 
if I remember right, there is a provision in the Civil 
Service to that effect, the right to self-organization. 


MR. FOZ. Yes, there is in the Civil Service. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, I am willing to 
accept any kind of amendment as long as the right of the 
people m the private sector is recognized, because under 
two provisions of P.D. No. 442, the Labor Code, this 
was denied. Unless we have an express provision in our 
Constitution, I am afraid we still have to go to the 
Supreme Court to declare these provisions of the Labor 
Code illegal. I will be very grateful to anyone who 
changes such provisions. 


FR. BERNAS. The Committee accepts. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment, as amended. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Guingona be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Guingona is recognized. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

the parties time to reconcile their differences. 
It was 5:13 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


At 5.29 p.m., the session was resumed with 
Honorable Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. presiding. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Lerum be recognized to continue his amend- 
ment. 


MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to propose the following amendment by addition, so 
that Section 16 will now read in full: “All persons shall 
have the right to a speedy disposition of their cases 
before all judicial, quasi-judicial, or administrative 
bodies. THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OR CONGRESS 
SHALL FIX BY LAW THE PERIOD WITHIN WHICH 
DECISIONS OF QUASI-JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRA- 
TIVE BODIES MUST BE DECIDED OR RESOLVED 
FROM THE DATE OF SUBMISSION.” 

Mr. Presiding Officer, may I explain that this will be 
complementary to the provision in the Article on the 
Judiciary that we approved. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Lerum is recognized. 

MR. LERUM. Mr. Presiding Officer, after a consulta- 
tion with several Members of this Commission, my 
amendment will now read as follows: “The right of the 
people INCLUDING THOSE EMPLOYED IN THE 
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS to form associa- 
tions, unions, or societies for purposes not contrary to 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Before 
Commissioner de Castro proceeds, may we have the 
answer of the Committee first. 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would like to hear 
some discussion on this . 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


763 


MR. DE CASTRO. The time limit for decisions of 
quasi-judicial bodies, particularly the constitutional 
commissions, like the Civil Service Commission, the 
Commission on Audit and the Commission on Elec- 
tions, have been fixed in the Common Provisions, that 
they shall decide their cases within 60 days from sub- 
mission thereof. So I think there is no need for the 
National Assembly to pass a law which limits such 
period within which decisions on their cases should be 
made. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, the quasi- 
judicial and administrative bodies we are contemplating 
include not only the constitutional commissions. In 
fact, there are other quasi-judicial or administrative 
bodies, and insofar as these are concerned, there is no 
fixed mandatory period for rendering decision. We are 
proposing that the legislature be mandated to fix the 
period by law. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). In other 
words, the Commissioner’s amendment covers only 
those bodies which do not have fixed period within 
which to decide their cases. 

MR. GUINGONA. In the Constitution, yes, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Just a point of information. In the 
Article on the Judiciary, there is a provision that the 
rules of quasi-judicial bodies shall be approved by the 
Supreme Court and shall remain effective unless disap- 
proved by the Supreme Court. So it will be for the 
Supreme Court to see to it that that provision regarding 
the period within which resolutions or decisions shall be 
handed down shall be incorporated in the rules of these 
other quasi-judicial bodies other than the constitutional 
commissions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). In other 
words, the Commissioner is saying that it is not neces- 
sary to put it in the Constitution. Is that the import of 
Commissioner Regalado’s statement? 

MR. REGALADO. It is not necessary, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, because of the provision in the Article on the 
Judiciary. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, 1 do not think 
all quasi-judicial or administrative bodies are covered by 
the provisions contained in the Constitution. I am think- 
ing of quasi-judicial and administrative bodies for which 
the period for making a decision may not be contained 


in the Constitution, both those existing now or those 
that may be created in the future. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
the Commissioners have been well-enlightened enough 
as to the rationale of the proposed amendment. Let us 
now vote on this. What does the Committee say before 
we go to a vote? 

FR. BERNAS. Especially in the light of the remark of 
Commissioner Regalado, we leave the matter to the 
body. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Those in 
favor of the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Guingona, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 2 votes in favor and 27 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, for a clarificatory 
question, I ask that Commissioner Quesada be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
ask the Committee on Section 16, page 3, which states: 

All persons shall have the right to a speedy disposition of 

their cases before all judicial, quasi-judicial, or administra- 
tive bodies. 

Do these cases also include administrative cases? 
FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. The reason I ask is that many 
government employees have not been able to invoke this 
particular provision of the Bill of Rights. And there are 
many pending administrative cases brought in against 
employees or officials which have remained undisposed 
of. So I am glad that this would have reference to these 
particular cases. 

Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Padilla be recognized. 


764 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I refer to 
Section 1 8 on the right to bail. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Anterior amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 


MR. DE LOS REYES.' It will be transposed to Sec- 
tion 19 as the opening sentence thereof, and I quote: 

No person shall be held to answer for a criminal offense 
without due process of law. In all criminal prosecutions, the 
accused shall be presumed innocent. 

The reason for this is that those are all matters which 
pertain to procedural due process. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). There is t>iere is no objection from any 

an anterior amendment by Commissioner de los Reyes. rnember of the Committee, I accept it. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I have two amendments on 
Section 17, which reads: “No person shall be held to 
answer for a criminal offense without due process of 
law.” The first amendment is to delete Section 17 
because it is self-delimiting inasmuch as it is already 
covered by Section 1 , which reads: 

No person shall be deprived by life, liberty or property 
without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied 
the equal protection of the laws. 

In other words, while Section 17 is limited to crimi- 
nal offense and to substantial due process. Section 1 is 
all-embracing in that it includes all rights, criminal 
offense, and substantive and procedural due process. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
the alternative amendment? 


(Mr. Bengzon). What is 


incWH the Committee is nc 

the 193? and hecaxxsQ it is present i 

amendment Constitutions, the alternate 

amendment is to transpose it to Section 19 as the beeii 
mng of Its sentence because it is more related o what 
contained m that whole section. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Section 17 is transposed as the first sentence of 
Section 19. 

MR. TADEO. Mr. Presiding Officer, anterior amend- 
ment on Section 5, page 2, line 11. Iminumungkahi 
kong alisin iyong mga salitang nagmumula sa “or upang 
maiwasan natin ang walang pakundangang paglabag sa 
liberty of abode sa ngalan ng national security at pagsa- 
sagawa ng “hamletting” ng kung sinu-sino na lamang. 
Kapag inalis ito, maisasagawa lamang ang “hamletting 
upon lawful order of the court. Inuulit ko na alisin natin 
ang mga salitang nagmumula sa “or” pagkatapos ng 
“court.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Puwede 
po bang basahin ng Commissioner ang buong pro is- 
yon? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr, Bengzon) WI 

does the Committee say? ® 


f f is concerned, 

first of all, let me say that I am in agreement with Com- 
missioner de los Reyes that this matter is adequately 
covered by Section 1. However, I do not think it is 
timely to delete this now because we have just exper- 
ienced a period when there was very little respect foi 
due process in criminal proceedings. For us now to 
delete this might give the message to the people that we 
are reducing their rights. So it is not a question of sub- 
stance but of timeliness. I think it is not timely. As fai 
as the other proposed amendment is concerned, if it is 
just a question of transposition, I think that can be 
easily handled. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Does the 
sponsor mean the Committee accepts the second amend- 
ment? 

FR. BERNAS. May I know where it is transposed? 


MR. TADEO. Ang Section 5 ay nagsasaad ng sumu- 
sunod: 

The liberty of abode and of changing the same ^d of 
travel, within the limits prescribed by law, shall not e im- 
paired except upon lawful order of the court. 

Iminumungkahi kong alisin iyong or when neces- 
sary in the interest of national security, public safety, or 
public health.” 

the presiding officer (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would like to hear 
discussion on this and preparatory to that, let me read 
the provision of the 1935 Constitution. This provision 
we have now is a provision of the 1973 Constitution. 
The 1935 Constitution simply says: 

The liberty of abode and of changing the same within 
the limits prescribed by law shall not be impaired. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo is recognized. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


765 


MR. RODRIGO. Aside from that, this includes the 
right to travel. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. And there are cases when passports 
may not be granted or passports already granted may be 
cancelled. If the amendment is approved, then passports 
may not be cancelled unless it is ordered by the court. 
Is that the intention? The proponent is really worried 
about changing of abode when he mentioned “ham- 
letting.” 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. But another right is involved here 
and that is to travel. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I request a 
suspension so that we can separate the liberty of abode 
and of changing the same from the right to travel, be- 
cause they may necessitate different provisions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 5:45 p.m 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:48 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
session is resumed. 

Commissioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. The proposal is amended to read; 
“The liberty of abode and of changing the same within 
the limits prescribed by law, shall not be impaired 
except upon lawful order of the court. NEITHER 
SHALL THE RIGHT TO TRAVEL BE IMPAIRED EX- 
CEPT IN THE INTEREST OF NATIONAL SECURITY, 
PUBLIC SAFETY, OR PUBLIC HEALTH AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Committee has accepted the amendment, as amended. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized. 


MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I refer to the 
right to bail on Section 18, page 3, lines 21 to 24. With 
the expectation that capital punishment would be 
abolished, the Committee deleted the clause “except 
those charged with capital offense when evidence of 
guilt is strong.” This is the phrase that has been in the 
1935 and 1973 Constitutions. There is a difference 
between capital punishment and capital offense; they 
are not identical. Of course, capital offense as defined 
in Rule 1 14, Section 4, of the 1985 Rules on Criminal 
Procedure reads: 

A capital offense, as the term is used in this Rule, is an 
offense which, under the law existing at the time of its 
commission and at the time of the application to be admit- 
ted to bail, may be punished with death. 

Assuming that the Congress or the National Assembly 
will not reinstate capital punishment, if this clause ap- 
pearing in the former Constitutions is likewise not re- 
instated, every accused person before conviction will be 
entitled to bail, even if he is charged with a capital of- 
fense. For example, murder is punishable by reclusion 
temporal in its maximum period, reclusion perpetua to 
death; treason, by reclusion temporal, reclusion perpe- 
tua to death; and parricide, by reclusion perpetua to 
death. So even if death penalty is not imposed, these 
and other offenses are considered capital offenses. It is 
true that under the Revised Penal Code, the maximum 
of the prescribed penalty is death, but the actual penal- 
ty imposed by the court, especially if the mitigating 
circumstance is attendant, is the minimum period of the 
penalty. So in murder, assuming, for example, the quali- 
fying circumstance of treachery, the accused may be 
convicted of murder but the lower penalty is imposed 
in its minimum period which is reclusion temporal in its 
maximum period. 

I do not believe the intention of the Committee was 
to allow all these persons accused of these capital of- 
fenses — where the death penalty may be imposed but 
which in many cases is not imposed even by the court 
because of some mitigating circumstances — before 
conviction the right to bail. So my amendment is to 
restore that clause so that a person accused of rape, 
murder, treason, kidnapping with ransom, robbery, 
homicide, etc., where the evidence of guilt is strong may 
be denied by the court the right to bail. Of course, it is 
upon the prosecution to prove, because it has the 
burden of proof that the evidence of guilt is strong. I am 
afraid that if this clause is not reinstated, it would mean 
that all persons accused no matter how grave the felony 
is will be entitled to bail as a matter of right. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding of the intention of 
the Committee is that with the abolition of the death 
penalty, the category of capital offense disappears. Also, 
the intention of the Committee is to make bail by suffi- 
cient securities available to all types of crimes. 


766 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. PADILLA. I think the inaccuracy, if not error, 
in that intention of the Committee is to identify capital 
offense with capital punishment, which are not identical. 

FR. BERNAS. But if an offense is no longer punish- 
able by death, it ceases to be a capital offense. 

MR. PADILLA. That is not correct because a capital 
offense may be punishable by death. But even if it is not 
punishable by death, if the penalty is reclusion perpetua 
or even reclusion temporal in its maximum period, it is 
still a capital offense. In other words, capital offense is 
not synonymous nor identical with capital punishment. 

FR. BERNAS. We submit the matter to a vote by the 
Commission. 


MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon) Just a 
matter of clarification. Does the Chair unimand tL' 

this Sut'‘r " PadUla is that if 

bailabTef “that'^crert? " 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, that is the intention, 
sio™ RegalTirrecorn'ied.'^ ®“8zon). Commis- 

sider'^thif aTOndmem 

before I state it, may I e° plLr‘’“ ™™dment? But 

only be reclusln peZ'ua 

here, even a confessed murderer will 

us consider a scenario The' roerso^?'' '’f ' 'r'=‘ 

murder knows that the imnosahip^ ^ charged with 

perpetua. Upon being charged in cou^rrhemosVh'^?'^'' 
swears that he will get even with the family of hi^victta 
for charging him m court. Since he is a man of h s wo™ 
one week later he goes back and kills another Tern: 
ber of the family. Again, he is haled into cT f 
posts bail, and so forth, and so on. Would 
been the intention of the Committee that this oerSIn 
who has shown that degree of moral perversity anS 
depravity can still be allowed to roam free under a baS 
of generally now P50,000, which is the bail for offense' 
punishable by reclusion perpetua? 


FR. BERNAS. It is not the intention of the Commit- 
tee to fix the bail at P50,000 because the meaning of 
sufficient sureties will be changed by legislation. 

MR. REGALADO. We have a provision that excessive 
bail shall not be required, which has been in the Consti- 
tution since 1935 and up to now. The then Department 
of Justice, pursuant to that provision that no excessive 


bail shall be required and also considering the interests 
of society, generally puts it at P50,000, but let us forget 
about the bail. I now go back to the situation where a 
person is known to have harbored criminal intent, and 
actually it has been demonstrated that he had really 
carried out such a criminal intent and was still going to 
again carry out that criminal intent. Should he be 
permitted to roam free? I propose, therefore, an 
amendment to the amendment to avoid a discussion on 
the meaning of capital offense and capital penalty to 
read as follows: ALL PERSONS EXCEPT THOSE 
CHARGED WITH OFFENSES PUNISHABLE BY 
RECLUSION PERPETUA WHEN EVIDENCE OF 
GUILT IS STRONG SHALL, BEFORE CONVICTION, 
BE BAILABLE. In other words, in effect, we are just 
substituting offenses punishable by reclusion perpetua 
for offenses punishable by death, because this is no 
improbable. Jurisprudence shows that there are peop e 
who are repeater-killers. There are people 
only recidivists in the crime of murder but are * 
delinquents. The mad-dog killers of the Unite 
are also replicated in the Philippines. Shall we per 
them to be free on bail despite the danger j^h 

to rape and then go out of detention under bai , 
can easily be procured through sufficient 7 

because we cannot also require cash bail bond. 

P50,000 or PI 00,000? He merely pays a 
premium for a surety bail bond. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Will the Commissioner please restate 
his amendment? 


MR. REGALADO. My 

» add the. nhra^P- AT T. PERSONS EXCEE 1 / 


to add the phrase: ALL PERSONS E^CEPl 
CHARGED WITH OFFENSES PUNISHABLE 
RECLUSION PERPETUA WHEN EVIDEN^^^ 
guilt IS STRONG SHALL, PPPURE CO , 

BE BAILABLE, which is at least for the protection of 

society against moral perverts. 


FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Although I am inclined to accept the 
proposed amendment, I guess the original proponent 
should be the one to accept it because it is an amend- 
ment to his amendment. 


Mr. REGALADO. Yes. My amendment is the effect 
of the discussion over the distinction between a capital 
offense and a capital punishment, which is actually true 
in American jurisprudence. Here in the Philippines, we 
seem to equate the meaning of a capital offense with an 
offense punishable by death. That is as it is in the Rules 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


767 


of Criminal Procedure which, of course, will be affected 
by this. 

So to avoid a possible uncertainty as to what we 
really mean, I proposed this exception of offenses 
punishable by reclusion perpetua. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does Commissioner Padilla say? 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I fully agree 
with the idea proposed by Commissioner Regalado. 
My only problem is that if we limit it to reclusion per- 
petua, persons charged with murder may still claim the 
right to bail, even when the evidence of guilt is strong, 
because he will say that murder is punishable not by 
reclusion perpetua but by reclusion temporal in its 
maximum period to death. The same way, in treason, 
the penalty is reclusion temporal to death. That is the 
only problem, otherwise, I would accept the amend- 
ment. But if I do, then I am afraid that some of these 
accused might commit the same offense again especially 
those contemplated in the proposed amendment to the 
amendment — for example, a fellow commits murder, 
then he is released on bail; he commits another murder, 
he is released on bail again, because he might say “My 
penalty is not reclusion perpetua." It may only be 
reclusion temporal or reclusion temporal in its 
maximum period. 

MR. REGALADO. May I say something? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. That is the only thing that I am 
worried about; otherwise, I would agree with Commis- 
sioner Regalado. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can 
Commissioner Regalado plug that loophole? 

MR. REGALADO. Actually, as of now, the penalty 
for murder is reclusion temporal in its maximum period 
to death. It could be reclusion temporal in its maximum 
period, if he has a mitigating circumstance and no 
aggravating circumstance; or it could be reclusion per- 
petua, if he has neither mitigating nor aggravating cir- 
cumstances. But the words used are “which may be 
punishable by reclusion perpetua. ” 

In other words, that does not rule out a range ot 
penalty, the maxunum of which is reclusion perpetua, 
as it is now with the amendment. Offenses which may 
be punishable by reclusion perpetua will cover the 
situation of a range of penalty. Let us say. Congress 
later makes a law to comply with the three periods in a 
degree. The penalty for murder will now be reclusion 
temporal to reclusion perpetua. Therefore, a penalty of 


three periods, with prision mayor as the minimum, 
reclusion temporal as the medium and reclusion 
perpetua as the maximum may be provided. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, under the 
phrase “which may be punishable by reclusion perpetua, 

I accept the amendment to my amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In line with the suggestion of the 
Chair to plug the loophole, I was about to suggest to 
Commissioners Regalado and Padilla, if we could use the 
term “imposable penalty” of reclusion perpetua. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
suggestion of Commissioner Regalado covers that con- 
tingency which has already been accepted by Commis- 
sioner Padilla. 

MR. PADILLA. The word “punishable,” I think, 
would be more accurate than “imposable” because 
when one says “punishable,” that is the penalty pre- 
scribed by law; when one says “imposable,” that is the 
penalty that may be imposed by the court, and we 
usually follow the penalty that is prescribed by law. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can we 
hear the comment of the Committee before recognizing 
Commissioner Davide? 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee would like to accept 
the amendment, as amended, by Commissioner 
Regalado. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. We have just approved the section on 
the abolition of the death penalty, but we left it to the 
National Assembly to reimpose it in certain cases. What 
will now happen? If there will be a law which might be 
enacted later restoring the death penalty in certain 
cases, would it be an exception to this proposed amend- 
ment? 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding of the amendment 
is that the penalty at any rate will be a range which 


768 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


would include reclusion perpetua, so that even if the MR. AZCUNA. Yes, death for a heinous crime and 
maximum will be death . . . then there is no range. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, with the understanding that if, 
in the event that the National Assembly will enact a law 
restoring the death penalty, it is with more reason that 
that particular offense to which a penalty of death is 
imposed should not be bailable except when the 
evidence is not strong. 


FR. BERNAS. So, in that case, tlie situations con 
templated by Commissioner Regalado would be bail 
able. 

MR. AZCUNA. Would be bailable? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Azeuna is recognized. 


MR. AZCUNA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
suggest that instead of using “reclusion perpetua, ” 
because really, heinous crimes which later on may be 
punishable by death will become bailable, why do we 

™.Vh OFFENSES PUNISHABLE 
the HIGHEST PENALTY because then, it 
would include reclusion perpetua, if we do not have 

death penalty; but if we do have death penalty, then 
^ ^ A '^“^Eide death penalty. Heinous crimes might be 

Phhfchable with 

is vei? c"ear Xr- "hat we say here. It 

ly ear, there is no need of interpretation. 

acc«fabkTco™° Bengzon). Is that 

acceptable to Commissioners Regalado and Padilla? 

cril''s” w1fr^^s°cti™‘22'''■ r'"-* 

rS7enX 

sSSeS 


FR. BERNAS. Would become bailable in case we 
have a crime punishable by a single death penalty. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, that is right; it would be bail- 
able. So, the most heinous crime would be bailable 
whereas a lower crime would not be bailable, because 
a lower crime might be punishable by reclusion per- 
petua only, whereas a crime punishable with a single 
penalty of death would be bailable because it is not 
within the exception. 

FR. BERNAS. But I think from the logic of the 
proposal — the explanation requested by Commissioner 
Davide — even if the crime were to be given a single 
imposable penalty, that crime would be nonbailable. 

MR. AZCUNA. But the life of the law has not been 
logic; it has been experience. I would prefer to make 
it clear. 

FR. BERNAS. Except that the Commissioner re- 
duced the scope of the nonbailability. He could reduce 
the scope of nonbailability to that crime. 

MR. AZCUNA. Which includes the highest penalty. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Would 
Commissioner Azeuna insist on that amendment or 
would he be satisfied with the explanation? 


MR. AZCUNA. Yes, but supposing that happe 
that provtston on bail will be faulty because E 
Will make offenses that are punishable by a single de 
penalty bailable because it is not punishable by rec 
sion perpetua. 


MR. AZCUNA. I would leave it to the Committee. 
I just want to bring up the point. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I just want to 
say that I am not happy with the word “heinous. 


MR. REGALADO. In other words, the Commis- 
sioner contemplates a situation where Congress may 
eventually restore the death penalty. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. That is right. So, we should word it 
such that it will read; EXCEPT OFFENSES PUNISH- 
ABLE WITH THE HIGHEST PENALTY. 

FR. BERNAS. But what the Commissioner contem- 
plates is a situation where Congress prescribes a single 
imposable penalty. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Padilla, we are now discussing that particular 
portion with respect to bail. The word “heinous will 
be on Section 22. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. Precisely, the proposed amend- 
ment has something to say about heinous crimes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Azeuna is not insisting on that amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. I just like to say that in the Revised 
Penal Code, the crimes are classified into grave, less 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


769 


grave and light. Maybe we can say “most grave” but not 
“heinous.” That is not found in the Revised Penal 
Code. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think this burden will fall on my 
committee, the Committee on Style. And so, I just 
want to ask: When we say a crime is punishable by 
death, does that not mean that it can be punished also 
by lower penalties but it can be punished by death? 
There is a difference between saying a crime is punished 
with death, which means it is only death, and it is 
punishable by death, which means it can be punished by 
death but it can also be punished by reclusion perpetua 
or reclusion temporal. Is that not right? 

FR. BERNAS. That is my understanding. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. AZCUNA. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a comment 
on that. That is not necessarily so, Mr. Presiding Officer. 
In Malaysia, for trafficking in drugs, they have a single 
mandatory penalty of death, regardless of mitigating 
circumstances. The only penalty is death, if the accused 
is found guilty. So, it is possible that in the future, our 
National Assembly may adopt that form of penalty. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
we are ready to vote on the amendment. Can Commis- 
sioner Regalado restate the amendment? Or can Com- 
missioner Padilla please restate his amendment, as 
amended by Commissioner Regalado? 

MR. PADILLA. We request Commissioner Regalado 
to restate his amendment because he inserted his amend- 
ment which I have accepted. 

MR REGALADO. Section 18 would read as follows: 
“All persons, EXCEPT THOSE CHARGED WITH OF- 
FENSES WHICH MAY BE PUNISHABLE BY RECLU- 
SION PERPETUA WHEN THE EVIDENCE OF GUILT 
IS STRONG, SHALL, before conviction, be bailable 
by sufficient sureties xxx.” 

FR. BERNAS. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, as amended. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment, as amended, is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Commissioner Nolledo be recognized. 


MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, a point of 
clarification only on the section which we have just 
approved. I refer to Section 18 on the phrase “or may 
be released on recognizance as may be provided by 
law.” 

May we ask the distinguished sponsors if this matter 
of release on recognizance contemplates a situation 
where an offense is punishable by reclusion perpetua 
but the evidence of guilt is not strong and the offender 
may be entitled to release on recognizance in the man- 
ner provided by law? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, we put “as may be provided 
by law” because we would like the legislature to deter- 
mine when recognizance is an adequate substitute for 
bail. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, as contemplated by the sponsors, 
it does not preclude that . . . 

FR. BERNAS. It does not. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). May the 

air ask the Floor Leader how many more Commis- 
sioners would wish to propose amendments? 

MR. RAMA. There are three more. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

1 is an addition to the original Section 

w ich now forms part of Section 19 by reason of 
an amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes. This 
proposed amendment is coauthored by Commissioners 
eresa leva and Chito Gascon. The Committee rejected 
this amendment which is covered by Resolution No. 

on the ground that it was already covered by due 
process. 

To my mind, due process has two parts: the proce- 
ural due process which talks of jurisdiction, previous 
notice, hearing and judgment, while the second part is 
substantive due process which talks of a valid law. 
And so, the proposed amendment has no direct rele- 
vance to due process and cannot be categorized as in- 
volving and, therefore, covered by due process. This 
amendment assumes that one who espouses certain 
political beliefs and aspires for realization thereof must 
do so through peaceful and lawful means. 

Before I read the proposed amendment, I would 
like to state that there is a similar provision in the 
Constitution of France which reads as follows: “No 
man is to be interferred with because of his opinions, 
provided his avowal of them does not disturb public 
order as established by law.” 


770 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


My amendment will be relevant if we adopt the 
provision in the report of the Committee on the Legis- 
lative that the declaration of martial law will not sus- 
pend the operation and application of the Constitution, 
and this amendment will fully uphold the freedom that 
should be guaranteed to every citizen in a democratic 
society. 

The amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer, reads as 
follows; “No person shall be held to answer for a 
criminal offense without due process of law NOR 
SHALL ANY PERSON BE DETAINED MERELY BY 
REASON OF HIS POLITICAL BELIEFS AND AS- 
PIRATIONS.” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER. (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Again, if I may speak for the Com- 
mittee, the subject of the amendment in my judgment 
IS covered 1) by the due process clause; 2) by Section 9 

Txnr. and freedom of 

hnh ’ privilege of the writ of 

?he T.h?r^ instance^ves the person 

of ou?^n?^ uTi^mediate liberty because the philosophy 

act o^r^^Tt goverLent can 

cannot ^noL/ authority to act. If the government 
tion then tlVn authorizes the deten- 

privilet of th. > *’fted by appeal to the 

attemnt • ^ habeas corpus. So that if any 

that personTmay ^ 

process clauTaXSl"" “ 

sJak’iJe th^r "O' necessarily 

speaKing tor the Committee, this matter is adeauatelv 

covered by our Bill of Rights. And if this warviSid 

Se pasTand rt'h"’rm‘’'’““' "‘'"“"""ences of 

the past, and I think the remedies will be adequately 

provided for also m the delineation of the scope of 

the power to impose martial law and the power to 

suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus and 
the consequences thereof. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Would 
Commissioner Nolledo insist on his amendment? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I answer 
only for one minute. I do not believe that this is covered 
by due process as I already stated. If we were to say that 
it is covered already by the freedom of the press, then 
I would like to mention here that the purpose of the 
provision is preventive in nature. There are times that 
because of some political beliefs that one espouses in 
peaceful or through lawful means, he is unjustly de- 
tained and when one goes to the Supreme Court for a 
writ of habeas corpus it takes a lot of time for the 


Supreme Court to decide even if there is a provision on 
the period during which the Supreme Court may decide 
in order to dispose of the case. 

And so, if the Committee does not mind, Mr. Presi- 
ding Officer, I would like to submit this to the body 
for decision, and I will abide. 

FR. BERNAS. We submit the matter for decision by 
the body. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The amendment is an addition to 
the former Section 17 which now forms part of Section 
19, and it reads: “No person shall be held to answer for 
a criminal offense without due process of law NOR 
SHALL ANY PERSON BE DETAINED MERELY BY 
REASON OF HIS POLITICAL BELIEFS AND AS- 
PIRATIONS.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 19 votes in favor and 10 against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Brocka be 

recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Brocka is recognized. 

MR. BROCKA. This is a very minor amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. On Section 9, page 2, line 29, it says: 
“No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of 
speech.” I would like to recommend to the Committee 
the change of the word “speech” to EXPRESSION, or 
if not, add the words AND EXPRESSION after the 
word “speech,” because it is more expansive, it has a 
wider scope, and it would refer to means of expression 
other than speech. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. “Expression” is more broad than 
speech. We accept it. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


771 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is it 
accepted? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. So, that provision will now read; “No 
law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech, 
expression or of the press . . .” 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de los Reyes 
be recognized for the last amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On Section 18, line 23, after 
the period (.) and before “Excessive,” insert the follow- 
ing sentence; THIS RIGHT SHALL NOT BE AF- 
FECTED BY THE SUSPENSION OF THE PRIVILEGE 
OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. As far as the Committee is concerned, 
I am just debating whether it should be here or in 
Section 1 5. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is for the Committee on 
Style to decide. So long as the concept is admitted, 
I will be satisfied. 

FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, it is also in the 
provision on the executive department. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, the concept is accepted. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Subject to style. 

FR. BERNAS. Could the Commissioner read his pro- 
posed amendment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. After the period (.) and before 
the word “Excessive,” add; THIS RIGHT SHALL NOT 
BE AFFECTED BY THE SUSPENSION OF THE PRIV- 
ILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Suppose we say; THE RIGHT TO 
BAIL. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. All right. 


FR. BERNAS. The phrase ‘^SHALL NOT BE AF- 
FECTED” is rather weak. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. How about SHALL NOT BE 
DENIED? 


FR. BERNAS. I suggest it will be; SHALL NOT BE 
IMPAIRED EVEN WHEN THE PRIVILEGE OF THE 
WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS IS SUSPENDED. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Could 
Commissioner Bernas read it now? 

FR. BERNAS. It will read; THE RIGHT TO BAIL 
SHALL NOT BE IMPAIRED EVEN WHEN THE 
PRIVILEGE OF THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS 
IS SUSPENDED. 

MR. RODRIGO- Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask a 
question? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is that not understood? The sus- 
pension of the writ of habeas corpus refers to an entire- 
ly different thing. It is understood that it does not 
affect the right to bail. All that is affected is, if one 
is arrested, one can go to the court and ask that the 
body be produced. 

FR. BERNAS. There is jurisprudence during martial 
law which says that the suspension of the writ of 
habeas corpus also suspends the right to bail. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is that so? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. I mean, I disagree with that 
Supreme Court ruling, but it is there. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Another amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Wait 
a minute. Is there any objection to that amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, please. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. When the writ of habeas corpus 
is suspended, the person arrested sometimes is not 
charged. Therefore, there is nothing to bail. For exam- 
ple, during the time of President Quirino, when we 


772 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


were at the height of the Huk campaign, the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus was suspended. All those 
people whom we suspect to be participating in the 
rebellion or in the sedition were imprisoned, but they 
were not charged. So, there is nothing to bail. There- 
fore, the right to bail will not be effective. 


FR. BERNAS. The one about the right to bail. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

The suspension of the privilege of the writ shall apply 
only to persons judicially charged for rebellion or for 
offenses inherent in or directly connected with invasion. 


FR. BERNAS. I think that is a very good point, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. The remedy for this is to narrow 
the scope of the writ of habeas corpus, and this has been 
done in the provisions of the Article on the Executive 
where the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus will 
apply only to offenses . May I appeal to Commissioner 
Regalado? What was the scope of the suspension of 
the writ under the executive department? 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I help? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Yes, 
Commissioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is a recommendation by the 
Committee on the Executive to which I have some 
reservations, particularly on the proclamation of martial 
law and the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. 
Until such time that that provision is passed by this 
body, I think my comments on the suspension of the 
writ of habeas corpus relative to debates are still valid. 

FR. BERNAS. I think the comments are valid, yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I might as well read the provisic 
It says '" ®>^bodied in Committee Report No. 2 

th shall be the commander-in-chief of all 

the armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it be- 
comes necessary, he may call out such armed forces to 

fnTai of r*’"" '-'---lence, invasion or rebellion. 

requS it hT r the public safety 

and with tL ^ exceeding sixty days, 

and, with the concurrence of at least a majority of all tL 

ot the writ of habeas corpus, or place the Philippines or 
any part thereof under martial law. The Nationri^Assem- 
bly, by a vote of at least a majority of all its members in 
regular or special session, may revoke such procUm^o” 
or suspensron, or extend the same if the invasL or r““ 
hon shall persist and public safety requires it. 

^^other sentence there whi< 
says that the privilege of the writ may be . . . 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
body will now vote. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment proposed 
by Commissioner de los Reyes, as corrected by the 
Committee, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Few Members raised their hand.) 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a com- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). May I 
just announce the results first? 

The results show 33 votes in favor and 2 against; the 
amendment, as amended, is approved. 

Commissioner de Castro is recognized. 


MR. REGALADO. There is still some more 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. May I continue, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer: 

The Supreme Court may review, in an appropriate pro- 
ceeding filed by any citizen, the sufficiency of the factual 
basis of the proclamation of martial law or the suspension 
of the privilege of the writ or the extension thereof and 
must promulgate its decision on the same within thirty 
(30) days from its filing. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Just a comment, please. What 
happens if in the suspension of the writ of habeas 
corpus a person is arrested without any charge? 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. In a situation like that, since the 
privilege of the writ is not available and bail is not 
available either because there is no charge, then the 
person has to stay in jail. 


FR. BERNAS. There is another. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


MR. REGALADO. There are still four more para- 
graphs. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


773 


MR. RAMA. Commissioner Rustico de los Reyes is 
not yet through with his amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. My amendment is on Section 
19 . 

What is the statement of Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. PADILLA. Anterior amendment on Section 15. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Does 
Commissioner de los Reyes still have an amendment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On Section 19, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). How 
about Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. PADILLA. Section 15. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized for an anterior amend- 
ment. 

MR. PADILLA. In my interpellations on Section 15, 
I noticed that the phrase “or imminent danger thereof’ 
was deleted or eliminated and the explanation of the 
Committee through Commissioner Bernas was that it 
contemplates only actual invasion and rebellion. Consi- 
dering that the power or authority of the President as 
Commander-in-Chief in suspending the privilege of the 
writ of habeas corpus will be limited under the execu- 
tive department to not more than 60 days with the 
concurrence of Congress and then subject to review 
by the Supreme Court, will the Committee consider 
to reinsert the phrase “or imminent danger thereof,’’ as 
in the provision on the writ of habeas corpus? Com- 
missioner Bernas has said that it can be introduced and 
considered either by the Committee or by the body, 
so that it will read: “The privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus shall not be suspended except in cases of in- 
vasion or rebellion OR IMMINENT DANGER THERE- 
OF when the public safety requires it.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. Let me just say that when the Com- 
mittee decided to remove that, it was for the reason 
that the phrase “OR IMMINENT DANGER THERE- 
OF” could cover a multitude of sins and could be a 
source of a tremendous amount of irresistible tempta- 
tion. And so, to better protect the liberties of the peo- 
ple, we preferred to eliminate that. So, we submit it 
to the body for a vote. 

MR. PADILLA. I would just like to state that the 
term OR IMMINENT DANGER THEREOF appears 


in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions and it has not even 
resulted in a multitude of sins, temptations nor con- 
fusion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will 
Commissioner de Castro speak in favor of the amend- 
ment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am in favor of the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 15 speaks of actual rebel- 
lion and actual invasion, if we eliminate “OR IMMI- 
NENT DANGER THEREOF.” When there is already 
actual invasion or rebellion, the President no longer 
suspends the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus be- 
cause we already have actual shooting. There is nothing 
more to be remedied by the Chief Executive. But when 
we put the words “OR IMMINENT DANGER THERE- 
OF,” perhaps they are still assembling; they are still 
preparing for their departure or their provisions for 
immediate rebellion. The Chief Executive then has the 
power to suspend the writ of habeas corpus, but with 
the situation I mentioned there is nothing more to sus- 
pend. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR, RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. I yield to the Floor Leader. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Concepcion 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The elimination of the phrase 
“IN CASE OF IMMINENT DANGER THEREOF” is 
due to the fact that the President may call the Armed 
Forces to prevent or suppress invasion, rebellion or 
insurrection. That dispenses with the need of suspending 
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. Ref^erences 
have been made to the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. 
The 1935 Constitution was based on the provisions of 
the Jones Law of 1916 and the Philippine Bill of 1902 
which granted the American Governor General, as 
representative of the government of the United States, 
the right to avail of the suspension of the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus or the proclamation of martial 


774 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


law in the event of imminent danger. And President 
Quezon, when the 1935 Constitution was in the process 
of being drafted, claimed that he should not be denied 
a right given to the American Governor General as if 
he were less than the American Governor General. But 
he overlooked the fact that under the Jones Law and 
the Philippine Bill of 1902, we were colonies of the 
United States, so the Governor General was given an 
authority, on behalf of the sovereign, over the territory 
under the sovereignty of the United States. Now, there 
is no more reason for the inclusion of the phrase ‘"OR 
IMMINENT DANGER THEREOF” in connection with 
the writ of habeas corpus. As a matter of fact, the 
very Constitution of the United States does not mention 
“imminent danger.” In lieu of that, there is a provision 
on the authority of the President as Commander-in- 
Chief to call the Armed Forces to prevent or suppress 
rebellion or invasion and, therefore, “imminent danger” 
is already included there. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Concepcion be kind 
enough to yield to a question? 


to the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus, as a means of immobilizing potential internal 
enemies, would be denied to the President of the Phil- 
ippines? 

MR. CONCEPCION. My question is this: Were there 
many Japanese naturalized in the Philippines at that 
time? I do not believe so. I think Commissioner Ople 
made a supposition. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Which is not based upon a fact. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. I said that in contemporary terms, 
we could have a repetition of this from the most popu- 
lous neighbor that we have. And it is a fact that about 
half a million of them are naturalized Filipinos now. 
Do we wait for the troops to land before the remedy 
of a suspension of the privilege of the writ can be acti- 
vated by the President of the Philippines? 


MR. CONCEPCION. Gladly. 


MR. OPLE. I want to thank him for giving us a brie] 
historical narration of the genesis of this controvertec 
deleted “OR IMMINENT DANGEP 
THEREOF.” But I would like to imagine a situation. Il 
IS not hypothetical; it is partly historical in terms o! 
what happened in the Second World War. President Que 
zon, the President of the Philippines then, knew that or 
e asis of intelligence reports from the Americar 
government there was a war brewing in Asia and in th( 
acific. That is the historical part. The hypothetical par 
is Suppose President Quezon at that time knew tha 
Japanese transport troops had just left Tokyo or Oki 
nawa for the Philippines for three or four days trave 
on an invasion of the PhUippines. Let us assume tha 
there were several thousands of Japanese scattered ii 
the Philippines, especially in pivotal areas like Manih 
and Davao, and then his Chief of Staff proposed tha 
potentially hostile elements within the Philippines ough 
to be immobilized in some way or another which couh 
require the suspension of the privilege of writ of /zaftea 
corpus. In this example, let us say, the Japanese ele 
ments in the Philippines are immobilized, some o 
whom were undoubtedly spies but a good number o 
whom had become Filipino citizens and who, therefore 
could not be accessible through this form’ of immc 
bilization except through a suspension of the privileg 
of the writ of habeas corpus, especially in areas lik 


Mindanao. One could vary the analogy and change the 
most populous nation throughout the North, which in 
contemporary terms could be a more likely invader or 
aggressor and there are so many of their countrymen, 
although a good number have already been naturalized 
- and we were talking about the dangers of dual alle- 
giance in a previous session — will this mean that where 
there is an imminent danger of invasion, the recourse 


MR. CONCEPCION. That is why I oppose the libera- 
lization of the naturalization law. In other words, we 
speak of the danger, the doors of which I was trying 
to close. Now, we open it; who is to blame? 

MR. OPLE. That is why I am trying to distribute 
blame or credit, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is Com- 
missioner Ople proposing or speaking in favor of the 
amendment? 

MR. OPLE. I wanted to bring out certain possibilities 
that have a great deal of plausibility and which pertain 
to the survival of a country under imminent danger of 
invasion. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Chair takes it then that he is in favor of the amend- 
ment proposed by Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Will 
Commissioner de Castro speak in favor of the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Padilla? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Just to strengthen the hypothesis 
of Commissioner Ople, it is not a hypothesis. It hap- 
pened during the last war when we had Japanese 
bazaars, hardwares and photographers all over our 
country. And we know then that these people were 
suspected as agents of the Japanese, as in fact they 
were. But the President of the Philippines failed, despite 
the imminent danger thereof, to suspend the privilege 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


775 


of the writ of habeas corpus such that we began arrest- 
ing the Japanese agents only when the Japanese began 
landing in the Lingayen Gulf. 

So, it was there; it was not used at the time that it 
was needed. How much more if it is not there? 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I believe 
that the issue has been amply discussed; the body 
should be ready to vote. 

MR. BROCKA. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one mo- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Just 
one observation. Commissioner Brocka is recognized. 

MR. BROCKA. This is in disagreement with what has 
been said, particularly to what Commissioner de Castro 
said; not so much a disagreement, but on the other 
hand, the abuse of the phrase “OR IMMINENT DANGER 
THEREOF’’ can be done also like in the past adminis- 
tration. It would be so easy for a President who wants 
to remain in power to stage rebellions and bombings 
and make it appear that there is an imminent danger. 
I just want to bring that up also. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
we have discussed the issue enough. 

MR. REGALADO. The Chair recognized me earlier, 
but I yielded to Commissioner Concepcion; and I just 
want to make this point because I am a little confused. 

We seem to be in a reverse situation now. In the 1935 
Constitution, the phrase “OR IMMINENT DANGER 
THEREOF” did not appear in the Bill of Rights. It 
was, however, in the Article on the Executive. Now, 
in our draft Article, the phrase was eliminated in the 
Article on the Executive. But now, we seek to restore 
it in the Article on the Bill of Rights which is the exact 
opposite. We have already given the reasons why “OR 
IMMINENT DANGER THEREOF” was eliminated in 
the draft Article on the Executive. However, the point 
that was raised here is the matter of invasion. The hypo- 
thesis is that we would still have to wait for the invaders 
to overrun our shores before we can suspend the privi- 
lege of the writ of habeas corpus. If I recall my public 
international law, especially The Hague Convention on 
the laws of war, an invasion does not necessarily require 
a physical invasion of the shores of a foreign country. 
The start of a belligerent act directed towards the 
objective of invasion is already actual invasion. It is not 
to be used in a very literal sense under the Articles of 
The Hague Convention. The scenario that was described 
was that planes and vessels had already left those foreign 
countries on the way to attack the Philippines; from 


the moment they left that was already a belligerent act. 
That was already the start of the invasion in the coun- 
try, not the physical sense of actually overruning the 
country through force. 

MR. PADILLA. May I just say one sentence, Mr. 
Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized for a final statement on 
his amendment, considering that that is his amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. It has been said that under the 
Article on the Executive, the President has the power to 
call whenever necessary such Armed Forces to prevent 
or suppress lawless violence, invasion, insurrection or 
rebellion. That provision appears in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion as well as in the 1973 Constitution. But despite 
that power to call on the Armed Forces to suppress 
lawless violence, both Constitutions still inserted the 
following; “In case of invasion, insurrection, or rebel- 
lion, or imminent danger thereof, when the public 
safety requires it . . .,” and after this the power arises 
to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
or to declare martial law. 

With regard to the dangers that have been mentioned, 
of course, the former regime abused this provision, 
overabused its power. But with the limitations now 
under the executive department, wherein the duration 
of martial law is for only 60 days and still with the 
concurrence of Congress and with the review by the 
Supreme Court and suspension will not affect the right 
to bail, the dangers of abuse are very small compared to 
the dangers of actual invasion or rebellion before the 
President may declare the suspension of the privilege of 
ti;e writ of habeas corpus. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
the various distinctions have been amply explained. The 
body should be ready to vote by now. 

Could Commissioner Padilla restate his amendment? 

Mr. PADILLA. The amendment is just to insert the 
omitted phrase OR IMMINENT DANGER THEREOF 
after “rebellion” and before the phrase “when the pub- 
lic safety requires it.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment, please raise their 
hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 16 votes in favor and 20 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

Mr. Floor Leader, how many more? 


776 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


MR. RAMA. There is only one more who will present 
an amendment on two clarificatory questions from two 
Commissioners. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Who do 
we recognize now? 


that that is already provided under our Rules of Court. 
In other words, one can waive his continued appearance 
as an accused after he shall have been arraigned, and he 
can do this waiver by submitting it in writing. So, I do 
not feel there is any necessity to include that as a con- 
stitutional provision. 


MR. PADILLA. I would ask that Commissioner de los 
Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On Section 19, page 4, line 6, 
after the period (.) in the word “unjustifiable,” I pro- 
pose to insert the following: OR WHEN HE HAS 
WAIVED IN WRITING HIS PRESENCE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
line? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. I 
am aware that there is such a provision in the Rules of 
Court, but there are judges who for one reason or 
another, when the accused fails to appear, orders the 
confiscation of the bail bond even if the accused has 
already waived his presence in writing, and there is 
nothing in the Rules of Court about that. 

MR. COLAYCO. May I answer that? 


.. REYES. Line 6, page 4. After the wore 

unjusUfiable, delete the period (.) and then add th( 

PRESENC^”^^ WAIVED IN WRITING HIS 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon) Whai 
does the Committee say? 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Can w, 
wait for the comment of the Committee? 

because there is no assurance. The individual is noi 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon) Coulc 
Commissioner Bernas speak louder please? 

FR. BERNAS. If the individual is not there, wha 
assurance do we have that the waiver, even if in writing 
IS freely done? ^ 


MR. DE LOS REYES. No. He should be present 
during the arraignment. That is a requirement according 
to the first sentence. Then, during the trial proper for 
example, if the individual wants a speedy trial but he 
cannot attend it because he is sick, he is in the hospital 
the trial may proceed even in his absence when he has 
waived in writing his presence. The way it is worded 
now, it is as if the trial can only proceed when the 
failure of the individual to appear is unjustifiable. The 
proposal is that the trial may proceed even when the 
appearance is justifiable provided there is a waiver in 
writing. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we 
volunteer the information to Commissioner de los Reyes 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Colayco is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. The practice in the trial court is that 
if the presence of the accused is necessary for his identi- 
fication, then even if he waives, the court may still order 
him to appear. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Correct. 

MR. COLAYCO. So, I do not really see that that is 
necessary. What the court will require is for him to 
appear, notwithstanding his waiver if his presence is 
necessary so that he can be identified as the accused. As 
we all know, the identification of the accused is 
indispensable. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. But in trials before the 
Sandiganbayan, the Sandiganbayan also makes it of 
record that the accused is waiving his identification. 
And in that manner, he is allowed to waive his presence 
provided it is in writing. So, do I get it from the Com- 
mittee that it means tht the accused may waive in 
writing his presence although this is not stated in this 
provision? I just want to place it on record if that is 
the sense. 

MR. COLAYCO. Will the Commissioner please repeat 
that again? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Is it the sense of the Commit- 
tee that there is no need for my amendment because it 
is understood that the accused can waive in writing his 
presence in court, except for purposes of identification, 
during the arraignment and, of course, during the 
promulgation of judgment? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


111 


MR. DE LOS REYES. That is the reason why it will 
not be accepted; it is already understood. I will not 
insist on my amendment so long as it is on record that 
that is the intent. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Clarificatory question, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I have one last amendment 
which is the addition of another section which will also 
provide protection to victims of crimes. I filed Proposed 
Resolution No. 160 but I realized that it was quite long, 
and so, the decision of the Committee is to treat it as 
proper for ordinary legislation. So, in order to make it 
more proper for the Constitution, I have endeavored to 
capsulize it as follows: VICTIMS OF CRIMES AND 
THEIR RELATIVES ARE ENTITLED TO A SPEEDY 
INVESTIGATION AND SOLUTION OF THE CRIMES 
COMMITTED AGAINST THEM AND AN EXPEDI- 
TIOUS PROSECUTION OF THE CRIMINAL OF- 
FENDERS. THEY SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO 
POLICE PROTECTION AGAINST THREAT TO 
THEIR LIVES AND SAFETY AT GOVERNMENT 
EXPENSE. 

My reasons are as follows: It has been observed by 
most people, especially my constituents with whom I 
have been in close touch, that the Bill of Rights seems 
to be loaded in favor of the accused without con- 
comitant protection to the victims, thereby creating 
the impression that we are overconcerned in protecting 
lawlessness rather than protecting people who are law- 
abiding and God-fearing but are unfortunate victims of 
crimes. Most of my constituents who happened to be 
victims of crimes have hinted that if this is the way we 
treat them, considering the lopsided treatment in favor 
of the accused, they might as well campaign against the 
ratification of this Constitution. I respectfully submit 
that this provision could provide the balance between 
the rights of the accused and the victims especially con- 
sidering the many amendments we have incorporated 
favoring the accused. The theory that the state protects 
the victims by the very nature of their relationship 
is more fantasy than realism, especially when the 
offenders themselves are agents of the state. 

So, if I may repeat my proposal, it reads as follows: 
VICTIMS OF CRIMES AND THEIR RELATIVES ARE 
ENTITLED TO A SPEEDY INVESTIGATION AND 
SOLUTION OF THE CRIMES COMMITTED AGAINST 
them and an EXPEDITIOUS PROSECUTION OF 
THE CRIMINAL OFFENDERS. THEY SHALL HAVE 
THE RIGHT TO POLICE PROTECTION AGAINST 
THREAT TO THEIR LIVES AND SAFETY AT 
GOVERNMENT EXPENSE. This is subject to restyling 
but the concept is what I have said. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). What 
does the Committee say? 

FR. BERNAS. First of all, as far as speedy disposition 
is concerned, I would like to call the attention of the 
Commissioner to Section 16 and this includes the ac- 
cused: “All persons shall have the right to a speedy dis- 
position of their cases before all judicial, quasi-judicial, 
or administrative bodies.” So, as far as the speedy 
disposition of cases is concerned, that section applies 
not just to the accused but even to the victims. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But in Section 19, it is speci- 
fically stated that in all criminal prosecutions, the 
accused has the right to have a speedy, impartial and 
public trial, thereby creating the impression that it is as 
if it is only the accused who is entitled to a speedy trial. 
As a matter of fact, in court cases, the judge will ask: 
“Do you agree to a postponement, Mr. Accused? You 
are entitled to a speedy trial.” And the accused says, 
“Oh, never mind, I will waive my right to a speedy trial. 

I agree to a postponement.” This affects the offended 
parties who cannot invoke the same right. That is in 
actual practice. 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, the complainant can also 
appeal to Section 16. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But I think there is nothing 
wrong in emphasizing that the complainant has a 
concomitant right to speedy investigation and expe- 
ditious prosecution of his criminal case. 

FR. BERNAS. We leave the matter to the body. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, I would like to ask 
a question. 

He says that complainants will be entitled to police 
protection. Does the Gentleman believe that we will 
have enough policemen to protect all the complainants 
in criminal cases? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, that is making the provi- 
sion very absurd; it does not mean that all complainants 
will seek police protection. 

MR. RODRIGO. But if they have the right, what 
about the Bill of Rights, if that is a right they can 
demand? 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). I think 
we can now vote. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand. ) 


778 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 1 2 votes in favor and 1 9 against; the 
amendment is lost. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just ask 
the Committee one question? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). In con- 
nection with what? 


MR. TINGSON. With Section 23. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is it just 
a question? 

MR. TINGSON. Just a question. Inasmuch as we will 
have to explain to the people when we campaign for 
ratification of this Constitution, will the Committee 
just please explain to me Section 23 which reads: 


No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment 
for the same offense. If an act is punished by a law and an 
ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either shall consti- 
tute a bar to another prosecution for the same act. 

Is that second act not referring to the same offense? 

is a good question, Mr. Presiding 

Zardv Th^r “f 

saSl offense P™“«ion for the 

noT requhe Ihat the T of double jeopardy does 

by a law and an ordLance ” Aract nanV 

both a statute and an ordinance If brthaY 5 

committed two offenses onp ^ single act, he 

another against the ordinance if^h^ h ^ ^nd 

made to answer for either, then he cannot be"made1o 
answer for the other even if the other is a dTffereS 
offense but arising from the same act. uirrerent 


MR. TINGSON. Now I know what to tell the people 

of Negros Occidental when I campaign for the ratifies 
tion of this Constitution. r me ratitica- 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Thank 
you very much. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. For a clarificatory question, I ask that 
Commissioner Maambong be recognized. 


myself, regarding our Proposed Resolution No. 482 
which gives meaning and substance to the constitu- 
tional provision against cruel or unusual punishment. I 
do not wish to be expansive about it. I will try to stick 
to my time limit, but I find this rather emotional on my 
part because, as a practicing lawyer, I have been going 
in and out of jails. As a lawyer, of course, I would like 
to call the attention of the Committee to certain things 
which they already know, that it has been established 
by courts of modern nations that the concept of cruel 
or unusual punishment is not limited to instances in 
which a particular inmate or pretrial prisoner is sub- 
jected to a punishment directed to him as an individual, 
such as corporal punishment or torture, confinement in 
isolation or in large numbers, in open barracks or 
uncompensated labor, among other forms. Confinement 
itself within a given institution may amount to cruel or 
unusual punishment prohibited by the Constitution 
where the confinement is characterized by conditions 
and practices that are so bad as to be shocking to the 
conscience of reasonably civilized people. It must be 
understood that the life, safety and health of human 
beings, to say nothing of their dignity, are at stake. 
Although inmates are not entitled to a country club 
existence, they should be treated in a fair manner. 
Certainly, they do not deserve degrading surroundings 
and unsanitary conditions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is it 
possible for us to just incorporate the Explanatory Note 
of Commissioner Maambong in the Record and proceed 
with his amendment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one sentence, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, so tiiat my train of thought will not be 
destroyed, if I may. 

Unless facilities of the penitentiary are brought up 
to a level of constitutional tolerability, they should not 
be used for the confinement of prisoners at all. Courts 
in other jurisdictions have ordered the closure of sub- 
standard and outmoded penal institutions. All these 
require judicial orders in the absence of implementing 
laws to provide direct measures to conect violations 
of human rights or institute alterations in the operations 
and facilities of penal institutions. 

I may not have to present any amendment but I 
will ask some clarifications from the Committee. For 
example, in the case of the words “cruel, degrading or 
inhuman punishment,” my question is: Does this cover 
convicted inmates and pretrial detainees? That is the 
first question. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, the clarifi- 
cation being sought or the amendment which may be 
proposed, if it becomes necessary, reflects the concern 
of Commissioners Natividad, Ople, de los Reyes and 


This is a matter which I discussed with 
Commissioner Natividad. I think the Gentleman has 
similar ideas on this. I tried to explain to him that the 
problem he envisions is different from the problem 
being treated here. In Section 22, we are talking of a 
punishment that is contained in a statute which, if as 
described in the statute is considered to be degrading 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


779 


or inhuman punishment, invalidates the statute itself. 
But the problem that was discussed with me by Com- 
missioner Natividad is the situation where a person is 
convicted under a valid statute or is accused under a 
valid statute and, therefore, detained but is confined 
under degrading and inhuman circumstances. I suggested 
to him that that will be treated not together with this, 
because this section has a different purpose, but as a 
different provision as a remedy for individuals who are 
detained legally but are being treated in an inhuman 
way. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Are we saying that when a person 
is convicted under a valid statute and he is inside the jail 
because of the conviction out of that valid statute when 
he is treated in an inhuman and degrading manner, we 
have no remedy at all under Section 22? 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding is that this is not 
the protection he can appeal to. That is why I was 
asking Commissioner Natividad that if he wants a 
protection for that, to please formulate something else. 

MR. MAAMBONG. All right, then. 

The second question would be: The words “cruel, 
degrading or inhuman punishment” do not cover the 
situation that we contemplate of substandard or out- 
moded penal facilities and degrading and unsanitary 
conditions inside the jail. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, we are referring to cruel, de- 
grading or inhuman punishments which are prescribed 
in the statute itself. We cannot conceive a situation that 
the statute would prescribe that. The problem that the 
Gentleman contemplates again, I think, is about a 
person who is held under a valid statute but is treated 
cruelly and inhumanly in a degrading manner. So, we 
ask for a different remedy for him. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that our proposed 
amendment is very long, I will now propose an amend- 
ment by addition after the word “inflicted” on line 29 
of Section 22, page 4, which would be very short. It 
only says: RELIEFS FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS 
SECTION SHALL BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

Let me explain that in the previous section, we 
already approved the sentence which says: “Penal and 
civil sanctions for violation of this section as well as . . . 
shall be provided by law.” Perhaps, if the Committee 
will consider it as a parallel provision akin to Section 21 
and insert the short amendment that I have just stated, 
that could satisfy us immensely. 

FR. BERNAS. I think the proposal will not give the 
relief that the Gentleman wants because if there is a 
violation of this section, the relief that is needed really 
is an invalidation of the conviction or of the detention 
because the law under which he is being held is invalid. 
Perhaps, we could discuss this sometime in the future. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, so that I do not have to 
waste the time of the body and the Committee, con- 
sidering that the Committee has understood our pur- 
pose, perhaps the Committee could help by giving us 
just one section to be inserted there or one sentence or 
one phrase which would satisfy the requirements that 
we have presented, considering that in the United States, 
circumstances of this nature which happen inside the jail 
are considered under the provisions and jurisprudence of 
the United States as cruel and unusual punishment. 
Probably, we can have a parallel provision along that 
line and I hope the Committee will help. Would that be 
all right? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. And I thought the Gentleman 
already has the formula which we can discuss. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, we reserve our right to insert 
something here in coordination with the Committee. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

Do we still have another amendment? 

MR. RAMA. For the last clarificatory question, I ask 
that Commissioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Commis- 
sioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I just want to make it crystal clear that when we are 
referring to Section 15 regarding the suspension of this 
priceless privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, the same 
is subject to the conditions, limitations and require- 
ments provided for in the Article on the Executive. 
I just want to make that clear, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. The two go 
together. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is for purposes of the record. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
close the period of amendments on the Article on the 
Bill of Rights. 


780 


FRIDAY, JULY 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection to the closure of the period of amend- 
ments subject to the reservation made by Commissioner 
Maambong? ( Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion 
is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we proceed to the voting on 
Second Reading on the Article on the Bill of Rights, 
subject to the amendment that will be presented later 
by Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will please read the title of the 
resolution before we vote. 


please raise their hand. (All Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 35 votes in favor and no vote 
against. 

Proposed Resolution No. 486 on the Article on the 
Bill of Rights is approved, as amended, on Second 
Reading. (Applause) 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 486, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS. 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO 486 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on the Bill of Rights) 


favor of the proposed resolution, as amende 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Bengzon). Before 
we adjourn, tomorrow we will take up Committee 
Report No. 30 on the Article on Suffrage. 

The session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning. 

It was 7:20 p.m. 


APPENDICES 


I 


j: 


K 

( 


781 


RULES OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 50 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE RULES OF 
THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 

Resolved by the Constitutional Commission, to 
adopt, as it hereby adopts, the attached Rules of the 
Constitutional Commission. 

Resolved, further. That this Rules shall supersede the 
Provisional Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

(Sgd.) Ponciano L. Bennagen (Sgd.) Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
(Sgd.) Ricardo J. Romulo (Sgd.) Regalado E. Maambong 

(Sgd.) Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. (Sgd.) Rene V. Sarmiento 

RULE I 
OFFICERS 

SECTION 1. Election of Officers. - The Constitu- 
tional Commission shall elect from among themselves by 
a majority vote of all the Members, a President, Vice- 
President, Floor Leader and two Assistant Floor Lead- 
ers. It shall also elect by a majority vote of all its 
Members a Secretary-General and a Sergeant-at-Arms. 

SEC. 2. Powers of the President. - The President of 
the Constitutional Commission shall have the following 
powers and duties: 

(a) To preside over the sessions of the Constitutional 
Commission; and, at his discretion, to designate a 
Member to perform the duties of the Chair, but 
such designation shall not exceed one day each 
time without the consent of the Commission; 

(b) To preserve order and decorum during the ses- 
sions, and in case of disturbance or disorderly 
conduct in the Session Hall, in the lobby, galle- 
ries, corridors or rooms or within the premises, 
take such measures as he may deem proper or 
as the Commission may direct; 

(c) To decide all questions of order subject to appeal 
by any Member of the Commission; 

(d) To sign all resolutions, memorials, writs, warrants, 
subpoenas, and other documents issued by or 
upon order of the Commission; 

(e) To coordinate and expedite the work of the Com- 
mission; 

(f) To appoint the personnel of the Constitutional 
Commission including the staff of each Member 
upon recommendation by the Member; request 
the detail of employees from other government 


agencies; and upon recommendation of the Secre- 
tary-General suspend, dismiss or otherwise 
discipline an employee upon proper notice and 
hearing; 

(g) To disburse funds of the Commission. 

SEC. 3. Powers of the Vice-President. — The Vice- 
President of the Commission shall have the following 
powers and duties: 

(a) To assume the powers and duties of the President 
when the latter is absent or incapacitated. In the 
event of the resignation, removal, death, or per- 
manent incapacity or disability of the President, 
the Vice-President shall act as President until a 
new President is elected by the Commission; 

(b) To assist the President in the performance of his 
duties and functions, particularly in coordinating 
and expediting the work of the Commission; and 

(c) To perform such other functions as may be as- 
signed to him by the President or the Constitu- 
tional Commission. 

SEC. 4. Floor Leaders. — The Floor Leader, with his 
Assistant Floor Leaders, shall implement the agenda pre- 
pared by the Steering Committee for the sessions of the 
Constitutional Commission, guide the proceedings and 
deliberations during the sessions of the Commission so 
that they may be conducted with order, dignity and 
decorum, and decide the order of speakers to insure 
exhaustive discussion of all matters and proposals re- 
quiring consideration of the Constitutional Commission. 
They shall further perform such other functions and 
duties as are performed by the same or similar officials 
under accepted parliamentary practices or as the Com- 
mission may direct. 

SEC. 5. Powers and duties of the Secretary-General.— 
The Secretary-General shall have the following powers 
and duties: 

(a) To receive all constitutional proposals, resolu- 
tions, memorials and other communications to 
the Constitutional Commission; 

(b) Under the direction of the Steering Committee, 
to prepare the Order of Business and the Calendar 
of the Constitutional Commission; 

(c) To prepare and keep the Journal of each session, 
which shall comprise a clear and succinct account 
of the business transacted and action taken by the 
Constitutional Commission; 

(d) To call the roll of Members of the Constitutional 
Commission and read the constitutional pro- 


782 


posals, resolutions, memorials, petitions and other 
documents which should be reported by him to 
the Constitutional Commission or the reading of 
which is required by the President or the Commis- 
sion; 

(e) To refer to the proper committees all constitu- 
tional proposals, resolutions and other documents 
as may be directed by the President or the Consti- 
tutional Commission; 

(0 To attest and affix the seal of the Constitutional 
Commission to all writs, warrants, and subpoenas 
issued by the Commission, and certify to the ap- 
proval of all resolutions adopted by the Commis- 
sion; 

(g) To perform such other functions and duties as 
may be assigned to him by the President or the 
Commission. 


SEC. 6. Powers and duties of the Sergeant-at-Arms. 
The Sergeant-at-Arms shall have the following powers 


(a) To attend the sessions of the Constitutional Com- 
mission and the meetings and public hearings of 
Its committees; 

(b) To maintain order under the direction of the Pres- 

• Commission or its committees, and, 

m e ischarge of such duty, exercise supervision 
and control over all security guards of the Com- 

*3W enforcement agents assist- 
ing the Commission; 


(c) To execute all orders of the Commission and i 

committees and serve all processes issued und( 
their authority; 


unauthorized persons are not t 
nutted or allowed to enter or stay within 
space reserved for the exclusive use of Memt 
o le ommission and of its officers and 
ployees on duty during any session or commit 
meeting or public hearing; 


(e) To be responsible for the behavior of employees 
under his immediate supervision and the faithful 
performance of their functions and duties; 


(f) To strictly enforce the regulations relating to 
privileges and the admission to the Session Hall 
or its corridors; 


(g) To perform such other functions as may be 
directed by the Chairman or the Commission. 


SEC. 7. The Mace. - The Sergent-at-Arms shall have 
custody of the Mace which is the symbol of the authori- 
ty of the Constitutional Commission. The Mace shall be 
displayed at the President’s rostrum when the Commis- 
sion is in session. The Mace shall serve as the warrant 
for the Sergeant-at-Arms in enforcing order in the 
Commission. 


RULE II 
COMMITTEES 

SEC. 8. Committees. — The Constitutional Commis- 
sion shall elect the following committees on the basis of 
proportional representation of the Members according 
to regions and sectors they represent, the number of 
Members and the general jurisdiction of which shall be 
as hereinafter stated: 

( 1 ) Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles, 7 Members — all proposals 
relating to the Preamble, the National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles, including a clear definition of 
the Philippine base lines, adherence to the Law of the 
Sea and other international laws; 

(2) Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, Political 
Rights and Obligations and Human Rights, 15 Mem- 
bers — all proposals relating to citizenship, bill of rights, 
rights and obligations of citizens, suffrage, human rights; 

(3) Committee on the Legislative, 15 Members — all 
proposals relating to the structure, organization, powers, 
functions, duties, privileges and limitations of a legis- 
lative body; 

(4) Committee on the Executive, 15 Members — all 
matters pertaining to the Executive, the nature of the 
position, the powers, functions, duties, privileges and 
limitations of such position, the persons vested with 
executive powers; 

(5) Committee on the Judiciary, 15 Members — all 
proposals relating to the Judiciary, its powers, func- 
tions, duties, privileges and limitations, the organization 
of the judicial system, jurisdiction of courts; 

(6) Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies, 11 Members — all proposals relating to consti- 
tutional commissions specifically on audits, elections 
and the civil service; 

(7) Committee on Local Governments, 7 Members ~ 
all proposals relating to local governments; 

(8) Committee on Accountability of Public Officers 
11 Members — all proposals relating to accountability 
of public officers, impeachment, and special courts to 
have jurisdiction over graft and corruption cases involv- 
ing public officers; 

(9) Committee on the National Economy and Patri- 
mony, 15 Members — all proposals relating to the 
national economy, the preservation, utilization and 
exploitation of natural resources, the conservation of 
the patrimony of the nation, regulation of public utili- 
ties, limitations on monopolies and regulation of private 
corporations; 

{ 10) Committee on Human Resources, 11 Members — 
all matters relating to the educational system, the 
development of the national language, the development 
of science and technology, support of arts and letters, 
conservation and development of national culture for 


783 


national consciousness and sense of identity, protection 
of works of arts, riglit to inventions, writings and artistic 
creations, scholarships, grants-in-aid and other incentives 
for specially gifted citizens, promotion of customs, 
traditions, beliefs of the various cultural communities; 

(11) Committee on General Provisions, 11 Members— 
all other proposals of fundamental nature which could 
not be included in other articles of the Constitution, 
which shall include the Philippine Flag, duties and 
responsibilities of public officials, the armed forces and 
the separation of the church and the state; 

( 1 2) Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions, 7 Members — all proposals relating to the 
manner the Constitution can be amended and the 
transition of the present government to the government 
under the Constitution; 

(13) Steering Committee, 11 Members including as 
Ex-Officio Members the Floor Leader and the two 
Assistant Floor Leaders - it shall monitor and coor- 
dinate the activities of the committees of the Commis- 
sion; ensure that the report of such committees for 
deliberation in Plenary Session are submitted in ac- 
cordance with these Rules, prepare the Agenda or 
Calendar of Business for the Plenary Sessions of the 
Constitutional Commission, and, subject to appeal to 
the Commission, decide on all matters relating to the 
Rules of the Commission; 

(14) Committee on Privileges, 7 Members - all 
niatters relating to the conduct, rights, privileges, safety, 
dignity, integrity and reputation of the Constitutional 
Commission and its Members; 

( 1 5) Committee on Social Justice and Social Services, 
15 Members - all matters relating to labor, land reform, 
rural and community development, health and other 
social services; 

( 1 6) Committee on Style, 15 Members - all matters 
relating to the correction of the phraseology and form, 
and the consistency, and accuracy of proposals, but 
the Committee shall have no authority to change the 
sense, substance or purpose of any proposal referred to 
it; 

( 1 7) Committee on Sponsorship, 15 Members - all 
matters pertaining to the formulation and final draft of 
the Constitution, the correction, harmonization of 
proposals for the purpose of avoiding inaccuracies, 
repetitions, and inconsistencies, and the arrangement 
of proposals in a logical order, but the Committee shall 
have no authority to change the sense, substance or 
purpose of any proposal referred to it, and the sponsor- 
ship of the final draft of the Constitution. 

Whenever a proposal covers subject matters falling 
within the jurisdiction of more than one committee, 
said proposal shall be referred to the committee within 
whose jurisdiction the principal subject matter falls. The 
committee which acquired original jurisdiction over any 
proposal shall be mainly responsible to submit a report 


to the Commission incorporating therein the appro- 
priate recommendations of the other committee which 
has jurisdiction over the same proposal. 

SEC. 9. Timetable. — The committee provided for 
under this Rule II shall be organized and made ready to 
function not later than June 9, 1986; they shall finish 
their hearings and submit their respective Committee 
Reports on the resolutions or constitutional proposals 
referred to them for study and report not later than 
July 7, 1986; the Second and Third Readings on said 
Committee Reports shall be finished not later than 
August 15, 1986; and the Sponsorship Committee and 
Committee on Style shall finish their work of formulat- 
ing and polishing the style of the final draft of the new 
Constitution to be submitted to the entire membership 
of the Commission not later than August 25, 1986. 

SEC. 10. Working Draft. — To facilitate and expedite 
the work of the Commission and its committees, the 
1935 Constitution, as amended, the original version of 
the 1973 Constitution and the Malolos Constitution 
may be referred to as working drafts for considering the 
constitutional proposals filed with the Commission. 

RULE III 
SESSIONS 

SEC. II. Commencement of daily sessions. — Unless 
the Constitutional Commission decides otherwise, the 
daily sessions shall commence at three o’clock in the 
afternoon except on Fridays when the session shall 
commence at nine o’clock in the morning. The Com- 
mission may hold sessions on Saturdays and Sundays if 
it so decides. 

SEC. 12. Quorum. — A majority of all the Members 
of the Commission shall constitute a quorum to do 
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to 
day and compel the attendance of absent Members. 
Members who subsequently appear shall so inform the 
Secretary-General who shall have the presence of the 
Members recorded. If lack of a quorum subsists or there 
is no prospect of constituting a quorum, the President 
shall so declare and adjourn the session. 

SEC. 13. Call to order. — The President shall open the 
session by calling the Constitutional Commission to 
order. 

At every session, the National Anthem shall be sung, 
followed by a one-minute silent prayer or meditation, or 
by an invocation delivered by any Member designated 
by the President. 

SEC. 14. Attendance at sessions. — Every Member 
shall be present in all sessions of the Constitutional 
Commission, unless expressly excluded by it or necessa- 
rily prevented from doing so by sickness or other 
unavoidable circumstances duly reported to the Consti- 
tutional Commission, through the Secretary -General. 

SEC. 15. Sessions open to the public. — The sessions 
shall be open to the public except when petitions or 


784 


motions affecting the dignity of the Constitutional 
Commission or a Member are being considered, in which 
event, the Commission may hold an executive session. 
On a motion to hold an executive session, the President 
shall direct the galleries and hallways to be cleared and 
doors closed. Only the Secretary-General, the Sergeant- 
at-Arms and such other persons as are specifically 
authorized by the Commission shall be admitted in 
executive sessions. They shall preserve the secrecy of 
whatever may be read or said at the session. 

SEC. 16. Request for recognition to speak. — Any 
Member who desires to speak may rise and ask recogni- 
tion by the President. He shall not proceed until so 
recognized. 


mitted to the Constitutional Commission for its final 
vote by yeas and nays, after mimeographed copies 
thereof in final form have been distributed at least one 
day but not more than three days prior to their 
approval. 

SEC. 19. Distribution of Calendar. — The Calendar 
shall be distributed to the Members each day of session. 
If there be no addition to the Calendar previously 
distributed, a note to that effect on the Order of 
Business shall be sufficient. 

RULE VI 

CONSTITUTIONAL PROPOSALS, RESOLUTIONS, 
MEMORIALS AND PETITIONS 


RULE IV 

ORDER OF BUSINESS 

SEC. 17. Order of Business. - The daily Order of 
Business shall be: 

(a) Roll call of Members; 

(b) Reading and approval of the Journal of the 
previous session; 

(c) First Reading and referral to committees of pro- 
posed resolutions, messages, petitions, memorials 
and communications; 

(d) Committee Reports; 

(e) Unfinished Business; 

(0 Business for the Day; 

foi’ 3 Certain Date; 

(n) Unassigned Business; 

(i) Resolutions for Third Reading 


RULE V 
CALENDAR 


(a) Unfinished Business. -Business being considei 
by the Commission at the time of adjourLent of 
preceding session. Its consideration shall be resunr 
until such Unfinished Business is disposed of. The 
after, the President shall call for the Business for i 
Day. 


(b) Business for the Day. - Resolutions and other 
matters set on the Calendar for consideration on that 
day and arranged in the order appearing in the special 
order adopted upon petition of the Steering Commit- 
tee. 


(c) Business for a Certain Date. - Business set for 
consideration on a certain date. It shall be considered 
on the date set and on subsequent days in chronological 
order until disposed of, unless the continuation of the 
consideration of any business therein included is set for 
another day. 


( d ) Matters for Third Reading or final action. - Reso- 
lutions and the draft of the Constitution to be sub- 


SEC. 20. Form of constitutional proposals. - Consti- 
tutional proposals shall be embodied in resolutions 
which shall be signed by the authors. If a proposal 
emanates from a committee, the resolution shall be 
signed by its chairman. Resolutions shall be filed with 
the Secretary-General who shall assign to each a number 
in the order they are received. 

SEC. 2 1 . First Reading and Referral to Committees. — 
After the resolutions are filed, they shall be included by 
the Secretary-General in the Order of Business for the 
next following day for First Reading. After the titles 
of the resolutions are read, the resolutions are referred 
to the appropriate committees. 

SEC. 22. Committee Report. — Each committee shall 
submit a report on each resolution read at least within 
ten days after the resolution has been referred to it. The 
Steering Committee shall include the Committee Report 
in the Calendar for Second Reading. The report shall be 
sponsored by the chairman or any member of the 
reporting committee or one or more of the authors of 
the constitutional proposal. The Floor Leader shall 
determine the order of speakers accordingly. 

SEC. 23. Second Reading and Debate. — On the day 
set for the consideration of a resolution for Second 
Reading, the same shall be read in full with the amend- 
ments proposed by the committee if any, unless copies 
thereof had been distributed and such reading is dis- 
pensed with. Thereafter the resolution shall be subject 
to debate and pertinent motions. 

SEC. 24. Motion to close debate. — During the 
Second Reading of a resolution, a motion to close the 
debate shall be in order after three speeches for and two 
against, or after only one speech for has been delivered if 
none has been entered against it. 

SEC. 25. Cloture of Members. — When several Mem- 
bers have registered or signified their intention to speak 
on the matter under consideration and when said matter 
has been sufficiently and thoroughly discussed by the 
Member speaking, the President may, motu proprio, or 
upon motion of a Member, order that a Member having 
the floor shall desist from speaking further so that other 
Members may not be deprived of their opportunity to 
speak. 


785 


SEC. 26. Amendments. — After the close of debate 
the Constitutional Commission shall proceed to the 
consideration of committee amendments subject to the 
five-minute rule. A Member who desires to speak against 
an amendment shall also have five minutes. 

The five-minute rule shall apply, likewise, in the 
consideration of an amendment to an amendment, or an 
amendment by substitution. 

SEC. 27. Third Reading. — After a resolution provid- 
ing for a constitutional proposal has been approved on 
Second Reading, it shall be included in the Calendar for 
Third Reading. No such resolution shall be voted on 
Third Reading unless mimeographed copies thereof shall 
have been distributed to the Members of the Constitu- 
tional Commission at least one day but not more than 
three calendar days before final action thereon is taken. 
No further debate nor amendment shall be made on the 
resolution on its Third Reading. In the consideration of 
all constitutional proposals, as well as of the final draft 
of the entire Constitution on Third Reading, nominal 
voting shall be adopted and the individual vote of each 
Member shall be duly recorded in the Journal of the 
Constitutional Commission. A Member may explain his 
vote in not more than three minutes. 

SEC. 28. Procedure for the adoption of other resolu- 
tions. — Resolutions which do not embody a constitu- 
tional proposal shall be subject to the same procedure as 
resolutions embodying a constitutional proposal regard- 
ing introduction, reference to appropriate committees 
and consideration. However, the Steering Committee, 
for reasons of urgency, may calendar them for imme- 
diate consideration. After its Second Reading, the 
resolution may be voted on for final approval. 

SEC. 29. Final draft of Constitution. — All constitu- 
tional proposals approved by the Commission shall be 
referred to the Committees on Sponsorship and Style 
for collation, organization and consolidation into a 
complete and final draft of the Constitution. The final 
draft shall be submitted to the Commission for the sole 
purpose of determining whether it reflects faithfully 
and accurately the proposals as approved on Second 
Reading. Final voting on the final draft shall be by 
nominal voting. 

RULE VII 

DECORUM AND DEBATE 

SEC. 30. Manner of addressing the Chair. - When a 
Member desires to speak, he shall rise and respectfully 
address the Chair, “Madam President”. 

SEC. 3 1 . Recognition of Member to speak. - When 
two or more Members rise at the same time, the Chair 
shall determine and recognize the Member who is to 
speak first. 

SEC. 32. Time limit for speeches. - No Member shall 
occupy more than fifteen minutes in debate on any 
question or speak more than once on any question 


without leave of the Constitutional Commission, except 
as hereinafter provided. The period of interpellation 
shall not be counted against the time of the Member 
speaking. 

SEC. 33. Sponsor to open and close debate. — The 
Member reporting a constitutional proposal, resolution 
or other matter under consideration from a committee 
may open and close the debate thereon. If the debate 
should extend beyond one day, he shall be entitled to 
an additional fifteen minutes to close. 

SEC. 34. Decorum and debate. — In all cases, the 
Member who has obtained the floor shall confine him- 
self to the question under debate, avoiding personalities. 
He shall refrain from uttering words or performing acts 
which are inconsistent with decorum. 

If it is requested that a Member be called to order for 
words spoken in debate, the Member making such 
request shall indicate the words excepted to, and they 
shall be taken down in writing by the Secretary-General 
and read aloud. The Member who uttered such words 
shall not be held to answer, nor be subject to censure 
by the Constitutional Commission if further debate or 
other business has intervened. 

SEC. 35. Conduct during session. — Members shall 
attend session in proper attire and observe proper 
decorum. No Member shall remain by the Secretary- 
General’s desk during the roll call or the counting of 
votes, and no one shall pass between a Member who 
has the floor and the Chair. 

RULE VIII 
VOTING 

SEC. 36. Manner of voting. — Unless otherwise pro- 
vided herein or decided by the Constitutional Commis- 
sion, voting shall be either viva voce or nominal . 

SEC. 37. Viva voce voting. — If the voting is by viva 
voce, the affirmative vote shall be taken first, then the 
negative vote. If the President doubts the outcome of 
the voting or a division is called for, the Commission 
shall divide. Those in favor shall first rise and then those 
against. If he still doubts, or a count by tellers is de- 
manded, he shall name one from each side of the 
question to tell the Members in the affirmative and the 
negative, which being reported, he shall rise and state 
the decision. Unless otherwise provided in these Rules, 
a majority of those voting, a quorum being present, shall 
decide the issue. 

SEC. 38. Nominal voting. — On nominal voting, the 
Secretary-General shall call alphabetically the names 
of Members who shall answer “yes” or “no” upon being 
called, after which the President shall forthwith an- 
nounce the result. Nominal voting on questions not 
connected with constitutional proposals or the next of 
the Constitution itself shall not be allowed, except when 
it involves the discipline of a Member. 


786 


SEC. 39. Vote required for approval of constitutional 
proposal. — The final draft of the Constitution or any 
provision thereof shall require a majority vote of all the 
Members of the Constitutional Commission. 

SEC. 40. Vote of President. — The President or the 
Presiding Officer shall not be obliged to vote except to 
break a tie. 


RULE IX 

RECONSIDERATION 


SEC. 4 1 . Who may move; precedence; exceptions. - 
When a motion, report or resolution is adopted or lost, 
it shall be in order for a Member who voted with the 
majority to move for the reconsideration thereof on the 
same or succeeding session day. Such motion shall take 
precedence over all other questions except a motion to 

adjourn, to raise a question of privilege and a call to 
order. 


SEC. 42. Timeliness; withdrawal; period- anc 
adoption^ - A motion for reconsideration, if timelj 
made, shall not be withdrawn without the consent o 

upon Xe cairof' may be considerec 

fifteen dLs if " ^®"^ber. If made during the las 
diatelv session, it shall be disposed of imme 

open a new d.h f ^ to reconsider shal 

pen a new debate on the motion, report or resolution. 

memoriallecoSS", ' 

printed shall h. I ^ u ^ ‘"°™mittee or ordered to b^ 




motions and their precedence 

be en^ed'if X^^Journfl^^^^^^ ~ sh; 

n.a«„g it. unless iUs 

When a motion is nfadtlh^Pretirm stalUt’alrit < 
If in writing shall cause it to be read by the sfcreta 
General before being debated on. Except t h«e 
otherwise provided, a motion may be withdrawn at a 
time before its approval or amendment. 

SEC. 46. Precedence of motions. ~ When a quests 
is under debate, no motion shall be entertained exce 
to adjourn, raise a question of privilege, declare a rece; 
lay on the table, postpone to a certain day (whii 
motions shall be decided without debate), refer, amei 
or postpone indefinitely (which motions shall 
decided subject to the five-minute rule). Said motio 
shall have precedence on the foregoing order. ^ 
motion to postpone to any day certain, refer or po; 
pone indefinitely having failed passage shall again 1 
allowed on the same day. 

SEC. 47. Amendments. - When a motion or prop 
sition is under consideration, a motion to amend and 


motion to amend that amendment shall be in order. It 
shall also be in order to offer further amendment by 
substitution, but it shall not be voted upon until the 
original motion or proposition is perfected. Any of said 
amendments may be withdrawn before a decision is had 
thereon. 

SEC. 48. One motion to cover one subject matter. — 
No motion shall cover more than one subject matter. 

SEC. 49. Motion to strike out and insert. — A motion 
to strike out and insert is indivisible. A motion to strike 
out being lost shall not preclude an amendment or 
motion to strike out and insert. 

SEC. 50. Vote on paper objected to. — When a 
motion to read a paper other than that which the 
Constitutional Commission is called to vote upon is 
objected to, it shall be decided without debate. 

SEC. 5 1 . Call to order, precedence. — A motion to 
read any part of the Rules is equivalent to a call to order 
and takes precedence over any motion other than to 
adjourn. 


RULE XI 

QUESTIONS OF PRIVILEGE 

SEC. 52. Definition. — Questions of privilege are: 

(a) Those affecting the rights of the Constitu- 
tional Commission, its safety, dignity and the integ- 
rity of its proceedings; 

(b) Those affecting the rights, reputation and 
conduct of the Members, individually, in their capa- 
city as such Member. 

Questions of privilege may be availed of only on 
Fridays, except when the matter at issue is urgent, sub- 
ject to the ten-minute rule. No interpellations shall be 
allowed beyond the ten-minute rule. 

RULE XII 

PRIVILEGED QUESTIONS 

SEC. 53. Definition and precedence. — Privileged 
questions are those motions or subject matters which, 
under the Rules,take precedence over other motions and 
subject matters. 


RULE XIII 
DISCIPLINE 


SEC. 54. Discipline of Members. — The Constitution- 
al Commission may punish its Members for disorderly 
behavior and, with the concurrence of two-thirds of all 
its Members, suspend or expel a Member. A penalty of 
suspension shall not exceed fifteen days. 


RULE XIV 

JOURNAL AND RECORD OF THE PROCEEDINGS 

SEC. 55. Official records. — The official record of the 
proceedings of the Constitutional Commission shall be 


787 


referred to as the Journal and the Record of the Consti- 
tutional Commission of 1986. 

SEC. 56. The Journal. — The Journal shall contain, 
among others, the following: 

(a) Nature of the session, whether special or regular; 

(b) Date and place of the session; 

(c) Statement whether the journals of the previous 
sessions were approved, or the reading thereof 
dispensed with, and the dates of said sessions; 

(d) Name of the Presiding Officer; 

(e) All main motions, resolutions and petitions; 

(0 Points of order and appeals, whether sustained or 
lost; and 

(g) Hours of session and adjournment. 

The Journal shall be signed by the Secretary-General 
and authenticated by the Presiding Officer in that 
session. It shall be entered in a good, well-bound record 
book and the corresponding dates of approval or disap- 
proval properly placed thereon. 

SEC. 57. The Record. - The Record of the Constitu- 
tional Commission of 1986 shall reflect in detail every- 
thing that has been said, done and read in the plenary 
sessions and shall express faithfully everything that 
takes place therein, including the speeches, remarks, 
nominal votes and observations of Members. 

SEC. 58. Revision in style and form. — Notwith- 
standing the provisions of the preceding section, the 
speeches and interpellations of the Members shall be 
revised in style and form prior to their publication. 


To this end, the Secretary-General shall transmit a 
copy of the speeches or interpellations to the Members 
who made them for revision within a period of three 
days from the date of receipt thereof; otherwise, the re- 
vision shall be deemed delegated to the Committee on 
Style. Copies of the Record shall be furnished the 
Members only after such revision has been accomplished. 

RULE XV 

SUPPLEMENTAL RULES 

SEC. 59. Supplemental rules. — The Rules of the 
Batasang Pambansa, the Rules of the House of Rep- 
resentatives and the Senate of the Philippines and the 
Jefferson’s Manual may be invoked to govern in a sup- 
plemental manner insofar as they are not incompatible 
with the provisions of these Rules. 

RULE XVI 
AMENDMENTS 

SEC. 60. Amendments. — Any portion of these Rules 
may be amended by a majority vote of all the Members. 

RULE XVII 
EFFECTIVITY 

SEC. 61. Effectivity. — These Rules shall take effect 
on the date of their adoption. 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 1 


The Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles to which was referred Resolu- 
tion No. 72, entitled: 


RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT A PREAMBLE TO 
THE CONSTITUTION, 


has considered the same and has the honor to report it 
back to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with 
the recommendation that the resolution be approved in 
consolidation with Proposed Resolution No. 2, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PREAMBLE, 


Proposed Resolution No. 24, entitled: 

RESOLUTION MAKING THE PREAMBLE MORE CONCISE 
AND EMPHATIC, 


and Proposed Resolution No. 73, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PREAMBLE OF THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION THE CONCEPT AND TERM 
COMMON GOOD” AND TO COMPOSE THE SAME 
ACCORDING TO THE IDEAS COMPREHENDED BY 
THE SAID CONCEPT, 

with the following amendments: 


1 ■ On line 5, delete the word “FILIPINO.” 

2. On line 6, delete the word “AID” and in lieu ther 
ot insert the word GUIDANCE. 


3. On the same line 6, delete the words “IN ORDER.” 

4. On line 7, after the word “IDEALS” but before 
the comma (,) insert the phrase AND ASPIRA- 
TIONS. 

5. On line 8, delete the words “THE GENERAL 
WELFARE” and in lieu thereof insert the words 
THE COMMON GOOD. 

6. On lines 8 and 9, delete the words “DEVELOP 
THE PATRIMONY OF OUR NATION” and in lieu 
thereof insert the word ENHANCE OUR PATRI- 
MONY. 

7. On line 10, between the words “OF” and “DE- 
MOCRACY” insert the word PARTICIPATORY. 

8. On line 1 1, delete the word “REGIME” and in lieu 
thereof insert the word RULE. 

9. On the same line 1 1, delete the word “LIBERTY” 
including the comma (,) and in lieu thereof insert 
the word FREEDOM. 

with Honorable Davide, Nolledo, Tingson and Villegas 
as authors. 


(Sgd.) Decoroso P. Rosales 
Chairman 

Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles 


789 


LECTURE DELIVERED BY SENATOR BENIGNO S. AQUINO, JR. 

“The historical background of the Moro Problem 
in the Southern Philippines” 


At the outset, allow me to express my deepest 
gratitude to the President of this most prestigious center 
of learning in the Middle East, Dr. Abdullah Omar 
Naseef, for his kindness and generosity. We are here this 
evening to discuss the problem that is affecting most of 
our people. I have come to Jeddah about three days ago 
from Boston where I am now presently connected with 
the Harvard University as Fellow of the Center of Inter- 
national Affairs. It has been my pleasure to meet so 
many of my countrymen, and I was surprised that there 
are about a hundred and fifty thousand Filipinos in the 
Royal Kingdom alone. When we landed at Dhahran, we 
were met by Filipino porters, and when we arrived at 
our hotel, we were met by Filipino employees. I never 
saw so many Filipinos in my life. I think if I run for 
election, I will easily win. 

My dear friends, over the last eight years, as a result 
of the so-called Muslim mini-war in the Philippines, 
more than a hundred thousand Filipino Muslims have 
lost their lives; over two hundred fifty thousand have 
come as refugees in the neighbouring Sabah State of 
Malaysia, and more than one million have been dis- 
placed and rendered homeless. On the other side, 
according to President Marcos himself, about ten to 
eleven thousand Filipino soldiers have been killed over 
the last eight years as a result of the battle in the 
Southern Philippines. This grim statistics has not cap- 
tured the headlines of the world press and, as a result, 
world public opinion has not been mobilized enough 
to clamor for the halt of this senseless carnage. The 
Philippine government under President Marcos calls the 
Muslim fighters rebels; he calls them outlaws, he calls 
them insurrectionists; he calls them secessionists, or, far 
worse, traitors to the Philippines. The Muslims, on the 
other hand, see themselves as patriots, as holy warriors, 
defending their homeland and their Islamic faith and 
sacred birthright of self-determination from infidel 
attacks. It is most unfortunate that Filipinos are fighting 
against Filipinos today. 

I have come all the way from Boston precisely to urge 
our brothers, especially those from the Moro National 
Liberation Front and the Bangsa Moro Liberation Or- 
ganization, to start their unity effort so that as one 
Muslim nation they will be able to present a more 
formidable force in any negotiation with the present 
government. This evening, I would like to announce to 
you that the MNLF under Chairman Nur Misuari and 
the BMLO under Sultan Haroun Al-Rashid Lucman have 
finally joined forces and together will now continue the 
struggle for the freedom of our Muslim brothers in the 
Southern Philippines. Chairman Misuari, who heads this 


joint group, together with the leadership of Sultan 
Lucman, will be rallying most of the Muslims not only 
here but in our country so that once united they will be 
able to present their case better in the halls of the Or- 
ganization of the Islamic Conference before the Philip- 
pine government and be able to work towards the 
resumption of the Tripoli Agreement in international 
bodies like the United Nations. 

However, before I go into this, I would like to give 
you a brief history of the Muslim struggle. This struggle 
has continued for almost four centuries and this may 
well be the last chapter of the classic encounter of the 
crescent and the cross. It is true that this conflict has 
many ingredients and has many causes — ethnic hostili- 
ties, economic rivalry, and political antagonism — but 
all these reasons are radically different from the under- 
standing of each side as to what the conflict is all about. 
My point is, the Muslims look at this problem from one 
angle and the non-Muslims from another. They cannot 
seem to agree on what they are saying and we have this 
incessant conflict. I will just cite to you an example of 
what happened last February. According to the best 
reports, to an island outside of Jolo known as Pata 
Island, which has about eleven thousand people, the 
military sent a battalion of soldiers to inventory the fire- 
arms of its people. However, the soldiers who came 
from Luzon, not understanding the customs of our 
Muslim brothers in the South, occupied the mosque in 
that island. After they had occupied the mosque, they 
got some pigs and dogs and started making lechon (grill) 
inside the mosque. Now, you know that pork is one of 
those prohibited foods in the Muslim religion but these 
soldiers did not notice that they were in a sensitive 
situation, and so started cooking inside the mosque, 
which naturally enraged the people in the village. I 
understand that one soldier got drunk and raped a 
Muslim woman. The next thing there was a shootout in 
that area, and about one hundred and sixty to two 
hundred soldiers were massacred, killed. The army, on 
the other hand, when they found out that their soldiers 
were killed, started bombing, strafing and shelling the 
civilians in that island. We do not know how many 
civilians died. Some say two hundred, some say five 
hundred, some say one thousand, but the truth is that 
many civilians died in the encounter that followed the 
massacre. Subsequently, a lot of shootouts occurred, 
and we do not know now how many people have been 
killed. The incident started because there was a mis- 
understanding of the cultural habits of those in these 
regions. So, mere misunderstanding had caused these 
conflagrations which have contributed to the bloodshed 
in our country for the last eight years. 


790 


I would like to say that the events in the world of 
humans are not mutual nor are they fixed in some 
universal meaning. Human observation of events is 
always socially interpretive. People do not say what 
truly happens. They say what really happens is what 
comes. They do not merely experience events; they in- 
terpret them and their understanding of what happens is 
exaggerated. Typically, men witness the behaviour of 
someone from another society in accordance with their 
own society’s cultural norms and judge it in terms of 
their own ordinary means which in everyday life are, on 
the whole, ethnocentric. They take for granted then- 
own understanding of events as reality. This state of 
affairs has caused more amount of trouble in human 
relations, and two individuals may come to blows 
because they differently assess a small act because the 
meaning taken is not the meaning intended in the whole 
nation. They may find themselves at war because they 
differently mterpret each other’s behaviour. Filipino 
Muslims have no contact with the Christian West and 
they quite differ on many points with the Christian 
Fihpmos who have read them. And this cultural con- 

fusion of tongue has contributed greatly to the present 
day of bloodshed and violence. Present- 

At this juncture, my dear friends, let us look back at 
trv Arah tro/J predated the Christians in that coun- 

Simunul. Islam Sto to the Phir ^ °f 

the coming of Christianity in 1 
realize that Islam came to pVr ^ 
before Christianity so t^t when L ^00 years 

arrived in our shores Islam wa? forces of Magellan 
nao and there were a^v ma ^ over Minda- 
enclaves of Luzon. In fact thp many 

Muslim leader called Rajah Suleim^ Manila was a 

trolled all the headwSofSZv 
history. When the Spaniards carnfm du 
they fought the Muslims vigorously because m'vou 
know. Spam was occupied by Muslim Moors for many 
centuries and this occupation ended at th. ' '"^ny 

Battle of Granada. Therefore, the Spaniards who Tm“e 
to the Phdippines had already fought the Muslims in 
their own homeland. And when they came to the Philin 
pines and found the same Muslims, they renewed this 
hostility and again fighting broke out. This is the begin 
ning of the conflict between the Christians and the 
Muslims because the Spaniards saw in the Muslim 
another threat to their hegemony. In the Philippines 
the Spaniards tried to set up their control. They tried to 
establish political control and converted the natives into 
Christianity. Most of the other Filipinos who had no 
religion were taken as hostages and converted into 


Christianity. But our Muslim brothers fought and 
resisted the coming of the Spaniards and denounced 
the Spanish faith. The Muslims were the only ones who 
fought for four hundred years thereby staving off what 
the Spaniards wanted to call a “complete conquest.” 
In 1578, for example, the Spanish Authority com- 
missioned Captain Esteban de Figueroa, who lost the 
campaign against the Muslims. He was ordered to burn 
mosques, arrest Muslim priests and stop Muslim mis- 
sionaries in coming to the Philippines from Borneo. 
Captain Figueroa had succeeded. He captured Jolo, the 
capital of Sulu, and signed a treaty with Sultan Pangi- 
ran. As soon as Captain Figueroa left, the Sultan 
repudiated the treaty and declared “Jihad” against 
Spain. This was to be repeated for over four hundred 
years of Spanish conquest in the Philippines. When 
the Muslim warriors attacked Spanish enclaves, the 
Spaniards called them “pirates” and “barbarians”. To 
the Muslims it was a “Jihad” against an infidel. When- 
ever a Spanish conquest was successful in Muslim areas, 
however temporarily, there were individuals who would 
carry the “Jihad” on their own. The Spaniards call them 
“huramentados” (amoks) while the Muslims call them 
“Mujahids” — one who performs a sacred act in defense 
of Dar-ul-Islam, the abode and territory of Islam. Upon 
the death of the “huramentados” they were buried as 
“Shahids” which was Arabic for martyrs. 

When the Americans came to the Philippines, they 
followed what the Spaniards were doing. They also 
wanted to govern the entire Philippines from Manila, 
and so, when the Spaniards left, the Americans came in, 
also wanting to conquer the Muslim communities and 
integrate them into the greater community of Chris- 
tians. Here, many Americans came and many generals 
distinguished themselves. You will recall that the 
Americans in World War II had an American .45 caliber. 
It is not realized that this American .45 caliber was 
discovered and actually invented for the Moro Wars in 
the Philippines. Before that, the Americans had small 
guns. They shot Muslim “huramentados,” but they 
could not stop them and these “huramentados” kept on 
coming with their “bolos” (sword). So, the Americans 
devised a gun strong enough, that when it hit the 
huramentado,” he would fall instantly from the 
impact. That was the beginning of the American Colt 
.45. 

The Americans failed to subdue the Muslims^ and 
there were many treaties that followed. There were the 
Bates Treaty and the Carpenters Agreement and, to the 
end, the Muslim failed to integrate into the body 
system. General Sumner, a US military commander in 
Southern Philippines, wrote and I quote: “It will be 
necessary to eradicate all their customs; their Muslim 
religion will be a serious bar to any efforts toward 
Christian civilization.” General Leonard Wood, the first 
American Governor in the Southern Philippines, made 
his observation, and I quote: “The Moros and other 
savage peoples have no laws, simply a few customs 
which are nowhere general; nothing has been found 


791 


worthy of codification and imitation . . . little or 
nothing has existed and better for human decency and 
civilized laws are enforced.” 

According to our own Dr. Mauyag Tamano in his 
book, and I quote: “by 1917, the US government had as 
one of its goals the complete fusion of a group of 
Filipino Muslims and a majority segment of the Filipino 
Christian.” In other words, the Spaniards before and 
the Americans who came later had one goal — to in- 
tegrate this community. But this community could not 
be integrated because the Muslims felt they had their 
own national identity. 

The Americans bringing in their own cultural tradi- 
tion wanted to enforce a strict separation of the 
Church and the State, but this American tradition was 
seen by the Muslims as a threat to their own traditions. 
The very notion of the separation of the Church and 
the State, in the view of a Muslim, was a Christian idea 
for, among the Muslims, the Church and State are indi- 
visable; at most, two aspects of the same reality. 

You will find that here in the Royal Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia, you do not have a strict separation of the 
Church and State. The Church and State are one 
because such is the will of Allah and this is the Muslim 
tradition. 

American secular schools, American laws, American 
political organizations may be enlightened, progressive 
and humanitarian in the eyes of Americans, but they are 
not in the eyes of the Filipino Muslims. 

The system of education, law and government may be 
secular models to Americans, but they certainly are not 
to Muslims. Their institutions stand at the very center 
of God’s revealed will for man. There could be no better 
example of fundamental difference in how events are to 
be understood. This misunderstanding is to plague sub- 
sequent Filipino governments which inherited the 
American tradition. So we had the Spaniards setting up 
a tradition; the Americans followed the Spaniards, and 
when the Filipinos came in, they followed the Ameri- 
cans, and the misunderstanding continued. 

What was worse was by 1928, when Luzon was 
getting crowded and part of the Visayas was getting 
crowded, the American administration, together with 
the Filipino administration, started moving Filipino 
settlers to the south. The idea was . . . “go south, young 
man,” because the south is the land of promise. So what 
happened was that thousands of settlers came into 
Mindanao. The Muslims who were in Mindanao were 
pushed away from the coastal regions and then when the 
Philippines became independent, there were, for every 
six persons in Mindanao, five Christians and one Muslim. 
Today, for every seven persons in Mindanao, six are 
Christians and one is a Muslim. And where they con- 
trolled all of Mindanao before, the Muslims today are 
concentrated at most in five provinces; minorities in 
other six provinces and, therefore, our Muslim brothers 
are asking what they had done to deserve this. They 


are asking: Why is it that we who fought the colonizers, 
who fought the Spaniards, we who fought the Ame- 
ricans, we who fought the Japanese, we who have been 
fighting for our Darul Islam are now a minority in our 
own region? And that, my friends, is the answer to the 
crisis that we now face. Can we now redress this griev- 
ance? Can we now cure this neglect? And should we 
continue in this fratricidal warfare that will spill the 
blood of the Filipinos? Let me be more specific. When 
the Americans came and tried to impose their law, our 
Muslim brothers did not want to follow the Americans. 
The Americans wanted to teach English, but the 
Muslims wanted to study Arabic. 

The Americans brought in their law, which is Chris- 
tian, and which said that in all marriages there should be 
one wife. The Muslims were practising the Quranic 
law where they can have polygamy and, therefore, they 
were resentful. They said: “We are Muslims, why should 
we follow your tradition, your Christian ethics? ” This 
was the cause of the clash. In the American system, the 
government and the church were separated. In the 
Muslim system, the government and church were one. 
Under the American system, the laws were civilian and 
secular. Under the Muslim system, the laws were part of 
the Quran and they drew their own ethics and their own 
laws from the Quranic law and from the sayings of the 
prophet. Therefore, this clash was to continue and this 
became the bedrock and the reason for the conflict. 

But let me now focus for you what had happened to 
us in Luzon and the Visayas because I think many of us 
here are Christians and come from Luzon and the 
Visayas. Due to the fighting and warring during the 
Spanish times, when our families were living in the 
enclaves and there were pirates coming in, we told our 
children in the Christian north to beware of the Moro 
pirates. We called a Moro a pirate and a barbarian — 
slave-trader, cruel, cunning, treacherous, savage. When a 
child does not go to sleep, the father will say, “Go to 
sleep, or the Moro will take you away.” This has 
become a tradition. Eventually, for two hundred years, 
the saying in our country has been “a good Moro is a 
dead Moro.” You will also note that when a Moro asks 
to marry a Christian girl, the entire family rejects the 
proposal and say they could not let her get married to a 
Moro. They had a very bad image. My friends, this was 
being perpetrated from generations to generations by 
word of mouth, by majority of school courses, in 
history books, and in popular dramas. In our Christian 
north, we had our “Balagtasan,” we had our own 
Zarzuela,” and inevitably their “contrabida” (villain) 
was always the Moro. In American history, the Indians 
were always the villain ... in our society, the Moro was 
always the villain. The Muslims have been portrayed, 
primarily because of their religion, as ignorant and back- 
ward people, as having a low-grade civilization, as tricky, 
violent and lawless. They are oversensitive and ultra- 
conservative. Their picture, in short, is a second-class 
citizen in a Catholic country. 


792 


The Muslims had a contrary view. To illustrate their 
Islamic identity, they held virtually an opposite image 
of a popular Christian Filipino opinion. Because of their 
faith, the Muslims feel that they are, in fact, morally 
and culturally superior to the Christians who, after all, 
ate pork, worshipped images, perpetrated abuse after 
abuse on the Muslim people. As a result, Muslims 
rejected the integration policy which meant assimilation 
into the Christian culture which led to their noninclu- 
sion into the mainstream of development which, in turn, 
created great economic disparity between the two com- 
munities which persists today. My point is, because the 
Muslims refused to integrate, they did not go to school. 
Because they did not go to school, they were left be- 
hind. The Christians who went to school developed 
themselves. So, while the Christians have gained more 
money, they have been getting better and better in 
business; the Muslims have been falling behind. Then 
they have been losing their land and losing their mineral 
claims. Then they have been driven away. Only few 
Muslims have actually been succeeding while many 
Christians have been succeeding under the new environ- 
ment. Over the decades, a number of Muslims have been 
attracted into a larger Filipino national identity, but 
the great majority, particularly in the rural areas, have 
had no real sense of being part of the Philippines at all. 
Their orientation has been entirely local or if beyond to 
the larger Islamic world. They regard the Philippines as a 

tZn nf to the annexa- 

npnni ^ Muslim lands and the subversion of the Muslim 

Christian Filipino and the Muslim Filipino do belong to 
^fferent worlds. Each is oriented towards a different 

Thricf ’ values and their sense of history. The 
world ^^the Muslim^’ English-speaking 

and m the Arabic tongue. While the Filipino Christians 
go to the Vatican, the Filipino Muslims make pilgrim 

pS?p le^sS's?? " if' ^eTo 

peoples which so fires the conflagration in the Southern 

f obfemT'c. ^olve thTs 

^ f Wh 1 f in Minda- 

nao; What could be a solution? This evening, my 

/riends, I would like to outline to you a solution that I 
propose to the leaders of the Muslim communities led 
by Chairman Nur Misuari and Sultan Haroun Al-Rashid 
Lucman, and, hopefully, will be able to bring peace to 
our troubled land. 


1- We will note that in 1977, under the aegis of the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference, an agree- 
ment was signed in Tripoli known as the TRIPOLI 
AGREEMENT. Under this agreement, our Muslim 
brothers have given up the quest for independence 
and they will remain in the Republic provided they 
are given autonomy in the thirteen (13) provinces 
of Mindanao. In the thirteen provinces of Minda- 
naOj we are going to give the Muslims autonomy in 
those regions. We will be able to set up their own 


security forces and they will be able to govern 
themselves. This was a very good beginning . . . and 
for a while there was a ceasefire and there was no 
killing. Unfortunately, when this agreement was 
implemented, our President did not implement 
it to the letter and instead of discussing this with 
the Muslim leaders, broke off, and Mr. Marcos 
went on to implement it unilaterally. Instead of 
thirteen provinces, Mr. Marcos split these two 
regions . . . one is Region IX and the other Region 
XII and they removed three provinces. Naturally, 
our Muslim brothers said “That is a violation of the 
TRIPOLI AGREEMENT. . . The Tripoli Agree- 
ment talks of thirteen provinces and now you have 
reduced this number to ten, and what is worse, you 
have split us into two.” 

Number one — I, therefore, would like to propose 
that the Philippine government return to the original 
Tripoli Agreement. If the Philippine government returns 
to the Tripoli Agreement, then we will make an appeal 
to our Muslim brothers to come back to the table so 
that we can discuss our problem rather than shoot it 
out. If we do not negotiate, my friends, there will be a 
return to bloodshed, and more people will die. But we 
have promised our Muslim brothers that if they come 
back to the negotiating table, if they come back to the 
Tripoli Agreement, then the entire Christian north will 
support them in the claim and once more we would like 
to propose affirmative actions on the regions in Minda- 
nao . . . What do I mean by this? If our regions in 
Mindanao are underdeveloped and they are entitled to 
only one school, by our definition of affirmative 
actions, we will increase your school to four every year 
so that the income between the two communities will 
be close at the end of the century. Number two, we 
believe that all Christian troops in Mindanao should be 
withdrawn from that area. It takes two to fight. If there 
are no more soldiers, there will be no more fighting and, 
therefore, we will be able to disconnect the fighting. All 
Christian troops will be removed from those Muslim 
areas and we will let the Muslims police themselves. We 
will tell them. We are removing the Christian troops and 
they will set up their own police force* they will set up 
their regional forces. . . they police themselves because 
we do not want anymore conflict between Christian and 
non-Christian communities. Number three, we will 
propose that the Muslims set up their own courts . . . 
their own Shari’a courts, their own schools, their own 
madrasahs; if they want to use Arabic to teach their 
children, they can use Arabic to teach their children. 
Why should we impose English or Tagalog, if they want 
their own Arabic? We believe that they should also have 
their own courts, and they should also have their own 
schools. Their local autonomy officials should be 
Muslims and these should be elected by their own 
people. The national government will always support 
them, if they are entitled to it by way of development. I 
believe the Muslim community should be allowed to call 
in their lawyers and set up their own civil code as 


793 


against our own civil code. If this will be achieved, it 
will go a long way as essential opportunities that will 
signal the beginning of the Renaissance in the Muslim 
Philippines which some five hundred years ago was the 
center of Filipino culture, learning and power. With the 
assistance of the Islamic Conference, funds for develop- 
ment could be secured to usher in a new prosperity, 
envision a system of official free institute all over the 
Philippines. We feel that if our brothers are united and 
the hostilities stop, we can set up training camps, 
educational institutions all over Mindanao so that the 
products of these institutions can come to the Middle 
East for better employment. And if we appeal to the 
Organization of Islamic States, I believe the Filipinos, 
now numbering to a hundred and fifty thousand to two 
hundred thousand here, will increase to more than half 
a million. 

It is with tremendous pleasure that I have discovered 
your Kingdom’s love for our people. The leaders of the 
Kingdom have nothing but sympathy for the Filipino 
people as a whole. They have given full employment to 
Filipinos here because they feel an attachment to our 
people, whether Muslims or non-Muslims, as people that 
must be given help, if all are doing their very best. It is 
our prayers that the Filipinos here in the Royal King- 
dom of Saudi Arabia will now be given the responsibi- 
lity to show that they are good workers, peaceful 
workers, so that the Royal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
will take more of our brothers and give them more 
gainful employment here. And that is the best thing that 
you can do for your people back home. I would like to 
repeat that if the present Filipino workers here today 
will not do their job properly but instead create 
problems for the government and then the attitude of 
the government will change, not only they will suffer 
but all succeeding generations will suffer. But if the 
Filipinos here now will prove their worth, that they are 
not only good workers but the best among the good 
workers all over the world, I believe that two hundred 
thousand will become five hundred thousand eventually. 
The kingdom will call for Filipino workers not only in 
Saudi Arabia but all over the Middle East and this will 
be the best thing that you can do for our people. Let me 
tell you, I have been in the United States and I have 
gone to a hospital in America. When I woke up, there 
was a Filipino nurse. The one who operated on me was a 
Filipino (surgeon) doctor; the one who fixed me up was 
a Filipino attendant. I discovered that there were six 
hundred Filipino employees in that hospital alone. So, 
if these Filipinos would leave the hospital, the hospital 
would collapse. And I asked them why they were so 
many. “Because,” they said, “the Filipinos are good 
workers, the Filipinos face difficulties without any 
complaint.” Therefore, they have established this 
employment record. This hospital will not accept any- 
body else but Filipino nurses who come to America. 
Today, we have more than thirty eight thousand nurses 
in America and about twenty thousand doctors practis- 


ing in the United States, and these brothers are creating 
a new name for the Filipinos. If you prove to the 
Kingdom that you are good workers, this reputation 
spreads out to employers and they talk and say “I think 
you should get a Filipino because he is a good worker. 
Then they will call more of our brothers back home and 
eventually maybe we can find not only gainful employ- 
ment here but we will find we can solve the crisis that is 
affecting our country. We are lucky indeed that the 
Royal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia opened its door to us. 
Can you imagine if you were in the Philippines today 
looking for work? Can you imagine if two hundred 
thousand people there in the Philippines cannot find 
employment, what kind of a problem will we have? But 
because of the Filipinos who are here, now about a 
hundred and fifty-two and seventy thousand, and 
another fifty thousand in the other states in the Middle 
East and fifty thousand seamen in the seven seas, as a 
result of this, all your earnings that are collected and 
remitted back home will have a tremendous income for 
the Filipino government. And I hope that our govern- 
ment will realize the tremendous potentials that you 
have been giving and are giving to our economy and 
because of that the conditions in our country will be 
alleviated and not make you pay to predators, exploiters 
of our own brothers who become vultures, living on 
your blood and your sweat. This must stop and I think 
eventually we will find a better employment for our 
people from our recruiters. For my part, I will be 
returning to Boston, happy in the thought that our 
Muslim brothers have finally found unity in their ranks. 
Chairman Misuari has come all the way from his place in 
Tripoli and Damascus, Syria to meet Sultan Lueman and 
the rest of the BMLO members and with this new aggru- 
pation today, this meeting, this new forging of unity 
that I find, our Muslim brothers will now have a strong 
voice in the international forum and as a result of this 
we will be able to present their case better. For my part, 
I have come to mediate and to ask and to plead that we 
should now join forces. Hopefully, once we are united, 
Mr. Marcos will listen to us after stealing power 
now for sixteen years. We do not want to kill Mr. 
Marcos. All we want from Mr. Marcos is to return to us 
our freedom; all we ask from Mr. Marcos is to give us 
clean and honest election, and if in that election he will 
win, then let him continue. But if he should lose, let 
him go to oblivion. That is all we ask. And it is nothing 
more but to ask that the Filipinos be given the freedom 
to choose the governors who must govern them. 

Lastly, therefore, I would like to ask in the name of 
our brothers in the Philippines, that our brothers here 
be the best workers in the Kingdom, to establish a 
reputation that the Filipinos are second to none ... so 
that eventually the Royal Kingdom will increase the 
number of our brothers to come here and eventually 
when our Muslim communities have found their libera- 
tion, then find assistance and, therefore, find a new 
beginning. On that note, I thank you very much. 


794 


JOINT WORKING DRAFT ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS 
(Resolution No. 4, as amended by the Committee, 
in relation to Resolution No. 84 and others.) 


SECTION 1. No person shall be deprived of life, 
liberty, or property without due process of law, nor 
shall any person be denied the equal protection of the 
laws. THE RIGHT TO LIFE EXTENDS TO THE 
FERTILIZED OVUM. (For purposes of this section, life 
is deemed to begin at the moment of conception.) 

Explanation: The first sentence embodies the old 
provision. The second sentence expresses the pro-life 
option and precludes the Supreme Court from follow- 
ing the ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court in Roe v. 
Wade, 410 113 (1973) and Doe V. Bolton 410 US 
179 (1973) which weighs the life of the unborn 
against that of the mother only when the fetus has 

Explanation: This preserves the old provisioir. 

their peLns,' Wes^^papLs^ andTff ^ 

reasonable search, searchet t: h 
nature and for any purpose shl whatever 

search warrant or warSnt of! inviolable, and no 
upon probable cause to be except 

by the judge after examination PERSONALLY 
tion (through searching questions! of or affirm a- 

and the witnesses he mav nroH ^ complainant 
describing the place to be Lamhln^^’ Particularly 
things to be seized. *be persons or 

Explanation: The provision n 
formula by eliminating 1973’s “or 500 ^%^ 

,ols] 5TlT9%:y2T Of fo--- 

SEC. [5] 4. (1) The privacy of communication and 
correspondence shall be inviolable except upon lawful 
order of the court [or] when public safety or order 
require otherwise. (2) Any evidence obtained in viola 
tion of this or the preceding section shall be inadmissi- 
ble for any purpose in any proceeding. 


Explanation: By dropping the word “or” from the 
1973 version, intrusion into communication and cor- 
respondence becomes allowable only upon order of a 
court and on the stated grounds. 

This section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tion 274. 

SEC. [6] 5. The liberty of abode AND OF CHANG- 
ING THE SAME and of travel, WITHIN THE LIMITS 
PRESCRIBED BY LAW, shall not be impaired except 
upon lawful order of the court, or when necessary in the 
interest of national security, public safety, or public 
health. 

Explanation: (1) The phrase “and changing the 
same” is taken from the 1935 version. (2) The addi- 
tion of the phrase “within the limits prescribed by 
law” ensures that whether the rights be impaired on 
order of a court or without the order of a court, the 
impairment must be in accordance with prescrip- 
tions of law. 

The section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tions 169.5 and 261. 

[SEC. 7. The right of the people to keep and bear 
arms shall be recognized subject to reasonable limita- 
tions as may be provided by law.] 

Explanation: In the interest of law and order, the 
Committee prefers the present system where there is 
no presumptive right to bear arms but which requires 
lawful permit to bear arms. 

SEC. [8) 6. The right of the people to information on 
matters of public concern shall be recognized. Access to 
official records, and to documents and papers pertaining 
to official acts, transactions, or decisions, shall be af- 
forded the citizen subject to such [reasonable] limita- 
tions as may be provided by law. 

Explanation: The provision preserves the 1973 
version. The section also attends to the contents of 
Resolution 165. 

SEC. [9] 7. The right of the people to form associa- 
tions, unions, or societies for purposes not contrary to 
law shall not be abridged. 

Explanation: The section preserves the old provi- 
sion which had its origin from the Malolos Constitu- 
tion. 

This provision is intended to include government 
employees. 


795 


SEC. [10] 8. No law shall be made respecting an 
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exer- 
cise thereof. The free exercise and enjoyment of reli- 
gious profession and worship, without discrimination 
or preference, shall forever be allowed. No religious test 
shall be required for the exercise of civil or political 
rights. 

Explanation: The section preserves the old provi- 
sion. 

SEC. [ 1 1 ] 9. NO LAW SHALL BE PASSED ABRIDG- 
ING THE FREEDOM OF SPEECH, OR OF THE 
PRESS, OR THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE PEACE- 
ABLY TO ASSEMBLE AND PETITION THE GOVERN- 
MENT FOR REDRESS OF GRIEVANCES. [The free- 
dom of speech or of the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and petition the government for 
redress or grievances shall be inviolable. The government 
shall provide freedom parks for the assemblage of the 
people in the exercise of their freedom of speech and of 
assembly.] 

Explanation: The provision (1) preserves the con- 
secrated language of the old version and (2) relegates 
the creation of freedom parks etc. to ordinary legisla- 
tion. 

The section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tions 131 and 237. 

SEC. [12] 10. No law granting a title of royalty or 
nobility shall be enacted. 

SEC. [13] 1 1. No law impairing the obligation of con- 
tracts shall be passed. 

SEC. [14] 12. No ex post facto law or bill of at- 
tainder shall be enacted. 

SEC. [15] 13. No person shall be imprisoned for debt 
or nonpayment of a poll tax. 

SEC. [16] 14. No involuntary servitude in any form 
shall exist except as a punishment for a crime whereof 
the party shall have been duly convicted. 

Explanation: Sections 12, 13, 14 and 15 preserve 
the old provisions. 

Section 14 also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tion 169.14. 

SEC. [17] 15. The privilege of the writ of habeas 
corpus shall not be suspended except in cases of in- 
vasion [insurrection] OR REBELLION [or imminent 
danger thereof] when the public safety requires it. 

Explanation: The provision limits the ground for 
suspension of the privilege of the writ to actual 
invasion and actual rebellion. 

The section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tion 98. 


SEC. [18] 16. All persons shall have the right to a 
speedy disposition of their cases before all judicial, 
quasi-judicial, or administrative bodies. 

SEC. [19] 17. No person shall be held to answer for a 
crirhinal offense without due process of law. 

Explanation: Sections 16 and 17 preserve existing 
provisions. 

SEC. [20] 1 8. All persons, [except those charged with 
capital offenses when evidence of guUt is strong,] shall, 
before conviction, be bailable by sufficient sureties, OR 
MAY BE RELEASED ON RECOGNIZANCE AS MAY 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW. Excessive bail shall not be 
required. 

Explanation: Section 18 adds “recognizance” as 
another way of obtaining release especially for those 
who cannot afford to post bail. 

The words in brackets will be attended to after the 
Committee disposes of Section 22. 

SEC. [21] 19. In all criminal prosecutions, the ac- 
cused shall be presumed innocent until the contrary is 
proved, and shall enjoy the right to be heard by himself 
and counsel, to be informed of the nature and cause of 
the accusation against him, to have a speedy, impartial, 
and public trial, to meet the witnesses face to face, and 
to have compulsory process to secure the attendance of 
witnesses and the production of evidence in his behalf. 
However, AFTER ARRAIGNMENT, trial may proceed 
notwithstanding the absence of the accused provided 
that he has been duly notified and his failure to appear 
is unjustifiable. [In such case a plea of not guilty shall 
be entered for the accused.] 

Explanation: The provision preserves the 1973 
version which allows trial in absentia but only on con- 
dition that the accused was present at arraignment. 

The section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tions 28 and 58. 

SEC. [22] 20. No person shall be compelled to be a 
witness against himself. 

Explanation: This is the old self-incrimination pro- 
vision set apart in a section by itself. 

SEC. [22] 21. IT SHALL BE THE DUTY OF EVERY 
OFFICIAL INVESTIGATING THE COMMISSION OF 
AN OFFENSE TO INFORM THE PERSON UNDER 
INVESTIGATION OF HIS RIGHTS TO REMAIN 
SILENT AND TO HAVE COUNSEL. IF THE PERSON 
CANNOT AFFORD THE SERVICES OF COUNSEL, 
HE MUST BE PROVIDED WITH ONE WHO IS COM- 
PETENT AND INDEPENDENT. THESE RIGHTS CAN- 
NOT BE WAIVED EXCEPT IN WRITING AND IN 
THE PRESENCE OF COUNSEL. No force, violence, 
threat or intimidation shall be used against him. SEC- 
RET DETENTION PLACES AND INCOMMUNICADO 
DETENTIONS ARE PROHIBITED. 


796 


Any confession OR ADMISSION obtained in viola- 
tion of this OR THE PRECEDING section shall be inad- 
missible for any purpose in any proceeding. 

THE LEGISLATURE SHALL ENACT A LAW 
PUNISHING ANY VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION. 

COMPENSATION FOR AND REHABILITATION 
OF VICTIMS OF TORTURES OR SIMILAR PRAC- 
TICES, AND OF THEIR FAMILIES, SHALL BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW. 


[Any person under investigation, custodial or other- 
wise, for the commission of an offense shall have the 
right to remain silent and to counsel, and to be in- 
formed of such right.] 


Explanation: The Miranda rule on “custodial in- 
vestigation as embodied in the 1973 version has 
been recast ( 1 ) to assert the duty of the investigator 

to inform the person under investigation of his rights 
(2) to include “admissions” in the exclusionary rule’ 
and (3) to reflect the martial law experience with 

detentions. More- 

laws’to p" tecVth'Tgr^ 

tions 40, 48, "6^9"°2o! 

nofTruefiEGRASc^^ 


punishment, or the death penalty inflicted [imposed]. 
Death penalty already imposed shall be commuted to 
reclusion perpetua. 

Explanation: The section drops the word “unusual” 
and prohibits imposition of the death penalty. 

The section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tions 48, 242 and 250. 

SEC. [24] 23. No person shall be twice put in jeo- 
pardy of punishment for the same offense. If an act is 
punished by a law and an ordinance, conviction or 
acquittal under either shall constitute a bar to another 
prosecution for the same act. [an acquittal by a trial 
court is however appealable, provided that in such event 
the accused shall not be detained or required to put up 
bail.] 

Explanation: The section adheres to the existing 
provision on double jeopardy. 

This section also attends to the contents of Resolu- 
tion 26. 

SEC. [25] 24. Free access to the courts AND 
JUDICIAL BODIES AND ADEQUATE LEGAL AS- 
SISTANCE shall not be denied to any person by reason 
of poverty. 


C-Z54 


PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS APPROVED ON THIRD READING 



r 

»_ 



797 


RESOLUTION NO. 4 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO ADOPT A PREAMBLE TO 

THE CONSTITUTION 

WHEREAS, it is essential to identify the power that shall 
ordain and promulgate the constitution; 

WHEREAS, it is necessary for any national constitution at 
the outset to enunciate the great national purposes and aims for 
which reason it is adopting a constitution to estabhsh a govern- 
ment; 

WHEREAS, by reason of the intense religious nature of the 
Filipino people, it is but fitting and proper that they should in- 
voke Almighty God, to utter a collective prayer, before essaying 
in a constitution the provisions of a government they are estab- 
lishing. Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session as- 
sembled, That the foUowing be adopted to serve as the Preamble 
to the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines; 

“We, the sovereign Filipino people, imploring the aid of 
Almighty God, to build a just and humane society and estabhsh a 
Government that shall embody our ideals and aspirations, pro- 
mote the common good, conserve and develop our patrimony, 
and secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of demo- 
cracy under the rule of law and a regime of truth, justice, free- 
dom, love, equality and peace, do hereby ordain and promulgate 
this Constitution.” 

Adopted, June 17, 1986. 

RESOLUTION NO. 6 


aerial domains, including the territorial sea, the seabed, the sub- 
soil, the insular shelves, and other submarine areas thereof. The 
waters around, between and connecting the islands of the archi- 
pelago, irrespective of their breadth and dimensions, form part of 
the internal waters of the Philippines. 

Adopted, July 10, 1986. 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON CITIZENSHIP 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled. To incorporate in the new 
Constitution the following Article on Citizenship: 


ARTICLE II 
CITIZENSHIP 


SECTION 1. The following are citizens of the Philippines: 

(1) Those who are citizens of the Philippines at the time of 
the adoption of this Constitution; 


Philippines; 

(3) Those born before January 17, 1973 of Filipino mo- 
thers, who upon reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine 

citizenship; and 

(4) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law. 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL TERRITORY 


Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled. To incorporate in the new 
Constitution the following provision: 


ARTICLE 1 

THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 

SECTION 1 . The national territory comprises the Philip- 
pine archipelago, with all the islands and waters embraced there- 
in and all other territories over which the Philippines has sover- 
eignty or jurisdiction, consisting of its terrestrial, fluvial, and 


SEC. 2. Citizens of the Philippines who marry aliens shall 
retain their citizenship, unless by their act or omission they are 
deemed, under the law, to have renounced their citizenship. 

SEC. 3. PhUippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired 
in the manner provided by law. 


SEC. 4. Natural-born citizens are those who are citizens of 
the Philippines from birth without having to perform any act to 
acquire or perfect their Philippine citizenship; Provided, That 
those who elect Philippine citizenship in accordance with Section 
1 ) Paragraph 3 above shall also be deemed natural-born citizens. 

SEC. 5. Dual allegiance of citizens is inimical to the na- 
tional interest and shall be dealt with by law. 

Adopted, July 10, 1986. 



