
(/WT£P STATES AT WAR 

DECEMBER 7, 1941 ★ DECEMBER 7, 1942 




4 



Bitter Brew For Freedom's Foes 



We at Bridgeport have not been used to think- 
ing of brass in terms of destruction. But we 
are used to it now. And it gives us consider- 
able satisfaction to know that what we make 
will be put to work where it will do the most 
damage — to the sworn foes of freedom. 

For practically all of Bridgeport's produc- 
tion now goes into planes, tanks, guns, ships 
and other vital weapons. These are instru- 
ments of destruction with which America will 



blast its way to victory. These are the ma- 
chines-the deadly, lethal machines- which 
will spread devastation in the ranks of those 
who asked for it. 

Yes, this is bitter brew that Bridgeport 
cooks up in huge arc -fired "kettles." And 
Bridgeport workmen are brewing it fast and 
furiously. Yet they do not forget to keep the 
hand steady and the eye clear. For men in 
the thick of the fight will be driving the tanks 



• • • flying the planes . . . manning the ships 
. . . firing the guns in which Bridgeport brass 
is used. And this metal must be as good as 
the men it serves. That is why every iota of 
Bridgeport's skill and experience, as well as 
every moment of its time, is marshalled to 
the making of brass for Victory. 



,k iBridgeport , 



BRIDGEPORT BRASS COMPANY 



BRIDGEPORT, CONN. 



ESTABLISHED 1 865 



bkiim;i i oitr^: BI , ASS 






btyoJ&G 04it • • . we were ready to deliver the finest type of aviation gaso- 
line because in time of peace we had pioneered in the perfection of a revolution- 
ary new process which enabled us to make more and finer gasoline at less cost. 
Today, our refineries are pouring forth torrents of high grade aviation gasoline. 



bfaoJzG 04lt • . . we were ready with a line of specialized industrial lubri- 
cants now invaluable to American production. In many industries these products 
Ife have reduced waste and increased efficiency to the point where the industrial 
engineers of Sun Oil Company are known far and wide as "Doctors of Industry." 

fyUli&tt UMZSl bsioJzG Oui . . . we were ready with our own shipbuilding facilities -Sun 

Shipbuilding and Drydock Company- established during the first World War. 
Here we had developed a unique welding process which enables us to build faster 
and better ships, quicker and cheaper, to aid America in our fight for Victory. 

★ ★ ★ 

We are proud of our products . . . proud of the men who make them. 
Trained and toughened in the peace-time battle for business, we eagerly 
shoulder our assignments for war. 



SUN OIL COMPANY 

PHILADELPHIA 





The AttMY and Navv J'>i'"N/ 
Number 3 J 4 3. J?^ b ?t h %%hMt spec 
this issue may be repuDlisnea 



oekly except, during the week ending December 12 1042 when two nuubtn ' ^^^Quiffiii fwS ■rtJ£*ln 

re Md., under Act of March 3. 1879. Copyright 1942 by Akmy AND Na\* Journal 
to the Army and Navy Joornau 

3 



FAITH 



The greatest asset of a man, a business or a nation is faith. 

The men who built this country and those who made it pros- 
per during its darkest days were men whose faith in its future was 
unshakable. 

Men of courage, they dared to go forward despite all hazards; 
men of vision, they always looked forward, never backward. 

Christianity, the greatest institution humanity has ever known, 
was founded by twelve men, limited in education, limited in re- 
sources, but with an abundance of faith and divine leadership. 

In these days of stress let us hold to faith: faith in divine 
leadership; faith in the power of Christianity; faith in the leader- 
ship of our Commander-in-Chief, President Roosevelt; faith in his 
official staff and all the men in our armed forces; and faith in ourselves. 

As Whittier declared: "The steps of faith fall on seeming void, 
but find the rock beneath." 

In the situation which faces tile world today the "seeming 
void". ceases to exist when we realize the solid rock beneath our 
cause. 

The vision essential to clear thinking; the common sense needed 
for wise decisions; the courage of convictions based on facts not 
fancies; and the constructive spirit of faith as opposed to the de- 
structive forces of doubt will preserve our Christian ways of life and 
win the war. 




President 



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION 



To Winston: 




"Sail on, O Ship of State! 




Sail on, O Union, Strong and Great! 




TUT 1 1 r-» t Hr n)if n oil 1 t"C TPOfC 

Humanity witn au lib rcuib, 




With all the hopes of future years, 




Is hanging breathless on thy fate!" 




— Longfellow 






• 


DEDICATION 




America is at grips with the most portentous peril of its 




history. Temporarily in possession of its territorial outposts, 




and menacing its flanks and vital interests everywhere, are 




Totalitarian States, which are employing formidable num- 


• 


bers of trained men and machines to effect its conquest. To 




overcome the ruthless forces seeking our destruction, we 




are, with our Allies, fighting across and on the seas and in 




the air, and are speeding to complete mobilization the vast 




• interrelated resources of Man Power and Industry with 




which we are blessed. To the Commander-in-Chief, in 




whose leadership we have placed our trust, to those who 




already have given their lives for country, to the Personnel 




of our Armed Services striving to attain and expressing in 




action full battle efficiency, to the Captains and Workers of 




Industry and to our Farmers strenuously laboring to supply 




them, to the Engineers and Inventors searching to perfect 




their equipment, to the Nations united with us in the deter- 




mination to save Democracy, the Army and Navy Journal, 




secure in its faith in American patriotism and power, dedi- 




cates this Record of Progress toward, and promise of, 




certain Victory. 




The Army and Navy Journal 






TO FRANKLIN: 




"And not by eastern windows only, 




When daylight comes . . . comes 




in the light, 




In front the sun climbs slow, how 




slowly, 




But westward, look, the land is 




bright." 




— Clough 







5 




... He probably trained behind them, because the majority 
of twin-engine Trainers are now powered by Jacobs. 



JACOBS AIRCRAFT ENGINE CO. 

POIISTOWN, PENNSYLVANIA, U. S. A. 



6 



I 

juo 'OIUOIOJ,- • • PW «umo } 8I96b H «A "M 'uoi6uBun H ipi^ 'KOi^a ' " ' 'xej, 'se^a :s 9 dt }JO BuiieeutBua 

JQL 



invo 




Yanna 



•juauidmba paHP P UB Supi-pire 'DijtnjjpAq 'jjoddns 

3UTJ UT }S3q 3111 JOJ ,/I3aV» ^JP^S 'SJUTOd pOJBDOJ 
XjpJDI^WJJS XtS UJOJj 3DIAJ3S jdlUOjd tUip S9TJ3Aipp 
JJBJDJTB JO 3pp SuiSIJ 9ip qjTAV ODTjd sd^ T3CIV 








Vi \ v / 

Production has two dimensions at Revere 



n p ■ 



'/ 



REVERE TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICE 

In many plants and industries, Revere Technical Advisory 
Service men are working shoulder to shoulder with execu- 
tives and engineers in solving defense problems by selecting 
a suitable type and form of copper or one of the many copper 
base alloys. 

These are picked men, with broad backgrounds in metal- 
working methods, plus highly specialized knowledge of 
copper and copper base alloy characteristics and applications. 
They are supported in this work by the full cooperation of 
the Revere Research Laboratories and Revere Mills. 

This Technical Advisory Service comprises a thoroughly 
equipped Research Laboratory, manned by engineers and 
metallurgists for (1) developing new and better Revere ma- 
terials to meet active or anticipated needs of industry; (2) 
supplying specific and detailed knowledge of the properties 
of engineering and construction materials; and (3) con- 
tinuously observing developments of science and engineering 
with a view to their utilization in the improvement of Revere 
production methods and equipment. 

In addition a corps of technical men are available to (1) 
help industrial executives make use of data developed by 
the Revere research laboratory staff ; (2) perceive the ma- 
terial problems existent in industrial plants contacted; (3) 
assemble data enabling Revere research laboratory men to 
study these problems; and (4) make practical tests of the 
materials recommended in the plants concerned. 

This Revere Technical Advisory Service set-up has been 
very successful in reducing costs, improving products and 
increasing the output for many industrial concerns. 

Its service is available to you with no expense or obligation 
on your part. 



RECENTLY, the Army-Navy "E" for high achievement in the 
production of war equipment was awarded to 2200 
Revere workers in Chicago. A few months previously, the 
workers in Revere's New Bedford and Rome Divisions re- 
ceived similar awards. Revere Copper and Brass Incorporated 
is proud of this great honor, and knows that the will and the 
means are available to maintain that level of production. 

In doing so Revere can offer a further service of value, a 
second dimension in production that reaches beyond the 
Revere plants and aids other industries. For Revere's wide 
knowledge of copper and copper-base alloys is available, 
through the Revere Technical Advisory Service, to Army and 
Navy technicians as well as to industry generally. 

In this twofold way, it is hoped, Uncle Sam can be provided 
still more quickly with the world's most potent arms for victory. 




8 



COPPER AND BRASS INCORPORATED 

Founded by Paul Revere in 1801 
Executive Offices: 230 Park Avenue, Netv York 

Sales Offices and Distributors in Mn*t „/ a * ^ 

**ur* in most of America s Major Cities 



A 



Foreword 



AMERICA and her Allies, with growing might, are 
moving to destroy the formidable forces which are 
seeking to conquer them and to drive Democracy from this 
Earth. The stalely verse which recites the events of the 
first year of this savage Armageddon, is a lustrous addition 
to the epic of our country. It is a verse that breathes the 
spirit of the Pioneer, the Continental, the Wearer of the 
Blue and the Wearer of the Grey, the Conqueror of Spain 
and the Crusader for Our Way of Life a quarter of a cen- 
tury ago. Animated by that spirit, a unified People, will- 
ingly greeting sacrifice and giving lavishly of its wealth, 
is offering millions of eager and indomnitable Youth for 
battle, and the greatest Industry the world ever has seen, 
has ceased the manufactures of peace, and is applying its 
skill and plants and yards to the manufactures of war. It 
is an onerous task, this transformation of a Land that 
hated armament into a machine of destruction; but with 
quickening speed it is being accomplished. And while we 
have been developing and massing our strength, those of 
our Sons who were ready, were meeting our enemies with 
traditional gallantry and courage. There was the instant 
resurgence by our superbly disciplined officers and men 
from the perfidious Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor. 
There were the efficiency and fortitude of the little band 
MacArthiir commanded in the Philippines, supported by 
the heavily outnumbered Asiatic Fleet, which by their skill- 
ful and courageous resistance bought time for our prepara- 
tions. There were the dashing raids from Pataan and in 
Macassar Straits offset by the brave reverse of the Java 
Sea. There were the magnificent victories Avon by our 
squadrons in the Coral Sea, at Midway and in the waters 
of the Solomon Islands. There was the stoical fighting of 
our Marines and their reenforcements of troops on Guadal- 
canal. There were the operations in New Guinea, in the oc- 
cupied Aleutian Islands, and the campaign inaugurated in 
North Africa. There were the dangerous feats of our silent 
submarine service. On all the Fronts and on the Seven 
Seas, the Valor of America, ashore, afloat, and in the air, 
stands out both as a fact established, and a promise of 
what is to come. 

It is not simple to change the thinking of a People nor 
their mode of life. Man is inclined to hold to opinion and 
cling to custom. As the cry of ravished Nations sounded 
louder in our ears, and the thickening clouds of war began 
to lower over us, we were forced to accept violent disloca- 
tions in our economy, to experiment, regiment, organize 
and reorganize, and to put up with dictatorial impositions 
upon our freedom and conduct, which have only begun. 
With an unanimity that demonstrates that Democratic 
Government does work under emergency circumstances, 
President Poosevelt and the Congress agreed upon laws 
and policies designed to fit us to meet the powerful foes 
that were menacing us. During the years since Hitler 



smote Poland with his ruthless fist, appropriations and 
contract authorizations have been provided, which total 
the incredible sum of 225 billions of dollars; and more will 
be forthcoming. At the time the Japanese struck, there 
were under training in the Army,' 1,5SS,000 officers and 
men, there was a Fleet of power and efficiency, there were 
growing, but still wholly inadequate, Air Forces, and there 
was an Industry which, thanks largely to Allied Orders 
and Lend-Lease, had started to deliver to the Arsenal of 
Democracy increasing quantities of guns, tanks, planes, 
ships, and a myriad of other items of munitions for the 
Nations struggling against totalitarianism and slavery. 
Since the Declarations of the State of War with Japan, 
Germany and Italy, the Army has been enlarged to 4,250,- 
000 officers and men, with 7,500,000 as our planned strength 
by the end of 1943; new warships have been rapidly 
launched and commissioned to replace those lost and to 
add to our sea strength, and Industry, spending billions of 
dollars from its own pocket or of Treasury loaned funds, 
has enormously expanded its productive facilities. Labor, 
and management, more and more conscious of their respon- 
sibility as the weeks passed, are joining in patriotic al- 
liance. Organizational failures have provoked confusion, 
blunders have been made, waste has occurred; but it can- 
not be forgotten that within the year battles have been 
won and offensives have been inaugurated. The year will be 
noteworthy for the progress made toward the peak of ef- 
fort, and when that is achieved the United Nations, bound 
together by unity strengthened by our able statecraft, will 
have forces at the point of battle which will assure the 
complete defeat of our enemies, the Philippines regained 
and the conquered freed. 

In this -United States At War," the Army and Navy 
Journal, which has reported faithfully every war since 
that which split the States in Lincoln's time, is presenting 
articles on their activities prepared agreeably at its re- 
quest by the responsible officials of the Government, the 
Leaders of the Army and the Navy, and outstanding Chiefs 
of Industry and Labor. Enabling it to perform this am- 
bitious service are the Bureau of Public Relations of the 
War Department, the Office of Public Relations of the 
Navy Department, and the Office of War Information, to 
which our own thanks and the thanks of our readers are 
due. The combined effort carries the certainty expressed 
by our President and Commander-in-Chief: 

-With confidence in our Armed Forces, with the 
unbounding determination of our People, we will 
gain inevitable Triumph, So help us God." 

JOHN ('ALLAN O'LATJGHLIN, 

Publisher, Army and Navy Journal 



COPYRIGHT 1942 - JONES a LAUGHLIN STEEL CORPORATION 



FROM AN ORIGINAL DRAWING BY ORISON MACPHERSON 



THROUGHOUT THE MIGHT 
DETER MIMED MEM 
MAKE BATTLE STEELS 

Like commandos on attack, stalwart steel men come in the dead of night to work till 
dawn, grim in their determination to produce speedily the fighting steels to arm your sons 
and brothers on the battle fronts. On the night-turn, thousands strong, come men like the 
metallurgist who added the final touch in perfecting a new armor steel; like the melter who 
now makes that steel two-hundred tons at a time. 

There come men who roll wide steel plates for ships and miles of tubes for bombs 
and those who forge and machine glistening shells from steel made by their fellow work- 
ers. There are the coke workers, the blast furnace men, the melters, blowers, heaters rollers 
finishers -workmen of many trades and skills -all doing their part to furnish steel for 
ships, tanks, guns, planes and other fighting equipment. 

These men of steel, by their will-to-do to help win this war, achieve new hi^h records in 
production night and day, month after month. Every ton of steel they make is shipped to 



war. 




Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation 

PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA 

PARTNER TO INDUSTRY IN WAR PRODUCTION 



J&L 

STEEL 




^And the Stasi Bfia*t(fLed &a*tn&i r 
9*t t>iiutnfiU d-Uall wave!" 



11 





To every essential industry striving to aid the MORE 
PRODUCTION war effort, General Cable pledges 
all possible cooperation ... in all ways. 

GENERAL CABLE CORPQRATIO 



12 



Table of Contents 



Le,te a^d r Navy " Caaaua ^*>^t of the Army 

The Honorable Franklin Delano Roosevelt 

npi -m/-- , President of the United States.. 17 

I he March of Freedom for the Common Man 

fry The Hon. Henry A. Wallace 

mi ^-s, KiVe President of the United States.. 18 

Ihe General of the Armies Speaks 

by General John J. Persuing, USA 19 

Foreign Policy of the United States 

by The Hon. Cordell Hull 
Q ' *- * 1 Secretary of State . . 20 

British Commonwealth of Nations at War 

by His Excellency the Rt. Hon. the Viscount Halifax, K.G. 

-pv -. _ British Ambassador. . 21 

Belgium s Heroic Stand for the Allies 

by His Excellency, Count Robert van der Straten-Pontiioz 

^ , 9 Ambassador of Belgium.. 22 

Cuba s Position in the Present War 

by His Excellency, Dr. Aurelio F. Conciieso 

— Ambassador of Cuba. . 23 

Panama's Importance in World War 

by His Excellency, Senor Ingeniero Ernesto Jaen Guardia 

Ambassador of Panama.. 24 

China's Fight For Freedom 

by His Excellency, Dr. Wei Tao-ming 

Chinese Ambassador.. 25 

Financing the War 

by The Hon. Henry Morgentiiau, Jr. 

Secretary of the Treasury. . 26 

The Department of Justice and the War Effort 

by The Hon. Francis Biddle 

Attorney General of the United States.. 27 

The United States Navy Today 

by The Hon. Frank Knox 

The Secretary of the Navy.. 28 

Resources for Victory 
Agriculture and the War 
The United States Fleet 
Global Warfare 

by Admiral William D. Leahy 

Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy. . 31 

The Army of the United States 

by General George C. Marshall 

Chief of Staff, United States Army.. 31 

Industry and the Army of the United States 

by Hon. Robert P. Patterson 

Under Secretary of War. . 32 

Industry and the United States Navy 

by Hon. James V. Forrestal 

Under Secretary of the Navy. . 33 

The Navy's Shore Establishments 

by Hon. Ralph A. Bard 

Assistant Secretary of the Navy.. 34 

Modernization of the Army 

by Hon. John J. McCloy 

Assistant Secretary of War. . 35 

Expanding the Naval Air Force 

by Hon. Artemus L. Gates 

Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Air. . 36 

The General Board of the Navy 

by Admiral A. J. Hepburn, USN-Ret. 

Chairman, General Board of the Navy. . 36 

Wartime Activities of the Department of State 

by Hon. G. Howland Shaw 

Assistant Secretary of State.. 37 

Thp Glorv of Unconquerable Russia 

llie WOry u H Admjral William H . Standley, USN-Ret. 

Ambassador to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.. 38 

The Army Air Forces in Action 

liie ^Limy Lieutenant General H. H. Arnold 

Commanding General, Army Air Forces.. 39 

The United States Marine Corps 

ine bv Lieutenant General Thomas Holcomb 

The Commandant, United States Marine Corps.. 40 

Production for Victory ^ Dqnald m Nelson 

Chairman, War Production Board.. 41 

The United States Coast Guard Ifa , , 42 

y Commandant, United States Coast Guard.. 42 



by The Hon. Harold L. Ickes 

Secretary of the Interior. . 29 

by The Hon. Claude R. Wickaro 

Secretary of Agriculture . . 30 

by Admiral Ernest J. King 

Commander in Chief, United States Fleet.. 31 



I The Netherlands Navy Fights On 

I by Professor Dr. P. S. Gerbrandy 

I Prime Minister of the Netherlands. . 43 

Norway's Part in the World Strife 

n ■ via r • » 1 *? by JORCEN GaLBE 

Charge d Affairs, a.t., Royal Norwegian Embassy, Washington, D. C. 44 

Australia in the War 

by J. B. Brigden 

financial Counsellor, Australian Legation.. 45 

by Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai 

l gent-General for India in the United States.. 46 



by Saleg 
{South African Legation).. 47 



India's War Effort 
South Africa and the War 

France at War 

by Jean Monnet 

Member of the British Supply Council, Washington, D. C. 
Formerly, Chairman of the Anglo-French Coordinating Committee, London.. 48 

Production for the United States Army 

by Lieutenant General William S. Knudsen 

Director of Production, War Department. . 49 

Battle Order in the Offensive 

by Colonel I. N. Shishurjn 

, Red Army, USSR.. 50 

Petroleum and the War Effort 

by Rear Admiral Harry A. Stuart, USN 

Director of the Naval Petroleum Reserves. . 51 

American Labor in the War 

by H. A. Millis 

Chairman, National Labor Relations Board . . 52 

The American Federation of Labor and the War 

by William Green 

President, American Federation of Labor. . 53 

The CIO and the War 

by Philip Murray 

President, Congress of Industrial Organizations . . 54 

The Independent Unions in the Shipbuilding 
Industry and Their War Efforts 

by E. H. Petterson 

President, East Coast Alliance of Independent Shipyar/l Unions of America.. 55 

Record of the First Year of War at Home and Abroad 



The Services of Supply, U. S. Army 

by Lieutenant General Brehon Somervell 

Commanding General, Services of Supply. . 6G 

Training the Army Ground Forces for Combat 

by Lieutenant General Lesley J. McNair 

Commanding General, Army Ground Forces. . 67 

The Merchant Marine in War and Peace 

by Rear Admiral Emory S. Land (CC), USN-Ret. 

Chairman, United States Maritime Commission and War Shipping' Administrator. . 68 

Navy Shipbuilding and Industry 

by Rear Admiral A. H. Van Keuren, USN 69 

All-Out Mobilization for Ail-Out War 

by Paul V. McNutt 

Chairman, War Manpower Commission.. 70 

The Selective Service System 

by Major General Lewis B. Hershey 

Director, Selective Service System.. 71 

The New World United For Victory 

by Nelson A. Rockefeller 

Coordinator of Inter- American Affairs. . 72 

Lend-Lease and the United Nations War Effort 

by Edward R. Stettinius, jr. 

Lend-Lease Administrator . . 73 



Keeping the Public Informed 



by Elmer Davis 

Director, Office of War Information.. 74 



War Censorship for the United Stales 



Navy Public Relations 
The Army Nurse Corps 
The Navy Nurse Corps 



by Byron Price 

Director of Censorship . . 75 



by Captain Leland P. Lovette, USN 

Director of Public Relations, Navy Department.. 75 



by Col. Julia 0. Flikke, AUS 

Superintendent of the Army Nurse Corps.. 76 

by Lt. Comdr. Sue S. Dauser, USN 

Superintendent, Navy Nurse Corps. . 77 



For Military Efficiency— The WAAC 

by Cor.. Ovkta Cui.p Hobby 

Director, W A AC. 78 



13 



How the WAVES Fit Into the War Picture 

by Lt. Comdr. Mildred H. McAfee, USNR 

Director Women's Reserve, U. S. Naval Reserve.. 79 

Army Emergency Relief 

by Major General Irving J. Phillipson, USA 

Executive Director, Army Emergency Relief.. 80 

Navy Relief Society 

by Mrs. Robert M. Griffin 

Third Vice President, Navy Relief Society. . 80 

The Army Chaplain 

by Chaplain William R. Arnold 

Brigadier General, Chief of Chaplains, U. S. Army.. 81 

The Navy Chaplain 

by Chaplain Robert D. Workman 

Captain, Chaplains Division Bureau of Navy Personnel . . 81 

The United States Congress and the War 

by Hon. Sol Bloom 

Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives . . 82 

Manpower and the Army 

by Lieutenant General Joseph T. McNarney 

Deputy Chief of Staff, United States Army.. 83 

The Home Front 

by Leon Henderson 

Administrator, Office of Price Administration.. 84 

Civilians in the War 

by James M. Landis 

Director, U. S. Office of Civilian Defense.. 85 

The Coast and Geodetic Survey's Part in the 
War Effort 

by Rear Admiral Leo Otis Colbert 

Director, U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. . 86 

Naval Ordnance 

by Rear Admiral W. H. P. Blandy, USN 

Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance.. 87 

The Navy's Business 

by Rear Admiral William Brent Young, (SC), USN 

Chief of the Bureau of Supplies and Accounts and Paymaster General of the Navv.. 88 

The Quartermaster's Role in a Nation at War 

by Major General Edmund B. Gregory 

The Quartermaster General, U. S. Army.. 89 

West Point at War 

by Major General Francis B. Wilby, USA 

Superintendent, United States Military Academy.. 90 

The Naval Academy at War 

by Rear Admiral J. R. Beardall, USN 

Superintendent, United States Naval Academy. . 91 

The Coast Guard Academy at War 

by Rear Admiral James Pine, USCG 

Superintendent, United States Coast Guard Academy. . 92 

Science and the Navy 

by Rear Admiral Julius A. Furer, USN 

Coordinator of Research & Development, U. S. Navy. . 93 

The Army Transportation Corps 

by Major General C. P. Gross 

Chief of Transportation, Services of Supply, U. S. Army. . 94 

The Armored Force 

by Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers. USA 

Chief of the Armored Force.. 95 

The Federal Bureau of Investigation is at War 

by John Edgar Hoover 

Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States Department of Justice.. 96 

The Rubber Situation in the United States 

by William M. Jeffers 

National Rubber Director. . 97 

Keeping the Navy Physically Fit to Fight 

by Rear Admiral Ross T. McIntire 

Medical Corps, Surgeon General, U. S. Navy.. 98 

The Exacting Test of War 

by Major General James C. Magee 

The Surgeon General, U.S.A... 99 

Naval Communications in Wartime 

by Captain C. F. Holden, USN 

Director of Naval Communications . .100 

The Army Signal Corps 

by Major General Dawson Olmstead 

Chief Signal Officer of the United States Army.. 101 

Radio — Vital to Modern Warfare 

by Colonel David Sarnoff 

U. S. Army Signal Corps. .102 

Labor, Management, and the Navy 

by Rear Admiral C. H. Woodward, USN-Ret. 

Chief of the Incentive Division, Navv Department . .103 

"Send the Word, Send the Word— Over There" 

The U. S. On the Psychological Warfare Front 

by Robert E. Sherwood 

Director of Overseas Operations, Office of War Information* .104 

The Philippines in the War 

by Manuel Quezon 
President Philippine Commonwealth . .105 

Special Services to the American Soldier 

by Brigadier General F. H. Osborn 

Chief of The Special Services Branch.. 106 

Army Exchange System 

by Brigadier General Joseph W. Byron 

Chief of the Army Exchange Service.. 107 



A The Procurement of Naval Personnel 

by Rear Admiral Randall Jacobs, USN 

Chief of Naval Personnel . .108 

Navy Ship's Service Activities 

1 by Commander J. L. Reynolds, USN 

Director, Welfare Division, Bureau of Naval Personnel . .109 



Motor Torpedo Boats of the United States Navy 

by Captain A. Loring Swasey, 



USNR 



no 



in 



Submarines in the War 

by Lieutenant Commander Lewis S. Parks, UbJN 

Staff, Commander Submarines, Atlantic Fleet.. 

Functions of the Provost Marshal General in the War 

by Major General Allen W. Gullion 

The Provost Marshal General.. 112 

Ordnance Department Speeds Herculean Task 

by Major General Levin H. Campbell, jr. 

Chief of Ordnance, U. S. Army.. 113 

Charting the Seas for War 

by Rear Admiral G. S. Bryan, USN-Ret. 

Hydrographer of the Navy.. 114 

The Bureau of Aeronautics, Navy Department 

by Rear Admiral John S. McCain, USN 

Chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics . .115 

The Development of Tank Destroyers 

by Major General A. D. Bruce 

Commanding, The Tank Destroyer Center.. 118 

America's Desert Soldier 

by Major General Alvan C. Gillem, jr. 

Commanding General, II Armored Corps . .120 

Our Merchant Marine and the War 

by Frank J. Taylor 

President, American Merchant Marine Institute, Inc.. .122 

The Airborne Command 

by Brigadier General Elbridge G. Chapman, USA 

Commanding, The Airborne Command . .124 

The Operation of the Judge Advocate GeneraPs 
Department 

by Major General Myron C. Cramer 

The Judge Advocate General of the Army . .126 

War Activities of the Office of the Judge Advocate 
General of the Navy 

by Rear Admiral W. B. Woodson 

Judge Advocate General of the Navy.. 126 

The War Effort of the Infantry School 

by Major General Leven C. Allen, USA 

Commandant, The Infantry School.. 128 

The Shore Support for the Fleet 

by Rear Admiral Ben Moreell, (CEC) USN 

Chief of Civil Engineers and Chief of the Bureau of Yards and Docks, U. S. Navy. .130 

The Army Engineers and Global War 

by Major General Eugene Reybold 

Chief of Engineers . .131 

War-Time Tasks of the U. S. Public Health Service 

by Thomas Parran, M. D. 

Surgeon General, U. S. Public Health Service . .132 

We Understand War 

by Eric A. Johnston 

President, Chamber of Commerce of the United States . .134 

Field Artillery in the United States Army 

by Brigadier General Jesmond D. Balmer 

Commandant, The Field Artillery School. .136 

American Antiaircraft 

by Major General Joseph A. Green, USA 

Commanding General, Antiaircraft Command Army Ground Forces. .138 

The Contribution of the Electrical Distributor to 
War Effort 

by A. H. Nicoll 

President, Graybar Electric Company, 7;;r...l40 

U. S. Cavalry Today 

by Brigadier General Rufus S. Ramey, USA 

p Commandant, The Cavalry School . .142 

Manufacturing Miracles for War 

n by William P. Witherow 

I resident, National Association of Manufacturers 
J resident, Blow -Knox Company, Pittsburgh, Pa... 144 

The Operation of the Adjutant General's Department 

by Major General James A. Ulio 
mi /- a .li -. Thc A d fatont General, U. S. Army. .146 

Hie Coast Artillery Today 

by Brigadier General Lawrence B. Weeks 

Commandant of the Coast Artillery School.. 148 

The Chemical Warfare Service 

by Major General William N. Porter 

rpi T-k Ch ' e f of thc C/t emical Warfare Service. .150 

ihe finance Department 

by Major General H. K. Loughry 

. C/lie f °f Finance, United States Army. .152 

Army Dentists' Part in the War 

by Brigadier General R. H. Mills DC 

Assistant to the Surgeon General of the Army. .154 



Canada's War Effort 



by The Hon. L. G. McCarthy 

Canadian Minister. .156 



14 



Battle Flags 

for Phileo Soldiers of Production 



On four separate occasions ... in Philadelphia, Pa., 
Trenton, N. J., Sandusky, Ohio and, now, in Chicago . . . 
distinguished officers of the Army and Navy have pre- 
sented the Army-Navy "E" Flag to the men and women of 
Phileo for their achievements in the production of the 
weapons of Victory. 

Of course, Phileo is proud of its soldiers of production 
who have turned their knowledge and their skill so effec- 
tively to the service of the nation. In the manufacture of 
intricate communications equipment, powerful radios for 
tanks, airplanes and ships, artillery fuzes, shells and storage 



batteries, Philco's war production activities serve every 
branch of our fighting forces, on land, at sea and in the air. 

The Army-Navy "E" flags that now fly above the Phileo 
plants are symbols of the vital partnership between our 
soldiers of the front and our soldiers of production. More 
than that, they are battle flags for America at home, sym- 
bols of the devotion and sacrifice beyond the line of duty 
which are the price of Victory. To the men and women 
of Phileo, they are a challenge and a responsibility ... an 
inspiration to even greater accomplishment until that 
Victory is won. 



HILCO CORPORATIO 




16 



THE WHITE HOUSE 

WASHINGTON 



November 25, 1942 



Dear Colonel O'Laughlin: 

The dominant note of our common war effort is unity, unity of 
our people, and unity of the United Nations. That is the hard fact which 
is the spearhead of victory. I an happy in the knowledge that it exists with 
us. Upon the battlefields of the seas and the continents across them, our 
crews and troops ere operating with the efficiency of well trained and 
disciplined teams. Coral Sea, Midway, the Solomons, New Guinea and North 
Africa are shining instances of their power. Also, thanks to the patriotism 
of our people, our land has "become the Arsenal of Democracy from which, to 
quote Milton's pregnant lines, the world hears: 

"Sonorous metal blowing martial sounds: 

11 At which the universal host up sent 

H A shout that tore Hell's concave, and beyond 

"Frightened the reign of Chaos and old Night." 

I take pride in the grim determination of our people to preserve 
our democratic heritage whatever the sacrifices required of them; in the 
deeds of our fighting personnel, which are adding unfading glory to our 
traditions; in the magnificent resistance and resurgence of Britain, Russia 
and China, and in the unconquerable spirit flaming in the countries desecrated 
by the Frankensteins created by blood-fouled criminals. 

I take pride, too, in our unity in deliberation, in decision, 
in action. Our initial acceptance of the defensive, our assumption of the 
initiative when the opportunity struck, were no hit or miss calculations. 
They were the outcome of thoughtful estimate made not by nightmarish 
amateurs, but by military men whose lives have been consecrated to the 
study of war. An outstanding example of their labors is the brilliant 
campaign underway in North Africa. 

The truth about the war effort of the United Nations will make 
our people appreciate how great has been, and promises to be, our progress 
toward victory and freedom for mankind. 

Very sincerely yours, 



Colonel John Callan O'Laughlin, 
Publisher, 

Army and Navy Journal, 
Washington, D. C. 




* * * * * 

17 



The March of Freedom for the Common Man 



by 

The Hon. Henry A. Wallace 

Vice President of the United States 



HP HIS is a fight between a slave world and 
A a free world. Just as the United States 
in 1802 could not remain half slave and ft&lf 
free, sp in 1942 the world must make its deci- 
sion for a complete victory one way or the 
other. 

As we begin the final stages of this fight to 
the death between the free world and the 
slave world, it is worth while to refresh our 
minds about the inarch of freedom for the 
common man. The idea of freedom — the free- 
dom that we in the United Slates know and 
love so well — is derived from the Bible with 
its extraordinary emphasis on the dignity of 
the individual. Democ- 
racy is the only true 
political expression of 
Christianity. 

The prophets of the 
Old Testament were 
the first to preach so- 
cial justice. But that 
which was sensed by 
the prophets many cen- 
turies before Christ 
was not given com 
plete and powerful po- 
litical expression until 
our nation was formed 
as a Federal Union a 
century and a half ago. 

Even then, the march 
of the common people 
had just begun. Most 
of them did not yet 
know how to read and 
write. There were no 
public schools to which 
all children could go. 
Men and women can- 
not be really free until 
they have plenty to 
eat, and time and abil- 
ity to read and think 
and talks things over. 

Down the years, the people of the United 
States have moved steadily forward in the 
practice of democracy. Through universal 
education, they now can read and write and 
form opinions of their own. They have 
learned, and are still learning, the art of pro- 
duction—that is, how to make a living. They 
have learned, and are still learning, the art of 
self-government. 

If we were to measure freedom by stand- 
ards of nutrition, educat ion and self-govern- 
ment, we might rank the United States and 
certain nations of Western Europe very high. 
But this would not be fair to other nations 
where education has become widespread only 
in the last 20 years. In many nations, a gen- 
eration ago, nine out of ten of the people 
could not read or write. Russia, for example. 



was changed from an illiterate to a literate 
nation within one generation and, in the 
process, Russia's appreciation of freedom was 
enormously enhanced. In China, the increase 
during the past 30 years in the ability of the 
people to read and write has been matched by 
their increased interest in real liberty. 

Everywhere, reading and writing are ac- 
companied by industrial progress, and indus- 
trial progress sooner or later inevitably 
brings a st rong labor movement. From a long- 
time and fundamental point of view, there 
are no backward peoples which are lacking in 
mechanical sense. "Russians, Chinese, and 




Vice President Wallaa 



right, with Under Secretary of W ar Patterson, inspects a 
its .75/71771. gun and .50 calibre machine guns. 



Indians both of India and the Americas all 
learn to read and write and operate machines 
just as well as your children and my children. 
Everywhere the common people are on the 
march. Thousands of them are learning to 
read and write, learning to think together, 
learning to use tools. These people are learn- 
ing to think and work together in labor move- 
ments, some of which may be extreme or im- 
practical at first, but which eventually will 
settle down to serve effectively the interests 
of the common man. 

When the freedom-loving ] >eople inarch — 
when the farmers have an opportunity to buy 
land at reasonable prices and to sell the pro- 
duce of their land through their own organiza- 
tions, when workers have the opportunity to 
form unions and bargain through them col- 



lectively, and when the children of a l l the peo- 
ple have an opportunity to attend schools 
which teach them the truths of the real world 
in which they live — when these opportunities 
are open to everyone, then the world moves 
straight ahead. 

But in countries where the ability to read 
and write lias been recently acquired or where 
the people have had no long experience in 
governing themselves on the basis of their 
own thinking, it is easy for demagogues to 
arise and prostitute the mind of the common 
man to their own base ends. Such a dema- 
gogue may get financial help from some per- 
son of wealth who is 
unaware of what the 
end result will be. 
With this backing, the 
demagogue may domi- 
nate the minds of the 
people, and, from what 
ever degree of freedom 
they have, lead them 
backward into slavery. 

Herr Thyssen, the 
wealthy German steel 
man, little realized 
what he was doing 
when he gave Hitler 
enough money to en- 
able him to play on the 
minds of the German 
people. The demagogue 
is the curse of the mod- 
ern world, and of all 
Hie demagogues, the 
w o r s t are those 
financed by well-mean- 
ing wealthy men who 
sincerely believe that 
their wealth is likely 
to be safer if they can 
hire men with political 
"it" to change the sign 
posts and lure the peo- 
1 a very of t he most degraded 



Signal Corps Photo 
half track scout car with 



pie back into 
kind. 

Unfortunately for the wealthy men who 
finance movements of this sort, as well as 
for the people themselves, the successful 
demagogue is a powerful genie who, when 
once let out of his bottle, refuses to obey any- 
one s command. As long as his spell holds, he 
defies God Himself, and Satan is turned loose 
upon the world. 

Through the leaders of the Nazi revolution, 
Satan now is trying to lead the common man 
of the whole world back into slavery and dark- 
ness. For the stark truth is that the violence 
preached by the Nazis is the devil's own re- 
ligion of darkness. So also is the doctrine 
that one race or one class is by heredity 
{Continued on page 16] , 



18 



The General of the Armies Speaks 



by 

General John J. Pershing 



HUMANITY again is engaged in a titanic 
struggle to determine whether men shall 
be free or enslaved. The issue cannot be in 
doubt. Victory will be won by free men, and 
the world will be free. 

The World War of 1914-1918 taught us that 
we could not regard with indifference the 
clouds of war even in regions of remote inter- 
est to us. With the utmost desire 
to remain aloof from that con- 
test we were drawn into it in de- 
fense of a great principle. Such 
is the case now. During the last 
decade we watched with concern 
the grave events which transpired 
in Europe, realizing that Ave 
could not stand aside, and this 
realization became sharper as 
Nazi Germany and its Allies over- 
ran Europe and threatened the 
destruction of the British Em- 
pire. When Japan treacherously 
attacked our Fleet at the very mo- 
ment her Ambassador was dis- 
cussing peace with our Secretary 
of State, it was the inevitable con- 
sequence of the chain of events 
which began with our allied fail- 
ure during World War I to move 
on Berlin, and in that enemy 
Capita] dictate peace to the Ger- 
man people. Had we marched 
through their conquered land, 
there would have been brought 
home to them the horrors of war 
and the humiliation of defeat, 
and they would have been re- 
strained from following the 
patfanoically ambitious paper 
hanger of Austria. 

Two years after the Armistice 
of 101 S, the Congress enacted into 
law a policy which gave us a 
framework for the forces Ave now 
have in the field. That law pro- 
vided for a Regular Establish- 
ment, one duty of which was de- 
fense of our overseas possessions 
of Panama, Hawaii and the Philippines. We 
have learned by bitter experience how pitiful- 
ly inadequate in strength was the handful of 
brave and skilfully led men assigned to hold 
the Far Eastern Archipelago. The Jaw also 
contemplated that the Regular officers and 
troops should instruct and train our citizen 
soldiers, and there was a further provision 
for the organization of the National Guard 
and the Reserves into regiments and divi- 
sions, utilizing as a basis the splendid units 
that had so gallantly saved civilization in 
1918. The program was meagre, yet for so- 
called economy reasons it was not fulfilled as 
planned, and we were in a deplorable condi- 



tion of defense when Hitler began the war by 
marching into Poland. Although the sign- 
posts pointed to our inevitable participation 
in the conflict, although our military leaders 
emphasized this certainty and pleaded for the 
increased armaments which they foresaw 
would be needed, we moved slowly. Yet when 
Japan struck, Ave were in a far more effective 




posture than was the case in 1917. Then, aside 
from our small Regular Establishment and 
National Guard, we had no trained or disci- 
plined troops, and it was necessary to throw 
into battle, many who never had fired a ride. 
More fortunate now as a result of that law 
and the Selective Service Act and the inten- 
sive instruction given to the men called to the 
Colors, we have troops who have learned how 
to fight, and they have officers whose pre- 
liminary training promises to make them ef- 
ficient as leaders. I am particularly interested 
in the General Staffs that have been created. 
As far back as the Revolution, Washington 
said : "To remark to a military man how all 



important the General Staff of an Army is to 
its well-being, and how essential consequently 
to the Commander-in-Chief, seems unneces- 
sary;' During World War I, but for the 
training in General Stall' duties given to our 
Officers at Service Schools, the successful 
handling of great masses of partially trained 
troops in operations, while al the same lime 
providing for their enormous 
needs in food ant] materials, 
would not have been possible. 
Since the Armistice of 1918, our 
Service Schools have continued in 
operation, and there is the pros- 
pect of efficient conduct of opera- 
tions by trained officers. As for 
the troops, I can say of them what 
I said of the men I commanded. 
Being Americans they have 
initiative and energy, which are 
as essentia] in the test of war as 
they are in the pursuit of peace, 
and they vie with their Allied 
comrades in tenacity and valor. 
A. pacific spirit and a sense of 
justice have not weakened their 
virility and courage*. I have no 
doubt they will acquil themselves 
as nobly as their Fathers did. 

War is a vast consumer of ma- 
chines and munitions and food. 
When it; suddenly came upon us 
in L917, tremendous burdens fell 
upon t he country's resources, 
with no organization by which 
they could be expeditiously util- 
ized. Manufactured materials of 
all kinds were Lacking, and facili- 
ties for their production were 
undeveloped. Pood products 
were needed, and the system of 
handling thera was inadequate. 
Kail transportation was unorgan- 
ized for mobilizing men and sup- 
plies, while ship tonnage avail- 
able was well nigh negligible. 
Happily when we entered the war 
a year ago. we were in a better 
situation, but by no means at the point where 
expected military needs could be supplied. 
However, the resources of capital and indus- 
try are being mobilized, and relying as I do 
upon the patriotism of management and 
labor, I believe the peak of production will 
be achieved, and that our troops will have the 
food and munitions they require lor the im- 
portant operations in which they will engage. 

Without food for our Armies and our Al- 
lies, the war cannot be won, but as in 1917 we 
can rely upon our farmers to produce suffi- 
cient for our needs and upon our civilian 
population to make 1 the sacrifices to assure 
(Continued on page 166) 



19 



The Foreign Policy of the United States 



by 

The Honorable Cordell Hull 

Secretary of State 



THE primary objectives of our foreign 
policy have been, and are, the security of 
our country and the welfare of our people. In 
pursuance of these objectives, the Govern- 
ment of the United States has sought the ad- 
vancement in international relations of order 
and morality, which are indispensable to the 
national security and well-being of our na- 
tion and of every nation and people. 

In 1033, at the Montevideo Conference of 
the republics of the Western Hemisphere, the 
American delegation advocated and signed 
the Convention on the Rights and Duties 
of States, in which specific precepts of 
international morality were made a part 
of the international law of the American 
Republics. In 1934 — when the last of the 
United States Marines were withdrawn 
from Haiti, and when we abrogated the 
Piatt Amendment, which had given the 
United States the right to intervene in 
Cuba to preserve order — the world real- 
ized that we meant what we had said at 
Montevideo; The solidarity of the Amer 
ics is a visible sign of the Good Neighbor 
policy. 

In the summer of 1037 I formulated 
briefly the fundamental principles of our 
international creed. Among other things, 
I said : 

". . . We advocate adjustment of prob 
lems in internat ional relations by process- 
es of peaceful negotiation and agree- 
ment. We advocate faithful observance 
of international agreements We advo- 
cate steps toward promotion of economic 
security and stability the world over. . . ." 

To those fundamental principles we 
have steadfastly adhered. By means of 
the trade agreements made under con- 
gressional authorization of 1934, this 
Government sought to bring about an in- 
crease of international commerce for the 
mutual benefit of this and other countries. 
The principles of peaceful negotiation and 
observance of treaties are those which we 
constantly advocated in the Far East and in 
Europe. 

Through the 1930's it became more and 
more clear that the policies of our present 
enemies were aggression and war. Manchuria 
was taken by Japan in 1931. The rearming 
of Germany commenced in 1933. The Wash- 
ington Treaty for the limitation of naval 
armament was ended by notice of Japan in 
1934. Italy invaded Ethiopia in 1935. The 
Locarno Treaty was destroyed by Hitler in 
193G. Japan invaded China in 1937. The 
outbreak of war in Europe, soon to spread 
over almost all that continent, came in 1939. 
A year ago we were brought into the mael- 
strom by the attack at Pearl Harbor and the 
German and Italian declarations of war 



against us. 

That succession of events went on despite 
all our efforts to maintain peace and, after 
war came, to limit its area. Until the hour of 
Pearl Harbor we constantly sought justice for 
China and a fair and honorable settlement of 
the conflict which Japan had started. In 
Europe, hoping against hope to avert catas- 
trophe, Ave took every possible displomatic 
step, including direct appeals by President 
Roosevelt to Hitler and to Mussolini. But 
nothing could change the plans of the three 




aggressors. 

In such a developin 



situation, it was the 



plain duty of the United States to prepare 
defenses. Modern science had narrowed the 
wide oceans of the past. Attack on either or 
both of our coasts was becoming more than a 
mere possibility. Military, naval, and air pro- 
grams of the administration were submitted 
to Congress and were approved, although 
there were some who still could not or would 
not see the handwriting on the wall. After 
the outbreak of the war in Europe, we averted 
conflict from our shores by furnishing sup- 
plies to those nations resisting aggression. 
And Ave secured outposts for protection of our 
country and of the highways of the North and 
South Atlantic, which Hitler aimed to con- 
trol as part of his plan for world conquest. 

It is not for me to speak in detail of the 
military results of our defense program. Our 
forces are on every continent ; we are battling 



20 



in the Atlantic, in more than one region of 
the Pacific, in the Mediterranean, and in 
Africa; we have kept the enemy from the 
homeland. 

Other consequences of what we have done 
are of momentous importance to the future. 
We have established friendships which are 
not merely alliances for the war but comrade- 
ship for the coming peace. Kussia, sorely 
pressed by the Nazi armies, stands in the fore- 
front of the peoples who have suffered and 
who will win through. China, after five years, 
maintains her noble resistance and looks 
with confidence to the future. The Brit- 
ish, with their marvelous tenacity and 
their inability to know defeat, through 
blood and tears have kept their island 
stronghold. The occupied countries of 
Europe, aiding in the struggle as best 
they may, look to us and to our allies for 
restoration after the holocaust. Our 
neighbor Canada is knit to us by closest 
ties. With the republics of this hemi- 
sphere we have cooperation of intimate 
amity. We are one of the United Nations 
who has adopted the universally ap- 
plicable provisions of the Atlantic Char- 
ter and are thus working together for a 
better world. 

With those friendships and with our 
own strength and unity of purpose, we 
cannot and do not doubt our coming 
victory. 



The Day of Infamy 

UVESTEKDAY, December 7, 1941— a 
date which will live in infamy — the 
United States of America was suddenly 
and deliberately attacked by naval and 
air forces of the Empire of Japan. 

"The United States was at peace with 
that nation and, at the solicitation of Japan, 
was still in conversation with its government 
and its emperor looking toward the mainte- 
nance of peace in the Pacific. 

indeed, one hour after Japanese air 
squadrons had commenced bombing in the 
American Island of Oahu, the Japanese Am- 
bassador to the United States and his col- 
eague delivered to our Secretary of State a 
formal reply to a recent American message. 
While this reply stated that it seemed useless 
continue the existing diplomatic negotia- 

Jn^^T 3 no threat or hint w« 

oi armed attack. 

Hlw 9 i7^V eCOrded that the distance of 
atte* l»* x T* makes 14 obvio « s A"* the 

^ZffSF* pla * ne d t «»y* 

zov^Atll ^ enin 8 time the Japanese 
i^Z^^^y -*t to deceive 
Tares. — Pr BSIDBNt Roosevelt. 



British Commonwealth of Nations at War 



by 

His Excellency the Rt. Hon. the Viscount Halifax, K. G. 

British Ambassador 



SIKCE the passing of the Statute of West- 
minster in 1931, the Dominions of the 
British Commonwealth have enjoyed, in con- 
stitutional theory as well as in actual fact, 
complete independence. They are an alliance 
of free peoples, linked together, it is true, by 
the bond of the Crown, but under no external 
control whatever. In 1939 they could, had 
they w r islied, have stayed out of the war — at 
least for as long as Hitler allowed them to do 
so. Instead, with the single exception of Eire, 
who chose to remain and still remains neu- 
tral, they all declared war on Germany. Nor 
were these declarations mere gestures. The 
Dominions have fully matched Great Britain 
in service and sacrifice. 

The war effort of Canada, as a near neigh- 
bor, is probably the most familiar to the peo- 
ple of the United States. Before the war, she 
was only partially industrialized and had a 
tiny army, navy and air force. Today the posi- 
tion has changed out of all recognition. Great 
munition plants are turning out ships, guns 
and tanks for the United Nations. Under the 
Empire training scheme thousands of young- 
airmen from Great Britain and the Domin- 
ions are winning the freedom of the air, under 



conditions of training as nearly ideal as can 
be conceived. Warships of the Koyal Ca- 
nadian Navy have a prominent part in the 
Atlantic patrol. A powerful striking force 





U. S. Army Signal Corps Photo 
Field Marshal Sir John Dill, senior British member 
of the Combined Chiefs of Staff; Maj. Gen. Leven 
C. Allen, AUS, commandant of The Infantry School, 
and General George C. Marshall, chief of staff of the 
U. S. Army, on a tour of inspection at Ft. Benning, 
Georgia. 



of Canadian soldiers and airmen is in Britain, 
to guard the island against invasion and, 
when the moment arrives, to operate on the 
Continent. These troops gave the Germans 
a taste of their quality in the recent raid on 
Dieppe, where, in spite of heavy losses, they 
fought with the same gallantly as their fath- 
ers showed at Vimy Ridge ; and when the hour 
strikes, they will undoubtedly be a spearhead 
of the army of liberation. 

Australia and New Zealand, although the 
more remote of the Dominions, are nearer 
danger point. They are threatened with in- 
vasion by the Japanese and already some of 
the cities of Australia have been bombed from 
the air. Australian and New Zealand troops, 
who fought in Libya and Malaya with the 
traditional stubborn courage of the Anzacs of 
the last war, are now, side by side with their 
American Allies, fighting with the same mi- 
shakeable courage in New Guinea. Units of 
their navies are operating with American 
units in the South Pacific; their airmen are 
harrying the Japanese, wherever they find 
them; and, in spite of the threat to their own 
shores, Australian and New Zealand troops 
had a large share in the recent defeat of Field 
Marshal Rommel on Egypt's western frontier. 

The Union of South Africa, too, with its 
smaller white population, led by that grand 
veteran of former wars, Field Marshal Smuts, 
has done and is doing her share 1 . The corirjuest 
of Mussolini's African Empire in Abyssinia, 



Eritrea and Somaliland was largely the work 
of South African troops, while soldiers and 
airmen from the Union are now fighting in 
Libya and Madagascar. 

There is another partner in this alliance of 
free peoples, Britain herself. In the admira- 
tion we rightly feel for the magnificent 
achievements of the men from the Dominions, 
full justice has not always been done to the 
men from the mother islands. Yet it is true 
that, even on a basis of population, no part of 
the Commonwealth has made greater efforts 
or sustained more grievous losses. In Britain 
today every fit man between the ages of lS 1 /^ 
and 51, who is not irreplaceable in essential 
work, is in one branch or another of the 
forces, and no less than 5*4 million women 
have been mobilized for work in industry. An 
immense output of munitions has been 
readied. The home production of food has 
been almost doubled. Over §15,000,000,000 
lias been raised in war savings. Food and 
clothing are strictly rationed. These great 
burdens have been borne, not only under the 
threat of invasion, but under aerial attacks in 
which over forty-four thousand civilians have 
been killed, over fifty thousand injured, and 
one dwelling house in every five destroyed. 
Meanwhile Britain's men are fighting in the 
Middle East, in the bombers which are visit- 
ing the industrial centres of Germany or the 
back areas of Libya, in the fighters which 
sweep over northern France, in the merchant 
ships which keep open the communications of 
the Commonwealth, and in the warships 
which guard our convoys and attack those 
of the enemy. 

Such is the record of the Commonwealth, 
without taking account of the great military, 
naval and industrial contributions of the In- 
dian Empire or of the Colonies. 

These mighty efforts of a society of free 
peoples must constantly bewilder the political 
pundits of the Axis. To them the conception 
of a Commonwealth united by bonds which 
appear to be lighter than air, but have proved 
to be stronger than steel, must appear not 
only incomprehensible but even improper. 
They feel that by every rule of logic, and of 
their own exper i ence, Britain's embarrassment 
should have been the Dominions' opportu- 
nity; and that, at the impact of war, a Com- 
monwealth, so tenuously united, should have 
promptly disintegrated. The Germans made 
that mistake in 1914. They made it again in 
1930. They will go on making it since, having 
bartered their own freedom so lightly in ex- 
change for an illusion of world power, they 
will never understand the devotion to free in- 
stitutions, which are a reality and no illusion, 
in the life-blood of every member of the Brit- 
ish Commonwealth. 



21 



Belgium's Heroic Stand for the Allies 



by 



His Excellency, Count Robert van cler Straten-Ponthoz 



Ambassador of Belgium 



TN spite of the most solemn pledges, Ger- 
many invaded Belgium on August 4, 1914. 

Twenty-six years later, the Reich commit- 
ted the same act of violation ; in 1937, it had, 
however, declared that the inviolability and 
integrity of Belgium were both of common in- 
terest to the European powers and it had like- 
wise asserted its determination to respect, 
under any circumstances, Belgian inde- 
pendence and territory. 

One might have thought that the sufferings 
and privations endured by Belgium from 
1914-18, the atrocities committed on the old 
people, the women and the children, would 
have diminished the power of resistance of a 
people still vividly impressed by the memory 
of so much horror. It was not so. 

When the German hordes crossed the 
frontier, May 10, 1940, they found facing them 
an army which, as one knows today, fought 
with the vigor of despair. For eighteen days, 
the King led his army against an enemy su- 
perior in number and arms, and lie sur- 
rendered only when he saw that all resistance 
had become useless. Since that time, the 
King considers himself, and is treated as a 
prisoner of war, the same as each of his sol- 
diers ; He resists the pressure Hitler exercises 
over him by refusing to cooperate with the 
occupying power. His people stand behind 
him. The example of tenacity and contempt 
for the invader, which the King shows them, 
raises the courage of all Belgians, whether 
they belong to the middle classes or the work- 
ing classes. Every day, acts of sabotage are 
committed, which unfortunate hostages must 
pay for with their lives. 

Belgium fights for the cause of justice and 
of right, not only on her own soil, but also 
outside. The Government, refuged 
in London, works in perfect har- 
mony with the Governments of the 
United Nations with whom it signed, 
on January 2, 1942, a declaration by 
which it pledged itself to employ in 
the struggle its full resources, mili- 
tary and economic, to cooperate with 
the other signatories, and not to 
make a. peace with the enemy, or a 
separate armistice. 

Since the beginning of hostilities, 
Belgium has placed 400,000 tons at 
the disposal of Great Britain, which 
constituted her merchant fleet; al- 
ready 50% have become victims of 
Axis submarines. 

The vast resources of the Belgian 
Congo, so vital to the Allied war ef- 
fort since the Japanese occupation of 
the Dutch. East Indies and of the 
British possessions in Malay, are 
sent to the United States and to 
Great Britain. In England, a new 



Army has been formed, composed of soldiers 
gone to that country after Dunkirk, of all 
men of military age residing in free coun- 
tries, of young men who, in daily peril of 





their lives, escape from Belgium. Many are 
the Belgian aviators who participate in the 
R.A.F. raids. And in Africa, the Colonial 
Army, several thousand men strong, awaits 
only the chance to repeat its military feats of 
the Ethiopian campaign, where cooperating 



with the troops of the British Empire, it took 
active part in the destruction of the Italian 
domination of East Africa. 

After thirty months of occupation, Bel- 
gium's will to pursue the fight until victory, 
has never been stronger. With the aid of their 
powerful Allies, the Belgian people are cer- 
tain that Belgium will regain her inde- 
pendence and will take her place again in the 
society of free and peaceful nations. 



King Leopold III 

by 

Hon. Joseph E. Davies 

U. S. Ambassador to Belgium, 1938-1940 



I MM 
Pc 




IMMEDIATELY following the invasion of 
oland, Belgium was subjected to very 
great pressure from both sides to swerve it 
from this strict neutrality. On the one side 
Germany tried to coerce Belgium into resist- 
ing the British blockade. It was the German 
position that the blockade was an attack on 
Belgium's sovereignty and it was intimated 
from Berlin that unless Belgium would pro- 
tect her sovereignty in this situation Ger- 
many would have to come in and do it for her. 
From the other side, as the war grew more in- 
tense, and particularly before the threatened 
invasion in November, there was great pres- 
sure from the friends of France and England 
that Belgium should permit closer liaison be- 
tween their military High Commands in 
order to be better assured against possible 
German attack. The attitude of the 
King in the face of both of these sit- 
uations indicated to me the quality of 
the principle and the strength of the 
man. Against that pressure from 
either side he stood like a rock. It 
took great courage and steadfastness. 
In this position he was charged with 
being pro-Ally and also with being 
pro-German. As a matter of truth 
and fact, he was neither— he was 
wholly, utterly and completely pro- 
Belgian. For the protection of his 
people he conceived that he had 
pledged his personal honor that his 
country would maintain neutrality. 
JNo P re ssure could weaken his adher- 
ence to principle. From the many 
a Iks of t hese days which I had with 



Belgian soldiers, completely re-equipped and re-armed training some 
where in Wales, to take their place with the Allied forces against the 
common enemy. Bren gun creivs in action in the undergrowth at the 

edge of a wood. 



him, 
with 
acter 

(The above is 



I always came away impressed 
the moral intensity of his char- 



wen* made 
ber 1, 11)40.) 



an extract from a state- 
oy Ambassador Davies, Novcm- 



22 



Cuba's Position in the Present War 

by 

His Excellency Dr. Aurelio F. Conclieso 

Ambassador of Cuba 



CUBA was one of the first nations in the 
Western Hemisphere to declare war 
against the Axis. As soon as the news of 
Japan's dastardly aggression reached the 
Cuban Government, on the afternoon of De- 
cember 7, 1941, President Batista sent Con- 
gress a Message asking the declaration of a 
state of war between Japan and Cuba. A few 
hours after President Batista had signed the 
declaration of war against Japan, moments 
after its approval by the Congress, news of 
the declarations of hostilities by Germany 
and her vassal, Italy, against the United 
States made it his duty to send the Congress 
another request for declaration of war. In 
view of the full demonstration of the popular 
will that Cuba take her place in the ranks 
forming against the whole totalitarian con- 
spiracy against human freedom, the Message 
was quickly written and sent, and as quickly 
acted upon by unanimous vote of both 
Houses. Before midnight of December 11 the 
new declaration of war had been signed. 

In Cuba there is no division of sentiment 
about the war against the Axis, nor has there 
been for a long time. The people of Cuba have 
reacted strongly and unanimously on learn- 
ing of the aggression and declarations of war 
against the United States, whose leadership 
they recognize in the defense of America and 
of the democratic way of life. As President 
Fulgencio Batista said on announcing Cuba's 
declaration of war against Japan to the peo- 
ple of Cuba gathered in front of the Presi- 
dential Palace — Cuba's White House, the 
people of Cuba have felt the Japanese aggres- 
sion at Pearl Harbor as one against them- 
selves. 

Cuba, the natural sugar bowl of the United 
States, is an important outpost in the defense 
of the strategic Caribbean area. Only 90 
miles from Key West, Florida, at its nearest 
point, the Island of Cuba stretches across S00 
miles of vitally important Caribbean frontier 
of the United States. The vital Panama Canal 
is only 720 miles from Cuba's southernmost 
point. The nearest entrance through the 
Antilles to the Panama Canal — the key of the 
whole continental defense of the United 
States — is the Windward Passage, which lies 
between the eastern tip of Cuba and Haiti. 
The American naval base at Guantanamo, 
southeastern extremity of Cuba, guards the 
strategic strait. Guantanamo was rented by 
treaty to the United States in 1903. 

The strategic importance of Cuba has been 
recognized, in the course of history, by Spain, 
England, Germany and the United States. 
Spain made use of the Island as a base of 
operations for the expeditions which con- 
quered Mexico, Florida and other regions of 
the New World. Hern an Cortes, the con- 
queror of the Aztec Empire, started out from 



Cuba, as did Juan Ponce de Leon, the dis- 
coveror of Florida. 

The interest of the United States in Cuba 
dates from the time of Jefferson, who on Oc- 
tober 20, 1S05 informed the British Minister 
in Washington — according to the American 
historian Henry Adams in his ''History of the 
United States during the Administration of 
Thomas Jefferson" — that if the United States 
should wage war with Spain, by reason of the 
dispute over Western Florida, they would 
need Cuba since the Island was vital to the 
defense of Louisiana. 




Throughout the past century, various 
North American governments were well 
aware of the privileged strategic position of 
Cuba in the Gulf of Mexico. More recently, 
at the turn of the century, Rear Admiral 
Mahan confirmed this view in his well-known 
book, "The Influence of Sea Power on His- 
tory" : ''One thing is sure," he stated, "in the 
Caribbean is the strategical key to the two 
great oceans, the Atlantic and the Pacific; 
our chief maritime frontiers." 

In the present two-ocean war in which the 
United States is engaged against the Axis 
powers, and with the German submarines op- 
erating in the Gulf of Mexico and the whole 
Caribbean Sea, Cuba's geographical position 
is unique. An enemy force, once past Cuba, 
would have relatively little difficulty in mak- 
ing its way to the strategic Panama Canal. 
We don't need to go into detail about the pos- 
sible consequence of a Nazi foothold or beach- 
head in Cuba. 

The close cooperation which has always ex- 
isted between our two Governments in every 
way has been strengthened by an Agreement 



of Military Cooperation and in an economic 
way by measures coordinating our exports 
and imports. As a manifestation of economic 
cooperation was the sale of practically our 
entire 1942 sugar output of 4,000,000 long 
tons to the United States Defense Supplies 
Corporation at a price of 2.65 cents F.O.B. 
Cuban ports — a price which is about a quar- 
ter of a cent lower than the average price for 
the last thirty years. 

As you may realize, sugar is an essential 
product in the war effort. The National Geo- 
graphic Society recently pointed out that the 
powder necessary to load five projectiles of a 
10-inch gun required the alcohol production 
of an acre of the best sugar lands in Cuba. 

However, Cuba is not cooperating with the 
United States alone in the economic field. The 
Cuban Government, by virtue of a military 
convention, signed at Havana on June 18 of 
this year, authorized the United States to set 
up a special training center for aviation and 
anti-submarine operating personnel in Cuba. 
This important air base, which has facilities 
for both land and sea planes, is practically 
completed. No one can ignore the importance 
of this air base, as well as of the others which 
the United States has established in Cuba, in 
the struggle against the submarines that are 
preying upon both Allied and neutral ship- 
ping in the Caribbean. 

In addition, the armed forces of Cuba- 
Army, Air Force and Navy— are cooperating 
in the patrolling of our coasts and in the es- 
cort of convoys. The Cuban secret police, 
whose chief General Manuel Benitez Vald6s 
recently visited Washington as a guest of 
honor of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the Fed- 
eral Bureau of Investigation, is operating en- 
ergetically against the German and Italian 
spies working in Cuba. A few months ago, 
the Cuban secret police, in cooperation with 
the FBI and the British Intelligence, trapped 
the Nazi agent Heinz August Lunin, who had 
entered Cuba under a forged Honduran pass- 
port and was transmitting radio messages to 
Berlin concerning ship movements. Lunin, 
who was recently executed, was an important 
link in a chain of spies having ramifications 
throughout Latin America. 

However, the contribution of our country 
to victory is not just academic. A volunteer 
expeditionary force is being organized in 
Cuba to fight at the battle fronts. The Min- 
ister of Defense, Colonel Aristides Sosa de 
Quesada, as well as other high officials of the 
Government, have asked President Batista 
for permission to join the Cuban expedition 
that will fight for liberty at the front. Thus, 
with positive deeds, and not with empty 
phrases, is Cuba fulfilling her obligations 
of solidarity with the United States and 
{Continued on page 172) 



23 



Panama's Importance in World War 

by His Excellency 

Senor Ingeniero Ernesto Jaen Guardia 

Ambassador of Panama 



HP HE Republic of Panama is formed by the 
strip of land that links Central and South 
America, which is known as the Isthmus of 
Panama. It lies from East to West, having a 
length of about 480 miles and a width varying 
from 110 to 32 miles. It has 477 miles of coast 
on the Atlantic and 767 on the Pacific. The 
total area is 29,072 square miles and has a 
population of G32,000, excluding that of the 
Canal Zone, which has a civilian population 
of 43,000. 

The Canal Zone divides the territory of the 
Republic of Panama in two parts; runs from 
North to South; is 41 miles in length from 
coast to coast and has a width of 10 miles, 5 
of which are on each side of the Canal. 

Panama City, the Capital of the Republic, 
with a population of 112,000, is situated at the 
Pacific entrance of the Canal, but is not in- 
cluded in the Canal Zone area. Neither is 
Colon City, with 45,000 inhabitants, and 
located at the Atlantic entrance of the Canal. 

The Atlantic coast of the Isthmus of 
Panama was first visited by Rodrigo de Bas- 
tidas in 1501. A year after, Christopher Co- 
lumbus, trying vainly to get through the 
American Continent to continue his voyage 
to the Orient, visited most of the coasts of 
Panama. He found out that the region was 
rich in gold and went back to Spain with this 
valuable information and samples of the gold 
mines from Veraguas. 

In 150S Diego de Nicosia was appointed as 
the first Governor of "Castilla de Oro," which 
was the name given by the Spanish Govern- 
ment to Panama, but failed to 
establish a foothold on the 
Isthmus. 

In 1511 Yasco Nunez de Bal- 
boa, through whose advice the 
first foothold was established in 
"Castilla de Oro," took charge 
of the Government and on the 
first of September of 1513 de- 
parted with 190 Spanish sol- 
diers, some friendly Indians 
and a few fighting dogs, to look 
for the Pacific Ocean after get- 
ting information about its ex- 
istence through an Indian 
named Panquiaco. After going 
through craggy and rough moun- 
tain trails, through the wet and 
entangled jungle of the tropics, 
and fighting against unfriendly 
and savage Indians who used 
poisoned arrows, Balboa discov- 
ered the Pacific Ocean, one of 
the greatest achievements in the 
world's history, on September 
25, 1513. 

From that date on, the Isth- 
mus of Panama began to acquire 



its great importance as the crossroads of the 
world; many expeditions were then organ- 
ized which departed from its shores to the 
North and to the South looking for new lands 




to discover. The most important of these ex- 
peditions headed by Francisco Pizarro, one 
of Balboa's lieutenants, went to Peru, and 
Panama became the bridge through which 
passed the richness from the Incas to Spain. 




Soldiering in the jungles of Panama requires special technique. Here 
masters" members of Uncle Sam's Commandos of the jungle, build o 
It's a pup tent raised from the ground to keep the men dry and protected 

24 



So important became Panama that, during 
the period of the Buccaneers that followed the 
discovery of America, its shores and settle- 
ments were frequently assaulted by almost 
every known pirate of that time. 

The discovery of the gold mines of Califor- 
nia in 184S, brought Panama again to the at- 
tention of the world as the most feasible pass- 
age from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, 
and showed, once more, the need for an arti- 
ficial waterway across the Continent. 

For many years, ever since the discovery of 
America, the thought of the need for an arti- 
ficial canal prevailed in the minds of many 
outstanding statesmen throughout the world, 
bringing about numerous discussions and 
treaties without any practical result. In 1878 
M. Lucien Napoleon Bonaparte Wise, pro- 
cured a concession from the Government of 
Colombia to build an interoceanic canal 
across the Isthmus of Panama. The work was 
soon started by the Compagnie Universelle, 
but the so-called De Lesseps project collapsed 
in 1SS9 after two-fifths of the digging was 
done. The French disaster paved the way to 
American destiny. 

After several projects were considered by 
the Government of the United States, a treaty 
was signed with Colombia, but it was rejected 
by the Colombian Senate on August 12, 1903, 
having voted favorably only the Panamanian 
Representatives in the Senate. 

Panama, whose citizens proclaimed, single- 
handed, its independence from the Spanish 
yoke on November 28th, 1821, willingly 
bounded its destinies imme- 
diately afterwards to the Re- 
public of Colombia formed by 
the Great Liberator Simon Bo- 
livar, with Colombia, Venezuela 
and Ecuador. After Bolivar's 
influence waned in the central 
Government of that union of 
nations, the last two mentioned 
countries separated, and Pan- 
ama, after several unsuccessful 
attempts, seceded on the 3rd 
of November in the year of 1903, 
less than three months after the 
Hay-Herran Treaty was reject- 
ed by the Colombian Senate. 

One of the first acts of the 
newly formed Republic of Pan- 
ama was to sign a treaty with 
the United States providing for 
the construction, operation and 
protection of an interoceanic 
canal. Immediately, Uncle Sam 
rolled up his sleeves and got on 
the job. On August 15, 1914, the 
Panama Canal was opened to 
navigation, realizing, thus, the 
{Continued on page 163) 



S. Army Photo 

two "Bush* 
"Wiki-Up." 
from snakes. 



China's Fight for Freedom 



by His Excellency 

Dr. Wei Tao-ming 

Chinese Ambassador 



A 



LITTLE over eleven years ago, Japan 
started to carry out her plan of world 
domination by attacking Mukden in Man- 
churia and swiftly occupying the three 
Northeastern provinces of China. Six years 
later the Japanese expanded their aggressive 
activities in an endeavor to conquer the whole 
of China. Although inadequately prepared in 
point of modern equipment, China unflinch- 
ingly gave battle to the invaders ; and today 
the Chinese flag still flies proudly and tri- 
umphantly over a united and unconquerable 
people. 

The world at first was only mildly inter- 
ested in the staunch resistance of Chinese 
arms. Little did it comprehend the signifi- 
cance of Japanese aggression on a peaceful 
China. As later events proved, Japan's ag- 
gression, left unchecked by the world at large, 
was the forerunner of a series of acts of ag- 
gression by other predatory nations which 
eventually encompassed and placed in grave 
jeopardy the very security and happiness of 
all mankind. 

We held the fort against the aggressors for 
more than five years. We suffered initial re- 
verses. We lost our important cities and 
tow r ns and long-cherished territories. We lost 
upwards of 3,000,000 casualties. Thousands 
of peaceful civilians have been killed and over 
50,000,000 have had to abandon their homes. 
In spite of these bitter experiences and sacri- 
fices, we have strengthened the spirit of an 
unconquerable people — the determination to 





Generalissimo 
Ch ion g K a i-Sh ek 



Dr. Wei Tao-ming 



fight and to die so 
that the nation as a 
whole will survive. 

We accepted the 
sacrifices and en- 
dure d hardships 
with fortitude and 
tenacity because we 
knew we were fight- 
ing for a just and 
noble cause — the 
freedom and dignity 
of mankind. Today, 
eleven years after 
Mukden, and five 
years after Marco 
Polo Bridge, all 
peace loving peoples 
have joined the battle against aggression and 
we are marching on together under the same 
glorious banner for a common cause. To- 
gether with our comrades-in-arms, we are 
pledged to fight resolutely on until our flags 
fly triumphantly in the life-giving breeze of 
Freedom and Democracy. 

Grievous though our own losses have been, 
we have, nevertheless, inflicted corresponding 
losses on the enemy. Up to July 7th, 1042, 
China's armies have killed 1,000,000 Japanese 
soldiers and wounded 1,500,000. In addi- 
tion, 29,924 prisoners have been taken. Be- 
sides these casualties inflicted upon the 
enemy, China's armies are holding down 1,- 
000,000 Japanese soldiers in the Battle of 
China. In view of the comparatively meagre 
manpower of Japan, such losses represent a 
tremendous drain on her fighting potential. 
Were it not for these soldiers of China, the 
Japanese would have had a far stronger strik- 
ing power; and it would surely have serious 
repercussions on the fortunes of the war. 

It has well been said that China has pitted 
flesh and blood against steel and fire. That 
she stands unconquered today is a tribute to 
the triumph of the human spirit. Our record 
of the last five years is sufficient evidence that 
our fighting spirit will sustain us to the very 
end. But it may be seriously asked whether 
it is not tragic waste to permit China to con- 
tinue pitting mere flesh and blood against 
steel and fire. We offer a reservoir of man- 
power which is practically limitless. If this 
manpower is properly equipped, China will 
contribute a much greater part in shortening 
the route to our common victory. Generalis- 
simo Chiang Kai-shek expressed this succinct- 
ly when he said: "give us 10% of the equip- 
ment put out in America, and the Chinese 
army will give you 100% of the desired 
results." 



China stands ready to give her all in the 
attainment of these results for the vindica- 
tion of our common cause. She has already 
given much. But she has also gained much. 
The spirit of the New China is a glorious trib- 
ute to the noble sacrifice of her heroic dead. It 
is a spirit which forgets self in the advance- 
ment of the common good. It stands em- 
blazoned in the souls of China's millions as 
they go forth to meet the enemy with prac- 
tically bare hands but backed by sheer deter- 
mination. But they continue to go forth con- 
fident in the righteousness of the common 
cause of the United Nations, and determined 
to fight on and die if necessary to bring about 
the early dawn of the day when Freedom and 
Democracy will once again gladden and en- 
richen the hearts of men throughout the 
world. 




1J. 8. Army Photo 
Part of the duties of General StilwelVs command is 
the training of Chinese fighters in India. Shown 
above is Maj. Gen. Franklin C. Sibert, AUS, and Lt. 
Gen. Sun Li-Jung, who are supervising the instruc- 
tion. General Sun, a Division commander in the 
Chinese Army, won wide acclaim for the rescue of 
5,000 British troops who were trapped by the Jap- 
anese at an oil field near the Burmese border. 



25 



Financing the War 

by 

The Hon. Henry Morgenthau, Jr. 

Secretary of the Treasury 



READERS of the Army and Navy Journal 
need hardly be reminded that wars are 
won on the field of battle, not in the field of 
finance. But while victory may not be the 
result of financial triumphs, defeat might 
very well be the result of financial blunders. 

The American people, through their repre- 
sentatives in Congress, have determined to 
devote one-half of our total production in the 
current fiscal year to the business of winning 
the war. Our task at the Treasury is to assist 
in converting this expression of purpose into 
an expression of fact. 

The decision to devote one-half of our 
national productivity to war will inevit- 
ably entail great sacrifices in our physical 
comfort and well-being. Wise financial 
policy attempts to keep to a minimum the 
sacrifices that must be made — by encour- 
aging the fullest practicable use of our 
productive resources, by accomplishing a 
prompt and adequate diversion of re- 
sources from peacetime to wartime use, 
by distributing sacrifices among our citi- 
zens with a maximum of equity and a 
minimum of hardship, and by causing the 
fewest possible postwar dislocations in 
the economy as a whole. 

The diversion of goods and services 
from peacetime to wartime use should be 
accompanied by a corresponding diver- 
sion of purchasing power from peacetime 
to wartime use. The failure to enforce the 
necessary diversion of money incomes will 
not increase the amount of goods and ser- 
vices available for purchase; it will in- 
crease only the prices people must pay for 
the same amount of goods and services 
as before. 

The fact that the material and financial 
sides of war-making are in reality com- * 
plementary aspects of the same problem 
has often been obscured by the employment 
of financial policies running counter to the 
high goals we have laid down. Governments 
at war have been known to debase the coinage, 
issue new currency, and rely on the credit- 
manufacturing mechanism of the banks to 
provide them with the necessary resources to 
conduct Avar. These practices did not reduce 
by one iota the sacrifices people were called 
on to make during the war. They simply add- 
ed to the necessary burdens of wartime sacri- 
fice the wholly unnecessary, arbitrary, and 
inequitable burdens of war inflation and post- 
war deflation, with their attendant misery 
and injustice. 

Taxes are the ideal method of distributing 
the costs of the war consciously, deliberately, 
equitably. Since the beginning of the rearma- 
ment program, we have increased tremendous- 
ly government revenues from taxes. Taxes 



were increased twice in 1940, once in 1941, 
and once again in 1942. Total tax revenue in 
the current fiscal year will amount to about 
21 billion dollars. While this is nearly four 
times our tax revenue in fiscal 1940, it is only 
one-fourth of our estimated expenditures in 
this fiscal year. Against the standard of past 
achievement, the result is impressive ; against 
the standard of present needs, however, it is 
not so impressive. We need still more tax 
revenue. 

In theorv there is no reason why the war 




cannot be financed entirely from taxes; in 
practice, however, there are many obstacles 
to doing so. Any attempt to increase taxes 
tenfold f rom 1941 to 1943, the magnitude re- 
quired, would undoubtedly dislocate vital 
sections of our economy, discourage indi- 
viduals and firms from putting forth their 
best efforts, drain industry of necessary de- 
preciation reserves, and work great hardship 
on people whose sacrifices might better be in- 
vited by way of a war savings bond than a tax 
receipt. From the practical viewpoint, there- 
fore, we must borrow as well as tax. 

Non-inflationary war financing requires, 
however, that as much as possible of govern- 
ment borrowings be directly from the people, 
and not from the banks. We must do all we 
can to avoid either creating new money or 
activating old money, but instead we must 
draw from the current income stream money 



that would otherwise have been spent in 
buying consumers' goods. Our borrowing 
must not add unnecessarily to the total of 
purchasing power already in existence; it 
must transfer from private to public use the 
income that is being created by the war pro- 
gram itself. Only in this way can the Govern- 
ment check whatever tendency to a price rise 
it may be producing by its own spending 
program. 

The purchase of war savings bonds accom- 
plishes this very purpose. For the most part 
investments in these bonds represent 
savings from current income. This is par- 
ticularly true of the investment in war 
bonds by workers participating in Pay- 
roll Savings Plans, through which some 
23 million individuals are now investing 
approximately 8 per cent of their incomes. 
By January 1 it is hoped 30 million indi- 
viduals will be investing regularly 10 per 
cent of their incomes. 

The Treasury is leaving no potential 
source of non-inflationary funds un- 
tapped. Investments in government se- 
curities by Savings banks and Insurance 
companies provide the government with 
considerable institutional savings. Such 
nonbanking purchasers of government is- 
sues as corporations, fiduciaries, and in- 
dividuals provide a growing market for 
both regular and so-called u tap" issues. 
Various government trust funds, like so- 
cial security, constitute an important 
additional source of non-inflationary 
funds. Finally, Treasury Tax Savings 
Notes, designed both for individuals and 
corporations, provide the government 
with the kind of funds it needs by remov- 
ing current income from the circulation 
while tax liability is accruing. 
What the government wall not be able to 
obtain from the people by way of taxes and 
savings must come from the commercial 
banks. While borrowing from this source is 
by no means necessarily inflationary in its 
c onsequences, a large part of it could undoubt- 
edly have precisely that effect. Our policy, 
theref ore, must be to keep this type of borrow- 
ing to an irreducible minimum, and at the 
same time employ added measures to control 

goo2 aSmg P ° Wer Prices 0f c °»sumer 

fZtlT* r 1 ° bjeCtive ° f a s ™»<* wartime 
financ a pohey, i repeat> ig tQ 

whne d 0n of the nati0 »' s sources 
SSS* ?u g the burde » s °f sacrifice 
^^T^' The attai ^ent of these 

ESSE™" 18 the *— «•* 



2C> 



The Department of Justice and the War Effort 



by 

The Hon. Francis Bidclle 

Attorney General of the United States 



ON the morning of August 4, 1918, the 10,- 
000-ton American tanker 0. B. Jennings 
was proceeding to Newport News from Ply- 
mouth, England. When she was 150 miles 
from her destination a German submarine at- 
tacked her with shellfire. The tanker's crew 
abandoned ship. When the vessel had been 
sunk, the submarine approached one of the 
lifeboats and drew alongside. At that mo- 
ment a man suddenly stood up in the boat, 
jumped to the deck of the submarine, and be- 
gan talking rapidly in German to the com- 
manding officer. The two shook hands 
and without more ado disappeared to- 
gether down the conning tower. The be- 
wildered American crew never saw that 
shipmate again. 

That was one of the ways it was done 
in 1918. Today there is another U-boat 
campaign in American waters. Our ves- 
sels again are being shelled and tor- 
pedoed. We hear of a heavy toll. What 
we do not hear, and shall not until such 
time as the details are no longer of any 
possible strategic value to the enemy, is 
the other side of today's story — a story of 
telling losses to the German fleet, of con- 
voys that keep on getting through, of oil 
slicks rising to the surface, one after an- 
other, impermanent markers of the graves 
of these enemy craft. 

Behind the scenes of submarine war- 
fare there is a story of espionage and 
counter-espionage, of Axis agents at- 
tempting to furnish the U-boats with nec- 
essary information on the whereabouts 
of American ships, and of men of the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation thwart- 
ing that attempt. All of that story can- 
not be told yet — for obvious reasons — but 
the effectiveness of the FBI and the other 
Federal agencies which cooperate with it 
may be measured by the fact that the enemy 
has found it impossible to carry on this work 
in the United States and has resorted to 
round-about communications from points 
outside the borders of this country. 

Now and then a sample of what has gone 
on does come to light and is made available 
to the press when the details are no longer of 
practical use to the enemy. Last July 9, for 
example, Herbert Karl Freidrich Bahr, com- 
ing to this country in the guise of a refugee 
from Nazi Germany, was arrested by the FBI 
on board the Swedish ship Drottingholm. 
Bahr was an American citizen, who had gone 
to Germany in 1938 as an American Exchange 
Student. However, during his stay there he 
had joined the Gestapo, and after going 
through special training, it was his purpose 
to come back to the United States and engage 
in espionage for the Nazis. He had been 
taught the use of secret inks and other tech- 



niques for sending information, and he was 
furnished with cover addresses in Spain, 
Switzerland, and South America. 

This young man was all ready to do busi- 
ness — had not the FBI been waiting for him 
at the pier when the Drottingholm reached 
this side of the Atlantic. As a result, Bahr 
will have a rather difficult time getting any 
information out of this country. He is now in 
prison, where he has been sentenced to re- 
main for the next thirty years. Other inci- 
dents of this sort, owing to surrounding cir- 




cumstances, have been made public. But there 
is far more to the story of the fight to make 
undersea warfare as difficult and expensive as 
possible to the Germans, through lack of the 
information that submarine commanders 
must have if they are to operate at a mini- 
mum of risk and a maximum of efficiency. 

Today the undersea raider is on his own. 
He is not getting the help from these shores 
which he had expected. The far-flung system 
of espionage which Germany had hoped to 
keep in operation for the U-boat campaign of 
1942 is defunct. And in the absence of that 
help, the marauder must catch as catch can. 
Of course, in the heavily trafficked sea lanes, 
he has found prey. But he has paid too. The 
whole U-boat campaign is a far costlier opera- 
tion than it was in the last war. More craft 
are required, diverted from other waters. 
More are sunk. But the convoys to Britain, 
to Australia, to Russia, go on. 



What has happened to that elaborate net- 
work of German espionage? Why has it fallen 
down on the job? First, because much of the 
work must be done ashore, and America, 
through Government agencies assigned to the 
task, is a far more vigilant nation than she 
has ever been before. Second, the protection 
at sea, the facilities for patrol of American 
waters, are ever expanding and becoming 
more efficient. And third, the preventive and 
counter-espionage forces of this country — the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation of the De- 
partment of Justice, and the intelligence 
offices of the Army and Navy — all have 
been coordinated, all work closely to- 
gether. 

G2 of the Army, ONI (Office of Naval 
Intelligence) and the FBI began piecing 
this effective war machine together in 
the summer of 1939. Coordination was 
worked through many important lines. 
An interdepartmental committee for two- 
way visa control over movements into and 
out of the country, for example, was set 
up by the State, War, Navy and Justice 
Departments. This tightened the gates to 
meet specific wartime requirements of 
each agency. Immigration and Naturali- 
zation inaugurated an interdepartmental 
check on applications for citizenship, 
channeling them for clearance through 
the other offices. Also in 1939 the FBI 
undertook a survey looking to a nation- 
wide program of plant protection under 
Army supervision. That program is now 
operating. Espionage and sabotage have 
become as difficult ashore as they are at 
sea. 

Between ihe FBI and the intelligence 
offices of the Army and Navy there is a 
constant exchange of information. They 
are in daily liaison. An example of how 
it works out: Counter-espionage operators of 
the FBI, assuming the role of Nazi agents in 
this country and working their way into a 
ring of Nazi spies, were operating a short- 
wave radio station for many months in direct 
contact with Hamburg. The information they 
got was valuable to this country, as far as it 
went. But the fact that they were pouring a 
steady stream of misinformation into trust- 
ing German hands was of even greater bene- 
fit to us. That which came in and that which 
went out over the secret station were subjects 
of daily consultation of the FBI, the Army 
and Navy. The misinformation which the 
Nazis got was officially approved by the best 
American authorities! 

Also supporting the armed forces these 
days is the Criminal Division of the Depart- 
ment of Justice. Sedition is a crime. One of 
the clearcut categories of sedition was the ef- 
(Oontinued on page 163) 



27 



The United States Navy Today 



IT is a year since "Pearl Harbor" rendered 
an abrupt decision on the debate over 
America's vulnerability to invasion. 

That issue is closed. The judges' decision 
was rendered in the shape of bombs and tor- 
pedoes. It was confirmed by the shelling of 
the California coast, the probable dropping 
of incendiary bombs on Oregon forests, the 
enemy occupation of Alaskan islands, the 
landing of saboteurs from enemy submarines 
on our east coast. 

Our effort now is to repel invasion and to 
carry it to the enemy. But debate continues. 

It is our heritage from the town meeting 
and the cracker-barrel forum of the village 
grocery. Nobody would advocate its surrender 
or prohibition. The right to argue is one of 
the privileges we our giving our blood and 
substance to preserve. Lively debate over the 
conduct of the war is in itself proof that the 
public is not apathetic or complacent. 

There is, however, a tremendous difference 
between reasoned discussion and unreason- 
able bickering, between constructive criticism 
and destructive fault-finding. The evil takes 



by 

The Hon. Frank Knox 

The Secretary of the Navy 



advantage of the protection afforded the 
wholesome and the good, just as crab grass 
thrives in the best of lawns, to employ a thor- 
oughly un-nautical metaphor. And, from a cer- 
tain oblique point of view, even crab grass can 
be made to look good, just as crabbing criti- 
cism can be rationalized. 

We Americans are amateurs at war. We 
have insisted upon retaining our amateur 
standing until long after the undisguised ene- 
my had thrown away the rule books, and 
forced our peace-loving friends to do the same. 

Even after we were brutally kicked into a 
war for survival, we as a nation expected our 
fighting forces to implement themselves with 
left-overs. We, as a nation, had acquired an- 
other and indefensible habit, which heaven 
knows was no part of the heritage left us by 
our fighting forefathers — passing the buck. 

We substituted the ostrich for the eagle, 
and displaced Molly Pitcher with Pollyanna. 
We exchanged the slogan of "Trust in God 
but keep your powder dry" for the motto "It 
can't happen here." The rubber we did not 
(Continued on page 164) 




T.cWco! Al*J«* 
Public Relation* 

Ptfroleum Reserves 
Training, Lioi»on, 

ond Coordination 



DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 



SECRETARY OF THE NAVY 



ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY 

Shore Establishments Division 



ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE 



BUREAU OF 
NAVAL PERSONNEL 



BUREAU OF 
ORDNANCE 



II 

l!= = 



T 



UNDER SECRETARY OF THE NAVY 

Procurement Lcsal Division 
Army and Navy Munition! Board 
Naval Eiromining Board 
Board of Medical E.aminert 
Naval Rtl...n 3 Boa-d 



OFFICE OF CHIEF 
OF PROCUREMENT 
AND MATERIAL 



OFFICE OF JUDGE 
ADVOCATE GENERAL 



OFFICE OF CHIEF OF 
NAVAL OPERATIONS 



BUREAU OF 
AERONAUTICS 



_ -/IK- - 

JL. 



n 

L JL, 



BUREAU OF 
SHIPS 



"F" 



JL. 



JL_ 



BUREAU OF 
YARDS AND DOCKS 



BUREAU OF 
SUPPLIES AND 
ACCOUNTS 



General Board 
Joint Board 
Rcicorch ond Development Board 
Lcnd-Leate Liauon 



\ 



ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY 
FOR AIR 

Army and Navy Aeronautical Board 



BUDGET OFFICE 



BUREAU OF 
MEDICINE AND 
SURGERY 



■ L ^ 



' n 





HEADQUARTERS 1 
MARINE CORPS 1 



I SHORE 
1 ACTIVITIES 

L _ 



I ■"■ 

LOCAL 
DEFENSE FORCES 
u f 

=====0 





1 1 


-J -4., 




11^ 









, HEADQUARTERS 
COAST GUARD 



TT 



-=====JJ 



I Certain Marine Force! 
| ond Aclivilio, 



| Certain Coast Guard J 
| Forces and Activities J 
I J 



Llnti of admin. iholiv* authority. 

Ltntt of military control. 

Coordination of v«orl< offtctinj efficiency. 



Coordli 



Ml of -oik under ac'm,n„tmli. 

of the Auiiionl Secretory. 
Tor mainn wiihin Buieau cognisance 
Unili which arc not by law an initial 
port of the No«y Deportment. 



28 



Resources for Victory 



by 

The Hon. Harold L. Ickes 

Secretary of the Interior 



ttf~\TJR immediate and primary function is 
" the full mobilization of the Nation's 
natural resources for war." These words were 
written in a Departmental order on the night 
of December 7. 

The Department of the Interior, which is 
the Government's primary agent in the peace- 
time conservation of natural resources, lost 
no time in mobilizing its activities for war. 
Employees and bureaus have been placed on 
a war emergency basis. A War Resources 
Council was created to coordinate informa- 
tion and action relating to natural re- 
sources. 

The natural resources which the De- 
partment of the Interior controls, and is 
putting at the disposal of the armed ser- 
vices, are strategic and vital. They in- 
clude oil, power, fuel, helium, food, land, 
water and timber. Without these ma- 
terials we could not build our planes, 
ships, tanks and guns. 

To mobilize ample supplies of these war 
necessities, the Department of the In- 
terior has set in motion a 52-point action 
program. This program is based upon the 
Department's long experience in conserv- 
ing the Nation's natural resources. For 
example, the Geological Survey and the 
Bureau of Mines, after years of explora- 
tion and experiment, have enabled our 
metallurgical industry to turn unused, 
low-grade materials into essential war 
metals. New processes which these In- 
terior agencies have developed are now 
being used, while other important experi- 
ments are being rushed into the final test- 
ing stages. Old ore veins are being worked 
on an increasing scale, while new ones are 
being discovered and opened up. The De- 
partment furnishes the War Production 
Board with information on the expected 
quantities, speed of availability and costs of 
production of all strategic minerals. To pre- 
vent sabotage and waste, the Department 
exercises a rigid supervision over the use and 
purchase of explosives throughout the coun- 
try. 

Petroleum is another one of the Depart- 
ment's responsibilities. The Office of the Pe- 
troleum Coordinator, who is also the Secre- 
tary of the Interior, is organizing the produc- 
tion of petroleum products for war purposes. 
The task of the Petroleum Coordinator is to 
make sure that the crude oils, condensates 
from high pressure fields, and natural gaso- 
lines needed for aviation gasoline and lubri- 
cants, toluene, synthetic rubber, and other 
specialized products, will be available quick- 
ly and fully. For this purpose, high octane 
gasoline plant capacity has been multiplied, 
transportation systems have been reshaped, 
marketing programs have been formulated, 



and conservation measures have been carried 
out. Though much yet remains to be done, the 
machinery for the efficient handling and pro- 
duction of petrolueni is already functioning 
with considerable smoothness. 

To implement the Nation's war program, 
electric energy to the extent of more than 
150 billion kilowatt hours is needed. The De- 
partment is now producing at the rate of 
more than 7 billion kilowatt hours annually. 
Plans are under way to triple the 1941 output, 
particularly in the areas where the principal 




undeveloped resources of the Nation are lo- 
cated. 

As Coordinator for Solid Fuels, the Secre- 
tary of the Interior is also responsible for 
the efficient organization of coal and coke. It 
is estimated that more than 000,000,000 tons 
of anthracite, bituminous and lignitic coals, 
and 70,000,000 tons of coke will be required in 
1942. Proper organization, now under way, 
will provide an adequate war-time supply of 
coals and coke for all ascertainable needs. 

The Department of the Interior controls 
the only major sources of helium in the 
world. This year the record production of the 
1941 fiscal year will be doubled. 

Food is another important resource to 
which the Department of the Interior is con- 
tributing. Through the Department's Fish 
and Wildlife Service, fishing products are be- 
ing raised by 1% billion pounds. Under the 
direction of the Department's Grazing Ser- 



vice, products of 12,000,000 head of livestock 
on Federal ranges are being increased up to 
10 per cent. In our island possessions and 
territories, which are under Interior's juris- 
diction, cane and beet production is being in- 
creased and a food-drying program is being 
conducted to relieve demands on tins and con- 
tainers. 

About one-third of the Government's forest 
resources are under Interior, including Alas- 
ka. These are being administered on a sound 
conservation basis— mature trees being cut 
for commercial use while young trees are 
spared for the future. Under this kind of 
sustained-yield management, timber pro- 
duction from the Oregon and California 
Bevested lands, as well as from the for- 
ests of the Indian reservations, is being 
increased to a billion board feet in 1942. 
Interior is also mapping areas of mili- 
tary significance, and it also prepares, 
produces and supplies maps required by 
the armed forces. The Department's 
trained crews for combatting forest fires 
are also acting as air raid detection units. 

Under the Department's war program, 
public lands are being withdrawn so as to 
permit the establishment of military 
ranges, cantonments and aviation fields, 
as well as town sites. Meanwhile, already 
established national parks are providing 
special facilities for the recreation of 
members of the armed forces. 

While the Department is utilizing the 
natural resources of the Nation to help 
win the war, it does not neglect its prime 
peacetime function, which is to guard and 
conserve our country's natural wealth. 
Despite the exigencies of war, everything 
passible is being done to protect the re- 
sources for future use. 

If the intelligent use of natural re- 
sources can help win the war, then the De- 
partment of the Interior is justified in con- 
sidering itself an essential war agency. Ee- 
cently Congress cited Interior as more closely 
related to the war effort than any other de- 
partment, except War and Navy. This natur- 
ally pleased the men and women on the staff 
of Interior, for it assured them that they were 
on the right track. 

In another phase of its work the Depart- 
ment felt immediate percussion of the war. 
As a Governmental agency in which there has 
been placed the Division of Territories and 
Island Possessions, it had Federal civil super- 
vision over Hawaii, Alaska, the Philippines, 
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and a num- 
ber of other islands in the far Pacific. The 
effects of the war were more immediate in 
these possessions than on the mainland and 
strained the civil facilities available to their 
{Continued on page 103) 



29 



Agriculture and the War 



by 

The Hon. Claude R. Wickard 

Secretary of Agriculture 



TjlAEMERS of the United States are 
waging a gigantic battle in the fight 
for freedom. They have just won the first 
round of their battle. Farm production in 
1942 was the largest in our history. It 
was a tremendous gain over the previous 
high mark set a year earlier. With mount- 
ing handicaps and still heavier demands, 
they face a second round next year that 
will tax their resources to the utmost. 

Our farmers are feeding the U. S. fight- 
ing man better than any other on earth. 
They are helping feed the military forces 
of other Nations at arms against the 
Axis. They are feeding our workers in the 
war industries and our civilian popula- 
tion generally as no other people in the 
world can be fed. 

To do this job, sights had been set as 
far back as September 1941, for un- 
equalled production in the 1942 crop year. 
Pearl Harbor made even those sights too 
low. Promptly farmers aimed higher. 
They revised their planning to fit the new 
goals called for by the Department of 
Agriculture. They set out to provide more 
meat, milk and eggs and more of other 
vital products. Particularly they aimed 
for more vegetable oil crops to make up 
for the Far Eastern vegetable oil ship- 
ments cut off by the Japanese. 

As the record shows, they went all-out in 
every phase of production. With the help of 
exceptional weather, they gave their country 
a food, fiber and oil production 40 percent 
greater than that of the war year of 1918. 
They surpassed 1941's all-time record by 12 
percent. And they did this despite scarcity 
of manpower and other handicaps at 
every turn. 

Let me be a little more specific. They 
broke the world records of 1941 notably 
in these vital items : Beef and veal by one 
billion pounds; pork by one and a half 
billion pounds; lamb and mutton by 60 
million pounds ; milk by nearly two bil- 
lion quarts; eggs by about 600 million 
dozen; soybeans for oil by five million 
acres; peanuts for oil by two million 
acres. 

But, farmers realize that, no matter 
how ably they have produced to date, they 
have won only the first stage of the agri- 
cultural battie in World War Two. The 
second year after Pearl Harbor, they 
know, will bring a vastly more critical 
test, with food fitted closely into the vic- 
tory strategy of the United Nations. They 
know that U. S. production must antici- 
pate the possible freeing of subjugated 
nations and the feeding of peoples whose 
larders have been stripped bare by the 
Nazis. 




The job is huge and there is no time to lose. 
Already U. S. farm people are mapping a 
farm offensive for 1943. Only by the best of 
strategy in their own fields can they support 
the military offensives across the Atlantic and 
the Pacific. 

They must win this great food battle with a 
reduced farm force. This means that man- 



Progress Toward Meeting 1942 Farm 

Production Goals fiSnjSl 

Pcrcent daction is 

1942 Production 1942 jjoals above or 
Indicated exceed 1941 below 

Crops Nov. 1 product i<»n goals 

All corn 3,185,141,000 bu. 1 19 

All wheat 984,016,000 bu. —16 24 

Oats 1,369,540,000 1)11. 2 14 

Barley 426,188,000 bu. — 6 18 

Ryo 59,665,000 bu. 6 24 

All hay 104,914,000 tons 0 12 

Grain sorghums 149,795,000 bu. — 22 25 

Flaxseed 42,682,000 bu. 14 19 

Soybeans 209,953,000 bu. 43 37 

Peanuts 2,810,525,000 lbs. 154 —25 

Kice 70,086,000 bu. 20 8 

Beans, dry edible 2,090,200,000 lbs. 9 3 

Peas, dry Held 725,500,000 lbs. 65 12 

Potatoes 379,624,000 bu. 7 —1 

Tomatoes, canned #2.. 33,000,000 cases 27 — 18 

Peas, canned #2 35,500,000 cases 32 — 7 

Percent 
1st 10 

Percent months, 

increase 1942, is 
above 1941 above 1st 

Production called for 10 months 

Animal Products Jan. -Oct., 1942 by goals 1911 

Beef 1 5,384,529,000 lbs. 8 8 14 

Pork and larcH 7,242,644,000 lbs. 8 17 18 

Eggs 3 3,544,750,000 doz. 13 15 

Milk* 102,673,000,000 lbs. 8 4 

American cheese 885,000,000 lbs. 33 SI 

Evaporated milk 3,150,000,000 lbs. 8 20 17 

Dry skim milk for lin- 
eman consumption . . . 505,000,000 lbs. 8 46 60 
^Federally-inspected slaughter, dressed weight. 
■Produced on farms, Jan. -Oct., 1942. 
•Estimates for the month of October. 



power must be used with maximum effi- 
ciency, must be turned first to primary 
crops. Above all else, this means dairy, 
livestock, and poultry farms. Among the 
planted crops, preference must go to those 
that provide basic nutrition. Critical 
manpower, machinery and tires cannot be 
wasted on non-essentials. Resources ex- 
pended on each product must be scaled to 
hard necessity, to providing a strict, war- 
time diet and few frills. 

The farm production goals for next 
year are based upon estimates of all the 
different needs for American food, and 
also upon our capacity to produce, process 
and transport food. This work was done 
largely by the Foods Requirements Com- 
mittee, of wliich I serve as Chairman. 
This group, made up of representatives 
from nine Government agencies, has 
brought together their specialized knowl- 
edge of requirements for our food, and 
facilities for growing, processing, and 
distributing it. 

Working together, the Foods Require- 
ments Committee and the Combined Food 
Board of this country and Great Britain 
have, in effect, pooled the food resources 
of the United Nations. These total food 
resources have been allocated according 
to military and civilian needs, location of 
supplies, nutritional value of the foods repre- 
sented, and the facilities for transporting 
them. 

Food requirements of our own military 
forces, and those of our allies will be large 
in the year ahead, and they likely will grow as 
the war progresses. In 1943 it is expected that 
military and Lend-Lease requirements 
will be half again as large as in 1942 and 
will take one-fourth of our total farm pro- 
duction. Workers who man the machines 
on the home production front are working 
harder and longer and have much larger 
purchasing power. This means that our 
civilian families need more food than 
ever, and have the money to buy all they 
need, and more. 

Since we must first meet the require- 
ments of our fighting forces and of our 
allies, some foods will be available for 
civilians in lesser amounts than normal, 
and we will not have the great variety of 
foods we have always enjoyed. For ex- 
ample, meat will be available in reason- 
able amounts, but not in the quantities 
civilians would like to buy it. There will 
be less canned fruits and vegetables, and 
smaller amounts of some dairy products, 
tfut, m the main, our civilian population 
can count on a food supply that will meet 
adequate nutrition standards. 

{Continued on page 163) 



30 




U. S. Navy Photos 

Admiral Ernest J. King, USN 
Commander in Chief, U. S. Fleet 
Chief of Naval Operations 



The United States Fleet 

by Admiral King 



Admiral William D. Leahy, USN -Ret. 
Chief of Staff to the Commander- 
in-Chief of the Army and Navy 



Global War 

by Admiral Leahy 



General George C. Marshall, USA, 
Chief of Staff of the Army 



U. S. Army Photo 



Army of the United States 

by General Marshall 



IVTO one appreciates more fully than I the 
J- ^ keen interest taken by the American pub- 
lic in the activities of the U. S. Navy. As I 
have stated elsewhere, I should be deeply con- 
cerned if you were not so interested, for in the 
final analysis the Navy belongs to the people 
of the United States and is responsible to you 
for the proper discharge of the great trust you 
have placed in its hands. 

As citizens of a democracy we have become 
accustomed to an unrestricted flow of in- 
formation on all subjects in which we are in- 
terested. We have built up and supported 
vast and powerful organizations whose sole 
purpose is to keep us informed ; and we jeal- 
ously guard the rights of a free press as being 
a major factor in our democratic processes. 
Because of these facts, some of us expect, even 
in the midst of a total war, to receive a con- 
tinuous flow of information about military 
and naval activities ; and we overlook the fact 
that to publish this information indiscrimi- 
nately w^ould, in fact, give "aid and comfort 
to the enemy." 

I should like to be able to inform you fully 
and completely of our broad strategic con- 
siderations and the reasons therefor, of the 
detailed manner in which each campaign or 
battle was conducted, of what we teach each 
one of your sons to make him an efficient fight- 
ing man, and of the magnificent manner in 
which these men live — and die if need be — in 
the service of their country ; but a moment's 
thought will show you why this is impossible. 
It is impossible because there is no way in 
which I can tell you these things without also 
telling our enemies, who avidly desire any 
detail of this nature which may assist them 
in their ruthless prosecution of the war. With 
these facts in mind, and in the hope that with- 
in these restrictions I may be able to explain 
(Continued on page 164) 



TN this Global War, with its fateful conse- 
quences to Humanity, the world appears 
to the strategist and logician as a mass of 
water dotted with islands of land. Merging 
into each other, the oceans constitute a single 
area, and an event transpiring in a part of 
one of them has a direct relationship to an 
event occurring elsewhere. For example, a 
convoy passing through the Arctic Sea bound 
for Murmansk must be coordinated with an 
attack upon the Solomons in the South Pa- 
cific, and the attack upon the Solomons must 
be coordinated with an operation at another 
far distant point. Further, such coordination 
must maintain in all the activities of the 
United Nations. Whether it be the British 
Navy silently engaged in the arduous and 
monotonous duties of a blockade, or the Rus- 
sian Black Sea Fleet exacting toll from the 
Nazi sea borne supply lines, their efforts must 
be coordinated to insure a weakening of the 
foe at the proper time and place. Again, on 
land, as all men now can see, the debarkation 
of American and British troops in North 
Africa may force the German hordes to aban- 
don their ambitious designs upon Russia and 
her oil fields, and the Caspian Sea route to the 
Near East, and to pass to the defensive, an 
action which may enable the magnificent Red 
Army, still in being in spite of the murderous 
assaults directed against it, to launch an over- 
whelming offensive. 

If we were fighting alone, a complete defeat 
of all the aggressors would be well nigh im- 
possible. We would be faced with enemies 
controlling territories capable of supplying 
them with ample food stuff, ample strategic 
materials, and ample production facilities 
operated by ample slave labor. Fortunately, 
we are blessed with Allies fighting in the com- 
mon cause of freedom and the rights of men. 
To them is largely due the comparative safety 



HP HE growth of the Army from one of thou- 
sands to a force of four million men during 
the past three years indicates the solid foun- 
dation upon which we base our plans for the 
future. The increase in mass is impressive, 
and the rate of increase even more so. But 
the most reassuring phase is reflected by the 
highly trained personnel, commanders, staffs 
and troops that are being developed, despite 
the size and rapidity of the expansion. 

The trickle of machines, munitions, and 
material which reached us in 1939 has be- 
come a swell in 1942, but it is only a harbinger 
of the flood to come. These are the tangible 
and quantitative signs of our progress. Our 
major inspiration, however, comes from the 
realization, as a result of his performance in 
action against the enemy, that the American 
soldier is strong, devotedly loyal, highly effec- 
tive in combat, and fully determined upon de- 
struction of the enemy forces which oppose him. 



which we enjoy. Because their fight is our 
fight, a ship lost by them, a regiment of theirs 
destroyed, is our loss. Therefore, we glory in 
their successes, just as they glory in ours. 

We must never forget that it is the common 
effort which will bring us victory. On our 
part we rapidly are becoming the Arsenal 
of Democracy the President envisioned. From 
our factories are issuing steadily increasing 
quantities of planes and tanks and other mu- 
nitions. Our ship yards are performing mir- 
acles in speedy delivery of all types of war- 
ships and merchantmen. With submarine 
sinkings under better control, there is war- 
rant for the hope that in 1943 the 16 million 
tons of the new merchant shipping expected 
will give us the greatly needed increased 
(Continued on page 1G4) 



31 



Industry and the Army of the United States 



by 

Hon. Robert P. Patterson 

Under Secretary of War 



AS a nation we have one job : to destroy the 
military strength of the Axis powers so 
completely that they will never rise again to 
disturb the peace of the world. That job will 
have to be done on the battlefield, but we shall 
require the fullest mobilization at home of all 
our resources of manpower, machinery and 
materials if we are to attain our goal. 

More than any war in history, this war has 
demonstrated the inter-dependence of the 
military and the industrial fronts. However 
well-trained or well-led our troops may be, 
however gallantly they may fight, we 
cannot hope for victory unless we give 
them the weapons a mechanized army 
needs. 

Under these circumstances we must re- 
gard our theatre of operations as extend- 
ing from the combat zone to our factories 
and shipyards and even beyond to the 
mines and forests from which we get the 
raw materials for our instruments of war. 
We must see to it that no holes open up 
anywhere along that line. 

Having a full crew of miners in an 
Arizona copper mine is as important to 
the Army as having a full complement of 
soldiers in a Caribbean island base. An 
aircraft factory that is operating only 
eight hours a day because it does not have 
enough, metal to keep going around the 
clock can cost us more planes than we 
have lost in any engagement against the 
Nazis or Japs. 

We can't attack the Nazis with tanks 
that never come out of the factory. We 
can't sink a Jap fleet with blueprint bat- 
tleships or bombast bombers. We can't 
put our marksmen behind the sights of 
phantom guns. We must be sure that we 
have more and better tanks, more and bet- 
ter planes, more and better arms of every 
sort before Ave can be certain that we will 
win this war in the shortest possible time 
and with the least sacrifice of American blood. 

That is why the Army is no less concerned 
about how well the war is going in the steel 
mills of Pittsburgh than it is about develop- 
ments in the South Pacific. Every upward 
movement in the chart of industrial produc- 
tion represents progress for the United States 
and its allies in the battle map of this war. 

We have made herculean advances in the 
twelve months since the Japs struck at Pearl 
Harbor. We have taken the most highly de- 
veloped industrial system in the world and 
harnessed its enormous productive energies 
to the engines of war. We are turning out 
four times as many weapons today as we were 
at the beginning of the war and impressive 
gains have been recorded in our effort to plan 
and coordinate production in such a way that 
we will be sure we get the arms and equip- 



ment we need most in the greatest volume. 

There is no room for self-satisfaction or con- 
gratulation in this record. We are not getting 
all we could get out of our industry. We are 
still far from producing enough to meet our 
own requirements and those of Britain, Rus- 
sia and China. Even now comparatively few 
of our plants are running their machines 
every hour of every day. Measured on a 
round-the-clock basis, we are still using less 
than half of our productive capacity. 

This is no 50 per cent war for the men on 




the battle Held. It cannot be a 50 per cent war 
for us at home. It is our hope that efforts now 
under way to stimulate the output of stra- 
tegic raw materials and the more efficient 
program of materials distribution set up un- 
der the newly-instituted Controlled Materials 
Plan will do much to overcome the shortages 
that have retarded production and prevented 
many plants from going on a three-shift 
schedule. 

We are not overlooking the fact that it is 
as important to use men full-time as it is to 
use machines, recognizing always that what 
constitutes full-time work in the case of a man 
is very different from full-time work in the 
case of a machine. The strength and skill of 
our workers are military assets in exactly the 
same sense as the strength and skill of our 
soldiers, and they must be brought to bear 



32 



against the enemy with maximum effective- 
ness if we are to end the war in the shortest 
possible time. 

We must determine in each industry how 
many hours a man or woman can work with- 
out undermining his health or slowing down 
his machine. In some industries forty-eight 
hours may prove the most fruitful schedule. 
In others it may be fifty-two or fifty-six or 
even longer. We do not w r ant to overtax our 
workers ; we dare not undertax them. 

Our object must be to get the most work 
done with the smallest number of work- 
ers. Our manpower reserves are too low 
to permit any waste or diffusion. It is not 
enough to lengthen working hours in 
those plants engaged directly in war pro- 
duction. We must also lengthen them in 
plants doing essential non-war work so 
that these plants can get along with fewer 
workers and release part of their present 
work force to war industries. 

The average work week in all manufac- 
turing industries, war and non-war, is 
only 42.S hours: If we could raise that 
over-all average to forty-eight hours, we 
could get the same volume of production 
with 1,500,000 fewer factory employes. In 
other words, 12,500,000 workers could do 
the work now clone by 14,000,000, leaving 
the others free to step up our total output. 

The latest government figures indicate 
that some 38 million workers are em- 
ployed in non-agricultural occupations in 
this country, of whom about 15 million 
work in war industries or in such related 
fields as the transportation of war mate- 
rials or the production of electric power 
for war uses. In addition to these work- 
ers, our work force embraces 10y 2 million 
farm workers, all of whom have their part 
in the great common effort on which we 
are embarked. There are four million 
self-employed and domestic workers in 
the country. 

Many of the 23 million non-agricultural 
workers not now engaged in war work will be 
drawn into such work as further curtailments 
are ordered in non-essential services and 
materials for civilian supply. Even this will 
not meet our full need and it is estimated that 
we shall have to recruit at least four and one- 

a ™°o n addition a] workers before the 
end of 1943. 

Since our military and naval forces will be 
growing at the same time from a present total 
S ]t 6 m *"A ^ to something between 

mSt of tl" 1101 10 milli ° n men > !t is ^ that 
Z £ i I 6 ne T° merS t0 the ranks ° f indus- 
try will have to be women. We will also 

have to make fuller use of those persons 
who have been denied their rightful s? are in 

{Continued on page 109) 



88 



'jaqiaSo) ;t op nuqs oav 
Aj;snpui piiu Aau^ oq; jo qoC oq; Si siqx 
•sjno st Ajo;oia ii;un qpoj Sut.mod uoui puu 
sauBid puB sdtqs oq; doo>[ ;snra oav -sjoqinnu 
jo ddjoj Jooqs qSnojq; sotuiouo jno uipqAv 
-J8A0 oav ii;un ^qSg puB dmbo puB pimq ^snra 
Aidwis oav 0^ -A'.iopta— unu o;Biui;in ouo jtiq 
OAuq oav puy -suiiu o;uun;in no sa^Bnn^sa jno 
osuq Alio uuo OA! ''MJP^d 8l W u l AV0U SuiSbj 

SI ipil[AV yeTQ SU A.l0;Sll[ H13 HI JBJJ1 IOAT3U 1? 

SuiSuuiup os ii90(i .ioaou suq aaaqj, 'Supreads 
AlBDtisiWS ^inni ;noq;iAv juav b si siqi 
•suoi;sonb osoq; 0? s.ioavsuu ou oju o.ioqx 

£JOAO SI JUAV Sllj) 

ojojoq poou i] [[iav aapAiod puu uiuuiumiu 
puB no put? po;s qonra Avon i&qsnpui 
jo spuuuiop S;t oq I[IAV ;UI[A1 0l H 
jo s;ttouiojmboj o.m;nj oq; oq hjav ;ui[AV 

'Ststao stq; ui jiuj }ou upv A;tnuoSui ubo 
-poiny )vx\i ;uopijuoo oq Auui oav ^qSuq 
os ;ou st s[upo;uiu omos .10 j >iooi;uo o;uip 
-ounut oq; qSnoipHV *AU[op ;nu.iod ;ou 
soop orat) — avou %x op ;sniu oav puu 'sojn; 
-[isqns .10 dn.tos 'siupo;um avu.i jo oo.tnos 
A'.ioao 3110 >joos ;sniu oav *sn ^suibSb 
posu oq iiiav ;uq; suri3 o;ui suibS osoq; 
aoiqSBj o; Ajtunpoddo oq; .10 oun; oq; 
uoaiS oq ;ou ;snui a\h[X 'suoduoAV IBt;ua; 
-od jo sojo;s ;uo.iS 'Araouo oq; o; opjiqiuAU 
opuui OABq ;su:q jlb^ oq; ut s;sanbuoo 
osouuduf ;uq; puj oq; ojouSi oav ubd 
J0ii -pouoiju.t Ap.iOAOS nooq OAuq sjBia 
-ojuiu avim oi^oju.ijs *po[iupno .to po;iuq 
joqjp uooq SBq uoipnpo.td aBijiAp [Bijnas 
-sa-uoa \\v. ;soui[v "I[Oav si? woiqo.id stq!) 
StctAioS ut opuui Snioq Avon o.iu sapujg 

•S[Ul.lO}UUI 

avlm jo A;inqiqn?AV oq; Avon st maxqoad 
uoipnpo.id aiBin oq; ;i?q; 4 poods jo o;i3.i 
Suizbuib mi q.)iis ;u souiqDimi 0|i;i;s.ioa 
o.iotu ;no Siiiu.in; o.iu s.io.iiipujuiiuiii \oo\ 
outqouin oq; k ssopq;.iOAOjsj -qol.' ,ioq;o £ws 
op o; ;{mqo.i A^opuluioo puB poddu.tos 
oq o; 9ABq ppioAv ;lm{; souiqOBm osod.md 
-o^Suts oju s;tuqd o.o.uq in spo; ouiqouui 
oq; jo ;som 4 si ;uq; ipodoiOAop AqSiq os si 
uoipnpo.ul ssuiu s^uot.iouiY osuuooq o^qissod 
-mi uooq Anunsu suq uois.ioauod n n ii 'XJiStip 
-ni 0{iqouio;uu o.it;uo oq; o; doqs JtBdOJ £d\\v. 
-^[ouq ;soulmus oq; uio.tj — poods do; ;t3 poqsnd 
uooq suq soi;i[iouj itoipnpo.id Sui;stX9 jo 
nois.ioAuo^ •uoi;oupo.td ;[itj ut pun popxdtnoo 
avou moq; jo A'uiuu ^^o^^ofo.id uooq oaiuj suois 
-uudxo ;uiqd jo sjmqd avou jo spuusnoq; 
^s.iuoA* oav; ;sud oq; xxj *uoi;ou jo ui.ioj oq) in 
aoAVSiiu s;t uoaiS suq ;j *^su; £ws o; juiUm 
st f ;t uo posoduii qoC oq; Aq suav ;t qSuoq) 
po.io8Su;s Aii.iu.iodiuo; 4 A.i;snput UBDiaaurv 



•soo.'rf ;i os puy 
•o.)iqd o\ o.)tqd aiOJj [Btja^Bin siq; nu [riBq o; 
sibo tm }xo uo ;tul ;suui spuo.iiiu>i -uioq; uuui 
oqAV SJOtlBS oq) puB sdiqs oq) diubo d[oq o; 
SJOpJO q;tAV podiuuAvs o.iu 'suio;i .toqjo jo puo 
on puB 4 so[t;xo; c ;uiBd ^oAisoidxo 's)iiouiiu;s 
ut [BDi^do jo s.io.ui;oujnuuK *s;uuDt.iqnx puu 
'ounosuS uoi;uiau 6 jio [anj jo sot;i)uunb ;sua 
;no iuit; o; poxu; o.iu soi.iouijo.i jxq *;uoui 
-dinlK) .lujiuiis jo suo; sso[;unoo puu ^souiq 

-.ill) II11N))S 'S.lOjOUl .H.lJ.Kq,) ^SOULollO ;osoi([ 

uo oini;jOAO >|.h)av sjojnpujnuura a'.iouiijouui 
a'au.)J[ 'saiJOJDBj ourqd oq; pooj ;uq; s;uu[d 
uitiuiiuntu oq; puu spai?Adii[s oqj A'[ddus ;uq; 
soiuuduio.) [Oo;s oq; oiuoo uoqj, -soinqd Aa1?x 




;uo .oiiiu.iiu o.iu ;uq; sjiuqd ;ju.iDJiU oq; q;iAV 
joq;o3o; k [[u jo ;s.itj ;i spoj ^os.tuoo jo 'Sin 
-pjmqdiqg 'satjjsnpni jo sojods jo s;.io t uo ;so 
-[[iij oq; spuumop ouo[U uoi;onpo.id juau^ 

•poj.)Oj}uuu uiuuio.t pjllOAV 
soju)S P 0 U li n 8 q^ u \ A,t;snput ;uu;.iodun 
ou : uiu;joo suav ^avus A'oq; k Sutq; ouo *0{>iou; 
o; po>isu avou o.ioav Aoq; raotqojd oq; jo odoos 
oq; q;iAv pojuo.ijuo.) uoqAV s;qSis .tioq; ;snfpu 
-o.i o) puq s.iopuoj {ui.i;snput s^uoijoiuy f s^su; 
Suouuouo o; uooq OAuq Aoq; su poiuo;snooy 

•p9SB9JDUi A[,iuiiiuis uooq suq ^.tuoA ;sut 
.toddoo puu po;s jo suo; jo suotniui po.tnoAop 



qoiqAV ^tuuaSojd .otiip;mqdiqs ;uuqoJOui oq; 
'uot;tppu hi -suoi;u;oodxo outt;-ODBod puoAoq 
.iuj o;uj u ;u posuojoui OAuq s;uouiojmbo.i aao 
'uoq; ooutg muoa aod tu;oui jo suo; jo spuBs 
-uoq; jo spojpunq Attutu pojmboj rau.igojd 
Sutpnnqdiqs s^Aa-u^ oq; 'joqJBH V™d<z ojojoq 
110A3 qoo;s jo uioq; jo ;^u ;soutiu Sutp{tnq ojb 
oav puu 'suos oq; po^ius joao OAuq ;uq; sdtqs 
.oiitjqSy: ;sot;qSiui oq; Suipjmq ojb oav avo^; 
•pooAV jo opura uo;jo sdiqs jo;[Uuis q;tAv ;uo; 
-uoo ojoai oav uoqx *suos uoaos oq^ jo ijb uo 
;q.oij o; qSnouo 0.0.IUI ouo OAuq ;snui oav avo x s[ 
•Aau^ uuooo-ouo u jo stu.io; ui Supjutq; ojo.w 
oav uoqx s.iuoA oaij-a;uoav; jo potuuo.ip 

-uu uot;onpo.id aoj Sup[su st Aaux; oqx 

•o.oiiq os si aau ujopoui oq; Aq 
Ajoutqouut uoi;.mpojd uo posodiut uopjnq 
oq; AqAv 00s 0; Asuo st ;x 'SOAtsoxdxo 
jo spunod OOO'f ' 19A0 soij.iuo puu f iunu 
-uuiqu jo spunod 000 f £6 ^ttoqu so.nnboj 
.toqmoq AAuoq b Aupox *sqmoq jo spunod 
Of ;noqu pot.uuo puu pooav jo pottotqsuj 
ojoav souu[djUAV sxoi oqx *I ^M. PP^Ai 
ut uuq; 11 auAV Pb I0 AV n I Aj;snput Iq 
poAupI ;jud jo;uoj8 A'io;tunui oq; ozijuoj 
o; SuiuuiSoq a^uo si otjqnd xujouoS oqx 

•Auuy oq; jo st? Aau l s[ oq; 
jo ouj; su o.iu sSutq; osoq; puy 'pjinq 
oqAV uom oq; q;tAV A t io;otA Ajoao joj ;tpojo 
oq; ojuqs ;qSn oqAV uom oq; iptqAv ut 
^.iuav I^^OX S I s iqX 'sSutq; o^utu 0; odbj b 
st 4 pius suq onooiuos su ^ju.w siqx 'not; 
-onpojd jo Ju.w u st stq; ^suot;uu jossojS 
-Su oq; joj su qonui su ^uopomy jo^ 

•jC;joqn 

uuninq jo osnuo uouiuiod oq; ut joq;o3 
-0; popuuq uora oojj ^ooqAV oq; 0; sjop 
qnoqs jpq; Sui;;nd oju 'o^tju Joquj puu 
;uouioSuuui\i; *uot;ujodo-oo Aju;uuioa jo 
sisuq u uo st ;i ;nq £ oouid Sut^u; st Aj; 
-snput jo uoi;uotpopoj puu uop'uztuuSjooj 
snopuoiuoj; u 'aj;uuod stq; ui *Sut;q3u 
oju oav qotqAV joj so^dpupd Ajoa oq; 0; 
.)t;oq;udi;uu Axopxdraoo oju sotpu; qong 
•uouoiuy joj ;ou oju spoqptu qong 
•Axssoxq;n.i JOAvod ;uq; ospjoxo puu not; 
-onpo.id juav Jioq; joao jo.wod op^duioo 
ssossod Aoqx *so;uptp Aouotpodxo su soij; 
-snput o;uojo puu ^;joauod ^diustp ofox 
puu JO[;in ;uq; st ^sjuod jo ^joavsuu oqx 

•uotpnpojd juav qons 
jo oxquduout ojoav stxy oq; jo sotj;snput oq; 
;uq; OAO.td o; so.inSi; puq Aoqx 'oxqtssodrai 
suav ;i ptus puu savi^C jpq; poddo.ip spodxo 
oq; 'oijpu ( i q;nog oq; jo spuujsi oq; ;sutuSu 
souupl jo spuusnoq; jo 00 joj jib iuaunj b 
puu sdtqs ;uquioo OSS Aptuou gunB;o; Aau x s[ ^ 
poqsuoiun uuduf uoijav puu k sun3 Stq puu 
souuni £ s>iuu; jo spuusnoq; jo oojoj 
u q;tAV odojii^q uu.uoAO Auuuuo{) K3H7j\. 



Xab^ saa^g p^liuf; zip pue Xjjsnpuj 



The Navy's Shore Establishments 



by 

Hon. Ralph A. Bard 

Assistant Secretary of the Navy 



<;<;TN a genuine sense, bases are ships. They 
are part and parcel of the fleet, as well 
as of the sea power which they represent 
jointly with^the fleet and merchant marine, 
the sea power which is intimately a member 
of our national structure and indispensable 
to the national economic life." 

Thus several years ago wrote a disting- 
uished contemporary authority on naval sub- 
jects. Today his words are even more true 
than when they were written. We are living 
in a period when technological progress is 
bringing great changes in naval warfare. As 
is all such periods it is not always easy 
to see what weapons and what tactics will 
finally emerge in a dominant position. 
But there is one trend which lias been 
consistent. Every change that is taking 
place in naval warfare increases the ne- 
cessity not only of bases but of a multi- 
tude of other shore establishments. Im- 
proved guns mean increased consumption 
of ammunition. Faster ships use up their 
fuel more quickly than those which they 
replaced. More complicated machines 
mean more training facilities to teach 
the men who must use them. And above 
all, the constantly increasing importance 
of the airplane in naval warfare empha- 
sizes a craft which is, above all others, 
tied to its bases and which demands huge 
and complicated ground facilities for 
operations and maintenance. 

When this trend is combined with the 
tremendous expansion of all our facili- 
ties, it ma}' easily be imagined the vast 
scope of the naval shore establishments 
which result. Let me call the roll of the 
things which the Navy must do ashore to 
keep our fleets at sea. 

Fundamental, of course, to our war ef- 
fort are the plants which build the ma- 
teriel of war — shipyards, gun factories, 
armor plate factories, airplane factories, 
— factories which make all the thousands 
of items which a ship or plane must take to sea. 

Some of these, Navy yards, Ordnance fac- 
tories and Aircraft factories, are operated by 
the Navy Department itself. Others, includ- 
ing a considerable number of ordnance plants, 
are owned by the Navy but managed by pri- 
vate companies. And, of course, today more 
than ever, there are thousands of private com- 
panies manufacturing every sort of materiel, 
from ships to uniforms, for the Navy. The 
Navy is proud of the fact that conditions and 
wages in our Navy yards are among the best 
in the country and in the world. And it is 
significant also that by encouraging a sys- 
tem of both private and governmental con- 
struction of ships, the Navy lias fostered a 
healthy rivalry as to the speed, excellence 



and cost of the finished product. 

Even more important, perhaps, in time of 
war, are the facilities we must have for the 
maintenance and repair of our ships and 
planes. We must have shops and yards and 
drydocks where ships can be hauled out, 
where airplane engines can be taken down 
and rebuilt. We must have enormous storage 
facilities where we can keep ready for instant 
use large quantities, not only of food, fuel, 
clothing and ammunition, but also every con- 
ceivable item which goes aboard a modern 
ship or plane. 




Nor does the list of Navy shore establish- 
ments end there. Radio communication is the 
nervous system of the modern Navy. The Na- 
vy maintains a vast network of stations for 
communication between our shore establish- 
ments, the Department, and our ships at sea. 
Then there are research laboratories, testing 
plants, the Naval Observatory, even a coffee 
roasting plant. And recently, under the im- 
pulse of our expansion project, the Navy has 
had another job assigned to it — housing — see- 
ing to it that the workers who flock to centers 
of Naval activity have a decent place to live. 

It has been inevitable that our bases and 
other shore establishments should be tremen- 
dously expanded as we feverishly increase the 



size of our Navy. The fiscal year 1942 broke 
all records in the amount of public works 
which were constructed for the Navy. They 
included every conceivable variety of facili- 
ties, from the construction and repair of ships 
to the housing and maintenance of personnel 
and shore bases. 

Shipbuilding ways have been built at a 
large number of yards. Two hundred cranes 
of all sizes were installed. Our drydock pro- 
gram was doubled. Roads, telephone systems, 
sewers were built at new centers of shore 
activity. Barracks were erected. Fuel depots, 
ammunition warehouses, radio stations, 
aviation fields, sea plane runways, hang- 
ars — a ii these had to be built at bases un- 
der conditions which varied from the 
frozen rock plains of Northern Iceland 
to the thick jungles of tropical posts. 

These facilities were added to those 
which the Navy already possessed, ex- 
panding an already tremendous network 
of facilities ranging from Northern Ice- 
land to the South Seas. It takes over 500,- 
000 civilians alone to man this huge plant, 
in addition to many thousands of Navy 
personnel. 

The increased emphasis on mechanized 
warfare and the rising star of aerial forces 
have imposed additional tasks on the 
Navy shore establishments. The technical 
advances in shipbuilding and the rapid 
development in the design of aircraft have 
made it necessary to revise and in some 
cases drop old methods in order to keep 
pace with the results of scientific research. 
Ft is not too much to say that one familiar 
with the activities and character of work 
performed in Navy Yards and Naval sta- 
tions twenty-five years ago would be com- 
pletely at a loss were he to witness the 
machines, methods, materials and tech- 
niques in use at this time. 

This tremendous expansion all took 
place before the war broke out. It can well 
be imagined that since then we have been 
increasing our facilities at an even faster 
rate. We are spending many, many bil- 
lions of dollars on this, already the finest 
shore plant possessed by any navy in the 
world. As our Navy expands its operations 
into many distant waters, new^ problems will 
arise in the construction of shore facilities 
overseas. We have, however, already had ex- 
cellent training in meeting these problems 
while building bases at those points which we 
received from Great Britain. 

Unquestionably, there will be many difficult 
problems We face them with confidence, 
knowing that their solution will be a major 
factor in the victory to come. 



34 



Modernization of the Army 



by 



Hon. John J. McCloy 

Assistant Secretary of War 



T¥7E have heard much of the modernization 
of armies. We have sought to make our 
army modern, but I am not certain that many 
realize all of the implications of such a 
process. Certainly I can claim no such knowl- 
edge of the subject as to justify my writing 
on it in a periodical read by professionals. 

It is many months since the editors of this 
journal requested me to write on this subject. 
Indeed, so much time has passed since then 
that the excuse of press of work has worn 
pretty thin. My only excuse is that of the sol- 
dier who, being charged with pro- 
longed leaning on his shovel, declared 
that he was thinking hard. My thoughts 
on the subject are not new and certainly 
are not profound, yet I hold them with 
considerable conviction. 

Superficially, modernization implies 
new weapons; planes, highly developed 
automatic weapons, tanks, motor ve- 
hicles. Much could be written describing 
these new weapons provided for our 
Army, and it could be most interesting, 
but, however good such a description, it 
would be a most incomplete picture of the 
modernization of an army. With an abun- 
dance of these weapons, our Army may 
still be outdated. An army, in short, is 
as modern as its thought. With all our 
new weapons and increased fire power 
and mobility, our Army can be ante- 
diluvian if it seeks with these weapons 
to apply tactics that do not reflect the 
new capacities, or if it attaches the new 
forces to old plans conceived long before 
the war started and which do not reflect 
the new extent and method of war. 

To determine whether we have a mod- 
ern army we should not compare ourselves 
with what we were in 1917-18, as we so 
frequently do, but with the successful 
armies of today. The German Army in- 
troduced tactics for which the French and 
British, and, one must admit, we, were total- 
ly unprepared. Not one of these armies was 
modern at the beginning of this w r ar in the 
sense that it knew how to cope with or itself 
deliver the type of attack the Germans had 
perfected. 

The modernizing process really starts with 
the knowledge of what the new weapons can 
do and how their combined power can be in- 
tegrated. To date our modernization has 
mainly taken the form of supplying certain 
weapons to the troops and training them in 
their individual use and characteristics. 
Much study and thought has also been given 
to their organizational employment, but as 
yet there are of necessity, I venture to say, 
relatively few battalions in the Army which 
are both fully equipped with all these weapons 
and are fully trained in their integrated use. 



The writer happens to have been an artil- 
leryman in the last war and the self -satisfy- 
ing thought was often accepted by him, as, no 
doubt, it has been by many other artillery- 
men, of how superior from a technical and 
scientific point of view he was to the infantry- 
man. The infantry battalion is generally 
considered to be a relatively simple form of 
tactical unit, yet today the variety and fire 
power of the weapons of even an infantry 
company are staggering. An infantry bat- 
talion commander and any of his officers must 




know how to employ the guns, howitzers and 
vehicles of the cannon company, the anti-tank 
guns, the GO mm mortars, the 81 mm mortars, 
hand and rifle grenades of varying types, semi- 
automatic rifles and carbines, light machine 
guns, heavy machine guns, Tommy guns and 
bayonet. He must also know the proper use of 
engineer troops, for the pioneer unit with its 
demolition and road-blocking equipment is a 
most important element in the strength the 
battalion can deliver. An infantry command- 
er's job would seem today to be much more 
varied and technical than that of a cor- 
responding artillery officer. Besides these 
weapons which come under his direct charge, 
the battalion commander, and when one says 
battalion commander that really means every 
officer in the battalion, must know the tactical 
employment of smoke, gas and airplanes, in 



the sense that he must have complete knowl- 
edge of how they can be employed to harass 
or assist him. 

It has taken so long to acquire the weapons, 
so long merely to teach men how to operate 
them, that the most important element of in- 
struction, the effective employment of what 
we have, has had to wait. The new r and varied 
tactical possibilities which the weapons pres- 
ent have to be absorbed throughout the Army 
and they probably will not be fully realized 
until some time after our troops have been 
in sustained combat. 

There has been so much thought di- 
rected to the employment of planes and 
tanks that the modern aspects of infantry 
tactics are generally overlooked. Com- 
parisons are odious anywhere, and be- 
come even hazardous in the armed forces, 
but I feel from my observations of the 
training of the army that the job of an 
infantry commander under modern condi- 
tions is, if anything, more complex than 
that of any other in the Ground or Air 
Forces. There is quite as much room for 
original thought in the development of 
modern infantry tactics as is the case 
with other units. In fact, such a com- 
mander, considering the variety of wea- 
pons he has to employ and the mission he 
has to perform, is more truly a "general" 
officer than the artillery, the tank, or the 
air officer. The popular concept that if 
we have good modern tanks and airplanes, 
the infantry will somehow rock along on 
the old lines, is false. Unless the infantry 
training keeps pace with the full capacity 
of its weapons and its supporting forces, 
t he cornerstone of an up to date army is 
lacking. 

It was not until the last war was far 
advanced that officers, including the pro- 
fessionals, appreciated the new uses to 
which artillery, then a very old weapon, 
could be applied. If not the greatest, at 
least one of the chief advances of the last war 
lay in the employment of this arm. Increased 
suppleness of fire, made effective through 
varying types of guns, shells, and fuses, bet- 
ter communications and firing methods, came 
in then, and. they exerted strong influence on 
the effectiveness and the method of infantry 
employment. Few officers, however, in either 
the artillery or the infantry, previously had 
had the actual experience to inspire these de- 
velopments. It was only after thoughtful men 
who knew something of what their guns could 
do had continuously lived, studied, and com- 
muned with the infantry, that real integra- 
tion of infantry and artillery power was 
achieved. 

Today it seems reasonable to assume that 
( Continued on page 165) 



Expanding the Naval Air Force 



by 

Hon. Artemus L. Gates 

Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Air 



THE outstanding lesson of the present 
war, repeatedly demonstrated in every 
theater from the Arctic to the Tropics, 
and in every type of military operation, 
whether by land or by sea, has been the 
paramount importance of establishing 
air superiority. 

During the twenty-five years between 
the first World War and the present one, 
the United States Navy did not have a 
large air force, but it did pioneer many 
of the really effective uses of air power- 
including dive bombers and aircraft car- 
riers. Its planes have always ranked with 
the best in the world and, in spite of the 
handicap of carrier-based planes due to 
problems of take-off and landing on the 
short and narrow deck of a ship, our na- 
val planes have scored outstanding suc- 
cesses against Japanese land-based air- 
planes in the Pacific. 

Thus, although efforts to improve our 
airplanes must certainly continue, the 
immediate problem today is not simply 
one of designing superior, new airplanes 
and of learning how to use them, but 
the building up of a sufficiently large 
force, so that the superior quality of the 
United States Naval Air Arm can be most 
effective. 

It is common knowledge today, both to 
ourselves and to the enemy, that our goal 
this year is 60,000 planes, of which a large 
number are for naval use. While detailed de- 
livery figures can not be revealed, some idea 
of our expanded production program can be 
gained from the fact that deliveries of com- 
bat airplanes to the Navy in February of this 





year were virtually equal to the total number 
delivered during the entire year of 1940. 
Along with the expanded output of airplanes, 
we are actively engaged in increasing the 
number of our aircraft carriers, including 
those being converted from merchant 
vessels. 



or ,mirse the man-power required for 
this new li plans now have been 

WU1 "f Z 1 to in'<Jc : 30,000 picked stu- 
TT Tle\v or P lot training. At four 
i eU l Eduction Tenters, each utilizing a 
^ZSSS^a of the total facilities 
5 such well-known universities as Iowa 
State Georgia, Saint Mary's (Cahfor- 
niafand North Carolina, the new pilots 
3 receive three months of rigorous 
hvsical training, during which emphasis 
will be placed on stamina and the ability 
to withstand the gruelling punishment of 
modern full-scale warfare. 

At our great flying schools these men 
will then be brought to the pitch of pol- 
ished aviation performance required for 
active duty with our expanding carrier 
aircraft squadrons and patrol wings. 
Every fundamental requirement of suc- 
cessful, hard-hitting naval aviators will 
be thoroughly and competently imparted 
to these men until, by their own efforts, 
they are ready to take their places in the 
most highly developed and best-trained 
naval air force in existence. 

It must be realized that a program of 
such magnitude can not be completed 
quickly or easily. The training of a 
modern pilot alone takes almost twelve 
months and aircraft carriers are among 
the most complicated and difficult to build 
of all combat vessels. 

We are, however, making real progress 
toward our goal which, with the full and un- 
selfish cooperation of all concerned, we are 
sure to reach. 



=»<>•• 



The General Board of the Navy 



by 

Admiral A. J. Hepburn, U. S. N. Ret. 

Chairman, General Board of the Navy 



THE General Board of the Navy, as such, 
dates from March 13, 1900, when it was 
established by Navy Department General 
Order No. 544 issued by Hon. John D. Long, 
then Secretary of the Navy. 

Prior to the war with Spain, there had been 
no advisory body in the Navy. With the ap- 
proach of hostilities in 1898, the Secretary 
felt the need of a body to advise him on naval 
matters and, in the spring of that year, 
formed the Naval War Board of 1898, the 
forerunner of the General Board. This was a 



purely informal group. All of its members 
had other duties in the Navy Department and 
"were asked" to act in an advisory capacity 
to the Secretary. At the close of the war with 
Spain, the "War Board" went out of ex- 
istence. 

The Naval War Board of 1S9S, during its 
brief existence, had served its purpose so'well 
that, when it ceased to exist, the need for a 
permanent advisory body to the Secretary of 
the Navy was immediately felt. This manifest 
{Continued on page 162 ) 



30 




Wartime Activities of the Department of State 



jpROM the offices in its building alongside 
the White House and the several other 
buildings in Washington in which some of its 
divisions are now housed, the Department of 
State maintains contact with every Govern- 
ment agency in Washington the duties of 
which involve aspects of foreign relations ; it 
advises those agencies on matters of fact and 
of policy ; it aids them in carrying out their 
foreign activities through channels estab- 
lished by the Foreign Service; it conducts 
negotiations on political, military, commer- 
cial, and humanitarian problems with the 
diplomatic emissaries of foreign countries 
who are stationed at Washington and 
(through the Foreign Service) with the 
authorities of foreign governments; and it 
performs other duties imposed upon it by law 
or international usage. The manifold aspects 
of this work, in their historical development 
and current status, have engaged the atten- 
tion not only of outstanding scholars but also 
of journalists and professional writers. 

A superficial student of government might 
assume that in time of war the work of the 
Department of State would be considerably 
diminished. In actuality, the Department's 
work since December 7, 1941 has increased to 
such an extent that the personnel now num- 
bers more than twice what it was a few years 
ago. Nevertheless the Department is still 
small; not counting the Foreign Service, its 
staff consists of fewer than 3,000 persons, in- 
cluding permanent officers and employees and 
those on war-service appointments. 

Among the wartime functions of the De- 
partment of State are collaboration with the 
War and Navy Departments and other war 
agencies of the Government in the mapping 
of broad strategies; the determination of 
questions relating to lend-lease policy; the 
negotiation of mutual-aid agreements with 
our allies; the initiation of measures for the 
acquisition of critical materials of foreign 
origin ; the appraisal, in the light of accumu- 
lated knowledge, of the considerations in 
favor of and opposed to the export of Amer- 
ican materials to certain countries ; the con- 
duct of discussions with enemy governments 
through neutral channels regarding prison- 
ers of war and related subjects ; the planning 
and administration of devices for economic 
throttling of the enemy ; and the study of con- 
ditions and developments in all countries 
with a view to promoting an eventual world 
settlement that will abide and stand firm 
through the political seasons of the future. 

The Foreign Service of the United States 
includes (1) ambassadors, ministers, and 
other diplomatic representatives accredited 
to approximately fifty foreign governments, 
and (2) consular officers of the rank of consul 
general, consul, vice consul, or consular agent 



by 

Hon. G. Howland Shaw 

Assistant Secretary of State 

stationed in approximately 250 seaports, com- 
mercial centers, and other strategic cities 
throughout the world. Since September, 11)39, 
the United States has established diplomatic 
missions in such places as Iceland and Saudi 
Arabia and has opened new consular offices 
at Godthaab in Greenland, Dakar and Braz- 
zaville in Africa, Vladivostok in Siberia, and 
elsewhere, in order to observe developments 
in those places and represent American inter- 
ests there. Officers of the Foreign Service 
have been on the job in the "hot spots'' of the 




world, and some of them are st ill prisoners in 
the Philippines. 

Military and naval attaches on the stall's of 
American embassies and legations, iu addi- 
tion to reporting directly to the War and 
Navy Departments on matters of interest to 
those branches of the Government, have ren- 
dered invaluable service to the heads of the 
diplomatic missions on numerous occasions. 
The Military Attache section and the Naval 
Attache section of an American diplomatic 
mission are functionally integrated units of 
the mission and contribute to the effective 
representation of the United States abroad. 

At the head of the Department of Stale in 
Washington is Secretary of State Cordell 
Hull, who is responsible to the President for 
the Department's conduct: of our foreign re- 
lations. He has held the office since; March i, 
1938. Under Secretary of State Sumner 
Welles is next in rank. He was promoted 
from the position of Assistant Secretary of 
State in 1 !):>!. There are four Assistant Sec- 
retaries of State and a Legal Adviser, all of 



whom are charged with weighty responsibili- 
1 ies in their special fields. 

The Department's organization has under- 
gone extensive changes in recent years, de- 
signed to increase the efficiency with which 
the Department may deal with the problems 
that it must solve. An Assistant and five Spe- 
cial Assistants are among the immediate 
aides of the Secretary of State. There are 
four advisers on Political Relations and an 
Adviser on International Economic Affairs, 
who are comparatively free of administrative 
worries and are able to devote their energies 
exclusively to the problems of foreign policy. 
The one-year-old Board of Economic Opera- 
tions (not to be confused with the Board of 
Economic Warfare, of which Vice President 
Wallace is the head) includes a number of 
high officers of the Department. 

The Divisions of the American Republics 
and of European, Near Eastern, and Far 
Eastern Affairs are the four "geographic" di- 
visions, which initiate and review policy pro- 
posals concerning their respective regions, 
conduct conversations with foreign diplo- 
mats, and issue vital instructions to the For- 
eign Service. Some thirty-odd other divisions 
and offices such as the Treaty Division, the 
Division of Cultural Relations, the Passport 
Division, etc., perforin essential duties that 
relate directly to one phase or another, or to 
all phases, of our foreign policy; much of this 
work is ancillary to the formulation of 
policies, but at times it involves decisions on 
matters of the highest importance. 

The Department of State of the United 
States is thus primarily the Foreign Office of 
the American Government, but in four of its 
functions it has the characteristics of a 
"Home Office." First, the Department is 
charged with the custody of the seal of the 
Tnited States and with impressing that em- 
blem upon proclamations and certain other 
documents which bear the signature of the 
President. Secondly, the Department pub- 
lishes the laws of the United States, at first 
in "slip law" form and later in the volumes 
of the United States Statutes at Large. The 
. third ''domestic" function of the Department 
is the so-called "ascertainment of electors" of 
President of the United States, a part of the 
Constitutional procedure of electing the 
President. Lastly, the Department is the 
medium of contact with the forty-eight States 
in connection with the ratification of amend- 
- raents to the Constitution. 

In the ways that have been described and in 
other ways the Department of State plays its 
part in preserving our cherished inheritance 
of a democratic policy and in preparing for 
the day when the task of winning the war 
will be replaced by tlx* task of building a 
peace that will ensure the four freedoms for 
;tll men everywhere. 



The Glory of Unconquerable Russia 



by 

Admiral William H. Standley, U. S. N.-Ret. 

United States Ambassador to Russia 



FOR the second lime in the last twelve 
months I have returned from the Soviet 
Union with a deep feeling of admiration in 
my heart for the great Russian people. In the 
fall of 1941 I was a member of the Beaver- 
brook-Harriman Supply Mission sent to Mos- 
cow at the request of the President for the 
purpose of facilitating and expediting the 
supply of materials of war to the valiant Rus- 
sian armies. From June 22, 1941 , when the 
Germans invaded the Soviet Union, up to the 
time of the departure from the United States 
of our Mission it was generally thought 
in military and civilian circles that the 
Russian armies would not be able to stand 
up much longer against the Nazi invaders 
and that if not during the fall of 1941, 
surely by the following Spring, Russia 
would to all intents and purposes have 
been conquered by the hordes of Hitler. 
We were in the Soviet Union but five 
days, yet this time was long enough to 
induce me to state upon my return that 
"it was my opinion that the Russians 
would, light on to the bitter end no matter 
what the sacrifice." That was a year ago, 
and events have justified my faith in the 
Russian nation, for that country not only 
held out practically alone against the 
powerful invading forces of Germany and 
its satellite states, but fought furiously 
through the summer and fall and now 
appears to be taking the offensive. Upon 
my recent return after six months as 
American Ambassador in Moscow I am 
still convinced that Russia will continue 
to fight this winter, next spring, and con- 
tinually until every foot of Soviet soil is 
cleansed of the Hitler invaders, until 
Europe has been liberated from the 
tyranny of Hitler, and freed from the 
threat of Nazi aggression. 

The question people most frequently ask me 
now is: "What is the secret of Russia's 
strength of resistance?'' or u Why were so 
many of our experts Avrong when they pre- 
dicted that the powerful German Army would 
sweep over Russia like an avalanche?'' In 
reply no one answer can be given. There are, 
of course, those of a purely military character 
— the strength, endurance, and proved effi- 
ciency of the Russian military machine, the 
"defense in depth battle tactics" which the 
Soviet High Command has so successfully 
employed against the Germans, and the geo- 
graphic considerations which made these 
tactics possible. But in my opinion there is 
perhaps more to the Russian tenacity and 
power of resistance than the efficient func- 
tioning of the Red Army. The self-sacrificing 
devotion of every man, woman and youth in 
the Soviet Union to their Army and to the 
cause for which it tights impressed me during 



my slay in Russia more than anything else 1 
as one of the main reasons for the success of 
(Mir Soviet Ally. There is complete unity of 
war effort in Russia today and a common de- 
termination to see this war through to vic- 
tory. This in my mind is the guiding spirit 
and driving power that is motivating the en- 
tire country — the Government, the military 
mid the people behind the lines. Everything 
is being sent to the front lines. The produc- 
tion of consumers goods has been replaced by 
front-line production, shops are practically 




empty, and food is severely rationed. Vet the 
spirit and morale of the Russian people is 
magnificent and their stubborn fortitude, 
their unified determination to carry on to 
victory and freedom in spite of sacrifices and 
privations which we in this country might 
well find insupportable have impressed me as 
immortal attributes of a truly great people. 
The Russian nation in defending its way of 
life 4 against those who seek to destroy it is 
lighting as one man. and it is just this uni- 
fied effort and self-sacriticing devotion that 
has won my everlasting admiration. 

This unity of effort should be a shining ex- 
ample not only to our own country but also to 
all the nations united today against the 
forces of aggression and tyranny. Those na- 
tions have now entered into a military part- 
nership, and they are progressively lighting 
as one integrated team. When victory is 
ours, we must strive to transform these* ties 



which we have forged in battle into even 
closer unity of effort nnd cooperation m 
peace and in the pent task of peaceful recon- 
struction that will be before us. 1 feel con- 
fided Zat we are on the threshold of that 
postwar period of collaboration m the fullest 
spirit of the word. The Anglo-Soviet Treaty 
and the Soviet-American Agreement of last 
June are firm foundations for the develop- 
ment of such collaboration. These agreements 
were signed in battle and are being strength- 
ened by the ever increasing deliveries of war 
materials to our great Russian Ally. They 
will contribute, as .Mr. Stalin recently 
pointed out, to the -progressive rap- 
proachement between the members of t he 
Anglo - Soviet - American coalition ami 
their uniting into a single lighting al- 
liance." and 1 am confident that Mr. 
Stalin will agree that when victory is 
won it will be our duty to t ransform this 
lighting alliance into a concordat dedi- 
cated to the improvement of peaceful in- 
ternational relations and the betterment 
of the commonwealth. I am sure that our 
statesmen and diplomatists, to whom will 
lie assigned this task, will live up to the 
great responsibility that will lie before 
them and will make sure that that com- 
plete unity of effort generated in war will 
continue in peace and will be the spirit 
of the postwar era. 



The European Situation 

by Joseph Stalin 

(from an address made to the Moscow Soviet 
November C, 1942) 

"One of the characteristic features of 
the present moment is the progressively 
growing isolation of the Italic-Germany 
coalition and the depletion of its moral 
and political reserves in Knropo, its growing 
weakness and disintegration. 

"The effects of the program of act ion of the 
Anglo-Soviet-Ameriemi coalition has been 
that all the occupied countries in Europe are 
m nil sympathy with the members of this 
coalition and are prepared to render them all 
the help of which they are capable. 

(w I co , nnection ' another characteristic 
| ture of the present moment is that the 
******* political reserves of this coalition 
■ growing from day to day in Europe, and 
< al.t.on ,k progressively winning mil- 

ng I SSSS i iZ6rS thefight- 
r. r V liitlerisni tyranny 

is exam^% tiVe Strength of thes * coalitions 
, ^ i , '" m ^ 8tan <*point of human 

reachtog er 4e SSE^ °* e ean 
•Soviet- Vn, f ° ,,tlus, »» that the Anglo- 

able adtSS » C °^ iti0n has tbe ^isput- 



3S 




The Army 



by 



orce^gj Action 



Lieutenant General H. EL Arnold 

Commanding General, Army Air Forces 



HPl-IE Army Air Forces have a pledge to 
make to all the men in all the armed 
forces of America. 

That pledge is, that from henceforward on. 
Americans will strive for the vital advantage 
of Air Supremacy, at every time and place 
of action against the enemy. And when at- 
tained, it will be as overwhelming an Air Su- 
premacy as we can make it, an inevitable 
prelude to complete and permanent Victory 
in every corner of the earth. Everything that 
brings us closer to this one goal will be done, 
with as much ingenuity, gallantry, and inten- 
sive striving as Americans can bring to the 
fulfillment of such a goal. Everything else 
will be ruthlessly discarded. 

Already, I am glad to say, we have made 
tremendous strides in the accomplishment of 
that objective, as the events of recent weeks 
have proved. For example, the great recent 
sea victories, at the Coral Sea, and at Midway 
Island, have proved without doubt how Amer- 
ican land-based bombers can hit with crush- 
ing blows. American Air Superiority can and 
will go hand in hand with American land and 
sea Superiority until the last remnant of the 
Japanese naval forces is wiped off the surface 
of the seas. 

Equally significant, however, is the fact 
that our air power has made it possible for 
our fighting forces to have the huge asset of 
Air Superiority on land as well, in every area 
where large numbers of American troops have 
landed overseas. In Australia, our hard-fight- 
ing airmen have established definite mastery 
over their enemies, and with this mastery 
there has come, if not an end to the Japanese 
threat to that southern continent, a complete 
halt to the once seemingly irresistible inarch 
of the Japanese hordes. There is little doubt 
that the enemy's war machine has been stalled 
for the present. 

But it is not alone the presence of power- 
ful American air units, in Australia, India, 
and Europe, lor example, that has put a per- 
manent dislocation in the timetable of our 
enemies. An even greater deterrent is the 
certainly that our nation is now engaged in 
building up the mightiest aerial armada Hie 
world has ever seen, an aerial armada that 
will continue to grow in relentless fury while 
it is at the same time destroying not only the 



air forces of the enemy, but also his ability to 
produce more. 

Let us contrast this outlook with the situ- 
ation that prevailed at the time of Pearl Har- 
bor. At that time our forces, especially our 
Air Forces, were spread dangerously thin all 
over t he globe. It was no question of whether 
or not we could have aerial superiority at any 
one place. It was simply a grim mathematical 
proposition whereby our small number of 
available air units were divided by areas 
where they had to be. Step by step, we were 
forced to give up areas, because it was impos- 
sible to get the air reinforcements there in 
sufficient numbers and soon enough to pro- 
vide any real help to our embattled troops. 
The immutable factors of time and space were 
a much greater cause of our original setbacks 
than anything which the Japanese were able 
to do. 

Despite the enormous handicaps and nu- 
merical inferiority with which our flyers were 
faced, however, they have been giving a mag- 
nificent account of themselves, in every en- 
counter with the enemy. They have provided 
proof, if such proof had been necessary, that 
American airmen, and American airplanes, 
are second to none. Space does not permit the 





enumeration of the brilliant feats which they 
have accomplished, over the vast reaches of 
the Pacific, over the Philippines and Java and 
Australia, and elsewhere that they have thun- 
dered through the skies. The "impossible" 
raid conducted by General James Doolittle 
against Japan, the famous "picnic" from Aus- 
tralia to the Philippines and back, the extra- 
ordinary combat achievements of men like 
Captain Colin Kelly, .Major 1 1 ewe!, t Wheless, 
Li. Col. George E. Schaetzel, Capt. Alvin L. 
H. Mueller, jr., and Captain James Byington 
.McAfee, and literally dozens of others, all 
point to the fact that our gallant air fighters 
are determined to gain the supremacy of the 
air, no matter what the odds. And from now 
on, the odds are going to be in our favor. 

The most hopeful sign of all, however, is the 
fact that our airmen who have returned to 
this country after action in the battle zone 
are absolutely convinced that Victory in the 
air is simply a matter of time. Well aware 
from experience how our bombers, like the 
Hoeing B-17 "Plying Fortresses," the "B- 
24t%" and the "B-25's" are tin; nearest ap- 
proach to a completely impregnable means of 
waging aerial warfare, our livers have slated, 
time and again, that these splendid airplanes 
(Continued on page 165) 



39 



The United States Marine Corps 



by 



Lieutenant General Thomas Holcomb 

The Commandant, United States Marine Corps 



THE Marine Corps is larger than at any 
time in its long history. On 7 Dec. 1041, 
the Corps boasted approximately 4,000 offi- 
cers and 02,000 enlisted men on active duty. 
Today there are about 10,000 officers on active 
duly and the enlisted personnel has been dou- 
bled. Actual figures may not be revealed. 

The rapid expansion following the attack 
on Pearl Harbor, Wake, Guam and Midway 
has forced the Marine Corps into the most 
comprehensive program any small unit of 
service was ever called upon to absorb. This 
expansion has not been made at the sacrifice 
of efficiency or training. Every recruit has 
been furnished sufficient uniforms, adequate 
shelter, and, above all, competent instruction 
under officers and non-commissioned officers 
who know the Marine way of life. 

ft is true that recruiting divisions and dis- 
tricts have been given enlistment quotas. It 
is also true that there are waiting lists at 
many recruiting stations. However, we will 
continue to enlist more and more men. The 
two big recruit depots — at Parris Island, 
S. C, and San Diego, Calif. — have been ex- 
panded and additional barracks and range 
facilities added since December. 

The Marine Barracks at New River, N. C, 
is rapidly nearing completion. Many of its 
facilities are now in use by members of the 
corps. 

On the West Coast at Camp Pendleton, a 
huge new training area has been established 
on the Rancho Santa Margarita y Los Flores 
in northern San Diego County. Office build- 
ings and other structures are to be built there 
to take care of the §20,000,000 cantonment 
which eventually will house more than 20,000 
Marines. 

On bot h coasts the men of the Marine Corps 
are undergoing extensive training in am- 
phibious and woods warfare. The daily 
schedules at New River on the East- 
ern coast and San Diego on the 
Western keep pace with the Marine 
tempo of getting things done today 
so that tomorrow they may become 
automatic under conditions of war. 

The Marine Barracks at Quant i- 
co, Va., hum with the stepped up in- 
tensity of super training as the Ma- 
rine Corps Schools turn out well- 
trained junior officers in monthly 
increments of two to three hundred. 
The two officers schools, the Candi- 
dates' Class and the Reserve Offi- 
cers' Class have been streamlined 
into courses of ten weeks' duration 
as against the former 13 weeks 5 
training. College graduates and 
selected non - commissioned officers 
are eligible to undergo the intensive 



training for second Lieutenants' commissions. 
More men are needed, however, for officer 
training. Graduates of these two schools are 
now on duty throughout the Marine world, in 
the continental United States, on island bases 
and aboard ships of the fleet at sea. 




Emphasis is also upon the enlisted per- 
sonnel. At the Training Center at New River 
men are being schooled in all the specialist 
branches of the service. Motor transport, wa- 
ter distillation, engineering, aerial photog- 
raphy, armorer and numerous other experts 
in military pursuits are graduated after an 
intensive course. Each company or battalion 
in the Corps today either has obtained or is 




Marine Corps detachment unloading a light anti-tank gun by hand from 
a ramp boat during maneuvers near Ft. Story, Va. 

40 



obtaining men trained as gas NCO's, snipers, 
rubber bLt repairmen and other specialists. 

Today's ever-expanding and streamlined 
Marine Corps places the emphasis upon spe- 
cialists. Men are being taken from the ranks 
of civilians and being commissioned or given 
enlisted rating's as engineers, radio air raid 
warning experts, trained journalists or as 
other specialists. Every effort is being made 
to place qualified men in posit ions where they 
are most valuable due to experience or spe- 
cial aptitude. 

The Marine Corps has extended its expan- 
sion program to its balloon barrage units, 
parachute troop organizations, glider detach- 
ments, to tank and amphibious tractor bat- 
talions and to all the other special units that 
make up a complete fighting force today. 

An ever increasing number of naval avia- 
tors are entering the Corps as Marine officer 
pilots. Many non-commissioned officers are 
completing flight training. Our air wings, 
each commanded by a general officer in the 
Marine Corps, are today at their highest peak 
both in efficiency and in numerical strength 
of officers, men and equipment. Marine planes 
and pilots gave a good account of themselves 
at Wake, Midway, and the Solomons, and to- 
day are helping on ocean patrol. 

The assault on the Solomon Islands is proof 
that the Marine Corps is ready and eager to 
meet our country's foes. This attack, inci- 
dentally, was the first offensive by American 
land forces against the enemy. 

What the Fourth Marines did from Cavite 
to Bataan to Corregidor is history. They took 
a heavy toll of opposing Japanese troops. We 
had our own losses, but when the complete 
story is told, the courage and fighting power 
of the Marines under Col. "Sam" Howard 
will perhaps some day rank with the deeds 
of Maj. "Jimmy" Devereux's infantry bat- 
talion and the pilots and ground 
crew of Maj. Paul Putnam's Wake 
Island Air Marines. 

The Marines have seen their dead. 
They will not forget. The tremen- 
dous expansion program of today is 
the Corps' memorial to these men 
who died against tremendous odds 
with an empty shell in their rifle 
chamber and wielding a bayonet. 

We make no boast ; we detract 
credit from no one. When the Com- 
mander-in-Chief tells his Marines to 
take "that" Jap-held island or to 
land on "that" German-occupied 
shore, the Marines will do it. They 
will push ashore and pave the way 
lor the hordes of American liberat- 
ing troops that follow in 1 he wake of 
America's Amphibian warriors. 




0W1 Photo by Palmei 

Unloading completed 155-771171. shell bodies from a 
drying conveyor at a converted midwest auto plant. 



0\V1 Photo by Palmer 

Red hot parts for a big Navy gun being drop-forged 
in a Navy arsenal. 



OWI Photo by Ann Rosuner 
Final touch-up of airplane motors in a large midwest 
airplane plant. 



Production for Victory 

by 

Donald M. Nelson 

Chairman, War Production Board 



T AM glad for the opportunity to discuss the 
J- policies of the War Production Board, and 
some of the problems it faces, in these pages. 
I think of the WPB's basic policy as a real- 
istic policy to soberly and deliberately carry 
out the job of utilizing all the tangible, physi- 
cal, productive capacities of the country 
in the war effort. 

Germany began in 1933 to build up a 
tremendous war machine. Under the guid- 
ance of her brilliant military strategists, 
she produced an air force and a ground 
force of hitherto undreamed-of propor- 
tions. Against future needs she accumu- 
lated tremendous stockpiles of materials 
to expand and operate her military ma- 
chine when the going got rough. Add to 
Germany's military production program 
the offensive, belligerent spirit implanted 
in her people and the tactics of warfare 
her military genius originated and de- 
veloped — all this while the democracies 
were asleep — and you don't have to look 
further for the reasons of Germany's mili- 
tary success. Japan and Italy planned 
and prepared lor this war like Germany 
did. 

We started our production program 
late and we started slow. In the last 
months we have been speeding to catch 
up, and we have done well. We caught up 
with the enemy's rate of production some 
months ago, and at present the United 
States alone is out-producing all of Axis 
Europe by a wide margin. 

That is a fact, but only the foolish and 
unrealistic will be made unduly optimistic by 
it. So far, in spite of our really enormous pro- 
duction, the amount of materiel we have de- 
livered to the fighting fronts is only a begin- 
ning. There have been enormous, world-wide 
demands for the shooting equipment we have 
produced and until the war is won, those de- 
mands will continue and actually increase as 
new fronts are opened. 

If we are to keep on expanding for war, we 



must make sure that no materiel, no physical 
asset, is wasted or left idle. We must trim 
our lives and habits to fit a war economy. The 
needs of the war program — the need for over- 
whelming quantities of shooting equipment — 
must force this country to cut civilian pro- 




duction and civilian activity to the bone. 

Before this war is over and before we can 
lay aside our weapons and return to the ways 
of peace, we shall need to use in some way 
for essential purposes all the management 
ability we have, all the manpower we have and 
all the materials we have. 

What does that mean ? 

It means a nation of men and women work- 
ing solely for victory in this war. It means 



the full use of the best skills of every citizen. 
It means the complete dedication of manage- 
ment and labor. It means the best use of all 
raw and manufactured materials and of every 
bit of valuable scrap. And it means that no 
labor, no factories, no machinery can be laid 
aside on the shelf and frozen into a non- 
prod ucl ive st ate. 

Nothing in this nation that is useful 
and can be put to work within a war 
economy can be allowed to simply lie idle 
mil il the war ends, even if it means break- 
ing up for scrap of machinery that has no 
place in a war economy and cannot be 
used for strictly essential product ion. 

The job of the War Production Board 
is to fake every step necessary to bring 
the full, brutal weight and power of 
American production against our en- 
emies. It is our job to succeed, regardless 
of sacrifices and adjustments. War im- 
poses harsh terms on a country that had 
not built for war. 

I don't believe for one moment that we 
have any reason to fear the consequences 
of the drastic changes that we are now 
forced to make in our economy. I firmly 
believe that we will solve the post-war 
problems of conversion to peace with the 
same resourcefulness that we are putting 
into the fighting of this war. If we exer- 
cise the proper forethought now, we can 
preserve the opportunity to re-establish, 
in peacetime, our free enterprise system, 
I even though we must put temporary re- 
strictions on it: in time of war. There will 
be a great challenge to Americans when the 
fighting is done. A challenge to build and 
develop a world of decency and justice and 
plenty for all men. The horizons of the future 
will be truly boundless. 

But until that day comes, we will go reso- 
lutely ahead with what we have started. We 
will look neither to the right nor to the left. 
We will keep our eyes fixed on the one goal 
ahead of us— the winning of this war. 



41 



The United States Coast Guard in the War 



by 



Vice Admiral Russell R. Waesche 

Commandant, United States Coast Guard 



WITH the progress of the present war, the 
organization of the Coast Guard and its 
duties and responsibilities have undergone a 
number of changes. The most important 
change occurred just prior to the opening of 
hostilities when the President by executive 
order transferred jurisdiction over the Ser- 
vice from the Secretary of the Treasury to the 
Secretary of the Navy. Another significant 
change took place on March 1, 1942, when 
many of the functions of the Bureau of Ma- 
rine Inspection and Navigation of the Depart- 
ment of Commerce were transferred to the 
Coast Guard in order that they might be con- 
solidated and coordinated with the aids to 
navigation, lifesaving, port security and other 
related functions already being administered 
by the Service. Since r.KW there has been a 
tenfold increase in personnel and hundreds of 
floating units have been added to the fleet. 

In view of the vital role of the merchant 
marine in the war effort, many of the more 
important wartime responsibilities of the 
Coast Guard relate to safety at sea and the 
protection of ships carrying war supplies to 
the armies of the United Nations all 
over the world. 

In the administration of its newly 
acquired maritime functions, the 
Service now supervises the construc- 
tion of merchant ships; inspects 
them for seaworthiness and compli- 
ance with the requirements of law 
regarding safety equipment; issues 
licenses and certificates, to officers, 
pilots, and seamen; supervises the 
shipment and discharge of seamen 
and protects their rights; investi- 
gates casualties and accidents in- 
volving merchant ships ; and gen- 
erally enforces the laws and regula- 




tions relating to water-borne commerce. 

Under legislation which has been on the 
books since the last war but which remained 
practically dormant until the German inva- 
sion of Poland, the Coast Guard is devoting 
much of its effort to the security of our ports. 




This work has to do with the protection 
damage by lire, explosions and acta 
of sabotage of the ships and ter ™»*£<* e 
ties in American harbors. It involves me 
SiarSng and patrolling of piers wharves 
IX, and other waterfront structures the 
control of the anchorage and movement of 
vessels, the regulation of the stowage and 
hand liAg of explosives and other dangerous 
cargo and the control of access to harbor fa- 
cilities and ships in port. To a arge extent 
this function is being performed by reserve 
personnel and small boats acquired for the 
duration of the war. . 

To prevent enemy submarines from making 
contact with the American coast and to in- 
sure that prompt aid is given to merchant 
ships attacked by submarines near our shores, 
the Service maintains a patrol of the beaches 
along the Atlantic, Pacific and Gulf coasts. 

The war has not caused serious interrup- 
tion of the Coast Guard's service to vessels in 
distress and it continues to maintain the aids 
to navigation so necessary to the safety of 
maritime commerce. 

While the war has resulted in the 
placing of increased emphasis on the 
merchant marine duties of the Coast 
Guard, there has been no diminution 
of its military activities. On the 
contrary such activities have in- 
creased materially. The larger cut- 
ters of the Service have become part 
of the Navy fleet and are doing ocean 
convoy work. Many of the smaller 
cutters and boats are being used in 
coastwise convoying and for subma- 
rine patrol duty. Coast Guard air- 
men are also convoying coastwise 
ships and maintaining an off-shore 
(Continued on page 161) 




U. S. Coast Guard Photos 



It was barges such as 
these, operated by- 
Coast Guardsmen, 
which worked with 
the Marines in the 
operations in the 
Solomon Islands. 

Alert Coast Guards- 
men man their bat- 
tle stations as they 
escort a convoy on 
the North Atlantic 
Patrol. Fast Coast 
Guard Cutters pro- 
tect the convoy from 
enemy submarines. 



Wooden ships and 
men with wings— 
Coast Guard schoon- 
ers and Coast Guard 
patrol planes work 
together on anti- 
submarine patrol. 




42 



The Netherlands Navy Fights On 



by 



Professor Dr. P. S. Gerbrandy 

Prime Minister of the Netherlands 



WHILE in the South Pacific night has now 
fallen over the Dutch East Indies, and 
while in Europe the first glimmers are ap- 
pearing of the dawn that surely follows night, 
the people of the Netherlands Kingdom all 
over the world remind themselves that they 
have to do one thing only: to hold on and 
to fight back. 

It was for that reason that, at the very 
moment when the treacherous Japanese were 
overrunning Java, Sumatra and all the other 
treasure Isles of the East Indies, I was able, 
on behalf of the Netherlands Government, to 
give the assurance that at that very moment 
our work and our fight were being continued 
on new lines, under the guidance of our 
revered Queen Wilhelmina, who knows bet- 
ter than any, what it means to "maintain." 

The greater part of our Fleet had perished 
gloriously in a naval campaign that will live 
forever in naval tradition. But within a 
matter of days the Fleet was being reorgan- 
ized; plans were already on foot to obtain 
new fighting vessels, plans which will 
steadily come to fruition. 

The indomitable campaign of our people 
in the Netherlands Kingdom, whether it be 
in the Nazi-oppressed Holland or the Japan- 
oppressed East Indies, has given us the hope 
and the strength to carry on, thinking not 
only of peace but of the liberation of our 
country which will precede the true peace. 

Many times during the past two years, 
since Germany invaded Holland, I have been 
asked two questions. The first is, "Why did 
Holland have a Navy?" and the second is, 
"What has been Holland's strategy?" 

The first question may be answered thus : 
To a nation with a long seaboard with a vast 
Empire stretching to the very ends of the 
earth and consequently with extensive com- 
mercial sea routes, a Navy is naturally a 
necessity. This does not mean that such a 
Navy is to be regarded as a threat against 
other Powers, for to Holland as to the United 
States or Britain, a Navy is always likely to 
be a weapon of defense rather than offense. 
Indeed, the Navies of all the Democracies 
might well be described as the greatest in- 
strument in existence for the preservation of 
peace. 

since the Dutch naval wars with the 
British in the seventeenth century the func- 
tion of the Royal Netherlands Navy has been 
essentially that, of protecting the sea-routes 
that lead to and from the distant parts of the 
Kingdom. But since the Motherland was in- 
varied in 1940, the Navy has certainly re- 
vealed that the Dutch are still worthy sea- 
men, still courageous sailors, still daring de- 
fenders of the great traditions of the past. 

The gallant destroyer Van Galen fighting 
to the last gun in Holland; the intrepid de- 



stroyer Isaac Sweers dealing out its hurri- 
cane of death blows in the Mediterranean; 
the dauntless Dutch submarines striking re- 
lentlessly at the Axis in the Seven Seas; all 
these were typical pages out of Dutch Naval 




history lending up to that most glorious 
drama of them all when Admiral Karel Door- 
man, facing almost incredible odds, ran up 
his signal, "I am going to attack. Follow me." 
The lustre of such deeds as these will glitter 
forever over the waters where so many brave 
Netherland and Indonesian sailors have lost 
their lives. 

The part played by the Dutch Navy in the 
great Allied sea campaign is as yet a very in- 
complete tale. But when the story is told in 
full, it will give a very definite brilliant 
answer to that query, "Why did Holland have 1 
a Navy?" 

Coming to the second question, that of 
naval strategy, the answer is a little more 
intricate. 

In the first place once the Netherlands were 
faced with war it was clear that their 
strategy, as far as their own territories were 
concerned, could only be the same as that of 
their great Allies, which has been a Long-term 
st rategy. I n the Pacific region there had been 
some preparation to adapt the Dutch forces 
to the new demands, which had not been the 
case in Europe. But even that preparation 
was far too brief. 

The strategy of the Netherlands Kingdom 
at war has been to offer to the Allied cause 
all that it possesses. There has been no 
niggardliness about this; it has been an out- 
and-out cooperation, unstinting and without 
thought of the sacrifices involved. But all 
along there has certainly been the recognition 
that the Dutch Navy would be kept at the 



greatest possible strength with the assistance 
of the United States and Britain. Our naval 
material is being reorganized; our Fleet will 
con tinue to operate — in fact is already operat- 
ing — against the common enemy, wherever 
lie can be found. And especially, knowledge of 
actual conditions in the great East Indies 
Archipelago with its thousands of islands 
will make it possible in the not distant future 
lor units of the Dutch Fleet to operate there 
once more to great advantage, forming part 
of the Allied Fleet. 

But in addition to this long-term strategy, 
there 4 is the more apparent strategy of tactics. 
It is yet too early to attempt to analyze or 
to assess the matter in which the three or 
four outstanding sea-battles of the Pacific 
were fought. Full reports are not yet avail- 
able, whilst the gallant Admiral most inti- 
mately concerned now sleeps with so many of 
his gallant sailors beneath those tropic 
waters washing Java's shores. Nevertheless, 
it is clear from preliminary reports that the 
strategy of the Netherlands Navy in the East 
Indies conformed to Dutch tradition and 
teaching. 

From the days of De Kuyter and Tromp, 
those great founders of our Navy and our 
traditions, the main principle of our tactics 
has been attacking the enemy at his weakest 
point. In modern warfare this is not quite 
as easy as in the olden days; as was shown 
in the Java Sea battle. Future Naval his- 
torians will undoubtedly discuss at great 
length whether it might or might not have 
been advisable to endeavour to cut the 
Japanese lines of communication before the 
naval tentacles reached the larger islands of 
Borneo and Celebes. But there will he no 
t Continued on page 171) 




Army Air Forces Photo 

Dutch (Iters train in V. S.— Eagerly looking at V. S. 
shins flying over a training school, in the Southeast 
Army Air Forces Training Center, these Netherlands 
East Indies Dutch resume their flight training under 
more peaceful skies after being evacuated from their 
homeland to Australia and thence to America. 



43 



Norway's Part in the World Strife 



by 

Jorgen Galbe 

|-V 

Charge oV Affaires ad interim, Royal Nonvegian Embassy, Washington, U. 



there is anyone who still wonders why 
1 this war is being fought," said Presi- 
dent Roosevelt in September, 1942, "let him 
look to Norway. If there is anyone who has 
any delusions that this war could have been 
averted, let him look to Norway. And if there 
is anyone who doubts of the democratic will 
to win, again I say, let him look to Norway." 

The President voiced this tribute while pre- 
senting an American built sub-chaser to the 
Royal Norwegian Navy under terms of the 
lend-lease agreement between the United 
States and Norway. Recalling the treachery 
and brutality of the German attack on Nor- 
way in April, 1040, President Roosevelt con- 
tinued : 

"But the story of Norway since the con- 
quest shows that while a free democracy may 
be slow to realize its danger, it can be heroic 
when aroused. At home, the Norwegian peo- 
ple have silently resisted the invader's will 
with grim endurance. Abroad, Norwegian 
ships and Norwegian men have rallied to the 
cause of the United Nations. And their as- 
sistance to that cause has been out of all pro- 
portion to their small numbers." 

In 1040 Norway had a population of about 
three million people scattered of a total area 
of about 125,000 square miles. In population 
it was one of the smallest nations in Europe, 
yet it boasted the fourth largest merchant 
marine in the world, one which still is sur- 
passed only by those of Great Britain, the 
United States and Japan. More than 80 per 
cent of the Norwegian merchant fleet was out- 
side Norwegian territorial waters when the 
Germans struck on April 9, 1940, and all of 
these ships, with the more than l^OOO sea- 
men manning them, immediately 
placed themselves at the disposition 
of the Allies in the war against the 
Axis Powers. 

The services of this merchant fleet 
at once became of vital importance 
to the Allies, and particularly to 
Great Britain during those crucial 
months when that nation was stand- 
ing off the enemy virtually single- 
handed. Norwegian tankers were 
bringing to England fully half of 
her oil and gasoline supply, and 
Norwegian freighters were deliver- 
ing one-third of her foodstuffs. In 
December, 1940, Ronald Cross, Brit- 
ish Minister of Shipping, declared 
the services of the Norwegian mer- 
chant fleet were of "decisive im- 
portance." A little later it was 
stated authoritatively in England 
that "the Norwegian merchant fleet 
is worth more to us than a million 
men." 

Since that time Norwegian ships 



and seamen have by no means relaxed in their 
war effort. This has not been accomplished 
without sacrifice. Since April, 1940, more 
than 300 Norwegian ships have been de- 
stroyed by enemy action, and about 2,000 Nor- 
wegian seamen have perished. But the Nor- 




wegian merchant fleet sails on, bringing men, 
foodstuffs and vital materiel to all parts of 
the world where United Nations forces are 
fighting or preparing to fight. 

These all-out services of her combined mer- 
chant fleet constitute Norway's chief contri- 




bution to the war ^^^^ 
Axis Powers from abroad. But they aie not 
No way's only contribution. To speed a 
Un5 e/ Nations' victory she also offers the 
services of sea, air and land fighting forces. 

The German invasion interrupted the pro- 
gram of enlarging and modernizing the Royal 
Norwegian Air Force but did not end it. 
Barely had the Germans completed their con- 
quest of Norway when the Air Force set up a 
new training center at Toronto, Canada. To 
this camp, called "Little Norway," have come 
hundreds of young men, most of whom have 
escaped from occupied Norway at the risk of 
their lives. Ground crews as well as pilots 
and plane crews are trained there, and "Little 
Norway" graduates compose the all-Nor- 
wegian squadrons bow in active service in 
England and Iceland. Other "Little Norway" 
graduates are flying with the K.A.F. Still 
others are engaged in ferrying American-built 
bombers across the seas. In England, Nor- 
wegian fighter pilots have become famed for 
their skill and daring. In the Dieppe raid 
they accounted for 15 per cent of the de- 
stroyed German planes. 

The Royal Norwegian Navy was never 
large, and what there was of it was almost 
entirely wiped out in resisting the German 
attack. A few ships, however, managed to get 
to England and there formed the nucleus for 
a new navy which is already larger, both in 
ships and personnel, than that which coped 
with the Germans in 1940. Today the Royal 
Norwegian Navy's operations extend to all 
the seven seas. It has bases in such far-off 
places as South Africa, Australia and in the 
Caribbean. Chiefly, however, it is devoted to 
convoying ships across the North 
Atlantic and to patrol duties in the 
North Sea. The ships of the modern 
Norwegian Navy are, for the most 
part, small and fast, and they serve 
mainly as weapons against enemy 
submarines. 

At camps in England and Scot- 
land the Royal Norwegian Army 
prepares for the day when accounts 
are to be squared up, once and for 
all, with the Germans. It is still a 
small army, but it is vigorous, de- 
termined and well-trained. Its offi- 
cers and men have been thoroughly 
schooled in invasion tactics, and 
many of them have already been 
^ > opportunities to test their 
" Participants in Allied Corn- 



skill as 
mando raids. 



Canadian War Information Photo 
One of the flyers in training at Camp Little Norway in Toronto displays 
his mascot to General W . Stefjons, head of the Norwegian Ministry of 
Defence in Canada. General Stefjens went to Canada shortly after the inva- 
sion to help set up the Norwegian training center. 

44 



Norway's air for 



ce, navv 



and 



are under the unified com 



army 

• ~ — va^x nit umnea com- 
.and of Genera] Wilhelm Hansteen 
lose headquarters are in the Lon- 
(< ontmued on page 169) 



Australia in the War 



by 

J. B. Brigden 

Financial Counsellor, Australian Legation 



A USTEALIAN participation in the war lias 
naturally followed the lines of British ac- 
tion from the date of the declaration against 
Germany in September 1939, and its first 
troops for service abroad were in fact sent to 
England, where they formed part of the Army 
held against the threatened German invasion 
after Dunkirk. Soon afterward, however, 
they joined with increasing numbers sent di- 
rect from Australia to Egypt. Those Aus- 
tralian forces were conspicuous in the first 
advances across the Libyan desert, and until 
the greater part were returned home early 
this year for service under MacArthur, they 
were important elements in every campaign 
around the Mediterranean. Those who re- 
mained have participated in the victory of the 
British Eighth Army. A separate force met 
with misfortune in Malaya, but the tide of 
Japanese advance on Australia itself was 
destroyed in the mountain jungles of New 
Guinea. 

The small but effective Australian Navy, 
which became an integral part of the British 
Navy on the outbreak of war, was also active 
in the Mediterranean during the earlier cam- 
paigns as well as in the oceans nearer to its 
home. Three of its fine cruisers have been lost 
since then, one in the Indian Ocean, one in 
the battle of Java, and one in the Coral Sea. 

The Koyal Australian Air Force, which on 
the British model is a separate Service, has 
also been prominent throughout three years 
of war, both in direct connection with other 
Australian forces and as a supplier of person- 
nel to R.A.F. units wherever the R.A.F. has 
flown. Australian airmen for service with the 
R.A.F. are as a rule trained partly in Canada, 
under the comprehensive Empire Air Train- 
ing Scheme, first planned in 1939. From Aus- 
tralia itself the R.A.A.F. lias been busy with 
the U. S. Army Air Force. 

The resources of a young in- 
dustrial community of 7 million 
people have of course been inade- 
quate to supply and maintain its 
armed forces in their numerous 
fields with all the arms and equip- 
ment required in this war, but a 
surprising variety of service stores 
has been furnished from Australia 
to a common pool in each area. 
Starting with food, Australia soon 
became a main source of provision- 
ing for all British forces in Eastern 
areas. Woollen clothing of all 
kinds followed, with blankets, 
boots, and numerous other items 
of that kind. Cam]) and fortifica- 
tion material and equipment, radio 
and other signal gear, and field en- 
gineer stores were needed in vast 
quantities for the Middle East, and 



Australia was soon supplying all such classes 
of stores to the limit of its capacity. 

Early in 1941, when the Lend Lease pro- 
gramme was developing in the United States 
to meet the needs of Britain, the increasing 
demands of the Eastern areas were onlv less 




urgent. A British Eastern Group Supply 
Council was set up in India with the object 
of making that area as self -supporting as 
possible. It was found that Australia was 
the most hopeful field for further supplies of 
all kinds. Demands increased from North to 
South Africa, from New Zealand and the Pa- 
cific Islands, from the Netherlands Indies and 
of course from the East generally. Australia 
set about the more severe rationing of its 




Army Signal Corps Photo 
United States Army troops landing in Australia. As to other bases, 
nurses accompany the troops. 



45 



civil usage of materials and of manufacturing 
capacity, scores of small firms were taught to 
make machines and then tools, other pre- 
viously imported equipment was copied or 
improvised, and many small towns became 
branches of munitions factories. Not every- 
thing could be contrived and it was hard even 
in those days to get critical items out of the 
United States to complete some essential 
plant or to maintain a vital programme. 

When the Japanese blow struck in the East, 
Australian losses had already been heavy, and 
the catastrophes of Malaya and of the Archi- 
pelago came as severe shocks. Its own sea- 
soned fighting forces were abroad. Its stores, 
arms, ammunition, and even the products of 
its small aircraft industry had been poured 
out to the distant fronts. It was therefore a 
great tonic to the Australian people when 
fully equipped United States forces began to 
arrive, when General Douglas MacArthur ar- 
rived also, and was given supreme command 
over the appropriate area, and again when 
American naval and air forces intercepted 
with such notable effect the southward drive 
of the new enemy. 

For Australia these episodes in the long 
ordeal of the war have created an entirely 
new situation, and although the task at the 
moment may be sterner than ever, the future 
is bright with its new associations across the 
Pacific Ocean. The two armed forces work 
together as naturally as they speak the same 
language, with only such piquant differences 
in manners as are found in the different na- 
tive idioms of that language. Australian 
shortages are being made good, not by replac- 
ing the same things as Australia had sent 
abroad, but as far as they can be spared by 
more urgently needed aircraft, and by muni- 
tions components for a still greater intensity 
of war production. 

Australia is regarding its new 
situation as one of preparation 
with the United States for a mas- 
sive offensive from its shores, and 
its manpower and resources are be- 
ing re-aligned and replanned ac- 
cordingly. Foods are being grown 
and processed to suit the particu- 
lar needs of the United States 
forces. Large additional bases for 
sea, air, and ground forces have 
been completed. All of these works, 
services, and supplies come under 
the heading of "Mutual Aid," 
which began from Australia with 
food for Bataan. Their scope and 
volume will continue to increase 
until the fiood tide of the democ- 
racies overwhelms the menace to 
their lives and freedom. 



India's War Effort 



by 



Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, 

Agent-General for India in the United States 



THE United States of America entered the 
second World War in December 1941. The 
moral energy, technical skill and material 
resources of this great country are now dedi- 
cated to the winning of this war. Already her 
Army is reported to have passed the 4y 2 mil- 
lion mark. Her production oi: armaments — 
for aeroplanes alone, the President set the 
staggering figure of GO, 000 planes for 1042 
and 100,000 for 1943— is likely to be unprece- 
dented, not only in her own history but in the 
history of the world. Her war expenditure is 
already to be measured in astronomical fig- 
ures. This gigantic effort entitles her to ask 
what the other United Nations, associated 
with her in this struggle for freedom, are do- 
ing to achieve victory. 

India is one of the United Nations. Though 
only two-thirds the size of the United States, 
she has three times the population. Her re- 
sources in raw materials, whether in the 
vegetable or mineral kingdom, are known to 
be great. She ranks eighth amongst the 
world's leading industrial countries. She has 
been in the war since the British Common- 
wealth of Nations took up, in Sept. 1939, Ger- 
many's challenge to dominate Europe and the 
World. By virtue of her central strategic 
position in the middle of the Indian Ocean, 
India constitutes a vital source of supplies 
and reinforcements for both the Middle and 
the Far East. Since the loss of Burma she has 
become the sole base from or across which 
China may receive much needed aid in essen- 
tial supplies. From Assam, the province that 
constitutes her northeastern border, and from 
her eastern seaboard, the Allied offensive that 
will drive Japan out of Burma and, ulti- 
mately, of southeast Asia must be launched. 

India Plays Her Taut 

How has India played her part as a source 
of material supplies and fighting man-power? 
To what extent has she been prepared for the 
offensive against Japan? 

Though India is eighth amongst the world's 





Men of Royal Indian Navy ivith a breech-load in i* 
gun aboard a minesweeper of the R.I.N. 



great industrial countries, her manufactur- 
ing strength is mainly in textiles and leather 
goods. When the war broke out, her annual 
production of steel was only three-quarters 
of a million tons; she was not organized for 
the production of heavy equipment such as 
tanks or aeroplanes, both weapons, as experi- 
ence has proved, essential to the successful 
prosecution oL ! mobile modern war. A com- 
prehensive programme for modernizing her 
Army had been worked out in the beginning 
of 1939. But this Avas only a few months be- 
fore the war with Germany began and its im- 
plementation was seriously handicapped in 
consequence. 

Neither Great Britain nor France was pre- 
pared industrially to meet the full weight of 
German armaments. All their production 
and what the United States, then neutral, 
could furnish barely sufficed for the needs of 
the Allied forces on the western European 
front. After the defeat of France in June, 
1940, all available supplies, from whatever 
source obtainable, had to be diverted to the 
defence of Great Britain, then in deadly peril 
of a German invasion, and of Egypt which 
was threatened by a formidable Italian army. 
Equipment of the peace-tiine Indian army, as 
also of the new forces that might be raised, 
thus became a slow business. The same causes 
operated to restrict the flow to India of ma- 
chinery with which she could expand her own 
output of military equipment. 

India's war effort has to be viewed against 
this background of limitation of essential 
supplies, a limitation which still operates be- 
cause of the heavy responsibilities that the 
German invasion of Russia in the summer of 



46 



1941, and Japan's entry into the war last De- 
cember, have thrown upon the P~^J» 
nacitv of the United States and the United 

Snglm. Supplies of ^^Xfo^th 
still have naturally to be earmarked for the 
Sting forces in those areas where enemy 
pressure is the greatest. Productive plants 
nd essential raw materials also cannot be 
easily diverted from the U. S. A. or the U. K., 
since they are urgently needed to maintain 
and even increase output in these two coun- 
tries. Finally, there is a shortage of shipping. 

War Production 

Nevertheless, India's output of steel has al- 
ready been increased by 500,000 tons to 1% 
million tons a year. Her output of rifles is 6 
times the pre-war figure, of machine guns 8 
times, of small arms and ammunition 4 times, 
of gun ammunition 24 times, of guns and car- 
riages 0 t imes. Bullet-proof armour plate of a 
new composition is being successfully manu- 
factured in large quantities. The manufac- 
ture of armoured vehicles has greatly in- 
creased; the chassis are obtained from Can- 
ada and the United States and are assembled 
in India by Indian workmen, while the bodies 
are completely manufactured in India. One 
of the manufacturers is producing over 500 
bodies a week. A large number and variety of 
mechanical engineering stores are also being 
manufactured. Considerable strides have 
been made in the production of electrical 
equipment. India's strength in the produc- 
tion of textiles has been fully utilized. The 
output of clothing for the Army is now over 
10 million garments a month. Tents for the 
Commonwealth forces engaged in Africa and 
the Middle East come mostly, if not entirely, 
from India. The combined total output for 
the requirements of the fighting forces in 
{Continued on page 173) 




A railway workshop 
the production of 
tvorker is cleaning 



shells and hand grenades. The 
anc lime washing the bore of a 
shell case. 



South Africa and the War 



by 

Saleg 

('"Saleg" is the code name for the Legation of the Union of South Africa, Washington, D. C.) 



THE Union of South Africa is in this war 
and is playing a notable part in it. This 
has not been so widely appreciated by her 
friends overseas as South Africa would like 
it to be; but when the war is over and the 
whole pattern of its vast moves and confus- 
ing cross-currents can be seen objectively one 
of its most engrossing studies will be the war 
in Africa and the manner in which the small 
white community south of the Limpopo, the 
Union's northern border, made its influence 
and its leadership felt throughout the Con- 
tinent. 

South Africa declared war against Ger- 
many less than two days after Britain did 
so and began to apply itself at once to the 
task of raising an army and gearing its indus- 
tries to war-time production. An immediate 
task was to institute an unceasing watch over 
the Cape sea lanes — the Southern ocean high- 
way between the West and the East. On June 
10th, 1940, when Italy entered the war, the 
Union had a striking force in readiness in 
Northern Kenya, several thousand miles be- 
yond her own Northern border, and since that 
date the South Africans have been almost con- 
tinuously in action, first in East Africa and 
later in the Middle East. 

South Africa has put all her resources in 
manpower and material into this war, but her 
part has largely been played out of the lime- 
light. Pier efforts, great as they are in rela- 
tion to her own limited resources, have been 
overshadowed by events in other theatres of 
war. 

Though the Union figures largely on the 
map — its area is more than five times that of 
Great Britain — it is but a small portion of 
the African continent. And yet the two and 
a quarter million whites who occupy this 
Southern fragment of Africa are the largest 
settled white community on the whole of the 
African Continent which contains 4,000,000 
whites and 150,000,000 non-Europeans, pre- 
dominantly Negro races. 

In the Union itself there are eight million 
non-Europeans or "Bantu" natives. For long- 
settled reasons of national policy the 
"Bantu" natives are not available for com- 
batant purposes, but a remarkable contribu- 
tion has been made by the non-European peo- 
ple both on the home industrial front and in 
non-combatant work in the Army. 

But the task has fallen mainly on the shoul- 
ders of South Africa's small white com- 
munity, and under the leadership of her great 
soldier-statesman, Jan Christiaan Smuts, 
South Africa has played a role in^the African 
Continent in this war which may have far- 
reaching effects upon the future relationships 
of the Southern African States, already 
bound by strong ties of friendship. 

Smuts is a Field Marshal, but it is his own 
wish that his friends continue to address him 



as General, a title which in his case conveys 
a wealth of esteem that has endured for many 
years. When South Africans today speak of 
"the General" they do so with affection and 
admiration for one of the world's greatest 
living personalities whose voice is heard with 
respect far beyond his own country. 

General Smuts has since the outbreak of 
war combined the offices of Prime Minister of 
the Union of South Africa and Commander- 
in-Chief of the South African Forces. On 
September 5th, 1939, he took over the reins of 
government from General Hertzog, whose 
policy of benevolent neutrality for South 
Africa in the event of a European war did not 
commend itself to the majority of the people. 
It rested with the Union Parliament — the 
Parliament of the country enjoying full sov- 
ereign independence within the framework 
of the British Commonwealth — to decide 
whether or not the Union should go to war. 
Parliament on a majority vote rejected neu- 
trality and under General Smuts' leadership 
the country which was wholly unprepared 
and unequipped for war started to gird itself 
for the task which General Smuts saw loom- 
ing ahead. The fact that South Africans did 
not unanimously support the declaration of 
war should, to be properly understood, be 
viewed against the background of the coun- 




Harri3 & Bwlng 
His Excellency Ralph William Close, Minister 
of the Union of South Africa. 



try's history and the composition of its white 
populat ion. 

Before the war broke out the ideal of a 
united South African nation of English and 
Afrikaans (Dutch) speaking people had been 

47 




S. A. Official Photo 

The Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa, 
General J. C. Smuts, Capt. E. T. Dodson, and engi- 
neer officer, and Lt. Gen. Sir Pierre van Ryneveld, 
Chief of General Staff. 



very nearly realized. Roughly sixty per cent 
of South Africa's white population are not of 
British descent but are mainly of Dutch 
(Netherlandish) and partly of French, Bel- 
gian, Scandinavian and even German descent, 
generally referred to as the Africkaans- 
speaking section. To a very large part of this 
section the decision to enter the war was a 
decision not of the heart but of the head. For 
those who followed t he leadership of General 
Smuts — himself of Dutch descent — it: was a 
matter of cold logic that South Africa's own 
safety, no less than her loyalty to the concept 
of partnership which is the basis of the Brit- 
ish Commonwealth, demanded her participa- 
tion in the war. The decision was more read- 
ily made by the forty per cent of South 
Africa ns who are of British descent, but a 
fairly strong minority of south Africans are 
still isolationist in sentiment. It is against 
this back-ground that the performance of 
South Africa must be judged — and it is a good 
performance, by any standards. South 
Africa's lighting forces are fully representa- 
tive of both the Afrikaans- and the English- 
speaking sections in the Union. Some units 
are 95 per cent Afrikaans-speaking, others 
are mainly English-speaking, but I he men in 
Hie field do not think of themselves as 
Afrikaans or English-speaking bu1 as citizens 
united in a common task. 

"There is," says General Smuts, "no blot 
on our sovereign independence. We acted as a 
p ree an d honorable i eople. Dishonor and sov- 
ereignty do not go well together." 

Parliament in deciding to sever relations 
with German also resolved that no troops 
should he sent overseas from South Africa as 
had been done in !he Great War of 1014-1918. 
This at first caused some misapprehension 
overseas as to the part the Union was pre- 
i Continued on page L75) 



France at War 



by 

Jean Monnet 

Member of the British Supply Council, Washington, D. C, Formerly, Chairman of the Anglo-French Coordinating Committee, London 



"FRANCE at War— 1918, under the Arc de 
A Triomphe those of the French soldiers who 
did not remain forever on the battlefield 
marching together with their British and 
American comrades; Pershing, Foch, Haig; 
Hags Hying; an immense hope filling the 
hearts of all when President Wilson drove 
down the Champs Elysees, the hope of a new, 
safe world, where families could be raised in 
peace, where the life of the village would not 
be disrupted every generation by the call of 
the "mobilisation generate." At last France's 
sons could be raised and live. 

And then in 1940 — the same Arc de 
Triomphe, the same Champs Elysees, the same 
clear atmosphere, the same trees; but march- 
ing down the beautiful avenue once more the 
barbaric hordes of the invaders. The dreams 
ol' 1918 have given place to desolation and 
despair. Hope — there is no more. England in 
danger ; America so far away — where is salva- 
tion to come from, how will liberty and free- 
dom be restored ? 

A weight of lead fell on France — doubt of 
themselves, anger against her allies, hatred of 
the invaders martyrised the hearts of French- 
men. For the third time in 70 years French 
soil has been ravaged, and sons of nearly all 
the families of France have been taken away. 
The life of the village is again to be tortured 
by the presence of the conquerors, and the 
sons still alive are now prisoners in Ger- 
many's own land. 

For the third time France, the advance 
guard of the democracies, has had to stand up 
first against the German invasion. Whether 
of Bismark in 1870, of William II in 1914, or 
of Hitler in 1940, the armies were the same, 
1he purpose was the same — domination, de- 
struction of the principles of freedom on 
which Western civilization, European and 
American, has been built. To achieve these 
aims France had to be conquered, more than 
conquered — France must be destroyed. No 
possibility of enforcing German doctrines or 
muzzling liberty in Europe with France 
wounded but still alive. France must be 
humiliated forever, her belief in liberty and 
humanity killed in her soul. Her manhood 
must be kept in captivity to destroy the spirit 
and wreck the bodies. France must have no 
future. The German army of occupation must 
be the ruthless and subtle army of destruc- 
tion. 

France fell. She fell under the weight of an 
army at least double the size of her own— her 



own depleted by the 1,000,000 dead French- 
men left on the battlefields of the last war, 
and under the weight of a military prepara- 
tion pursued ruthlessly during years by Ger- 
many, preparations never equalled before in 
the world. 

Then one of the greatest tragedies of all 
time took place — France, that vanguard of 
Democracy, that champion of the universal 
rights of man, was enslaved. France was to be 
chained, the martyrised sister of the free 




peoples whom she had stood to defend. Cut oil* 
from the world, from her brothers in freedom, 
France had to be blockaded by those in whom 
rested her only hope. 

The Germans established themselves in 
France. The line of demarkation cut France 
in two. Communication became impossible. 
The Germans occupied all the towns, many of 
the villages. Machine guns in the market 
square, patrols with heavy feet marching up 
and down main streets ; officers, soldiers, forc- 
ing themselves into the homes of the people 
who had to continue to live in the same place 
— where else to go? Food requisitioned for 
the occupying armies, hostages shot at dawn, 
workers sent to Germany. The workers re- 
maining in France forced to go to the factory 
to earn for their families the short rations 
enabling them barely to exist. The factory 
makes weapons for Germany — France works 
for Germany, against her own liberators! 



But Bombers come from England ; the work- 
ers applaud, sing the Marseillaise; the fac- 
tory is crushed ; workers die. The widows fol- 
low with fervour the funeral of the British 
pilots responsible for the death of their men. 
But the family must live— those who remain 
continue to work and to hope that more bomb- 
ers will come. 

France disarmed — her sons away in 
prisons in Germany — hatred and determina- 
tion in her invincible heart, but powerless — 
she had to submit, and yet prepare for the day 
of liberation. Few voices are heard, the mil- 
lions must remain silent — how can one be 
surprised then at all the contradictions that 
seem to have come from France? 

Gradually through this period of desolation 
the undying belief in liberty that fills the 
French people's hearts came to life again. The 
wonderful effort of England ; the determina- 
tion to resist, so heroically voiced by Winston 
Churchill, Russia, and at last the entrance of 
the United States into the war. And now 1942 
— the appeal of President Roosevelt to the 
French people — the liberation of North 
Africa by the American and British armies. 

That liberation of France overseas has 
brought the occupation of the whole of France 
— there is not one village now in France that 
will not know the invaders — and the tragedy 
reaches its climax — France bad to be lost, lost 
in her entirety, so that she could be saved. 

The hardships are greater, the food is 
scarcer. French ports on the Mediterranean 
will suffer the tragic fate of the ports of the 
Channel. More allied bombs will fall on more 
parts of France. But French hearts now again 
believe in the future. Liberty will live again. 
Sons will come back ; and who knows but that 
the life of the village may this time become 
peaceful for good. 

The eyes of the French are now turned 
towards North Africa, awaiting the rise of a 
French army. They are awaiting the day when 
they will hear that French armies will at last 
have been able to take their part in the strug- 
gle that will liberate the people of France, 
together with those gallant French who went 
on fighting and never gave up. They are wait- 
ing and preparing for the day when the whole 
nation can join in the effort to finallv crush 
the invader. They are awaiting the day when 
again the voice of France can speak of liberty, 
freedom, and bring once more its contribution 
to the building of a safer Europe, of a better 
world. 



=»<>.. 



"Patriotic Frenchmen will know that our presence in North Africa is the promise of their freedom— whether they are in ( terma 
on the slave gangs of the German factories, or in the vast concentration camp which the Germans has made of France. My former com P ^ 1S °^ S ' 
arms will believe me when I tell them that the Axis has met its Marne, and that if they listen closely they will hear the tramp of nn°T 

i swinging along the Champs-Elysses on their way past Chateau Thierry, St Mihiel and V„Li„ * men 



ILL 1UO M ^ ~ ' ~ 

who not so long from now will be 



wnonox so xoug ,> ... », ....... 6 0 — _ L — "~v "«»«:»u (^i, Minipi and Verdun to viHm-v .t 

Berlin. Tliey will heed, I am certain, my invitation to form their battalions and join our ranks, so that the hills and the vallevs of fl i> i 
which I know and love so well, will once more be free."— General John J. Pershing, General of the Armies of the I inh-<i Stntt, ; , f? e 
President Roosevelt, November 12, 1942. " ltes > "' " letter "> 



48 




Production for the United States Army 

by 

Lieutenant General William S. Knudsen 

Director of Production, War Department 



HPO give a picture of war production for 
the U. S. Army, I might do this in the 
simplest way by stating that I have, during 
the last nine months, visited over 500 plants 
in 120 cities in 31 states. I have inspected 
plants employing more than 700,000 men and 
women doing war work ranging from the 
manufacture of airplanes and tanks to fuzes 
and primer caps. 

I have been impressed and much encour- 
aged by the progress made to date. Fa- 
cilities have been created or converted. Bil- 
lions of dollars have been expended for fac- 
tories, machine tools, and jigs and fixtures, 
but, best of all, American industry and labor 
have put their teeth into this job — the big- 
gest ever undertaken by any nation, and we 
are on our way. True, we still have a long 
road ahead of us, but the flywheel has gotten 
started and is gaining momentum with every 
day that goes by. 

We have a system in the United States dif- 
ferent from that of our enemies. We have 
learned the trick in peace-time pursuits of 
producing things in quantities by splitting 
operations and making fixtures which can 
duplicate pieces rapidly and accurately. All 
the development of these methods and their 
application to munitions manufacture had 
to be started from the ground up, as but very 
few of our manufacturers bad previous ex- 
perience in munitions work. I am reminded 
of a shop which 1 saw on one of my trips 
which had previously manufactured conduc- 
tor pipes and ash cans and was now turning 
out cartridge clips at the rate of millions 
per month on automatic dies, with furnaces 
and conveyor line assembly— quite a step to 



take, but doing it efficiently and well. 

All over our land we have automobile build- 
ers making airplane motors and tanks — busi- 
ness machine companies making guns and di- 
rectors — electrical equipment manufacturers 
making radios and instruments; all started 




in a little better than a year. We have built 
explosive plants which outdistance the pro- 
duction of World War T, and before we finish 
we will out-manufacture the Axis nations by 
a comfortable margin. 

In pushing our production ever upward, 
to meet the requirements, balance is essential. 



49 



We know, of course, that every day some- 
where in the world some American friend is 
being killed fighting for you and me, and it 
is our supreme duty to see to it that he has 
the material to fight with, in order to keep 
the casualties at a minimum. 

I have every confidence that our Army and 
Navy will do their job, and I have every con- 
fidence that every American manufacturer, 
engineer or workman will do his utmost to 
win the battle of production which must 
necessarily back up the battle in the held. 

We have started thousands of shops doing 
work they never did before, but we are ex- 
citing their imagination. The good old Amer- 
ican ingenuity is coming forward to find ways 
to do Hie work quicker and better. The War 
Department officials in the field are ever ready 
to assist and cooperate in eliminating delays. 
Tuder Secretary Patterson has done marvel- 
ous work in helping to unravel legal tangles 
and gel quirk decisions. The War Depart- 
ment procurement machine is functioning at 
high speed. Commitments are being made of 
a size that no one dreamed of a year ago. 

The monthly expenditures for finished work 
are setting records month after month. Our 
President's program, thought fantastic at the 
start, is rounding into shape. 

We are all part; of this effort to win the 
war. Our combined efforts will show the ene- 
my that free labor and free enterprise can 
lick any combination of slavery and fear. We 
have the resources; we have the men ; and we^ 
have the will to win. This is your United 
States and my Qnited States— united as never 
before. 



Battle Order in the Offensive 



by 

Colonel I. N. Shishurin 

Red Army, U.S.S.R. 



"W7"AK is a stern teacher. In wartime, old 
established forms and methods of tactics 
and strategy undergo their trials and Army 
Manuals and Regulations adopted in peace- 
time are put to test. In the case of the Red 
Army, these documents which prescribed va- 
rious methods of activity of our troops in war- 
time have been, are, and will still be, of great 
value. However, certain points in Regula- 
tions are already out of date and since they 
do not answer modern conditions are in need 
of revision. 

That applies particularly to sections deal- 
ing with battle formation in the offensive. 

Practice has shown that the best battle 
order in sucli cases is that which permits the 
simultaneous bringing into play of the largest 
possible proportion of infantry and its firing 
weapons for direct action against the enemy 
in the selected direction of advance. 

If from this standpoint we compare the 
battle order of the platoon, company, bat- 
talion, or regiment echeloned in depth and of 
the same units arranged in line, the ad- 
vantages of the latter will become quite 
obvious. 

When the battle order is arranged in a line 
composed of all platoons and companies with 
the exception of a small reserve, the entire 
battalion or regiment takes part in battle 
simultaneously. Tims, the commander of a 
given unit is in a position to bring all his own 
and supporting lire weapons to bear on his 
adversary. In the case of a unit echeloned in 
depth, on the other hand, a considerable part 
of its forces is doomed to inactivity: for ex- 
ample, one or two squads out of four in the 
case of a platoon ; six to eight squads out of 
sixteen in the case of a company ; five platoons 
out of nine in the case of a battalion, and 
nineteen squads out of twenty-seven in the 
case of a regiment. In other words, a unit 
echeloned in depth during offensive opera- 
tions does not bring into play more than half 
its manpower and lire power. 

The battle order in line lias other ad- 
vantages compared with the battle order 
echeloned in depth. It is less noticeable 
against the background, can more easily 
adapt itself to it and camouflage itself so that 
it is harder for the enemy to discover it and 
maintain aimed fire with his artillery, trench 
mortars and infantry weapons. 

Furthermore, (he unit arranged in two or 
more echelons, occupying as it does a square 
or rectangle of ground tilled with men and 
tiring weapons, presents a very favorable tar- 
get for attack from the air and for zone tire. 
Whereas the unit arranged in a line is far less 
vulnerable in this respect. 



We may point to another advantage of the 
battle order arranged in line. It is as follows : 

Ballistic properties of artillery and small 
arms are such that the zone of dispersion of 
missiles is less in height and width than in 
length, especially in short distances (less than 
800 metres in case of small arms). For in- 
stance, when firing at a range of 100 metres, 
the zone of dispersion is 110 metres in length 




Army Signal Corps Photo. 



Officers of the Red Army on an inspection tour at Ft. 
Benning, Ga. Maj. Paul Barayev {with glasses) and 
Col. Paul F. Berczin, {USSR Aviation) inspecting a 
plane's tving. In the right background is Capt. 
Dernetri Shimkin, USA. 



and only 170 centimetres in height and width. 
This means that when an enemy machine gun 
is firing at a given point, only a few of the 
men in line are liable to be hit, and, if the 
gunner makes the slightest mistake in aim, 
they are not liable to be hit at all. When the 
unit is echeloned in depth, on (he other hand, 
not only men in the first echelon, but also 
those in the second echelon, who virtually are 
mad Lve on the battlefield, are liable to be hit. 

Hence, formation in line insures not only 
maximum effeel of manpower and firepower, 
but also, considerably reduces losses of ad- 
vancing infantry. 

Furthermore, in case of format ion in line, it 
is easier and simpler to effect coordination 
within the unit ilself and between the unit 
and supporting weapons. "Elbow contact" be- 
tween men in squad, platoon, or company 
makes it possible to transmit orders, com- 
mands and reports along the line, consider- 



ably facilitating the direction of battle. 

Thus the battle order of sqads, platoons, 
companies, battalions and regiments should, 
as a rule, be such as to permit maximum and 
simultaneous participation in battle of infan- 
try and its fire weapons from the beginning 
to the end of an offensive operation. This be- 
ing so, the commander's reserve assumes the 
highest importance. It is the duty of the re- 
serve to parry enemy surprise attacks, espe- 
cially against flanks and junction points; to 
support forces in action and to develop and 
consolidate their successes. The strength and 
composition of the reserve will depend on the 
task in hand, the plan of battle, and the na- 
ture of the ground occupied by the units in 
fighting formation. 

As a rule, when advancing under normal 
conditions with protected flanks, the reserve 
may consist, in the case of a battalion, of a 
platoon of riflemen or automatic riflemen, 
platoon of anti-tank rifles, several heavy ma- 
chine guns and 45 milimetre guns and, in the 
case of a regiment, of a rifle company, anti- 
tank guns, heavy machine guns, and 45 mili- 
metre guns. 

What is the best battle formation for in- 
fantry waging offensive operation? Squad 
and platoon should be deployed for battle in a 
line in which men are placed and advance at 
interval of six or eight paces from one an- 
other. The place of the squad commander is 
in the line itself and of the platoon com- 
mander behind his unit where he can most 
conveniently direct the battle, watch the 
enemy and keep his eye on flanks and neigh- 
bors. 

In a rifle company, all pla toons should be 
arranged in one echelon and, depending on 
conditions, either in a straight line or with 
forward (or backward) angle, while the place 
of the company commander, as of the platoon 
commander, should be behind his unit. 

The battle order of the battalion should be 
arranged as follows: Either all three com- 
panies in a straight line or angle forward (or 
backward) or staggered to right (or left). 

Battalions in battle order of the regiment 
should be arranged roughly as companies are 
arranged in the battalion. 

Such a system of arrangement of battle 
order will, undoubtedly, strengthen forward 
lines and make it possible to strike simul- 
taneously at the enemy with full strength of 
advancing forces. The rest depends on the 
commander, on how effectively he masters the 
P^ciples of the new battle formations, and 
how skillfully he applies them on the battie 



Petroleum and the War Effort 



by 

Rear Admiral Harry A. Stuart, U. S. N. 

Director of the Naval Petroleum Reserves 



MODERN warfare on land, sea and in the 
air is largely dependent on petroleum 
products — munitions as essential to armed 
combat as ships, planes, guns and ammuni- 
tion, i 

Products of petroleum, former- 
ly required by our armed forces 
in relatively small quantities, in 
the main, as fuel for the navy and 
smaller amounts as lubricants, 
diesel engine oil and gasoline for 
trucks, staff cars and small boats, 
now is in demand to provide gaso- 
line and fuel for engines of all 
types in volumes which only a few 
years ago would have seemed fan- 
tastic to those responsible for the 
fuel supplies of our army and 
na vy. 

The ordinary engine fuels and 
lubricants, heretofore the most 
important petroleum products, 
are no longer the only refinery 
fractions required in vast quan- 
tities in order to prosecute war- 
fare. 

The modern oil refinery, of 
necessity, is being converted into a chemical 
factory wherein the basic raw materials used 
are crude oil and natural gas, which contain 
natural hydrocarbons now the source of iso- 
octane, the premium fuel for combat planes 
and bombers, toluene, the basic substance for 
manufacture of trinitro-toluene, the TNT of 
high explosives, and butadiene and other 
basic stocks for the manufacture of synthetic 
rubbers. 

Large volumes of methyl-alcohol can, it is 
claimed by some, be produced more cheaply 
from petroleum hydrocarbons than from 
grains or sugar refuse. All these are rapidly 
being recognized as important factors in the 
petroleum picture as we see it today. 

There is still much research remaining to 
be done on the hydrocarbons contained in the 
many types of crude oils produced in the 
United States and the future probably wiU 
see developed special fuels and petroleum 
products in commercial amounts which, as 
yet, are only dimly conceived in the minds of 
a few of our foremost petroleum chemists. 

The very abundance of petroleum in the oil 
fields of the United States has, of course, led 
to its profligate use, and little thought has yet 
been given to its conservation through salvag- 
ing for re-use even our extremely limited sup- 
plies of Pennsylvania grade paraffin base oils, 
perhaps the finest base stock for high grade 
lubricating oils and waxes available in the 
United States, and other products which can 
be reconditioned and re-used. 

At the present time, with a domestic pe- 
troleum production approximating four mil- 



lion barrels daily, the How of petroleum from 
producers to consumers, private and military, 
will doubtless go on unchecked — due to the 
very momentum of the process which the pe- 



2b 




U. S. Navy l'iiotos 

Thousands of barrels of the "black blood of ivar" 
went up in smoke as this United States tanker was 
torpedoed by an Axis submarine. In this instance, 
crew members brought the flames under control and 
the tanker was towed to port by a V. S. naval ship. 
It has since been repaired and is now back in service. 
Below: Rear Admiral Stuart, Director of the Naval 
Petroleum Reserve?. 





troleum industry has set up for handling this 
valuable natural resource. 

In the war today, petroleum products are 
used in such large quantities on land and sen 



and in the air that the problem of keeping all 
units supplied has developed into an im- 
portant phase of modern warfare. Both land 
and sea borne petroleum products to the 
lighting fronts or to other points 
where they are necessary to the 
war elVort, are subject (o destruc- 
tion at sea, by enemy submarines 
and bombers and on land by 
bombers and sabotage. 

The principal difficulty facing 
the oil industry and those respon 
sible for supplying I he armed 
forces and essential civil and in- 
dustrial needs in support of the 
war effort, comes from the fact 
that the areas of greatest demand 
at home and where oil and gaso- 
line are required abroad are re- 
mote from sources of supply. The 
difficulties in supplying large 
eastern industrial areas, in the 
face of disruption of tanker trans- 
port from the Mexican ( lulf Coast 
has imposed a heavy burden on 
our eastern railway system, 
which il is hoped will be lightened 
by construction of necessary pipe lines before 
tank car rolling stock becomes too worn out 
to continue to carry the heavy transportation 
load it is now called upon to deliver. 

While at the present lime the industry's 
main bottle-neck is transportation, there is 
also looming on the horizon, the threat of an 
actual shortage of supplies caused by the 
rapid decline of wildcat drilling and the fail- 
ure to discover new fields containing sufficient 
oil to offset current production. This devel- 
opment has long been foreseen by most oil 
men and government personnel familiar with 
the over-all petroleum picture but there has 
seemed to be little that could be done in the 
face of the country's apparently enormous 
potential production from its developed and 
partly developed fields. ' Warnings that new 
discoveries at the rale of nearly one and a half 
billion barrels of oil each year could not long 
be sustained after all shallow fields had been 
lested to deepest horizons fell, for the most 
part, on deaf ears and although there appears 
to be a back-log of approximately twenty bil- 
lion barrels of recoverable oil yet to be pro- 
duced from known fields in the United States, 
H is my belief that these reserves, oil in sight, 
must Of necessity be the main support of onr 

war effort and Little help ean be expected from 
discoveries made during the war period. 

In conclusion, we must give credit where 
due and must marvel at how onr enemies in 
Knrope have been able to do so much with 
their meager petroleum resources. 

There seems lo be but little doubl now, 

( ('on finned Oft /xit/c 161) 



51 



American Labor in the War 



by 

H. A. Millis, 

Chairman, National Labor Relations Board 



IN the labor relations field, the United 
States entered this war under far more 
favorable circumstances than last time. In 
early 1917 the trade union movement included 
not more than three million workers. Labor 
in most of the key industries was unorganized, 
with no experience in collective 
bargaining. Serious differences of 
opinion existed within the labor 
movement as to our participation 
in the war. At the end of 1041, in 
contrast, organized labor counted 
over eleven million members. 
While the labor movement was di- 
vided and competing, with minor 
exceptions it was united on the 
war program. 

During the war emergency of 
1917-1018 agreement had first to be 
obtained on policies which in 1941 
were matters of established law. 
Thus, the War Labor Conference 
Board of 1918, months after our 
entry into the war, was concerned 
with obtaining agreement on two 
national duties: (1) recognition 
of employees' right to organize 
and to bargain collectively; and 
(2) the necessity of establishing 
minimum rates of pay to insure the worker in 
health and reasonable comfort. In 1941 these 
policies had already been recognized in fed- 
eral statutes. The National Labor Relations 
Act had outlawed employer practices inter- 
fering with collective activities of employees 
and had established machinery whereby em- 
ployees could designate representatives of 
their own choosing. The Fair Labor Stand- 
ards Act had put a floor under wages. 

Partly as a result of federal legislation, the 
development of the war production program 
found labor extensively organized in such key 
industries as steel, rubber, automobiles, ship- 
building and the maritime industry. In the 
last war, the government found it necessary 
to develop machinery to handle grievances in 
war production plants. Many employee rep- 
resentation plans, the beginning of company 
unions, were the result. This time, however, 
workers and their managements had devel- 
oped and were accustomed to using collective 
bargaining machinery. Their regular provi- 
sion for handling grievances could quickly 
tackle and adjust the innumerable problems 
which arose in connection with conversion to 
war production. The prompt and orderly set- 
tlement of differences over rates of pay, 
seniority rights of shifted workers, changed 
overtime rules, and the introduction of wo- 
men and Negroes into fields from which they 
had been excluded, for instance, meant an in- 
calculable contribution to the good morale 
essential for top production. 



Since labor is united on the war, moreover, 
it has been possible for the Government to get 
the cooperation of the American Federation 
of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Or- 
ganizations, who are able to speak for labor 
on important questions of policy. They agreed 




OWI Photo by Palmer 
Workers splicing wire cable. Miles of stout cable are 
needed for the United States Fleet. Lower: Chair- 
man Millis of the N.L.RB. 




with representatives of management and 
Government that there should be no strikes. 
As ;i result the number of workers involved in 
strikes, since Pearl Harbor, has been far less 
than in corresponding months of 11)17, in 
spite of the much greater volume of present 



production. In August and September time 
lost from strikes was only 1/1 0th of 1 per 
cent of the man-days worked. 

Stabilization agreements for war construc- 
tion and for shipbuilding have provided 
orderly review of wage rates, and removal of 
inequitable variations, in order to 
promote orderly recruitment of 
labor and to prevent pirating and 
the competitive bidding up of 
rates. The unions have cooperated 
also in removing many peace-time 
restrictions, which interfered 
with war production. Thus the 
A. F. of L. and the C. I. O. agreed 
to modify overtime regulations by 
removing the double-time penalty 
which hampered regular 7-day op- 
eration. Many unions have modi- 
fied their rules to permit the dilu- 
tion of skilled trades for the dura- 
tion. Others have changed old 
rules which prevented the employ- 
ment of women and of Negroes. 

While organized labor is not yet 
satisfied that it has the representa- 
tion at policy-making points to 
which its interest and its special 
knowledge and ability entitled it, 
it is playing an increasingly important role 
in the war agencies. Men from the unions are 
at work in the War Production Board and on 
its advisory committees, while representa- 
tives of labor sit on the War Labor Board, 
and on the Management-Labor Policy Com- 
mittee of the War Manpower Commission. 

Another major contribution of organized 
labor to the war effort has been made possible 
because of the close contacts and the mutual 
confidence and cooperation between organ- 
ized labor and the Government. Recognizing 
the importance to labor of preventing such an 
increase in prices as followed World War I 
with the resultant dissatisfaction and poor 
morale, and the disastrous deflation which 
followed, the representatives of labor agreed 
hat control of wages should be included in 
the badly needed program for the stabiliza- 
tion of prices. 

The extensive labor organization which 
« ctions m the key industries, making its 
contribution to the war effort by settling 
grievances and peacefully working out major 
differences developed in peace-time under 

^S^£iU a 2T Labor Rela " 

onto? 3 ~ 
workers W i to ^present the 

• n. b a dlVided labor movement, 

erv for 2? ! Gn, e ° f S° ve ™ntal machin- 

wou d of ten T ° f PrOWem > dire ^ ^tion 
often have interrupted war produc- 
l< ontmued on page 175) 



The American Federation of Labor and the War 



A MERTCAX workers are responding in full 
measure to the nation's call for service 
on the production front to help win the war. 

There is hard work to be done — plenty of it 
— before our country can see its way to vic- 
tory. The members of the American Federa- 
tion of Labor are doing this work. 

These men and women of labor — millions 
of them — are on the job! They have only one 
aim and purpose right now and that is to help 
win the war. They say to America : — "Give us 
the tools and the materials and we will pro- 
duce the goods!" 

In all my experience I have never witnessed 
a more unanimous and patriotic devotion to 
duty than that which now prevails among the 
workers in war industries. That is because 
the men and women of labor realize that this 
war is their war, that America must win or 
all of us will become slaves to Hitler or 
coolies for the Japs. That is the driving force 
which is giving new strength to the muscles 
of American workers and inspiring them to 
achieve new records of production every day. 
That is why American labor is working — not 
as usual— "but as never before! 

Furthermore, organized labor has made an 
important contribution to real national 
unity. Shortly after war broke out, the A. F. 
of L. and the C. I. 0. agreed to lay aside their 
differences and work together for victory. 
From the top leadership down through the 
ranks, the men and women of labor are coop- 
erating as good Americans should. 

Some uninformed persons are laboring un- 
der the false impression that America has no 
war labor policy and that Congress should 
enact one at once. 

But: we do have a war labor policy in this 
country— a very definite and constructive 
one. It was arrived at and adopted shortly 
after war broke out by a conference of labor 
and industry representatives called by the 
President. 

This war labor policy is brief but all-im- 
portant. It provides that there shall be no 
interruptions of work by strikes or lockouts 
for the duration of the war and that all dis- 
putes shall be settled by peaceful means 
through machinery provided by the War La- 
bor Board. 

Every national and international union in 
the A. F. of L. has subscribed to this policy. 
We were, in fact, the first to suggest it. We 
have taken a solemn pledge not to strike for 
any cause. Our members have lived up to that 
pledge almost 100 per cent. Let the record 
speak. Since the war, production delays due 
to strikes have virtually disappeared. 
. The A - F - °f L - has not and will not sanc- 
tion or condone any strike by any of its mem- 
bers as long as this war lasts. T publicly dis- 
avow any strikes of any kind by any A. P. of 



by 

William Green 

President, American Federation of Labor 

L. union for the duration. In the few un- 
authorized, wildcat, local strikes (hat have 
occurred since the war, union officials have 
immediately exerted all their influence to get 
the men back on the job as soon as possible. 
And they have succeeded marvelously. Offi- 
cial records show that last year strikes aver- 
aged ten days in length. This year such strikes 
as have taken place were ended within an 
average of only two days. 




Many of our members have been called to 
the colors. They and the sons and daughters 
and loved ones of American workers are fight- 
ing on the front lines alongside the American 
citizens from all other walks of life. 

Those who are carrying on at home are giv- 
ing patriotic service on the production front. 
They are accomplishing production miracles 
and beating schedules every day. 

A. F. of L. building trades workers have 
made the prompt {raining of our new Army 
possible. Within six months they completed 
construction of cantonments which are, in ef- 
fect, forty-six cities, housing from 20,000 to 
60,000 men each. These projects included (he 
construction of living quarters, powerhouses, 
roads, stores, hospitals, laundries, mess halls, 
water supply lines and sewage 1 systems. 

Many of these camps are in small, rural 
communities, Ear away from any considerable 
labor supply. Our building trades unions 
came to the aid of America by lecruiting 
scores of thousands of trained workers. We 
took them from every part of the < ountry and 
brought them to the job without any expense 
to the Government. Our unions shouldered 
the entire cost; themselves. 

Furthermore, in the stabilization pact en- 
tered into with their employes and the Gov- 



ernment, the building trades unions waived 
double-time overtime standards. This meant 
a 7 per cent voluntary contribution by each 
worker from his weekly pay. 

Besides Army cantonments and other 
bases, our building trades workers have com- 
pleted 63,690 new housing units in Avar pro- 
duction centers and are now engaged in 
building 43,000 additional homes and many 
thousands of new factories. We are proud of 
their line record. 

The metal trades unions have made similar 
contributions. Their men are working like 
beavers in America's shipyards and aircraft 
plants. Throughout the nation the metal 
trades unions have made continuous shipyard 
production possible by establishing schedules 
for 24 hour a day production, seven days a 
week. 

More than 1,000 of our metal trades and 
building trades workers are now prisoners of 
Japan. They were at Guam and Wake when 
the enemy struck. They dropped their tools 
and fought side by side with our gallant 
soldiers and marines until they were finally 
subdued by superior force. 

Almost a hundred thousand of our mem- 
bers are now building America's defenses in 
Hawaii, in Alaska, in the Canal Zone and in 
all our new naval and air bases off our coasts. 
They gave up safe, secure jobs at home to do 
their bit. 

Members of our Teamsters Union rode the 
Burma Road and are now helping to trans- 
port; vital supplies to China by other routes. 

Members of our maritime unions are sail- 
ing the ships and tankers on the high seas and 
they are daily exposed to the risk of subma- 
rine attacks. More than 500 A. F. of L. sea- 
men already have given their lives and others 
are still reported missing. 

All of us are buying War Savings bonds 
from our weekly earnings. The A. F. of L. has 
set a billion-dollar goal of War Savings bond 
purchases by its members for 1942. We will 
exceed that goal. 

Yes, American workers are paying their 
full share of the cost of this war — in blood, 
in sweat, in sacrifice and in taxes. They are 
not complaining. They entered this war with 
their eyes open as free men and women and 
they are determined to come out of this war 
free men and women. 

At its recent annual convention, held in 
Toronto, Canada, the American Federation 
of Labor voted full support of all the Govern- 
ment's war programs and policies. And it- 
further resolved that when this Avar is over, 
the forces of freedom and democracy must 
win the peace — a peace that will endure and 
that will assure liberty and security in line 
with the Four Freedoms to all the peoples 
of the earth. 



53 



The CIO and the War 



bv 



Philip Murray, 

President, Congress of Industrial Organizations 



TX a message cabled to the Congress of In- 
(his! rial < )rganizations last March, General 
Douglas MacArthur declared it to be his firm 
conviction that labor will "prove the inde- 
structible backbone that will determine the 
present vital struggle." 

This conviction is shared by all who truly 
know the American working people and our 
labor movement. Speaking for the Congress 
of Industrial Organizations, I can say that 
long before Pearl Harbor our unions and our 
membership were at work strengthening the 
productive backbone upon which our present 
war effort depends. 

As far back as 1940, in fact, we made de- 
fense production our first concern, advanc- 
ing our Industry Council plan lor expand- 
ing the production of all essential war mate- 
rials. And in every industry, the CIO unions 
were the first to call for speedy plant conver- 
sion and the elimination of bottlenecks and 
shortages, by the full use of all available fa- 
cilities and their planned expansion. 

At the national convention of the CIO in 
Detroit in the fall of 1941, we expressed our 
complete support for the foreign policies of 
President Koosevelt and dedicated all our 
efforts to the promotion of the world strug- 
gle against Hitlerism. 

So when the United States finally became 
directly involved in the war, there was not 
a moment's doubt or hesitation among the 
membership of the CIO. We went all-out 
for victory from the very start, subordinat- 
ing every other consideration to this all-im- 
portant purpose. 

The CIO joined at once with the rest of 
organized labor in a voluntary agreement to 
lay aside the strike weapon for the duration 
of the war, and to do everything within its 
power to maintain uninterrupted production. 

In every war plant, our unions take the 
lead, through labor-management committees 
and in every other way, in all steps necessary 
to produce more and more of the ships, planes, 
tanks and other war materials needed by our 
armed forces and those of the United Na- 
tions. 

We offer to management and to government 
our complete cooperation in the spirit of na- 
tional unity. For we realize that all groups 
must pull together, without selfish bicker- 
ing and quibbling, if our total war effort is 
to be crowned with success. 

The men and women of labor are not only 
our soldiers of production, they are also the 
backbone of every other form of war ac- 
tivity. Most of our fighting men come from 
the ranks of labor in industry and on the 
countryside. On every battlefront, on land, 
at sea and in the air, CIO members are fight- 
ing for their country and for the cause of 
freedom and democracy. Every one of our 



unions can point with pride to long and 
growing lists of its members who are now in 
the armed forces and many of whom have 
been honored for heroic deeds. 

It may be noted here that it is not onlj 
our men' in uniform who risk their Lives in 
this war. Some of the heaviest casualties 
have occurred among our merchant seamen, 
among the CIO union men who plow the seas 
to carry supplies to our armed forces and 
those of our allies all over the world. 

In civilian defense, in war relief and every- 
where else there is a job to be done to win 
this war, you will find the men and women 
of organized labor giving their services un- 
stintingly and enthusiastically. 




auest ii is also the promoter of hideous doc^ 
1 human enslavemenl that know no 

boundaries but ^ ^v ^ m . 

££S "wherever reaction seeks by tyranny 
, • , a 10 rrush the democratic aspira- 
SMJ ~ people for social prog. 

reS The labor movement has been at war with 
these fascist tendencies and doctrines long 
before Hitler's armies began to march. As 
it has seen them spread from country to com- 
L by invading troops and native Quislings, 
its opposition lias become steeled to grim tie- 
termination to fight them to the death. 

American labor knows that victory for the 
Vxis would mean not only defeat and debase- 
ment for our loved country but also the de- 
struction of it s democratic institutions. Labor 
unions would be no more, and our working 
people would be doomed to the same kind of 
slavery as has been imposed on the workers 
in every Axis-dominated country. 

These are some of the reasons why organ- 
ized labor is not only a loyal follower but also 
the most active leader in this tremendous 
struggle of all the freedom-loving peoples 
against the world menace of Axis fascism. 

America can depend on her working peo- 
ple in this greatest crisis in world history, 
in industry, in the armed forces, in civilian 
defense, and wherever else they may be, the 
men and women of labor will work and fight 
with boundless energy and devotion until vic- 
tory is assured. 



The reasons tor American labor's attitude 
toward this war are not tar to seek. For this 
is labor's war in a deeper and wider sense 
than has ever been true before. Certainly 
labor always bears the heaviest burdens in 
any war. But never before has it had so much 
at stake. 

For the purposes and doctrines which have 
linked together German Nazism, Italian Fas- 
cism and Japanese imperialism arc 1 directed 
against everything tor which the labor move- 
ment stands. Hitler and his associates have 
made it their first business to destroy the 
labor unions in ('very country that has come 
under their iron heel. They have done so be- 
cause they know full well that organized 
labor is the strongest bulwark of democracy 
and the rights of the common people, and 
the bitterest enemy of fascist dictatorship 
and oppression. 

Hitler's Axis is more than a military men- 
ace to every country that stands in the way 
of its imperialistic program of world con- 



54 




orkers ready 



owi w {0 



«'* engine for the Navy. 



American Labor in the War 



by 

H. A. Millis, 

Chairman, National Labor Relations Board 



TN the labor relations field, the United 
States entered this war under far more 
favorable circumstances than last time. In 
early 1917 the trade union movement included 
not more than three million workers. Labor 
in most of the key industries was unorganized, 
with no experience in collective 
bargaining. Serious differences of 
opinion existed within the labor 
movement as to our participation 
in the war. At the end of 1941, in 
contrast, organized labor counted 
over eleven million members. 
While the labor movement was di- 
vided and competing, with minor 
exceptions it was united on the 
war program. 

During the war emergency of 
191 7-1918 agreement had first to be 
obtained on policies which in 1941 
were matters of established law. 
Thus, the War Labor Conference 
Board of 1918, months after our 
entry into the war, was concerned 
with obtaining agreement on two 
national duties: (1) recognition 
of employees' right to organize 
and to bargain collectively; and 
(2) the necessity of establishing 
minimum rates of pay to insure the worker in 
health and reasonable comfort. In 1941 these 
policies had already been recognized in fed- 
eral statutes. The National Labor Relations 
Act had outlawed employer practices inter- 
fering with collective activities of employees 
and had established machinery whereby em- 
ployees could designate representatives of 
their own choosing. The Fair Labor Stand- 
ards Act had put a floor under wages. 

Partly as a result of federal legislation, the 
development of the war production program 
found labor extensively organized in such key 
industries as steel, rubber, automobiles, ship- 
building and the maritime industry. In the 
last war, the government found it necessary 
to develop machinery to handle grievances in 
war production plants. Many employee rep- 
resentation plans, the beginning of company 
unions, were the result. This time, however, 
workers and their managements had devel- 
oped and were accustomed to using collective 
bargaining machinery. Their regular provi- 
sion for handling grievances could quickly 
tackle and adjust the innumerable problems 
which arose in connection with conversion to 
war production. The prompt and orderly set- 
tlement of differences over rates of pay, 
seniority rights of shifted workers, changed 
overtime rules, and the introduction of wo- 
men and Negroes into fields from which they 
had been excluded, for instance, meant an in- 
calculable contribution to the good morale 
essential for top production. 



Since labor is united on the war, moreover, 
it lias been possible for the Government to get 
the cooperation of the American Federation 
of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Or- 
ganizations, who are able to speak for labor 
on important quest ions of policy. They agreed 




OWI Photo by Palmer 
W orkers splicing wire cable. Miles of stout cable are 
needed for the United States Fleet. Lower: Chair- 
man Millis of the N.L.R B. 




with representatives of management and 
Government that there should be no strikes. 
As a result the number of workers involved in 
strikes, since Pearl Harbor, has been far less 
than in corresponding months of 11)1 7, in 
spite of the much greater volume of present 



production. In August and September time 
lost from strikes was only l/10th of 1 per 
cent of the man-days worked. 

Stabilization agreements for war (construc- 
tion and for shipbuilding have provided 
orderly review of wage rates, and removal ol 

inequitable variations, in order to 

promote orderly recruitment of 
labor and to prevent pirating and 
the competitive bidding: up of 
rates. The unions have cooperated 
also in removing many peace-time 
restrictions, which interfered 
with war production. Thus the 
A. F. of L. and the C. I. O. agreed 
to modify overtime regulations by 
removing the double-time penalty 
which hampered regular T-day op- 
eration. Many unions have modi- 
fied their rules to permit the dilu- 
tion of skilled trades for the dura- 
tion. Others have changed old 
rules which prevented the employ- 
ment of women and of Negroes. 

While organized labor is not yet 
satisfied that it has the representa- 
tion at policy-making points to 
which its interest and its special 
knowledge and ability entitled it, 
it is playing an increasingly important role 
in the war agencies. Men from the unions are 
at work in the War Production Board and on 
its advisory committees, while representa- 
tives of labor sit on the War Labor Board, 
and on the Management-Labor Policy Com- 
mittee of the War Manpower Commission. 

Another major contribution of organized 
labor to the war effort has been made possible 
because of the close contacts and the mutual 
confidence and cooperation between organ- 
ized labor and the Government. Recognizing 
the importance to labor of preventing such an 
increase in prices as followed World War I, 
with the resultant dissatisfaction and poor 
morale, and the disastrous deflation which 
followed, the representatives of labor agreed 
that control of wages should be included in 
the badly needed program for the stabiliza- 
tion of prices. 

The extensive labor organization which 
functions in the key industries, making its 
contribution to the war effort by settling- 
grievances and peacefully working out major 
differences, developed in peace-time under 
the protection of the National Labor Rela- 
tions Board. The growth of organization led 
in many plants to questions as to which 
union, if any, had the right to represent the 
workers. With a divided labor movement, 
and in the absence of governmental machin- 
ery for solution of the problem, direct action 
would often have interrupted war produc- 
(Continued on page 175) 



The American Federation of Labor and the War 



by 

William Green 

President, American Federation of Labor 



A MERICAN workers are responding in full 
measure to the nation's call for service 
on the production front to help win the war. 

There is hard work to he done — plenty of it 
— before our country can see its way to vic- 
tory. The members of the American Federa- 
tion of Labor are doing this work. 

These men and women of labor — millions 
of them— are on the job! They have only one 
aim and purpose right now and that is to help 
win the war. They say to America :— "Give us 
the tools and the materials and we will pro- 
duce the goods !" 

In all my experience I have never witnessed 
a more unanimous and patriotic devotion to 
duty than that which now prevails among (he 
workers in war industries. That is because 
the men and women of labor realize that this 
war is their war, that America must win or 
all of ns will become slaves to Hitler or 
coolies for the Japs. That is the driving force 
which is giving new strength to the muscles 
of American workers and inspiring them to 
achieve new records of production every day. 
That is why American labor is working— not 
as usual — but as never before! 

Furthermore, organized labor has made an 
important contribution to real national 
unity. Shortly after war broke out, the A. F. 
of L. and the €. I. 0. agreed to lay aside their 
differences and work together for victory. 
From the top leadership down through tile 
ranks, the men and women of labor are coop- 
erating as good Americans should. 

Some uninformed persons are laboring un- 
der the false impression that America has no 
war labor policy and that Congress should 
enact one at once. 

But we do have a war labor policy in this 
country— a very definite and constructive 
one. It was arrived at and adopted shortly 
after war broke out by a conference of labor 
and industry representatives called by the 
President. 

This war labor policy is brief but all-im- 
portant. It provides that there shall be no 
interruptions of work by strikes or lockouts 
for the duration of the war and that all dis- 
putes shall be settled by peaceful means 
through machinery provided by the War La- 
bor Boa I'd. 

Every national and international union in 
the A. F. of L. has subscribed to this policy. 
We were, in fact, the first to suggest it. We 
have taken a solemn pledge not to strike for 
any cause. Our members ha ve lived up to that 
pledge almost 100 per cent. Let the record 
speak. Since the war, production delays due 
to strikes have virtually disappeared. 

The A. F. of L. has not and will not sanc- 
tion or condone any strike by any of its mem- 
bers as long as this war lasts, i publicly dis- 
avow any strikes of any kind by any A. F. of 



L. union for the duration. In the few un- 
authorized, wildcat, local strikes that have 
occurred since the war, union officials have 
immediately exerted all their influence to get 
the men back on the job as soon as possible. 
And they have succeeded marvelously. Offi- 
cial records show that last year strikes aver- 
aged ten days in length. This year such strikes 
as have taken place were ended within an 
average of only two days. 




Many of our members have been called to 
the colors. They and the sons and daughters 
and loved ones of American workers are fight- 
ing on the front lines alongside the American 
citizens from all other walks of life. 

Those who are carrying on at home an* giv- 
ing patriotic service on the production front. 
They are accomplishing production miracles 
and beating schedules every day. 

A. F. of L. building trades workers have 
made the prompt training of our new Army 
possible. Within six months they completed 
construction of cantonments which are, in ef- 
fect, forty-six cities, housing from 20,000 to 
60,000 men each. These projects included the 
construction of living quarters, powerhouses, 
roads, stores, hospitals, laundries, mess halls, 
water supply lines and sewage systems. 

Many of these camps are in small, rural 
communities, far away from any considerable 
labor supply. Our building trades unions 
came to the aid of America by lecruiting 
scores of thousands of trained workers. We 
took them from every part of the < oun try and 
brought them to the job without any expense 
to the Government. Our unions shouldered 
the entire cost themselves. 

Furthermore, in the stabilization pact en- 
tered into with their employes and tin? Gov- 



ernment, the building trades unions waived 
double-time overtime standards. This meant 
a 7 per cent voluntary contribution by each 
worker from his weekly pay. 

Besides Army cantonments and other 
bases, our building trades workers have com- 
pleted 63,G90 new housing units in war pro- 
duction centers and are now engaged in 
building 43,000 additional homes and many 
thousands of new factories. We are proud of 
their fine record. 

The metal trades unions have made similar 
contributions. Their men are working like 
beavers in America's shipyards and aircraft 
plants. Throughout the nation the metal 
trades unions have made continuous shipyard 
production possible by establishing schedules 
for 24 hour a day production, seven days a 
week. 

More than 1,000 of our metal trades and 
building trades workers are now prisoners of 
Japan. They were at Guam and Wake when 
the enemy struck. They dropped their tools 
and fought side by side with our gallant 
soldiers and marines until they were finally 
subdued by superior force. 

Almost a hundred thousand of our mem- 
bers are now building America's defenses in 
Hawaii, in Alaska, in the Canal Zone and in 
all our new naval and air bases off our coasts. 
They gave up safe, secure jobs at home to do 
their bit. 

Members of our Teamsters Union rode the 
Burma Road and are now helping to trans- 
port vital supplies to China by other routes. 

Members of our maritime unions are sail- 
ing the ships and tankers on the high seas and 
they are daily exposed to the risk of subma- 
rine attacks. More than 500 A. F. of L. sea- 
men already have given their lives and others 
are still reported missing. 

All of us are buying War Savings bonds 
from our weekly earnings. The A. F. of L. has 
set a billion-dollar goal of War Savings bond 
purchases by its members for 1942. We will 
exceed that goal. 

Yes, American workers are paying their 
full share of the cost of this war — in blood, 
in sweat, in sacrifice and in taxes. They are 
not complaining. They entered this war with 
their eyes open as free men and women and 
they are determined to come out of this war 
free men and women. 

At its recent annual convention, held in 
Toronto, Canada, the American Federation 
of Labor voted full support of all the Govern- 
ment's war programs and policies. And it- 
further resolved that when this Avar is over, 
the forces of freedom and democracy must 
win the peace — a peace that will endure and 
that will assure liberty and security in line 
with the Four Freedoms to all the peoples 
of the earth. 



r>:j 



The CIO and the War 



by 



Philip Murray, 

President, Congress oj Industrial Organizations 



TX a message cabled to the Congress of In- 
dustrial Organizations] as I March, tieneral 
Douglas MacArthur declared it to be his firm 
conviction that labor will "prove the inde- 
structible backbone that will determine the 
present vital struggle." 

This conviction is shared by all who truly 
know the American working people and our 
labor movement. Speaking for the Congress 
of Industrial Organizations, I can say that 
long before Pearl Harbor our unions and our 
membership were at work strengthening the 
productive backbone upon which our present 
war effort depends. 

As far back as 1940, in fact, we made de- 
fense production our tirst concern, advanc- 
ing our Industry Council plan for expand- 
ing the production of all essential war mate- 
rials. And in every industry, the CIO unions 
were the first to call for speedy plant conver- 
sion and the elimination of bottlenecks and 
shortages, by the full use of all available fa- 
cilities and their planned expansion. 

At the national convention of the CIO in 
Detroit in the fall of 1941, we expressed our 
complete support for the foreign policies of 
President Roosevelt and dedicated all our 
efforts to the promotion of the world strug- 
gle against Hitlerism. 

So when the United States finally became 
directly involved in the war, there was not 
a moment's doubt or hesitation among the 
membership of the CIO. We went all-out 
for victory from the very start, subordinat- 
ing every other consideration to this all-im- 
portant purpose. 

The CIO joined at once with the rest of 
organized labor in a voluntary agreement to 
lay aside the strike weapon for the duration 
of the war, and to do everything within its 
power to maintain uninterrupted production. 

In every war plant, our unions take the 
lead, through labor-management committees 
and in every other way, in all steps necessary 
to produce more and more of the ships, planes, 
tanks and other war materials needed by our 
armed forces and those of the United Na- 
tions. 

We offer to management and to government 
our complete cooperation in the spirit of na- 
tional unity. For we realize that all groups 
must pull together, without seltish bicker- 
ing and quibbling, if our total war effort is 
to be crowned with success. 

The men and women of labor are not only 
our soldiers of production, they are also the 
backbone of every other form of war ac- 
tivity. Most of our fighting men come from 
the ranks of labor in industry and on the 
countryside. On every battlefront, on land, 
at sea and in the air, CIO members are light- 
ing for their country and for the cause of 
freedom and democracy. Every one of our 



unions can point with pride to long and 
growing lists of its members who are now in 
the armed forces and many of whom have 
been honored for heroic deeds. 

It may lie noted here that it is not only 
our men in uniform who risk their lives in 
this war. Some of the heaviest casualties 
have occurred among our merchant seamen, 
among the CIO union men who plow the seas 
to carry supplies to our armed forces and 
those of our allies all over the world. 

In civilian defense, in war relief and every- 
where else there is a job to be done to win 
this war, you will find the men and women 
of organized labor giving their services un- 
stintingly and enthusiastically. 




The reasons for American labor's attitude 
toward this war are not far to seek. For this 
is labor's war in a deeper and wider sense 
than has ever been true before. Certainly 
labor always bears the heaviest burdens in 
any war. But never before has it had so much 
at stake. 

For the purposes and doctrines which have 
linked together German Nazism, Italian Fas- 
cism and Japanese imperialism are directed 
against everything for which the labor move- 
ment stands. Hitler and his associates have 
made it their tirst business to destroy the 
labor unions in every country that has come 
under their iron heel. They have done so be- 
cause they know full well that organized 
labor is the strongest bulwark of democracy 
and the rights of the common people, and 
the bitterest enemy of fascist dictatorship 
and oppression. 

Hitler's Axis is more than a military men- 
ace to every country that stands in the way 
of its imperialistic program of world con- 



54 



quest . It is also the promoter of hideous doc- 
SS Of human enslavement that know no 
natTonal boundaries but 

thizers wherever reaction seeks by tyrannj 
and violence to crush the democratic aspira- 
tions of the common people lor social prog- 

^The labor movement has been at war with 
these fascist tendencies and doctrines long 
before Hitler's armies began to inarch. As 
it has seen them spread from country to coun- 
try by invading troops and native Quislings, 
its opposition lias become steeled to grim de- 
termination to fight them to the death. 

American labor knows that victory for the 
Axis would mean not only defeat and debase- 
ment for our loved country but also the de- 
struction of its democratic institutions. Labor 
unions would be no more, and our working 
people would be doomed to the same kind of 
slavery as has been imposed on the workers 
in every Axis-dominated country. 

These are some of the reasons why organ- 
ized labor is not only a loyal follower but also 
the most active leader in this tremendous 
struggle of all the freedom-loving peoples 
against the world menace of Axis fascism. 

America can depend on her working peo- 
ple in this greatest crisis in world history. 
In industry, in the armed forces, in civilian 
defense, and wherever else they may be, the 
men and women of labor will work and fight 
with boundless energy and devotion until vic- 
tory is assured. 




owi riioto 

° rfecrS r " n ''y <"< e^ne for the Navy. 



The Independent Unions in the Shipbuilding 
Industry and Their War Efforts 

by 

E. H. Petterson, 

President, East Coast Alliance of Independent Shipyard Unions of America 



T ONG before the day of the bombing' of Pearl 
^ Harbor, December 7, 1941, the Inde- 
pendent Unions in the Shipbuilding industry 
on the East Coast organized what is now 
known as the East Coast Alliance of Inde- 
pendent Shipyard Unions of America. 

During the days of our vast defense pro- 
gram prior to the outbreak of the war it be- 
came apparent to the Independent Unions the 
necessity of close cooperation between labor 
and management in order to meet the require- 
ments of our government. Ships had to be 
built with the least possible delay. Strikes 
and lock-outs were looked upon as detrimental 
to the defense program and clauses were in- 
serted in the Independent Unions' sole bar- 
gaining contracts to outlaw strikes and lock- 
outs and arranged for disputes to be settled 
around the conference table or through 
arbitration. 

During the days when the Shipbuilding 
Stabilization program was first undertaken 
by the Office of Production Management, in 
the early part of 1941, the Independent 



Unions displayed (heir willingness to coop- 
erate although they were denied representa- 
tion on the Shipbuilding Stabilization Com- 
mittee. Conferences were held by representa- 
tives of the Navy Department, Maritime Com- 
mission, representatives of Management and 
representatives of the Independent Unions of 
the Atlantic Coast when agreements were 
concluded and accord reached on the several 
points of the Shipbuilding Stabilization pro- 
gram, one of the most important being no 
strikes and lock-outs. This has been strictly 
adhered to by the Independent Unions. Up 
to the present time there has been no work 
stoppage or strike in any of the yards where 
the Independent Unions hold the sole bar- 
gaining contract. 

Contracts were re-negotiated with the em- 
ployers in the various Independent yards in 
conformity with the East Coast Shipbuilding 
Stabilization Agreement and the membership 
of the unions promptly ratified the new 
agreement. 

In March, 1942, a conference of the Ship- 




building Stabilization Committee was called. 
It was finally decided to hold the conference 
in Chicago. Again pressure was exerted and 
the Independent Unions were excluded. Vig- 
orous protests were made by the East Coast 
Alliance of Independent Shipyard Unions 
against this unfair and undemocratic pro- 
cedure. 

However, governmental agencies, realizing 
that over 100,000 workers in the industry 
should not be ignored, called a conference. 
This conference was called by Mr. Paul R. 
Porter, Chairman of the Shipbuilding Sta- 
bilization Committee of the War Production 
Board, with the concurrence of the Navy De- 
partment and U. S. Maritime Commission, 
June 10, 1042. 

Space will not permit the relation of what 
took place at these conferences, but the Inde- 
pendent Unions again reiterated their former 
stand as to strikes and lockouts and pledged 
an all out effort in the war program. It was 
also agreed that the War Production Board, 
Navy Department and U. S. Maritime Com- 
mission would endeavor to work out a plan 
by which the East Coast Alliance of Inde- 
pendent Shipyard Unions of America and 
shipbuilders with whom they have collective 
bargaining contracts will be officially repre- 
sented in the interpretation and administra- 
tion of Zone Standards insofar as they affect 
yards under the jurisdiction of the East 
( (Jontinued on payc 1 TO j 




(AVI Thoto 

Shipbuilders setting the ribs of one of the new mine sweepers in an eastern yard. Some of these men had 
been house carpenters but were quickly adapted to their new ivork. 



55 



DECEMBER 7, 1941 



RECORD OF THE FIRST YEAR 



(The followwig account of the first year of 
the United States' participation in World 
War II teas prepared entirely from official 
sources and official statement*.) 



AS the first year of participation by the 
■ United States in World War II draws to 
a close, the offensive which all of the United 
Nations waited for has started, and our 
troops are engaged in a campaign toward 
final victory. 

Yet even before this offensive, men of the 
Army, Navy and Marines had spread to Aus- 
tralia, to India, to China, to the Mediter- 
ranean, to the oceans and lands thousands of 
miles from our own shores. We had struck 
the enemy where we could, by sea and by air. 
We had maintained routes of supply in the 
face of tremendous difficulty. And we had 
thrown into gear a war machine which Pres- 
ident Roosevelt has promised will be the 
greatest in the world. 

Against an enemy which had lived for war, 
we, who have lived for peace, had suffered 
grievous defeats which our offensive actions 
in the Solomons, at Midway, in the Coral Sea, 
our raids on Tokyo and on Japanese-held 
bases around Australia had not made up for. 
With the exception of two Aleutian islands 
which the Japanese abandoned, we had re- 
gained none of the territory we had lost. In 
one important engagement — the defense of 
Java — our naval forces, together with other 
forces of the United Nations, had been deci- 
sively defeated. 

In the first ten months of war our weight 
had not been sufficient to destroy the enemy's 
power in Russia, China, and other lands of 
invasion. Although we had manufactured for 
our allies ever-increasing amounts of mate- 
rials for war, the initiative had remained with 
the enemy. Despite our sea and air attacks 
on enemy ships and land installations in the 
Pacific, we had not crippled our foe seriously 
enough to put him on the defensive. 

Our country had not been invaded. Our 
cities had not been bombed. We had been 
free to raise, train and equip an army, to 
build ships, to make airplanes, with no handi- 
caps other than those imposed by nature and 
by ourselves. We had time to organize a 
system of home defense. Our sea routes for 
oil from the west to the east had been inter- 
rupted by enemy submarines, but we had 
been able to supplement this method of trans- 
portation with others, and our war effort had 
not been gravely upset. Our manpower had 
not been reduced by epidemics. While there 
had been some strikes, there had been no 
violent internal disturbances to disrupt our 
industrial progress. 

These things had been in our favor. Why, 
many asked, were we not then doing more in 
the war? Where was the Second Front? Were 
we going to wait a year to start lighting? 

The answer was provided at 9 p. m. the 
night of November 7, when President Roose- 
velt announced that "a powerful American 
force equipped with adequate weapons of 
modern warfare and under American com- 





U. S. Nary PW 

Results of the treacherous Jap sneak attack on Pearl Harbor December 7 1941— the "date 
which will live in infamy " Upper left, Wreckage of USS Arizona. Lower left, USS Downes, 
hit by Japanese bombs (USS Cassin, in about same condition, lies behind the Downes). 
Upper right, USS Shaw shortly after Japanese aerial bomb made direct hit on forecastle. 
Center right, USS Utah capsized. Lower right, PBY patrol planes wrecked on Ford Island. 
Below, Magazine of USS Shaw exploding. A most remarkable combat photograph, made at 
the exact moment the destroyer blew up. 

mand is today landing on the Mediterranean 
and Atlantic coasts of the French colonies in 
Africa." 

The story of that A.E.F. is an unfinished 
one. That its initial success resulted from 
months of careful planning has been related 
in detail, in the newspapers of the land. But 
back of that success was not only exact plan- 
ning by military experts, but a. long year dur- 
ing which a nation fought to throw off the 
lethargy engendered by peace and a feeling of 
security. It was not easy to discard that bur- 
den. It had become pretty firmly attached to 
us. Many of us were made aware that we 
might have a difficult struggle with ourselves 
before we began to fight the enemy. 

The Start 

Navy Department Communique No. 107, 
issued August 17, read : 

"Transport-borne, amphibious forces of the 

56 




DECEMBER 7, 1942 

WAR AT HOME AND ABROAD 




U. S. Xavy 



> 4 

Photos 



u. \ 

Some of the replies up to December 7, 1942. Upper left: A Jap torpedo plane, symbolic of the 
hundreds that have been shot down, leaves a ivhite tongue of flame as U. S. Navy antiaircraft 
fire downs it. Upper right: A Jap heavy cruiser of the Mogami class after being bombed by 
U. S. carrier-based aircraft. Left center: The Jap carrier Ryukaku nears her end {note U. S. 
Navy plane veering off to the right after dropping torpedo). Lower right: A Japanese trans- 
port burning and sinking in Kiska Harbor after being hit by a U. S. Army bomber. (Note 
additional ships and installations in harbor.) Lower left: A carrier of the Shokako class which 
ivas set ablaze by U. S. Navy torpedo and dive bombing planes. Below: A sinking Japanese 
freighter photographed through the periscope of the U. S. submarine that fired the torpedo. 



United States Marine Corps made several 
landings on islands in the Guadalcanal- 
Tulagi area. Vigorous enemy resistance was 
rapidly overcome and a number of Japanese 
prisoners were taken. The shore positions 
taken by United States forces have since been 
developed and now are well established." 

This attack on islands in the Solomon 
group, which the Japs occupied last March, 
was the first invasion by our troops of enemy 
territory in the war. 

The defeats inflicted upon us included 
Pearl Harbor, where 2,340 were killed, 946 
wounded, three ships disabled and others 
damaged, many planes destroyed on the 
ground and military installations wrecked; 
Wake Island, taken by the Japs after 378 
Marines had withstood 14 days of assault by 
overwhelming forces; the Philippines, where, 




according to unofficial figures, some 42,000 
United States and Filipino troops were cap- 
tured or killed since the beginning of the cam- 
paign to the fall of Corregidor May 6 ; the loss 
of 43 ships, among them the battleship Ari- 
zona, the aircraft tender Langley, and the 
carries Lexington and Yorktown. By Novem- 
ber 7 the toll amounted to 70 ships lost, 49 pre- 
sumed lost, 9 demolished to prevent capture 
and 12 damaged— a total of 140 out of action! 

The list of enemy ships sunk totals 178; 
this includes at least six aircraft carriers, 11 
cruisers, and 26 destroyers. Enemy ships 
probably sunk amount to 34, and damaged, 
102. As early as December 26, less than three 
weeks after Pearl Harbor, an Army bomber 
sank a Japanese submarine off the California 
coast with three bombs. 

Besides our offensives in Africa, at Midway, 
the Solomons, May's battle of the Coral Sea, 
and over Tokyo, we have bombed Rumanian 
oil fields ; sunk Italian ships in the Mediter- 
ranean; wrecked airdrome installations on 
Jap-occupied Wake Island; participated in 
allied raids over Tobruk; sunk auxiliary ves- 
sels and cargo ships in Far Eastern waters ; 
brought down Italian bombers over Malta; 
sent a force of planes 2,000 miles from Aus- 
tralia to bomb the Jap conquerors of the 
Philippines with a loss of only one plane out 
of 13 ; launched Flying Fortresses upon the 
enemy in the Burma war theater and sent 
more than 100 Fortresses and Liberators to 
bomb factories in Lille, France, which were 
turning out war goods for Germany; and 
transported and maintained troops in Aus- 
tralia, England, Egypt, Ireland, New Guinea, 
the New Hebrides and the Fiji Islands. 

On one day — August 13 — our forces in the 
Solomons, strongly reinforced, closed in on 
strategic Tulagi Harbor ; MacArthur's planes 
raided Jap warships and transports off New 
Guinea; United States fliers raided Japanese 
bases in Hunan, China; American Army 
bombers crippled three out of four Italian 
cruisers near the Axis-held Greek port of 
Pylos; and our airmen, piloting our own and 
English ships, flew "wing to wing" with 
R.A.F. fliers in attacks on Germans in West- 
ern Europe. 

Our Air Force 

In one year of war the airplane has become 
one of our weapons of greatest force. It pre- 
pared the way for our attack on the Solo- 
mons, the troops reaching the beach under 
strong protection of carrier-based aircraft. It 
was most important in our invasion of north- 
ern Africa. It has since assisted in repelling 
counter-attacks, allowing the troops time to 
dig in and establish bases from which to 
launch further offensives. 

The weapons we give our men — including 
airplanes — cannot be inferior to the weapons 
of our enemies. If we give them anything less 
than the finest we are able to produce, we are 
sending men to death as surely as sending 




U. S. Navy Photos 



Some of the flag officers commanding units of the 
United States Fleet. Upper row, left to right: Ad- 
miral Royal E. Ingersoll, USN, CinC Atlantic Fleet; 
Vice Admiral Jonas II. Ingram, USN, Commander 
South Atlantic Force, Atlantic Fleet; Vice Admiral 
Arthur S. Carpender, commander U. S. Naval Forces 
in Southwest Pacific; and Rear Admiral Henry K. 
Hewitt, USN, commander of Amphibious Forces, At- 
lantic Fleet. Center: Admiral William F. Halsey, jr., 
USN, commander of the U. S. Naval Forces in the 
South Pacific, is shown with members of his staff on 
the signal bridge of an aircraft carrier. Left to right: 
Lt. Col. J. P. Drown, USMC; Lt. H. D. Moulton, 
USNR; Lt. Comdr. S. E. Burroughs, jr., USN; Capt. 
M. R. Browning. USN; Chief Signalman R. Gardner, 
USN; Lt. Comdr. G. E. Griggs. USN; Admiral Hal 
sey; Capt. B. T. Holcomb. USMC; Lt. Comdr. L. J. 
Dow, USN; Capt. B. Groesbeck (MC) USN; Chief 
Quartermaster II. G. Gibson, USN; Lt. Comdr. W. H. 
Ash ford, USN; Lt. Comdr. B. B. Nichol. USN; Comdr. 
JV. H. Buracker, USN; Chief Yeoman P. T. Hunt. 
USN; Chief Yeoman II. C. Carroll. USN; and Chief 
Yeoman I. 11'. Bowman, USN. Bottom left, Rear 
Admiral John F. Shafroth, jr., USN, commander of 
U. S. Naval Forces in Southeast Pacific; and Rear 
Admiral Robert C. Giffin. USN, commander of a 
Task Force. 

them before a firing squad. Our aircraft, 
working with those of our allies, must be the 
equal of, if not superior to, anything our 
enemies can hurl against us, for without air 
power, the war will be lost. 

Unfortunately, an airplane cannot be all 
things to all conditions. The fighter that per- 
forms capably in the Southwest Pacific may 
be unsuitable for the defense of Britain ; the 
bomber that is best for heavy night attacks on 
German industry may not be the best aircraft 
for the Solomons. Some American planes 
have turned in marvelous performances 
wherever they have flown. The true test of a 
plane is in a scrap — and no matter how it acts 
in a wind-tunnel or over the field, combat 
must give it the final okay. 



Our Navy planes, compared plane for plane 
in battle performance with the equipment 
of other navies, are superior in every cate- 
gory. This was not true of the early days of 
the conflict. It is true now. 

Army planes, in the Pacific area, were 
handicapped in the early stages of the Avar by 
being forced by the surprise attack to retreat 
to makeshift fields and to use inadequate re- 
pair facilities. Therefore they did not do as 
well as they might have had they been able 
to retain their original bases. Yet in the Pa- 
cific area, and in China, the overall battle 
score of Army aircraft has been better than 
the enemy's. 

Both the Bell P-39 and the Curtiss P-40, 
medium-altitude fighters, have proven not 
suitable for operations over England, for they 
are outclassed in high-altitude performance 
by the British Spitfire and the German Mes- 
serschmitt 109 and the Pocke-Wiilf 190. The 
only American high-output liquid-cooled 
engine, the Allison, which powers both the P- 
39 and the Curtiss P40, started late in its 
development and under great difficulties. It 
has not yet caught up with its opposite num- 
bers, Britain's Rolls-Royce, also made in this 



i rwnvmv's Daimler-Benz. 

"SS. M?S b.«*.«-n ** 
thJv are valuable weapons in Russia and 
5 y + i I Ifrica The reason is in the tactical 
^Ett^a — A ba t . 
Serf nation calls for a predominance of low- 

SiSX work by ^^^^^^ 
pp , and army cooperation craft of all kinds, 
in lud* "ow-flying pursuits. To situations 
o is kind the heavily armed and armored 
?4» and P-40 are well suited. Their deficiency 
fn altitude performance does not count heav- 
l^ainst Ihem. Thus in the desert the P-40 
has been, and still is, a first line pursuit wea- 
O0 n With its latest improvement, it is prob- 
ably the most efficient fighter in the desert. 

In the similar situation on the Russian 
front the cannon-carrying Bell P-39 has been 
effectively employed by our allies. The Rus- 
sians report that it has turned in a crack bat- 
tlefield performance, even beating the best of 
the Luftwaffe's pursuits. Similarly, in the 
Aleutians the striking power and range of the 
P-39 have made it one of our most valuable 
weapons. 

Our big four-motored Consolidated B-24 
bombers have not yet been tested in all areas. 
Where they have been tried, their perform- 
ance has been superior. The B-1T— the Flying 
Fortress — has performed excellently. Our 
medium and light bombers are the best in the 
world. They have been tested in all theatres. 
And United States dive-bombers, developed 
over a long period by the Navy, have no equal 
among planes in combat in any country on 
the globe. 

We have learned many lessons about air- 
planes since the beginning of the war in 19?> ( .). 
not only from our friends, but from our foes. 
Those lessons are being put to practice. 

Difficult Task Ahead 
We have recognized that this Avar cannot be 
won except by smashing our enemies, pene- 
trating their defenses, driving them back in 
the air, on the land and the sea, until they 
have been rendered impotent — not only for a 
short period, but for years, perhaps for cen- 
turies. We have recognized the need to de- 
stroy completely the militarists in Germany, 
Japan and Italy, so they will no longer be a 
menace to the peace of the world. To those 
who believe that Germany is our principal foe, 
and that Japan can be "mopped up" when we 
have beaten Germany, former Ambassador to 



Aftermath of Pearl 
Harbor was the ap- 
pointment by the Pres- 
ident of this special 
board of inquiry. Left 
to right are: Brig. 
Gen. (now Lt. Gen.) 
Joseph T. McNarnev ; 
Admiral W. H. Stand- 
ley, Justice Owen J. 
R o berts, c h air m a n ; 
Admiral J. M. Reeves; 
Maj. Gen. Frank R. 
McCoy, and Mr. U al- 
ter Bruce Howe, Re- 
corder. The Board 
found, among other 
things, that "errors in 
judgment were the ef- 
fective causes for the 
success of the attack." 






"S 1 § 1 • z a " = 1 S = -= ; ^ s 



^ ^ ~- 5j . 



> *» ik. a . o w , 



w "~ vj _r ft. 
o3 «2 ® * 



w ' c = »3 y. ^ 0 0 ~* — ^ 

"5b *~ ^ "5 | ti^' "a* ^ ^ £ ? ^' 




8 g 6*3 



o 

— > t 



03 



C r— 

b£ 



d m o 



f^CH 03 



' S-c 03 



^ C5 
3 > 



C rM 



3 +■> ° 



d £ 



or. | -/ - il 
•E r x ^ /- 



H ,4 a ^ - 

h C > Q 



h ~ gT 03 

a) - ^ > 



O pQ 



^2 o g 



«2 o 
C ^ V2 



* 5 H ^ 5 = 

o 



3 X 



> o O P 



o 5 



H o o 



72 p - H 



c r = il g 



0 00 

5 [3 

g ro O § ^ g g C 
C ? ^ 

> 



, r O 

-J- — o 0 -rS tj C3 c r 



y. W o " 



X X 5 ^ r- . ^ w£ 



r' C D 

^ © P* c3 



O 03 



^ g g o njj 



b£ O 

"z cd 



o $ 8 '2 ^ ^ 

^ "ti p£ = - 



— 0 ' J - — 
< 1 







































! — 










cd 


g 




I 

— 






P 


« 


§ cd 












o: 


DQ 






















E 






-+-= 


















X 


— 




CQ 


o 














c: 








03 


— 




H 


c: 
-~ 

V! 


o 
cT 


0 




o th 


























o 


- — 1 


03 




































!^ 


y: 






y^ 




71 


03 


03 


















/. 


















y. 


c 






X" 

a 




— 


j> 




a; 




'A 


03 


— 


03 






























— 






7. 


c 








bJC 








s 


y: 




P3 


M 





53 Eh ~ 



QJ m 

X T 
d g 



i — i +3 

— i— H 

03 03 



p^- cd 

^ 03 
DQ >■ d 



*ls >. 03 03 
g C © a 

Sao g 
I '5 ^ § § 



S 03 
" /. 
03 03 



03 rM 
— ^ ~\ 

^h* H 

2 -H a O 



L Oi 03 

1.1 ^ 

o 



^03 g m ^ ^ ^j* g r^j 03 o^ii.^:cjw 



"x ^ 



0) O P ^ a M 

o3 R ^d 0) Q 



^ w ' — 1 >r. d *m . ci- _i_> ^ ..*^ 



^ rj ^ o 



^ tz" o x r-i w ^ *^ iri r. 

_. e_. e O — ^ ^ 



03 M C 



S 03 9 S rfl ^ ^ M 03- 

s s o -° 



X 



■4-> £ - w M d 
* •§ ^ >S fl 



'd "S 03 



c ft 

, 03 



r-> ft 



<^ S — ! 



cd e 

03 03 



O 03 

6 



- oj 



21 
o 

a) 

Q S 

03 & 



O 03 



O 03 J] 



c^ ^ ?q 

>4 



S ^ 03 



rH O 0) 



2 H c5 03 

s 



G m C3 «J 

03 

p ^ 03 



■H - S rH 

0> *»H fe 



M ° 03 G -d v r CM U ^ h ^ ^ 



w '3 5 2 

"S 9 ^ ^ 

d d +3 m1 



03 

«M 03 

03 ,jd 

^ Eh 

03 
- 



H 03 .2 



M r^-J 05 ^5 . 
d 03 



O r-H 



O 03 

O ^ 03 



"S I ° 

g 03 ^ 



■X N 



o cd 

«M 

o 



d 

03 



o 43 03 p 



Pi : ? « S 



03 M d d § ^ Hf- ^ 

* £ S 3 5 ^ p: x r - S o S 7 ® - 1 B SI j 

0) W rd J -p rj 5 4J — O § H n - C ^ r— » 9 



O) 

§1 



cd 

03 

rd 1^ 03 



. g d x 

o> cd d 

§ ° 2 ^ 



r ^ 03 r 



03 
tfi. 



d ^ » T 

O rrj M 03 



S * .d rt 



H 03 

d ^x 



c ^ 
S bo Eh 03 
d d 



P 03 



«M p 



« a 03 2 g 



rd P 



03 ,0 03 

-d 



2, O ^ 
^ 03 



y o 



O 03 

Xfl 



^,2^ Cd 03 S:S^rS"E^>'S'S" 



S CL d C ; 

O M 03 O S 

^ "d c/. +5 




03 



w X 
03 *d 



^ £ & 03 - 
» X H d 

ho bcO ^ d 



— I d -M 



|£5 



Others said : "We have the plants, but we 
can't change from peacetime to wartime pro- 
duction over-night. Maybe we can't change 
at all. How are you going to make a tank 
with machinery intended for turning out re- 
frigerators? How are you going to build an 
airplane on an assembly line designed for 
automobiles? We haven't got the tools, we 
haven't got the machines to make the dies, 
we haven't got . . ." 

"Well," said the first group, "if this is so, 
we'll build new plants. We'll put up thou- 
sands of war plants, all over the country." 

"Where are you going to get the mate- 
rials?" the other group hooted. "We'll need 
all the copper, brass, steel, chemicals, all the 
lead, nickel, zinc we can get for weapons of 
war. If you take them to build factories, you 
won't have them for the goods to be made in 
the factories. Sure, this country is rich in 
raw materials — the richest in the world — but 
they're in the ground! They have to be dug 
out and processed, and this takes man-power. 
We'll need all the men we can get to fight the 
war and to manufacture the goods with which 
the war is to be fought. We can't waste men 
on mining copper and zinc for other men to 
build factories with in which more men must 
work to produce weapons of war which mil- 
lions more men have to use against the enemy. 
This war is fought on the blitz pattern. We've 
got to do the best we can with what we've got 
— now." 

It was a problem. And it was increased 
many-fold by the loss of the rubber and tin 
producing centers, captured by Japan. 

Conversion was begun on a huge scale. Fac- 
tories making agricultural implements were 
turned to the production of shells ; automatic 
pencil plants began to make shell parts; 
plants manufacturing beverage containers 
were put to the manufacture of oxygen tanks 
for planes; cutlery factories started to make 
bayonets; egg poachers turned into percus- 
sion caps, and electric heaters into parachute 
flares. Even hair curlers became aircraft as- 
sembly clamps. 

Conversion of the automobile factories to 
war factories is a dramatic page in the his- 
tory of America's war of production. More 
than 3 million passenger cars were produced 
annually in the United States. In one day — 





Some of the ranking generals leading fighting forces around the world. Top row, left to right: 
General Douglas MacArthur, commanding general, United Nations Forces in the Southwest 
Pacific; Lieutenant General Dwight D. Eisenhower, supreme commander the Allied Forces 
in North Africa; Lieutenant General Mark JV. Clark, deputy Supreme Commander in North 
Africa; Lieutenant General Delos C. Emmons, Army Commander in Hawaii; Lieutenant 
General Frank M. Andrews, commanding U. S. Forces in the Middle East. Middle roiv, Lieu- 
tenant General George II. Brett, commanding the Caribbean Defense Command; Lieutenant 
General George C. Kenney, commanding air forces in the Southwest Pacific; Lieutenant General 
Robert L. Eichelberger; Maj. Gen. Simon Bolivar Buckner. jr., commanding Army forces in 
Alaska; and Maj. Gen. Charles H. Bonesteele, commander in Iceland. Bottom row, Maj. Gen. 
Alexander M. Patch, commanding in New Caledonia; Maj. Gen. Lewis H. Brereton, Air Force 
commander in China, Burma, and India; Maj. Gen. George S. Patton, jr.. commanding the 
task force which landed on the ivest coast of Africa; Maj. Gen. Charles W . Ryder, ivho under 
the British Lt. Gen. Anderson, landed in northeast Africa and completed the negotiations for 
the capitulation of Algiers; and Maj. Gen. Lloyd R. Fredendall, who commanded the force 

landing at Oran, French Morocco. 



XL S. Army Photo 

A fighting general is Lieutenant General Joseph W. 
StilwelL commander of American Army Forces in 
China. Burma, and India, and a Chief of Staff to 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-Shek. 



February 11, 1042— this was halted. 

Machinery for making automobiles was 
ripped out of its foundations, and presses and 
lathes and drills for the production of tanks 
and airplanes Avere installed. Workmen 
stood by with the new units, waiting for other 
workmen to dismantle the old. Literally, not 
a minute was wasted. Within GO days, the 
great, sprawling automobile factories which 
turned out pleasure cars like sausages or bot- 
tle-tops were ready to send tank and airplane 
parts down the assembly line. 

By the end of February, 1942, 13 billion dol- 
lars in defense contracts had been awarded 
the automobile industry. 

A meeting of automobile agency men in 
Waterbury, Conn., the day after manufacture 
stopped, was actually a wake for a deceased 
business. The livelihood of these men had 
been wiped out. They said : "We will go on as 
well as we can — we'll repair cars — we'll deal 
in second-hand cars, it' they won't give us new 
ones to sell — we may even go into the bicycle 
business — " 

Then bicycles went on the restricted list. 

Red Light For Civilian Goods 

This hailing of production of goods for 
civilians so that the plants might be turned 
to war use was a vital step in the war gear-up. 
Manufacturers of refrigerators — there were 
3,670,000 produced from August 1, 1041, to 



60 



August 2, 1042 — radios (the number of radios 
in use in the United States in 1941 was esti- 
mated at 57 million) — oil burners, electric 
fans, ranges, fishing tackle, golf clubs, lawn 
mowers, outboard motors, electric signs, toys 
— all were affected. 

By curtailing or halting manufacture of 
such goods, America had at hand a vast ma- 
chine for the production of the weapons of 
war. Besides these thousands of plants turned 
in whole or in part to war use, others were en- 
larged, new ones were built. An indication of 
the immensity of this production can be got- 
ten by considering the figures on war con- 
tracts awarded. 

Between June 1, 1940, through May 31, 
1042, contracts awarded by the Army, Navy, 
Maritime Commission and the Treasury pro- 
curement division totaled $66,630,000 000 

Of this amount $45,323,000,000 was for 
supplies— guns, ammunition, aircraft, Mili- 
mV7 SS 1 * pr °3 ects amounted to $21,307,000,- 
000 This represents the final cost of each 
construction project for which a contract has 
been ^warded or a letter of intent issued, and 
n eludes land purchases, construction mate- 
i:^;;^;- 1 - 11 -^ 1 -^ and maintenance 

The figure on contracts for aircraft produc- 
Fnl i ^me period is $17,063,998,000. 
l or ships, it is $7,760,300,000. 
The second War Production Report, issued 



Aug lls t 22, 1942, by War Production Board 
Chairman Donald M. Nelson, showed that out- 
put of planes, guns, tanks, ships and other 
war equipment has been rising steadily since 
Pearl Harbor. Although progress is in some 
respects uneven— the present program calling 
for creation of balance between production 
items— the index of munitions production 
shows that war goods by October were being 
produced at a rate three-and-a-half times the 
rate of output the month before Pearl 
Harbor. 

In June, 1039, only 224 military and com- 
mercial transport planes were built. In June, 
1940, military plane output was G02. The fol- 
lowing June, 1941, plane production amount- 
ed to 1,476. 

In the first specific announcement of 
United States war production figures since 
Pearl Harbor, President Roosevelt declared 
on June 26, 1942, that factories in May had 
turned out nearly 4,000 airplanes, more than 
1,500 tanks, nearly 2,000 artillery and anti- 
tank guns, and "well over" 100,000 machine 
guns. 

The output of planes had increased 300 per 
cent in the past year, 733 per cent in the past 
two years, and 1,739 per cent in the past three 
years. 

On September 26, WPB Chairman Xelson 
asserted that around 40 per cent of the entire 
production of the country was going for war. 
"By the middle of next year that proportion 
has got to be around 60 per cent," he declared. 

The manufacture of anti-aircraft guns pre- 
sented complex problems, for these have never 
been produced in quantity in this country be- 
fore the war, and each gun has a great num- 
ber of parts with close tolerances. Yet three- 
and-a-half times as many anti-aircraft guns 
were produced in the first six months of 1942 
as in all 1941. 

In July, production of these weapons leaped 
upward, one class showing a gain of 64 per 
cent, another of 50 per cent — both exceeding 
schedules by a wide margin. 

Production of medium tanks in July in- 
creased 26 per cent over June, and was con- 
siderably ahead of schedules. 

The manufacture of ammunition and ex- 
plosives in July was also in excess of goals 
set. As an indication of the tremendous 
strides in this industry, a single new plant in 
the spring of 1942 was producing more. TNT 
than the entire explosives industry made in 
peacetime. 

One of the best barometers of a war effort 
is the amount of machine tools manufactured. 
This increased 125 per cent from 1939 to 1940, 
and 72 per cent more from 1940 to 1941. The 
monthly average of machine tools manufac- 
tured in 1929, at the peak of prosperity, 
amounted to some $15,000,000. In 1932 it was 
a shadow of this— $1,800,000. In 1938, it was 
112,000,000. In 1940 it amounted to $37,500,- 
000, and in 1941 the monthly average reached 
164,600,000. The total output of machine 
tools during 1942 will be 350,000 units, with a 
value of $1,400,000,000, almost double the pro- 
duction in 1941. 

"Priorities" 

. The word "priorities" came to be a familiar 
one not only to manufacturers and business 
men, but to storekeepers, housewives, even to 
kids knocking a golf -ball around a vacant lot 
—for materials used to make golf balls were 
on the priorities list. Among the goods listed 



Message From CinC Pac. 

by 

Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, USN 
Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet 

JT\ URING the first year of (ho war in the 
Pacific the Fleet has completed three 
major tasks. First, the sea lanes across the 
greatest of oceans have been made safe for 
the movement of the increasing Hood of men 

and materials to 
the f i g h t i n g 
fronts. Second, 
our task forces, 
assist (Ml by the 
Army, have not 
only repulsed all 
major e n emy 
thrusts — notably 
in the Coral Sea, 
j£ at Midway and 
' in the Solomons 
yi — but have pro- 
| gressively car- 
ried on the war 
of attritio n, 
J steadily whit- 
tling down the 
enemy's superior sea and air power. Finally, 
most of the ships caught by the enemy's sur- 
prise attack on Pearl Harbor are on their way 
back to the Fleet, better fighting ships than 
ever, and our citadel in Hawaii has been 
greatly strengthened. 

The unselfish courage and devotion being 
displayed by all officers and men who have 
been fortunate to come to grips with the 
enemy is a brilliant new chapter in the glor- 
ious traditions of the Army, Navy and Ma- 
rine Corps. Support given our operations by 
the Army and the Coast Guard is positive evi- 
dence of the unity of all American fighting 
forces. 




as being needed almost entirely tor war pur 
poses were asbestos, rubber, tin, burlap, cer 
tain grades of hard 
and soft w o o d, 
(which meant drastic 
curtailment of build- 
ing) silk, pig and hog 
bristles, (s h a v in g 
and tooth brushes) 
quinine, shellac, and 
various metals and 
chemicals. 

The system of pri- 
orities was designed 
to get these essential 
m a t er i a 1 s to the 
places w here they 
would do the most 
good in the war ef- 
fort. To obtain these 
materials, you had to 
have a priority rat- 
ing, and these ratings 
were based on the im- 
p o r t a n c e of your 
product to the Avar. 
Regulations were 
strict; violators were 
penalized by punitive 
action against them, 
and by suspension 
orders w h i c h cut 
them off from all pri- 
ority assistance and 
which forbade them 
to handle certain 
products. 



Num. (J0 per cent of (he net weight of an 
airplane. In 1933, aluminum production 
amounted to 85,1 25,000 pounds. In 1038 it 
was 280,882,000. In 1941, the production rose 
to 015,000,000 pounds. 

Other metals, used in war production, fol- 
lowed this increase. The consumption of mag- 
nesium, also vital in war production, in- 
creased from 4,819,617 pounds in 193S to 12 - 
823,033 pounds in 1940. 

Metals which had become scarce through 
enemy capture of producing centers were be- 
ing replaced by substitutes. The use of tin, 
for instance, was sharply cut, and "tin" con- 
tainers which had no tin in them were devel- 
oped. Lead base alloys reduced the amount of 
tin in solder from 40 per cent to 15 per cent; 
in babbitt metals (a tin alloy used around 
bearings to reduce friction) from SS per cent 
to as low as one per cent. 

In the summer of 1942 "scrap metal drives" 
were initiated in cities and towns throughout 
the United States. Scrap bins were erected 
on street corners, in front of city halls, on the 
Greens of New England, where householders 
deposited flattened tin cans, metal dish hold- 
ers, aluminum cooking utensils, doorknobs, 
everything they could spare containing metal. 
There were "rubber drives," "paper drives," 
"rag drives." Flat irons, extra gas stove 
grates, worn dresses, hose nozzles, were con- 
tributed to feed the war machine. 

The increasing occupation of America with 
the Avar — which was not only a total war, but 
a "global" war — was evident in the disturb- 
ance of civilian life necessitated by the ap- 
plication of the priority system, in the ra- 
tioning of certain articles, such as sugar and 
gasoline, the control of prices and particu- 
larly in the change in civilian life made by 
thousands of men going into the armed ser- 




Aluminum alloy 
constitutes better 



Commissioned Officers of the Marine Corps on Guadalcanal during the early days of the 
American offensive are shown above. This photograph was taken by a Marine Corps 
photographer on 11 Aug. 1942. Tivo of the officers are unidentified. In the picture are: 
First Row, Col. George R. Rowan, Col. Pedro A. Del Valle, Col. William C. James, 
Maj. Gen. Alexander A. Vander grift, Col. Gerald C. Thomas, Col. Clifton B. Cates, Col. 
Randolph McC. Pate, Comdr. Warwick T. Brown, USN; Second Row, Col. William G. 
Whaling, Col. Frank B. Goettge, Col. LeRoy P. Hunt, Lt. Col. Frederick C. Biebush, 
Lt. Col. Edwin A. Pollock, Lt. Col. Edmund J. Buckley, Lt. Col. Walter W. Barr, Lt. Col. 
Raymond P. Coffman; Third Row, Lt. Col. Francis R. Geraci, Lt. Col. William L. Max- 
well Col. Edward G. Hagen, Lt. Col. William N. McKclvy, Lt. Col. Julian N. Frisbee, 
Maj. Milton V. O'Connell, Unidentified, Unidentified, Maj. Forest C. Thompson; Fourth 
Row, Maj. Robert G. Ballance, Maj. Henry W. Buse, jr., Maj. James G. Frazer, Maj. 
Richard H. Crockett, Lt. Col. Lenard B. Cresswell, Maj. Robert O. Bowen Lt. Col. 
John A. Bemis, Maj. Robert B. Luckey, Lt. Col. Samuel G. Taxis, Lt. Col. hu<>cne H. 
Price; Last Row, Lt. Col. Merrill B. Twining, Lt. Col. Walker A. Reaves, Lt. Col. John 
DeW. Macklin, Lt. Col. Hanley C. Waterman, Maj. Homer C. Murray. 



61 




vices and into war plants. 

On October 3, 1942, President Roosevelt 
named Associate Supreme Court Justice 
James P. Byrnes Director of Economic Sta- 
bilization, with wide authority to control 
civilian purchasing power, in the war on in- 
flation. He ordered the immediate stabiliza- 
tion of farm prices, urban and rural rents, 
wages, and salaries in industry. A board was 
created to assist Byrnes in developing a policy 
covering not only prices, wages and rentals, 
but profits, rationing, government subsidies 
and related matters. 

As another move in the battle against in- 
flation Price Administrator Leon Henderson 



Because of their deva- 
stating power, carriers 
have been the enemy s 
principal target in this 
war. Left are some of 
this type which have 
met honored deaths 
after taking telling tolls 
of the foe. Top: The 
USS Lexington, a cas- 
ualty of the Battle of 
Coral Sea, shown as 
"abandon ship'* ivas 
ordered. The destroyer 
at the right, shrouded 
in smoke, is taking off 
the sick and wounded. 
Note the men sliding 
down ropes into the 
water. Not a man was 
lost in abandoning ship. 
Center: USS Yorktown. 
her guns still pointed 
defiantly toward the 
sky, lists heavily to port 
alter a savage battering 
by Japanese bombers 
and torpedo planes in 
the battle of Midway. 
Crippled, she was struck 
by two torpedoes from 
an enemy submarine on 
June 6. and capsized 
and sunk the following 
day. She had contrib- 
uted gloriously to our 
victory in the Midway- 
battle on June 4. Bot- 
tom: The USS Wasn, 
mortally wounded by 
three enemy submarine 
torpedoes. The 14.700- 
ton carrier, on escort 
duty near the Salomon 
Islands when she was 
attacked on Sent ember 
15, was abandoned and 
later sunk by a U. S. 
destroyer. 

U. S. Navy Photos 



placed 60-day emergency ceilings over most 
of the foods hitherto excluded from control, 
thus putting under OPA regulation 90 per 
cent of the food purchased by housewives. 
President Roosevelt stated : 

"I am certain that from now on this sub- 
stantial stabilization of the cost of living will 
assist greatly in bringing the war to a suc- 
cessful conclusion, will make the transition 
to peace conditions easier after the war and 
will receive the wholehearted approval of 
farmers, workers and housewives in every 
part of the country." 

As war factories were built and enlarged, 
as plants manufacturing goods for civilian 



THE BATTLE OF MIDWAY 



JAPANESE OCCUPATION FORCE 
•1 - Many Jap ohira olChted bv Navy 
patrol planes in nornlng cf June 3 



Fortresses afternoon of June 3. 
Hlto on cruisers and transports 

3 - Navy patrol planca scored hits in 
nlfifit torpedo attack. 

10 - FleclnC Jap ships attacked by 

Marine dlvo borfcers and Plylnj 
Fortresses cn rornlr.,: and after- 
noco cf June 5. Several hlto cn 
cruisers. 

11 - Carrlcrdlvebccteromderereated 

12 - attacks cn fleeing .'ap ships. 2 

13 - cruisers and 2 destroyera sunk. 



OVERCAST 



/"""N ******* 




JAPANESK CARRIER FORCE 
4 - Jap Gtrikim; force corulatlnfl of 
3airrieru . batthxihipj, cruu^ra 
and destroyers. Air attack on 
Kidvay launched by thin force 
early aornlng of June 4. Att-acted 
by Arry and Marine borbors and 
torpedo planeo rornlnf, June 4. 
b - Carrier dive borterc and torptlo 
planca attacked 3 r.arricra and 2 
battle-chipa. leaving 3 carriers 
aflaro, helpless, and atorml; 1 
battle-uhip a MSB cf flv»-j; 1 
destroyer Dunk. 

6 - Carrier Soryu attacked by U.S. 
nub. Left sinking. 

7 - Fourth and laat Japanese carrier 
attacked on afternoon of June 4 
by carrier dive becbera. Hiryu 
crippled, ainkinf! later. 2 
battle-ahira damped, 1 cruiser 
hit. U.S. obtains msteryof air. 

8 - Amy Flying Fortresses attack 
daaaged eneny ohiro late after- 
noon of June 4. Hits on carrier, 
battlc-ahip and heavy crulaer 
Destroyer aunk. 

9 - Kerr.ar.t3 cf Jap force escaping in 
bad weather area. 



V 



MIDWAY 



use were converted into war factories with 
tremendously increased loads, men began 
leaving private industry for war jobs. 

More and more men were being called to 
the armed forces. The training of men for war 
work was begun on a gigantic scale. Training 
centers were set up in many cities, where men 
—and women— could receive, without charge, 
instruction in some branch of machine work. 
Clerks began to learn how to operate a turn- 
ing lathe. Clothing salesmen took instruction 
in automatic screw machines. Nurse maids, 
chauffeurs, interior decorators, artists, writ- 
ers, florists, professional football players, 
took training for war jobs. 

Skilled workmen, employed for years in the 
production of delicate instruments for peace- 
lime uses, over-night were put on war proj- 
ects. Peacetime plants were turned to the 
manufacture of parts for airplanes, propel- 
lers, radio-transmitter equipment, air train- 
ing equipment, gyro horizon-indicators, alti- 
meters, compasses. 

The multiple-shift operation in war indus- 
tries was put into general effect shortly after 
Pearl Harbor. War workers crowded buses, 
trains and cars at all hours of the day and 
night. A husband, leaving home at 6:30 a.m. 
for the factory, would get his own breakfast, 
for his wife was working the 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. 
shift, and wouldn't arrive home until 7:30. 
Plants operated seven days a week, holidays 
included. 

Women were taking an increasing part in 
war industry. By the end of 1942, Labor Sec- 
retary Perkins estimated that 250,000 would 
be engaged in airplane factories, as against 
2,000 the year previous. In his radio talk 
October 12, President Roosevelt said: "With- 
in a year from now, there will probably be as 
many women as men working in our war pro- 
duction plants." 

A move to aid in recruiting 5,000,000 more 
women for Avar production by the end of 1943 
was taken September 5 by the War Manpower 
Commission, which appointed a women's 
policy committee consisting of 12 women lead- 
ers of labor, industry and public activity. 

On September 14, 1942, the Brooklyn Navy 
Yard broke a 141-year tradition and hired 
women to work as mechanics. 

In May, 1942, all records for employment 
in the United States were shattered. The 
Census Bureau announced that 51,600,000 
men and women were employed. 

President Roosevelt late in July directed 




Happy scene on an unnamed U. S. Navy carrier Cant C r> ^ Vm S * Navy rhoto 

W. D. Boone with a framed picture of the Japanese heavvZruiSr <-aT" y °? d Comdr - 
tack groups from naval carriers sunk durintz the R f .tti f » , ■ , lo " am > which at- 

s ne Battle of Midway Island. 

62 



the drafting of a National War Service bill, 
under which the total manpower of the coun- 
try, estimated at 60,000,000 labor unity, 
would be mobilized in a total war effort. 

Ships and More Ships 
In the building oL ? ships, the United States 
has shown its full power. From September 
1941 to September 1942 deliveries of com- 
pleted merchant ships totalled 488, aggregat- 
ing 5,450,000 deadweight tons. Of this, 327 
are Liberty Ships, 4!) are C-type cargo ves- 
sels, 51 arc tankers, 5 are ore carriers and 4(5 
are cargo ships for private use and for 
Britain. 

Since January, 1041, American shipyard 
capacity for production of large ocean-going 
merchant ships has been more than tripled. 
Ship production of the nation is now at an 
all-time high, and is considerably greater than 
that of all other nations combined. 

The earlier picture was not so encouraging. 
Rear Admiral Howard L. Vickery, vice-chair- 
man of the Maritime Commission, on March 4 
declared that during the first ten months of 
1941, strikes in shipbuilding and ship repair 
industries resulted in the loss of over 5,000,- 
000 man hours, or the equivalent of 10 
Liberty-type ships. He added that the number 
of ships delivered in February was "unsat- 
isfactory." 

"If we do not bring some new life into the 
shipyards, I don't see where we are going to 
get the ships," he said bluntly. 

Then, on March 10, Commander Robert C. 
Lee, executive vice-president of Moore-Mr- 
Cormack lines, in a speech to members of the 
Export Managers club in New York, declared 
that the United States did not have control 
of the seas, and would need 1S,000,000 tons 
of ships, or the combined 1942-1943 produc- 
tion schedule, to carry on and supply success- 
ful offensives against Japan and Germany. 

But by the summer of 1942, Liberty ships, 
the backbone of the nation's war shipping 
program, were being delivered in greater and 
greater numbers. Only 200 had been ordered 
in early 1941. This was increased seven times 
between late 1941 and early in 1942, with the 
emergency fleet being built in IT new ship- 
yards having 16,5 shipways. Production 
schedules had been shortened to three-and-a- 
half months, half the time originally allotted. 
During the first World War, the average pro- 
duction time for a cargo ship was 10 to 12 
months. 

National Maritime Day was held May 22. 
From one minute after midnight, when the 
first vessel marking the day was launched in 
the Tacoma plant of the Seattle-Tacoma Ship- 
building Corporation, until the next mid- 
night, when the last launching took place in 
the same yard, 27 merchant ships went down 
the ways or were released from building 
basins. 

"The fastest shipbuilding job in history" 
took place August 28, when the Kaiser ship- 
yards at Richmond, California, sent a Liberty 
ship into the water 24 days after its keel had 
been laid. 

That record didn't last long. Less than a 
month later— September 23— Kaiser's Ore- 
gon Shipbuilding Company launched the 
Liberty ship Joseph N. Teal, 10,500 tons, just 
10 days after the laying of the keel. The ship 
was 87 per cent completed, and steam was in 

her boilers. . 

The "fantastic"— according to the Axis- 
shipbuilding program had come true. 



Scenes in the far readies 
of the Pacific. 



Right: Brig. Gen. E. B. 
Sebreem assistant to 
Maj. Gen. Alexander M. 
Patch, and Col. Bryant 
E. Moore, review troops 
in New Caledonia prior 
to their embarkation for 
duty in the Solomons. 

U. S. Army IMioto 




Raising the National 
Emblem on Midway Is- 
land during the height 
of the battle of June 4. 
5, and 6, 1942. This dra- 
matic incident tvas not 
staged. Because word 
of the approach of Jap- 
anese forces came so 
early in the morning, 
th e flag was raised while 
the battle was in ' 
progress. 

V. S. Navy Thoto 



Japanese attack on 
Dutch Harbor, June 3 
and 4, 1942. Marines on 
"alert." Note smoke 
from burning tanks in 
background, set afire 
by dive-bombing planes. 

V. S. Navy Photo 




Transportation 

In a nation the size of the United States, 
the problem of transporting men and mate- 
rials within the country is as important as 
transporting them to battle areas on (side the 
borders. 

When we began to raise our Army and pro- 
duce the goods of war we had the lines! net- 
work of railroads in the world, it is on this 
network that we have to depend for much of 
the movement of men and materials. In 1041, 
our railroads set an all-time record— hauling 
1,227,050,428 tons over 231,861 miles of Amer- 



ican tracks, using one-third less cars than the 
rail industry had available in its previous 
peak year of 11)21). 

The year L942 will far surpass this. Take 
oil as an example. November, L941, a few 
weeks before Pearl Harbor, railroads were 
transporting OS, 000 barrels a day. Now the 
figure lias risen to more than 800,000 barrels 
daily. The reason, of course, is that subma- 
rines and diversion to other uses have reduced 
our tanker -service just at a time when we 
need more oil than ever before in our his- 
tory. Besides this increased oil burden, there 
are troops to be carried, shipments to be made 



63 




A photograph obtained by the U. S. Army from undis closed sources, shows a Jap battery of 105-mm guns in 

action in China, 



of tremendous quantities of steel castings, 
tank motors, sheet aluminum for planes, 
shells, cartridges, the materiel of war. 

To perform this task, unessential travel 
and shipments had to be cut drastically. Tims 
far, however, there have been no severe re- 
strictions on civilian use of railroads. Ac- 
tion has been confined to public appeals to 
travel only when absolutely necessary. 

Trucks assist trains in carrying America's 
materials. Last year there were some 5,000,- 
000 trucks in the United States, and one- 
fourth of all United States trucks are on 
farms. Estimates are that in 1942 they will 
travel more than 700,000,000 miles on rural 
roads and highways, carrying agricultural 
produce. Over 77 billion pounds of milk and 
cream will be hauled by farm trucks for 1,- 
775,000 miles. Trucks will move 83,000,000 
hogs; 23,000,000 sheep; 28,000,000 cattle for 
slaughter; 2,000,000,000 pounds of chicken 
and about 100,000,000 cases of eggs. 

Private automobiles contribute to the war 
effort. Last year 77 per cent of all auto trips 
were for necessary purposes — to and from 
work, business, school, church. Only a small 
portion of the country's automobiles were 
used for unessential purposes, and with add- 
ed restrictions in force, this will be reduced 
almost to nothing in 1943. 

Troop movements during the first nine 
months of the war were three times that of 
the same period of the first World War. In 
the nine-month period beginning December 7, 
1941, troop movements by rail totalled ap- 
proximately 6,500,900, as opposed to 1,910,- 
417 for the first nine months of the last war. 
In June, 1942, the Transportation Corps 
moved a million soldiers by rail. In June, 
1917, the figure was 308,000. 

Navy Building 

The night of March 11, General MacArthur 
and his party of 20 left Bataan Penninsula in 
four torpedo boats, bound for an island in the 
Pacific where they were to board planes to 
complete the trip to Australia. They trav- 
elled by night and hid along the coast during 
daylight. They made the island safely, and 
three days later were Hying toward the main- 
land. 

Mac Arthur's safety depended upon the. 
skill of the men operating those torpedo 
boats, and on t he boats themselves. They were 
known as P-T boats, and were "the pride of 
the Navy and the scourge of the Japs." They 
were responsible for the sinking of enemy ves- 
sels, but their greatest achievement, said 
Lieut. John D. Buckeley, was "whisking Gen- 
eral MacArthur and his party out of Bataan 



under the noses of the Japs, battling through 
heavy seas at high speed every mile of the 
way, and not faltering once." 

A big brother of those P-T's was launched 
at Bayonne, New Jersey, May 16, as part of 
the program of Navy expansion. It was the 
"fiercest, speediest small boat the Navy has 
ever produced," according to Rear Admiral 
Adolphus Andrews. And when it was 
launched, submarines, destroyers, warships 
of all types, were being produced not only 
on schedule, but, said Representative Vinson, 
chairman of the Naval Affairs committee, 
"ahead of schedule." 

The House Naval Committee July 23 re- 
ported a 360 per cent increase in naval ship 
building in the past year. On June 30, a total 
of 3,230 ships in the classification of com- 
batant, auxiliary, patrol and mine craft had 
been deliverd, as against 697 the year pre- 
vious. Sixty combatant vessels were actually 
completed, when it had been expected that 
only 48 would be finished. 

Ten auxiliaries were completed, the report 
showed, with only nine predicted ; 143 patrol 
craft, with 133 expected. Only construction 
of mine and district craft fell short of the 
goal, with 280 completed, of a schedule of 
394. 

So sharp was the speed-up in ship con- 
struction, that the time for completing a bat- 
tleship had been cut from an average of 42 
months to 36 months; aircraft carriers from 
45 months to 17.3 ; heavy cruisers from 36.4 
to 22.7 ; light cruisers, 33.8 to 22.3 ; destroy- 
ers, 27.2 to 11.6, and submarines from 21.2 
to 11.5. 

Records for ship launchings were broken 
every week. No sooner would a navy yard 
proudly announce that a destroyer was 
launched in 13 weeks, than another navy yard 



Mr. Harry L. 
Hopkins, Spe- 
cial Assistant 
to the Presi- 
dent ivho has 
performed 
many impor- 
tant missions 
abroad, par- 
ticularly in 
connection 
with I j end- 
Lease, a mem- 
ber of the 
War Produc- 
tion Board, 
and chair- 
man of the 
M u nit io n s 
Assignments 
Board, Uni- 
ted States and 
GreatBritain. 

Harris & 

EwinR Photo 




would slide one down the ways in 12 weeks. 
The impossible had become the commonplace 

Navy yards arose from barren flats and 
beaches Two shipbuilding corporations m 
Portland, Maine, employed only six persons 
in 1940. By August, 1942, they were employ- 
ing more than 26,000. t tt 

The mightiest battleship ever built, the U. 
S. S. Iowa, slid down the Navy Yard in 
Brooklyn August 27, seven months ahead of 
schedule. She was the first of six 45,000 ton 
battleships under construction to reach the 
launching stage. Her keel was laid June 27, 

1940. . 

The new aircraft carrier Lexington was 
launched at the Bethlehem Steel Corpora- 
tion's plant at Quincy, Massachusetts, more 
than a year ahead of schedule— and less than 
live months from the sinking of her namesake 
in the battle of the Coral Sea. 

The greatest of the nation's new naval 
building programs was signed by the president 
July 9. It authorizes 1,900,000 more tons of 
fighting ships, distributed as follows : 500,000 
tons of aircraft carriers, 500,000 tons of 
heavy and light cruisers, and 900,000 tons of 
destroyers and escort vessels. Also provided 
for are 800 smaller patrol, mine-laying and 
tending vessels. 

The New Army 

The creation of the new Army of the United 
States was begun October 16, 1940, when some 
sixteen million men between 21 and 36 regis- 
tered for the first peacetime draft in the his- 
tory of the country. 

Since then, about 4% million have been 
inducted. These millions have been trained, 
out-fitted, and many of them sent to lands 
which the majority had heard of previously 
only through newsreels, adventure stories, or 
in the geography books of their school years. 
When you hear a mother say: "I'm fixing a 
Christmas box for my boy in New Guinea," 
you realize what a global war means. 

To train the millions, camps were erected 
almost overnight. Problems rising from the 
concentration of great numbers of men in sec- 
tions previously of a few hundred population 




U. S. Marino Corps Photo 
Maj. James Roosevelt, right, and 1st Lt. M C Plum- 
ley center, pore over maps, with Li. Col. Evans F 
Carlson, commanding officer of the Marine battalion 

Island in the Gilbert group. Major Roosevelt was 
second in command to Colonel Carlson 



64 



were met and solved. The United Service 
Organizations came into being, to provide the 
men with recreation in their off-duty hours. 
Certain camps and forts became training 
centers for specialized branches of warfare, 
such as the tank-destroyer training center at 
Camp Hood, Texas, where more than 1,800 
buildings were constructed, scores of miles of 
roads were built out of Texas limestone, and 
ranges were made from dusty stretches of 
ranch land where anything from a .45 caliber 
Colt to a 75-mm. antitank gun can be fired. 
Even before the camp was completed, men 
were being taught tank-busting. 

The new Army was mechanized. A cor- 
respondent at the opening of the 1942 war 
maneuvers in North Carolina said that "the 
troops are using tactics which make last 
year's maneuvers appear as outdated, in 
many respects, as the battles of the Civil 
war." On the ground, over water, in the air, 
the men were trained for fighting in desert, 
jungle, swamp and mountains. High above 
wastelands parachute troops dove from grea t, 
multi-motored planes. 

The United States Eangers, who joined 
Canadian, British, and Fighting French in 
Commando raids on Hitler's Europe, were 
trained in England. They practiced beach- 
landings wiiile rifle and machine-gun bullets 
cracked the paddles of the men in the boats. 
They rowed canvas boats across water while 
tracer bullets from a British Bren gun came 
within an arm's-length of them. Their ma- 
neuvers were executed over terrain where 
land mines and grenades splattered them with 
mud and water. 

The Army, in its need for accommodations 
and training grounds for its millions, took 
over hotels, beach clubs, fashionable watering 
places, even a motion picture studio in As- 
toria, Long Island, where once Rudolph 
Valentino made film love to Nita Naldi. This 
studio became the Photographic Center of the 
Signal Corps, U. S. A. 

Hundreds of thousands of young men were 
taken from civilian life and funneled into the 
war machine, to emerge hardened, confident 
soldiers. No sooner was one unit trained and 
brought up to tactical strength than a section 
of it was split off to form the nucleus of a new- 
unit, while the rest of the men were assigned 
to duty on the fighting front. By keeping a 
portion of the experienced unit as a basis for 
a new, untrained unit, there is a constant out- 
pouring of trained troops, in almost arith- 
metical progression. 

On September 11, Lieutenant General 
Lesley J. McNair, commander of the Army 
ground forces, said that the number of divi- 
sions in existence or in process of mobiliza- 
tion was more than double the total at the be- 
ginning of the year. 

Formations of women's auxiliary corps of 
both the Armv and the Navy were well under 
wav before the fall of this year. Known as 
the WAACs — Women's Army Auxiliary 
Corps— and the WAVES— Women Appoint- 
ed for Volunteer Emergency Service— the or- 
ganizations are an important part of the 
United Stales forces. By taking over the jobs 
of soldiers at training centers and militan 
posts, the WAACs and the WAVES release 
men for combat duty, swelling the ranks ol 
our fighters. 

Training centers for the organizations 
were established in colleges and at camps. Re- 



cruiting for 10,000 women began in mid-Sep- 
tember. A number of the women will be sent 
on foreign service, where they will replace 
men on non-combat jobs. 

The first officer candidate class of WAACs, 
430, took the oath of office August 29 at Fort 
Des Moines. 

Women have been taking part in our civil 
defense system, also. They are members of 
the Civil Air Patrol; they are air raid 
wardens; they promote salvage campaigns, 
war bond sales, are on defense housing com- 
mittees, rationing boards, they have (heir own 
Motor Corps. 

Women are fighting this war as well as 
men. 



Commanding Generals of the Four Armies. Upper 
left, Lieutenant General Hugh A. Drum. USA. First 
Army and Eastern Defense Command. Upper right. 
Lieutenant General Ben Lear. USA, Second Army. 
Lower left. Lieutenant General Walter Krueger, USA. 
Third Army. Lower right. Lieutenant General John 
L. DeU itt. USA. Fourth Army, and Western Defense 
Command. 





Upper: A small part of the 
huge Anglo-American con- 
voy plows through a rough 
sea carrying troops, equip- 
ment, and supplies for the 
occupation of North Africa. 



Right: A half-track scout 
car emerges from the water 
and grinds up this beach 
west of Oran during the 
American occupation of Al- 
geria. Landing barges have 
also brought equipment for 
American paratroopers and 
Tiangers. 

Press Association Fhoto 



65 



The Services of Supply, U. S. Army 



by 

Lieutenant General Brehon Somervell 

Commanding General, Services of Supply 



OX June L3th the War Department an- 
nounced arrival in Ireland of "the great- 
est American convoy which ever crossed the 
Atlantic." How ninny men, how much ma- 
teriel it carried naturally are military secrets. 
No secret, however, is the fact that For every 
man who landed in [reland, ten tons of equip- 
ment went ashore. That is the ratio of man- 
power to supplies on our overseas fronts. 

Nor is it a secret that this convoy, fourth 
huge trans-Atlantic movement of (lie war, 
made its journey "without incident/' The fact 
that our transports have carried troops and 
supplies to the four quarters of the globe with 
practically no losses should encourage us and 
dismay our enemies. 

There may be those who say we have been 
lucky. That" is not the truth. The fact is, be- 
fore a man set foot aboard ship we were thor- 
oughly prepared. We will continue to be pre- 
pared. There will be some losses, of course. 
But thanks to thorough preparations, to fore- 
sight and long-distance planning, they will 
be very small. 

Tbe Services of Supply, charged with pro- 
curement, distribution, storage, maintenance 
and transportation of supplies and the move- 
ment, housing, health and equipping of 
troops, faces the largest, the most important 
and the most difficult job of organization in 
history. 

The fact that we are at war on five conti- 
nents brings endless complications. In addi- 
tion to the immense distances involved there 
is the matter of climate, and its effect on the 
health of troops, on their clothing and their 
food and their housing, on mobile equipment 
and on stores. 

Obviously foods suited to stations in the 
Arctic are not suited to the Caribbean or to 
Africa. We must experiment, must test cer- 
tain foodstuffs for their ability to withstand 
•extremes of cold without losing vital proper- 
ties. And we must also experiment with other 
type's of food while we seek suitable diet for 
Equatorial stations. 

We at last after long research developed 
a butter that will not melt and not become 
rancid in temperatures up to 120°. We 
have found types of powdered milk that re- 
tain all their necessary elements even after 
(hey have been frozen or have been in storage 
many months. 

The variety of uniforms we must provide 
is infinite. In Other wars, fought in restricted 
areas, we usually have been able to supply 
two kinds of uniform, for summer and for 
Winter. But now simultaneously we must pro- 
duce and distribute many thousands of uni- 
forms especially designed for desert fighting, 
often on the same day we are supplying many 
thousands for men in Iceland, along the Arc- 
tic coast, and in Alaska. We must have ready 



a1 the proper moment, in the proper amount, 
uniforms for tank troops, parachute troops, 
infantry, flame throwers, ski patrols. 
Time was when a truck was a truck, a tank 




a tank, and lubricating oil was lubricating 
oil. Now we must design and procure trucks 
for the African desert, for south sea islands, 
lor Alaska's foggy coasts, for mountainous 
terrain, for the plains of Europe, for wintry 
Iceland. 

We must supply the proper oil and gaso- 
line for Libyan oasis stations, other oil and 
gasoline for the far north. We must build 
tanks and guns and trucks that will with- 
stand sandstorms, aridity, snow r , fog, and the 
northern winter. 

We must prepare housing facilities on all 
(he continents for our men in training, fa- 
cilities suited to the pe- 
culiarities of climate 
and to the type of troops 
who will occupy them. 
We must use those ma- 
terials most easily ob- 
tainable, that will re- 
quire least transporta- 
tion, least time lor con- 
struction. This we have 
succeeded in doing in 
these first stages of the 
war. Our troops, no mat- 
ter where they are, are 
the best housed in the 
world. 

A primary duty of 
the Services of Supply 
is to bring together the 
right number of the 



right troops properly equipped with every- 
thing they wiU need... and nothing they do 
not need . . . at the exact place they can board 
ship for transport to tbe battle fronts. 11ns 
requires split-second timing. It requires the 
integration of hundreds of widely scattered 
authorities. It requires organization, atten- 
tion to the minutest details, cooperation to 
the Nth degree. 

This we are accomplishing, thanks to the 
splendid spirit and the skill of the division 
and the services staffs of the S. O. S. 

Because shipping is one of our principal 
bottlenecks at this" moment Ave have had to 
utilize each ship to the utter limit of its ca- 
pacity. This means not only quick turn- 
arounds at American ports but the use of 
every inch of cargo and passenger space pos- 
sible. Six months ago ships usually were 
counted adequately loaded if fifty per cent 
of the holds were filled with goods. Today 
we fill nearly ninety per cent of that space. 
We fill it fast, unload it fast. 

The Services of Supply must foresee not 
only the needs of the army and of the armies 
of our allies, but it must keep constantly in- 
formed on the state of production of war 
supplies and the state of the sources of raw 
materials. For there must be no interruption, 
no slowdown, in the journey of iron ore from 
the mineshaft, to the steelmills, to the muni- 
tions plants, to the base port, to the theatre 
of operations overseas. In that journey it will 
have been converted from raw material into 
a tank, a truck, a shell. This is true of every- 
thing the army uses, everything it wears and 
eats, everything on which it travels, in which 
it lives, with which it lights. 

That is the business of the S. O. S., the big- 
gest big business of all time. 



Transports laden with men, supplies and equipment 
carry American might to the warring corners of the 
globe. 

V. S. Army Thoto 




\ • •- ' 








\ 











66 




Training the Army Ground Forces for Combat 

by 

Lieutenant General Lesley J. McNair 

Commanding General, Army Ground Forces 



UNDER the recent reorganization, the War 
Department commands directly the over- 
seas theaters and the four defense commands 
into which continental United States is or- 
ganized to combat external attacks. All mili- 
tary forces and establishments in this coun- 
try, other than the defense commands, are 
organized into three coordinate commands 
— Army Ground Forces, Army Air Forces, 
•and Services of Supply. While these three 
commands also are directly under the War 
Department, it is contemplated that they ex- 
ercise all possible latitude within their re- 
spective spheres in order to relieve the War 
Department to the maximum. 

Briefly, the mission of the Army Ground 
Forces is to create units and train them so 
that they are fit to fight. The units then are 
turned over for employment in theaters of 
operations. The Ground Forces consist gen- 
erally of a headquarters and a number of 
subordinate units or commands. 

There are two armies in the Ground Forces 
—the Second Army, Lieutenant General Lear, 
with headquarters at Memphis, and the Third 
Army, Lieutenant General Krueger, with 
headquarters at San Antonio. Each army has 
several corps, each corps a number of divi- 
sions. In addition to corps and divisions, 
both armies have a great many smaller sep- 
arate units, from brigades to companies. 

The First and Fourth Armies garrison the 
Eastern and Western Defense Commands, re- 
spectively, and thus are directly under the 
War Department. 

In addition to the armies, there are a num- 
ber of separate corps directly under Head- 
quarters, Army Ground Forces, in Wash- 
ington. 



The number of infantry divisions in train- 
ing is increasing rather rapidly, although 
troops are being sent overseas from time to 
time. Shipping, not training, is the bottleneck 
of our effort overseas, and it is the intention 




to maintain training well ahead of shipping. 

A spectacular and powerful component of 
the Ground Forces is the Armored Force, 
commanded by Lieutenant General Devers, 
with headquarters at Fort Knox. The Ar- 
mored Force now is well and soundly estab- 
lished, and is expanding smoothly and effec- 
tively. The proportion of armored divisions 
as compared with infantry divisions is a moot 
question. The latest information of the Ger- 



man army places their total of divisions at 
:>00, including 25 armored and 10 motorized 
infantry divisions, the others being almost 
wholly foot infantry divisions. 

While the tank unquestionably is a for- 
midable military weapon, the means of de- 
fense against tanks are developing rapidly. 
Whatever the future may hold for the ar- 
mored forces, it seems reasonably certain that 
tanks hereafter will encounter no such push- 
over as in the Battle of France in 1940. 

While many hold that the most effective 
antidote of tanks is more tanks, antitank guns 
have proved their worth and are considered 
one of our principal answers to the devastat- 
ing power of tanks. In order that antitank 
Strength may be developed and trained on an 
adequate scale, the Tank Destroyer Center 
has been established near Temple, Texas, un- 
der Major General Bruce. It is schooling 
individuals, and organizing and training 
tank destroyer units. 

The Antiaircraft Command is another pow- 
erful component of the Ground Forces. It is 
commanded by Major General Green, with 
headquarters at Richmond, Virginia. It com- 
prises some 11 camps, distributed from Mas- 
sachusetts to Southern California, and 
includes antiaircraft replacement training 
centers, schools, and training centers for 
producing finished antiaircraft units. 

The Airborne Command, under Brigadier 
General 03. G. Chapman, jr., is a new com- 
ponent, established to expedite the develop- 
ment of parachute and airborne troops, in- 
volving both airplanes and gliders. As the 
production of airplanes makes more equip- 
ment available, this training will be expanded 
(doHtimwd on paye 



(IT 



The Merchant Marine in War and Peace 



by 



Rear Admiral Emory S. Land (CC), U. S. N.-Ret. 

Chairman, United States Maritime Commission and War Shipping Administrator 



OUR Army and Navy in the front lines, and 
all of the rest of America back of them, 
are engaged today in the bitterest struggle for 
individual freedom in the history of mankind. 
Upon the outcome of the current conflict will 
depend not only the future of our children, 
but the future of the generations to follow. 
There can and will be but one conclusion — 
complete victory for the United Nations 
forces. 

We cannot dodge issues. Above all we 
must face reality and hard cold facts. The 
victory for which every true American is bid- 
ding will not be bought cheaply. However, the 
price to be paid, regardless of how high, is 
little in comparison to the maintenance of 
American Liberty. 

The safeguarding of our freedom cannot 
help but depend to a large degree on the abil- 
ity of our government to move vital war car- 
goes and troops to the many points along the 
United Nations' fighting fronts. 

Obviously, the efficiency and speed with 
which this transportation of guns, tanks, 
planes, oil and men is accomplished, must 
depend primarily upon our Merchant Marine. 
This has not been, and is not now, an easy 
task, and its successful prosecution can only 
be carried through by the most carefully 
planned use of available tonnage and through 
the efforts of the men in the shipyards, who 
are engaged in carrying out the most gigantic 
shipbuilding program in the history of the 
world. 

The demand of our President for "ships, 
more ships and still more 
ships," has not gone un- 
heeded. American s h i p - 
building has now reached a 
capacity which has never be- 
fore been deemed possible. 
It is being stepped up and 
expanded constantly, so that 
for this year and next the 
schedules call for delivery 
into service of approximate- 
ly 2,300 big merchant ships. 
Thus will be created the 
greatest merchant fleet in 
world history, the opera- 
tions of which are being 
guided by a centralized au- 
thority, the War Shipping 
Administration. 

Present construction con- 
tracts call for the delivery 
into service of S00 ships 
this year and 1,500 by the 
end of 1043. Delivery of one 
ship a day was begun in 
February, by late May our 
shipyards reached two-a- 
day, and in September three- 



a-day. Approximately 1,500 of these vessels 
now under contract are of the emergency or 
Liberty ship type. The remainder are C-types 
and tankers of various Maritime Commission 
standard and special designs. 

Liberty ships are being constructed pri- 




marily for wartime emergency use, while the 
standard designs are intended as replace- 
ments for outmoded and obsolete vessels al- 
ready in service — to be the nucleus for Amer- 
ica's post-war merchant marine. 




Arming Merchant Vessels at an Atlantic Port. 



68 



Originally, the peace-time program, begun 
in 1937 ? called for 50 ships a year, or a total 
of five hundred over a ten-year period. In 
1939 this was expanded to 100 ships a year; 
in 1940 to 200 and in 1941 to 400. Up to the 
present time these schedules, although vastly 
expanded over the original program, have 
been maintained. 

At the same time schedules were expedited 
from the original contemplated six months 
for production of Liberty ships to 105 days 
or approximately three and one-half months 
from keel-laying to delivery into service. 

In comparison with the year 1937, when 
there were but 10 yards with 46 ways capable 
of producing ocean-going merchant ships, 
there are today more than 00 yards building 
merchant craft of all types, and approximate- 
ly 300 ways for the large type ocean-going 
vessels. Employed in the Nation's shipbuild- 
ing and repair yards are more than three- 
quarters of a million workers as compared 
to the less than 100,000 normally employed 
during peace time. 

Soon after the inauguration of the program 
it became evident there was going to be a 
shortage of shipbuilding brains. The first im- 
pulse was, of course, to spread, as far as pos- 
sible, the skilled labor which was then avail- 
able. It was also recognized that if this 
skilled labor were spread too thin, its intend- 
ed purpose of allocation would in time defeat 
itself. Therefore in every shipyard under 
Maritime Commission authorization, train- 
ing schools have been set up and are turning 
out thousands of trained 
shipyard workers each 
month. 

At the same time, an esti- 
mated million workers in in- 
dustrial plants are produc- 
ing materials and parts for 
ships, so that when the ac- 
celerated shipbuilding pro- 
gram reaches its peak at the 
end of 1943 there will be ap- 
proximately two million 
workers engaged in our na- 
tion's shipbuilding and re- 
pair yards and ^fabricat- 
ing plants. 

Meanwhile, it must be 
borne in mind that this vast 
production machine can and 
will continue to build ships 
at the rate of 15,000,000 to 
18,000,000 deadweight tons 
a year so long as may be nec- 
essary after 1942 to bring a 
successful termination to 
Jhe present conflict Most of 
this great production ma- 
(Continued () n page 178) 



U. S. Navy Photo 



Navy Shipbuilding and Industry 



by 



Rear Admiral A. H. Van Keuren, U. S. N.* 



W HE)s the Present emergency shipbuild- 
" ing program was first gotten under way 
with the enactment of the 11% Expansion 
Act of 14 June 1940, and the 70% Expansion 
Act of 19 July 1940, the problem immediately 
confronting the Bureau of Ships was to place 
the newly authorized tonnage under contract 
with the shipbuilders in the shortest possible 
time. In June, 1940, apart from the S Navy 
Yards where ship construction was in prog- 
ress, there were only 13 private shipyards 
actually engaged in naval shipbuilding. In 
anticipation of the expansion program, sur- 
veys had been made of the nation's existing 
shipbuilding facilities and these were the first 
to he allocated contract awards. The next step 
was to ascertain which of the existing yards 
could be expanded to the maximum advantage 
and with a minimum of delay, and with the 
award of contracts for carrying these expan- 
sion projects into effect, there were simul- 
taneously awarded contracts for new ship 
construction in quantities equivalent to the 
yards' expanded capacities. There remained 
a large amount of authorized tonnage yet to 
be placed and to this end contracts were let 
for two wholly new shipyards, one at Orange, 
Texas, and the other at Seattle, Washington, 
with a third yard — that of Cramp's at Phila- 
delphia — being given a major rehabilitation. 

The hump of the enormous paper work job 
of getting these contracts placed was sur- 
mounted in the summer of 1940 when, in less 
than the three months period from June to 
September, ship construction awards were 
made totalling more than four billion dollars. 

Although the volume of new ship construc- 
tion authorized by the 11% and 10% Expan- 
sion Acts appeared to have filled the ship- 
building bottle to the point of overflow, places 



had to be found or made for the additional 
naval vessel construction authorized by Con- 
gress in the Acts of 31 January 1941 (400 
small boats), 24 May 1941 (550,000 tons of 
auxiliary vessels), 21 November 1941 (400 






miscellaneous light-draft vessels), 
IT December 1941 (800,000 addi- 
tional tons of auxiliary vessels and 
400 additional miscellaneous mine 
craft and patrol craft), 23 Decem- 
ber 1941 (150,000 tons of com- 
batant ships), 6 February 1942 
| 1799 minor combatant, auxiliary 
and patrol vessels), and 13 May 
1942 (200.000 tons of combatant 



♦This article was prepared 
by Admiral van Keuren while 
he was Chief of the Bureau of 
Ships, just prior to his reas- 
signment to be Director of the 
United States Naval Research 
Laboratory at Anaeostia, I). C. 



Launching of the U. S. Sub- 
marine Gunnel, at the Elec- 
tric Boat Company's yards, 
Groton, Conn. 



A forward view of the how 
before the formal launching 
of the USS Iowa, 45.000 
ton battleship. (The drag 
chains hanging by cables are 
dropped into the water at the 
time of launching in order 
to slow the ship down as she 
slides into the main channel 
of the launching basin.) 

TJ. S. Navy Photos 



ships). In addition to these, two major size 
authorizations have recently been enacted by 
Congress, one (Tub. No. 666 — 77th Cong., 2d 
Sess.) providing for 1,900,000 tons of combat- 
ant vessels, and the other (Pub. No. 665 — 
77th Cong., 2d Sess.) providing for 1,200,000 
tons of auxiliary vessels. However, this new 
construction, which, when completed, will 
give the Navy its much discussed five-ocean 
fleet, is to be undertaken only as ways are 
released by the completion of the work al- 
ready in progress. 

Geographically speaking, there is practical- 
ly no limit to the extent to which the ship- 
building industry of this country may be ex- 
panded. Every effort has been made to spread 
the present program over the widest possible 
area: not only are the Atlantic, Pacific and 
Gulf Coast-lines studded with ship construc- 
tion and repair yards, but naval vessels are 
building on all five of the Great Lakes, and up 
and down the Mississippi, and its principal 
tributaries, the Ohio and the Missouri. Even 
so land-locked a locality as Denver, Colorado, 
is engaged in the pre-fabrication of parts for 
naval vessels building at the Mare Island 
Navy Yard in San Francisco. 

Unfortunately, however, the extent to 
( Continued on page 170 ) 




69 



All-Out Mobilization for Ail-Out War 



by 

Paul V. McNutt 

Chairman, W ar Manpower Commission 



AS the Nation speeds up its industrial and 
military mobilization to meet the de- 
mands of all-out war, I should like to impress 
upon you a sense of the magnitude and 
urgency of the manpower problem which con- 
fronts us. 

Between now and the end of next year we 
must add about 4 million workers in our war 
industries and probably an equal number to 
the armed forces. 

In order to replace workers withdrawn by 
the armed forces and to make the necessary 
shifts from nonessential to essential work, we 
shall have to place about 18 million workers 
in new jobs. About 11 million workers must 
be trained, mainly for semi-skilled production 
jobs, between now and the end of 1943. 

At this moment there are serious general 
Labor shortages in 35 major centers of war 
production, including Los Angeles, Seattle, 
Detroit, Buffalo, and Philadelphia. Each of 
t liese shortages must be met. Labor shortages 
in copper mining and smelling have already 
cost several thousand tons of this valuable 
war material and shortages exist also in other 
non-ferrous metal mining industries and in 
logging. 

Meanwhile, needless migration goes on and 
labor pirating remains unchecked. In some 
areas acute shortages of housing and trans- 
portation facilities are preventing an ade- 
quate flow of labor into critical war plants. 
In other areas artificial labor shortages exist 
because of discrimination against women 
workers and members of minority groups. 
Workers already employed in war plants are 
frequently utilized at much less than their 
full capacity. All of these problems must be 
met wherever they arise. 

The latest estimate of the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics and the Bureau of Employment Se- 
curity indicates that 62.5 million people will 
be employed in industry and the armed forces 
by December, 1943. 

Tt is not safe to count heavily on labor re- 
quirements geared to our present industrial 
capacity when it may become necessary 
through forces of circumstances to stretch our 
capacity farther than now seems possible. In 
manpower planning it is the part of caution 
(o set the sights high. We should face the pos- 
sibility that we may need a labor force of 65 
million or more by the end of 

It is misleading to make a simple addition 
of the numbers in these various groups and to 
label the result "the labor reserve." Such a 
(olal merely states that there are so many 
million people in the population with charac- 
teristics which do not bar them for gainful 
employment. The important question is how 
many of these people can actually be brought 
into employment. The answer depends on the 
kinds of inducements offered and the effi- 



ciency of the recruitment and placement 
efforts. 

Our labor reserves are widely dispersed, 
while the demand for labor in war industry 
is highly concentrated. This difficulty can be 
met only partially by greater spreading of 
war contracts, because production facilities 
themselves are highly concentrated. 

W hile conditions differ from one area to 
the next, certain common elements are found 
in almost all the shortage areas. There has 




been little effort to see that workers already 
employed are efficiently utilized. Some plants 
are seriously over-manned and hoarding 
skilled workers, while nearby plants are in 
urgent need of labor. In spite of persistent 
efforts by the War Manpower Commission, 
there is still widespread discrimination 
against Negroes and minority groups. Fail- 
ure to use local labor reserves has necessitated 
heavy in-migration, which in turn has caused 
acute housing and transportation difficulties. 
The prospect of many thousand more in- 
migrants during the next year creates an 
urgent need for additional housing construc- 
tion. Labor turnover is high and rising in 
most areas, due partly to unsatisfactory liv- 
ing conditions. 

In localities such as Seattle and Detroit, 
where labor shortage's are serious and housing 
facilities are inadequate, special efforts are 
now being made to recruit women not normal- 
ly in the working force. Efforts are also being 
made to facilitate the entrance of women into 
the labor market by developing an intensive 
program for the day care of young children. 

The placement activities of the Employ- 



70 



meat Service are being concentrated more 
and more directly on jobs related to the war 
program. Workers with scarce skills not al- 
ready engaged in war production are being 
called to the local employment office for inter- 
views This effort to persuade skilled workers 
to transfer voluntarily to more important 
positions has thus far been successful in only 
about 10% of the cases. The main reason for 
mi willingness to transfer has been loss of 
seniority and other accumulated rights in the 
worker's present job. This objection must be 
met if transference of labor is to be carried 
out on a large scale. 

Increasing emphasis is being placed on the 
extension and development of training pro- 
grams. More than 3 million workers have 
been trained in vocational schools alone since 
June, 1040, and the pace is still increasing. 
Training is being made increasingly available 
to women, Negroes, and national minority 
groups. 

While manpower requirements stem from 
the requirements of the war production pro- 
gram, the relation is not so simple and direct 
as in the case of raw materials. A given pro- 
duction schedule does not indicate the exact 
number of workers required, because labor 
productivity varies greatly from plant to 
plant and may change rapidly over the course 
of time. Even more important, a given pro- 
duction schedule does not determine the 
kinds of labor needed — the proportions of 
skilled, semi-skilled, and unskilled workers, of 
male and female workers. 

The raw material problem is mainly a prob- 
lem of allocation. The labor supply problem 
is essentially a problem of utilization. There 
is no evidence that our labor reserves are in- 
adequate to meet the needs of essential indus- 
tries and the armed forces. The problem is 
not that too few people are available, but that 
too few people with the right training are 
available. The main problem is to break down 
skilled jobs into semi-skilled jobs, to train 
large numbers of inexperienced workers rap- 
o fill these semi-skilled jobs, and to meet 



idly 



the minimum requirements for skilled labor 
by training and promotion within the plant. 

I have frequently been asked whether T con- 
sider additional legislative authority neces- 
sary lor an effective manpower program. W€ 
have been trying thus far to do the iob bv 



voluntary 



authority neces- 
e 

do the job by 
measures such as the local anti- 
piratmg agreements, the provisions for vol- 
untary transfer of workers to essential indus- 
tries through the Employment Service, and 
special voluntary agreements such as the one 
concluded for logging and non-fer- 
al mining. There is good reason to 
doubt, however, whether 
long be adequate. 

< Continued 



recently 
rous me 



such measures will 



on 



page !(>:>> | 



The Selective Service System 

by 

Major General Lewis B. Hershey 

Director, Selective Service System 



T^HE stealthy Japanese attack on Pearl 
* Harbor that plunged America into war 
found the Selective Service System ready to 
accept the new and added responsibilities of 
raising a wartime Army. 

Organized in September of 1940, to select 
less than a million young men each year for 
twelve months of military training, Selective 
Service faced 1942 and the problem of select- 
ing millions of men for active combat service 
with confidence in its organization and its 
ability to do the job. 

The transition from peace to war operations 
that convulsed most government activities 
caused no substantial change in the organi- 
zation or operation of Selective Service. 

Years of careful planning and research by 
the Joint Army and Navy Selective Service 
Committee since its creation on January 22, 
1926 and the training of three hundred and 
fifty Army, Navy, and Marine Corps Reserve 
and National Guard officers from every State 
in the Union, as Specialists in Selective Ser- 
vice, were responsible for the unprecedented 
speed and efficiency with which the nation- 
wide Selective Service System was organized 
and implemented, after President Koosevelt 
signed the Selective Training and Service Act 
of 1940 on September 16, of that year. 

Just thirty days later, on October 1G the 
System had mobilized the Nation for the 
greatest single effort in its history. 

With the aid of over a million volunteer 
workers and the organization of over 125,- 
000 registration places, 10,310,908 men were 
registered between 7 :00 a.m. and 9 :()0 p.m. in 
the continental United States on that day. 

Fifteen months of actual operations 
brought Selective Service to the beginning of 
1942 with a trained and experienced organi- 
zation that extended into every community 
in the country and numbered more than 200,- 
000 citizens, the large majority of whom were 
patriotic volunteer workers. 

The advent of war did not bring any 
change in the basic principle upon which its 
plans had been based and its peacetime oper- 
ations had been conducted. 

That principle was and must always be 
that Selective Service will provide the armed 
forces with the number and kind of men they 
require, at the lime and place they are need- 
ed, with a minimum of disturbance to the so- 
cial, agricultural, commercial and industrial 
life of the Nation. 

The obligation to serve is universal and 
knows no social, political or other arbitrary 
consideration. 

The order of call is determined by chance. 

Selection for service is based on "fitness for 
service" and "availability for service 1 ' alter 
consideration of the relative value to the Na- 



tion of the civilian versus the military service 
of the individual. 

During peacetime when comparatively few 
men were required by the Army, an average of 
less than S0,000 a month in 1941, physical 
standards were high and the rate of rejection 
for physical rejections surprisingly high, 
over 50 per cent. 

Men were deferred and placed in Class II 
because of their civilian occupation on a very 
liberal basis. 

Almost any gainful, worthwhile occupa- 
tion was considered a cause for deferment "in 
the national health, safety and interest." 




Men were deferred and placed in Class III 
for "dependency" on an equally liberal basis. 

Spiritual, social and mental dependency as 
well as financial dependency were considered. 

Over 63 per cent of those classified were so 
deferred in 1941. 

The principle of deferring men because of 
"unfitness for service," "civilian service in 
the national interest" and "to avoid hard- 
ship to their dependents" is fundamental 
and continues in war as it did in peace. 

Only the application of the principle lias 
changed. 

As the need for men and the size of Hie 
Army lias increased, the physical standards 
have been Lowered because 1 there are increased 
opportunities for service by men who are not 
tit for full combat duty. 

As the need for men has increased. Selec- 
tive Service 1 has become increasingly strict in 
the classification of men for occupa t ion a 1 rea- 
sons and has judged requests for deferment on 
a basis of comparative contribution to the 
total war effort. 

As the need for men has increased. Selec- 



tive Service has become increasingly strict 
also in the classification of men for depend- 
ency reasons and has become more and more 
curious and concerned about the kind and 
amount of dependency involved in each indi- 
vidual case. 

In all of this process of selecting the men 
who will serve in the armed forces and 
selecting the men who will stay at home to 
continue in their civilian occupations, the 
local board, comprised of patriotic volunteer 
workers from the individual community, has 
the first jurisdiction and makes the decision 
regarding their neighbors who are registered 
in (he local board. 

There are now 0,441 of these local boards 
throughout the country, at least one in each 
of the 3,070 counties. 

The entire Selective Service System num- 
bers more than 200,000 persons, the very large 
majority of whom are patriotic volunteer 
workers who serve as local board, appeal 
board and advisory board members, govern- 
ment appeal agents, medical and dental ex- 
aminers and reemployment committee men. 

The Selective Service System was com- 
pletely organized and iis personnel i rained 
over lo months of actual operations to do 
anything the armed forces required in war- 
time personnel procurement. 

The first registration, on Oct. 16, 1040, of 
men 21 to 36 years of age totaled about 17,- 
000,000. 

The second registration, on July 1, 1041, 
of men who had become 21 since the firsl reg- 
istration, swelled the total to around IS, 000,- 
000. 

This was the storehouse of manpower from 
which Selective Service had to meet the man- 
power requirements of our armed forces; al- 
though millions more in the 20-to-21-years and 
36-to45-years groups were registered in L942. 

Thus if was that Selective Service was 
ready to meet the exigencies of sudden and un- 
expected war without any appreciable change 
in its organization or operations, while every 
other phase of our national life was convulsed 
and contorted by the Rising Sun of aggressive 
invasion. 

In total war, deferment for occupational 
reasons became a much more serious problem 
I han ever before. 

Total war placed a new importance on food 
production, mineral and metal production, 
Lumber production, arms and munitions pro- 
duction, transportation, communications 
and public service's and a myriad of other ac- 
tivities essentia] to "the national health, safe- 
ty, and interest.'' 

' Total war put a back-breaking burden on 
;ill war-essential activities. 

At the same time the increased demands 
(Continued on page 178) 



71 



The New World United for Victory 



by 

Nelson A. Rockefeller 

Coordinator of Inter- American Affairs 



THE Good Neighbor Policy has made pos- 
sible the close and effective cooperation be- 
tween the republics of the Western Hem- 
isphere in their fight against Axis aggression. 

From the snows of the Arctic to the tropical 
sunshine of Panama, Canada, the United 
States, Mexico and the Central American and 
Caribbean Republics are united as war allies 
for the first time in history. Brazil, largest 
and richest of the countries to the south, like- 
wise has actively joined the world battle for 
freedom. The other South American republics 
also are supporting the United Nations by 
supplying materials for war industry, by con- 
trol of anti-American activities, and by 
strengthening of hemispheric defenses. 

Victory in total war depends on overwhelm- 
ing economic as well as military 
power. To crush the enemy, fight- 
ing men on world battle fronts 
must be supplied with tools of war 
— planes, guns, tanks and ships — 
from the industrial arsenal. This 
arsenal, in turn, must receive an in- 
creasing flow of vital raw mate- 
rials to keep the wheels of produc- 
tion turning. 

Today, the rich resources of the 
other American republics, long 
coveted by Hitler, are being fed to 
the war plants of the United 
States. Here these strategic raw 
materials are being forged into 
weapons to be hurled against the 
Axis enemies of freedom. The peo- 
ple of the United States did not 
realize fully the prime importance 
of New World resources to the war 
effort until our supply sources of 
rubber, tin and other materials in 
the Far East were cut off. 

Military cooperation for defense 
of the Western Hemisphere has 
made great strides during the past year. Only 
a few months ago, while on a flying trip to 
South America, I saw this preparedness first- 
hand. Hemisphere defenses are stronger than 
at any time in history. Our neighbors are col- 
laborating fully with our armed forces to 
make impregnable the approaches to the vital 
Panama Canal and other strategic hemi- 
sphere points. 

To grasp the full meaning of tins hemi- 
spheric military collaboration, reverse to- 
day's picture of solidarity. Consider the enor- 
mous difficulties that would confront the 
United States if the other republics were not 
cooperating actively to prevent the establish- 
ment in the New World of any Axis bridge- 
head. But the nations to the south are as 
keenly aware of the Axis threat to their free- 
dom as are the people of the United States. 
They are on the alert. 



Today, the planes and naval vessels of our 
Mexican and Brazilian allies, in close coop- 
eration with United States forces, are helping 
to safeguard the ocean highways of the Amer- 
icas. Both Mexico and Brazil are moving 
swiftly toward a complete mobilization of 
their manpower. Other New World republics 
are taking similar steps toward a war footing 
in proportion to available equipment. The 
hemisphere's belligerent republics have been 
granted non-belligerent rights by the other 
countries which, in effect, enable them to use 
ports and airfields of the non- warring 
Americas. 

Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox, after 
inspecting bases in Brazil last October, de- 
scribed cooperation between the Brazilian 



patrol 




Mr. Rock 
President 



efeller on the occasion of his visit to Brazil at the invitation of 
Getulio Vargas. Left to right: President Getulio Vargas, Mrs. 
Getulio Vargas, and Mr.' Rockefeller. 



and United States armed forces as of ''the 
100% variety.'- Think of what it means to the 
United Nations' war effort to have friendly 
airfields in Brazil and the other Americas 
from which bombers and cargo planes are be- 
ing flown across the Atlant ic to our new front 
in North Africa, to (he Middle East and Rus- 
sia, to India and China. 

Consider, too, this aspect of hemisphere 
collaboration: friendly labor from the other 
republics formed the bulk of the working 
force in the construction of new additions to 
the Panama Canal and in building strategic 
air fields in the southern republics. This per- 
mitted thousands of North American work- 
men, urgently needed for war production, to 
remain in this country, with the consequent 
saving of valuable transport space. 

Other joint efforts for hemisphere defense 
are being made. Mapping plans Tor the de- 



tense of the American continent, tor example, 
job of the Inter-American Defense 
Board which was created by the Rio Confer- 
e^e This board, meeting in Washington, is 
composed of high-ranking Army, Navy and 
A? Force officers of all the Americas. The 
pa st year also has seen the United States es- 
ablish joint defense commissions with two 
hemisphere co-belligerents, Mexico and 
Brazil These commissions, supplementing 
the work of the Inter-American Defense 
Board, co-ordinate plans of the general staffs 
of the respective nations for defense of stra- 
tegic areas of the New World 

To bolster hemisphere defenses, the United 
States has been sending planes, guns, coastal 
vessels and other equipment to its 
sister republics. Officers from these 
republics have come to this coun- 
try to inspect our armed forces and 
to study aviation, tank warfare 
and other phases of modern com- 
bat. Similarly, United States in- 
structors have been invited to 
many of the American republics to 
explain the use of new equipment to 
the armed forces of those nations. 

At Rio de Janeiro last January 
the spirit of continental solidarity 
was translated into a far-reaching 
program of wartime action. The 
historic Third Meeting of Foreign 
Ministers of the American Repub- 
lics opened a new epoch in inter- 
American cooperation as the New 
World republics welded a united 
front against Axis threats to their 
freedom, the basis of the civiliza- 
tion of the Americas. 

The Rio Charter is a blueprint 
for hemispheric collaboration, not 
only to win the war, but also the 
peace that will follow. It outlines 
a coordinated plan of action extending to the 
fields of military affairs, diplomacy, control 
of subversive activities, finance, economics, 
transportation and communications. This 
Charter had no counterpart in the First 
World War. It stands today as a monument 
to the way free and independent nations, in 
voluntary association, can meet and solve 
major problems. 

The American republics moved fast to im- 
plement the Rio Charter's resolutions for de- 
fense ot the hemisphere. By Februarj 
after the Rio Conference ended— 19 re 



'v — soon 
republics 

ie New World had either declared war on 

. Z ° r had broken off relations with the 

ES f ThU !' wit,,hl two after 
Japan had forced the United States 
world conflict, Hit] 
fiv 



of the N 



ler was 



into the 
confronted with 



ve more avowed New World defenders of 
<f onttnned on page 17(i) 



Lend-Lease and the United Nations War Effort 



by 

Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. 

Lend-Lease Administrator 



THE lend-lease idea is essentially a simple 
one. It is that nations which are threat- 
ened in common by a 
hostile force must em- 
ploy in common all 
their resources against 
that force. Step by 
step this idea has be- 
come the guiding force 
in American foreign 
policy, although the 
strategy with which it 
has been put into ac- 
tual practice has un- 
dergone a major 
change as a result of 
our entrance into the 
war. 

When the Lend- 
Lease Act was passed 
on March 11, 1941, the 
United States became 
a non-belligerent part- 
ner of those nations 
opposing Axis aggres- 
sion. We were giving 
our friends weapons 
for them to use against 

our common enemy, while we gained precious 
time to prepare ourselves for, as it turned out, 
Axis attack. 

Once we became a belligerent, the strategy 
behind lend-lease entered a new phase. Even 
before Pearl Harbor, the needs of our own 
armed forces were increasing rapidly ; if they 
were increasing in mathematical progression 
then, they have increased in geometrical 
progression since. Naturally, this has affect- 
ed the lend-lease program. 

We must now continue to supply our allies, 
and, at the same time, we must train, equip, 
and eventually transport, the greatest army 
in all our history, an army which, as Secre- 
tary Stimson has told the Senate, is expected 
to number approximately 7,500,000 men by 
the end of 1943 — and this huge figure does not 
include the Navy, the Coast Guard, or the 
Marines. The needs of our allies must be bal- 
anced with the needs of the growing forces of 
the United States. 

This balancing must be done in terms of a 
United Nations' grand strategy, and is the re- 
sponsibility of the military leaders. In ac- 
cordance with their directives, the Combined 
Boards established by President Roosevelt 
and Prime Minister Churchill apportion the 
resources and production of the United States 
and Great Britain. For example, the percent- 
age of American tank production allocated by 
the Munitions Assignments Board to a given 
theater of operations is determined by the im- 
portance the Combined Chiefs of Staff place 
upon that theater. Implementing such deci- 



sions, lend-lease aid is being provided cur- 
rently at a rate which, in monetary terms. 




Airplanes, dismantled and protected for shipping, 
and tanks from America's Arsenal of Democracy, are 
loaded on ships for delivery to other members of the 
United Nations at distant ports. These two items are 
often carried as deck loads while the holds of the 
ships are laden ivith smaller and easier packed war- 
needs. Lower: Mr. Stettinius, Lend-Lease Admin- 
istrator. 

OWI Photos 




amounts to something over 10 per cent of our 
total war expenditures. 



Thus, from a peacetime effort to keep war 
away from our shores, lend-lease has become 
an essential part of the 
machinery with which 
the United Nations are 
waging world - wide 
warfare. 

Moreover, lend-lease 
is now a two-way op- 
eration. We are learn- 
ing that it doesn't mat- 
ter who uses a weapon 
or technical process so 
long as it is used, and 
in the way that hurts 
the enemy most. Amer- 
ican-made planes bat- 
tle the Luftwaffe over 
the invasion ports of 
occupied France and 
iain destruction upon 
the war industries of 
(he Rhineland; they 
strafe German troops 
in the snow of the Cau- 
casus and the sands of 
Egypt; and they shoot 
down Japanese bomb- 
ers which are seeking as targets the crowded 
cities of China or Marine emplacements in the 
Solomons. American troops in the United 
Kingdom are using British ordnance, in Aus- 
tralia they are wearing Australian-made uni- 
forms, and as they cross the Atlantic they 
are protected by British, Norwegian, Fight- 
ing French, and Polish-manned ships and 
planes. American pork feeds British factory 
workers, New Zealand vegetables feed Amer- 
ican troops. The knowledge of what the stress 
of battle does to a certain tank, knowledge 
paid for in Russian blood, is applied in Amer- 
ican munitions plants. Techniques developed 
by American engineers are employed in Rus- 
sian oil refineries. Some of the anti-aircraft 
guns, barrage balloons and plane detection 
devices, that guard our shores were furnished 
by the British. 

Thus, in dramatic and hard-hitting fash- 
ion, the reciprocal lend-lease aid agreements 
are put into effect. These provide that "the 
war production and the war resources of 
(each nation) shall be used by the armed 
forces of each and of the other United Nations 
in ways which most effectively utilize the 
available materials, manpower, production 
facilities and shipping space/' 

There is one other aspect of lend-lease op- 
erations which, in the long run, may turn out 
to be the most important of all. It concerns 
not the war, but the peace to follow. Civiliza- 
tion is bound to disintegrate if we cannot, 
after this war, work out some form of society 
(Continued on page 170) 



Keeping the Publie Informed 



by 

Elmer Davis 

Director, Office of War Information' 1 



WE believe not only that the public is en- 
titled to every bit of truth, where truth 
would not aid the enemy, but that a public 
armed with truth, whether that truth be good 
or bad, is a public equipped for the responsi- 
bilities and sacrifices of war. The very ex- 
istence of the Office of War Information is 
proof that this policy exists. 

In so far as we can make victory easier by 
our efforts, we of the Office of War Informa- 
tion are to that extent auxiliaries of the 
armed forces. This is especially true of the 
Overseas Branch. There is plenty of histor- 
ical proof, recent and remote, that victory of 
fighting forces can be expedited by psycho- 
logical and political warfare. The armies of 
Genghis Khan, like the armies of Adolph Hit- 
ler, were preceded by agents who spread de- 
featism throughout the populations he intend- 
ed to attack. And among other and happier 
examples of the use of propaganda and psy- 
chological warfare might be cited the achieve- 
ments of Benjamin Franklin in France dur- 
ing the Revolution and the classic job done 
by Woodrow Wilson in 1918. 

There isn't any real cleavage between what 
we are trying to do abroad, not only in enemy 
countries but with allied and neutral coun- 
tries as well, and what we are trying to do 
toward maintaining an informed public opin- 
ion at home. There is no cleavage because 
both at home and abroad we are telling the 
same story— the truth. As the directive which 
established the O. W. I. phrased it, the office 
was established "in recognition of the right 
of the American people, and of all other peo- 
ples opposed to the Axis aggressors, to be 
truthfully informed." 

Our job at home, the job of the Domestic 
Branch, is to give the American people 
the fullest possible understanding of what 
this war is about — a war which our enemies, 
for more than two years past, have called a 
world revolution. 

In reality, of course, this war has been con- 
ducted even more as a counter-revolution, a 
counter-revolution against the ideas and prin- 
ciples which first appeared in this country in 
1TTG, and spread from here over most of the 
world. And so it is the job of the 0. W. I. not 
only to tell the American people how the war 
is going, but where it is going and whence it 
came — its nature and its origins, how our gov- 
ernment is conducting it, and what— in addi- 
tion to national survival— our government 
and our people hope to get from victory. 

We intend to give the people all the news 
except those things which must be held back 
on the ground of military security, because 
Ave believe that the better the American peo- 
ple understand what this war is about the 
harder thev will work to fight and win it. We 



are not press agents for government. We set 
forth the difficulties which face both military 
and civilian branches and their shortcomings 
in meeting these difficulties as well as their 
successes. To do that we must give the people 
not merely such news as is immediate enough 
to get into the newspapers or onto the radio, 
but that background information which will 
help them understand what the news is about. 
We plan, for instance, to issue general reports 
from time to time in which we shall try to tell 
the people how the total picture looks at the 
moment. 

It might be objected that such surveys are 
propaganda directed against the American 




people rather than against our enemies. But 
propaganda is an instrument which may use 
cither truth or falsehood as its material and 
which may be directed toward worthy or un- 
worthy ends. We are going to use the truth, 
and use it toward the end of winning the war. 
We regard this part of our job as education. 

Not only have the American people a right 
to know what is going on, they have a right 
to know what the enemy is doing to keep them 
from understanding what is going on and to 
deceive and confuse them. Dr. Goebbels is 
still trying to fool the American people and 
he is still using the news itself as a weapon. 

To keep news from enemy sources out of the 
country would be impossible and, I believe, 
unwise. The proper attack is to take this 
news from the enemy sources and set it in its 
proper relations to the facts. Thus the anti- 
dote comes along with the poison and people 
are enabled to recognize enemy news or so- 
called news for exactly what it is — a weapon 
of war which he uses just as he uses air bombs 
on people in Europe. This task is the duty 
of one of the most important divisions in the 
Domestic Branch. 



74 



The directive establishing the Office of War 
Information instructed us to coordinate the 
information work of all the Federal Depart- 
ments and authorized us to issue binding di- 
rectives in the field of information to all Fed- 
eral Departments and agencies. 

In practice, however, we find we get the 
most effective results through constant, seven- 
day-a-week consultation with the War and 
Navy Departments. This office's attitude 
toward its relationship with the departments 
of War and Navy perhaps is best explained 
by citing the single exception to our regula- 
tion of July 10, 1042 requiring all Federal 
departments and agencies to clear all war in- 
formation with the Office of War Informa- 
tion. The single exception said : 

-The Office of War Information will coop- 
erate with the War and Navy Departments in 
facilitating the fullest possible dissemination 
of information involving naval and military 
information. Whether specific military in- 
formation would be of aid to the enemy will 
be determined by the War or Navy Depart- 
ments after consultation with the Director of 
War Information." 

What we are trying to do — and we have at- 
tained some degree of success which Ave hope 
will increase— is to persuade different agen- 
cies concerned with the same problem to get 
together and agree about it, and when only 
one agency is exclusively or primarily con- 
cerned to persuade others to keep out. We do 
not make military policy, nor, for that matter, 
labor policy or production policy. But when 
conflicts in such policies cause confusion we 
feel called upon to go to the right people in 
the government and ask that the difficulties 
be corrected so that we can he]]) remove con- 
fusion from the public mind. 

There are some who seem to think this of- 
fice is charged with maintenance of national 
morale. We are not; and in my opinion there 
is no need for such an agency. We, too, be- 
lieve that -there are no privations which our 
peop e will not willingly endure, no sacrifices 
which will not be unflinchingly faced as long 
as they are truthfully informed of the reasons 
tor making such demands on them " 

This office has acted and will continue to 

bp J£ 5? an - We believe the p e °p le m * st 

of u vnf tha i th / great Sacrific <* which all 
M uto, r Ca lGd on to make are being dis- 
suvelftZ lrl ' V f S P0Ssible ' thev are 

v v ' ° nCe i thGy kn ° w ^ ^ going on, 

much w7h ! e f Sl i ed t0 make orifices, how 
—on c e tli o v i ^ ? and W ^ we h ave to do it 
\o^^S!"T^ aU that -*nd it is the 
no one need ! ' t0 them ^derstand- 

noone need worry about national morale. 

fore™! §22 S^S 5? a ? tat *ment he- 
Ltr(_ on Appropriations. 



Navy Public Relations 



by 

Captain Lelancl P. Lovette, U. S. N. 

Director. Office of Public Relations, Navy Department 



T^ODAY the United States Navy is one of 
A the biggest news stories on earth. As our 
fighting forces afloat battle the enemy around 
the world, the American peoj:)le are avid for 
news. It is their right to know as much about 
what is happening as can he revealed with- 
out aiding the enemy. To supply that informa- 
tion is the job of the Navy's Office of Public 
Relations. 

This job falls into four fields. First, to keep 
the public informed of the progress of the 
war at sea through official communiques. Sec- 
ond, to assist all the information media — 
newspapers, magazines, radio, moving pic- 
tures, etc. — to cover Naval activities and use 
Navy material. This involves both aiding ac- 
credited correspondents, writers, and photog- 
raphers to cover operations, and supplying 
the Navy's own photographs and informative 
material. Third, under the Code of Wartime 
Practices for the American Press, to act as 
"appropriate authority" in assisting publicity 
media to release news and photographic ma- 
terial on subjects restricted under the Code. 
And finally, to handle all inquiries from peo- 
ple throughout the nation who want informa- 




tion on Naval personnel and activities. 

Today Navy Public Relations is stream- 



lined for war. Our central office in Washing- 
ton is a compact unit consisting of a number 
of sections, each designed for a special pur- 
pose. These include Press, Radio, Magazine, 
Pictorial, Motion Pictures, and Special 
Events, Each, of course, serves the field for 
which it is named. 

This does not mean that we are an office 
completely centralized in Washington, cut 
off from the Nation's needs and moods. Navy 
Public Relations Officers are posted in vari- 
ous large cities throughout America. These 
officers are our contact with the individual 
problems of each naval district. Through 
them we maintain a direct relationship with 
naval activities all over the country. 

Over all Navy Public Relations work hangs 
the question : "Will this information give aid 
and comfort to the enemy?'' To answer this 
question properly is one of the most impor- 
tant, and least understood, aspects of our 
work, one that has become a double problem, 
like the twin-headed monster of legendary 
fame. One head takes the form of an under- 
standable desire on the part of press and pub- 
(Continucd on patjv ITS) 



War Censorship for the United States 

by 

Byron Price 

Director of Censorship 



TJ77ARTIME censorship in the United 
" States continually faces a twofold prob- 
lem. It must be restrictive enough to conceal 
vital information from the enemy, yet it must 
not be so inclusive that all news about the 
war is kept from the American people. To 
establish the proper line between these two 
considerations is not easy ; very often there is 
legitimate disagreement between patriotic 
Americans as to the proper extent of censor- 
ship. 

During the year in which the Office of 
Censorship has been in operation we have held 
to a principle which I believe is fundamental : 
Censorship must rely on a studied applica- 
tion of common sense. It must not be based 
on whims or prejudice. 

If Censorship is to have the confidence of 
the people, it must not be used merely to pre- 
vent criticism of the Government or the war 
effort. Instead, it should deal in facts rather 
than opinion. There must be a compelling rea- 
son whenever information is stopped by the 




censor. Invariably that reason has a direct 
connection with the national security, involv- 



ing the safety of American troops or ships or 
the factories which are turning out tools of 
war at ever-increasing speed. 

When President Roosevelt established the 
Office of Censorship last December, less than 
two weeks after the Japanese attack on Pearl 
Harbor, he gave it two tasks. He ordered the 
Director of Censorship to censor in his abso- 
lute discretion all types ol: communications 
entering or leaving the United States. He also 
asked the Director to work out a voluntary 
system whereby American newspapers and 
radio stations would agree not to spread such 
information about our military and economic 
plans as would endanger our wartime op- 
erations. 

From a physical standpoint, the first of 
these jobs is by far the greater. Stations have 
been established around the rim of the coun- 
try where letters and cablegrams are ex- 
amined and overseas telephone calls are moni- 
tored. From these communications the cen- 
{Continued on page 170) 



75 



The Army Nurse Corps 



by 

Col. Julia 0. Flikke, A. U. S. 

Superintendent of the Army Nurse Corps 



WBEN the trend of events pointed an 
ominous finger to gathering war clouds, 
the Army Nurse Corps emerged, from its 
peacetime routine, and began preparations 
for the inevitable coming of the next conflict. 
During the years of peace that followed the 
conclusion of the first World War, the Corps 
had made rapid gains in the status of its al- 
ready enviable standards. It had been accord- 
ed the dignity and benefits of relative rank in 
1920; the assured security of longevity re- 
tirement in 192G and retirement for disability 
in 1030. 

In 11)40, a state of emergency caused train- 
ing camps and air fields to spring up, mush- 
room like, in every section of the United 
States. A call for volunteers was issued to 
augment the insufficient ranks of the Corps. 
Nurses who were enrolled in the First Re- 
serve of the Red Cross responded gallantly 
and were assigned to active duty for a period 
of one year. Later, that year was to be ex- 
tended to "the duration, plus six months." 

The attack on Pearl Harbor in December 
1941 proved a stimulus that brought an influx 
of nurses to the service. No matter how many 
nurses were assigned, however, there has 
never been enough. That is because romance 

Army Signal Corps Photo 




Sharins the hardships of our troops in our many 
outposts are members of the Nurse Corps Shown 
above are Nursing Sister Margaret Dm $?*%C™f « 
(left) and 1st Lf. Dorothy Kurtz, NC, USA, at a 
North Atlantic Base. 



\A. 



Comdr. Sue S. Dauser (left) 
Julia O. Flikke (right) 



has been rampant in 
Army camps and 
fields. During certain 
months there were as 
many marriages as 
there were assign- 
ments. Nurses who 
married were consid- 
ered unsuitable for 
military service and 
automatically released. 
No epidemic could 
have been more devas- 
tating to the numer- 
ical strength of the 
A.N.C. Recently, a 
policy has been adopt- 
ed that has established 
a new precedent in the 
history of the Army 
N n r s e Corps. This 
policy provides that 
nurses who m a r r y 

while on duty, be retained in the military 
service at the discretion of the Surgeon Gen- 
eral. Such an innovation promises to afford 
material aid in attaining the essential quota 
of nurses. 

During the past ten months, Affiliated Hos- 
pital Units have been organized at most of 
the large cities and have been trained at Army 
camps or General Hospitals. These nurses, 
fresh from civilian life, have been subjected 
to strenuous periods of training, including 
long hours of exercise, formation drill, chem- 
ical warfare with gas chamber drill, and the 
school of the Soldier. The latter has taught 
them the forms and practice of military cour- 
tesy. They have also been attached to General 
or Station Hospitals for duty that they might 
become familiar with Army Hospital proce- 
dures, discipline and the paper work incident 
to Army records. Many of the first Units ac- 
tivated are now on foreign soil. They may be 
attached to General or Station Hospitals, 
Evacuation Units, Surgical Units, or Field 
Hospitals. Later on, it is probable that they 
will know service at advanced dressing sta- 
tions. That assignment is the first ambition 
of every nurse who sails. 

Army Units have received materially the 
same training, though not in so concentrated 
a form. Many such Units are now overseas 
stationed in Alaska, Iceland, Newfoundland, 
South America, Africa, Ireland, the South 
Sea Islands, and Australia. 

In this war, definite emphasis is placed on 
the important role the Air Forces are destined 
to assume. For this reason, nurses who are 
especially qualified physically and by reason 
of experience, are being assigned to that ser- 
vice. Very recently, five nurses who have 
demonstrated their ability to fly without ad- 



76 




superintendent, 
superintendent. 



JJ. S. Navy Photo 
Navy Nurse Corps, and Col. 
lrmy Nurse Corps. 



verse reaction were 
bulance Corps. It 



assigned to the Air Am- 
is anticipated that such 
ambulance service will facilitate transporta- 
tion of casualties to second line hospitals. 

The Army Nurse of World War II presents 
in appearance, a sharp contrast to her prede- 
cessors of any other period. She is smartly 
uniformed in trim, well fitted suits of blue, 
in two contrasting shades. Insignia of rank 
adorns her square young shoulders, a shining 
U.S. each tailored lapel, a caduceus with su- 
perimposed N, to denote her status as a nurse 
each side of her trim color. On her cuffs and 
edging her shoulder epaulets are bands of 
maroon braid to further indicate her affilia- 
tion Avith the medical department. 

During the Summer, she may, at her dis- 
cretion, change to a biege suit with white 
shoes and gloves. For informal hours, when 
comfort is her first thought, she has one-piece 
dresses, which conform equally to military 
specifications as do the other components of 
her uniform. 

Her head gear consists of neat visored hats 
hat match her uniforms, for Summer, and 
orae garrison caps with maroon trim for 
vv inter. Her uniform equipment may be ex- 
tended to include many varied garments and 
r^% S apP ^P ri A ate ' f °r duty in climates that 
^ m th , e Arc tic to the Tropics. Every 
The Arm \° f Serial and make. 

Col^ of the 



^^ST^^ thei 

is promoted from the relative 



rank of Captain 
the Army Nurse 



recognition 



ll ° *J*t of U. Colonel, A.U.S, 
se Corps received its finest 
from the War Department. 



The Navy Nurse Corps 

by 

Lt. Comdr. Sue S. Dauser, U. S. N. 

Superintendent, Navy Nurse Corps 



T^EN years before the birth of Florence 
Nightingale, Doctor Paul Bartin, a young 
surgeon in the Navy, who had but recently 
left the Pennsylvania Hospital, made a report 
to Congress, at the request of the Secretary 
of the Navy. In his report he recommended a 
provision for women in the Navy which in 
part is as follows : 

"The nurses, whose number should be pro- 
portionate to the extent of the hospital and 
number of patients, should be women of hu- 
man disposition and tender manners, active 
and healthy. They should be neat and cleanly 
in their persons and without vices of any 
description." 

One hundred years after this recommenda- 
tion, the Navy Nurse Corps was established 
by law May 13, 1908. It followed along the 
same regulations as the Army Nurse Corps. 
Section 3 of the Bill reading as follows : 

"Chief nurses and nurses shall receive the 
same pay, allowances, emoluments and priv- 
ileges as are now or may hereafter be pro- 
vided by or in pursuance of law for the Nurse 
Corps (female) of the Army." 

The first Navy nurses were assigned to the 
Naval Hospital, Washington, D. C. Their 
number consisted of a superintendent, a chief 
nurse, and nineteen nurses. There were no 
quarters for them but they were given an al- 
lowance for quarters and subsistence. They 
rented a house and established their own 
mess. 

It was necessary for nurses requesting an 
appointment in the Navy, at this time, to 
travel to Washington for an oral and written 




U. S. Navy Photo 

Aboard the U. S. Navy's floating hospitals, the mem- 
bers of the Navy Nurse Corps play an essential part. 
Shown above are Navy nurses assisting officers of the 
Navy Medical Corps in an operation in the starboard 
operating room, U.SJ5. Solace. 



professional examination, and also a physical 
examination. They were required to perforin 
the travel entailed at their own expense, and 
bear their living expenses during the period 
of time required for the examination which 
lasted about three days. They then returned 
to their homes to await the outcome of their 
application. Most oL' the applicants were 
from the East Coast since the expenses in- 
volved in travel were considerable and nurses 
living in distant states were not inclined to 
seek positions where placements evolved on 
such requirements. As the Nurse Corps in- 
creased and nurses were reluctant to assume 
the expenses incident to appearing in Wash- 
ington for the required examinations, the Sur- 
geon General directed the applicants to sub- 
mit an original essay on nursing subjects in- 
stead of the written examination. At present 
credentials on applicants are collected from 
the training schools and the hospitals in 
which they state they have been employed. We 
have the full cooperation of directors of nurs- 
ing in the various schools and appointments 
are made on the credentials which they sub- 
mit in behalf of the nurse concerned. The Na- 
val Reserve Nurses whose applications are 
initiated through the Red Cross have had 
their credentials searched by the local Red 
Cross committees. 

Early in 1909 nurses were sent to the Naval 
Hospitals in Annapolis and New York. In a 
short time they were ordered to Mare Island, 
California and rapidly to all the Naval Hos- 
pitals. In 1940 they were sent to the Philip- 
pine Islands. A few years later to Guam, 
Honolulu, Yokohama, Samoa and on the East 
Coast to Virgin Islands, Haiti and Guan- 
tanamo Bay. 

in the first World War they were assigned 
to hospitals in Ireland, 
Scotland and the coast of 
France. In this war their 
designations of duty are 
many and varied both 
within and without the 
Continental limits of the 
United States. They fol- 
low the fleet in hospital 
ships and truly see the 
world through and beyond 
the port hole. They are 
assigned to transports for 
the care of evacuees. 

The requirements for ap- 
pointment in this service 
with the Navy are usual: 
age, 21 to 40, high school 
graduate, academic: grad- 
uate, registered, n urse 
from a School of Nursing 
approved by the Surgeon 
General ; single. They 



must be physically qualified in accordance 
'with prescribed standards, and be prepared 
for acceptance of assignment without limita- 
tions of service. 

There is opportunity for exercise of all the 
nursing arts and skills in the large Naval 
Hospitals. Instructors, anesthetists, ward 
administrators, physical therapists operating 
room supervisors, pediatrics supervisors, ob- 
stetrical supervisors, out-patients and clinic 
work, industrial work and many other arts of 
the nursing profession. 

The Navy Nurse Corps is increasing to 
meet the needs of Naval expansion. The Naval 
Hospitals will be rapidly stalled and must be 
prepared for any emergency. 

Navy Nurses in Pearl Harbor, Kaneohe 
Pay, on U. S. S. Solace, in the Philippines 
and in Guam felt the first impact of this war. 
Five were made prisoners of war when Guam 
was captured but have since been repatriated. 
Eleven Navy Nurses are somewhere in (lie 
Philippines. One Navy Nurse, who was part 
of a Navy operating unit with the Army on 
Pataan, escaped in a submarine to Australia 
and eventually came to the United States. 

The aim of the Navy Nurse Corps is to ex- 
pand in number of nurse appointees who are 
capable of ellicient performance of duty in 
any situation regardless of the difficulties 
with which they might be confronted. 



Representatives of four women's brandies of the 
armed services. Left to right: 2nd Lt. Doris Hyde, 
U. S. Army Nurse Corps; Ensign Mary E. Hill, U. S. 
Navy Nurse Corps; Lt. (jg) Marion R. Enright, 
USNR, of the WAVES (Women Assigned to Volun- 
tary Emergency Service), and Lt. /llberta M. Holds- 
worth, of the W AACs (Women's Army Auxiliary 
Corps.) 

U. S. Navy Photo 




77 



(ill oGvd no porm^uoQ) 
ajn;nj ixb k paqsnqB;sa si snapnn jaoqjo sim 
aou 0 -noi;Bjapisuoa auiijd Jaq;oiiB sbav dtqsaa 
-pBat jo X^pmb aq X -^uaijadxa pnB SntmBj; 
Htqs aAijBJBdraoo jo sisBq aq; no uasoqa ajo vv 
uaiuOAi asaqj, - JBa ^ gpB sio0 qo g ajBptpnB > 
jaogffo 9iiiu qSnojq; SnioS ojb snoi;BDTTd 
-dB apiAv-uoi;Bu ooo^Qg 9lnos ra0JJ ajiiWipv 
-p uiojj papaps uauioAv 0 ()8'l uBq;'ajo K * 

'sapBjg J9DIJP0 panoissinraiOD-nou 
IBOimpa; ulav «uo sjvVAV <*[i a'uay ano si 
SnxntBj; ^stiBpads snoijBDinnnnno; > rBnSig 
jo 'notfBjJodsnBJx jo;ok 'Sotjooq Sni 
-5[Ba 'noTjBJjsintnipv in SnraiBj; Jaq;jnj joj 
poipg jsirepadg o; ao ;nas aq auiu ao A>np 

O; pauSlSSB ApjBipaiUUIl aq Aimi A.lUl [1X111! 

aq; 'SninrBJj DiSBg jo noijaidnioD aodjQ 

-sAqj pnB ixijq japjQ 9«oio 'Ainqisttodsaa 
A;jadoj«i 'uo^biujojui ajb;i[TK SntpjBtigajBg 
'fctproa; dui\r c ^dbwV JTV P^b iBDiniaqo 

;SUIBSb 0SU0J8([ k OU9Lt5A'H [BUOS.lO t J_ pilll 

not;B;inBg a\iu;i[!K fc J«AV jo saioijjy aq; P ub 
suor;iqn.t59ji OVVM P^B Auuy 'saisa^noj 
piiB suio)SLi3 Ajb;ii!K slJ spafqns qans 'sjaq;o 
SnouiB 'sopupui qoiqAv noipnj;sni jo pop 

-9d ^9BAV JttOJ B SI k LieiU pa;si[Ua JO ;ilO[UAl lib,) 

JWAA 'saiJBinxnB joj gmuiBj;) DiSBg 

•uoi; 

-Bnijpopni a\ib;i[iui at SniniBa; Dijpads uaAiS 
ajB'Aoq; uoi;ippu ui *Aji[uub Aaq; qoiqAv 
joj sai;np aq; ui 'aajSap aiuos o; aonapad 
-xa ;sud pBq 9ABq \[y 'uouioav paniBj; jo 
-;uaajad qSiq b ;iiuoaj o; ajqB naaq OABq oai 
•puuosjad pauiBj; b aABq ;snm 110A ;uauiaDBid 
-aj jo qoC b op o; aapjo in k JO^ *sdJOD ?.siXBp 
-ads b £ 9sn9s b in k si OWA1 9q^ ?.nasajd ^.y 

•snoi^-Bjsj; paiTttQ 

dl[1 JOJ AJO^DIA X)UB AUlOUa 9Tf|. JO ^-BOJOp 

— saojoj peuuB aq^. jo uiib oiSBq aqj OAeiqoB oav 
,ianoos aq^. "aAisuo^o aq^. o;ni Avojqj o; jaAvod 
-uBia-jaipxos aqi eia^Bajg aq; jo^ -Xjo^oia jo 
ABp aqi na.|SBq nm SQyyAi ^ 'sapnp ^nB^Bq 
-moa-non ni uani SnpB[daj jo sqoC jpq; 

•lIBlll eTOJ 

hbuioav ^sod JBinai^JBd }Bqi no sjaipios aoBi<I 
-aj niAV qoiqAs. sai^np ogioads aq^ Sinop ^mn 
SumiB.)siis-jias b — ADiiapyja joj apBin-Jon^l 
si qOBy; -paipBUB aq hiav ^aq^ qoiqAv o) ^soj 
aq^ jo spaan aq?. SB uoijbziubSjo hi aiqixay SB 
aq [JIM. Aaqx -uiaq^. Sumoijisinbaj piiBuiiuoo 
Amjy aq; jo s;uaiuaJinbaj aq} 0; i^uipjo.) 
-OB suoo^Bid jo sadA} pnB azis 111 ajba A'bui 
sauiBduioo sja^JBiibpBaH l$°cL 'J^AaAvon 

•snoi^aag XjBjqn pxre qnio odia 
jas MajBaqx s;x q«^ noo^d snoauBiposiK 
aq; puB ^aaiAjas aiuoqdapj joj iioo^bij snopj 
-BDiunraraoo aq; ^anuosjad noi;B>iodsiiBJj 
jo;oin jo uooibm aoiAja S aq; ^SJaqdBjSou 
-a;s piiB s;sidA jo noo;B [c [ TBopaio aq; 
-uiB^ns-jias Jinn aq; a^Bui dpq oqAv s^ooa 
puB sja^Bq ;uB;jodmi-TTB aq; pnB T annosjad 
aAi;Bj;siuiai P B jaq;o ^jap .CiiBdmoa ;nBa.o 



-Jas iqddus 'juuaSjos 
ssam ijiiipnpni 1100; 
-b [ j sja;jBiibpB9H 
b jo pasoduioo ajB 

A'aqj, "paj.BAp.DB .^Ul 
-aq avou ;iuu ad a; puo 
-oas aq; ajB 'saaqinatn 

03T 1 O q B aSBJBAB 

q o iq av 'saittBdraoQ 
!sJa;jBiibpBa][ ;soj 

'Sja;ua3 
' l0 JnjI pnB uoi;bulioj 
-uj ur s p mi m 111 0 v ) 
JQjqSt^j aq; q;iA\ a>ii[) 
0; pauinssB aq 0; 411111 
jsijBpads v si jarajoj 
aqjQ •saiuuduio,) s.io^ 
-JBnbpBan ;so t i puB 
'saiiiuduio^ > t).)iAJa^ 
S u 1 u Ji; AV JJBJDJiV 
: pamjoj Supq A[)uaj 
-jno sjuiu OWM 
jo sadA; oav; ajB 
ajaq; A{.oiiipjo.).>\- 

•1101; 

-Bnipjooo [BDisi!qd 
puB [B;uara ypmb pnB 
c ani;noj snoi;i;adaa 
^raajxap 1 b u u v ui 
fc aauai)Bd joj [ [ B .) 
qoiqAk sai;np Auuy 
Suc;sixa jo sad a; 
A'nBin ui pnB suoi; 
-Baiiiuuiiuo.j a n o q d 
- a 1 a ; ni 's.qppip 
phB iioi;ij;nii.oinpup 
-111 ^;iiauioSBiiBiu ssaui 
111 ^iioi;iM;siuiiiipB jo 
sasBqd suoijba ui ojb 



'OOSpUDJJ 

ut>§ fo Adiiojojv ji WW puo i'puj 'djiiauvQ /o 'utnq dsnwj i vj 'ifiunq 
-nihl 1° wavy aoiwajft i'£ -ft 'uSunqaiofij fo tivwiBfi £qn}[ i'SSDffl ^[WomXd^ 
fo udiuiwfj vpjipyjq .*•/// 'poocn&iSufl fo udiuuift *tf hdjd^ i'ssi)j\j 't/jnow/Xjj fo 
UlonilUD[\i "j vqiy -'HI 'doumiaji fo 'uou^lin^ 'J idJuSuum 'sjDJijfQ pJiqx 'vfiu 
0% jfoq 'Xiddris pun uoijDjjsimmpu ui osunoo v mfiaq 01 dauun Xoqi si) */ooi/^ J9J 

•SDUUDUDJlft SDD r l dUipQ fo UDOlJfQ OaiJ7l39X^[ 'iW^JOJ-J 'Jf oSjODf) 'JOJ lUOjf dlUOO 

•pai jvpijfo ud 9A19D0J. sduoj Ajuyiixny Xuuy suamo \[ oqj fo sjdjiJ/q pjii[ L i pfitft 




uam nBq; Ja; naAOJd 




aABq uauioAv qoiqAv 111 saiJoSojuo jaiqo aqj; 

*aiqB;dBpB pnB pauiBj; AnBioadsa 
ajB uauioAv qoiqAv joj sai;np jaq;o ui sjaipps 
^in;uauiatddns jtq puB ^^aanarjadxa ja);aq 
puB paints ajom naAOJd uaaq aABq uauioAv 
qoiqAv joj sqoC nr uam .oiiioBplaj ^q paqsxxd 
-niODOB aq 0% si uoi;oxraj siqx *;nojj SnxjqSg 
aq; ;b aoiAJas joj sai;np aui^-JBaj ui uaiu 8xn 
-suapj jo asodjnd aq; joj sa;w; g pajrnfl aq} 
.jo Auuy aq; q;iAv aAjas 0; ;nani;JBdaQ jb \\ 
aqj jo ^sanbaj aq; ;b paziuu^jo sbav ;j -avou 
uavou>[ [pAV si ^.iiAjas Ajb;i[iui Apjnd v. 
si sdJO( ) A.u;i[ixny Auuy s £ uamoAV J^ >l lX 
•\\ puiqaq asodjnd jaq;o on si ajaqx 'OWAV 
ai[^ joj nosBdJ jaq;o 011 si ajaqx '^issaaau 
AJiijiinu 111 ait OWAV °qj JO suiSuo aqx 

•auiqoBiu 

.u;av aq? qjiAi ^joajip ^[joav ibjta qSnojqj 
stq; op 0; A;ma;joddo auo uiaq) saAiS sdJOQ 
A.uqiixny Aiu.iy sjiauiOAV ^'KL *Aj;uhod 
.uai[) a a jas o; ;ubav A*ai[; 'sai^Bq ; P ssaj.^o.id 
aq; avo[[oj A[;iiaSiip;ui £aq? k .n> A v siq; 
jo saussi aq; piiB;sjapuii uauioAv nBDuaiuy 
•noi;Bdpi;jBd aAipB jo auo si jbav |b;o| aa 
hi ;jBd jpq; ;Bq; azqi?aj Aupo) x^I\[o7j(jl 



How the Waves Fit into the War Picture 



by 



Lt. Comdr. Mildred H. McAfee, U. S. N. R 

Director Women s Reserve, U. S. Naval Reserve 



HP II EKE have been moments during the past 
A month when women accepted for volun- 
teer emergency service began to wonder if the 
emergency consisted solely of being photo- 
graphed for war pictures. The curiosity of the 
public seemed occasionally to be limited al- 
most exclusively to what WAVES would 
wear and whether or not they would salute 
and be saluted. As to the wardrobe that is 
now established. The people who wear the 
uniform will be very comfortable in it when 
the world stops staring at it. As to the salut- 
ing, the women mean to do it on all appro- 
priate occasions. They have been known to 
bow politely and meet their hands midway to 
their hats, but that is the result of p re-Navy 
lifetime indoctrination and is not designed 
to be disrespectful. The question has fre- 
quently been asked as to whether the men will 
salute the women. The answer that has been 
given to me is that the WAVES are in the 
Navy, and that therefore they give and re- 
ceive salutes. Indeed, saluting is still such a 
new privilege and responsibility that one 
WAVE was surprised to hear herself respond 
to a male junior officer's salute by smiling and 
saying "thank you.' 7 This might be the mo- 
ment to say that there are places where a 
woman officer appears with her hat on be- 
cause she is a woman. Under such circum- 
stances, when a man would be without his 
cap, women consider their hats a feminine 
accessory, not a uniform cover — hence no 
saluting. 

But what do these women do besides get- 
ting their pictures taken and complicating 
the salutations of the Navy? So far the offi- 
cers' training school— the first of our schools 
— has mainly been preparing women to pre- 
pare other women to replace men in shore 
establishments, that the men may go to sea. 
Members of the first two officer classes grad- 
uating this autumn have in part been detailed 
as understudies to men Naval officers as- 
signed as instructors in the recently opened 
enlisted WAVE schools. A few, however, 
have already replaced men in the Bureaus 
and others are at work on job analyses upon 
which replacement assignments can be based. 
Future officers will come into active service 
as definite replacements except for the sev- 
eral women selected for supervision of large 
enlisted details of women. 

At this writing, two of the above mentioned 
enlisted schools are well on their way toward 
graduating their first classes of storekeepers 
and radiomen. A third enlisted school, set up 
for the training of yeomen, has already grad- 
uated its initial group some five w r eeks earlier 
than planned as a result of the unforeseen 
ability of those enlisted as stenographers. In- 
deed, these yeomen are already at work in 
numerous Naval Bureaus and centers, per- 




mitting enlisted men to be sent to sea. 

Two enlisted schools for general indoctrina- 
tion are in the process of being opened. A 
major share of students in these schools will 
be assigned to aeronautical training centers 
for technical instruction, that 
the first complements of the 
more than 20,000 WAVES 
requested by the Bureau of 
Aeronautics alone can be 
supplied at the earliest pos- 
sible time. 

The chief criticism of this 
program so far has been the 
fact that it will take so long 
to get any appreciable num- 
ber of women into positions 
replacing men in the imme- 
diate future. It seems most 
unwise to try to replace an 
experienced and trained man 
by an inexperienced and un- 
trained woman. Since the 
success of the whole venture 
will be determined largely by 
the efficiency of the first 
group of officers and enlisted 
women, all the official ad- 
visors of the AVomen's Re- 
serve have cautioned against 
inadequate preparation. 

There seem to be few ac- 
tivities in which women can- 
not be used. Congress has 
limited the place to the con- 
tinental limits of the U. S., 
and has forbidden assign- 
ments to combat ships on sea 
or in the air. It has limited 
the ranks to those of junior 



officers. There are no limits to ultimate 
numbers nor to varieties of billets. Already 
plans are approved for training parachute 
vigors, aerologists, tower control operators, 
aviation machinist's mates, aviation metal- 
snriths, cooks and bakers, and many other 
types of workers, in addition to the radiomen, 
storekeepers and yeomen already in training. 
With officers at, work in every Naval District 
and in each Bureau in Washington, and with 
approximately 200 yeomen already detailed 
to billets, the program begins to come to life. 

There are some Navy men who legitimately 
hesitate about the strange new developmenl 
in Navy pract ice. "This man's Navy" tinds it 
hard to imagine women at work in its offices 
and shops. The WAVES hope everyone will 
believe them when they say that il always 
will be "this man's Navy." The women are 
here because Navy officials foresaw a short- 
age of man power and asked women to sub- 
stitute for them. The women of America are 
honored to be allowed to substitute for Navy 
men who have commanded the respect of the 
entire country. They will make every effort 
to do as good a job as possible. They want 
no privileges except the fundamental one 
(Continued on />(t</<' 175) 




U. S. Navy Photo 



A group of the 
Left to right: Lt 
Virginia Carlin, 
USNR, of New 



first WAVE officers in Washington reporting for duty. 
. Jean T. Palmer, USNR, of New York, N. Y.; Lt. (jg) 
USNR, of Springfield, Mass.; Lt. (jg) Marian Enright, 
York, N. Y.; and Ensign Dorothy Foster, USNR, of 
Atlanta, Ga. 



79 



Services Organize Own Relief 

Navy Relief Society 



Army Emergency Relief 

by 

Maj. Gen. Irving J. Phillipson, U. S. A. 

Executive Director, Army Emergency Relief 



THE obligation of the Army to care for its own is traditional. The 
underlying purpose is to improve morale which is a function of 
command. It was with this purpose in mind that the War I department 
recently organized Army Emergency Relief to aid soldiers and their 
dependents. The American Red Cross through its Congressional 
Charter and under the provisions of AR 850-75 and ME 1-10 has the 
primary responsibility for a broad program of voluntary aid to mili- 
tary personnel and their dependents. Army Emergency Relief supple- 
ments this general program of Red Cross in those cases in which 
commanding officers deem that direct aid through Army Emergency 
Relief is essential. 

To facilitate these activities, a nonprofit corporation known as 
"Army Emergency Relief was organized under the laws of the Dis- 
trict of Columbia. The business of this nonprofit corporation is trans- 
acted by a Board of Managers consisting of a President, two Vice 
Presidents, an Executive Director, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and nine 
other members. Ex officio, the Under Secretary of War is the Presi- 
dent of Army Emergency Relief and the Assistant Secretaries of War 
are the Vice Presidents. The President appoints the Executive Direc- 
tor, the Secretary and the Treasurer. Successors to the nine members, 
who for the first year were appointed by the President of Army Emer- 
gency Relief, will be elected by the membership at the annual meet- 
ings. The Secretary of War is Chairman of the Board of Governors 
and General Pershing is the Honorary President. 

The following persons are now members of the Board of Managers 
which is impowered to transact all business of Army Emergency 
Relief: 

Robert P. Patterson, Under Secretary of War (President) 
John J. McCloy, The Assistant Secretary of War (Vice President) 
R, A. Lovett, The Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Vice 
President) 

Major General Irving J. Phillipson, Executive Director 
Mr. Ord Preston, President of the Union Trust Company (National 
Treasurer) 

Colonel F. Trubee Davison, Army Air Force (National Secretary) 
Lieutenant General H. H. Arnold, Chief of the Army Air Force 
Lieutenant General Brehon B. Somervell, Commanding General, 

Services of Supply. 
Lieutenant General James G. Harbord, U.S.A., Retired 
Major General John F. Williams, Chief of the National Guard 

Bureau 

Major General A. D. Surles, Director, Bureau of Public Relations 
Brigadier General Bennett E. Meyers, Army Air Force 
Brigadier General Miller G. White, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-l 
Colonel John Thomas Taylor, Bureau of Public Relations 
Mrs. Arthur W. Page, President, Army Relief Society 
The National Headquarters of Army Emergency Relief is located 
in the War Department. Branches have been established in the War 
Department, at each service command and department headquarters, 
in the Army Air Forces, and at West Point. Branches are authorized 
to establish sections at all posts, camps, stations, or other military 
establishments within the respective jurisdictions of the headquarters 
at which branches are located. Commanding officers of general depots, 
ports of embarkation, and other War Department activities are 
authorized to organize sections under appropriate service command 
branches by arrangement between commanders concerned. 

To obtain assistance, application should be made to the nearest 
branch or section or direct to Army Emergency Relief, War Depart- 
ment, Washington, D. C. Rank or service will not influence the 
amount of aid granted to Army personnel or to their dependents. 
(Continued on page 174) 



by 

Mrs. Robert M. Griffin 

Third Vice President 



FOR vears, there had existed in the minds of Naval Officers and 
their families the need of a fund to be used to relieve the distress ^ot 
the wives and children of men who died in the Service. In lJlH, 
eighteen thousand dollars was received by the University of Penn- 
sylvania from the sale of tickets for an Army-Navy football game. 
This sum was turned over to the Army and Navy. The Navy s share 
was used to start the Navy Relief Society, which was incorporated 
under the laws of the District of Columbia. 

Gradually, it became evident that active personnel and their fami- 
lies needed'assistance also, when illness and other such emergencies 
proved too big a drain upon their resources. Interest free loans, re- 
payable by allotment, gratuities, and advantageous hospital arrange- 
ments have been made for the past fifteen or twenty years, and the 
Navy Relief Society has grown steadily toward its present objective — 
that of social service work for the men and families of the Navy and 
Marine Corps. Its contribution toward morale in time of war is one 
of deep concern to every officer and man in the Naval Services. The 
value of the knowledge that his family will be assured of financial help 
and sympathetic understanding in any real problem that may con- 
front them during his absence cannot be overestimated. 

The headquarters of the Society are in Washington and its affairs 
are conducted by a Board of Managers. The officers and members of 
the present Board are : 

Admiral Ernest J. King, USN (President) 

Admiral J. O. Richardson, USN (Ret) (Executive Vice President) 
Rear Admiral Charles Conard (SC) USN (Ret) 

(Second Vice President) 
Mrs. Robert M. Griffin (Third Vice President) 
Lieutenant Floyd T. Starr, USNR (Secretary and Treasurer) 
Admiral David F. Sellers, USN (Ret) 
Rear Admiral C. R. Train, USN (Ret) 
Vice Admiral A. P. Fairfield, USN (Ret) 
Rear Admiral B. H. Dorsey (MC) USN 
Captain Frank Baldwin (SC) USN 
Captain Robert D. Workman (ChC) USN 
Colonel Alley D. Rorex USMC 
Mrs. Randall Jacobs 
Mrs. Frank Jack Fletcher 
Mrs. James F. Byrnes 

Admiral Richardson has charge of all administration and brings 
to this office his wide experience in matters of personnel. 

All general policy for Headquarters and Auxiliaries is made by the 
Board of Managers, working through its special committees and at 
its monthly meetings. 

One of the functions of Headquarters is to ascertain through the 
Relief Committee the need, financial or otherwise, of the family of 
every man who is killed or missing in action. This inquiry is made for 
Headquarters by one of the Auxiliaries, if the family lives near aNaval 
Station. If not, the Red Cross is asked to obtain the required in- 
formation. An operational agreement covering all details of such 
procedure has been signed by the Navy Relief and the Red Cross Thns 
a visit to the family is always made by some representative of Navv 
Relief, and any problems coped with by a competent person If the 
assistance required is monetary, it is promptly given. 

Auxiliaries have been established at the principal' Naval Stations 
There are thirty-one in existence at the present . They are set ut> under 
the Commandant as President, and have a working Board of Director, 
similar to that of Headquarters. This Board decides upon local policv 
and sends monthly reports to Headquarters. 1 

The Executive Secretary, who may be a Chaplain assigned to N 
{Confmued on page 174) 



aw 



80 



The Chaplaincy of the Armed Forces 



The Army Chaplain 

by 

Chaplain William R. Arnold 

Brigadier General, Chief of Chaplains, U. S. Army 



The Navy Chaplain 

by 

Chaplain Robert D. Workman 

Captain, Chaplains Division, Bureau of Naval Personnel 




rPHE task of providing proper religious ministration for the soldier 
is the work of the Army Chaplain. Primarily and essentially the 
purpose of a chaplain's life and work is Divine Worship. This must 
precede and determine all his other religious activities. Recognizing 
the importance of this work, the War Department stipulates that the 
chaplain must be an 
ordained clergyman 
with three years of 
practical experience in 
the ministry and must 
have the endorsement 
of his denomination at 
the time of being ap- 
pointed, and there- 
after. Chaplains, 
drawn from church 
groups of the three 
major faiths, as a body 
constitute the Corps of 
Chaplains, headed by 
the Chief of Chaplains 
who holds the tempo- 
rary rank of Brigadier 
General and is ap- 
pointed for a term of 
four years. The office 
of the Chief of Chaplains is an 
agency of the Administrative Ser- 
vices, Services of Supply. 

The co-ordinating and supervis- 
ing functions for the Corps of Chap- 
lains are the responsibility of the 
Chief of Chaplains. He recommends 
policies and methods of procedure, 
but never interferes with the relig- 
ious freedom or doctrinal beliefs of 
the chaplains, as a group or indi- 
vidually. At all times, the Chief of 
Chaplains maintains contact and 
cordial relationship with civilian or- 
ganizations, religious and secular, 
for the benefit of the chaplains and 
their work. 

The Deputy Chief of Chaplains 
and the Executive Assistant consti- 
tute the Executive Division which is 
charged with the direction of pro- 
curement and training, the execu- 
tion of plans and policies and the 
administration of the activities per- 
taining to the office and personnel. chaplain Arnold 
This division directs and coordi- 
nates all functions of the divisions 

of the Office of Chief of Chaplains, reviews the work and supervises 
the preparation of estimates on funds and appears in defense thereof 
before budget committees, procures office supplies and equipment, and 
is responsible for documents, publications, files and mail. 

The Control Division examines the organization, methods and pro- 
cedures of the Office of the Chief of Chaplains and recommends action 
{Continued on page 174) 



In our South Pacific island bases, the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps wor- 
ship together as well as fight together. Here, amid a setting of luxuriant 
palm trees, with a Navy Scout Bomber in the background, an Army Chap- 
lain performs the rites of the Holy Communion. The pews are made by 
plants supported by crated tail fins for heavy bombs. 




HP HE Navy Department, confronted by the greatest, most challeng- 
4- ing responsibilities in its entire history, is vitally aware today of 
its duty to provide an adequate religious and spiritual ministry to the 
personnel of this branch of our nation's armed forces. 
The Chaplain Corps of the Navy is being expanded to meet this 

challenge and respon- 
sibility. Through the 
medium of a Chap- 
lain's School, organ- 
ized in January of this 
year, clergymen who 
are accepted as Chap- 
lains are indoctrinated 
and trained for active 
duty. This period of 
preparation and train- 
ing is of inestimable 
value to the new Chap- 
lain. Prior to the in- 
troduction of this new 
system of training a 
newly appointed chap- 
lain was given what 
might be called a tutor 
course under an older, 
experienced Chaplain. 
In time of war, however, our older 
Chaplains are much too busy to have 
adequate spare time to devote to the 
indoctrination of the newcomer. 
Hence the adoption of the new and 
much more efficient method of prep- 
aration for the all important work 
of the welfare and religious leader. 

As rapidly as Chaplains are avail- 
able they are being assigned to 
ships and to stations in continental 
United States and abroad. In addi- 
tion to Naval Personnel, Chaplains 
are assigned to Marine Corps organ- 
izations and to Coast Guard sta- 
tions and bases. The present 
strength of the Chaplain Corps is 
sgveral times that prior to the emer- 
gency, and still there is need for 
many more qualified applicants. Re- 
ligious denominations are repre- 
sented in the Corps on a percentage 
or quota basis. 

Tt is the sincere hope of the Navy 
Department that these denomina- 
tions will realize that the Navy can 
meet this challenge only as the 
churches provide the clergymen necessary for this great task. The 
Bureau of Naval Personnel is extremely anxious that not a single 
ship or station be without its full quota of Chaplains. While this goal 
has not been realized we believe the people of the Uniied States will 
awaken to their share in this responsibility and give us the clergymen 
we need. 

(Continued on page 174) 



T". S. Navy Photo 



Chaplain Workman 



81 



/ 



The United States Congress and the War 



by 

Hon. Sol Bloom 

Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives 



THE successive steps taken by Congress 
after war broke out in Europe form a pat- 
tern of foresigkted preparation for per- 
formance by the United States of what has 
now become its supreme duty-w-the destruc- 
tion of its assailants. Congress sensed (lie 
danger and prepared for war long before 
Pearl Harbor. Since that attack, Congress 
l»as mobilized the energies and resources of 
the country on a scale sufficient to accomplish 
the end sought. 

Much war legislation before Dec. 7, 1941, 
was enacted at the suggestion of the Presi- 
dent. Cooperation between the legislative 
and executive departments is prescribed by 
the Constitution, desired by the people, and 
indispensable to success in war. Those critics 
who picture Congress as tamely surrendering 
its powers to the President would be the first 
to cry out if Congress should refuse to exer- 
cise its powers as recommended by the Presi- 
dent. It is silly to assert that Congress has 
surrendered its powers. It could not do so 
under the Constitution. Nor could any Pres- 
ident take over legislative powers without vio- 
lating his oath to support the Constitution. 

( >ne of the first steps designed to safeguard 
this country against rising dangers was the 
act providing for construction of 5,500 planes 
for the Army. This was enacted before war 
broke out in Europe. In taking this precau- 
tion Congress cooperated with the President 
and the people approved the procedure. 

The fortification of Guam was begun, also, 
about this time — too late, in view of the 
perfidy of Japan, but not too late if we bear 
in mind the fate awaiting Japan. 

When war broke out in Europe President 
Roosevelt called Congress in extra session 
and recommended the repeal of the embargo 
upon arms. The embargo had been applied in 
the hope that it would help to dissuade for- 
eign nations from going to war. Blasting of 
this hope brought realization that some na- 
tions had become outlaws and were bent 
upon destroying all nations enjoying free gov- 
ernment. The nations lighting the outlaws 
were enabled to obtain war material from us 
when the arms embargo was lifted. It was 
still hoped, however, that the United States 
could remain officially neutral and at peace. 

This hope dimmed rapidly after the fall of 
Prance. Congress and flu 1 President took 
stock of our country's situation. It was de- 
cided to double the size of the Navy and to 
apply universal conscription. The two-ocean 
Navy bill became law late 1 in .June, L940. It 
provided for the following combatant tonnage 1 
at an est imated cost of $4,010,000,000 : 



Cruisers 420,000 tons 

1 )estroyers 250,000 tons 

Submarines 70,000 tons 

By September, 1040, a year after war began 
in Europe, the draft bill was enacted and the 
Army began to expand. 

Later in 1940 and early in 1041 it became 
evident that the United States was in great 
danger and that neutrality was both imprac- 
ticable and unwise. Congress shared the 




Capital ships 
Aircraft earri" 



.385,000 Ions 
.200,000 tons 



President's opinion that it had now become 1 
the duty of the United States to aid the na- 
tions defending freedom. 

Then began the task of shaping the most 
powerful weapon that mankind has ever seen 
— the weapon of American War-might. The 
lend-lease bill was enacted, and appropria- 
tions were voted to build war factories and 
ships on a scale far exceeding the resource's 
of all enemy nations. 

It was well that time was saved, for soon 
the capacity of Japan was added to that of 
the other enemy nations. 

The President recommended that limita- 
tions upon the service of drafted men be re- 
moved. Opinion in Congress was sharply di- 
vided because many members' could not con- 
vince themselves that war was at hand. The 
bill extending the service of draftees became 
law by a. narrow margin. 

The last step before tin 1 United States 
found itself at war was the arming of mer- 
chant ships for defense against submarines. 

I submit that the record of Congress before 
Pearl Harbor was one of conscientious effort 



to avoid war while preparing for the worst. 

Japan's treacherous attack at Pearl Harbor 
was the signal for instant action by Congress, 
looking to the earliest possible destruction of 
the enemy. War was declared within a few 
hours. Three days later, Congress recognized 
that a state of war existed against Germany 
and Italy. The people's law-niaking powers, 
exerted through Congress, were invoked to 
arm the Commander-in-Chief with all author- 
ity required to strike effectively on and below 
sea, ashore and aloft. No request made by the 
Army or Navy has been neglected or denied. 
All that authority and money can do to aid 
the allies has been granted by Congress. 

T refer the reader to the list of appropria- 
tions made by Congress. The total allowance 
of money for war purposes had reached $220,- 
000,000,000 on Oct. 20, 1042. 

Many changes in civil affairs have resulted 
from war conditions, and Congress has dealt 
wisely in safeguarding the people against dis- 
aster on the one hand and undue restriction 
on the other. Control of the nation's economy 
by the government is unavoidable if we are 
to win the war. Congress has provided for 
price control, stabilization of wages and 
salaries, more abundant revenue, insurance 
against bombing raid damage, protection of 
civilians, encouragement of small business, 
employment of women in auxiliary Army and 
Navy organizations; declared war against 
Bulgaria, Hungary and Roumania ; increased 
Army and Navy pay, increased appropria- 
tions for housing war workers, granted allow- 
ances to families of enlisted men, given the 
vote to men in the Armed Forces, and other- 
wise promoted the general welfare. 

In the high tension of wartime it is inevit- 
able that all agencies of the government 
should be criticized for what they do and fail 
to do. Congress has received its full share of 
criticism, but it has also had the benefit of 
constructive suggestions and salutary advice 
from patriots everywhere. 

The net result of criticism, suggestion, ad- 
vice, information and opinion is enlighten- 
ment, which enables Congress to perform its 
work more effectively. Out of the ocean of 
tumult comes the considered act, represent- 
ing the collective will of the people. All that 
members of Congress ask is that critics con- 
sider the finished product, and not merely the 
raw material of projects put up to Congress. 
11 the laws are effective, sane and far-seeing, 
what matters all the commotion and hubbub 
surroundings discussion of the preliminaries ? 
In this democracy within a republic every 
man and woman is entitled to criticize and 
oiler opinions. This is (AND FOREVEB 
WILL BE, UNDER GOD) a free country. 



82 



Manpower and the Army 



by 

Lieutenant General Joseph T. McNarney 

Deputy Chief of Staff, United States Army 



"JVTUCH has been done to produce the kind 
of an Army that will bring victory. From 
a skeleton force scattered throughout the 
country, the Army has grown in an astonish- 
ingly short time to great proportions. We 
now have divisions where not so long ago the 
garrison consisted of little more than a bat- 
talion ; Air Force squadrons have grown into 
groups ; the schools involve such numbers of 
students and have increased so in size that 
comparison with pre-war days is almost im- 
possible. Industries are booming, villages are 
crowded to (he bursting point with Avar work- 
ers, even the landscape has changed. New 
weapons, new techniques, new types of forces 
are being developed with astonishing speed. 
The nation has changed from peace to war. 

In spite of the great strides which the 
Army has made, there is no justification for 
complacency. Much has been done; much 
more remains to be done. We must learn to 
use the manpower of the country with more 
care and much more efficiency. A great deal 
of it is being wasted or diverted to uses less 
essential to the war effort than is wise. 

Our war effort has reached a point where 
the effective use of available manpower is at 
the critical, the decisive stage. As the Presi- 
dent recently informed the nation, "We are 
learning to ration materials, and now we 
must learn to ration manpower/' This in- 
junction applies to the Army as well as to 
industry. 

For the Army this will be a new 
experience. In times of peace, the 
Army is prodigal in its use of man- 
power and is obliged to be miserly 
in the spending of appropriated 
funds. Now we are faced with a very 
different situation — it is absolute- 
ly essential that we exercise the 
utmost economy in the use of our 
manpower. The national spotlight 
is on the Army and the action 
taken by the Army ought to set the 
pace and serve as a model for in- 
dustry to copy. Unless the Army 
releases able-bodied men from sec- 
ondary jobs for the primary task of 
destroying the enemy, * industry 
can hardly be expected to man the 
war industries by drastic diver- 
sions from less essential jobs. 

Congress has authorized the in- 
duction of IS- mid 19-year-olds. 
This step is necessary. However, it 
is not enough for the War Depart- 
ment to secure the services of these 
young men. A very great respon- 
sibility rests upon the Army to ap- 
portion manpower in such a man- 
ner as to secure the greatest pos- 
sible economy of force. 



Economy of force applies in the Zone of the 
Interior, as well as on the battlefield. Para- 




graph IK) of (he Field Service Regulations 
prescribes : 

"Concentration of superior forces, both on 
the ground and in the air, at the decisive 1 




Economy of manpower, says General McNarney, is necessary to the end 
that the fighting fronts get their full needs. 



place and time, and their employment in a 
decisive direction, create the conditions es- 
sential to victory. Such concentration re- 
quires strict economy in t he strength of forces 
assigned to secondary missions." 

In the months to come, it is essential that 
commanding officers of all units bear in mind 
and practice these principles. 

To create a powerful Army — an Army 
geared to win — economy of force demands 
that the maximum number of strong, able- 
bodied soldiers be placed in tactical units 
I raining for combat. A corollary to this is the 
necessity to use limited service men for the 
jobs demanding less physical stamina than is 
required for active military operations. All 
headquarters and overhead installations must 
reduce their personnel requirements to the 
minimum. Also, members of the Women's 
Army Auxiliary Corps must be used to re- 
place able-bodied soldiers and thus release 
them to units destined for the lighting 
fronts. 

It is only human, and it is desirable, for 
any individual to consider his own job more 
important than any other. This is a proper 
attitude. Also, it is only natural that each 
should demand all that can be obtained to 
enable him to do his job. And so, because of 
this, a unit commander is inclined to build up 
his headquarters and overhead installations 
to be larger than is really needed, and to de- 
mand the very best in personnel. It is right 
for every commander to appreciate 
____ the importance of his job ; but it is 
wrong for him to try to obtain 
more men and in higher qualifica- 
tions than minimum requirements 
dictate. 

A very real contribution can be 
made by all officers and men who 
are not actually a I the fighting 
fronts. All must maintain a sense 
of proper over-all perspective; all 
must see the big picture. The job 
must be done, not only to the best 
of their ability, but with (he mini- 
mum, personnel. This requires a 
streamlined organization, utilizing 
to the utmost, personnel well suit- 
ed to the specific purposes of these 
organizations, but not fitted for ac- 
tive combat. This involves the 
transfer to tactical organizations, 
training for combat, of all able- 
bodied individuals not essent ial to 
their present duties. Nothing 
short of this will provide the man- 
power needed ;it f he fighting fronts 
and in the heavy industries which 
provide the sinews of war. 
This is essential for Victory. 



83 



The Home Front 

by 

Leon Henderson 

Administrator, Office of Price Administration 



ON the fighting front we have made our 
start. The battles of the Solomons, the 
Coral Sea, and of Midway, the defense of 
Wake Island are testimonials of the ability 
and courage of our Army and Navy and 
Air men. They demonstrate that spirit which, 
throughout our history, has won our wars. 

The speed with which our Marines, our 
Navy and our Soldiers have struck, the stub- 
born tenacity they have displayed are a por- 
tent of what we can soon expect from our 
armed forces. They know their job. They are 
doing their job. They have the will to win. 

We Americans at home have not begun to 
match them, If I say that we are less 
conscious — yes, and less conscientious about 
our part in this war — I am not under-evalu- 
ating the spirit and endeavor that has pushed 
our production ahead with speed and effec- 
tiveness. If I say that we Americans at home 
have not yet developed the same spirit of ag- 
gressiveness that our boys have displayed in 
the Solomon Islands, I am not suggesting 
that we are complacent. A glance at the 
shrinking map of that part of the world which 
we and our allies hold has pretty well killed 
complacency. What I am suggesting is that 
the time has come for us to develop our tradi- 
tional spirit— a spirit of offense which will 
equal that of our fighting forces, which will 
enable us to drive through. The time for wait- 
ing, the time for adjustment, the time for 
drifting and for aimless and amiable talk is 
over. We as a people must face up to the 
reality of this war. We must face it not in 
a mood of passive acquiescence, but in a spirit 
of angry and aroused determination — a deter- 
mination to fight with the same grim courage 
and unswerving will that our soldiers have 
shown and that wo have asked of them. 

For a time there was a clamor for a second 
front. That was a military matter, and as we 
all know, when the proper time arrived, our 
military leaders moved. But there is a third 
front — or a fourth — of which I can speak on 
which this war is also being waged. This 
front is the war on inflation and profiteering. 
It is the war on unjustifiable rent boosts and 
for a just distribution of war-reduced com- 
modities. It is a question of whether we want 
to win this war or whether we want person- 
ally to profit from it. 

It is not a front which can be fought with 
the weapons of war. It is a war of economic 
forces, which usually hits the headlines not 
in glamorous prose but in lustreless statistics 
and the bare boned facts of financial pages. 
The enemy is not always tangible — not always 
easy to find and grapple. Yet the enemy is 
there— and that enemy, like all enemies, must 
eventually be met and conquered by the will 
and determination, the courage and the 
sacrifices of men and women. 



The Office of Price Administration has been 
battling with that enemy. We have met him 
sometimes afar, sometimes at close quarters 
in the form of the greedy, the selfish and the 
blind self-seeker. For many months now we 
have been waging a campaign for the mainte- 
nance of prices on a large part of our com- 
modities — sometimes on the offensive, some- 
times, necessarily, on the defensive. 

Today — here and now — I am proposing a 




new offensive on that front. I am asking for. 
(he united aid of all people— workers and 
businessmen, housewives and professional 
men — throughout America to enter into a new 
phase of that, bat t le— a phase in which we will 
take and maintain the offensive. Today — here 
and now — I am asking all Americans to ac- 
cept — ll0 , to seek out — further sacrifices for 
the sake of our common fight for freedom. 

Why choose today? Tomorrow may be too 
late and — if we lose this war there may be no 
days after. Now, in this 12th month of war, 
we face one stark, certain fact. Unless we 
continually press ahead in oar fight against 
inflation, thai battle will be lost. 

First, what is the picture of our tight 
against inflation as it shapes up today? The 
plain fact is that we have been on the de- 
fensive. 

Let me give you a few facts on that. Since 
the institution of the General Maximum Price 
Regulation in May our cost of living has con- 
tinued to advance. Without price regulation, 
admit tedly, that cost would have been greater. 
How much greater it is impossible to say. Our 
figures do show that prices on commodities 



84 



that were controlled under the original Emer- 
gency Price Control Act have gone clown. 
That is an achievement. It is, however, mere- 
ly a ledger achievement. Balanced against the 
rise on costs not controlled, you can see that, 
despite the gain, the cost of living continued 
to rise. There is but one conclusion. Wemust 
press the offensive under the new anti-infla- 
tion legislation. 

I do not feel that it is too much to suggest 
that no single group be exempt from the de- 
mands of Avar. Nor do I feel that I am being 
unfair to the farmer— or the wage earner— 
when I say that this war has so far not de- 
manded from these groups what it will — and 
mus t_demand if we are to win. Again I say, 
are we out to win this war or to profit from it? 

Does that mean that the farmer and the 
wage earning group alone must accept these 
sacrifices? By no means. Corporations — big 
and small — must also accept the necessity for 
reduced incomes both for their stockholders 
and for their officers. If we are to win this 
offensive, there must be further cuts in cor- 
porate profits. A program which is fair — a 
program which calls for equality of sacrifice 
— demands that the profits of business, accru- 
ing either to individuals or to corporations, 
must, through taxes, be cut back into line with 
increases in farm prices and in wage pay- 
ments to workers. 

We must have widespread, wholehearted 
and complete compliance with price regula- 
tion, with rent controls, with rationing — com- 
pliance not only with the letter of regulations 
but with the spirit of them. No law is proof 
against man's ingenuity if he goes to work to 
evade it. No law is foolproof unless it is 
backed by the determination of a whole peo- 
ple. I have always insisted that Americans as 
a whole have been — and are — convinced that 
defense of the home front through price regu- 
lation, rent control, and rationing are vitally 
necessary measures. Yet I know, and you 
know, that there are some among us who still 
either are not convinced that the program is 
necessary or who feel that technical compli- 
ance is enough. There are some among us— 
the gasoline gougers, the petty bootleggers of 
tires and the nickel hungry price chisellers— 
who are placing their puny profits above the 
expressed will of the majority. It is time that 
all of us now join in the offensive against 
them. It is time that we call them to time. 

Does this seem little? Perhaps it does. But 
think of it this way. Battles themselves are 
not won by individuals but by the united effort 
of the many. Our battle on the home front— 
our war— will be won in the same wav— not 
by any single individual but by the united ef- 
ort and united determination of all of us to 
ollow through— even unto the least of the 
things that are demanded of us. 



Civilians in the War 



by 

James JVL Landis 

Director, U. S. Office of Civilian Defense 



T^HE complicated machinery of modern 
warfare is calling for more and more of 
the world's "population-power." Men, women, 
children in every nation — in those which have 
not felt the impact of enemy inva- 
sion or air attack and in those 
which have — are being drawn into 
the conflict in increasingly active 
roles. Military and civilian forces 
are complementing one another as 
never before, and in America the 
time is not far away when almost 
every citizen will have a clear-cut 
war job, a well-defined responsibil- 
ity. 

Modern warfare's first rule is or- 
ganization — swift, thorough, all- 
embracing. This rule applies as 
completely to civilian as to mili- 
tary action, and in nation after na- 
tion where active warfare is waged 
organized civilians are sharing 
honors with the military. 

America has learned much from 
the experience of its Allies and is 
steadily perfecting its civilian or- 
ganization against enemy attack 
which may bring war to these 
shores. 

Organized Civilian Defense in 
America did not begin with Pearl Harbor. 
As long ago as May, 1940, before the invasion 
of France, President Roosevelt approved a 
National Defense Advisory Commission. In 
August, 1940, the President created the Di- 
vision of State and Local Cooperation, carry- 
ing civilian war preparation directly to the 
communities of the nation. On May 20, 1941, 
still half a year before Pearl Harbor, the 
present Office of Civilian Defense, created by 
the executive order of the President, had a 
fully defined program for meeting the increas- 
ingly immediate threat of war. Almost im- 
mediately, the rush of volunteers overtaxed 
defense enrolling and training facilities, and 
when the enemy struck at Pearl Harbor and 
the Philippines, millions more came forward. 

There are now approximately 11,000,000 
enrolled and trained volunteers in all of the 
many divisions of the Civilian Defense organ- 
ization. These volunteers give most of their 
spare time to war work, under the direction of 
local Defense Councils in 11,000 American 
communities. , 

The Office of Civilian Defense has always 
been an advisory and coordinative body, a 
source to which state and local councils could 
turn for advice on the problems of organiza- 
tion as well as the proper defense methods 
and equipment. The problem of civilian de- 
fense is a civilian problem and civilians are 
engaged in its solution. Local communities 
are formulating and executing their own 



plans with -the advice, counsel, guidance and 
encouragement of Washington. 

The Office of Civilian Defense sets forth a 
program of protective measures for American 




Some of the tools used in civilian defense work. In 
the foreground is an outlet junction box, which dis- 
tributes electric current from an Emergency Service 
truck over a wide area. Then there are floodlights, 
all sorts of fire fighting tools and equipment to com- 
bat gassing of civilians. Power drills, and saws, a ten 
ton jack, an acetylene burning outfit and even port- 
able field telephones are included, all of which is 
carried in the Emergency Service Truck in the back- 
ground. Below Director Landis of the OCD. 

OEM Photos 




communil ies, to meet the danger of enemy air 
raids. It also considers proposals, suggests 
plans and promotes activities designed to 
sustain the national morale and provide op- 
portunities for civilian participation in the 
war programs of other federal agencies. Our 



volunteer army must be kept so organized that 
it can be called upon by other federal agencies 
to give immediate and sustained impetus to 
the war activities in all the communities of 
the nation. 

At the outbreak of the war, the 
first task of Civilian Defense was 
to expand the machinery of civil- 
ian protection, to enlist and train 
air raid wardens^ auxiliary tire- 
men and policemen, emergency 
medical units, and all the other 
units of the protective services 
which are part of the U. S. Citizens' 
Defense Corps. This protective 
program is now well underway. 

In February, 1042, an appropria- 
tion of §100,000,000 was made 
available by Congress to provide 
equipment to communities in "tar- 
get" areas on a loan basis. As a 
result, many types of equipment 
are being distributed by the United 
States Office of Civilian Defense. 
The manufacture of these articles, 
in some cases requiring months of 
planning and work, is far along. 
For example, 18,000 pumping units 
of 500-gallon permanent rating are 
being distributed to municipalities 
lor i he use of local fire departments, together 
with pumping hose and other fire supplies. 
Armbands, medical kits, gas protective de- 
vices, are being or have been distributed by 
the Office of Civilian Defense just as fast as 
the huge quantities that are needed can be 
manufactured. The OCD also recommends or 
approves many other items of equipment 
which it does not buy outright, but which 
State and local Defense Councils may pur- 
chase with every assurance that these items 
are suitable for the designated purpose. 

The various units which make up the pro- 
tective branch of Civilian Defense now have a 
total enrolled membership of over five and a 
half million civilians; and, while much re- 
mains lo be done in perfecting organization, 
the foundations are well laid. 

The second chief responsibility of the Office 
of Civilian Defense is to "promote activities 
designed lo sustain the national morale and 
to provide opportunities for civilian partici- 
pation in the defense program." 

All such civilian war service activities are 
carried on under the general sponsorship of 
the U. S. Citizens' Service Corps. Our own 
individual and national well-being are linked 
with the solution of problems arising directly 
or indirectly as a result of the war and the 
pressing necessity to speed all war produc- 
t ion. With the understanding and the help of 
the people, bottlenecks on the home war front 
{('on Cm iw<l on patje 174) 



The Coast and Geodetic Survey's Part 

in the War Effort 



by 

Rear Admiral Leo Otis Colbert 

Director, U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey 



EVERY resource of the U. S. Coast and 
Geodetic Survey is fully devoted to the 
war effort. 

That simple statement might well exhaust 
the subject indicated by the title of this arti- 
cle, particularly in these days when actions 
take priority over words. Nevertheless, every- 
one concerned with this war, that is, every 
citizen of the United States and of the United 
Nations, is entitled to know the efforts being 
made insofar as such information does not 
violate the discretion imposed by war condi- 
tions. 

The functions assigned by law to the Coast 
and Geodetic Survey are as vital to the prose- 
cution of a war as they are necessary to the 
commerce and industry of peace. This was 
recognized when the Survey was assigned an 
important role in the National Defense Pro- 
gram. Consequently on December 7, 1941, the 
Survey was prepared and began active par- 
ticipation as an adjunct to the armed forces. 

The production of nautical and aeronaut- 
ical charts is, perhaps, outstanding among 
Survey activities significant to the war effort. 
The surveying and charting of United States 
coastal waters has been a basic function of 
the Bureau since its inception in 1807. The 
task of charting the nation's airways was 
added in 1920. The year 1941 found the Sur- 
vey producing over eight hundred different 
nautical charts of the coastal waters of the 
United States and its possessions, and over 
one hundred different aeronautical charts 
blanketing the forty-eight States and Alaska. 

The inauguration of the National Defense 
program brought an immediate and substan- 
tial increase in the needs of the Army and 
Navy for these charts which have continued 
to grow at an unprecedented rate. For some 
years there had been a steady increase in sales 
of charts to the public, until in 1939 normal 
distribution reached a total of some Tin, 000 
copies; the largest issue of charts, up to that 
time, for any single year in the Bureau's his- 
tory. In the fiscal year 1942 over 3,500,000 
charts were distributed while, from present 
indications, requirements for charts during 
the present fiscal year will be well over 5,- 
000,000 copies. A considerable number oC 
special nautical charts have also been con- 
structed for naval use and the Bureau has 
undertaken extensive new programs of aero- 
nautical chart construction for the air forces. 

The impact of actual war created a situa- 
tion without parallel. Immediate delivery of 
large quantities of certain charts required 
for the movement of ships and air forces into 
strategic areas was necessary. Survey em- 
ployees, working night and day, met this 



crisis and overcame many obstacles in fulfill- 
ing this urgent need of the armed services. 

Since December 7, 1941, the Chart Division, 
responsible for the production of nautical and 
aeronautical maps and charts, has expanded 
its personnel and equipment to several times 
its normal size. New presses and equipment 
have been added to the reproduction plant to 
increase the output. To expedite compilation 
work and, at the same time, to further the 
policy of decentralization, chart compilation 
units have been established in other cities. 
This enables the Bureau to tap other sources 




of skilled draftsmen who might not otherwise 
be recruited for this important work. 

Chart production, however, is only one 
phase of the Survey's work related to the war 
effort. Another major function is the exten- 
sion of the great horizontal and vertical con- 
trol works of the United States upon which 
all precise mapping is based. These networks, 
which, reach into every part of the country 
and are connected to similar networks in 
Canada and (he Republic of Mexico, were be- 
gun over a century ago along the Atlantic 
coast of the United States. 

In considering the needs of National De- 
fense the War Department has defined sev- 
eral strategic areas throughout the country 
where new ma] is or revisions of old maps are 
urgently needed. To secure these a Defense 
Mapping Program was organized in which 
several map-making agencies of the Govern- 
ment are cooperating. It is now generally 
known as the War Mapping Program. 

The Coast and Geodetic Survey was as- 



86 



+ont functions in this 
signed two very nnp«^" ■ determined by 

program. In thepn«J<yf there was need for 
the U. S. Army Engineer s ther ^ ^ ^ ^ 

more control surve ^^_j ]ar <r e Coast and 
gram was under ^J^^f^^anizeA and 
Geodetic Survey P^^ v ^ Sj carrying out 
working in these ^^T^ d incidental- 
the necessary control ^ \^ works . In addi . 
lv extending the control neivvum 
ion the mapping of certain areas was as- 
signed to the Bureau and the work of survey- 
ing air photographing and the construction 
of precision equipment to expedite the task 
is well advanced. 

Information about our extensive coastal 
waters and coast lines is necessarily vital to 
defense in time of wax. This has tremendously 
increased the importance of other regular 
duties of the Coasr and Geodetic Survey, 
notably, the observation and prediction of 
tides and currents and the preparation and 
publication of Coast Pilots and their Supple- 
ments. 

The heights to which the tides rise and fall 
and the direction and velocity of currents are 
important to all navigation and particularly 
to naval operations where so many different 
types of craft are involved in necessary ma- 
neuvers. The Coast and Geodetic Survey has 
developed methods of predicting, with the 
highest degree of accuracy, the day by day 
tide stages in all important harbors of the 
United States and possessions for vears in 
advance. In like manner currents affecting 
navigation of coastwise sea lanes and ap° 
proaches to harbors are predicted These are 
compiled into tables and each vear the predic- 
tions for the year to follow are published in 
book form. Current charts of some important 
harbors are also issued from time to time. All 
o these are m great demand by the Navy and 
the Merchant Marine as evidenced bv in- 
creased orders and the ne*»d 
prints. tCl for mau ^ 

All mariners cruising along our coasts rely 




etc. Information in these W*, ^ hor ?g es > 
ously brought up to date b^m^i °? "f 
supplements. War conditions h f 1 "' 31011 ° f 
frequent revision necessary and tf "f 6 m °* 
meeting this need with a plann^l bm ' Vey 18 
he i ss ,,P nf ™™„ , i, med Program for 



the issue of more supplement pi ;°- ram tor 
tions of the Pilots. Require,*^ new edl " 
and Merchant Marine have madi -+ * he * m 



have nvirl^ 
to publish thousands of extra con! necessary 
The Coast and Geodetic S m . v * l ? s> 

[Continued on p« Vo f^ ls Perform- 



Naval Ordnance 



by 

Rear Admiral W. H. P. Blandy, U. S. N. 

Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance 



THE term naval ordnance, originally con- 
fined to the smoothbore guns, black pow- 
der and round shot of the sailing days, now 
covers a wide variety of weapons, devices, 
and ammunition, used not only on the sur- 
face of the sea, but hundreds of feet below it 
and thousands of feet above it. 

Naval guns today range from battleship 
main battery guns, weighing more than a 
hundred tons each, to aircraft machine guns 
weighing less than a hundred pounds. Gun- 
fire control has progressed from "sighting 
down the line o' metal," which was good for 
perhaps 200 yards range, to indirect fire 
methods and instruments effective at 40,000 
yards. 

Our heavy anti-aircraft guns and their con- 
trol systems must be able to bring down level 
bombers flying miles above the sea, or at least 
keep them up at inaccurate bombing alti- 
tudes. Lighter, automatic anti-aircraft guns 
must stop dive bombers and other close-flying 
airplanes in a matter of seconds after they 
come within range. 

Torpedoes, which might very properly be 
called "miniature no-man submarines," must 
generate their own power, convert it to mo- 
tion, control that motion in two planes, and 
detonate an explosive charge against the tar- 
get, all without human help after leaving the 
tube or rack. 

Bombs and bombsights, armor and projec- 
tiles, powder and fuses, depth charges and 
mines — all are included when we speak of 
"naval ordnance" in 1942. 

The agency responsible for the design, 
production, issue and maintenance of 
naval ordnance in this country is the 
Navy Department's Bureau of Ord- 
nance, which was established one hun- 
dred years ago as the Bureau of Ord- 
nance and Hydrography. This bureau 
works in close cooperation with the Bu- 
reau of Ships and the Bureau of Aero- 
nautics, as it must arm the ships and 
planes produced by those bureaus. It 
also provides a large part of the wea- 
pons and ammunition for the Marine 
Corps; arms merchant ships and Army 
transports; and produces many millions 
of dollars worth of ordnance for the 
navies and merchant fleets of our Allies. 

The materials needed for this vast and 
widely varied assortment of equipment 
range from silk to steel; the processes, 
from the carburization of face-hardened 
armor to the grinding of lenses and 
prisms. The bureau must include offi- 
cers and civilian technicists skilled in 
metallurgy, chemistry, interior and ex- 
terior ballistics, hydraulics, mechanics, 
electrical engineering, optics, machine 
shop practice, statistics, office and per- 




sonnel management, and all phases of operat- 
ing gunnery in every type of surface vessel, 
aircraft and submarine. 

In addition to these technical skills, there 
are many legal and financial problems which 
the officers of the bureau itself must handle, 
though many of these are dealt with, respec- 
tively, by the Judge Advocate General's Office 



Navy rhoto 




and the Bureau of Supplies and Accounts. 

Like al'l other organizations involved in the 
war effort, the Bureau of Ordnance has faced 
a tremendous increase in workload with a 
corresponding growth in personnel, during 
the past two years. From an average total an- 
nual appropriation of little more than a hun- 
dred million dollars for the five years ending 
in June 1940, the funds at its disposal for the 
present fiscal year exceed five billion dollars, 
an increase of nearly 5,000 per cent. The most 
active year of World War I, 1918, saw the 
Bureau of Ordnance handling little more than 
five hundred million dollars, only one-tenth 
the present load, and less than Lend Lease 
funds alone for the present year. 

The personnel has increased accordingly, 
(hough of course not proportionately. From 
32 officers and 173 civilians in 1938, the total 
now comprises 713 officers and 1,5G3 civilians. 
Only 12% of the officers are on the active list 
of the regular Navy. Eight per cent are re- 
tired regulars. The remainder are reserve 
officers, carefully selected. They are rendering 
loyal and highly efficient service. 

This great upsurge required a reorganiza- 
tion of the bureau. The former organization, 
while eminently suitable for the relatively 
small peacetime load, and with only a few 
officers available, was inadequate to cope 
with an expansion of 2,000 per cent in per- 
sonnel and 5,000 per cent in volume of ma- 
terial produced. There was no one other than 
the Chief and the Assistant Chief to coordi- 
nate the many sections in their various func- 
tions. And this coordination became more 
and more necessary as more contact with 
outside agencies, such as the Office of 
Production Management, (W.P.B.) 
Army and Navy Munitions Board, Na- 
tional Defense Research Council, etc., 
was required. These contacts, as well as 
the increased internal work of the bu- 
reau, required collective supervision 
over the general functions common to 
most of the sections. Manifestly, the two 
senior officers could not personally exer- 
cise all of this direct supervision. 

A modern type of functional organi- 
zation was therefore introduced by the 
present Chief of Bureau upon taking 
charge in February 1941. As finally 
evolved, the new organization contains 
six major divisions. Administrative; 
Planning and Progress; Financial; Re- 
search and Development; Production; 
Maintenance and Supply. Each is di- 
rected by a captain, with full authority 
to handle the affairs of his division, re- 
ceiving major directives from the Chief 
and his Assistant, and reporting to 
them on matters of major importance. 
(Continued on page 170) 



87 



The Navy s Business 



by 



Rear Admiral William Brent Young, (SC), U. S. N. 

Chief of the Bureau of Supplies and Accounts and Paymaster General of the Navy 



SECRETARY of the Navy Knox has said : 
"This is a war of supply." 
Even the most casual onlooker must be- 
come increasingly aware of that fact in con- 
templation of the problems 
involved in supplying food, 
fuel, clothing and other 
necessities of war to our 
fighting forces scattered all 
over the world. 

The Bureau of Supplies 
and Accounts, as the busi- 
ness administration arm of 
the Navy, is also its central 
purchasing agency. Few peo- 
ple realize that the principle 
of centralized procurement 
of material in the Navy is as 
old as the Bureau itself — 
100 years. 

Application of the dollar 
index alone gives a quick 
picture of the magnitude of 
the job now being done. The 
dollar value of contracts 
awarded by the Bureau in 
just one month of this year 
was three times larger than 
the total volume of con- 
tracts made during the whole period oi: 
World War L- 

The Bureau of Supplies and Accounts, dur- 
ing this particular month, purchased more 
than $2,344,000,000. In the twenty month 
period of the World War I from April 1917 
to December 1918, Navy purchases by the 
Bureau totalled $788,255,666. 

The importance of supply is evident even 
to the rawest recruit. It is the responsibility 
of officers of the Supply Corps to look ahead 
—to keep looking ahead in order that uni- 
forms may be turned out in required quanti- 
ties at the Naval Clothing Factory in Brook- 
lyn, New York, and by the large number of 
clothing manufacturers under contract with 
the Navy. 

In fact, the Bureau must always keep 
out in front of the well coordinated plans 
for expansion of our vast naval establish- 
ment. 

In this war, logistics seems destined to 
write the final verdict. We not only have sup- 
ply ships, tankers and tenders doing a vital 
job in the seven seas but a system of coastal 
and inland depots to service our lighting 
fleet. 

The idea of inland supply depots cannot be 
said to be entirely new. 1 can recall they were 
discussed frequently during the last war. The 
system was launched early in this year, how- 
ever, and is due to be completed shortly. The 
Naval Supply Depot at Mechanicsburg, Pa., 
was commissioned only a lew weeks ago and 



will soon provide 7,000,000 square feet of 
covered storage space for vital materials. 

The objective is greater logistic flexibility. 
It is unsound and unnecessary to provide tre- 



an< 




Gangway for Food! Sailors toting cases of supplies 
up the gangplank of a warship past the watchful eye 
of a Supply officer. Later the food will he inspected 
and stowed below. Lower: Rear Admiral Young, 
Chief of the Bureau of Supplies & Accounts. 



T\ S. Navy Photos 





predictable exigencies of war as extra- 
ordinary demands arise from different the- 
aters of operation. All are located near rail 
el high way facilities in strategic position 
to rush needed supplies to 
coastal points for loadings 
or overhauling^. 

The intricacies of supply 
and its part in the essential 
pattern of strategy is well 
illustrated aboard the mod- 
ern cruiser where the Sup- 
ply Corps officer, aside from 
liis commissary and dis- 
bursing duties, is charged 
with the storage, account- 
ability and issue of not less 
than 12,000 separate items. 

Aircraft's heavy role in 
global warfare has added to 
problems afloat. Space must 
be found for the convenient 
storage of motor and other 
technical parts which prob- 
ably were not even devel- 
oped at the time of launch- 
ing of many of our dominant 
fighting ships. 

I am convinced, having 
recently returned from an active theater of 
war, that the Supply officer on an aircraft 
carrier is probably one of the busiest persons 
aboard ship. The supply officer's daily battle 
is to combat the many problems of a "war of 
supply." 

Feeding the Fleet is a major concern of the 
Supply Corps. We buy, transport, store and 
prepare everything the sailor eats. As the 
war progresses to the remotest parts of the 
world, and wilderness areas in the United 
fetates are cleared over-night to make wav for 
raining centers, bousing 30,000 and more 
men, the Navy's reputation as the best fed 
body of men in the world seems to grow, 
iwl? "PfrfmentB, which the Bureau had 
fostered with the dehydrated food industry, 

oJt sVr r . yearS ' fort ™tely came te a 
os sa ,s actorv stage of development just 
about the time of Pearl Harbor. Practically 
Jake " ? UtPUt ° f this ind "^ has been 



in large measure to ***** 
the de hyd»ted products 



supplemental use of 



New 



mendous storage facilities and a wide range 
of materials at every port. The coastal depots 
stock for normal demands 1ml Hie net work of 
inland reservoirs is designed to meet the un- 



88 



othe /™^°?* f or the storage of food and all 
day Tl.o , S 1 " 1),,, V are being devised every 
more i! , £. f s . * h ™ to carry 

ib « si, Tn ^ 0g f tics reJi <* heavily on 

- -HXir^^' ^rM-^^l-nsportation 
m : o..s,i,,i,i.v of the Bureau of 
(Continued on page 172) 



The Quartermaster's Role in a Nation at War 



by 

Major General Edmund B. Gregory 

The Quartermaster General, U. S. Army 



TJJTORLD War No. 2, in which the United 

™ States is now a belligerent, is being 
fought on all oceans and all continents. It 
involves globe-girdling supply lines con- 
stantly facing relentless assault. 

Putting it another way, this is "a Quarter- 
master's war," to quote the famous military 
writer, Hanson Baldwin. Nazi General 
Eavenstein described it even more colorfully 
when he declared kk it is paradise tor the tac- 
tician but Hell on the Quartermaster." 

Our job right now is to furnish food, cloth- 
ing, equipment and general supplies to the 
Army no matter how large it may grow 
and no matter how far away its troops may 
be stationed. A glance at the food schedule 
alone is sufficient to show just how big a job 
we are facing. We have to furnish about 20 
million pounds of food a day for actual con- 
sumption, to say nothing of what we procure 
and store for future contingencies. 

Back of the supply lines we are building 
there is a procurement program of staggering 
proportions. We are buying in terms of mil- 
lions of articles and billions of dollars. Mil- 
lions of cubic feet of storage space in our de- 
pots hold Army supplies. The Quartermaster 
Corps is the world's greatest clothier; it's the 
best customer of the American farmer, and 
by far the biggest purchaser of hardware, 
kitchen equipment, canvas and a score of 
other essential items. We are buying horses, 
helmets, snowshoes and mosquito netting, to 
give an idea of how diversified a field Ave 



cover. 

Recently we placed orders for 421,000,000 
yards of cot ton and wool cloth — probably the 




largest single cloth order in Army history. 
We are teaching more than TO different trades 
to Quartermaster soldiers, and wherever 
troops are stationed we have a Quartermaster 
organization. These and kindred develop- 



ments are only small factors in the far-flung 
Quartermaster Corps set-up. 

Today, as in the past, the pattern of war is 
determined largely, if not entirely, by supply 
systems. The nation with the best supply 
system survives. Conquering nations have 
risen to domination through the medium of 
carefully planned services of supply; many 
of them lost that domination when rival 
countries surpassed them in this vital 
function. 

For hundreds of years the Romans held 
back barbaric hordes (hat constantly threat- 
ened their far-flung border. They had a superb 
supply system, that helped them beat oil" the 
Carthaginian invader, Hannibal, who finally 
succumbed when his own services of supply 
failed. 

The Roman empire collapsed when its 
elaborate supply system was allowed to dwin- 
dle away, making it easy prey for the marud- 
ing (Jot lis and Huns. Chaos reigned in Eu- 
rope for general ions until the canny Cardinal 
Richelieu made France the greatest nation in 
Europe. .Mindful of the vital role of the sup- 
ply system, Richelieu developed magazines 
and depots stored with military supplies in 
strategic sections. His foresight made it pos- 
sible for France to place well equipped armies 
in the field at vital locations far ahead of any 
opponent. 

The success of this plan was ignored by Na- 
poleon who lost his army and eventually his 
(Con finned on page 172) 





U. S. Army Photos 

Two Quartermaster functions close to the heart of every soldier are its duties in connection with the procure- 
ment and distribution of food and clothing. The various uniforms shown above, are, left to right, soldiers 
winter dress, nurses winter uniform, tropical battle dress, nurse, Armored Force, Paratrooper, and another nurse. 



89 



West Point at War 



by 



Major General Francis B. Wilby, U. S. A. 

Superintendent, United States Military Academy 



THE attack on Pearl Harbor on December 
7, 1941 found the Military Academy pre- 
paring itself for the conflict which had 
seemed to many people an inevitable result of 
the policies being followed by the Axis states, 
including Japan. While few had expected the 
United States to be plunged so precipitantly 
into a major war in both the Atlantic and the 
Pacific, the transition from a peacetime basis 
to a wartime program was rapidly brought 
about at West Point. The change having been 
foreseen, the necessary steps were rapidly 
taken. 

During the 140 years of its history, approx- 
imately 12,000 cadets have been graduated 
from the Military Academy. Of this number 
approximately 7,500 are on active duty with 
the United States Army today, serving their 
country throughout the world. This repre- 
sents a far greater number of graduates than 
had ever before been available in any of the 
previous wars in which our country has been 
engaged. This fortunate condition is due to 
the fact that since the last war the size of the 
Academy has been greatly increased, and 
these graduates have been able to carry on the 
mission of the Military Academy which has 
remained unchanged since West Point was 
founded in 1S02. Trained in the ideals of 
West Point, which are so well set forth in the 
motto of the Military Academy— "Duty, 
Honor, Country" — her graduates have carried 
the spirit and tradition of the Military Acad- 
emy into the Regular Army, and from there 
into that larger force "The Army of the 




United States"— which is being so rapidly or- 
ganized and trained for victory. 

In the years preceding the war, it became 
apparent that the Reservation at West Point 
was not sufficiently extensive to allow for the 
development of necessary training facilities 
such as ride, machine gun and artillery ranges 
and other installations required for tactical 




Bucliracti 1'iioic 



Sljrnal Corps Photo 

Cadets marching to the historic old Cadet Chapel. 



instruction which became necessary with the 
rapidly changing methods in the art of mod- 
ern war. During this time the Reservation 
has been increased in size from a little over 
3,000 acres to nearly 14,000 acres including 
the rugged terrain to the west and southwest 
of West Point itself. This land has already 
been developed into excellent combat ranges 
for the firing of small arms, anti-tank guns 
and light artillery pieces. A cadet camp has 
been built at Fopolopen Lake to replace the 
old summer camp on the Plain. Each Cadet 
spends several weeks during the summer at 
this camp where his time is spent in firing 
practice and instruction with all of the latest 
weapons. 

At the same time that it became apparent 
that the Reservation had become too small, 
the War Department realized that flying 
training must become an integral part of the 
curriculum for those cadets who are physical- 
ly qualified and who elect to prepare them- 
selves for a commission in the Air Corps. 
Stewart Field, lying a few miles to the west 
of the City of Newburgh, had been presented 
to that city by the Stewart family as a mu- 
nicipal airport. Realizing that it was the 
most suitable ground in the vicinity, the City 
of Newburgh turned over the original acreage 



90 



of Stewart Field to the Military Academy To 
ti e original piece of some 220 acres was added 
over 1,000 additional acres. During the past 
summer this ground Las been levelled, bar- 
racks, warehouses, hangars and other neces- 
snrv installations constructed by contractors 
working on a 24-hour basis until on August 
25th Stewart Field was formally dedicated as 
an Air Force Basic-Advanced Flying School 
and a component part of the Military Acad- 
emy. Cadets who had during the early months 
of the summer taken primary training at 
other Air Force Training Centers returned to 
Stewart Field for their basic training. 

In addition to this Field, three Auxiliary 
Landing Fields have been acquired in the im- 
mediate vicinity to provide for the necessary 
practice in landing and taking-off during stu- 
dent instruction. 

Today Stewart Field, the "Wings of West 
Point," 1 is in full operation with flying in- 
struction proceeding continuously. 

To enable the Military Academy to make its 
maximum contribution to the growing Army, 
Congress decided to increase the size of the 
Corps of Cadets from its previous authorized 
strength of 1960 Cadets to 249G. This Act of 
Congress was approved on June 3 of this year 
and steps were immediately taken to increase 
the size of the entering class to bring the 
strength of the Corps to the newly authorized 
figure. The new class entered during the 
month of July with a strength of over 1100 — 
the largest in the history of the Academy. 

Following this legislation, it became appar- 
( Continued on page 172) 




SiKnal Corps Photo 

First Class. 



men train on Z-inch Antiaircraft gun. 



The Naval Academy at War 

by 

Rear Admiral J. R. Beardall, U. S. N. 

Superintendent, United States Naval Academy 



HPO meet the present war requirements, the 
United States Naval Academy at Annap- 
olis has already accomplished the largest ex- 
pansion program in its history. Keenly aware 
of its responsibility to the American people 
and to the Navy, the Academy is intensively 
engaged in its vital task of sending forth to 
the Fleet inspired young naval officers of the 
highest caliber. By condensing the regular 
four-year course to a three-year period, and 
by instituting a special school for Reserve 
Midshipmen, the Naval Academy during 
1941 and 1942 commissioned 3,000 officers 
who were immediately made available for 
active naval service. 

It is not nearly enough, however, to have 
achieved the largest annual number of mid- 
shipmen to be graduated and commissioned. 
More than ever before the emphasis has been 
focused on the positive development of thor- 
ough naval adaptability and trained, aggres- 
sive leadership in the individual graduate. 
While this same emphasis has long been the 
keystone of policy at the Naval Academy, it 
has now been carried forward to include the 
practical requirements and lessons that are 
being constantly acquired from our forces 
engaged in the War. 
To make available to 
those forces that type 
of responsible and 
alert young naval of- 
ficer imbued with 
courage, devotion to 
duty, loyalty and 
trained initiative, 
possessing the stam- 
ina and fortitude to 
successfully meet the 
demands of this War, 
is the sole mission of 
the Naval Academy. 

The transitional 
period from the four 
to three year pro- 
gram was success- 
fully completed in 
June, 1942. Being ac- 
celerated rather than 
reduced, the present 
course includes ap- 
proximately 9G% of 
the academic and 
theoretical study pre- 
viously covered, with 
no appreciable loss in 
the purely profes- 
sional subjects of 
ordnance, navigation, 
seamanship, tactics, 
electrical and machine engineering. 

Careful study and attention is devoted to 
the vital subject of naval aviation and its 




influence on modern war. 
ron and a well equipped 



A training squad- 
hangar are main- 




United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Md. f looking from North West, 

tained at the Academy for the purpose of training program now 
indoctrinating midshipmen, and to assist in 
local security. Aerial navigation, the theory 



of flight and air tactics are covered as subjects 
in the academic course. New developments 
and the prevailing and potential functions of 
naval aviation are presented in an extensive 
lecture course. The fundamentals of engine 
maintenance are included in a modified 
ground school course, and thorough instruc- 
tion is received in radio and communications 
procedure. The possibility of further aug- 
menting aviation instruction and training at 
the Academy is now being studied. With the 
curtailed course as now scheduled, it is not 
practicable to properly qualify midshipmen 
as pilots, particularly since this can be ac- 
complished to greater advantage following 
their graduation. It is, however, of the great- 
est importance that those who are to be the 
active leaders of our fighting forces thorough- 
ly comprehend that victory in war can be 
gained only by the intelligent coordination of 
all weapons. 

It has been necessary to eliminate the sum- 
mer practice cruises at sea, due primarily to 
the fact that all seagoing vessels of the Navy 
are now required for war operations. This 
change, while not desirable from the stand- 
point of midshipman training, did permit the 

academic course to be 
better revised in that 
the summer months 
are n o w partially 
utilized for theoreti- 
cal study. Every ef- 
fort has been made, 
however, to cruise 
the midshipmen on 
smaller vessels with- 
in the waters of 
dies apeake Bay. 
Each third classman 
cruises during the 
summer on patrol 
boats and subchasers 
for a four weeks' pe- 
riod. While the value 
of seagoing training 
is certainly not to be 
overlooked, cruising 
on these patrol craft 
does permit the mid- 
shipmen to be given 
greater responsibility 
and to become more 
familiar with actual 
ship handling, tac- 
tical principles and 
maintenance. 

Of particular im- 
portance is the great- 
ly enlarged physical 
in effect. In addition 
to regular athletic drills and the minimum 
{Continued on page 172) 



91 



The Coast Guard Academy at War 



by 

Rear Admiral James Pine, U. S. C. G. 

Superintendent, United States Coast Guard Academy 



WITHIN the memory of many officers in 
the Service the Coast Guard Academy 
has grown from a school aboard ship to a full 
fledged engineering college. 

The growth of the Academy during the 66 
years of its existence has paralleled that of 
the Coast Guard. For a number of years prior 
to the outbreak of the present war need of the 
Service for officers was met by a cadet enroll- 
ment of about 150. With the additional duties 
assumed as a result of enforcing the neutral- 
ity laws it became necessary to provide for 
filling the vacancies in the commissioned 
grades, which in 1939 amounted to 300, as 
soon as possible. In that year 125 cadets were 
appointed instead of the usual 50 to GO and 
subsequent entering classes were set at 150. 
This provided for a total enrollment of 400. 

Upon the declaration of war the demand for 
additional officers became immediate. The 
First Class was accordingly graduated and 
commissioned on 10 December 1941. The 
four-year course was reduced to three years; 
the curriculum was completely revised to per- 
mit the Second Class to graduate the follow- 
ing June and subsequent classes to graduate 
after three years at the Academy. While some 
subjects have had to be reduced in this re- 
alignment, the basic engineering and profes- 
sional subjects have been retained. By con- 
tinuing studies throughout the year the three- 
year course contains about 85% of the former 
four-year course. 

In order to provide an immediate source of 
officer supply a four-months' reserve training 
class open to college graduates between the 
ages of 20 and 30 years was established. The 
first class of 200 reserves was admitted last 
February. Subsequent classes of 75 each en- 
tered in April and May. On J uly 1st this num- 
ber was raised to 150, and 
beginning in August was in- 
creased to 250 a month. This 
monthly quota will be raised 
to 300 by January 1043. 

The Academy's present 
buildings, which were com- 
pleted in 1932, were de- 
signed to accommodate 20S 
cadets. This capacity has 
been increased to 312 by ad- 
ditional construction and 
can accommodate 400 or 
more with a little crowding. 

In order to take care of a 
total of 1,200 reserve cadets 
temporary buildings on land 
adjoining the Academy are 
now under construction. 
Pending their completion 
some 000 reserves are tem- 
porarily housed at the 
Groton Training Station 



across the river from New London. 

Since 1939 there lias been no further expan- 
sion of the regular cadet program ; all efforts 
have been concentrated on the four-months' 
course for college graduates. This course con- 
sists of one-month's preliminary training as 




apprentice seamen. Those who complete their 
training satisfactorily are appointed reserve 
cadets for a further two-months' period. The 
final month is devoted to anti-submarine tac- 
tics in patrol boats and to a cruise aboard the 

Aerial view of the grounds and buildings of the 
United States Coast Guard Academy, New London, 
Conn. 

U. S. Coast Guard Photo 




sailing ship DANMARK and the schooner 
A TLA XT IT for those who cannot be accom- 
modated on the patrol boats. 

At present all reserve cadets are trained for 
deck duties. Those who have a background of 
engineering training in college are sent to the 
Navy Diesel Engineering School at Cornell 
after graduation for further engineering 
work. 

The preliminary term includes practical 
work in Seamanship, Small Arms, Signals, 
Tactics and in Physical Drill. The aim is to 
develop a military bearing and attitude and 
to determine the candidate's aptitude for the 
Service. A short Mathematics review, indoc- 
trination in Coast Guard methods through 
executive, engineering, and hygiene lectures 
supplement the practical instruction and pre- 
pare the students for the two-months' aca- 
demic term. 

In this term more time is spent in class- 
room work ; to the course in piloting is added 
instruction in Celestial Navigation; Ord- 
nance and Gunnery replace Small Arms 
work; the Signals course is expanded to in- 
clude Communications; lectures in Law and 
Maritime Economics are added. 

Classroom instruction and practical work 
total 40 hours a week. Week-end cruises pro- 
vide a useful form of recreation. 

The results of the combined program have 
been excellent Within two weeks after Pearl 
Harbor 30 regular cadets of the class of 1942 

morTthff + Uated and ° rdered t0 ^a. Six 
Ota^f% an additi0 * al < 2 cadets of the 
17 of I i t 7 erG - Taduat ed together with 
176 of the February Class of reserves The 

XLfX 6 S a8s M of 03 — * 

i 19th ; the July Class of 116 on October 
27th; the August Class of 
-10 on November 25th and 
the September Class of 241 
will graduate on December 
~~nd. Early in 1943 with a 
Program of entering classes 
of 300, with monthly gradu- 
ation, the Reserve Cadet 
*choo] will be in full pro 
duel ion. 

The advantages of having 
the reserve cadets at the 
Academy where they live 
and study together with the 
«paap cadets are apparent. 

L have the use of the 
'^ lltle s Provided; the offi- 
cers regularly assigned as 
J™ u ctors are available for 
IJ ' instruction. Finally, 
^ost important of all 
the y qmckly absorb the tra- 
^ontmuedon page 166) 



Science and the Navy 

by 

Rear Admiral Julius A. Furer, U. S. N. 

Coordinator of Research & Development, U. S. Navy 



HPHROUGH the application of .science man 
is constantly increasing his mastery over 
the forces of nature, but lie is as likely to use 
his newly acquired knowledge for evil as for 
good. In fact, progress in the held of the nat- 
ural sciences has often been stimulated more 
by the necessities of war than by those of 
peace. For example, the introduction of artil- 
lery into European warfare in the fourteenth 
century created a new kind of mathematical 
problem — the calculation of the position of 
bodies moving swiftly through the air to great 
distances. The geometry of Euclid and the 
simple algebra of the Arabs did not suffice to 
solve this problem, so new forms of mathe- 
matics had to be invented. It is, therefore, not 
a very great stretch of the truth to say that 
modern mathematics has its roots in the need 
of men during the Middle Ages to calculate 
the trajectory of a cannon ball. 

New conceptions as to the best methods 
for exploring the mysteries of nature ap- 
peared with the broadening of the mathemati- 
cal field, and this led in turn to what is com- 
monly known as the scientific approach to all 
such problems. It is, of course, a very far cry 
from the blind gropings of the men who first 
tried to predict where a round stone would 
fall when fired from the simple cannon of that 
day to the well-charted route which the mod- 
ern scientist follows in attacking the research 
problems of this day, but the approach is the 
same in principle. 

The extent to which the scientist is par- 
ticipating in the war effort of today is enor- 
mous as compared to his participation in the 
wars of the past. This is scarcely surprising, 
because in all fields of human endeavor sci- 
entific participation has increased at an as- 
tonishing rate, especially during the past 
twenty years. Such participation is now the 
commonplace rather than the unusual. 

Fifty years ago there were practically no 
research laboratories in the United States. 
Thomas Edison was working on inventions in 
his private laboratory following the "use 
every bottle on the shelf" method and inci- 
dentally getting some very good results. Thou- 
sands of other inventors were working as in- 
dividuals on all manner of gadgets from bent 
hairpins to horseless carriages. The profes- 
sors at a good many colleges were delving into 
this and that field of science, but the physi- 
cal and chemical laboratories of academic in- 
stitutions were still used principally for the 
teaching of students. Private industry was 
just beginning to employ as draftsmen the 
graduates in mechanical engineering from the 
few colleges that provided such courses. The 
employment of chemists to analyze for ac- 
ceptability the few materials that were being 
purchased according to specifications was 
only just getting underway. The use of physi- 



cists by private industry still lay far in the 
future, and there were practically no indus- 
trial laboratories carrying on organized sci- 
entilic research. Today there are about 2,000 
research laboratories in the United States 
employing over 70,000 trained workers. Only 
a very small percentage of these laboratories 
were in' existence at the time of World War 
I. Full realization of the value of the scien- 
tific method in solving material problems may 
be said to have come about during World War 




I as the tremendous growth in the number 
and size of such institutions has taken place 
largely since then. 

Among the few research laboratories in 
operation in the United States during the last 
decade of the nineteenth century was the 
Model Basin, built and operated by the for- 
mer Bureau of Construction and Repair of 
the Navy Department at the Washington Na- 
vy Yard, although it was never designated as 
a research laboratory. It was established pri- 
marily to determine the best underwater 
forms for the hulls of war ships, but it has 
carried on a great deal of other research con- 
nected with warship construction. Some of 
the work done at the Model Basin in the past 
is now recognized as classic in the fields of 
naval architecture and marine propulsion. 
Merchant ships have reaped the benefit of this 
work although it was originally intended only 
to improve war ships. The new Model Basin 
at Carderock, Maryland, as the successor to 
the Washington Navy Yard establishment, is 
carrying on scientific work of the same kind 
with a constantly broadening horizon in sub- 



jects involved in naval construction and ma- 
rine propulsion. The plant at Carderock is 
probably the finest of its kind in the world 
and employs about 330 scientists and mechan- 
ics of special skill. 

Some of the other scientific explorations 
conducted or sponsored by the Navy before 
the day of organized research laboratories 
were: improvements in explosives, armor, and 
naval guns; the substitution of steel for 
wrought iron in the construction of ships; 
the use of steel castings in place of forgings: 
research on the strength and water tightness 
of ships' structures, particularly when sub- 
jected to underwater explosions; artificial 
ventilation for ships; the fouling of ships 1 
bottoms and the development of ships' bottom 
paints; deep sea diving and the investigation 
of the physiological elfects resulting there- 
from; research in various branches of marine 
engineering, and many others. Practically all 
of these contributions to knowledge have had 
applications to peaceful pursuits although de- 
veloped originally 1o improve weapons or in- 
strumentalities of war. 

Much of this work was and is being done in 
naval establishments like the Navy Boiler and 
Turbine Laboratory, Philadelphia, which was 
started as a fuel oil testing plant in 1912, the 
Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis, 
Maryland, and 1he various establishments un- 
der the Bureau of Ordnance, such as the Na- 
val Ordnance Laboratory, the Torpedo Sta- 
tion, Newport, the Powder Factory, Indian- 
head, and the Naval Proving Ground, Dahl- 
gren. 

In 1915 the Secretary of the Navy estab- 
lished the Naval Consulting Board. This 
Board consisted of twenty-four eminent ci- 
vilian inventors and scientists with Thomas 
A. Edison as Chairman. It was hoped that 
through this Board the best technological 
in in ds in the country would be brought to bear 
on the problems of national preparedness 
which were then coming to the front because 
of the war going on in Europe. There is no 
record that any great contribution in that re- 
spect was made by the Board, possibly be- 
cause its members were devoting only part 
time to the work and only in a consulting 
capacity as implied by the name. The Board 
did, however, accomplish one important 
thing: it recommended the building of a Na- 
val Research Laboratory. This laboratory was 
completed and started functioning in 1923. 
Since that time it has been very actively en- 
gaged in exploring many fields of science and 
especially the fields of electronics and acous- 
tics. The laboratory has made some very im- 
portant contributions to knowledge and to 
practical applications in these and other 
fields. 

(Continued on page 168) 



93 



The Army Transportation 



Corps 



by 

Major General C. P. Gross 

Chief of Transportation, Services of Supply, U. S. Army 



THE Transportation Corps of the Service 
of Supply was created by the War Depart- 
ment Ho coordinate, direct, and speed the 
flow of men, equipment, and supplies into the 
war effort." The Corps lias taken over the 
functions of the Transportation Service, 
which was formed as part of the Services of 
Supply last March, and in addition has under- 
taken new and broader activities. The new 
Corps has an organizational status parallel- 
ing that of the Corps of Engineers, the Quar- 
termaster Corps, and the Ordnance Depart- 
ment. 

The mission of the Transportation Corps is 
to transport all the men and all the supplies 
of modern warfare to whatever destination 
they may be assigned. In order to properly 
execute its mission, the Transportation Corps 
has been delegated the authority to control all 
military shipments by rail, water and high- 
way. In other words, all methods of military 
transportation except air (which remains un- 
der the Chief of Army Air Forces) come un- 
der the direct supervision and control of the 
Chief of Transportation. 

The Chief of Transportation is in effect 
therefore the traffic manager of the War De- 
partment for rail, water and highway ship- 
ments of all types. In addition, he is respon- 
sible for and controls the operation of all field 
establishments pertaining to these forms of 
transportation. These establishments include 
ports of embarkation, port agencies, holding 
and reconsignment points and regulating 
stations. The agencies just mentioned have 
been set up by the War Department to co- 
ordinate and control all military movements. 

Because of this excellent system of coordi- 
nation and control the Transportation Corps 
has been able to (1) move troops and freight 
throughout the United States, (2) regulate 
the flow of troops and freight to the ports of 
embarkation, (3) move both men and freight 



overseas, (4) provide the transportation 
units and equipment needed for operations in 
overseas theaters. These functions have been 
carried out with a minimum of disturbance to 
the other essential activities of the trans- 
portation system of the country. 

The Transportation Corps has benefited 




greatly in planning and carrying out its mis- 
sion from the experiences of World War I 
when the transportation facilities of the 
country bogged down. Through lack of 
proper coordination and control in 1917-1S 
carloads of freight were permitted to pile up 
at one port where no ships were available, 
while at another port empty ships waited idle 
for cargo urgently needed abroad. Freight 
cars became storage cars and were so used 



for months at a time, which naturallv re- 
sulted in an acute shortage of rail freight 
equipment. As a result, the movement of 
freight both slowed down and piled up. 

To overcome such difficulties as these, the 
present Transportation Corps, acting as the 
traffic management branch of the Army, has 
instituted a carefully planned traffic control 
system to regulate the flow of men, materials 
and equipment from camps, stations and fac- 
tories to the ports of embarkation. This sys- 
tem of control has so far completely elimi- 
nated the bottlenecks of World War I. To- 
day we have a systematically planned, well or- 
ganized and smooth operating organization 
which plans, supervises, and executes all mili- 
tary movements from their inception to final 
delivery. That this is fortunate is proven by 
the nature of the present struggle. 

Transportation is the number one problem 
of World War II. We are all familiar with 
the tremendous manufacturing possibilities 
of this country. However, few of us are fa- 
miliar with the enormous transportation 
problem resulting from our production pro- 
gram. Moving the products from our thou- 
sands of factories to the ports of embarkation, 
from the ports of embarkation overseas, from 
the ports of debarkation overseas to points of 
final delivery for use, requires the movement 
of more traffic than was conceived of as pos- 
sible some time ago. This tremendous move- 
ment naturally taxes every transportation 
facility at our disposal and every freight car, 
every truck, and every vessel must be used to 
its utmost capacity. This means more trips 
for freight cars and trucks between factories 
and inland storage depots and the ports — and 
more trips for cargo vessels from our ports to 
ports in the theaters of operation, where the 
supplies are turned over either to our own 
forces overseas, or to our Allies. This is the 
(Continued on page 108) 




94 



The Armored Force 

by 

Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers, U. S. A. 

Chief of the Armored Force 



HP HE youngest and hardest hitting arm of 
the Ground Forces is, perhaps, the least 
understood. It came into being only after the 
fall of France. On July 10, 1940', the War 
Department issued an Immediate Action Let- 
ter creating the Armored Force. At that 
time there were infantry tank units and 
mechanized cavalry; but no armored divi- 
sions, and the Tank Corps had long since gone 
out of existence. 

One year later there were four armored di- 
visions and several GHQ tank battalions ; and 
on December 7, 1 941 ? live armored divisions. 

Today there are fourteen armored divi- 
sions. 

In addition, there are approximately twice 
as many separate tank battalions; also, the 
Armored Force School, which graduates more 
technicians and officers than any civilian uni- 
versity in the world ; the Armored Force 
Board, which tests all equipment used in the 
Armored Force ; the Armored Force Labora- 
tory, which tests both men and equipment, 
and the Armored Force Replacement Train- 
ing Center, in which thousands of soldiers re- 
ceive their basic training. 

The Armored Force Headquarters is at 
Fort Knox, Kentucky; while in our western 
desert and in more than 15 camps in con- 
tinental America, as well as in several 
theatres overseas, armored force units are be- 
ing trained or are taking their part in this 
global, three-dimension war. 

This suggests one of the miracles of ex- 
pansion being wrought by the Army; and the 
closer one looks at this miracle, the greater 
becomes the wonder. Each of these divisions 
must have 75% of its men highly trained; 
and each has more guns than officers and men 



put together. There is one vehicle, as an aver- 
age, to each five men; also, there is one 
armored vehicle to each 10 men ; yet only 15% 
of a division's personnel is required to man 
the tanks. 




In addition to the tank units, there are 
armored infantry regiments, armored field 
artillery battalions, and engineer, recon- 
naissance, medical, quartermaster, signal 
corps and ordnance units. 

Eight arms and services are welded into a 
compact, mechanized and armored self-sus- 
taining organization, the firepower of which 
is twelve times as great as that of a triangular 
division. 

Units of the Armored Force have partici- 
pated in the Philippine campaign, in battles 



against Marshal Rommel, in the Libyan 
desert, and are now playing a major roll in 
the North African campaign. Men and offi- 
cers have been tested under lire and in every 
instance, have displayed superior skill and 
courage in handling their armored cars and 
rolling fortresses. 

In Libya and Egypt both British and 
American crews have demonstrated that the 
M-3 tanks were more than a watch for Ger- 
man and Italian tanks. It was recently said 
by a. British officer, Capt. John Lovell Marsh, 
that he, as well as thousands of other English 
soldiers, found new confidence with the ar- 
rival of American-made tanks. Having com- 
manded a tank squadron, during his eighteen 
months with the 8th Army, Capt. Marsh, an 
authority on tank warfare, stated that he was 
most favorably impressed by our light tank. 
"If we had had that type of equipment at the 
start of the war, the story would be different. 
I found the American light tank to be reliable 
and mechanically perfect." 

Richard D. McMillan, in a news release 
sent from British battle headquarters in the 
Egyptian Desert, wrote in November: u Big 
forces of American-made General Sherman 
(M4) tanks, the latest, hardest-hitting, 
heaviest armored models, helped beat Mar- 
shal Rommel to his knees. The Sherman has 
proved itself the best tank in the desert, vast- 
ly superior to the vaunted German Mark IV's. 
British crews who have fought the Sermans 
in the last two weeks believe they are the best 
tanks ever made.'' 

Long before the M-3 had been in battle, 
Army Engineers, in conference with the Chief 
of Armored Force, and with the Armored 
[Continued an page 172) 




When messages must get through in a hurry, nothing con compare with the motor- 
cycle. The Armored Force uses them in quantity to direct convoys, get messages 
through, and for general reconnaissance work over terrain where larger vehicles 
are too ' conspicuous. They played a big part in the fall of France and Belgium, 
effectively used by the Germans. Note the Tommy Gun in the holster. 




Whether they fight on land or in water, M4 Tanks are the backbone of Americas 
mechanized might, and are proving their mettle in the African desert war which 
is turning out to be the downfall of General Krwin Rommel and his Afrika Korps. 
These tanks, on test run here at Ft. Knox, Ky., headquarters of the Armored 
Force, are the most powerful land battlewagons in the world. 



95 



The Federal Bureau of Investigation Is at War 

by 

John Edgar Hoover 

Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States Department of Justice 



LCVES of nations are determined not by 
1 the count of years, but by the lifetime 
of the score of the human spirit. The life of 
a man is three-score-and-ten, a little more, a 
little less. The life of a nation is the fullness 
of the measure of its will to live . . ." So spoke 
our Commander in Chief on January 20, 1941. 

The will of the United States to live must 
have been his thought on September 6, 1939, 
when lie directed the Federal Bureau of In- 
vestigation to direct, control, correlate and 
channelize all of the investigative work re- 
lating to espionage, sabotage and violations 
of law affecting our national security. So 
must he have thought when in this Directive 
he requested all law enforcement agencies 
to report to the FBI all evidence of any ac- 
tivity dangerous to the best interests of this 
count iv. 

Our President profited greatly from his 
service in World War I. Cur government and 
our peoples experienced much from that war. 
We saw at that time more than twenty dif- 
ferent agencies handling investigations of 
internal security matters. We observed at 
that time too many innocent persons prose- 
cuted by well-meaning but inexperienced in- 
dividuals. The activities of the Vigilantes 
mocked the civil liberties we fought to pie- 
serve. We knew at that time of too many in- 
stances where our national security was 
violated without the responsible persons be- 
ing brought before our bars of justice. 

Profiting from these experiences, seeking 
to avoid their repetition, realizing the nec- 
sity for a centralized Federal Agency to 
handle matters involving our nat ional secur- 
ity the FBI was ordered to shoulder this 
responsibility. 

It is interesting to point out that the or- 
ganization and administrative functioning of 
the FBI did not undergo any fundamental 
changes. The personnel was enlarged to meet 
the burdens of the increased responsibility. 
The curriculum of the Agents' training he- 
came more intensive and expansive. Scientific 
and practical studies of the investigative ap- 
proach to violations of our national defense 
program became the major concern. 

In 1924 the Identification Division of the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation was estab- 
lished with slightly more than 800,000 finger- 
print cards and a few contributors. Law en- 
forcement needed a central repository for 
Criminal data on individuals arrested for 
violations of the law. In 1939 this Division 
was serving nationally and internationally 
10,518 police agencies and had on file S,G32,- 
025 criminal fingerprints. It was ready for 
the emergency yet to come. 

In U):>2 the Technical Laboratory took its 
first objective step toward the light of day. 
With one scientist in a small room this sec- 



tion developed until 1939 it occupied over 
10,500 square feet of space and was manned 
by 20 technicians, serving an inestimable 
value in the solution of crime and defeat of 
the paid criminal alibi. Additional scientists 
were being trained to fit into the foreshad- 
owed wartime expansion program. 

In 1035 the National Police Academy was 
founded by (he FBI. Selected officers from the 
various law enforcement agencies were 




schooled in their field of endeavor. They re- 
turned to their respective departments and 
(heir conducted schools passing along the 
education of modern police work. In 1930, 
370 men had graduated from this school and 
78,700 police officials had benflted by their 
attendance. 

With these available facilities and many 
others — backed by experience and training — 
it was but another natural step for the FBI 
in its service to our country to respond to 
the order of our Commander in Chief. 

1 minediately the FBI Law Knforeement 
Officers Mobilization Plan for National De- 
fense became effective. More than 1 HO, 000 
police officers of the nation were mobilized 
into action. Quarterly Conferences for law 
enforcement officials were instituted at once 
and are still being held throughout the coun- 
t ry. Law enforcement representatives attend- 
ing t hese meetings learn first hand the investi- 
gative technique in national security cases. 
Defense matters of mutual interest are dis- 
cussed and serve to coordinate the efforts of 
the entire law enforcement field on a national 
scale. Today, law enforcement agencies are 



assisting the FBI materially in the handling 
of national defense cases. 

An immediate conference took place with 
the Office of Naval Intelligence and the Mili- 
tary Intelligence Division of the General 
Staff. Today at Washington and in the field 
where either Intelligence Service lias an of- 
fice, regular weekly conferences are held, par- 
ticipated in by officials of all three organiza- 
tions. In these conferences information is 
exchanged and furnished — all toward a closer- 
collaboration in the maintaining of a United 
Front against those who seek to destroy us. 

To avoid a duplicity of effort and to afford 
a more direct attack on the respective prob- 
lems a jurisdictional agreement lias been 
reached wherein the investigative responsibil- 
ities of the FBI, the Office of Naval Intelli- 
gence and the Military Intelligence Division 
are clearly defined. 

At the request of the Army and Navy. 
Agents went out into industry. They con- 
ducted surveys of those plants determined by 
the Army and Navy as vital to the national 
defense. Recommendations and suggestions 
were made toward the development of pro- 
tective facilities against the saboteur and 
spy. The Army and Navy influenced indus- 
try to adopt these suggestions. Up until 
January 5, 1942, we had conducted over 2,- 
:>00 surveys of this type. By that time the 
Army and Navy were in a position to assume 
the responsibility of plant security and are 
now affirmatively active towards assuring un- 
hampered production so that our fighting 
forces will not suffer for lack of equipment. 

Today every defense plant worker is finger- 
printed. Entrance into our plants is no long- 
er an "open door affair." The saboteur or spy 
would find it difficult to work bis diabolical 
intentions in our industry. 

It is interesting to note that most of the 
sabotage during World War I was committed 
before the United States went into war and 
during that period when the sympathy of 
this country was apparent to the world pow- 
ers involved. This was illustrated by the 
Black Tom and the Hog Island explosions 

I am happy to say there has been no evi- 
dence of foreign-inspired sabotage in this 
country to date. 1 attribute this in no little 
part to the plant surveys before we went into 
war, to the thousands of confidential publica- 
tions concerning precautionarv methods 
made available to industry, to industry it- 
self m complying with the recommendations 
made to it, and to the millions of workers 

' iVS re tw amed ever alert and 

In 1940, two representatives of the FRi 
went to England. They made studies and ob- 
servations of the methods used by law en- 
forcement to protect the home front under 
(Continued on par/e 



90 



The Rubber Situation in the United States 



William M. Jeffers 

National Rubber Director 



HP WO major needs of equal importance 
govern the rubber situation in the United 
States. 

The first of these is that rubber must be pro- 
vided for our Armed Forces, the greatest 
mechanized force in the history of the world. 
Everybody understands this need and agrees 
with it. 

The second is that rub- 
ber must be provided to 
transport war workers to 
and from their duties ; to 
transport materials from 
their sources to war 
plants; to transport food 
and clothing and other 
necessities to our manu- 
facturing centers. This 
rubber is just as im- 
portant as is rubber for 
our war machine. It is 
this point that needs to 
be fully understood by 
every American citizen, 
in the Services and out of 
them. 

Basically our rubber 
situation is simple 
enough. We have been 
cut off from Malaya, the 
world's principal source 
of crude rubber. No other rubber-producing 
area, or any combination of them, can even 
approach supplying the 600,000 long tons a 
year we normally consume. We cannot, there- 
fore, expect to get any appreciable quantities 
of crude rubber for a number of years. 

We are engaged in building a synthetic 
rubber industry to supply that need, com- 
pressing into a couple of years a task that 
normally would take a decade or more. At 
the end of that couple of years — the middle 
of 1944 or thereabouts — we should have 
enough synthetic rubber to fulfill all our basic 
needs, civilian as well as military. The inter- 
vening two years, between now and mid-1044, 
are the crucial ones. We must bridge that gap 
and we can bridge it only by the most careful 
conservation of rubber by every individual. 

We can and will provide the rubber for our 
military machine and for the needs of our al- 
lies. If the Services exercise reasonable cau- 
tion in their use of rubber we should have no 
difficulty in meeting military requirements. 

I t is I lie equally important civilian field 
that we must watch with the greatest of care. 
Millions of war workers must be transported 
to their jobs and back home again daily. Some 
of them must travel long distances, due to 
housing shortages in crowded factory areas. 
The public carriers, the buses, streei cars, 
subways and commuter (rains, cannot carry 
more than a fraction or them. The urban 



transportation systems of the United States 
can carry some 7,4f)0,000 passengers at a given 
time. Millions more than this must move — 
and the only way they can move is on rubber. 

The easiest path to military defeat is col- 
lapse of the domestic economy. We must 
avoid that at all costs, at whatever incon- 




Arniy Signal Corps Photo 



One of the reasons rubber must be rationed to further 
the ivar effort. It takes plenty of rubber to keep this 
155 -mm. gun rolling toward the enemy. Lower: Wil- 
liam M. Jeffers. National Rubber Director. 




venience to the individual. To avoid that col- 
lapse, rationing of gasoline, the 35-mile speed 
limit, compulsory tire inspection, and other 
regulations have been instituted. If these 
rules, designed to limit our motor cars to es- 
sential driving, are carefully observed we will 
bridge our two-year gap. The million tons of 
rubber in the tires now in service on the auto- 



mobiles of the United States may well repre- 
sent the margins of victory in this war. 

1 have a great deal of confidence in the 
American people. I am confident they will 
conserve their tires carefully and conscien- 
tiously because those tires are vital to the war 
effort. If the American people observe the 
present rules in the spirit 
T believe they will ob- 
serve them, it appears 
now no more stringent re- 
strictions will be neces- 
sary. We are not going to 
he able to bridge the gap 
between crude rubber 
and synthet ic in the style 
of motoring to which we 
are addicted, but we are 
going to keep this coun- 
try on wheels. 

While it is undoubted- 
ly t rue we did not jump 
into the production of 
synthetic rubber quickly 
enough on a large scale, 
nevertheless progress 
that is being made is a 
t r i b u t e to American 
chemical and mechanical 
ability. We are making 
great strides in the pro- 
duct! on and use of synthetic rubber. Sixmonths 
ago the tire fabricators of this country were 
estimating they could produce tires from 
synthetics at about half the speed at which 
they processed crude. Three months ago they 
had increased the rate to 70 per cent. Now 
they tell me they can operate at about 90 per 
cent and in a very few months they will be 
turning out tires just as rapidly from syn- 
thetic rubber as they ever did from crude. 

The use of synthetic rubber for tires pre- 
sents souk* unknown di faculties, of course. By 
early next year, however, we will be produc- 
ing tires from synthetic rubber in sufficient 
volume to study the operation and take the 
"bugs out of it." The fabricators of rubber al- 
ready have made important strides in this di- 
rection and constant research is being made to 
improve their* methods. 11 must be realized, 
however, that synthetic rubber is an entirely 
different product from crude rubber. It con : 
tains differenl materials and has different 
qualities. All these qualities musf be studied. 

There are many long-term projects for the 
solution to our rubber problem; crude rubber 
from Latin America, rubber from the guayule 
shrub and the cryptpstegia vine, and other po- 
tential sources. All of them will help. I make 
only one prediction— that never again will the 
Knifed States be utterly dependent upon a 
fur-distant source for a material so vital to 
its life as rubber. 



97 



t 



Keeping the Navy Physically Fit to Fight 



by 



Rear Admiral Ross T. Mclntire 

Medical Corps, Surgeon General, U. S. Navy 



THE average person and even the average 
military man sometimes does not realize 
sufficiently the importance of military medi- 
cine and the part it plays in the successful 
employment of a military organization in 
war. Victory is not only on the side of the 
higgest battalions, as Napoleon put it, but it 
is also on the side of the healthiest battalions. 
Indeed, the two expressions are nearly the 
same, for the battalion with half its men on 
the sick list is obviously likely to be the small- 
est battalion. The effect of disease upon mili- 
tary opertions is not sufficiently appreciated 
and the historian has not given it, in general, 
sufficient notice. Yet, we know now that the 
probable failure of three of the great: Cru- 
sades was due to epidemics of dysentery, 
smallpox and plague. The entire French cam- 
paign in San Domingo in 1802 was wrecked 
by yellow fever and malaria. Napoleon's Rus- 
sian campaign failed not only because of the 
Russian winter and Russian miliary action, 
but because of the tremendous number of men 
lost by typhus and pneumonia. Many, many 
more instances could be cited; and it is not 
remarkable that one of the great modern 
students of epidemiology has made the state- 
ment, which it would be hard to successfully 
dispute, "that typhus, with its brothers and 
sisters, plague, cholera, typhoid and dysen- 
tery, has decided more campaigns than * * * 
all the generals in history." Scurvy, which 
used to be one of the great diseases of the sea, 
had important bearings upon naval oper- 
ations and it is even said that the discovery 
of its cause and prevention in the 18th cen- 
tury resulted in the downfall of Napoleon, as 
if it had not been possible to con- 
trol scurvy in the British Heel, the 
blockade of the continent during 
the Napoleonic Wars could not 
have been maintained. 

It is evident then that the field 
of preventive medicine is one of the 
most important with which the 
military medical has to deal. It has 
been said that the specialty of the 
general practitioner is obstetrics. 
Tt is equally true that the specialty 
of the naval surgeon is preventive 
medicine. In our Navy, the Medical 
Department is concerned with the 
preservation of the health of the 
officers and men and this is car- 
ried out by means of all the scien- 
tific knowledge which modern 
medicine has to give. Selection of 
physically sound men; safeguard- 
ing of the purity of food, water and 
air; vaccinations against impor- 
tant diseases such as smallpox, 
typhoid, tetanus, and yellow fever ; 
are all a part of this work. 



Every large group of individuals, however, 
has what one would call, a normal sick rate 
and a normal injury rate ; and to care for the 
sick and injured and also to care for the 
casualties which may occur in battle, the 




Medical Department of the Navy maintains a 
great organization of dispensaries and hos- 
pitals. When these dispensaries are on ship, 
we speak of them as "sick bays." In addition 
to the hospitals which we have on shore, the 
Navy maintains hospital ships, which are 
floating hospitals capable of accompanying 
and serving the fleet. Besides this we have 




mobile hospitals, which can be packed up and 
moved from place to place. Our medical offi- 
ceTour denial officers, our pharmacists, our 

emale nurses, and our ^^^^S 
all engaged in these g^eat tasks. FoieMght 
planning, hard, conscientious worke d 
these are needed, and I am proud to say all 
are forthcoming from the medical personnel. 

There is another side which I would like to 
mention briefly and that is the supply of medi- 
cal materials" and appliances, instruments, 
dressings and drugs which are needed. The 
Navy maintains medical supply depots for 
the purchase and distribution of these medi- 
cal and surgical supplies. 

One other Held of the Medical Department 
of the Navy activities I must mention is the 
field of research. Medical research is going on 
all over the world, but there are many prob- 
lems of naval medicine that require special 
knowledge and special means of study. 

Finally, I would like to mention some of 
the great achievements of military medicine. 
The conquest of scurvy — one of the milestones 
of medical progress, was the work of naval 
surgeons. Scientific sanitation and hygiene, 
immunotherapy and preventive inoculation 
were largely developed by the medical men of 
armed forces. Our modern system of trained 
nursing had its origin in war. Hippocrates 
noted the value of military surgery in advanc- 
ing knowledge of the science of general sur- 
gery and many of the greatest surgeons and 
medical men, Par 6, Harvey, and John Hunter, 
have been military surgeons. I mention these 
developments as showing what has been ac- 
complished in the past and to indicate that 
in the future, military medicine 
may add many new things to med- 
ical progress for the benefit of 
mankind. 

All these things then add up to 
the value of what military medi- 
cine has done during the past years 
and what these things will do to 
hurry the winning of this war. One 
thought which should always be 
kept in mind is that although we 
now have materiel with which to 
light this war that nearly sur- 
passes mechanical perfection, to 
operate this a human being must 
be physically and mentally fit at 
all times. The Medical Department 
of the Navy is charged with the 
duly to see that the personnel is 
physically at With the program 
is now in force there is no 



aboard the I SS Solace 



TVS. Navy Photo 

a sea going hospital for sea going Americans. 



that 

doubt in the minds of the members 
of the .Medical Department of the 
Navy but that they will discharge 
that duty, and in so doing the de- 
feat of our enemies is sure. 



98 



The 



Exacting Test of War 



by 

Major General James C. Magee 

The Surgeon General, U. S. A. 



THE planning and preparation which en- 
gaged the attention of the Medical Depart- 
ment for many years have been put to the 
exacting test of war. Military theory has been 
converted to practice, plans into operation 
and surmise into experience. The treacherous 
assault on Pearl Harbor, which 
reserved to Japan a special page 
in the annals of infamy, immedi- 
ately reopened the book of mili- 
tary surgery and, happily, wrote 
one of its brightest chapters. Hun- 
dreds of cases of desperately 
wounded and burned individuals 
resulted within a short time, 
straining all medical facilities to 
the utmost in order to provide 
life saving care. Wounds were not 
only very extensive and mutilat- 
ing but heavily contaminated by 
the well fertilized soil of the is- 
land. Experience gained from pre- 
vious wars pointed to a stormy 
course on account of massive in- 
fection, and a dark outcome for 
many — if not the majority. A 
staggering death rate (80%) had 
always resulted from perforating 
wounds of the abdomen. Hope of 
better results were entertained 
from the sulfonamide com- 
pounds which had come into use in recent 
years, and the employment of human plasma 
for the treatment of hemorrhage and the 
much feared shock which invariably accom- 
panies severe injuries. 

The brilliant results obtained exceeded 
even the most sanguine of these hopes and 
gave assurance that a new era in battlefield 
surgery had been realized. Plans had already 
provided for the issue of a special box of sulfa- 
nilimide tablets to soldiers prior to combat, 
to be taken by mouth if wounded. The ex- 
perience at Pearl Harbor led to the inclusion 
in each first aid packet of a package of crystal- 
line sulfanilamide which is to be dusted on 
the wound itself. • 

One feature of the medical management of 
the casualties which has not received the at- 
tention it merits is the system of sorting and 
evacuation which functioned efficiently from 
the earliest phases of the attack. Without the 
successful operation of such an organization 
neither sulfanilamide, plasma nor surgical 
skill could have availed to save the lives of 
the wounded. The principles employed were 
those taught at the Medical Field Service 
School. The results demonstrated the inesti- 
mable value of t he field training given to medi- 
cal officers at that unique school. 

It will be remembered that in an article 
written last year the Medical Department 
was discussed under the following headings. 



To highlight the changes that; have occurred 
data will be considered under the same head- 
ings. 

SELECTION. The original standards for 
selection were purposely set high to attain 
the specific object ive of the moment. Grimmer 




Arm3" Signal Corps Photo. 

A most severe test of the Army Medical Department 
came during the Battle on Bataan Peninsula y when 
Medical officers had to improvise hospitals in the 
jungle to care for the thousands of American and 
Filipino casualties. Below: Major General Magee. 
Surgeon General of the Army. 



<1 




realities have required modifications in the 
physical standards. A new group now classi- 
fied "individuals with certain correctable de- 
fects" has been authorized. These inductees 



will be provided appropriate treatment at 
public expense so that they may be qualified 
for duty with the armed forces. In the com- 
missioned grades individuals possessed of 
special capabilities, although they do not 
meet certain physical standards, may be ac- 
cepted for "limited duty only."* 

For the first time in this period 
of emergency cases of acute un- 
complicated gonorrhea may be 
accepted for military service. 
Hospitalization is provided, thor- 
ough physical examination is 
made and treatment is given to 
make the disease non-infectious. 
These men accordingly become 
available for army service. 

Due to complications which 
arose as a result of the double ex- 
amination, the preliminary one 
by local boards lias been abol- 
ished. All examinations are now 
carried out by Army Induction 
Boards. A great deal of attention 
is devoted to the mental examina- 
tion. 

PRESERVATION. Regarding 
immunization, two very signifi- 
cant advances have been made. 
First, vaccination against tetanus 
has been established universally, 
and secondly, vaccination against yellow 
fever has been extended to all military person- 
nel scheduled for duty in zones where the 
disease is endemic. No reactions of an unusual 
nature appeared among the many thousands 
of the group first vaccinated. Mass immuni- 
zation resulted in the occurrence of a compli- 
cation which could not be anticipated, name- 
ly jaundice. In any pioneer endeavor unto- 
ward effects often happen. Intense study by 
leading medical scientists was devoted to this 
unusual condition. Despite the assurances of 
the Secretary of War that these were not 
cases of yellow fever the erroneous impres- 
sion, to the contrary, still tends to prevail. 
Let me, therefore, re-emphasize most emphati- 
cally that the condition did not result from 
the virus of yellow fever, a fact repeatedly 
continued by careful research conducted in 
many laboratories. The policy of immuniza- 
tion for bubonic plague, cholera and typhus 
fever is the same. 

A new activity of immense importance is 
I he compilation in the Office of The Surgeon 
General of data, most easily defined to mili- 
tary men, by the designation "Medical G-2" 
file. This is composed of a summary, from all 
possible sources, of the health conditions in 
potential theaters of operation. Extracts of 
this are made available to the commanders 
of task forces summarizing the health con 
{Continued on page Hit) ) 



1)0 



Naval Communications in Wartime 



by 

Captain C. F. Holden, U. S. N. 

Director of Naval Communications 



HP HE trend of world events in recent years 
-■- made it more and more apparent to 
thoughtful observers that war would inevit- 
ably reach the United States. No one could 
say where or when the first blow would fall, 
but for months before December, 1941, the 
Navy was on the alert for danger. Despite 
many precautions the unexpected disaster of 
Pearl Harbor took place, but it is more ac- 
curate to say of this tragedy that the nation 
was caught oil balance, than that it was 
totally unprepared. Attacks were expected, 
but the western Pacific seemed to be a more 
probable Japanese objective, and, thus, all at- 
tention was not centered on Honolulu. At any 
rate the Navy's rapid recovery from the 
treacherous assault has been most encourag- 
ing. Though there is much to be proud of in 
the exploits of the past few months, the real 
job has just begun. 

One of the many factors in this recovery 
has been the successful functioning of the 
Naval Communication Service. War re- 
quirements have added extra burdens to its 
usual task of maintaining contact with the 
fighting tleets and overseas possessions of the 
United States. Convoys of merchant ships 
with their vitally important cargoes must be 
shepherded through dangerous waters, and 
all this has meant tremendous growth. in com- 
munication problems. The most important 
duty, of course, is to keep the Task Forces in 
constant touch with each other and with the 
Commander in Chief. No one who can visual- 
ize the immense distances of this global war 
will minimize the difficulties of such com- 



munications. But fortunately for the success 
of the nation the problems have been solved. 
Had the Naval Communication system broken 
down during the Battles of Coral Sea and 
Midway, the story of triumph would have 
been much ditl'erent. 





The achievements of Naval Communica- 
tions were not made possible by sudden, hap- 
hazard efforts. Long before 1941 a sound 
standard system of communication had been 
organized in peacetime to meet the demands 
of war. Such foresight paid excellent divi- 
dends when war was at last declared. From 
the earliest beginnings of radio down to the 
present day, the Navy had been to the fore in 
research, and in the development of neAv and 
better equipment. No item or theory in the 
field of radio, however insignificant, had been 
left untested. It was a Chief Radioman in the 
Navy who first pointed out that sunspot s defi- 
nitely affected radio communications; the 
first trans-oceanic radiotelephone system was 
set up between the Naval Station at Arling- 
ton and Paris; motion picture newsreels were 
an outgrowth of Navy research ; and also the 
radio spectrum channelling system now in 
international use was the direct result of 
similar efforts. It is evident, then, that with 



U. S. Navy JL'hotos 

Upstairs and down, Naval Communications arc vital 
to the efficient functioning of ivar at sea. Left, a sig- 
nalman on a V. S. Navy destroyer on Atlantic convoy 
duty blinks a message to a tanker, while another reads 
the light flashes from another convoyed vessel. Right, 
surrounded by his compact transmitter and receiving 
set a radio operator aboard a Navy bomber keeps his 
big ship in touch with headquarters and with other 
ships of the air. 



such a background in the development of new 
devices, Naval Communications would have 
the most modern equipment available. 

As for the planning necessary for the 
proper use of such equipment, it may be said 
that as early as 1 !>:*>() the nation's basic pre- 
paredness program was in operation. Of 
course, when war broke out in Europe in 
1 <):!!>, no effort during the next two years was 
spared to have the Naval Communication Ser- 
vice ready for any eventuality. Those two 
years were of inestimable value in that, by 
the time America was attacked, the ground- 
work had been Laid for quicker, and more ef- 
ficient conversion of war operation. Not the 
least important aspect of such planning was 
the coordination of Navy radio channels with 
those of the commercial companies. In emer- 
gencies there must be no confusion, and tests 
have demonstrated the value of such coordi- 
nation. 

Though not fully completed by December 
7, 1941, the groundwork had been well con- 
ceived, and so, overnight, Naval Communica- 
tions passed smoothly from uneasy peace to 
global war. Fortunately, the Navy was able 
to supply the rapid communications that mod- 
ern warfare demands. In olden times ships 
operated separately or in small tight groups 
since communications at sea were extremely 
difficult, and delivery of messages was often 
a matter of weeks. Now whole tleets of ships, 
submarines, and planes operating at great 
distances from each other move as one syn- 
chronized body with the help of radio. The 
{Continued on page 1G6) 





100 



The Army Signal Corps 



by 

Major General Dawson Olmstead 

Chief Signal Officer of the United States Army 



JN a war in which men and machines move 
A at breath-taking pace on the ground and 
in the air, it is essential that vital informa- 
tion be dispatched at an even faster pace. And 
it is also essential that this information be 
withheld from the enemy. These twin require- 
ments of secrecy and speed are the guiding 
principles of the Signal Corps, which provides 
the equipment and personnel for the Army's 
lifeline of communications. 

In fulfilling these obligations, the Signal 
Corps is now active on an unprecedented scale 
both at home and overseas. It: keeps the 
Army's technical means of liaison function- 
ing between the War Department General 
Staff in Washington and the most remote 
point in any part of the world where an Amer- 
ican soldier is stationed. And it keeps the 
communications going among the units of our 
forces on the fighting fronts. At home, the 
Signal Corps is training men by the thou- 
sands in the advanced technique of radio, 
wireless and wire communication. And it has 
the grave responsibility of procuring, for the 
ground and air forces of the army, the best 
and most rugged in communications equip- 
ment — much of it new in design — to the value 
of billions of dollars. 

This complexity of communications is rela- 
tively new — but its purpose is a simple and 
time-honored one. Throughout the history of 
nations, honor has been paid to those who de- 
livered needed information at the right place 
and in the nick of time, from the swift-footed 
messengers of ancient Greece to the man who 
carried the celebrated message to Garcia. 

Today, while swiftness of foot still counts 
in certain emergencies, we are able to send 
most messages at the speed of electrons and 
radio waves. The major reliance is on elec- 
trical communication of the most modern 
type — a good deal of it more advanced than 
anything available to the general public. 
While statistics may no longer be divulged 
now that we are at w r ar, it can be said that the 
Signal Corps, continuing its phonomenal ex- 
pansion, already comprises one of the world's 
largest aggregations of telegraph, telephone 
and radio technicians, trained or in training. 

In obtaining this personnel, we have been 
fortunate in the fact that this in peacetime 
was a radio-minded nation. Former amateur 
operators and set-builders, former radio ser- 
vice men and others who made a hobby or 
profession of the radio field have been brought 
into the Signal Corps through selective ser- 
vice, by enlisting, by qualifying for officer's 
commissions and by civilian employment. Key 
men in the private radio and electrical com- 
munications industries are giving their ser- 
vices and counsel. 

In its current phase of rapid expansion, the 
Signal Corps is aided also by its own tradi- 



tion of scientific pioneering. The Signal 
Corps was the first Federal agency to collect 
weather information — a service which later 
developed into the Weather Bureau — and it 
still advances the weather-forecasting art by 
its development of radio-transmitting bal- 
loons for ascertaining conditions in the upper 
atmosphere. Again, the Signal Corps was the 
first United States military unit to make use 
of airplanes — for they could carry dispatches 
before they were powerful enough to carry 
guns or bombs. Out of the Signal Corps' 
original aviation division developed a child 




that has greatly outgrown its parent. The 
Signal Corps still serves that child by provid- 
ing radio compasses to guide airplanes, radio 
command and liaison sets to coordinate their 
operations, and interphone equipment for 
communication among the crew members of 
bombing planes. 

On the other side of the aviation picture, 
the Signal Corps operates an aircraft warn- 
ing service to detect and report the approach 
of hostile planes. This service makes use of 
"electrical sentries," a secret device to spot 
attacking planes many miles from our coasts. 
Only recently, with the need for recruiting 
electrical engineers and physicists to operate 
these detectors, was their very existence made 
public, but the method was worked out behind 
closed doors at the Signal Corps Laboratory 
in Fort Monmouth over a period of seven 
years. 



An important responsibility oj the Army Signal Corps 
is the design and procurement of radio apparatus for 
all types of troops. Here are shown, upper, a radio set 
in an airplane and, lower, a set transported by horse 
for use with the Cavalry, 

Army Signal Corps Photo 



For the men at the front, the Signal Corps 
has put into service special "walkie-talkie" 
radio sending and receiving sets, easily car- 
ried by one man. Radio sets with pushbutton 
control have been installed in tanks, so ar- 
ranged that the operator talks through a 
throat microphone and listens through ear- 
phones inside his padded helmet. Other 
equipment has been specially designed for use 
in scout cars and at field headquarters. 

In addition to its mobile units, the Signal 
Corps operates extensive fixed telegraph, tele- 
phone and teletype installations. Here we re- 
quire, and are training, large numbers of tele- 
graph, teletype and switchboard operators 
and men to install and maintain the various 
types of apparatus. 

Signal Corps units are present in all Army 
organizations from the division up through 
the Field Army. In smaller units, equipment 
procured by the Signal Corps is operated by 
men of the various arms. 

In addition to its expanded program of 
highly technical training for its own person- 
nel — a program that gives Fort Monmouth 
the aspects of both an army camp and a tech- 
nical college — the Signal Corps aids the 
training program of the entire Army. It does 
(Continued on p<t</c 1GG) 



101 




Radio - -Vital to Modern Warfare 



by 

Colonel David Sarnoff 

U. S. Army Signal Corps 



WEEN war broke out in 1039, a large 
part of the public looked forward to a 
repetition of the trench-warfare deadlock of 
1914-18. This time, the trenches were to be 
in modern dress, in the form of Maginot and 
Siegfried lines. The comparative quiet on the 
western front during the early months of the 
war seemed to confirm this view. 

What the public failed to realize was that 
the scientific and technical advances which 
had taken place in twenty years, all tended in 
one direction — mobility of action. The air- 
plane and the tank were conspicuous ex- 
amples of this change in fighting technique. 
Less conspicuous, but perhaps more impor- 
tant than any other single innovation in mili- 
tary methods, was the employment of radio 
in every phase of action. New strategy called 
for speed; speed called for rapid intelligence, 
communication and control; radio supplied 
the nerve system indispensable to coordina- 
tion between the brain and muscles of the 
fighting force. 

Radio coordination empowers the forces 
on land, sea and in the air to synchronize 
their operations and to function at high 
tempo without chaos. Successful handling 
of radio intelligence, whether by garrisons 
or commandos, by submarines or the fleet, by 
tanks or task forces, by reconnaissance planes 
or bombers, is a vital factor in the formula 
of victory. 

The enemy also is implemented with radio. 
Efficiency of the equipment and generalship 
in its use are weights that tip the scales of 
modern war. 

In land combat, accelerated by mechanized 
units,, .dive bombers and swift lighter planes, 
orders are Hashed and executed before the 
enemy can decode and counteract them. Pre- 
cision of mass air attacks by hundreds ol 
planes is made possible by radio. 

On the seas, transmission in wartime is 
restricted to urgent necessity. Silence guards 
the ships. They carry "silent;- radios, but they 
are aurally sharp and alert. Great convoys 
move in silence, lest a radio signal reveal 
their presence to submarines or to bombers 
beyond the horizon. 

Blitz and panzer tactics cannot outwit ra- 
dio communication, for radio itself travels 
at lightning speed. It annihilates time and 
distance, whether at sea. or on the desert. 
Radio can talk by voice, or flash its tradition- 
al code. Tanks are radio-equipped with 
rugged apparatus; air armadas have radio 
ears and voices adapted to the terrific, pres- 
sure of war. Scouts and infantrymen carry 
portable "walkie-talkie" outfits. 

Nothing can excel radio's ability as a. scout ; 
no mountain can block it, no curvature of the 
ocean can obscure or stop it. No gun or bomb 
can sever a wavelength. No sand-storm can 



rob radio of its intelligence or stop it as a 
dispatch rider. Lost fleets, lost battalions be- 
long to the past — to the Pre-Radio Age. 

Generals and military strategists, Presi- 
dents and Prime .Ministers talk across the 
sea as readily as over a local telephone; they 
fly the Atlantic guided by radio in less time 
t han the fastest trains run between New York 
and Chicago. 

The enemy cannot move supply columns 
or maneuver his forces with assurance that 
radio and plane are not watchfully following. 
He cannot put his radio transmitter on the 




air to communicate, or use his radio to guide 
an over-the-horizon shot, or to direct an anti- 
aircraft barrage, without being spotted. Ra- 
dio "telegraphs" the enemy's blow. The mili- 
tary ear listens in on all the earth as if it 
were a sea shell. 

Never in history has science been so widely 
diverted from its peaceful pursuits and ser- 
vices to wage war. American ingenuity, re- 
search and engineering have made radio a 
powerful arm of the United States, which 
reaches to all the United Nations. 

The airplane, radio, submarine, tanks, mo- 
tor, transport, machine gun, anti-aircraft bat- 
tery, radiolocator and an endless line of other 
inventions have been perfected by science, 
largely in America — the same science which 
brought forth broadcasting, television, the 
motion picture, the automobile and countless 
other things which make peace-time life more 
pleasant. Yet Mars, with a mighty sweep of 
the armored arm, pushes all up to the firing 

102 



line American laboratories, therefore, are 
oivhi<r their all-out efforts to equip American 
soldiers, sailors, marines and the forces of the 
United Nations with the finest radio equip- 
ment and weapons in the world, so that 
whether dive-bombing or torpedoing, para- 
chuting or shelling, science may protect them 
and give them the strongest arms of combat. 

In the twenty-five years that have inter- 
vened between the wars, an unsurpassed radio 
system has been developed in the United 
States. Mindful of the tremendous impor- 
tance and unlimited possibilities of the ra- 
dio electron tube, research has concentrated 
upon its development. Today there are hun- 
dreds of different tubes serving many pur- 
poses. Radio research is extensive. It is 
closely related to the sciences of electronics, 
chemistry and physics, with metallurgy and 
optics. The research laboratory is a mighty 
fortification. In it the shock troops of mod- 
ern warfare — the scientists — fight. Their 
weapons are infinitesimal electrons, high- 
frequency currents, sensitive ears that hear 
afar, and electric eyes that see at a distance. 

When America entered this conflict, it had 
a vast radio industry available for rapid con- 
version to war production. Against the back- 
ground of long experience in manufacturing 
millions of radio sets for civilian use and ap- 
paratus for all branches of radio communica- 
tion, the production lines were geared quick- 
ly to the total war effort. In 1917, the de- 
mand for radio was mainly limited to ma- 
rine and land stations, and to field equip- 
ment. Since that time, the airplane has great- 
ly intensified the uses of radio in warfare, 
and has put new demands upon enginerring 
and manufacturing. Both are answering the 
call magnificently. American aircraft and 
ship and shore stations have radio equipment 
unequaled in construction and efficiency. 
Constant pioneering and development of the 
electron tube have answered the challenges 
of communication in blitz warfare. 

Since World War I ? America has developed 
the finest system of broadcasting in the 
world. More than 900 stations are on the 
air, and more than 55,000,000 radio sets are 
in the homes of listeners. Nation-wide net- 
works serve the country and its people. The 
emergencies of war reveal the tremendous 
importance of the networks, for in times of 
national emergency they quickly can be 
linked to reach every nook and corner of the 
nation. Supplementing them, hundreds of 
mdependently operated stations serve local 
communities. 

In no other war has the American public 
m city and on farm been so thoroughly in- 
Tl t ^ er have the peopled 

,l I»-to-the-nnnute contact with the vari- 
\Vonnnued on page 172) 



Labor, Management, and the Navy 



by 



Rear Admiral C. H. Woodward, U. S. N. (Ret.) 

Chief of the Incentive Division, Navy Department 



RECENTLY the civilian workers at the 
Pearl Harbor Navy Yard presented Pres- 
dent Roosevelt with a unique token — a check 
for §70,000 representing pay 
earned by working Labor Day and 
contributed by them to help finance 
the war. Appropriately, the check, 
drawn on the Bank of Hawaii, was 
written on a fragment of a Jap 
plane shot down in the December 7 
raid. 

The fact is that many of these 
civilian workers had themselves 
been under fire in that treacherous 
attack and had courageously 
joined the Navy and Marine Corps 
in manning guns that defended the 
harbor. Undismayed and undaunt- 
ed, they subsequently resumed 
their duties with even greater zeal 
and devotion. And despite almost 
insurmountable difficulties, their 
production achievements during 
the next nine months were so out- 
standing that they won for them- 
selves the high distinction of the 
Army-Navy "E" — symbol of Ex- 
cellence in production. 

That indomitable spirit, manifested in a 
thousand ways by both labor and manage- 
ment in their relations with the Navy since 
the beginning of the world crisis, is immea- 
surably speeding the gigantic task we have 
before us. It is not only bringing ever closer 
to realization America's multi-ocean Navy of 
the future, but is laying, securely and inex- 
orably, the foundations for the smashing 
victory over the forces of aggression which we 
are consecrated to win. 

Today the Navy is the largest single em- 
ployer in the country, if not in the world. 
Grim necessity has forced us to embark on a 
Naval construction program of unprece- 
dented magnitude, while at the same time we 
are prosecuting the greatest war in history, 
and the needs in terms of manpower, ma- 
chines and materials for these interlocking 
objectives are simply staggering. 

At the present time we are building over 3,200 
combat, auxiliary, patrol and mine vessels for 
our own use, in addition to hundreds of war- 
ships and smaller craft for our Allies. Expan- 
sion of the Navy's air arm is rapidly strength- 
ening our striking power by hundreds of 
planes monthly. Also being tremendously in- 
creased are the Navy's land bases and shore 
establishments, with their countless dry- 
docks, wharves, barracks, machine shops, and 
other installations. And finally, there is the 
vast job of producing Naval ordnance, involv- 
ing some 10,000 different plants and compris- 
ing by itself an industrial program larger 
than that of the entire American automobile 



industry of pre-war days. 

In meeting this mighty production prob- 
lem, rendered doubly grave because in our 




OWI Photo 



Labor and Management work for the Navy — An elec- 
trical generator is coupled to a Diesel engine being 
manufactured for the Navy at a midwest plant. Lower: 
Rear Admiral Woodward, Chief of the Incentive 
Division of the Navy Department. 



«, tf I II If - * 



struggle we are facing enemies who have been 
frantically arming for years while we were 
busily beating our swords into ploughshares, 
the Navy sought to enlist every hand and 



brain, every ounce of energy, every bit of skill 
and ingenuity that free American labor and 
free American enterprise could muster. It has 
not sought in vain. The response 
from both management and labor, 
organized and unorganized, has 
been little short of magnificent. 

But even more inspiring has 
been the unity, the feeling of com- 
radeship that has animated these 
soldiers of production and the per- 
sonnel of the Navy in their com- 
mon task of transforming our enor- 
mous industrial organization and 
potentials into an arsenal for the 
tools of victory. Never has prac- 
tical democracy been more dy- 
namic or efficient. If any more 
proof were required that for us, the 
American way of life is the only 
way of life, this most perilous pe- 
riod of our national existence has 
supplied it beyond quibble or dis- 
pute. 

The Navy Department itself ac- 
curately characterized this prevail- 
ing spirit of understanding and 
cooperation when it declared pub- 
licly not long ago: "The aims, ambitions, 
plans and hopes of the Navy are identical 
with those of the vast majority of men and 
women who work for the Navy, and its em- 
ployees are engaged and joined in a common 
cause and a common objective." 

This cooperation and teamwork is a pre- 
requisite of total war, which is in essence war 
on two fronts — the fighting line and the pro- 
duel ion line. The strategy of this type of war- 
fare is simple: Produce — and attack! The 
side that produces materiel faster, and with 
this advantage of firepower attacks sooner, 
wins the day. 

In the Battle of Production, the primary 
task of management was of course conversion 
from peacetime to wartime output. The as- 
sembly lines of America, producing luxury 
goods like motor cars, radios, vacuum clean- 
ers and refrigerators, had to be halted and 
scrapped. Retooled and converted, new as- 
sembly lines had to be set rolling, turning out 
ships and the armor to protect them, shells 
and the guns to hurl them, bombs and the 
planes to drop them. 

This formidable task, considering the pres- 
sure of time, management met with admirable 
vigor and dispatch. Almost overnight makers 
of automobiles were making plane and super- 
marine engines; sewing machine plants, 
printing press factories, and optical equip- 
ment houses were producing parts for anti- 
aircraft guns; rubber mills were furnishing 
boats; confectioners were making 
(Continued on page 102) 



hi ml i iil 



103 



"Send the Word, Send the Word-Over There 

The U. S. On the Psychological Warfare t ront 



by 

Robert E. Sherwood 

Director of Overseas Operations, Office of War Information 



HP HE basic policy of all our psychological 
warfare for the past year can be reduced 
to terms as simple and direct as the injunc- 
tion written by the late, great George M. 
Cohan back in 1917 : 

"Send the word, send the word — 

Over There — 
That the Yanks are coming, 
The Yanks are coming " 

We have been sending the word over there, 
by radio, by press services, by pamphlets, leaf- 
lets, posters, movies and even by word of 
mouth which travels with mysterious speed 
and effectiveness and penetrates the stoutest 
walls of censorship and suppression that the 
Nazis, the Fascists or the fanatical militarists 
of Tokyo can build about their own and con- 
quered peoples. 

"The Yanks are coming !" 

No propagandists could possibly devise a 
better argument than that — nor could any 
propagandist think up a convincing excuse if 
the Yanks had failed to arrive — and to de- 
liver the goods. 

Words will not win this war. Words will 
not even win a little part of this war unless 
they are the convincing heralds of the over- 
whelming power of our armed forces and the 
unqualified good faith of our Government. 
But the right words delivered at the right 
place at the right time can save the lives of 
soldiers and sailors of the United Nations 
who have to do the real fighting and the real 
winning. 

Words can bolster the morale of our friends 
overseas and thus increase their powers of 
resistance. 

Words can disrupt the morale of our 
enemies and thus decrease their powers of re- 
sistance. 

The power of words was proved by Ben 
Franklin in the first war we ever fought. 

It was proved by Woodrow Wilson in 191 S. 

It has been proved again by Hitler and the 
Japanese in this war — most forcibly in the 
conquests of France and Malaya, where the 
deadly work of the propagandists facilitated 
the tasks of the armed forces. 

But I should say that the most remarkable 
achievement in psychological warfare was 
that of the British in 1940-'41. For many long 
months the British, beleagured on their little 
island, had nothing with which to fight Hitler 
except words. But what words they were! 
"We'll fight them on the beaches . . . We'll 
fight them in the streets . . . We'll never sur- 
render . . . Never have so many owed so much 
to so few . . . London can take it!" 



Those words — hurled into occupied Europe 
by the B.B.C., dropped in leaflets by the 
R.A.F., passed from hand to hand by anony- 
mous patriots — those words raised hopes and 
spirits in hearts from which all hope had fled 
— those words confounded the all-conquering 
Nazis and sowed in their people the first seeds 
of doubt of their invincibility. 

Furthermore, those words reverberated 
around the world and had their effect — par- 




ticularly here in the United States, where they 
helped immeasurably to speed up production, 
to facilitate passage of the Lend-Lease Law 
and to vitalize all of our preparations for the 
war which was declared upon us by Japan, 
Germany and Italy in December, 1941. 

The delivery of such great words to the peo- 
ples who must hear them has been the job of 
the various psychological warfare agencies of 
the United Nations. 

There have been vast areas where no news 
was available except that which came from 
Axis sources. At times, even our own troops 
in lonely outposts in the Southwest Pacific 
have been informed of the war news only by 
the inaccurate Tokyo radio. 

We have been and still are very badly 
equipped with short wave radio transmitters, 
since the United States, which led the world 



in the development of domestic radio, had 
taken but little interest in developing means 
for broadcasting to the rest of humanity. Now 
we are adding new facilities as best we may. 
We have been given direct access to the vastly 
greater facilities of the B.B.C., so that sev- 
eral times each day the people of Europe can 
hear the voice of America rebroadcast by the 
powerful battery of B.B.C. transmitters, long 
wave as well as short wave. 

We have had similar friendly and valuable 
cooperation with the R.A.F. Within a month 
after Pearl Harbor, the R.A.F. was dropping 
millions of American leaflets which gave the 
text of President Roosevelt's first war-time re- 
port on the state of the Nation. 

On November Sth, last, the arrival of an 
A.E.F. in North Africa was heralded by bliz- 
zards of leaflets, dropped by American and 
British aircraft, as well as by President 
Roosevelt's address to the French people, 
broadcast simultaneously from more than 
fifty transmitters on both sides of the At- 
lantic Ocean. 

The real work of psychological warfare, 
however, is not in the big, spectacular shows 
which make exciting news, but in the daily, 
twenty-four hour grind of communicating, by 
every conceivable means, to all peoples — 
friends, foes and neutrals — the story of how 
the United States and the United Nations are 
going about the winning of this war. We tell 
them the truth, as best we can determine the 
truth, for we believe that the truth is mighty 
and shall prevail. 

The question most frequently asked about 
our psychological warfare is this : 

"How can we be sure that anyone ever hears 
us?" 

The answer to that can not be given in sta- 
tistics. There are no Gallup or Crosley polls 
in Germany or Norway or the Netherlands 
East Indies. But we get the answer from our 
enemies themselves, from their increasing ad- 
monitions to their own people to stop believ- 
ing the lies that are told them bv American 
and British and Russian and Chinese propa- 
gandists. Our enemies wouldn't be denying 
these -lies" if their peoples in ever increasing 
numbers had not heard or read them 

And we had a pretty good answer from the 

13od ° N °? h AMca When °™ droops 
landed. According to one report, which came 
to us from the Algiers radio, French men and 
women walked along beside our troop^as theJ 
marched m and the French were sin^ng joy- 
ously, and the song that th 



°y sang was: 



"The Yanks are coming. 
The Yanks are comino- 



104 



Philippines in the War 



by 

Manuel L. Quezon 

President of the Philippine Commonwealth 



HPHE Japanese General Staff perhaps 
counted on an easy victory when they 
ordered the attack on the Philippines. 

Only about 14,000 American troops were 
there to block the way. Nothing seemed nec- 
essary but to overwhelm this small force — 
and then the road would be open for the Jap- 
anese to continue the southward march to 
speedy victory. 

But if the Japs thought so, a bitter surprise 
was in store for them. 

92,000 Filipino soldiers instantly sprang to 
the side of Mac Arthur's handful of Amer- 
cans. Overnight, the Philippines became 
world-wide symbols of dogged courage. 
Twenty thousand Filipino soldiers and three 
thousand American soldiers died in the light- 
ing, knowing that they were stemming the 
enemy long enough for the United Nations 
to mobilize their far-flung Pacific defenses. 

When the Battle of the Philippines was 
over, the name of the Fighting Filipinos was 
indelibly written on that special page of his- 
tory where mankind has placed Thermopylae, 
and Valley Forge, and the Marne. The Fight- 
ing Filipinos had fought for freedom as only 
free men light. They and their American al- 
lies had upset the time-table of the 
Japanese advance so thoroughly 
that, even in defeat, they had ac- 
complished one of the great delay - 
ing-actions of all time. 

That, in a nutshell, is the his- 
toric military contribution which 
the people of the Philippines, un- 
der MacArthur's military com- 
mand, made during 1941 and 1942 
toward the ultimate victory of the 
United Nations. Just as little Bel- 
gium stopped the Germans in 1914 
long enough for the Allies to 
gather their forces for defense, so 
in this present war fate decreed 
that the newest outpost of democ- 
racy, the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, should bravely ob- 
struct the march of the Japanese 
aggressors in the Pacific. 

But there is more to tell about 
the role of the Philippines in the 
war than merely a great military 
saga. In total perspective, my na- 
tion is more fundamentally im- 
portant in ways which are largely 
non-military — ways which have to 
do with the things of the human 
spirit, without which no great mili- 
tary feat such as the Battle of the 
Philippines is ever possible. 

The wartime achievements of the 
Filipino people have been the out- 
come of a unique national history 
that has given us the strength and 





Last April a battalion of Filipinos ivas organized in the United States and 
commenced training at Camp San Luis Obispo, Calif . Above, Capt. Turso G. 
Fajardo, seated, talks over the training schedule with Lt. A. K. Chavez, and 3r<7 
Lt. Roberto Lim. The latter, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, is 
the son of General Vincent e Lim who was last heard from in the front lines 

at Bataan. 



and the democratic character which make a 
people willing to die for their freedom. That 
is why the Philippines are important in more 
than merely a military way : we Filipinos are 
a symbol to the whole world, not only of the 
spirit of personal sacrifice through which 
this Avar must be Avon, but also of those prin- 
ciples of mutual respect and equality among 
nations which are basic post-Avar aims of the 
United Nations. 

Let me stress that, when Avar came, the 
President of the United States had the lawful 
poAver to call into the service of the United 
Slates all the organized armed forces of the 
Philippines. President Roosevelt did not do 
this. Of their own free will — and mark this 
Avell — the Filipino people stood by the United 
States, placing at the disposal of President 
Roosevelt not only our Army but all our man- 
power and everything Ave had. 

The reason is to be found in the enlightened 
spirit and methods employed by the United 
States in its relations with the Philippines 
since 189S. My people have been treated by 
the people and government of the United 
States, not as an inferior colony lit only to be 
exploited, but as a felloAv-nation Avhich had a 
right to independent self-govern- 
ment. 

The story of American adminis- 
tration of the Philippines is thus a 
story of square-shooting Avhich 
fostered in the hearts of all Fili- 
pines their burning desire for free- 
dom. With American help, the 
Filipino people achieved constant- 
ly increasing self-government, cul- 
minating in the Common Avealth 
established under President Roose- 
velt in 1935, with complete inde- 
pendence soon to folloAv. 

The end-product of this policy 
Avas that, when the Philippines 
were attacked, Ave Filipinos had 
something Avorlh fighting for. 

All of the great military feats 
which the Avorld then Avitnessed — 
in Bataan, and elseAvhere in Luzon, 
Visayas and Mindanao during the 
Battle of the Philippines — were 
thus a perfectly natural and inevit- 
ably outgroAvth of applying the 
freedoms later set forth in the At- 
lantic Charter. To the people of 
the Philippines, those principles 
were nothing neAV or untried. For 
years, they had been coming to 
fruition in the Philippines. 

The Filipino people have for all 
time vindicated the policy of self- 
determination and have lighted a 
guiding beacon for the post-Avar 
world which is uoav in the making. 



Army 1'hotOS 



105 



The Procurement of Naval Personnel 



by 

Rear Admiral Randall Jacobs, U. S. N. 

Chief of Naval Personnel 



TT is a year since the United States Navy, 
A held to prescribed peacetime limits by re- 
action from World War I, was thrust into the 
maelstrom of global war— unprecedented in 
its proportions— unprecedented in its de- 
mands. 

All the ships and planes which flow in ever- 
increasing numbers from the productive re- 
sources and genius of industrial America 
count for nothing without the officers and 
men to man them and make them effective 
instruments of modern, warfare. Thus it is 
that the procurement of naval personnel goes 
directly to the heart of war needs — and to 
meet this responsibility, the Bureau of Naval 
Personnel has streamlined its functions and 
''raised its sights" to the highest levels ever 
seen in the history of our Navy. 

Any discussion of the subject naturally di- 
vides itself into two classifications — (1) en- 
listed men, obtained on a voluntary basis by 
the Navy's selective recruiting system; (2) 
officers, also volunteers, accepted by the care- 
ful sifting processes of the Division of Naval 
Officer Procurement. 

Most of the officers and personnel of the 
Recruiting Service are in the field. Only six 
of the former are located in the Bureau of 
Naval Personnel. There they perform the ad- 
ministrative work, formulate the policies and 
guide recruiting activities for the entire 
country. 

Suffice it to say that there are several hun- 
dred Navy Recruiting Stations and Substa- 
tions distributed throughout the country, 
grouped into five divisions, each supervised 
by a Recruiting Inspector. Each Main Sta- 
tion is under the direction of an Officer-in- 
Charge and each Substation is conducted by 
a Petty-Officer-in-Charge. 

How has this Recruiting Service kept pace 
with the vastly increased demands? 

One of its first moves was to augment the 
staffs of all existing recruiting offices by new 
assistants, many of them men with sales ex- 
perience in industry. A new recruiting train- 
ing school was established and the two exist- 
ing schools were expanded. As Naval officers 
with long training and valuable technical 
experience were called to sea duty, experi- 
enced sales managers, men who had trained 
and directed large sales organizations, were 
trained, commissioned, and encouraged to 
apply to the Navy's recruiting problem the 
same methods and technique which they had 
used effectively in business. The vacancies 
arising from transfers to sea duty were filled 
as fast as they occurred, with the result that 
this transformation is now completed. 

At the same time the Recruiting Service 
lias undertaken a reexamination of all its 
methods and all its "tools" in the light of new 
demands. In one territory, for example, it 



found sixty percent of the population located 
in the area of substations producing only 
thirty percent of the enlistments. This started 
a nation-wide move to make all the substa- 
tions, which are more numerous than main 
stations, more productive. 

Every man in every recruiting station has 
been encouraged to realize that he shares a 
part in an important job, and the results 
depend upon him. 

Physical requirements have been modified 
to remove technicalities. With the whole- 
hearted cooperation of the Surgeon General, 
the medical section of each recruiting station 
was overhauled and streamlined. 

The prospective fields of enlistments have 




been rechecked in every state in terms of pop- 
ulation, geography, and distance to the near- 
est Navy recruiting office. Several states had 
no recruiting stations. That was corrected. 
In not a single instance have the steps taken 
failed to increase Navy enlistments. 

Newspaper advertising was undertaken to 
explain the "what, why, how and where" of 
Navy enlistment. Preliminary tests proved 
that advertising could be made to pay, espe- 
cially when accompanied by the valuable as- 
sistance of Civilian Recruiting Committees 
to augment the activities of the Navy Recruit- 
ing Service. 

As these measures began to take effect, the 
curve of enlistments which had been steadily 
declining after the first few months of onrush 
following Pearl Harbor, then turned upward 

Supplementing the basic program, many ef- 
fective promotional plans have been insti- 
tuted, some originating at headquarters, 

108 



more of them in the field. On June 7, six 
months to the minute after the first bombs 
were dropped on Pearl Harbor, at nation- 
wide mass inductions, 14,500 men took the 
Navy oath of allegiance. Members of the 
United States Congress have given invaluable 
aid by carrying the story of the Navy's oppor- 
tunity for service to every nook and cranny 
of the country. Two recruiting booklets, 
"Men Make the^ Navy" and "What Kind of a 
Job Can I Get in the Navy?" have translated 
the facts and the opportunities for Naval ser- 
vice into layman's language, in accessible 
form. More than two million copies have been 
distributed in response to letters, phone calls 
or personal requests. 

As a result of this coordinated program, re- 
cruiting of enlisted personnel for August 
showed a 7S0% increase over August a year 
ago, a 2G2% gain over May of this year. Now 
current figures surpass an entire peacetime 
Navy per month. 

The enlisted category of the Navy cannot 
be dealt with as a mass problem. It has many 
different classifications of work, with smaller 
numbers of men in each. Most applicants be- 
come experts in trades and vocations essen- 
tial to Naval service; but in the great ma- 
jority of cases, they are young men without 
specialized experience when they enlist. The 
Navy tests them out and trains ^them accord- 
ingly. That this selective recruiting system 
meets the Navy's needs in a highlv effective 
manner is demonstrated by their outstanding 
performance in the Pacific and every other 
test that confronts them. 

Notwithstanding its rapid expansion, the 



needs of the Navy ar 



— e comparatively small in 
relation to other war requirements. There- 



fore, there is a 



minimum of interference with 



other needs. 

Vavl e *TT u gC ° f men now J°»nin« the 
urn er the* ^ that of me » come 
ndi L I f 1T ° f ex P er ienced or key men 
o no h e I" t0 WarraDt the bel *f that little 

52 m W 0< ' ( ' Urs - Tn ord <*, however, 
nentr. r y /' an haVG no complaint, enlist- 
StoJTcJS -°« nge - permi «e<J of men in the 
(U A II T*?rlT S ot Sele < tive Service 
thee^^ 11 !?) without approval of 

^^t^SSX through the ,ocal 

needs tCttt^T?* 8 °! these facts an d these 

the least Selav hv °*t effect ively and with 
selective Teer&^^g^ its voluntary 

tablishment en fw S e * pausi °n of the Naval es- 
made it necessa^ \1a advent of war > has 
((i todra w more and more on 

(Continued on page 141) 



Navy Ship's Service Activities 

by 

Commander J. L. Reynolds, U. S. N. 

Director, Welfare Division, Bureau of Naval Personnel 



A SHIP'S Service activity of the Navy, 
whether afloat or ashore, is patronized 
by Naval personnel and dependents in the 
same popularly communal spirit as the typ- 
ical American general store, but regretfully 
without benefit of the open cracker barrel. 

However, it is by no means 
bucolic, for it caters to such a va- 
riety of tastes and demands of 
naval personnel as to constitute a 
fair comparison with that mani- 
fold merchandise mart — the com- 
munity shopping center. 

It is a source of everything from 
ice cream soda to jewelry and from 
photographs to hair cuts. Its mer- 
cantile appeal lies in quality goods 
or services dispensed at such rea- 
sonable cost as would bring joy to 
the heart of a Scotch housewife; 
they are well within the paying 
ability of the average American 
bluejacket. 

The selling price of articles sold by Ship's 
Service Stores is so regulated that the annual 
net profit of all sales does not exceed fifteen 
per cent. Each ship or station which operates 
a Ship's Service Department also operates a 
Welfare Department to which Department 
the profits of the Ship's Service Department 
are transferred. These funds are immediately 
expended in the interest of welfare and rec- 
reation of the personnel involved thereby pro- 
viding a fund for the Commanding Officer to 
use in his discretion which would not other- 
wise be available. This is considered to be one 
of the greatest factors in maintaining a high 
state of morale among enlisted personnel. 

The net result of such an operation is steady 
satisfied patronage that (a) tends to prevail 
upon naval personnel to spend with common 
sense and (b) at the same time does not in- 
fringe harmfully on purchases, if desired, 
from local merchants ashore. 

A Ship's Service activity is perfectly sound, 
serious business and is run according to rec- 
ognized business fundamentals. 

From the standpoint of organization, the 
Commanding Officer of a ship or shore station 
has complete jurisdiction over the conduct of 
all Ship's Service activities within, or per- 
taining to, his command. This is subject, of 
course, to the broad general supervision of su- 
perior authority. The Commanding Officer 
appoints the Ship's Service Officer, his as- 
sistants and employees, the Auditing Board, 
and any other Boards that he may deem nec- 
essary to the successful operation and admin- 
istration of the Ship's Service Department. 
His duties, in this connection, are in addi- 
tion to and secondary to his duties as an offi- 
cer in the Navy. The manner in which he per- 
forms this additional duty is noted in his 



Report of Fitness. 

The Commanding Officer does not act as the 
Ship's Service Officer nor may any officer 
charged with custody or disbursement of pub- 
lic funds be in any way connected with the 
operation or administration of the Ship's 




U. S. Navy Thotos 
A popular activity of the Ship's Service Stores is the 
soda fountain, where ice cream, sundaes, and soft 
drinks are the order of the day. This scene was taken 
aboard the USS Charger, a former merchantman con- 
verted to an aircraft carrier. Below: Commander 
Reynolds, director of the Welfare Division, Bureau 
of Naval Personnel. 




Service Department except with the specific 
approval of the Secretary of the Navy. Such 
officer may, however, be a member of the 
Auditing Board and his advice may be re- 
quired on any matters connected with the 
1 )epartment. 

In large commands the Ship's Service Offi- 
cer is of the rank of Lieutenant or above, 
while at small stations, where the total num- 
ber of commissioned officers is not more than 
three, he may be of Warrant Hank and he is 
not involved with the administration of the 
Welfare Fund. 

All personnel employed in connection with 



the Ship's Service Department of a vessel of 
the seagoing forces must be members of the 
Navy or Marine Corps. As in the cases of 
Officers assigned to Ship's Service activities, 
the duties of enlisted personnel, assigned to 
these activities, are in addition to and sec- 
ondary to the duties of their rat- 
ings. In connection with shore 
stations, the enlisted personnel 
may be supplemented by the em- 
ployment of such civilians as the 
Commanding Officer may deem nec- 
essary. Retired or Fleet Reserve 
personnel is also utilized as far as 
possible in this connection. Briefly, 
one carefully selected enlisted man 
may be detailed as assistant to the 
Ship's Service Officer for such 
administrative and supervisory 
duties as are found necessary. 

No enlisted personnel, on active 
duty, is detailed to duty with the 
Ship's Service Department within 
the continental United States except within 
naval prisons, isolation camps at training 
stations, and at isolated stations where suit- 
able civilian personnel is not obtainable and 
then only with the specific authority of the 
Bureau of Naval Personnel. 

Where, for the convenience of enlisted per- 
sonnel, the barber shop is kept open outside 
of regular working hours enlisted barbers 
may be detailed ; where the needs of the sta- 
tion require small branch Ship's Service ac- 
tivities, one enlisted man may be detailed for 
each branch provided the average net profit of 
the branch activity is less than §100 a month. 

All employees of the Ship's Service Depart- 
ment must be selected on a basis of excellent 
record and character and should be without 
extravagant tastes and satisfied to live within 
their means. Officers receive no compensation 
for duties performed in the Ship's Service 
Department. Enlisted personnel is paid extra 
compensation for employment in these activi- 
ties when such employment involves work 
under more arduous conditions, demands 
longer hours, or entails greater responsibility 
than is required by the usual duties of his 
rating. 

Activities authorized to be conducted under 
the Ship's Service Department include: 



Cobbler 
Presser 
Photographer 
Gasoline filling station 
Garage 



Store 

Restaurant 
Soda Fountain 
Laundry 
Barber Shop 
Tailor Shop 

An enlisted man or civilian employee is de- 
tailed as the head of each of these activities 
and is responsible to the Ship's Service Officer 
for the merchandise, funds and property of 
(Continued on page 1G4) 



109 



Motor Torpedo Boats of the United States Navy 



by 

Captain A. Loring Swasey, U. S. N. R., 

Construction Corps 



TYPICAL American sportsmanship favors 
the underdog. The weak team is always 
cheered loudest; the small, weak opponent of 
a large and strong force is always the most 
applauded by a group of spectators. This is 
typical American sportsmanship, and is re- 
flected in the American attitude towards Mo- 
tor Torpedo Boats. These are the smallest 
combatant vessels in the United States Navy, 
and, consequently, they have achieved a re- 
markable position in the interest of the Na- 
tion. Capturing public fancy as they do, they 
have been subjected to a tremendous amount 
of publicity. None of this publicity has been 
exaggerated. All of the fondest 
expectations of their designers 
and builders have been realized. 
All of this is public knowledge. 

A phrase common among aero- 
nautical people is, that given 
enough power, a barn door could 
be made to tly. This applies, like 
wise, to a boat. In looking, there- 
fore, toward an exceptionally 
high-speed combatant unit, en- 
gines were one of the first stum- 
bling blocks, and presented the 
first problems which had to be 
met. Kesearch was undertaken, 
perhaps unwittingly, by many 
of the small-boat racing en- 
thusiasts, who took motors 
apart between races, and who 
operated their engines at ex- 
tremely high pressures and tem- 
peratures. This necessi t a ted 
the development and refinement 
of alloys which have made pos- 
sible the development of a most 
excellent power unit for this 
type of craft. The "barn door," 
however, had to be such that it 
would be sea-worthy at low 
speeds as well as at high. Con- 
struction means and methods 
had to be developed to make practicable ;i 
hull which would not pound itself to pieces 
when traveling over the water at extremely 
high speeds. This could not. have been 
answered by laboratory technique. The forces 
involved on the bottoms of these vessels are 
tremendous. "Cut and Try" has been the 
watchword in the development of this type of 
craft. Each vessel has been a laboratory of 
itself. Succeeding vessels incorporate the ex- 
perience and information gained from the 
study of its predecessor. We, therefore, find 
the Motor Torpedo Boat, as it is now built, a 
combination of laboratory preparations, as 
far as engineering is involved, and "rule ol" 
thumb" design, so far as the hull is concerned. 
These two intercombine remarkable well to 
provide this country with one of the lines! 



small, high-speed motor torpedo boats in ex- 
istence. A Motor Torpedo Boat is constructed 
mainly of wood tied together in a most in- 
genuous fashion with wood screws, glue, and 
various other materials. The extremely large 
horsepower is secured in the vessel in such a 
fashion as to make practicable its complete 
use in propelling the vessel. Complete cook- 
ing arrangements have been provided; ven- 
tilation, too, has become a built-in feature. By 
virtue of their size, it is practicable to main- 
tain infra-ship communications during op- 
erations to a degree which would be impos- 
sible on a larger vessel. This means that each 



in the industry to 
do men's work in a very 




iNu\y i iiuco 

Backlighted against a glittering southern sea, this PT boat, greeting the task force 
upon its return to Hawaii from the Marshall Island attack, furnished an official Navy 
Photographer a chance to make this remarkable shot of a mosquito boat. The boat 
was cruising off Pearl Harbor when the task force returned. 



member of the crew is kept aware of the cir- 
cumstances taking place in the course ol' an 
action. It may be said that Motor Torpedo 
Boats are built like a fine watch; however, 
like a. watch, which, having been finely con- 
structed, is subjected to extreme tests of 
vibration and general wear and tear. 

At the outset of the war, little was known 
concerning the characteristics of the various 
pieces of equipment used to form the unit now 
known as the Motor Torpedo Boat. With the 
passing of time, however, cooperation be- 
tween the various manufacturers of this type 
of craft has made it possible to make use of 
the advantages discovered by one group of 
builders in all the other factories building 
these ships. 

At the outset of the program, men were 

110 



employed in the manufacture of this class of 
vessel However, of late, many of these having 
been taken away to more arduous tasks, have 
relinquished their places 
women who now 
proud fashion. . 

The crew of such a Motor Torpedo Boat is 
extremely small. The living accommodations 
are Spartan. This results in a very close re- 
lationship between various members of the 
crew. This relationship is begun at an early 
date in the training of the crew members. 
Training is established and crews are main- 
tained throughout, as a unit. In view of the 
type of service which these ves- 
sels render, they often operate 
for a long time from remote 
bases. This requires an extreme- 
ly self-reliant group of officers. 
Due to the extremely rough rid- 
ing which these vessels under- 
take, t he crew must be possessed 
ol" remarkable stamina. As a 
consequence, young men are 
chosen for this work. Under the 
most arduous conditions this re- 
sults in an extremely well- 
balanced and workable unit. 
The crews have a tough assign- 
ment, and are thoroughly aware 
of the difficulties which are to 
be encountered. As a result, an 
extremely great esprit-de-corps 
is present on this type of vessel. 
As a part of training, the men 
assigned to man these vessels 
are given a familiarization 
course at the yards of the build- 
ers. This enables them to ob- 
serve intimately the fashion in 
which their ships are put to- 
gether, and makes practicable 
the appreciation on the part of 
the builders, of the type of per- 
sonnel assigned to these craft. 
All credit and honor belong to the men who 
operate these vessels. Of these, Lieutenant 
Commander John 1>. Bulkley, USN, has come 
to the lore, using an incredibly keen ingenuity 
jn bis appreciation and clever utilization of 
the capabilities of these vessels. 

The first chapter in the use of these vessels 
in war-tin 10 has been recorded in William L. 
White's book, -We Were Expendable/' pre- 
sently a fine picture and description of the 
J^mties in which these boats engage. Surely 
h deeds which have been accomplished to 
jaj will go down in history; others will fol- 

mto^ nf W ° rl t War 11 ^s entered into the 
Mstorj of our Nation, the 

smallest class of combatant 
made it 



as well as 



virtues of this 
vessel will have 
a permanent fixture in the U. S Navy, 
the — # * 



m 



e minds of our people. 



Submarines in the War 



by 

Lieutenant Commander Lewis S. Parks, U. S. N. 

Staff, Commander Submarines, Atlantic Fleet 



QECRETARY of the Navy Knox recently 
^ expressed his appreciation of the fine 
work which our submarines have been doing 
in the war zones. He stated that he was "par- 
ticularly proud" of them as submarines gen- 
erally had "done a particularly amazing and 
outstanding job. This is primarily a war of 
attrition, and there is no arm of the service 
more important in a war of attrition than 
submarines." 

Life on board a submarine, always in- 
teresting and exciting, is doubly so in 
war time. When in the presence of our 
own forces they are continuously on the 
defensive due to difficulties of recognition 
peculiar to their type. Even approaching 
their own bases they cannot relax until 
"all lines are over" due to the enthusiasm 
and vigor exhibited by "friendly" air 
and surface patrols. In war zones they are 



Capt. E. F. 
Cutts, USN, 
C ommander 
of the U. S. 
S u bmar i n e 
Base and 
Submarine 
School at 
New London, 
Conn.Lotver: 
On the conn- 
ing toiver of 
a submarine 
at the Sub- 
marine Train- 
ing School, a 
Chief Petty 
Officer in- 
structs stu- 
dents. 






A modern type subma- 
rine, the USS Grampus, 
built by the Electric Boat 
Company, and commis- 
sioned in May of 1941. 



fair game for all, 
friend and foe alike. 



1 



Instead of reckon- 
ing their battle time 
in minutes, as do 
the aviators, sub- 
marine crews must 
count theirs in 
weeks or months. 
"Eternal vigilance 
is the price of 
safety" has long- 
been one of the mot- 
tos of this service. 

Tn e n e m y con- 
trolled waters most 
of t he i r daylight 
hours are, perforce, 
spent submerged. 
There are many men 
who never see the 
light of day from 
the beginning to the 
end of a long patrol. 
Because of the ne- 
cessity of being able 

at all times to instantly clear the bridge, the 
peace time practice of allowing the crew to 
"take a blow" topside must be dispensed with. 

Discipline on board, while far from being 
lax, is more informal than that usually en- 
countered elsewhere in our Navy. It is main- 
tained primarily by a feeling of mutual re- 
spect — respect of the men for their officers 
and of the officers for their men who consti- 
tute one of the finest and most capable groups 
to be found any where. Although they like the 
additional pay which they now draw, it is the 
esprit de corps that exists and thecomaraderie 
among submarine sailors that really holds 
them to their jobs. There are no USO's at our 
advance submarine bases nor do Hollywood 
movie stars or name bands entertain. Sub- 



U. S. Navy Photo 



This remarkable photograph, made by 
a periscope camera through the peri- 
scope of an American submarine, shows 
a Japanese destroyer of the latest and 
largest type going to her grave after 
having been struck by two torpedoes 
from the submarines from which the 
picture teas taken. The destroyer sank 
in nine minutes. Note the Rising Sun 
insignia on top of the turret to the left, 
and the two men in white scrambling 
over the conning tower to the right. 



______ 




U. S. Navy Photo 

Lt. Comdr. Lewis B. Parks, USN 



mariners must do without these artificial 
morale stimulants. They get their morale up- 
lift when they see and hear a torpedo find its 
mark. 

A submarine is a "lone wolf" and must ac- 
complish its work without assistance from 
(Continued on page 155) 



111 



Functions of the Provost Marshal General 

in the War 



THE Provost Marshal General's functions 
in the present war differ greatly from 
those of his predecessors. During both the 
Civil War and the World War the Provost 
Marshal General was concerned, primarily, 
with the operation of the draft acts. The 
nearest approach to the functions exercised 
presently was by the Provost Marshal Gen- 
eral of the American Expeditionary Forces 
who had charge of military police, investiga- 
tions of crime among the armed forces, and 
prisoners of war. 

The operations of The Provost Marshal 
General today cover a broad field. The most 
widely recognized is that of supervision of the 
Military Police. At the time the office was ac- 
tivated in July, 1941, soldiers of all branches 
of the service were performing military police 
functions. There was no central authority to 
develop doctrine, to coordinate, or to plan. In 
September, 1941, however, there was created 
a separate Corps of Military Police, a new 
branch of the service, under the supervision 
of The Provost Marshal General. 

Since September, 1941, the following types 
of Military Police Units have been activated 
and trained : Military Police Battalions for 
protecting vital installations; Military Police 
Escort Guard Companies; Military Police, 
Post, Camp, or Station; and Military Police 
Units with the Field Forces. 



by 

Major General Allen W. Gullion 

The Provost Marshal General 

New Tables of Organization and Mobiliza- 
tion Training Programs have been prepared 
for all types of Military Police Units. In Feb- 




Array Signal Corps Photo 

A British Military Policeman and a United States Army 
Military Policeman walk their beat side by side in a 
Northern Ireland town where United States troops are 
stationed. 




ruary, 1942, a Provost Marshal General's 
School was opened at Fort Slyer, Virginia. 
In May, due to the rapid expansion of the 
Corps of Military Police, the School was 
moved to Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia, and 
named The Provost Marshal General's School 
Center. Four schools are being conducted 
there; the Refresher School (for officers re- 
cently placed on active duty), the Advanced 
School (for officers on Military Police duty), 
the Officer Candidate School, 
and the Investigators School. In 
April, 1942, a Military Police 
Replacement Training Center 
was established at Fort Riley, 
Kansas, where enlisted men re- 
ceive their basic training and 
specialized instruction. It 
should be understood, however, 
that The Provost Marshal Gen- 
eral exercises no command over 
the Military Police. His super- 
visory functions are analogous 
to those of the former Chief of 
Infantry. 

The Provost Marshal General 
also has supervision over certain 
investigative functions. He is 
charged with investigating the 
loyalty and trustworthiness of 
civilians employed or applying 
for employment in military es- 
tablishments. This involves su- 

112 



pervising and evaluating the work of several 
thousand investigators. The loyalty investi- 
gative service is available to any military 
establishment which requests it. The number 
of requests per month has increased rapidly, 
from 2,500 in January, 1942, to 56,000 in 
October. Notwithstanding this increase in 
the number of requests, there is no backlog of 
uninvestigated cases. Thus new requests are 
given immediate attention. 

One of the most important functions con- 
cerns the internal security of the nation. Gen- 
eral plans to counter the activities of fifth 
columnists and to handle potential domestic 
disturbances and disasters are under the su- 
pervision of The Provost Marshal General. 
He is charged also with supervision of the 
protection afforded many thousands of plants 
engaged in the war effort. Primary respon- 
sibility for the protection of privately owned 
plants and other installations essential to the 
war effort rests upon the owners and op- 
erators and upon local governments. How- 
ever, it is the responsibility of The Provost 
Marshal General to take steps to provide pro- 
tective facilities not available to operators or 
local governments when, in the opinion of the 
military authorities, such protection is neces- 
sary in the furtherance of internal security. 
In discharging this responsibility, Army in- 
spectors, under the jurisdiction of field 
agencies, survey all war plants. In addition, 
a procedure for the identification and clear- 
ance of visitors has been developed ; ^-finger- 
printing program initiated for all employees 
in war production plants; accident and fire 
prevention programs instituted ; and guards 
at war plants enrolled as auxiliary military 
(Continued on page 151) 



i 




Instruction at the Provost Marshal General 
lunging a bayonet towards Lt 



Army Signal Corps .-Photo 

R F7„ro Sch F° l - Lt - R. G. Hooks is 
I "35, who demons^ate's a bare ZnTdefZ'^ 0 champio " * 



Ordnance Department Speeds Herculean Task 



by 



Major General Levin H. Campbell, Jr 



Chief of Ordnance, U. S. Army 



T^HE fighting weapons of the American 
A soldier have been developed and produced 
for him by the Ordnance Department of the 
U. S. Army ever since it was created by an 
Act of Congress in 1812. Its six research and 
manufacturing arsenals together with a few 
contracts placed among civilian factories suf- 
ficed in time of peace. Since World War I, a 
profound change has taken place. A whole 
new array of fighting weapons has been cre- 
ated, perfected, and put to full use. Included 
are tanks, self propelled artillery, high angle, 
fast shooting anti-aircraft guns, half track 
cars, scout cars, etc., etc., all operating under 
their own power and at high rates of speed. 
The fighting forces as well as their weapons 
have been put on wheels, armies have been 
mechanized, the automotive principle has been 
adopted and its effect on the Army has been 
even more profound than it was on civilian 
life. Today the mechanized division has 32 
horsepower for every soldier in it. 

The job of developing and equipping the U. 
S. Army with this materiel as well as the more 
than 1,700 other items including pistols, 
rifles, machine guns, anti-aircraft guns, 
trench mortars, hand grenades, tanks, arm- 
ored cars, scout cars, ammunition, cannon of 
all sizes, shell, fire control instruments, 
bombs, etc., is a Herculean task, but the Ord- 
nance Department is taking it in its stride. 
It has expanded its arsenals; expanded its 
13 Ordnance District Offices ; it undertook the 
conversion of something like half of our civil- 
ian industry to war production ; it spent sev- 



eral billion dollars erecting and equipping 
Ordnance owned, privately operated, fac- 
tories all over America ; built up a new explo- 
sives industry; took over the motor transport 





U. S. Army Photo 

Maj. Gen. Levin 11. Campbell jr., Chief of Ordnance, 
inspects an MA tank at Aberdeen Proving Ground. 
He is wearing tank helmet and coveralls. 

supply for the Army and last but not least, 
is in process of creating the greatest war ma- 
teriel maintenance system this world has 
ever seen, for a trusted friend who lets you 
down in a crisis is as nothing to a weapon 
mmm that fails its use in battle. 

The colossal proportion of this 
maintenance (as well as produc- 
tion) can be partially gaged from 
the fact that the vehicles of a motor- 
ized triangular division will make a 




column 30 miles long it ! placed at 10-yard in- 
tervals. There are 2,434 motor vehicles and 
the prime movers tow 275 trailers and 116 
guns. Together the 16,129 men and officers 
and the equipment of such a unit weigh 3,753 
tons and would require 1,707 freight cars or 
17 trains each a mile long to move it. The 
maintenance of these vehicles is added to the 
servicing of the 1,700 other major items pro- 
duced by the Ordnance Department. 

When a tank, gun or other fighting tool is 
put out of action, Ordnance troops must re- 
pair it in the shortest possible time. There- 
fore, rolling machine shops together with re- 
pair trucks for many special purposes, wreck- 
ing trucks weighing 36,000 pounds each and 
equipped with 10-ton cranes and winches 
capable of pulling 55,000 lbs., etc., etc., were 
developed and produced in mass for use in 
the zones of combat. Ordnance troops require 
special mechanical training and technical 
knowledge for the work. Hence, whole regi- 
ments of technicians already trained in more 
than 50 trades were recruited direct from 
civilian life through the Affiliated Ordnance 
Unit system specially created for this pur- 
pose. Many training centers were erected 
and equipped to train t hem in the servicing of 
motorized and other war materiel. A huge 
reserve of spare parts was developed and the 
personnel created for handling, storing, ship- 
ping and distributing to theaters of war all 
around the world. And then the Ordnance 
Department was assigned the vast motor ve- 
hicle section. With the design, purchase, and 
maintenance of motor vehicles, combat and 
otherwise, now centralized under the Ord- 
nance Department, an Ordnance Tank Auto 
motive Center has been established in De- 
troit, Michigan. This in addition to the seven 
motor supply depots scattered throughout the 
country to furnish motor sup- 
plies and spare parts; light and 
heavy maintenance companies 
of troops to care for and main- 
tain vehicles; truck companies 
(Continued on page 147) 




OWI Photo by Palmer 

The finished assembly oj a 37-mm. antiaircraft gun car- 
riage receives final adjustments in an eastern Arsenal. 



Signal Corps Photo 

To "Keep 'em Rolling" in the Field the Ordnance Depart- 
ment operates many mobile repair units. These Ordnance 
soldiers are doing a bit of welding. 



OWI Photo by Palmer 
John C. Garand, inventor of the Army's semi- 
automatic shoulder rifle, at work in the ex- 
perimental model shop, Springfield ArsenaL 



113 



Charting the Seas for War 



by 



Rear Admiral G. S. Bryan, U. S. N. (Ret.) 

Hydrographer of the Navy 



PROBABLY the least spectacular, but 
nevertheless one of the most essential war 
•activities of the United States Navy, is the 
work of the Hydrographic Office in carrying 
•out its mission which, as stated in its publi- 
cations is "to collect, digest, prepare, and is- 
sue all information calculated to afford the 
maximum possible naviga- 
tional safety to ships on the 
high seas and to aircraft 
operating over the sea 
routes." This in wartime be- 
comes a task of tremendous 
proportions, for added to 
the natural perils of the sea 
are the additional dangers 
contributed by friend and 
foe alike, in the form of 
minefields, danger areas, ex- 
tinguishment or removal of 
navigational aids, and many 
other hazards afi'ecting the 
safety of shipping. 

All vessels of the Navy, both surface and 
air, must be supplied at all times with the 
latest charts enabling them to proceed with 
the utmost dispatch to any quarter of the 
globe. The nautical chart is an essential in- 
strument of war without which not a ship 
can sail, a plane operate, sinews of Avar be 
delivered, or strategic plans successfully 
laid. The compilation, production, and dis- 
tribution of these charts is one of the primary 
duties of the Hydrographic Office, and some 
idea of the ever increasing work of the oifice 
may be gleaned from the fact that prior to 
hostilities the normal output of charts was 
approximately 450,000 annually, whereas 
during the past year, it ran in the neighbor- 
hood of 13,000,000 charts. 

One reason for the increase in the number 
•of charts is the necessity of covering areas 
which in normal times are of little im- 
portance, but are now vital to the successful 
prosecution of the war. In peacetime, the 
Hydrographic Oifice had employed but two 
survey vessels which were engaged in a long 
range program of surveying areas primarily 
of commercial importance. With the advent 
of war, the need arose for charts of strategic 
areas and bases. Today, the Hydrographic Of- 
fice has ten survey vessels in widely separated 
parts of the world, some with facilities, where 
the occasion demands, for producing neces- 
sary charts on the spot. The exigencies of war 
also require the preparation of many special 
charts for specific purposes, not only for the 
Navy but also for other governmental agen- 
cies. Naturally, these charts cannot be dis- 
cussed here, but they form another valuable 
contribution towards the winning of the Avar. 
There is one chart that can be mentioned, 



however, and that is the Pilot Chart, with its 
delineation of winds and currents. The gov- 
ernment, realizing its value to the mariner 
forced to abandon his vessel in mid-ocean, 
noAv requires that each lifeboat on every 
American ocean-going vessel be equipped 
with a Pilot Chart in a special metal con- 




The Navy Survey Ship, USS Bow ditch, named for 
Nathaniel Bowditch, author of the famous work on 
navigation. This vessel is used by the Navy Hydro- 
graphic Office as a survey ship. She was formerly a 
passenger steamer of the Grace Line running betiveen 
New York and the west coast of South America. 
Below: Rear Admiral Bryan. Hydrographer of the 
Navy. 

U. S. Navy Thotos 




tainer. 

The establishment of theatres of war all 
over the globe has also brought, a great de- 
mand for the description of coasts, port fa- 
cilities, and navigational aids of obscure lo- 
calities through the issuance of new Sailing 
Directions, Air Pilots, and other memoranda 
which are constantly being augmented as the 

114 



war progresses. 

InformatioD on sea water temperatures, 
ocean currents, and other cognate oceanog- 
"aphical phenomena are playing a most im- 
portant role in the present conflict and here 
Lain the Hydrographic Office, which has for 
nfany rears been engaged in the study of these 
subjects, has been able to 
supply much valuable data 
for projects connected with 
the Avar effort. 

Another phase in the 
Avork of the Hydrographic 
Office is the prompt dis- 
semination of navigational 
information to the navies of 
the allied nations and to 
their merchant marines. All 
material relating to changes 
in navigational aids, estab- 
lishment of minefields, chan- 
nels to be folloAved, and in- 
formation on drifting dangers such as mines, 
wrecks, icebergs, etc., is expeditiously placed 
in the hands of proper authorities, through 
t he medium of radio, the Daily Memorandum, 
Notice to Mariners, Hydrographic Bulletin, 
and certain confidential publications. 

The great volume of work iioaa^ carried on 
by the Hydrographic Office has naturally 
necessitated a vast expansion of the office 
physically. For many years, housed in the 
Navy Department, the office has been severely 
handicapped by a lack of space and proper 
facilities. With the outbreak of war in Eu- 
rope and the resultant curtailment in the 
Avork of foreign hydrographic offices, the in- 
creased work load imposed on the Hydro- 
graphic Office began to create an impossible 
situation. It Avas therefore decided that the 
office should be removed from the Depart- 
A building especially designed to 
the requirements of the varied ac- 
tivities of the office was erected at Suitland, 
Maryland, and during the month of October 
* s year al] divisions of the organization 
were transferred to the new permanent build- 

Here, with a personnel that has risen from 
j P^H-etime complement of 175 to an all time 
M i of approximately TOO persons, and 
*J^ ed J"th the latest machinery for 
cnart production, the Hydrographic Office 
seas 77^ m l daj and ni ^t ' charting the 
venture n the _ war in order that they who 
Ihores i " dark wate ™ 'lefendins our 
our Pu T Ca ^ in g m en and supplies to 
ay a v«n?M ng . battle lhl(is ma y be afforded 

7im !,l tl ^ lr vesse] s- This is the contribu- 



ment. 
serve 



]}™\ of the Hydrogra 
final vi,. toi . v . 



phic Office towards the 





Peeling off — Starboard wing up, port wing 
down, a North American Scout Trainer 
peels off, showing clearly the details of 
its under struct ure. 



Taking off from an aircraft carrier. 



U. S. Marino Corps Thoto 

// ar-time Alaska— PBY's, the Navy's Catalina Flying Boats, 
patrol the indented and complicated Alaskan shore line. 



The Bureau of Aeronautics, Navy Department 



by 

Rear Admiral John S. McCain, U. S. N. 

Chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics 



THHE function of the Navy's Bureau of Aero- 
nautics can be defined in very few words : 
to provide the United States Fleet with the 
necessary quantities of the finest combat air- 
planes and combat pilots that can be pro- 
duced. In wartime there can be only one mea- 
sure of how successfully the Bureau has ful- 
filled its function. That measure, of course, 
is the measure of our success against the 
enemy. In the year that has just gone by, we 
have had ample opportunity to see how naval 
aviation has stacked up in action. 

The spearhead of our first offensive action 
was the raid of carrier-based airplanes on the 
Marshall and Gilbert Islands on the 1st of 
February. The Japanese won't forget that 
one for a long time to come. Later in Feb- 
ruary a Japanese force attacked one of our 
carriers off Bougainville in the southwestern 
Pacific. Our fighter pilots shot down both of 
the enemy patrol planes sent out to locate our 
forces, and then shot down sixteen out of the 
eighteen Japanese bombers that attacked. 

The Marshall and Gilbert successes were re- 
peated, first at enemy-held Wake Island, then 
at Marcus Island. Damage to enemy shore 
installations would take months to repair. 
Then came the action at Salamaua and Lae 
on New Guinea. Our carrier-based dive bomb- 
ers, fighters and torpedo planes roared over a 
mountain pass and dropped down on a large 
Japanese force. These airplanes sank two 
Japanese heavy cruisers, one light cruiser, one 
destroyer and five transport and cargo ships. 
Two other destroyers and four other enemy 
vessels were damaged. Our losses were one 
dive bomber. 

The pattern of this attack was repeated at 
enemy-helcl Tulagi on May 4th. One light 
cruiser, two destroyers, a cargo ship and four 
gunboats were sunk. Five Japanese seaplanes 
were shot down. It cost us two fighters and ;i 
torpedo plane. 



In the Battle of the Coral Sea on May 7th 
and 8th our carrier-based airplanes went to 
work on a Japanese force which was advanc- 
ing on Port Moresby. A Japanese carrier and 




U. S. Navy Photos 



Just prior to becoming Chief of the Bureau of Aero- 
nautics, Rear Admiral McCain ivas commander of the 
Naval air forces in the South Pacific. He is shown 
here, left, with Major General Alexander A. Vande- 
grift, USMC, commander of the Marines at Guadal- 
canal. 

cruiser were sunk. Two other carriers were 
badly damaged and ninety-one enemy air- 
planes were shot down. We lost the Lexing- 
ton, but saved nearly all of her airplanes. 



Twenty-seven of our planes were lost in 
combat. 

At Midway, in June, we lost another car- 
rier, the Yorktown. The Japs lost two cruis- 
ers, two destroyers, and four carriers, the 
Kaga, Akagi, the Soryu, and the Hiryu. Of 
later actions in the Aleutians and the Solo- 
mons, as in the Atlantic, little can be revealed 
at this time. 

This record is impressive, but it is only the 
beginning. I would like to emphasize that the 
successes of naval aviation to date have been 
accomplished with types of airplanes which 
were already in active service at the begin- 
ning of the war. Principally, these were the 
Grumman "Wildcat" fighter, the Douglas 
"Dauntless" scout bomber, and the Douglas 
"Devastator" torpedo bomber. Great as has 
been the performance of these airplanes under 
the guidance of our pilots, we may count on 
highly improved performance from the new 
types which are now on the way. These types 
represent years of the most painstaking de- 
velopment in airframe design, engines, armor, 
and fire-power. They include outstanding 
airplanes in every combat type — dive bomb- 
ers, fighters, torpedo planes and long-range 
patrol bombers. AVe can say confidently that 
they will further advance the Navy's lead in 
combat airplane design. 

But superlative types of airplanes are by 
no means enough. We must have these types 
in the necessary quantities. The Navy's an- 
nounced program of 27,500 airplanes must: 
not be regarded as final. No one can foresee 
how many airplanes will be ultimately re- 
quired. AVe need all we can get. 

In this connection the members of the avia- 
tion industry have already solved the hardest 
part of the problem. Half a million men and 
women in the airframe, engine and propeller 
plants of this country, joined by tens of thou- 
(Continued on page 151) 



115 



TORPEDOES. . 

S H R V E D iMERIf AM STYIE 

... a deadly diet for the Axis 



The Submarines and PT Boats built by the Electric 
Boat Company for the U. S. Navy can out-speed, 
out-shoot and out-maneuver our enemy's best. 






MOISIAIQ 1VAVM 



$duuvtuqn$ 



"f JSI 4 3MWOAVa 
SXHOA DIWVMAQ OHX3TI3 



A M V a M O 3 



x v o a 



jo pjeputHs Suijiuuajtin Xjoao laaui saop 
pue isnui nils Xjijuvnb anxa step qe asjnoo 
jo puy 'spoqiaiu Xjqiuassi? pauqiueajis 
snouiej s c ooj3 .lapun Xqeniiiiuoa suieS sj^d 
0D I3 J° wdino i(p[3aA\ aqx "P JB A ^OPTA 
jno jo .{jpBcIuo aSaiq jeuoiiippe aqi .£q 
pojuaiuSnH Suiaq uieSe aaou si 'uoipruis 
-uoo jo spoqiaui paAOjdiui pue uoisnedxa 
luiqd Aq pjoj Aumu paqdiqrnui ipeaj 
-JB c uo;ojq ;e uoTjonpo.id aiiuemqns 
•oia c saa^uHi 'sjaodsiiRii c sjapuai auejdjie 
'saasiruo se sjueiS Xiuaiia ipns qjeap oj p c 
SuiAeq qiiA\ pajipaxo ATBpijjo aje sjeog 



opadjojL Jojop\[ oo|3 ^IHTI snopnqej jtiq 
•sqiuotu n uiqiiAv sdiqs Xuiaua ££ \ paSe 
-uiep jo i[uns aA^q o% pa^iodaj Aqepijjo aae 
auoji? aijpi?d aqi in satnjeuiqng S'fl 'seaae 
a[ui?q aqj iuojj sanbiumuuioa in dn Sin 
-\id si suodeaAv jbabjsi paaueApe s c eoLiauiy 
jo Xiijouadns aqi jo aouapiAa otibiubjq 

*STxy aqi Aq 

paonpojd Smaq Sinq^ue iujojjad-ino {pi 
leqi iiiaiudmba pajinboi? pue papueuiap 
seq i(AB]vi * mo ll^saj e sy *noiieu Xub Xq 
las isaqSrq aq; aje Xiiprib jo spjupiieis sij 
•Xab^ -jq aqj uajsBiu^sei §ui 
-laexa isoiu s t pjjOM aqi joj ^joa\ a 




The Development of Tank Destroyers 




EIGHTEEN months ago an independent 
combat team such as the Tank Destroy- 
ers, designed exclusively for tank destruction, 
was but a vague gleam in the eyes of the 
Planning Branch of the General Staff in 
Washington. 

This year, on September 18th, Camp Hood, 
Texas, home of the Tank Destroyer Center, 
was officially opened for business. And "offi- 
cially" is used in a purely rhetorical sense, 
since the Center had been functioning as a 
training area for many months prior to its 
ceremonial christening. 

In May, 1941, the Planning Branch made 
an intensive survey of all things pertaining to 
antitank warfare. Defense against tanks had 
reached a critical point; something drastic 
had to be done. The subject was given A-l 
; priority. 

" There were appointed antitank officers in 

every division, corps, and army, with the 
thought in mind of developing a specialized 
cadre of men with but one particular mission 
— that of tank destruction. 

In July, 1941, a conference was held and 
senior officers of all branches debated the 
questions of towed versus self-propelled 
mounts, of organic versus independent anti- 
tank units. Provisional antitank battalions 
were organized, and their experimentation on 
maneuvers carefully studied. 

A directive of May, 1941, stated, in sub- 
stance : 

"Although defense against tanks is the re- 
sponsibility of all branches, it is possibly be- 
yond the scope of any one arm and requires 
the development of a special force, or semi- 
independent combat team, composed of ele- 
ments of all arms, capable of great mobility 
and active rather than passive defense tac- 
tics." 

On December 1st, 1941, at Fort Meade, 
Maryland, the Tank Destroyer Tactical and 




1 



Many are the wiles of tank hunters. Here a Tank 
Destroyer soldier is ambushing a tank with a sticky 
grenade. 



by 

Major General A. D. Bruce 

Commanding, The Tank Destroyer Center 




Major General Andrew D. Bruce 



Firing Center was activated. 

The name Tank Destroyer was chosen since 
it epitomized active aggressive action as op- 
posed to passive resistance. 

The mission of the T. D. T. and F. C. was to 
organize a combined School, Planning Board, 
and Unit Training Center, to develop tac- 
tical doctrine and training methods. 

Fighting equipment presented the biggest 
problem. The Board realized it would be 
months before the ideal gun and mobile mount 
could be designed, tested, and put into pro- 
duction. Both halftracks and 75-mm's were 
available. Though neither gun nor mount 
were precisely the answer, the combination 
most nearly approached the self-propelled 
super-weapon. 

As for an armed reconnaissance vehicle — 
twenty-five dollars bolted the 37-mm to the 
three-quarter ton Fargo. Too, unbolt the gun, 
and the mount was still usable as a QM 
vehicle. Thus, economy, commercial produc- 
tion, mobility, and gun were all satisfied in 
expedients. 

Meanwhile, the Center expanded. They 
needed elbow room. They found that room in 
Texas. 

In January of this year, a site was chosen 
in Central Texas, near the small town of Kil- 
leen. Construction of the cantonment began. 
The Center mushroomed. Officers reported in 
droves, to the School, to the Advanced Unit 
Training Center, to the Board. Headquarters 
of the Center was moved from Fort Meade to 
Temple, Texas, near the Reservation. All 
available office space in the town was utilized. 
The acute housing problem, the lack, and hur- 



ried improvisation, of training facilities, the 
organization of the various instructional de- 
partments, all presented difficulties. 

The First Officers' Orientation Course, held 
in May, found the officers quartered in private 
homes in the nearby town of Gatesville, 
schooled in the municipal auditorium, 
trucked to the reservation for field work. 

There was no thought of waiting for the 
completion of the cantonment to inaugurate 
the Center as a training area. Time was vital. 
Battalions were brought in to the Unit Train- 
ing Center commanded by Brig. Gen. Richard 
G. Tindall, and lived in the field, in tents, 
under theater of operations conditions, draw- 
ing equipment and food from rail and truck 
heads, purifying creek water. 

The T. I). School, under the able command 
of (now Brig. Gen.) Hugh T. May berry, from 
its headquarters in Temple, was feverishly 
preparing training aids, coaching instructors, 
organizing its departments, in anticipation 
of the training of thousands of men. 

The Board, now under the competent di- 
rection of Colonel Ray C. Montgomery, was 
busy formulating doctrine, writing manuals, 
crystallizing their theories on equipment in 
conjunction with the Ordnance Department. 

During the latter part of August, troops 
began to occupy the cantonment area at Camp 
Hood, named in honor of the fighting Gen- 
eral of the South, John Bell Hood, whose 
Texas Brigade gained immortality in the 
Civil War. 

In the Center, every known method of tank 
destruction is taught, from the massed fire 
of the mobile, self-propelled heavy weapons, 
to the ambushing of tanks, guerrilla-fashion, 
by the individual soldier armed with Molotov 
cocktails and sticky grenades. 

( Continued on page 143 ) 




armored shield. 



118 



0 





CANNONEERS! 





One, tfoi czee/ 

Like Alexandre Dumas' immortal Three Musket- 
eers, the cannoneers of the Army's Air Force, 
Armored Corps, and Artillery team together 
with the single purpose of Victory for all. 



THIS IS AN ALLIED FIGHTING ACE who fires as he 
streaks through the sky— blazing away with a fast-shoot- 
ing cannon from the cockpit of a fast-stepping plane. 
He's tops in flying skill and cool fighting courage. 





THIS IS A TOUGH, HARD-HITTING GUNNER of the 

mobile armored corps. He fires a long-range, high-velocity 
cannon from the turret of a high-power tank. He shoots 
fast — he shoots straight — with deadly effect on the enemy. 

. . V 

M OLDSMOBILE PRODUCES TIRE-POWER" FOR 
ALL THREE COURAGEOUS CANNONEERS 



The fast-firing, hard- 
^T"" n'fM^ hitting guns in noses 
^ ftfN& • ° r w * n S s °f thousands 



THIS IS A QUICK-THINKING, QUICK-SHOOTING 
MARKSMAN of the field artillery, who blasts gaping 
holes in enemy ranks, with high -explosive shell. 
His barrage will pave the way for the final offensive. 



of fighter planes are 
Oldsmobile- built air- 
plane cannon. From 
Oldsmobile, too, come the high-veloc- 
ity, large-caliber cannon used in many 
of our Army's newest big tanks. Plus 
many different types of shell used in 
tank cannon, field pieces, howitzers 
and anti-aircraft guns! This flow of fire- 



power from Oldsmobile started more 
than a year ago. Today, the largest 
working force in Oldsmobile history 
is at the service of the "Cannoneers," 
giving their best in "work-power" 
to give them the best in "fire-power." 



The joint Army- 
Navy "E" pennant, 
highest of awards 
for outstanding rec- 
ords in war produc- 
tion, flies over the 
Oldsmobile arsenal. 



FOR VICTORY, BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS! 




OLDSMOBILE "^GENERAL MOTORS 

★ VOLUME PRODUCER OF "FIRE-POWER" FOR THE U. S. A. ★ 



119 



America's Desert Soldier 



by 

Major General Alvan C. Gillem, Jr. 

Commanding General, II Armored Corps* 



IN the blazing heat of the California desert, 
America is moulding a new type of soldier. 
He is a soldier who is learning, first-hand, 
lessons of the law of surviv- 
al, the advanced science of 
modern war, and the art of 
adapting his innate initia- 
tive and self-reliance to con- 
ditions which closely ap- 
proximate those he must 
face in actual combat. 

His classroom is the 
Army's new Desert Train- 
ing Center, a vast 12,000,- 
000-acre testing ground for 
men and machines, which 
encompasses huge mountain 
ranges, hundreds of miles of 
desert wastes, and a river 
obstacle. Few if any of 
the man-made limitations 
which normally hinder large 
movements of troops else- 
where in the country are 
present. 

The first maneuvers in 
the area, designed entirely for armored and 
motorized elements, covered two months of 
almost continual operations, under condi- 



tions unique in troop training. For 10 days 
before going into the field, men spent their 
time becoming acclimated to the intense heat. 





Army Signal Corps Photos 

Maj. Gen. Alvan C. Gillem, jr^ {right) goes over a 
map of part of the 12,000,000-acre area of the Army s 
Desert Training center. With him is his Chief of 
Staff, Col. John Pierce. 



Three low-level attack bombers swoop in on two tanks during air-ground 
California desert. The picture shows typical terrain, indicating some of 

camouflage. 



Prior to the start of the large-scale ma- 
neuvers, units got the "feel" of the desert on 
small problems, operating vehicles across- 
country in deep sand for the first time. From 
that point on, during days and nights of simu- 
lated warfare, men began learning the little 
lessons so vastly important in combat. 

They found out how easy it is to stall a 
vehicle because of failure to make a minor ad- 
justment; found out the importance of water 
and food — paying the penalty of hunger and 
thirst if supplies were lost or not maintained. 
They learned that, if they lost their guns, 
their shoes, or their shirts, replacement was 
difficult. 

They found themselves "killed" or "cap- 
tured" because of small mistakes. 

From mid- August to mid-October, while ex- 
ercises were under way, 100-degree tempera- 
tures — in the shade — were the rule rather 
than the exception. Ground temperatures of 
150 degrees at noon were not unusual. Con- 
servatively stated, the atmosphere inside the 
tanks was something less than cool. 

Tank crews found they had to wear gloves 
to avoid being seared by the hot metal. Offi- 
cers and men consumed daily rations of from 
three to six salt tablets, to ward off heat 
prostration. Water carried in canteens was 
too hot to use, and desert water bags were 
universally carried. 

At night, temperatures dropped sharply; 
when the men crawled out of their bed- 
rolls they shivered in the brisk air of the 

120 



early morning. There was little rainfall, but 
there were high winds and 

Both men and equipment stood the test 
satisfactorily. Out of the 
sand and heat came the new 
American desert soldier, in 
superb physical condition. 
He was tanned, hardened, 
keen and spoiling for a fight. 
He had begun to get an idea 
of what he was up against. 

Without exception, the 
physical condition of officers 
and men improved during: 
the guelling two months. 
From a military viewpoint, 
the results were impressive. 
Leaders met and learned the 
necessity for prompt de- 
cisions and immediate exe- 
cution of orders so vital in- 
actual combat. 

They learned, too, the ab- 
solute necessity for night re- 
connaissance, to determine 
the strength and location of 
the enemy. In desert terrain, moving units 
throw up clouds of dust. By use of various 
means, one type of vehicle can be made to 
throw up dust clouds resembling those usual- 
ly associated with another type. This is one 
method of desert camouflage. 

Commanders observing these dust clouds 
to their front found it essential to send up 
patrols at night for reconnaissance. These 
moved up in vehicles to points close to the 
{Continued on page 14:>) 



operations in the 
the difficulties in 




Maj. Gen. Walton H Walh» r i 

of the Desert Trunin* ?r Wh ° as8u ™* command 
«ri l raining Center in November. 



It means MUCH to us 
but MORE to our Stealthy Patrols 

. . . on their hazardous missions 




HONORS won either on the battlefield, in public life 
or on the production line are but a stimulant to 
greater effort and higher standards. Management, men 
and machines must team together as never before to 
achieve overwhelming victory. 

The coveted Army and Navy "E", which has been 
awarded to you men at the machines, in the tool rooms, 
on the assembly lines and in every department of our 
plants, is the Armed Services' way of saying "Well done". 
The Board of Directors and the management of Auto- 
Ordnance Corporation join heartily with the Armed 
Services in congratulating you on a successful effort. 

But this must be only a beginning. We must come 
through with more and more and MORE ... and 
together we will. 



Your splendid spirit and skill moved the "Tommy" 
Guns from the factory front to the fighting fronts, 
where they belong. You got them there not by hun- 
dreds but by hundreds of thousands . . . not tomorrow 
but yesterday . . . got them there when they were 
needed. 

And the Nazis and Japs have felt their sting! 

The men at Dunkirk and Tobruk ... in Greece and 
Crete . . . from Norway to Singapore . . . and our soldiers 
in their fox holes on Pacific islands have told you so. 

Your own American hearts and hard-working hands 
will tell you best how badly they are needed now and 
how well you can do the job of turning them out. 

Make the "Tommy" Gun a symbol of victory . . . and 
a way to achieve it. 



AUTO-ORDNANCE CORPORATION 

Manufacturers of the Thompson Submachine Gun .... "Tommy" Gun 

TPADC • MAKK 

BRIDGEPORT g^SS^ CONNECTICUT 

HI 0. U.S.PAT OFF. 

121 



Our Merchant Marine and the War 



by 



Frank J. Taylor 

President, American Merchant Marine Institute, Inc. 



FOR many centuries control of the seas has 
been a large deciding factor in great wars. 
In the history of our own country this has 
been especially true. Beginning with our fight 
for independence and in the conflicts that 
were to follow, our merchant marine has 
many times turned the scales in our favor. 
Today, in this total world-wide conflict, the 
importance of merchant shipping stands out 
clearly again in the maintaining of continu- 
ous supply lines and transporting munitions 
and men in vast quantities to the far-flung 
fronts of the universe. 

The nation that can obtain and maintain 
supremacy of the seas will win the war. Not- 
withstanding that air power has supplanted 
the superdreadnoughts in sea battles; that 
now we find airplane carriers replacing in 
importance the Navy's capital ships, our Na- 
vy remains our first line of defense and can 
and will bring to us a victorious decision in 
this war. 

Every vessel flying the American flag 
whether it be dry cargo, tanker or collier ves- 
sel forms an integral part of the armed forces. 
Merchant ships serve as auxiliaries to the 
Army and Navy. They serve as supply ships 
to the naval fleet and military transports to 
the Army. In the establishment and main- 
tenance of the naval bases, those important 
outposts that add most definitely to the se- 
curity of our country, are the job of merchant 
vessels. In fact, whereas our American mer- 
chant marine has often been referred to as 
our second line of defense, the true place in 
the war effort of the shipping industry is 
right alongside of our armed forces. 

Consider events to date. We are aware of 
the torpedoing of hundreds of our merchant 
ships since our entrance into the war. Many 
brave men who man the ships of our mer- 
chant fleet have given their lives, while others 
have undergone great hardships due to the 
sinking of the vessels on which they served. 
Their heroic deeds in line of duty and ser- 




vice to their country are constantly being 
brought to the attention of all of us. 

As each day passes the importance of the 
American merchant marine to the Army, Na- 
vy and the all-out effort becomes increasing- 
ly obvious. The ultimate success that will be 
ours at the end of the war cannot be achieved 
without the continued operation of American 




shipping. Today our ships are to be found 
all over the entire globe. Converted merchant 
vessels not long ago transported an army to 
distant Australia. Supplies and reinforce- 
ments must be maintained to that continent. 
Long voyages to Africa and the Red Sea with 
munitions, food, tanks and planes must be 
carried on. The routes to the Russian front 
are beset with constant perils. Still war sup- 
plies must and are going forward unhalter- 
ingly. 

The movement of American vessels is not 
confined to the shipment of military equip- 
ment and personnel, however. Daily going 
forth to the four corners of the 
earth are supplies and products 
of our country to our allies in 
this fight for the liberation of man- 
kind. To the south of our country 
strategic war materials must be 
brought to us for conversion into 
the tools of war for the protection 
of the Western Hemisphere. The 



Convoy in South Pacific Sailing with 
their sterns to the rising sun, ships of 
an American convoy set out for the 
Southwest Pacific. 



success of the United States and the other 
S Nations can only be achieved ^thtte 
continued and uninterrupted flow of the ma 
terials vital to our collective efforts, lheie 
can be no cessation under our lend-lease pro- 
gram and to the necessary aid to those coun- 
tries with which we share the job ahead of us. 

This job, this war, is all embracing in scope. 
Our lives, our homes and families are depen- 
dent upon its outcome. Ships, the common 
carriers of the essentials of war, are the key 
to that outcome. Their job cannot be over- 
estimated. The great distances at which the 
battles are being fought, the problems in- 
volved in maintaining connections to those 
fronts clearly show that it is a war of trans- 
portation. And the problems involved can 
only be solved by an adequate merchant fleet 
to successfully accomplish the task before us. 

Our country now has underway a ship con- 
struction program the like of which is un- 
paralleled in its history- Great credit is due 
to those government officials under which this 
program is going forward. Credit is due too 
to the American lines and the Maritime Com- 
mission that had, prior to the war and, as a 
matter of fact, as far back as 1937, laid the 
groundwork that made the present program 
possible. 




V. S. Nnvy Hioto 



S. 



Navy Photo 

Fitting out V. S 



Merchant Ships for war duties. 



122 



i 





Power 



(Emm®® ffwmuw, 



WORKING Power 




The patriotism of a great corporation can be as real and 
sincere as that of the most patriotic American citizen. 

Sears, Roebuck and Co. cannot literally carry a gun ... but 
its many important sources of supply can make bullets and bomb 
racks, planes and tank communication equipment, armor plate 
and a host of other vital war necessities. 

It can sacrifice the profits from the production of peace-time 
commodities for the production of war materials. 

It can open its corporate heart and give management, man- 
power, money, machines and skilled personnel to the manu- 
facture of anything and everything needed by the armed forces. 

It can, through its many sources, give the working power that 
produces fighting power 

... As in its big David Bradley Farm Implement Factory, 
and others. 

These things Sears has done and will continue to do. Not in 
the spirit of sacrifice but in the spirit of patriotism ... the regard 
of an American institution for the American way of life. 

"Produce for Victory" is more than a slogan ... it is a creed 
... in the many factories which for years have supplied Sears, 
Roebuck and Co. with the merchandise we sell. 

"Sears business as usual" can wait until the war is won. 




The Airborne Command 



Brigadier 



THE mass employment by the Germans of 
parachute and air-landed units lias pro- 
vided one of the major surprises in the cur- 
rent war and has led to such development of 
these units as to constitute a new weapon of 
increasing importance. 

The Airborne Command at Fort Bragg, 
North Carolina, is charged under the Com- 
manding General, Army Ground Forces, with 
sharpening the edges of this weapon and with 
developing a technique which will make its 
employment most effective. 




Brig. Gen. E. G. Chapman 



by 

General Elbriclge G. Chapman 

Commanding, The Airborne Command 



The Airborne Command is widespread geo- 
graphically, and consists of the Headquarters 
at Fort Bragg, the Parachute School at Fort 
Benning, parachute brigades and regiments 
not assigned to airborne divisions, and of 
numerous parachute and glider field artillery 
and antiaircraft units. The Command is re- 
sponsible for the training of all airborne divi- 
sions, and for training standard infantry di- 
visions in the use of transport aircraft. Addi- 
tional functions include the development of 
airborne equipment and materiel, and the de- 
velopment of supply by air utilizing para- 
chutes, gliders and aircraft. 

Closely allied to the Airborne Command is 
the Troop Carrier Command, under the Com- 
manding General, Army Air Forces, which 
furnishes the transport airplane and glider 
units for all airborne troops. Glider stations 
are operated throughout the country by the 
Troop Carrier Command, and set aside at 
each of these are facilities and training aids 
for the use of airborne units sent there by the 
Airborne Command for that phase of their 
training. 

It is true that airborne units are organized 
and equipped for special operations, and that 
parachute elements consist of volunteers, but 
the fact is stressed that the parachute, glider 
and airplane are but different means to place 
the soldier quickly near his objective. Upon 
landing, the action is that of other ground 
units, modified by the use of special equip- 
ment and weapons, and characterized by a re- 
duction in motor transport and the necessity 
for supply by air. The airborne soldier should 
possess military skill of a high order and, 
likewise, his effective employment demands 
aggressive, intelligent leadership in combat. 

The landings of airborne troops will be 
made usually in enemy territory and the term 
u shock troops" is not inappropriate, but the 
idea is far from correct that these are in any 
sense either "Commandos" or "sacrifice units." 

124 



U. S. A. 



The employment of airborne troops presup- 
poses a strong superiority in the air, a con- 
tinuing support by fighter aircraft, and em- 
ployment in mass and in conjunction with 
other major elements of the ground forces. 
The principle is accepted that an airborne 
operation would be too expensive to permit 
failure, and the operation accordingly is 
favored with more than the usual number of 
factors required to insure success. 




Utmost care eoe.s intn th*» t 0WJ Phot0 

for our troops ThTJe^r„ UfaCtUre ° S P^achutes 
parachutes bei„ g inspected V^rT? ^ 
airplanes *" dr ° PS fr ° m 





FC^ICTORY 

ill BUY 

VMi| united 

}mJ(tgfr STATES 
Si Jffj DEFENSE 

c^^K STAMPS 


• 


1 

I 


1 









December 8, 1941 the President quoted: 

"Yesterday, December 7, 1941— a date which 
will live in infamy— the United States of America was 
suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air 
forces of the Empire of Japan The attack yes- 
terday on the Hawaiian Islands has caused severe dam- 
age to American naval and military forces. Very 

many American lives have been lost No matter 

how long it may take us to overcome this premeditated 
invasion, the American people in their righteous might 
will win through to absolute victory." 




Each ship adds to our might and we 
shall build more and more ships for that 

VICTORY. 

fife 

■ 



SUN SHIPBUILDING & DRY DOCK CO. 

CHESTER, PA. 




125 



The Operation of the Judge Advocate 

Department 



General's 



by 

Major General Myron C. Cramer 

The Judge Advocate General of the Army 



THE primary purpose of the Judge Advo- 
cate General's Department is to furnish 
legal advice on military matters to the Presi- 
dent and to the Secretary of War, the Under 
Secretary, the Assistant Secretaries, the 
Chief of Staff, and the commanding generals 
on whose staffs the officers of the department 
serve. A secondary, but important, purpose is 
to furnish legal advice to anybody in the 
Army who needs such advice in the perform- 
ance of his official duties. 

The question may be asked:— why have 
lawyers in the Army? The Army is a fighting 
organization; what necessity is there for 
lawyers as a part of it?— The answer is that 
an army, if it is to be an army and not a mob. 
must have discipline and must be organized 
and administered in an orderly manner with 
due regard for the rights of eaery person in 
In order to have discipline, which is indispen 
it and of every person with whom it deals. In 
order to have discipline, which is indispensa- 
(Conthiued on page 159) 



Maj. Gen. Myron C. 
Cramer, The Judge Ad- 
vocate General, and Col. 
E. H. Young, J.A.G.D., 
Commandant of The 
Judge Advocate Gen- 
eraVs School and his 
staff, reviewing student 
officers. The added facil- 
ities provided the school 
by its new quarters in 
the seven million dollar 
Law Quadrangle of the 
University of Michigan 
has permitted an exten- 
sive broadening of the 
course. Noiv, in addition 
to technical training in 
the field of Military 
Law, daily infantry drill 
and instruction in weap- 
ons, map reading, chem- 
ical warfare, administra- 
tion, and other purely 
military subjects form 
an important part of 
the curriculum. 




War Activities of the Office of the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy 



by 

Rear Admiral W. B. Woodson 

Judge Advocate General of the Navy 



THE Judge Advocate General of the Navy 
is the chief legal officer of the Navy De- 
partment. His functions in detail are pre- 
scribed by the Navy Regulations which ai*e 
approved by the President. The activities of 
the Navy throughout the world include mat- 
ters of every nature; consequently, the prob- 
lems raised in its operation encompass 
practically every branch of law. 

Within the office, the cognizance is sepa- 
rated into four divisions : 

I The Administration of Justice. 
II Administrative, Admiralty, Interna- 
tional Law, Legislative Matters. 

III Contracts, Performance Bonds and 
Miscellaneous Claims. 

IV Patents, Trade Marks and Copyrights. 
Specialists in all branches of law affecting 

the Navy are assigned to these respective divi- 
sions The peacetime legal organization has 
been augmented by the addition of carefully 
selected lawyers with particular qualifica- 




tions and specialized knowledge. These have 
been selected from all over the country and 
have been inducted into the Legal Naval Re- 
serve and their special experience made avail- 
able for wartime legal requirements. 

The activities of the Navy are closely cir- 
cumscribed and controlled by laws, regula- 
tions and precedents. The first impact of 
World War II came in the summer of 1940 
with the passage of statutes providing for the 
so-called 11% and 70% building program 
applying particularly to ships. At about the 
same time the aviation pro-ram was also 
stepped up enormously. Shortly thereafter 
came the entirely new conception of Lend- 

nw '• , at had been in Peacetime simply 
Provisions for the control of the expenditures 

tt^l i Apartment, now often became 
accomplishment of the naval 

sures I 1 )r0g " am - As these regulatory mea- 
sures developed into hampering devices, in 
(Oontmued on page 153) 



126 



Time can be an Enemy 

-or an Ally 



When the whole story is told, America's citizens will be 
proud of the many ways their war leaders have made an 
ally of time. 

In our own contribution to the end that time will be an 
ally of the United Nations, we are determined that the flow 
of Vultee trainers, bombers and fighters will be accelerated. 

And this we reaffirm: The necessity for building planes 
will not stop with the cessation of hostilities. 

In a world where aviation has cancelled the protection 
of distances, our Air Forces must become stronger. 

In a world where trade-routes will be air-routes, Ameri- 
can aviation will have fresh opportunities to display its might. 

In the unfolding of the patterns of this Air Age, we 
intend the name Vultee will be as significant in re-shaping 
World Geography as it has been in re-shaping World Combat. 




VULTEE AIRCRAFT, INC. • VULTEE FIELD, CALIFORNIA 
Builders of Trainers, Dive Bombers and Fighters 

Member, Aircraft War Production Council, Inc. 




127 



The War Effort of the Infantry School 



by 

Major General Leven C. Allen, U. S. A. 

Commandant, The Infantry School 



THE vast expansion of the army incident 
to the transition from a peace to a war 
footing probably has had as profound an ef- 
fect upon The infantry School at Fort Ben- 
ning as upon any other peace time arnjy 
activity. 

Figures which, until 1940, enabled this 
school to proclaim it- 
self the largest of its 
kind in the world, 
have, in two short 
years been multiplied 
by hundreds. Its in- 
structional staff num- 
bers more officers than 
were graduated during 
the academic year end- 
ing in 1941. The vol- 
ume of training litera- 
ture which now issues 
from its army field 
printing plant is prob- 
ably greater than the 
volume of all military 
publications issued 
throughout the country prior to 1940. 

The necessity for and importance of the 
vast expansion of .The Infantry School stems 
from the fact that the school may properly be 
termed the fountain head of infantry train- 
ing. It works directly under the Replacement 
and School Command, which is in turn, an 
agency of the Army Ground Forces. 

The school performs its training mission by 
three major methods: First, by providing 
trained officer graduates, who then are as- 
signed to units in the field and pass on to 
those units the training received; second, by 
the timely preparation and distribution to 
infantry imits and training centers of up-to- 
date instructional pamphlets, films, and other 
training material ; and, third, by preparation 
of new and revision of old training manuals. 

To meet the increased demand for officers 
it became necessary for The Infantry School 
to curtail sharply the length of its courses and 
to increase the number of classes. The re- 
quired increase in the number of classes for 
candidates and junior officers was so great 
that the production of these officers had to be 
effected by the assembly line method. At pres- 
ent approximately one officer candidate class 
is being received and one graduated every 
day except Sunday. 

The required curtailment of time available 
made it necessary to make certain basic deci- 
sions. The most important and far reaching 
of these decisions was to concentrate upon 
the mass production of good infantry combat 
platoon leaders. If these are good, it was felt, 
their specialized training made necessary by 
assignment to some special type of infantry, 



such as armored, motorized, airborne or 
mountain infantry, would be a simple matter. 
It was further felt that these special types of 
infantry units would be in a better position 
than the school to give this additional train- 
ing since they would have a better under- 
standing of the exact requirements. 




Officer candidates practicing the art of thrusting 
bayonets at the Ft. Benning Infantry Officers' Candi- 
date School. Beloiv: General Allen, Commandant of 
the Infantry School. 

Army Signal Corps Photo> 




In order to keep The Infantry School 
abreast of modern trends in combat, certain 
officers are designated to comb reports from 
foreign theaters of war, and reports and di- 
gests issued by the Military Intelligence Ser- 
vice, for indications of new methods and wea- 
pons and to evaluate their effect upon infan- 
try training. As a result of these studies, the 
course of instruction at the school is con- 

128 



tinually being modified to keep it abreast of 
nresent-day combat methods. 
1 The second method employed by the school 
to assist in the training of infantry may be 
Z£Z « an attempt to do the h* twt 
in- for unit commanders in the field. One 
section of the school devotes its time exclu- 
sively to this type of 
work. It analyzes va- 
rious training subjects 
and issues schedules 
considered suitable to 
effect efficient training 
in these various sub- 
jects. It issues train- 
ing bulletins designed 
to place in the hands 
of units in the field as 
quickly as possible the 
latest thought on in- 
fantry methods, and 
changes in training 
methods made neces- 
sary by changes in or- 
ganization or equip- 
ment. The school is now distributing approx- 
imately two million pamphlets each month 
totaling about fifty million pages of training 
literature. It has prepared during the past 
year twenty-four training films, thirty-two 
film strips, and a number of training 
charts. 

During the past IS months The Infantry 
School has prepared a complete new series of 
Field Manuals dealing with the organization, 
tactics, and technique of Infantry units. All 
of these have been approved and distributed 
to the Service with the exception of one which 
is practically ready for distribution. By time- 
ly change and revision these manuals have 
been kept abreast of latest changes in organi- 
zation and equipment. 

Simultaneously with the great expansion 
of its training in general infantry subjects, 
The Infantry School has greatly increased its 
annual production of trained specialists for 
infantry units, including communication and 
automotive experts, both commissioned and 
enlisted. A course has also been added in the 
technique and tactics of the Infantry Cannon 
Company. 

The mushroom growth of the school's out- 
put of graduates has of course been accom- 
panied by a similar expansion in the demand 
for housing facilities, utilities, and training 
areas. Additional land purchases have, dur- 
ing the past year, approximately doubled the 
size of the Fort Benning Reservation. Hous- 
ing capacity has been increased in two vears 
by about 200 per cent, and other facilities 
have grown correspondingly 



National Steel Corporation's program to meet 
war demands for steel began more than a year 
before Pearl Harbor. It has extended at record- 
breaking speed into every department of every 
plant. As a result, iron and steel capacity of 
National Steel Corporation has been sub- 
stantially increased. 

Steel for guns, for tanks, for shells, for 
airplanes, for ships, for bombs, for all the other 
weapons of War— and Victory— is being pro- 
duced by the operating division of National 
Steel at greatly accelerated tempo. More steel 

better steel — than ever before. Steel that 

meets the strictest quality requirements laid 



down for vital war material. Steel that keeps 
our war industries operating at peak capacities. 
Steel that finds its way, quickly, into materials 
and munitions to insure a decisive Victory and 
a sure preservation of our own American way 



of life. 



■nations** 1 



Owning and Operating : 
Weirton Steel Company— Great Lakes Steel Corporation 
The Hanna Furnace Corporation 




129 



The Shore Support for the Fleet 



by 



Rear Admiral Ben Moreell, (CEC), U. S. N. 

Chief of Civil Engineers and Chief of the Bureau of Yards and Docks, U. S. Navy 



A S far back as 1800, shortly after the be- 
ginning of the Navy Department, the need 
for a shore establishment to build and sup- 
port the fleet became apparent and govern- 
ment Navy Yards were built at Portsmouth, 
N. H. ; Boston, Mass. ; New York, N. Y. ; Phila- 
delphia, Pa.; and Gosport (now Norfolk), 
Va. These yards still remain on the original 
sites with the exception of Philadelphia, 
which was moved to League Island in 18GS. 

In 1826 work was begun on the design and 
construction of graving dry docks at Ports- 
mouth, Boston, New York, and Norfolk. 
Eminent civil engineers were called in for 
all this work, and after the reorganization 
of the Navy Department in 1842 and the es- 
tablishment of the bureaus, including the Bu- 
reau of Yards and Docks, civil engineers were 
employed in a civilian status in increasing 
numbers at the navy yards, stations, and the 
Department. It became increasingly appar- 
ent, however, that the civil engineers respon- 
sible for the design and construction of the 
shore establishment could not function at best 
efficiency and with proper mobility in a mili- 
tary setup unlesss they were commissioned 
officers. Consequently, they were given rank, 
and the Civil Engineer Corps had its begin- 
ning in 1881. 

It is the function and responsibility of 
the Civil Engineer Corps of the Navy, through 
the medium of the Bureau of Yards and Docks 
of the Navy Department and its field organi- 
zation, to assist all bureaus and offices of the 
Navy Department in the development plan- 
ning and to administer directly the design, 
construction, and maintenance of such shore 
establishments. 

The development of our national emergency 
prior to the declaration of the war initiated 
an unprecedented expansion of the Naval 
shore establishment and has resulted in a 
very great increase in the size of the Civil En- 



gineer Corps. During the previous World 
War the Corps, augmented by Keserve and 
temporary officers, reached a total of 209 com- 
missioned officers at the signing of the arm- 
istice This number, compared to the pres- 
ent strength to date of 2,800 officers, is an 
excellent indication of the magnitude of the 
present Naval shore establishment construc- 




tion program as compared to the one of 1917 
and 1918. 

The area of effective operation of any com- 
bat arm of the Navy depends to a large ex- 
tent upon the number of adequate and strate- 
gically-located bases from which that arm 
can strike. The first impetus T)f the present 
unprecedented shore building program of the 
Navy was given by the report of the Hepburn 
Board to Congress on December 27, 1938. 
This report emphasized the necessity for 




Constructing naval works in war 
is part of the gigantic task of 
officers of the Civil Engineer 
Corps. This officer and his ad- 
visers are up to their waists plan- 
ning the runway ramps for sea- 
planes. Coral rock and sea 
urchins make the under footing 
tough going. 



Navy Seabees lay down steel 
mats which later are filled in 
with coral rock to make a 
smooth surface. The tents are 
hidden from the sight of enemy 
planes by towering coconut 
palms flanking the nexv street 
the Seabees are building in a 
Southivest Pacific Naval Base. 

U. S. Navy Photos 



promptly undertaking the establishment of 
air bases in the Pacific, in Alaska, and in the 
Caribbean, as well as within the continental 
limits of the United States. Congressional 
authorization late in April, 1939, paved the 
way for the commencement of work in the 
summer of the same year. The collapse of 
Prance and the threat of invasion to Great 
Britain emphasized the need of rehabilita- 
ting and enlarging the fleet bases on the At- 
lantic seaboard. In the summer of 1940 a 
heavy expansion program was accordingly be- 
gun at all of the existing navy yards and sta- 
tions along the Atlantic coast. Simulta- 
neously work was accelerated at all yards on 
the west coast, in the Canal Zone, and at 
Pearl Harbor. 

To this program was added in 1941 the de- 
velopment of the bases in the British leased 
sites in Newfoundland, Bermuda, Great 
Exuma, Antigua, St. Lucia, Jamaica, Trini- 
dad and British Guiana, together with the 
expansion of the Caribbean projects to in- 
clude a fleet operating base at Vieques, 
Puerto Rico. In the continental United 
States new Marine Corps training bases were 
begun in North Carolina and Santa Marga- 
rita, Calif., in addition to rapid expansion at 
the older Marine Corps barracks at Parris 
Island, S. C, Quantico, Va., and San Diego, 
Calif. Plans for construction of lighter-than- 
air craft required expansion at Lakehurst, 
N. J., new bases at South Weymouth, Mass., 
Elizabeth City, N. C, Port Arthur, Tex., Gal- 
veston, Tex., Tillamook, Ore., Santa Ana, 
Calif., Richmond, Fla., and Houma, La., and 
the return of the base at Sunnyvale, Calif., to 
the Navy. 

The Naval Aviation program began with 
provision for fundamental training. Through- 
out the country from coast to coast a series 
of primary training fields known as Naval 
(Continued on page 137) 




130 



The Army Engineers and Global War 



by 

Major General Eugene Reybold, 

Chief of Engineers 



HPHE Army of the United States comprises 
a mighty team, each component of which 
contributes something of vital significance 
The contribution of the Corps of Engineers 
is two-fold : to increase the mobility of our 
forces in the field; and, to further the fighting 
power of our forces by construction in the 
rear. 

Like all other components of our great new 
Army, the Corps of Engineers has kept 
abreast of the times. It has met the challenge 
of such developments as the necessity for 
clearing minefields, for breaching fortifica- 
tions, and for effecting the rapid crossing of 
rivers, by developing appropriate types of 
equipment, by establishing appropriate types 
of organization, by formulating appropriate 
doctrine, and by providing for efficient train- 
ing of troop units. 

On the construction front, the vast program 
for housing our new Army and for providing 
the schools and factories and other facilities 
involved in the total war effort already has 
passed the hump. In this great program, the 
Corps has utilized to fullest extent America's 




matchless construction industry. A few ran- 
dom figures give an idea of what this team of 



Army Engineers, American contractors and 
civilian labor have done. 

They have built enough airfield runways 
alone to make a 4-lane highway from Boston, 
Massachusetts to Denver, Colorado. They 
have installed railroad trackage equivalent to 
the railroad mileage between New York City 
and St. Louis, Missouri. They have construct- 
ed a pumping capacity for the Army's water 
system large enough to supply all the require- 
ments of the combined populations of Iowa 
and Kansas. They have built roadways with 
a surface area greater than thaf of three 20- 
foot highways paralleling the existing usually 
travelled route between New York City and 
San Francisco, California. 

Furthermore, in the construction of all the 
facilities erected in the war construction pro- 
gram, immense savings in critical materials 
have been effected through simplification and 
standardization of design and the use of sub- 
stitutes for aluminum, copper, steel and 
many other products — including even wood. 

The successful accomplishment of the Engi- 
(Con United on page 153) 




DIGGING THE FOUNDATIONS 
FOR VICTORY 

The entire production of Bucyrus-Erie's four plants is going into 
vital war work. Ordnance materiel, crawler and wheel-mounted shovels 
and cranes, and a variety. of tractor equipment are going direct to 
Army and Navy. Lend-lease is moving Bucyrus-Eries to many of the 
present and future fighting fronts. On the home front, Bucyrus-Eries 
are mining iron ore, copper, nickel, aluminum, coal, and other sinews 
of war. They are working 24 hours a day on shipyards, airports, 
ordnance plants, and cantonments. 

While we are naturally proud of the part our equipment is playing 
in the war effort, we are also deeply aware of our responsibility to 
build it as fast as we can and as well as we can. 





1942 will be remembered as the year America mobil- 
ized its great resources and economy from a defensive 
position to full-scale readiness for strong offense. 

Throughout the nation during 1942, Graybar has 
worked unceasingly toward the speedy mobilization 
and distribution of electrical supplies — supplies vitally 
necessary to war industry and the Armed Services. 
Graybar is proud of whatever small part it has played 
in bringing Victory closer. 



GraybaR 




IN OVER 80 PRINCIPAL CITIES 

Executive Offices: GRAYBAR BUILDING, NEW YORK« I*. V. 



131 



War-Time Tasks of the U. S. Public Health Service 



by 

Thomas Parran, M.D., 

Surgeon General, U. S. Public Health Service 



"17 IRTUALLY the entire staff of the Public 
^ Health Service is now engaged in activi- 
ties directly related to the war. In addition, 
with emergency appropriations from Con- 
gress, the Service has recruited and 
trained more than 700 physicians, 
nurses, engineers, and other tech- 
nical personnel for duty in war 
areas. These people have been 
loaned for the duration of the war to 
State health departments which in 
turn assign them to particular com- 
munities. Their duties include : 
setting up new local health services 
for the control of communicable dis- 
eases, sanitation of the environ- 
ment, and provision of maternal 
and child health services. 

The regular staff of the Public- 
Health Service has also been aug- 
mented and is constantly in demand 
for emergency duty. Supplement- 
ing the work of the Marine Hos- 
pitals and relief stations, nearly 100 
medical officers have been assigned 
to the War Shipping Administra- 
tion to examine candidates for 
training in the U. S. Maritime Ser- 
vice; to provide medical care for 
trainees at the Maritime Training 
Stations; and to provide similar 
service at the convalescent homes 
and rest camps for seamen whose 
ships have been bombed or torpedoed. The U. 
S. Coast Guard has grown by leaps and 
bounds and has needed many more doctors 
for boats on convoy duty, for recruiting units 
and training stations. 

The Medical Commission to China, ap- 
pointed by the Public Health Service a year 
ago to supervise malaria control, escaped the 
Japanese advance along the Burma Road. 
These 15 doctors, entomologists, and engi- 
neers are now on duty with the U. S. Army 
in India, where our troops must be protected 
against malaria. 

War has emphasized the importance of in- 
creasing our efforts against malaria, tubercu- 
losis and venereal disease among the civilian 
population. 

Malaria is one of the most widespread and 
consuming of all human diseases. It saps the 
strength of an estimated S00,000,00() people 
in the world. There are approximately 2,- 
000,000 people affected in this country each 
year, mainly in Southern States. 

Engineering surveys made in April and 
May 1941 revealed the need for controlling 
malaria and pest mosquitoes in 155 military, 
naval and industrial areas. The Public 
Health Service has initiated practical con- 
trol measures in critical areas in 17 Southern 
States. 



Although the mortality from all forms of 
tuberculosis has dropped sharply, from 194 
per 100,000 population in 1900 to 46 in 1940, 
the knowledge that the pressures of war have 




The Public Health Service considers it advisable, insofar as possible, to 
eliminate flight personnel as a quarantine hazard, as they generally travel 
great distances and enter many ports during a short period. A high degree 
of immunity is maintained against yellow fever, smallpox, and typhoid and 
should it seem indicated, there may be an attempt against cholera and typhus. 
In this photo, a Public Health Service officer is injecting the men ivho fly 
the Caribbean and to South America. Below: Surgeon General Parran. 



( ory, 




individuals so that, tuberculosis may be de- 
lected at an early stage where it may be ar- 
rested most easily. Mobile units are being 
made available for case-finding among work- 
ers and their families in war indus- 
tries. Present plans envisage ex- 
amination of all industrial workers, 
with an annual follow-up in certain 
groups. 

In every one of our 48 States 
there is a well established program 
of venereal disease control, provid- 
ing free diagnosis and treatment, 
and supplying physicians with free 
drugs. During the fiscal year 1942, 
3,3G3 venereal disease clinics were 
cooperating with the Federal pro- 
gram. More than 17 million serol- 
ogic tests for syphilis were made, 
and an average of 404,885 patients 
per month received treatment for 
syphilis. Approximately 10,500,000 
doses of anti-syphilis drugs were 
distributed. 

National control of gonorrhea by 
means of treatment with the new 
''sulfa" drugs is rapidly advancing. 
In 1942, over a million and a quar- 
ter laboratory tests for gonorrhea 
were made and 12 million tablets of 
sulfa drugs were distributed by co- 
operating agencies. 

For the first time in military his- 
a blood test for syphilis was given to 
Army candidates under our Selective Service 
laws. A Federal appropriation of $12,500,000 
has been provided for venereal disease con- 
trol for the current year, with emphasis on 
war areas and the treatment of men rejected 
because of venereal infection. 

To meet the production quotas, every war 
worker must be kept at top efficient. The 
health task is largely one of extending ser- 
vices training additional personnel, and 
using foresight to meet the problems created 
by the war, such as the use of new chemical 

Sux o^ UP P™ d ^ion, and Z 

influx of many new workers, women as well as 

£££ TJT r mm - T " S» » 

sisiance 10 modern indiied^-ir +k« 
ahi A 4« •/^•"Miastry, there is avail- 



able in the Federal Servi 



and local industrial hv 



ceand in the 45 State 



ization of more than w£T*- U * its an ° rgau - 



ical and engineer! no- - r^v 0 ,m CU - 

oratory serviced ^ T'T^ lab ' 
healtb protection oi <T r Z f ° F the 

Plants is available 111 lndi ^™l 

pleted Tsnrvefofr- ^ has -» com- 

atrial plants cmSef ^ 

'»ent for thorough investU, ^ Depait " 
(n* *• mestl £ation. Thesp in- 
(Contmued on varje 159) illese 111 



always resulted in an upswing of tubercu- 
losis has resulted in the intensification of ac- 
tivities of the Public Health Service to 
control this illness. 

The use of portable 35 mm. photofluoro- 
graphic units has greatly facilitated the tech- 
nique of swiftly examining large numbers of 

132 



881 



S3IU0AVU08V7 HDUV3S3U 




3111 0MIJLVU3J0 



•UBUI JO JUL'AJaS 

Xiqaadns os apBui uaaq \\° SB H H1 JBJ> u0 noijeu aaqjo on joj 

'JBAV JO O0B9(I III 'JBIH J n ° l U f° d °» S ' J" B ^ Op 9AV JBq^ 

•OITOTld Oql 01 SJOnpOjd XlIB JO 9pjS 9qi 

ojouiojd oj 9J3q siuouiqsfldmoooB asaqi jsq avou iou op 

•sbav ij jBipw sjqnop uBqj aaoui 
si XMX SupiBiu joj tiiovdm \vuon 
-TBVL jiio iBqj os uma[0 

j^gd uiojj 

9ABl[ AVOU 9AY ^[JOAY JBqj J° 9811FD9g 

•gUItp {t'9J 9l[] 
SSL'djllS sXBAY JBJ9A9S III |[IM JBlp ' 1 * 9110 
-ik9A9 JOJ HO J9]B[ pUB SO.JJOJ p9lllJB 9l{] 

joj isjij ■ • • raqqiu DnaqjuXs o; Xbay 9ip 

110 AVOU 9JB 9AV 6 >[JOAi JBlp JO 9SllBD9g 

'SS9USS9J 

■9sn oun vromdmba sqi P UB szsmj 

XI9J91U ppiOAV lOlipOjd XjHUipJO 9l[l 9J9IJAV 

S9jniuj9dui9j 01 uAiop sunS pue sdiqs pm? 
S9UB[d III SJOJ1UOD Supujodo JOJ S[10 oijnBjp 

-Xq [BioQds puy -safStmt SuiJoipAvs 6 suoiu 
-ojog 9ip jo S9unp pixio* isoui s 6 i?Xqi-j 




J9AO SB 9dd9JS JS9p[09 S^BlSSll^J UO 9[qBpiI9d9p SB S[lO [BIO 
-9ds 9ABl[ 9AV ; 9DU919S Uni9J0JJ9d JO Xj9JSBUI JBqi JO 9SIlBD9g 

*UB9 9Ai SB JO IJOIUU SB 9>[BUl 
UBD XJHIIIOO J9l[10 OU IfDllJAl [911J B pUB 'jBCpilOO JIB III 9§p9 SS9J 
-99lJcI B 4 9Ul[OSB§ 9 UB]9Q-QQ^ 9ABl[ 9Ai }[JOAY JBl[l JO 9SllB09g 

•UOIJBJS SUIJJIJ J9UJ09 JIIOX OJ SJDlipOjd J9J19q J9§ OJ 
S^BAV J9H9q JOJ lUliq 9UllJ9DB9d SS9[pU9 
UB III 6 0§B §U0[ p9UJB9[ 9Ai S9SS990jd 

9S0l IX " * * *T l PI Ai °P °* Alol { ^on5[ 
9Ai iui[Ai si jnBjjoduii 9JOUI H9Ag 

•Xjddns iiayoio[ s^pfjOAY 9qi jo %09 
XpjBuiixojcIdB qjiAV 4 9S[9 9uoXub UBqi 

Ulll9|0J19d 9JOUI 9ABIJ 9A1 JBqj JSllf JOU 

si jio s 6 B9iJ9iuy moqB Suiip lUBjjoduir 
lsoui 9qj joj[ -ji 9sn o% ^li[iqB ss9[ip}Biii 

Jl9qj JO pUB • • • JIO UAVO Jl9qj JO 99UBJ 

-jodun XjqSim 9qi jo 9jdo9cI UBDiJ9iiiy 
9ip oi J9puiai9j uoqs b 9j9q J9jjo 9^ 

'i(ui9ll9 9ip 

jo spuBq 9qi ni i 4 usi jo si mp [to jnoqB 

X]JB139CIS9 • • • JBAV SUJJ III JIO JO 99UBUOd 
-UIl 9ip llioqe [B9p 1B9JS B pB9J 9ABl[ HOT 




We Understand War 



by 

Eric A. Johnston 

President, Chamber of Commerce of the United States 



are at war today with countries 
™ whose economy has Jong since been 
geared to war. To wage this war most effec- 
tively, we must so gear our entire economy as 
to get maximum war production. That must 
be accomplished at once, so as to win the war 
in the shortest possible time, in order to save 
lives, avoid a long grueling war effort and to 
prevent unnecessary waste of resources." 

Those words are quoted from a resolution 
adopted by the Board of Directors of the 
United States Chamber of Commerce at a 
special war session held immediately after 
the attack on Pearl Harbor. A year has passed 
since the National Chamber's Board of Direc- 
tors took the stand that the nation's entire 
economy had to be geared to war. American 
business, as represented in the United States 
Chamber of Commerce, stands unswervingly 
behind that resolution today. 

For — we understand war. 

The fact that we do comprehend war in its 
full and perilous meaning was recognized by 
no less an observer than Field Marshall Von 
Hindenburg after the first World War. The 
German military leader gave as one of the 
decisive reasons for an Allied victory our un- 
derstanding of how to make war. You will 
recall these words from his oft-quoted 
memoirs : 

"America's brilliant, if pitiless, war indus- 
try had entered the service of patriotism and 
had not failed it. Under the compulsion of 
military necessity a ruthless autocracy was 
at work, and rightly, even in this land at the 
portals of which the Statue of Liberty flashes 
its blinding light across the seas. They un- 
derstood wa/r" 

Thus the words of a German war lord who 
realized only too well, but too late for his 
purposes, the terrible power of American in- 
dustry and the undauntable courage of 
American lighting men. 

But this vast global conflict, waged on most 
of the world's continents and many seas, is a 
different kind of war in many senses. Do we 
comprehend the scope and the implications of 
war in this century of science; the power and 
cunning of an enemy who asks no quarter and 
gives none; the tremendous measure of blood, 
toil and treasure necessary to compound vic- 
tory for freedom's forces? 

In speaking for the men of business and in- 
dustry, I can say that we do understand this 
war, even more profoundly than we under- 
stood war twenty-five years ago. 

We understand that all signs point to a 
drawn-out conflict; that the enemy today has 
hardly started on the path to defeat, even if 
he has started at all. 

We understand the great magnitude of this 
war, which thunders in the skies and on the 
sea and land of Europe, Asia and Africa. 



We understand that the cost of this war in 
terms of money is so enormous as to be be- 
yond the grasp of mentality — and also that 
vast as will be the money cost, victory cannot 
be bought with money alone, but must be paid 
for with a price-less currency, the lives of 
young American manhood. 

We understand that many of the principles 
by and for which our nation lives must be 
temporarily modified or even suspended ; that 
our economy and production must be geared 
to meet the challenge of atavistic enemies 
long and totally organized for war. 

We understand that we began war actually 




as amateurs and we are fighting profession- 
als. We will lose our amateur standing and 
achieve superiority over our opponents only 
through the costly and bloody experience of 
fighting them — and fighting them aggres- 
sively and savagely. 

From a military standpoint, the Japs have 
received intensive training in the Chinese 
theater of war; the Germans on the battle- 
fields of Europe. Theirs has been the grim 
lesson which can only be learned through the 
teachings of trial and error. 

From the production standpoint, the tech- 
nology and energy of our enemies for many 
years has been concentrated almost wholly on 
the development and manufacture of arma- 
ment. 

We of American business and industry 
guided by the dictates of a peace-loving peo- 
ple, were almost completely organized to meet 
civilian requirements. Yet, blessed with our 
resources and ingenuity, we turned overnight 
to the manufacture of the intricate machines 
of war, the planes, ships, tanks and guns of 
today's fast-movjng warfare. That our efforts 

134 



in this respect have met with phenomenal 
success is striking tribute to American tech- 
nicians, workers and managers and dramatic 
proof of the industrial development attain- 
able in a nation whose economy is established 
on a foundation of freedom. 

We understand — and this we understand 
with acute awareness — we understand the 
need for total unity to fight a total war. Any 
dispute, any conflict among management and 
labor and government and agriculture acts as 
a brake on the drive to victory. No need to 
recall the tragic story of France, a great na- 
tion whose bitter internal antagonisms led to 
her swift and disastrous defeat. 

Complete unity between all the groups in 
our national life can only be obtained when 
each and every group completely subordinates 
self-interest to national interest. The coop- 
eration of those groups necessary to weld a 
staunch national unity must be predicated on 
belief by each party in the integrity and mo- 
tives of the other. And the motive of all 
groups obviously should be to win this war in 
the shortest possible order. 

We are not subordinating self-interest to 
the general national interest so long as any 
group exerts self-seeking pressure on Con- 
gress. The only pressure excusable in this 
time of extreme crisis is pressure for the gen- 
eral welfare of the United States and the peo- 
ple of the United States. To this principle, 
the United States Chamber of Commerce is 
wholeheartedly dedicated. 

The United States Chamber of Commerce 
is the national voice of business and industry 
in Washington. More than a million business 
men are represented in the National Cham- 
ber's membership. Seventeen hundred and 
fifty chambers of commerce and trade associa- 
tions establish the policies of their national 
organization. Not only the great manufactur- 
ing concerns of the nation, but the merchant 
m your town, the machine shop operator who 
lives next door, your friend the baker— the 
business men who are the backbone of your 
community express themselves nationally 
through their organization in Washington, 
the United States Chamber of Commerce! 

Yes, we understand war. Since Pearl Bar- 
ter and before the National Chamber has 
^ awake to the unprecedented danger con- 
fronting our democracy and our country 4s 
♦resident of the Xnt^oi r^^.. ' 

no 
, the 

... de/tr^ ° Cated anv ' ,oli ^ or recom- 

Not once hl^^f 1 ^ and iud « stl 7- 

Within our Ta£ Special privile - e - 

_ _ na pon-wide membership, we 



■' o our democracy and our country 4 
•resident of the National Chamber, is wil 

c^aZ l Fide A that 1 Can *tate that on n 
«»moannee America', entrance into th 



1 

occ 
war 



watched as manufactur 



{Continued on page 160 



ers of civilian goods, 



************************ 



* * * * ★ 



* 
* 
* 

* - 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* * 



/ 




Bombers, battleships, tanks, guns- 
American energy is turning them out 
at full speed. And Pepsi-Cola helps. It 
provides quick food energy — helps sus- 
tain morale and send millions back to 
work, ready to do a better and faster job. 

Americas on the way — to Victory 



TH€ DRINK WITH QUICK FOOD ENERGY 



* * 



********* *************** 



* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 



135 



Field Artillery in the United States Army 



by 

Brigadier General Jesmond D. Balmer 

Commandant, The Field Artillery School 



'HP HE American Field Artillery embodies 
the most: modern concept of employment 
of mobile cannon. Field Artillery contributes 
to the action of a combat force through the 
devastating* effect of its projectiles. It is 
capable of intervening over a zone of great 
width and depth, of shifting and concentrat- 
ing its fire without changing position, and of 
moving with great speed from one area to an- 
other. Artillery thus constitutes a powerful 
reserve. It is the fastest, most flexible, and 
most effective source of concentrated fire 
power available to the force commander with 
which to influence the course of combat. 
Artillery projectiles are cheaper than the 
lives of our soldiers. 

Field Artillery must be able to MARCH, 
COMMUNICATE, AND SHOOT. Since field 
pieces were first placed on wheels, these have 
been basic fundamentals. These fundamentals 
remain unchanged. American artillery now 
marches faster, communicates more quickly 
and efficiently, and shoots with greater ac- 
curacy, speed, and masses of fire power than 
ever before. It is a modern arm of a modern 
army. 

The situation has changed since World 
War I. Then the artillery supported only 
slow-moving foot infantry and the somewhat 
more mobile cavalry ; today, it must be able 
to handle a multitude of possible situations. 
Artillery is ready to support infantry : Infan- 
try on foot, infantry riding in trucks, infan- 
try in the jungle and in the mountains, infan- 
try landing on a hostile shore, and paratroops 
dropping from the skies. To support this in- 
fantry the artillery is prepared to advance 
along roads, across country, through the 
jungles, over the mountains, across the water, 
and also drop from the skies. Artillery is 
ready to support the fast-moving armored 
forces. Such varied operations call for a ver- 




satility of action to keep pace with the par- 
ticular arm or unit supported. Our Field 
Artillery is training both to support rapid 
operations over broad fronts and to batter a 
slow, deliberate way through the most skill- 
fully designed permanent fortifications the 
world has known. 

To meet these increased responsibilities the 
Field Artillery is constantly improving its 
equipment, technique, and tactics. 




High up in the mountains a crew goes into action 
with a 1 55-//I m gun. 



To gain speed and mobility, motor vehicles 
and transport airplanes have been substi- 
tuted for the horse. For special operations in 
mountainous terrain, the horse and mule have 
been retained as transport, but the great mass 
of American artillery is motorized and capa- 
ble of great rapidity of movement. Self- 
propelled mounts, possessing all of the mo- 
bility of the armored tank, are being em- 
ployed to carry the powerful artillery pieces 
into any theater in which the armored units 
advance. 

To produce greater fire effect, the caliber of 
the close supporting light weapon has been 
increased by adoption of the 105-mm howitzer 
in the place of the 75-mm gun of World War I. 
Besides the additional blasting effect of the 
larger 105-mm howitzer shell, the artillery is 
able to occupy and shoot from positions and 
hit targets once denied to the flat trajectorv 
of the 75-mm gun. This howitzer is a deadly 
and accurate antitank weapon and will be 
used by artillerymen for close defense of their 
positions. 

To produce controlled, massed fires of large 
136 



units a simple fire-direction technique has 
been developed. Though subject of use and 
experiment at the Field Artillery School for 
many vears, this effective technique had its 
Irmtism of fire in the hands of the defenders 
of Bataan. The Japs testify to its effective- 
ness The results of the massed fires of Amer- 
ican artillery on that peninsula corroborate 
the faith whh-h artillerymen in this country 
have felt in our adopted tire direction 
procedure. 

The artilleryman still shoots from the hip 
when the situation or facilities demand such 
action. Consequently the individual training 
of the single gun crew, the platoon, and the 
battery are stressed. 

Wars today are fluid. There are no longer 
the static, solid front lines to guard the artil- 
lery positions and other rear installations. 
Our artillery is preparing to fire effectively in 
any direction, front, rear, or flanks, on a mo- 
ment's notice. Attack of artillery positions 
by enemy infiltrating infantry, fifth column- 
ists, tanks and paratroops are possibilities 
against which precautions must be taken. 
Thus, the artilleryman must be trained in 
close combat, both w ith small arms and with 
his bare hands. The importance of the artil- 
leryman as an individual fighting soldier has 
increased. Since the possibility of attack on 
the artillery position has become so strong, 
the artillery has been provided with new 
weapons to protect itself against enemy tanks 
and planes. The artilleryman carries a pow- 
erful shoulder weapon, a short, effective car- 
bine, which has greatly enhanced his protec- 
tive ability. The primary weapons of lighter 
calibers are within themselves effective anti- 
tank pieces; heavy machine guns and light 
antitank weapons seek to furnish the protec- 
tion necessary to repel an attempted inter- 
ruption of the artillery mission of support. 
{Continued on page 160) 




A , pot ? nt Field Artillor^ T s Mms " 

howitzer shown here IV we ?P°n is the 105-mm. 

•^re elevated for high angle fire. 



The Shore Support for 
the Fleet 

( Contin ued from page 130) 

Keserve Aviation Bases were established 
whore aviation candidates arc in ven their 
preliminary instruction and tests in ac- 
tual flight. Such units have been estab- 
lished in the interior in Minnesota, Mich- 
igan, Illinois, Kansas, Missouri, Georgia, 
Washington, Tennessee, Oklahoma, Indi- 
ana, Iowa, and Texas, in addition to 
other sites along each coast. The basic 
and advanced aviation training stations 
include Pensaeola, Fla., which has been 
greatly expanded ; a new $75,000,000 
training station at Corpus Christi, Texas ; 
and the Naval Air Station at Jacksonville, 
with the recently developed subsidiary 
stations at Banana River and Miami, Fla. 
operating air bases have been strategi- 
cally located at Quonset Point, R. I., at the 
greatly enlarged Naval Operating Base 
at Norfolk, Va., and at Alameda, Calif., 
Cherry Point, N. C, and Imperial Valley, 
Calif., with expansion of the existing 
l.ases at San Diego, Calif., Seattle, Wash!, 
and other continental locations. In Alaska 
and the Hawaiian Islands, at the Atlantic 
bases ranging from Newfoundland to 
British Guiana, and in Puerto Rico and 
the Canal Zone, aviation facilities have 
been established or vastly expanded. 

To serve the surface fleet and its auxil- 
iaries an unprecedented program in con- 
struction of dry docks, berthing and 
mooring facilities, and large repair shops 
was undertaken, and this work has been 
carried forward with record speed. 

In addition to these fixed installations, 
the Bureau is building more floating re- 
pair docks than have ever before been 
planned by any nation in a comparable 
period. 

To relieve Navy Yards of the burden 
of servicing the many smaller vessels 
used in coastal and harbor patrol, mine 
sweeping, submarine detection and at- 
tack, coastal convoy, and net tending, and 
to provide local ammunition and fuel 
storage, as well as crew accommodations 
for such vessels, a total of GO section 
bases have been authorized, the majority 
of which are already in service. 

The capacity for fleet overhaul and for 
ship construction in Navy Yards has al- 
ready been greatly increased by this pro- 
gram, and additional facilities are con- 
tinually reaching a usable stage. 

Housing for the rapidly expanding per- 
sonnel of the Navy has required several 
major construction programs. In addi- 
tion to the numerous Air Training Sta- 
tions already noted, existing Naval Train- 
ing Stations at Newport, R. I., Norfolk. 
Va., Great Lakes, 111., and San Diego, 
Calif., have been greatly enlarged, and 
will be supplemented by new stations in 
Maryland, Idaho, and New York. 

Hospital facilities have also been ex- 
panded at a rate corresponding to the in- 
crease in Navy personnel. These range 
from small temporary dispensaries at 
outlying stations, through 500- to 1,000- 
bed hospitals at training stations, air 
bases, and other necessary locations, up 



to the magnificent new National Naval 
Medical Center at Bethesda, Md. 

Utility services have presented many 
problems. The improvement, augmenta- 
tion and duplication of water supply fa- 
cilities, proper sewage disposal provi- 
sions, and other sanitary problems have 
been undertaken and solved. 

Fuel storage for the fleet has been pro- 
vided ni Locations covering nearly three- 
quarters of the circumference of the 
globe. 

New ammunition depots were required 
and provided at Burns City, Ind., Hast- 
ings, Nebr., McAlester, Okla., and Fall- 
brook, Calif., while older depots were 
vastly expanded, notably at Hingham, 
Mass., and Hawthorne, New Small de- 
pots are being provided at Charleston. 
S. C, New Orleans, La., and Indian Is- 
land, Wash. Major supply depots were 
constructed at Bayonne, N. J., and Oak- 
land, Calif., and inland supply depots 
have been begun at Media nicsburg, Pa., 
Scotia, N. Y., Clearfield, Utah. Spokane. 
Wash., and Barstow, Calif. At all Navy 
Yards and at many other points storage 
facilities have been greatly expanded. 

Construction equipment, supplies and 
stores are assembled and partly fabri- 
cated at a depot that has been set up on 
the eastern coast primarily to serve over- 
seas expeditionary forces. This has be- 
come a major Navy shipping point. Other 
depots of this type are under const ruction 
at other locations. 

The use of civilian personnel on con- 
struction work, which is a rule in lime 
of peace, cannot be continued in combat 
zones where enemy attacks are a serious 
threat. For work at these advanced loca- 
tions construction regiments are being or- 
ganized. Recruiting for the first regiment 
began in January, 1942, and since that 
time sixty-three regiments have been 
authorized. The regiment is composed of 
three battalions, each battalion compris- 
ing four Construction Companies of 220 
men each and one Headquarters Company 
of 1G5 men. The regiments are made up 
of enlisted men who are skilled mechan- 
ics, carpenters, divers, steelworkers. 
blacksmiths, etc. Ratings range from 
Seaman, 2c, to Warrant Officer. These 
men will be trained in military tactics 
to be able to protect themselves in com- 
bat, if the occasion should arise. From 
the abbreviation CB for Construction 
Battalion the designation "Seabees" was 
selected for this organization, and this 
designation suggested insignia appro- 
priate for the organization portraying, on 
blue background encircled by a hawser, 
a bee with a sailor hat on his head, a 
"Tommy Gun'' in his fore hand, a wrench 
in his second hand and a carpenter's ham- 
mer in his rear hand. Designation and 
insignia were authorized by the Chief of 
the Bureau of Navigation on March 5, 
11)42. Many battalions have already been 
sent abroad, and these units will be in 
evidence to an increasing degree as the 
fleet advances. Those construction units 
are the enlisted counterpart of the Civil 
Engineer Corps and are commanded by 
officers of that corps assisted by the 
necessary staffs of medical and supply 
corps officers. 



fUNTILTHIS IS OVER 



These peace-time products by 
Wiremold are now on active duty, 
speeding production in war plants 
. . fighting with the Armed Forces. 



SURFACE METAL RACEWAYS 

Plant changeovers call for new electrical layouts, and 
Wiremold is the speedy helper. It's the answer to space - 
saving wiring in trucks, trailers, and other mobile units. 

PLUGMOLD . . In factories 
and drafting rooms ... at work benches, 
on test racks, and even on wheels . . 
wherever convenient electrical outlets are 
needed, Plugmold will put them there. 

Wiremold Surface Metal Raceways and Fittings 
conform to Federal Procurement Specification 540 
and are listed by Underwriters* Laboratories, Inc. 






SCOURGE 
of the 





Wake Island . . . Coral Sea . . . Midway 
. . . the Solomons . . . whenever and wherever 
Tojo thrusts his task forces or transports . . . 
Grumman Wildcats and Avengers play an 
important part in wrecking his plans. 

The success of FIF's and TBF's is not a 
matter of chance. Sea duly and deck landings 
demand the structural "guts'' and precision 
performance that Grumman builds into every 
plane . . . characteristics born of long exper- 
ience in designing and building aircraft for 
specific services. 

These rugged Grumman planes are the 
scourge of the Pacific because they're built 
for the job . . . are doing it so effectively 
because of the skill and energy and daring of 
the lads who man them ! 



Wildcats & Avengers 



Gruiiuiiaii Aircraft Engineering Corporation 
Ilcllipago • Long Island • Now York 



137 



mm WImmolD Cmmmm 

Hartforp.Conn. 



American Antiaircraft 

by 

Major General Joseph A. Green, U. S. A. 

Commanding General, Antiaircraft Command, Army Ground Forces 



IT was American Antiaircraft Artillery that 
held Jap aviation at bay in Bataan and 
at Corregidor after effective American air re- 
sistance had been knocked out. Similarly, 
during the six months' siege of Tobruk in 
1941, Antiaircraft held off the Nazi and Ital- 
ian air attackers, and with only a 
small complement of antiaircraft 
guns, exacted such a toll on both 
high level and dive bombers that be- 
fore the end of the siege, the at- 
tacks were considerably reduced 
both in number and effectiveness. 
At Malta, heaviest bombed spot in 
this war to date, fighter aviation 
and antiaircraft working in unison, 
have withstood literally hundreds 
of attacks thrown at that rocky isle 
by large and determined units of 
Italian aviation and the Luftwaffe. 
The British Isles supply countless 
examples of the effectiveness of Anti- 
aircraft with its warning service, 
searchlights, heavy and light AA 
guns and barrage balloons. 

Prom the first operations of the Nazi 
hordes against Poland, it was evident thai 
this would be a war in which airpower would 
play an all-important part in the attack. Con- 
sequently, no defense can be assumed to be 
adequate unless enemy air attack can be 
beaten off or at least made so costly that it 
can not be long employed. Enemy planes can 
be assembled quickly over a given objective. 
Once started on their way, it is frequently 
impossible to assemble friendly fighters in 
sufficient numbers over the enemy's objective. 
Ground Antiaircraft defense must be on the 
spot at the time of attack, or the enemy al- 
most surely will cause serious damage to both 
personnel and materiel. 

Also, the airplane on the ground is one of 
the most vulnerable of targets to enemy air 
attack. If surprised before a sullicient num- 
ber of fighter planes can be sent aloft, a 
friendly air Held provides a target composed 
of helpless planes, easily damaged, with the 
gas tanks in every grounded plane an inflam- 
mable target for incendiary bullets. Ground 
defense of airdromes must be provided in 
sufficient quantity unless we are willing to 
accept a high percentage of losses while our 
own birds are on the roost. In addition, other 
ground installations in the theater of oper- 
ations and elements of the held forces — 
armies, corps, and divisions — all require ade- 
quate Antiaircraft protection or support in 
combat operations. The problems posed by 
time and space are of such magnitude that 
friendly air support, unless greatly superior 
to the enemy, cannot; possibly do the job alone. 
Because of the recognition of the need for 
positive protection from the ground against 
the enemv air attack, including attack 



against friendly airdromes themselves, and 
against elements of our held forces, our Anti- 
aircraft Forces have been increased tremen- 
dously during the past year and they are 
continuing to expand at an ever increasing ci 
rate. 




Getting into action with an antiaircraft gun. After 
unlimbering the gun, the soldiers then lower the 
platform preparatory to placing it on supports and 
getting the gun ready to fire. Below: Major General 
Green, commanding the AA Command. 



Army Sinnal Corps Photo 




Today, American Antiaircraft is composed 
of ( inn, Automatic Weapons, Searchlight , and 
Barrage Balloon units. These units are ca- 
pable of being associated together in various 
combinations to provide the proper balance 
of weapons needed for the job in hand, accord- 
ing to the dictates of the immediate tactical 
situation. Thus, in one case, a single Auto- 
matic Weapons Battalion may be assigned to 

138 



a task alone, whereas in another situation a 
combination of heavy guns, automatic weap- 
ons, searchlights, and barrage balloons may 
be associated with tighter aviation and air- 
craft warning nets in order to provide a com- 
plete defense against enemy air attack. In 
another case, Antiaircraft units, 
particularly those armed with auto- 
matic weapons, may be operating in 
close support of our mobile ground 
forces in providing them with added 
protection from enemy attack from 
the air as well as from the ground. 

Whatever the job, Antiaircraft 
Artillery is prepared to take it on 
and render a good account of itself. 
In cooperation with our Air Forces 
— whose magnificent achievements 
in combat operations since our entry 
into the war are so well known and 
so much admired by all of us — our 
primary mission, of course, is to pre- 
vent the enemy from accomplishing 
his objective through the use of his 
air power. In cooperation with the 
ground forces, it must protect these forces 
from attack from the air and be prepared 
to assist in attacks from the ground. Wheth- 
er this is done by shooting clown the attacker, 
or driving him off from his air or ground at- 
tack, by causing him to drop his bombs where 
they will do little or no harm, or keeping 
him so high that he fails to discover impor- 
tant dispositions on the ground, the result is 
to our advantage. The number of planes 
dropped from the skies is by no means a true 
measure of the effectiveness of Antiaircraft. 
A better yardstick would be a contrast of 
t he damage done where enemy air attack oper- 
ated unopposed with the damage done where 
the objective is provided with adequate anti- 
aircraft defenses. 

Antiaircraft Artillery has a secondary mis- 
sion today— that of defense against mechan- 
ized units. Because of the high muzzle velocity 
and rapidity of fl re of antiaircraft guns, the 
armored vehicle, from scout car to heavy 
tank, is a likely target when the AA is not 
engaging aerial targets. All of our AA units 
fZe mg iH anti - m echanized de- 

come e ^ ll1 l ii i,Tl ' art S ° ldier ° f tod *y Has be- 
Sson Oi i "J' 1 ' 0 " S ° ldier - ^raehute at- 

" in" r^Hli \ n - 8tam ' e ' inclnded stacks 
agcunsi; \A installations rln^ +^ +i 

tion by the enemv of t X . be reCOgm " 

defense of the Snd To lm P° rtance to the 

soldier must know how ^' **" ^» tiaircraft 

attacks; tlHM.M ri.o ri *°v? Pd P arach ^ e 

and bayonet a s wel i*Sf * *° ^ ^ 

l< <>nh,i,«;i on page 164) 



BATH IRON WORKS CORPORATION 

BUILDERS OF NAVAL & MERCHANT VESSELS 

BATH MAINE 




139 



The Contribution of the Electrical 
Distributor to War Effort 



by 

A. H. Nicoll 

President, Graybar Electric Company, Inc. 



jlTERRYLE Stanley Kukeyser, writing for 
1TJ - the International News Service, recent- 
ly stated "In peacetime, American business 
provided the public with a magnificent dis- 
tributive machinery." Donald Nelson, in 
conversation with Mr. Rukeyser, said "I have 
a full appreciation of the economic Function 
of distribution ; maybe at this stage it would 
be helpful to the Government to bring more 
wholesalers, jobbers, and distributors into the 
Federal setup to make sure that the muni- 
tions are available where they are needed, at 
the right time." 

Most people, familiar with the many com- 
plications of making the thousands of arti- 
cles of war which we need so urgently, will 
agree that our greatest problem is to get es- 
sential raw materials, parts, and finished 
goods to the point where they are needed, at 
the time they are needed. If that is our great- 
est problem, why not make the fullest possible 
use of a group of experienced people who have 
spent their lives doing this very job — a group 
which can offer warehouses, stocks of goods, 
and trained personnel to expedite deliveries? 

Whether or not a distributor appears in the 
picture, his functions must be performed. 
Someone must see that full information and 
specifications are given to the buyer, that a 
multiplicity of items are selected, ordered, 
warehoused, and delivered where and when 
they are needed. Someone must be responsi- 
ble for seeing that the items ordered do the 
job they are intended to do; someone must be 
responsible for credits and collections. 

Most manufacturers realize that they can- 
not perform these functions as well or as 
cheaply as can those who have specialized in 
them for many years. Take the actual case of 
an electrical manufacturer now operating 
entirely on war orders doing a volume of 
about ten million dollars. His policy is to sell 
entirely through the distributor or whole- 
saler. If no such distribution channel existed, 
he would have to set up a chain of ware- 
houses with at least a half a million dollars 
in warehouse stocks. He would have to build 
an organization to contact all buyers of his 
goods. He would have to hire and train credit 
and collection men. He would have to greatly 
increase his capital. All of this would se- 
riously hinder and slow down his principal 
function, that of manufacturing, and would 
actually cost him far more than the small 
margin lie allows his wholesalers. Then his 
production would be cut and his costs in- 
creased. The electrical distributor, represent- 
ing 100 or more electrical manufacturers, can 
obviously do a better job more cheaply than 
could any one manufacturer. 




So much for the fundamental principles of 
the distributor's functions. What specifically 
has the Electrical Distributor or Wholesaler 
done in our war effort? He has performed, as 
no one else was equipped to perforin, in speed- 
ing up our war effort both on direct services 
to government departments and in serving- 
war construction and war manufacturing. He 
has helped tens of thousands of purchasing 
men (many of them new to their jobs) select 
the right electrical items for their purpose. 
He has helped thousands secure substitute 
items when some of the items wanted were 
unavailable. He has helped save days, and 
even weeks, in getting construction and man- 
ufacturing jobs started by prompt deliveries 
from stock and by knowing where electrical 
materials were quickly available and getting 
them where they were needed, when they were 
needed. 

It is true that various government depart- 
ments and arms makers are the big buyers 
today. It is also true that they do not mate- 
rially differ from other buyers of electrical 
materials. They must be contacted, informa- 
tion and quotations must be furnished, de- 
liveries must be made, service must be ren- 
dered, bills must be sent. All this must be 
done by people who know their business, peo- 
ple who know electrical materials and their 
application, who know where thousands of 
items are made and who makes them, some- 
one who is up to date on prices and deliveries, 
someone who has a warehouse, a trained office 

140 



force, ample capital and responsibility. Gov- 
ernment departments and war materials 
plants are located in every part of our coun- 
try. Who can better serve them than the ex- 
perienced, responsible electrical wholesaler 
located right in their vicinity? 

Wherever you turn in a study of our war 
effort to date, you find that the electrical 
wholesaler has played a part in the remark- 
able job that has been done. In the early days 
he helped speed along army cantonments and 
air fields as well as naval establishments. He 
has helped in the rapid building of shipyards, 
airports, and war materials plants. He is now 
helping in the tremendous job of converting- 
whole industries from peace-time manufactur- 
ing to the production of war essentials. He 
has and will play an increasingly important 
part in furnishing emergency service on the 
maintenance supplies, more needed than ever 
now that industry is on a 168-hour week. All 
this he has done on a constantly lower margin 
of profit, which to begin with was less than it 
could be clone for by any other method. 

We give you just three examples of badly 
needed service to the Army, Navy, and war 
industries — examples which may seem un- 
usual to you but which are occurring hun- 
dreds of times every day : 

1. A complete telephone system for a dis- 
tant military base This wartime order to 

an electrical distributor covered everything 
required for erecting, installing, and main- 
taining the telephone communication all the 

switchboard apparatus, instruments, tools, 
wire and cable. It included dozens of small 
items — connectors, splicing compound, 
switchboard lamps, and the like— that come 
from scores of different manufacturers, vet go 
together on the job. The electrical distribu- 
tor s experience helped avoid omission of any 
small but essential item. The complete ship- 
ment was assembled, safely packed, and dis- 
patched on time. 

2 Day-to-day delivery from a stock of spe- 

if T PS * ; ' " An im I )orta »t builder of naval 
alt buys large quantities of special lamps 
for this service. An even flow of these lamps 
mto his yard as the work progresses^S 
him against delay, while avoiding the storage 
and inventory problem of taking" deliveTon 
huge lots direct from the manufactured 
electrical wholesaler is always ready w h the 
amps he needs, even though fa ctolv order 
lake many weeks to fill. 

3. "57 varieties" shipped overnight 1 
fire m this plant seriously crippled the 'elec 
tncal system just at a time when U , 
brooked no delay. They caLn 2 f 

m J J talled the electrical 
( ' <»i turned on page KiO » 




The Procurement of Naval 
Personnel 

{Continued from page 108) 

civilian sources for many thousands of 
Reserve officers. 

Naval Officer Procurement may hv 
roughly divided into two divisions: Un- 
dergraduate procurement; and graduate 
procurement. 

Undergraduate procurement is han- 
dled through the Navy "V" Programs— 
V-l, V-5, and V-T. The V-l and V-7 pro- 
grams are complementary. The V-l pro- 
gram offers the freshman or sophomore 
in accredited colleges an opportunity to 
enlist as an apprentice seaman in the 
U. S. Naval Reserve. He is placed on 
inactive duty and is required to remain 
in college at his own expense taking cer- 
tain reqnirod subjects desired by the 
Navy in order to maintain his status. 
Prior to the end of his sophomore year 
the V-l enlistee is given a qualifying ex- 
amination to determine his eligibility for 
transfer to Class V-T for further reten- 
tion in college, or for orders to active duty 
as an enlisted man if he fails such ex- 
amination. The V-7 program offers the 
junior or senior in accredited colleges an 
opportunity to continue his education to 
a baccalaureate degree while in the sta- 
tus of apprentice seaman, on inactive 
duty by transfer to Class V-7 or by en- 
listment in Class V-7 if he has not pre- 
viously enlisted in Class V-l. Certain 
courses of study are required by the Navy 
during this period. On graduation, the 
V-7 enlistee is ordered to a one month's 
probationary school as an apprentice sea- 
man and then to a three months' school 
as a Reserve Midshipman. On successful 
completion of this school, he is commis- 
sioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve. 

Class V-5 is the Aviation Cadet Pro- 
gram. Candidates may enlist in this pro- 
gram after graduation from high school. 
College training, although not required, 
is desirable and is a definite asset to the 
aviation cadet. College students may en- 
list directly in ('lass V-5, or may trans- 
fer from Class V-l or Class V-7 to Class 
V-5 at any time if qualified. Upon suc- 
cessful completion of the full flight train- 
ing course, the aviation cadet is desig- 
nated as a naval aviator and is commis- 
sioned as ensign in the Naval Reserve, or 
second lieutenant in the Marine Corps 
Reserve. He is then ordered to further 
active duty in the Aeronautic Organiza- 
tion of the Navy. 

College graduates may be enlisted in 
Class V-7 for immediate active duty up 
to their 2Sth birthday. However, if a col- 
lege graduate has held bis baccalaureate 
degree as long as one year, he will nor- 
mally qualify for a commission through 
Class V-ll. Candidates are eligible for 
enlistment as apprentice seamen in V-ll 
one year after graduation from an ac- 
credited college and up to their 39th 
birthday. This program, as it pertains to 
men under 28 years of age, parallels the 
V-7 program in that those physically 
qualified for sea duty are ordered to the 
same type of training school as the V-7 
candidates and are commissioned as en- 




MERCK & CO., Inc., 

*Jta*ia facta tiny c <?/icj>t&>fo 

RAHWAY, N.J. 

Fine Chemicals for the Professions 
and Industry Since 1818 



signs for general deck or engineering 
duties upon successful completion of this 
school. Those men under 28 years of aw 
not physically qualified for sea duty and 
those over this age are ordered to a one 
month's probationary school as appren- 
tice seaman. Successful graduates of this 
scln.ol are given a probationary appoint- 
ment in the Naval Reserve and ordered to 
one of the various types of probationary 
officer schools. On successful completion 
of these schools the probationary officers 
are commissioned as special service offi- 
cers in the Naval Reserve. In addition to 
the "V" Programs of Naval Officer Pro- 
curement, college graduates are being 
procured and appointed by the Naval Of- 
ficer Procurement Service to fill specific 
billets in the Naval Service. 

The Women's Program consisting of 
Women Officers appointed in a probation- 
ary status and detailed to perform Tech- 
nical and Administrative duties, and the 
V-9 and V-10 programs are under the 
cognizance of the Naval Officer Procure- 
ment Service. Women officers for tech- 
nical and administrative duties are ap- 
pointed and ordered to indoctrination 
schools in order to fill specific billets and 
to release male officers for sea duty. The 
V-9 program is an Officer Candidate Pro- 
gram, similar to the V-7 program and de- 
signed to produce qualified Women Naval 
Reserve officers to replace male officers 
in routine duties on shore. The V-10 pro- 
gram is the Women's Enlisted program 
designed to produce qualified enlisted wo- 
men who will replace enlisted men in rou- 
tine duties on shore. 

Today the Navy is practically ten 
times greater than it was a few short 
months ago. In this short space of time 
the Navy is carrying its challenge and the 
pattern of ultimate victory to the seven 
seas and the boundless skyways of the 
world. 

The United States is not satisfied with 
anything less than the best of fighting 
men and the best of fighting ships— and 
we are getting them. The heroic deeds 
of Midway, the Coral Sea. and the Solo- 
mon Islands leave no doubt of this fact. 



Guy F. Atkinson Co.- 
George Pollock Co. 



CONTRACTORS 
for 

ROOSEVELT BASE 
Contract NOy-4279 

Long Beach, California 



Guy F. Atkinson Company, 
662 Russ Building, 
San Francisco, California 

George Pollock Co., 
101 I Forum Building, 
Sacramento, California 




NORM A-HOFFM ANN BEARINGS CORPORATION, STAMFORD, CONN. 
BALL, ROLLER AND THRUST BEARINGS 
FOUNDED 1911 



141 



U. S. Cavalry Today 



by 



Brigadier General Rufus S. Ramey, U.S.A. 

Commandant, The Cavalry School 



the new German 



HE world listened and watched with tense 
incredulity during September 1939 while 
Hitler's new German Army destroyed what 
had been considered a powerful military ma- 
chine, the Polish Army. Then in May and 
June of 1940 the world experienced the tragic 
nightmare oi' France's conquest in a few short 
weeks ; when the German Army first demoral- 
ized, then destroyed or captured the elements 
of what was looked 
upon as a modern mili- 
tary force, the French 
Army. Initially, Ger- 
man success was mis- 
taken 1 y a 1 1 r i bu ted to 
overwhelming superi- 
ority of armored units 
and air forces. But 
with more facts and 
time to evaluate them, 
other significant fac- 
tors became apparent 
to our War Depart- 
ment. Most important 
was that in organizing 
Army, there was a radical departure from old, 
preconceived ideas ; the new Army emerged to 
world view as a scient ifically blended product, 
with all the necessary elements and means 
integrated into highly flexible organizations. 
The guiding consideration in the German 
military machine was flexibility of organiza- 
tion, providing ability to concentrate and em- 
ploy in any theater, or at any required point 
or time, exactly the means required. This de- 
velopment may be summed up in two words — 
task organization. 

As a consequence of analysis and evalua- 
tion of these facts, and based on our own ma- 
neuver experience, our War Department 
initiated application of pertinent lessons by 
reorganizing the U. S. Army, developing new 
weapons and equipment, new tactical proce- 
dure, technique, and methods. In this process 
the U. S. Cavalry has emerged completely 
revitalized, with a far greater importance in 
the vast Army now being raised and trained, 
and with a vital'role to play on the battle- 
fields for which we prepare. 

To appreciate this change we must examine 
a picture of modern campaign and combat to 
see the important influence that Cavalry ex- 
erts and how it orients the action oi" higher 
commanders by depicting the composite pic- 
ture of hostile operations. 

The speed of modern combat makes it im- 
perative that commanders be able to obtain, 
evaluate, and act on information for more 
rapidly than ever before. In cooperation with 
the Air arm, Cavalry secures the necessary 
information. Recent combat experience has 
necessitated a revision of air reconnaissance 
tactics, since only the high-speed reconnais- 



sance plane, Hying at great altitude and ob- 
taining its information by camera, can be ex- 
pected to operate successfully. The low, slow 
flying plane can no longer be expected to op- 
erate over enemy areas without prohibitive 
loss. Consequently, Cavalry must secure and 
< ransmit the detailed information required by 
higher tactical commanders. This, although 
important, is only one of the functions of 



m , |] !ltmKS _ furnished, m addition to 
horse means, mechanical transport which can 
™n™ w\th the necessary speed to great dis- 
all types of terrain and weather, to 
normation or to tight, 
information obtained is useless un- 



seen re 
Since 




Many forms of mechanization enter into modern 
Cavalry in the United States Army. Left shotvs scout 
cars in simulated attack on an enemy position, while 
the right photograph shows a Cavalry regiment in a 
mass column of 4's moving speedily toward its posi- 
tion (note the motorcycles, jeeps, and, in the rear, 
scout cars). Lower: General Ramey. 

Signal Corps riiotos 



ganization has been 
means, mecha 
move witli the neees*ar\ 

tances, ±.- 

information or to ngnt. 
information obtained 
less transmitted rapidly to the interested 
commanders in time for them to act upon it, 
modern means of transmission of informa- 
tion, such as radio, 
motorcycles, bantams, 
and other special ve- 
hicles, have been pro- 
vided. These means 
supplement the horse- 
man, which remains 
the old dependable for 
reasonable distances, 
in difficult terrain, and 
all types of weather. 
And, in order to be 
able to fight as con- 
templated, Cavalry 
units now have the 
weapons immediately 



modern 




Cavalry, which must also be able to fight, dis- 
mounted or mounted, either in offensive or 
defensive combat. 

Thus, in addition to the larger U. S. Cav- 
alry units, horse and mechanized regiments, 
horse brigades and divisions, we find Cavalry 
integrated primarily as mechanized recon- 
naissance elements into the various types of 
other larger units and task forces of our 
Army ; infantry divisions, foot and motorized, 
mountain units, armored units, and am- 
phibious units. To fulfill the demands upon 
it, Cavalry must have, and in its present or- 

142 



necessary 
available. 

Because of its many varied missions, espe- 
cially because Ca valry acts as the ground eyes 
and ears for higher commanders, the Arm 
must be characterized by high flexibility as to 
its organization and equipment, and be ver- 
satile in its tactics and technique. All the 
necessary means to enable fulfillment of these 
requirements are found in U. S. Cavalry units 
today, both horse units and mechanized units. 

But, the impression must not be gained 
from the foregoing that the job of U. S. Cav- 
alry is reconnaissance alone. Our current 
doctrine, as contained in the tactical bible for 
combined arms operations, Field Service Reg- 
ulations, charges Cavalry with all the combat 
missions of the Infantry, both foot and motor- 
ized, and many of those of light armored units 
when the need dictates. Both horse and 
mechanized Cavalry is expected to, and is 
equipped to fight offensively or defensively; 
to seize and hold terrain; to screen other 
oops or provide security for their front, 
flanks, or rear; to fight delaying actions; to 
^f «emy formation and installations to 
Pro. ide higher commanders with a highly mo- 
tomSTIV? any sitllati °»> and especially 

of on ^ 

be 'unm>, i t0day > bother fact must 

insomJS ' C <>»trary to mistaken belief 

o 

helpless mai thi! I ' ee f taml y 1* is not the 
constitnt? Tho m0n jammed in trucks 

^ l o( road bound. The horse- 
Continued on page 160) 



America's Desert Soldier 

(Continued from page 120) 

enemy's known assembly area, dis- 
mounted, and moved in and around the 
bivouac. 

The performance of vehicles was gen- 
erally excellent, particularly with re- 
spect to tanks, half-tracks, and the quar- 
ter-ton "peeps," which took the worst the 
desert had to offer. Desert operations 
were conducted on the thesis that, unless 
maintenance of equipment and vehicles 
reaches a high degree of excellence, the 
cost and loss of equipment will be pro- 
hibitive in money and fatal in battle. 

Problems of supply, always complex, 
presented the desert soldier with new 
and varied questions. Added to the vast 
distances involved, the speed with which 
motorized columns can move in open coun- 
try became a major factor in keeping 
men in the field supplied with fuel, am- 
munition and food. Certain faults in oper- 
ations became apparent — as did means 
of future correction. 

Air-borne supply entered the picture. 
In such open country, armored units ended 
small engagements some distance from 
the main body. At that point, out of fuel 
and ammunition, they would withdraw 
a short distance. The first unit resupplied 
could return to the attack or effect a 
withdrawal to the main body. Supply 
planes dropped ammunition, water and 
fuel in parachutes of different colors — one 
color for fuel, another for water, and so 
on, enabling ground forces to collect and 
use them promptly and with no lost 
motion. 

The necessity for uninterrupted com- 
munication became clear to troops in iso- 
lated units, uncertain of the location of 
the main body or the front line. Radio, 
wire, messengers, planes and pigeons were 
employed during the first maneuvers, ra- 
dio proving the most satisfactory. Here, 
again, the desert soldier found special 
problems of radio communication because 
of mountain ranges and distances. 

Thus, in coverall and helmet, the Amer- 



ican soldier met the American desert. 
In the heat, the sand, and the arid bad- 
lands of the Mojave, he found conditions 
and terrain generally similar to the worst 
American troops face in the theatres of 
war now occupied by us and our Allies or 
into which the United Nations must move. 

*This article wan prepared bu General Oil- 
1cm when, he was Commandinq General of the 
comZl 7?Z in ? Gomm ™*- t* November Mb 
' 7/ ir'','? tran *ferred <""> Maj. Gen. Wal- 

C°ommanI alk€r in De8eri 



Tank Destroyers 

(Continued from page 118) 

The T. D. Battalion, smallest tactical 
unit to be employed on an independent 
mission, is composed to include, or- 
ganically, elements of the various 
branches necessary to make it self-suffi- 
cient Usually held as a mobile reserve 
in support of divisions, corps, and armies, 
T. I). units must be able to move rapidly 
to meet any armored force threat acting- 
over a wide zone. 

Destroyers combat the tanks' lire pow- 
er with greater fire power — a high veloc- 
ity, flat trajectory 75 mm or 3" gun. They 
combat the tanks' mobility and inde- 
pendence of operation with greater mo- 
bility. Armor is reduced to achieve this 
maneuverability and T. D. units depend 
on their ability to fire four or five rounds 
from one position, dash to an alternate 
position, and re-open lire before the en- 
emy's guns begin to register. The cougar, 
chosen as an official symbol, epitomizes 
T. D. action. 

The particular manner in which they 
seek with motorized armored reconnais- 
sance, strike with heavy mobile weapons, 
and destroy with repeated trip-hammer 
blows and well-timed maneuvers consti- 
tutes its tactical doctrine. 

Soon, on all battlefields — wherever 
there are tanks — our destroyers will, in 
the words of our motto, SEEK — STRIKE 
— DESTROY. 




WAR SERVICE TODAY 

...with Faith in a Greater Tomorrow 

While we devote our full effort to war service, we continue to prepare for a 
greater tomorrow. We have built and are building a large number of the 
most efficient ships yet devised. We are constantly pl annin g new and supe- 
rior transportation facilities. Our organization, ashore and afloat, is bein^ 
tempered in the fire of the war to meet the obligations of a post-w ar world. 
GRACE LINE w ill be ready to meet the public needs of t he greater day to come. 

GRACE LINE 

Rockefeller Center or 10 Hanover Square, N. Y. 
Washington, D. C, Pittsburgh, New Orleans, Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Seattle 






Burning day and night with the white heat of the oxy- 
acetylene flame, these modern torches of industry are 
truly the torches of liberty. 

Teamed with the electric arc, these versatile tools of 
high speed war production have helped make possible 
remarkable savings in ship construction time. They have 
streamlined and speeded manufacturing methods for a 
wide variety of war products — from bullets to bombers. 

Many other Air Reduction products are rendering equally 
important service in over 60 separate industries. But all 
these diversified activities of Air Reduction are united by 
the common purpose of speeding America's war effort. 



Pure Carbonic, Incorpo- 
rated -Carbon Dioxide, Gas 
Liquid, Solid (Dry Ics.) 



National Carbide Corpora- 
tion - Calcium Carbide, Carbide 
Lights and Lanterns. 



Air Reduction Sales Com- 
pany—Oxygen, Nitrogen, Hydro- 
gen, Acetylene, Rare Gases, Gas 
Cutting Machines, Welding and 
Cutting Apparatus and Supplies. 



Wilson Welder and Metals 

Co. r Inc. -Arc Welders, Arc 
Welding Electrodes and Accessories. 



The Ohio Chemical & Mfg. 

Co. — Anesthetic and Therapeutic 
Gases, Apparatus and equipment 
for dispensing them. 



AIRCO. 



AIR REDUCTION 

Sales Offices in Principal Cities 



General Offices: 
60 East 42nd Street, 
New York, N. Y. 



Manufacturing Miracles for War 



by 

William P. Witherow 

President, National Association of Manufacturers 
President, Blaw-Knox Company, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



AS ;i great American expeditionary force 
Landed in Africa with tanks, trucks, 
mortars, and every other arl icle of armamenl 
and supply thai would make it a potent and 
self-contained military machine, and ;is Amer- 
ican tanks and planes blasted the shattered 
and retreating forces of Nazi General Rommel 
out of Egypt and Libya, the Italian radio 
Matted in defeat, "What can we do against 
the full resources of American factories?" 

These were brilliant achievements of the 
military forces engaged, and of the military- 
strategists who did the planning. American 
industry lakes pride also in its own contribu- 
tion. The fact that the Allies have turned 
from defensive to offensive operations is the 
best possible revelation that American indus- 
try again has "done the impossible." The 
Army and Navy have not counted on it in 
vain. 

The Axis has no doubt been aware of the 
quality of our lighting forces. It has been 
aware also of our matchless ability to pro- 
duce. But it has believed we could neither 
t ransfer any great part of our armed strength 
overseas against an air and sea blockade, nor 
fight a war effectively across two oceans, nor 



convert our industries to war production in 
time to turn the tide of Axis victory. But the 
American genius for inventiveness and mass 
production and managerial efficiency has suc- 
cessfully made the switch to full wartime ef- 
fectiveness, while the Army and Navy have 
trained their forces in new methods of war- 
fare, transported them safely across the seas, 
and equipped them with American armament 
from our newly-created arsenal of democracy. 

American industry, which has undertaken 
a production task without precedent in his- 
tory, is ahead of the program set down by 
President Koosevelt at the beginning of 1042. 
The job can be measured only in astronomical 
units. During 1942, it will produce at least 
60,000 military aircraft, 45,000 tanks, 8,000,- 
000 dead-weight tons of merchant shipping, 
and 20,000 anti-aircraft guns — to mention 
only a few war necessities. This amounts to 
two ships a day, a plane every nine minutes, a 
tank every eleven and a half minutes. 

For 1943 the President has already called 
for an additional 10,000,000 tons of shipping, 
75,000 more tanks, 125,000 more military air- 
craft, 35,000 more anti-aircraft guns. This 
will be producing at a rate of better than one 





O. E. M. Photo 

Industry Turns to War — These are partially completed 28-ton A/-3 tanks being turned out at a huge tank 
arsenal. The camera was directed toward the end of the three main assembly lines. Mass assembly methods 
developed in automobile manufacture arc used. Note overhead cranes for heavy parts. 

144 



tank every seven minutes, one plane every 
four minutes. 

The vastness of such a program is not 
easily grasped. How much more it will be nec- 
essary to produce in order to assure victory 
cannot now be told. But our war services 
know that the greatest and most resourceful 
and most, efficient industrial system in the 
world will meet their needs. 

Industry is all-out for war. Factories have 
been torn apart and converted from civilian 
to wartime production with no consideration 
for anything except how quickly the way can 
be cleared for an ever-increasing How of guns, 
planes, tanks, shells and ships. 

Where automobile assembly lines used to 
be, swarms of workers now work on bombers, 
guns, tanks, and engines. New machines start 
working even before they have been fully 
bolted to the floor. 

The story is the same the country over- 
total conversion of a great part of industry 
for total war, a modern industrial revolution. 

The impossible has been done. American 
industries have accomplished the impossible 
by the application of mass-production tech- 
niques to the making of munitions, aircraft, 
ships, and tanks. 

Just as men of the armed forces must be 
;; , ;; UM '. so ; unst ^ ^en and women on the 
induction front— an estimated 20,000,000 of 
JJemby years end. Training the new indus- 

SShST 1 T r n0 Sma11 P art oi industry's 
epoc altask. In this job industry is accept- 

efc£rtr nSlbiUty to the limit - » - also 
manv of it ° mti ™ and maintenance of 
manj o1 its war products to t he men who will 
(isontmued on page 160) 



The Operation of the 
Adjutant General's Department 



HP HE reorganization of the War Depart- 
ment into three basic commands — /Vrmy 
Ground Forces, Army Air Forces, and Ser- 
vices of Supply — became effective on March 
9, 1942. Since' then The Adjutant General's 
Department has functioned as one of the staff 
divisions of the Services of Supply. The De- 
partment is directed by Major-General James 
A. Ulio, The Adjutant General, who is charged 
with the responsibility of performing for the 
War Department and the Army such admin- 
istrative functions as are prescribed by law 
or delegated by higher authority. 

The Adjutant General has recently com- 
pleted the interior reorganization of his Of- 
fice, along functional lines. The changes ef- 
fected consist in streamlining administrative 
methods to fit the new tripartite division of 
the military establishment, and have resulted 
in materially facilitating the carrying out of 
the duties and responsibilities of The Ad- 
jutant General's Department. 

The major activities of The Adjutant Gen- 
eral's Department embrace staff and operat- 
ing duties within the War Department, and 
in the various field installations of the 
Military Establishment. 

The current organization of The Adjutant 
General's Office in the War Department con- 
sists of : 

The Personnel Division, which formulates 
and operates procedures pertaining to the 
procurement, maintenance, separation, and 
records of military personnel for all com- 
ponents of the Army of the United States. It 
is divided into six Branches: Officers, Ap- 
pointment and Induction, Machine Records, 
Casualty, Decorations and Awards, and En- 
listed. 

The Operations and Training Division, 
which formulates and operates procedures 
pertaining to operations and training within 
The Adjutant General's Department. It is di- 
vided into three Branches : Operations, Classi- 
fication and Enlisted Replacement, and 
Training. 

The Miscellaneous Division, which formu- 
lates and operates procedures vested in The 
Adjutant General pertaining to the reproduc- 
tion and distribution of military publica- 
tions ; maintenance of records of demobilized 
units and personnel; non-current records; 
furnishes estimates of required office supplies, 
furniture and equipment; and arranges space 
assignments of the Headquarters, Services of 
Supply. This Division is divided into six 
branches, namely: Publications, Reproduc- 
tion, Demobilized Records, Old Records, Ex- 
ecutive, and Civilian Conservation Corps. 

The Office of Dependency Benefits, is the 



by 

Major General James A. Ulio 

The Adjutant General, U. S. Army 

operating agency for matters vested in the 
Adjutant General connected with allowances 
to military personnel for family dependents, 
and allotments by military personnel for de- 
pendents; it also maintains the necessary 
records of its administration of these affairs. 
It is divided into the Control Branch and 




three Divisions, namely : Service Division, Fi- 
nance Division, and the Processing Division. 

The Control Division, which is charged 
with obtaining information regarding the 
efficiency of operations of The Adjutant Gen- 
eral's Department; with the evaluation of 
the effectiveness and progress with which 
plans of The Adjutant General are executed 
and recommending to The Adjutant General 
adjustments in policies, methods, and organ- 
izations to increase such effectiveness and 
progress; coordinating of the control activi- 
ties of The Adjutant General's Otfice and De- 
partment and compilation of various annual 
reports required by law. It is divided into 
four Branches: Methods Management; In- 
spection and Investigation, Planning and 
Statistical, ajid Policy and Historical. 

The Army Postal Service, which is charged 
with the establishment, direction, and super- 
vision of the postal service for the Army; 
supervises the establishment of Army post 
offices and is charged with the procurement 
and assignment of personnel of the Army 
Postal Service; the constitution, activation, 



and training of Army postal units, postal 
regulating sections, and with the constitu- 
tion and activation of base post offices ; and 
the procurement and issue of supplies. It is 
the operating agency for embarkation post 
offices; the V-mail service; and the EFM sys- 
tem. It arranges for transportation of mail 
for troops located at oversea posts, and of 
classified official essential air mail to all 
points outside the continental United States. 
By means of field inspection units investi- 
gates conditions and needs of Army postal 
units, and irregularities and complaints con- 
cerning the method of handling mail. It is 
divided into six Branches, namely : Control, 
Operations, War Department Communica- 
tions, Personnel and Training, Inspection 
and Investigation, and Transportation. 

The Civilian Personnel Branch which is 
charged with the establishment of standards 
and procedures for the processing of all per- 
sonnel actions; maintains personnel control 
records for budget; certifies payrolls for 
Headquarters Services of Supply; and pro- 
poses budget estimates and justification of 
personnel requirements for all civilian per- 
sonnel Headquarters Services of Supply. 

The Director of Records, who is charged 
with the operation and coordination of all 
activities of microfilming and disposition of 
records, Services of Supply; with the estab- 
lishment and operation of a central micro- 
filming plant and such auxiliary plants as 
may be necessary ; and with the technical su- 
pervision of all Services of Supply noncur- 
rent records. 

The expansion of the Department has been 
very extensive since the entry of the United 
States in the war. For instance, the Army 
Postal Service, which covers practically the 
entire globe and is one of the most potent 
factors in maintaining morale, has increased 
from less than twenty Army Post Offices for 
overseas service on December 7, 1941, to more 
than eight times that number in operation 
abroad at present; and this in addition to 
some eight hundred Army Post Offices at do- 
mestic ports, camps, stations, staging areas, 
and ports of embarkation. Another graphic 
illustration of growth is shown by the'volume 
of mail received : During the fiscal year 1940, 
3,587,114 pieces; 1941, 15,764,277; and up to 
July 1, 1942, a total of 4:>>X>:*7, 55 c>. Naturally, 
the rate increases steadily with the rapid rise 
in the strength of the Army. 

The pressing need for additional trained 
administrative personnel has been met by the 
establishment of The Adjutant General's 
Schools, offering courses in administration, 
(Continued on paye l(jS ) 



14G 



Ordnance Department 

(Continued from page 113) 
of troops to operate thein ; various repair 
shops, training- schools and other facili- 
ties—all for the purpose of enabling army 
trucks to run when and where thev are 
needed. 

It became necessary to develop a new 
and complete system of maintenance 
based on a definite schedule of preventive 
maintenance operation. As is well known 
motor maintenance functions are divided 
into four major types or echelons. The 
first and second echelons of maintenance 
which perform the first and second groups 
of maintenance tasks, are the responsi- 
bilities of the arms or services of the 
Army to which the Ordnance materiel is 
assigned. The third and fourth echelons 
are the responsibility of the Ordnance 
Department. And we continually pound 
home to the troops the fact that* a bit of 
carefree carelessness in servicing may 
put the finger of death on the perpetrator 
and his unlucky comrades. 

The fighting weapons of the American 
soldier are the world's best. They have 
been proved in combat. They are the cul- 
mination of 130 years of continuous re- 
search and invention by the Ordnance De- 
partment in which close watch was kept 
on ordnance developments in all countries 
abroad. The program is divided amon" 
the six research and manufacturing 
arsenals, each devoting its attention to a 
selected list of materiel. The research 
laboratories are among the world's best. 
The design and development of these 
weapons are carried on in collaboration 
with the using arms after authorization 
by the General Staff. At the Aberdeen 
Proving Ground in Maryland, facilities 
are maintained for testing completed 
models, testing and inspecting materiel as 
produced and also for ballistic research. 

The semi-automatic rifle of the infan- 
try has three times the fire power of the 
renowned Springfield. It is the world's 
best. Ordnance research developed cen- 
trifugal casting, and perfected cold work- 
ing of cannon, put America ahead of all 
other countries not only in the science of 



gun making, but also in mass production 
methods of gun manufacture. Aerial war- 
fare necessitated the development of 
gun mounts radically different in design 
(high elevation), together with fast fir- 
ing cannon of ever increasing calibers. 
The 37mm super machine gun was not 
copied from the 40mm Bofors, but was 
based entirely on American inventions ; is 
a superior arm. Again artillery carriages 
were redesigned for high speed travel, 
self propelled artillery mounts were de- 
signed and produced. Our tanks are su- 
perior in speed, armor and armament to 
those of any other army. Our half track 
cars are a marvel of engineering ability. 

Most of this development was by Ord- 
nance officers; much of it with the aid of 
civilian engineers ; all of it in collabora- 
tion with the using Arms. As fighting 
weapons require closer machining toler- 
ances than most industrial products, the 
Ordnance Department developed the best 
system of gaging yet devised. This gaging 
system is rapidly spreading and no doubt 
will have a profound influence on indus- 
try in general. In fact, many Ordnance 
inventions of past years have materially 
affected civilian manufacturing methods. 

Production of Ordnance materiel today 
is on a scale that beggars the imagination. 
Throughout 1941, the rate of output each 
month increased 25% over that of the pre- 
ceding month, on an average. At the pres- 
ent time, production has reached the 
stage where it is measured in terms of so 
many trainloads or so many shiploads per 
day. In terms of money, the present pro- 
gram already exceeds $50,000,000,000. 
The rate of output is still accelerating, 
and is expected to double in the not dis- 
tant future. When that goal is reached 
well over half of industrial America will 
be producing war materiel. 

We of the Ordnance Department are 
deeply conscious of the job we have to do. 
We will give the last we've got. Our 
troops set our sights for us. We are de- 
termined to see that design, production 
and supply of our military armament is 
all on high and that maintenance of 
equipment is of the very highest type. As 
far as I know there is no better prescrip- 
tion for victory. 



Ba&idc Casters 

"THE MACHINE TOOLS OF MOTION" 




THERE ARE SIZES AND TYPES 
OF BASSICK CASTERS FOR 
EVERY REQUIREMENT — FROM 
TEA TABLES TO TEN TON 
TRUCKS. 



WHEN YOU NEED MOVEMENT 
TO SPEED PRODUCTIONS FLOW 
CASTERS GET'EM ROLLING 
AND KEEP'EM ON THE GO! 




THE BASSICK CO. 



BRIDGEPORT, CONN. 



THE WORLD'S LARGEST MANUFACTURERS OF CASTERS 
DIVISION OF: THE STEWART-WARNER CORPORATION 




'With the Pistol Grip an 



Tripp er Switch" 



13'^^ HOLGUNS 



DRILLS 

HOLE SAWS 

DRILL STANDS 

SCREW 
DRIVERS 

NUT RUNNERS 

TAPPERS 

LECTRO- 
SHEARS 

BENCH 
GRINDERS 

DIE GRINDERS 

PORTABLE 
GRINDERS 

SANDERS 

BUFFERS 

HAMMERS 

SAWS 

VACUUM 
CLEANERS 

GLUE POTS 

WIRE WHEEL 
BRUSHES 

VALVE 
REFACERS 

VALVE SEAT 
GRINDERS 



JUST as peace-time industry learned the 
dependability of Black & Decker 
Portable Electric Tools, so War Industry 
all over the world is finding more uses for 
more of these famous tools than ever 
before in industrial history. Thousands 
of "HOLGUNS" are working 'round the 
clock, in aircraft and equipment plants 
and hangars, to construct, assemble and 
maintain the fighting planes of the 
United Nations. Compact and small 
enough to "palm", the HOLGUN is 
powerful and sturdy — helping new per- 
formance records that mean more planes 
— sooner! 

Larger Drills are fabricating engine 
mounts, truck bodies and transmission 
equipment; Portable Lectro-Shears are 
making fast, accurate work of intricate 
patterns in sheet metal; Portable Sanders 
and Grinders are smoothing surfaces on 
planes, boats, trucks and tanks; Electric 
Screw Drivers and Nut Runners drive the 
threaded fastenings on all types of as- 
sembly operations; Electric Hammers and 
Saws help build barracks, rolling stock 
and warehouses; Valve Reconditioning 
Equipment keeps engines at peak per- 
formance in planes, trucks, tanks, jeeps 
and power boats. 

Whatever the job — "rolling 'em out" or 
"keeping 'em rolling" — there are Black 
& Decker Portable Electric Tools that will 
help do it — Quicker and Better! 

SOLD BY LEADINC DISTRIBUTORS EVERYWHERE 

ELECTRIC TOOL 
HEADQUARTERS 

The BLACK & DECKER Mfg. Co. 
TOWSON, MARYLAND 



147 



The Coast Artillery Today 



by 

Brigadier General Lawrence B. Weeks 

Commandant of the Coast Artillery School 



TIII«; Coast Artillery today 
as always is on the alert 
and in fighting trim. It has al- 
ready proven its worth and 
ability in this present World 
War. The survivors of Bataan 
and Corregidor can testify to 
that. 

Trior to the First World 
War. the Coast Artillery was 
looked upon as a branch of our 
armed forces devoted primar- 
ily to the idea of static defense. 
It manned the fixed defenses of 
important harbors in tin 1 
United States, Panama, Ha- 
waii, and the Philippines. The 
armament consisted essential- 
ly of tixed seacoast guns 
mounted in concrete emplace- 
ments and of submarine mines. 
Before the Armistice was 
signed, many ('oast Artillery- 
men had been withdrawn from 
the lixed defenses and sent to 
Europe with regiments of rail- In a jungle 
way and heavy tractor-drawn loaded gun, 
artillery. The Coast Artillery 
also manned the early antiaircraft guns. 

In the present war, a year old today, the 
progress and changes have been even more 
pronounced. Coast Artillerymen are in every 
part of the globe darkened by the war. No 
longer is the Coast Artilleryman restricted to 
a concrete emplacement facing seaward. His 
tasks are as diverse as those of the properly 
famed United States Marines. At the begin- 
ning of this war, and soon thereafter, the 
responsibilities of the Coast Artillery includ- 
ed not only the handling of its World War 
fixed artillery weapons, submarine mines, and 
mobile artillery, both railway and tractor- 
drawn, but also a vastly expanding and mod- 
ernized antiaircraft artillery and barrage bal- 
loon defense. The guidance of these diversi- 
fied activities and organizations was under 
the Chief of Coast Artillery. The training of 
officers, officer candidates, and enlisted men 
was conducted at The Coast Artillery School, 
Fort Monroe, Virginia. 

Under the reorganization of the War De- 
partment, effected in March, 1942, the Coast 
Artillery underwent a change as did many 
other branches of the Army. The office of the 
Chief of Coast Artillery was abolished for the 
duration of the war and until six months after 
its termination. The seacoast artillery and 
the antiaircraft artillery were completely 
separated, although both were placed under 
the Commanding General, Army Ground 
Forces. The Coast Artillery School and the 
Coast Artillery Replacement Training Center 




somewhere in the Caribbean area. Coast Artillerymen are 
awaiting the order to "Commence Firing'' which will 
projectiles hurling miles to sea. 

U. S. Army Photo 

Below: Brig. Gen. Lawrence B. JFeeks, commandant 
of the Coast Artillery School, right y congratulating a 
graduating student of the Battery Officers' Course. 
In this case the student exemplifies the spirit of co- 
operation existing with our neighbors to the South. 
He is 1st Lt. Eulogio Cantillo of the Cuban Army. 



ready, with 
send huge 




for the training of individual enlisted men of 
the Coast Artillery were placed under the 
Commanding General, Replacement and 
School Command. The Coast Artillery Board 
was placed under the control of the Require- 
ments Division, Army Ground Forces. The 

148 



Submarine Mine Depot was 
placed under the Chief of Ord- 
nance. A new office, that of the 
Commanding General, Anti- 
aircraft Artillery Command, 
was established to control the 
Antiaircraft Artillery School 
and Board, the Barrage Bal- 
loon School and Board, the 
Antiaircraft Artillery Train- 
ing Centers, and Antiaircraft 
Artillery Replacement Train- 
ing Centers. Seacoast artillery 
troops operate under the Com- 
manding Generals of Defense 
Commands within the United 
States, and abroad under Task 
Force, Department, or Theater 
Commanders. 

General provisions for the 
composition, supervision, and 
control of the Coast Artillery 
Corps are contained in Army 
Regulations 90 5. These Regu- 
lations do not differentiate be- 
tween the seacoast artillery 
and the antiaircraft artillery. 
Under the Regulation, the 
Commanding General, Army Ground Forces, 
is charged with the following specific duties: 

1. Training.— The operation of replacement 
training centers and schools; the develop- 
ment of tactical and training doctrine and 
preparation of manuals and texts thereon; 
the training of all tactical units assigned to 
the Army Ground Forces, and of such other 
units, not assigned to the Army Ground 
Forces, as may be specifically prescribed. 

2. Equipment. — Determination of the mili- 
tary characteristics of weapons and other 
equipment and preparation of Tables of 
Equipment, Tables of Basic Allowances and 
special Tables of Allowances. 

3. Organization and personnel— The prep- 
aration of Tables of Organization and the fur- 
nishing of coast artillery personnel to the 
Army Air Forces, Services of Supply, defense 
commands, task forces, theaters deration 
an base commands, fa accordance with 
policies announced by the Chief of Staff 

4. Supply. The submission to the Com- 
manding General, Services of Supply, of such 
recommendations on construction: shelter, 

|«nmng aids, movements, supply, equipment, 
ro ^ t' e f ma , teS off ™ d * field trains 
be B nppL "? SUCh 0ther Mtten as may 

S a I! S0 A far a * P«tain> to units as 
25S th ? Gro ™<i Forces and to 

SSSf r iU n° T Whi ° h the Commanding 
( ; vV' my Gr ° nnd Forces > is sponsible 
l)llec * supervision and control over the 
{Continued on page 158) 





This year with over half the homes of 
the world shaken by the earthquakes of 
war there can be no greater gift than 
that which serves your country as well 
as you. 

A gift that will bring security for your- 
self, for your family, for your home. 
And not just this year, but for the years 
to come. 

It's a gift guaranteed by the might and 
power and richness of America. A gift 
that guarantees freedom from fear . . . 
freedom from want . . . freedom of 
speech . . . and freedom to worship as 
you please. 

It's a gift that increases in value with 



each passing year. Its a United States 
War Savings Bond, the greatest gift 
of all! 

UNITED STATES WAR SAVINGS BONDS 
(SERIES E) 



Today's Cost 

818.75 

37.50 

75.00 
375.00 
750.00 



Value in 10 Years 

825.00 
50.00 
100.00 
500.00 
1,000.00 



War Savings Stamps pasted into Stamp albums 
are very acceptable gifts for . . . why not most 
everyone on your list? 



War Bonds may be bought at Post Offices, 
Banks, Savings and Loan 
Associations, Mutual Sav- 
ings Banks, Retail Stores, 
Radio Stations, Credit 
Unions, Investment Houses, 
Security Dealers, or direct 
from the Treasurer of the 
United States — wherever 
you see this sign.— >~ 





fymrf^e WAR BONDS and ST A 



149 



The Chemical Warfare Service 



by 



Major General William N. Porter 

Chief of the Chemical Warfare Service 



T HE chemical Warfare Service is unique 
amon g the Anns and Services in its diver- 
sified activities. It is the only Branch which 
combines all of the following functions: re- 
search and development, production of mate- 
of personnel of its own as 



riel, instruction 

other branches, and combat opera- 
activities of this Service may be 



well as 
tions. The 

divided between offense and defense; offen- 
sively it produces and fires chemical muni- 
tions' defensively ii: produces and issues gas 
masks and other protective devices. Smoke 
. m( j incendiaries have already been used ex- 
tensively by our enemies in the present war. 
Just when the Axis powers will resort to war 
gases is unpredictable but should they do so, 
thev will our army prepared to retaliate 
with a terrible fury. 
The United Nations Chemical Warfare 
olicv is laid down in two statements by the 
Prime Minister of Great Britain and the 
President of <he United States on May 10th, 
l<jj.> . n ,(l dune (ith, 1042, respectively, as 

i0l ( l -n The Prime Minister on May 10th: 

"I wish now to make it plain that avc shall 
treat the unprovoked use of poison gas 





against our Russian ally exactly as if it were 
used against ourselves, and if we are satisfied 
that this new outrage has been committed by 
Hitler we will use our great and growing air 

superiority in the 
West to carry gas 
warfare on the larg- 
est possible scale far 
and wide upon the 
towns and cities of 
Germany." 

(b) The President 
on June 6th : 

"1 desire to make 
it unmistakably clear 
that if Japan persists 
in this inhuman form 
of warfare against 
China or against any 
other of the United 
Nations, such action 
will be regarded by 
this government as 
though taken against 
the United States and 
retaliation in kind 
and in full measure 
will be meted out." 

This is a scientific 
war. Courage and a 
strong arm are still 

Upper: Tear gas being 
sprayed from airplane for 
instruction purposes at 
c ? r C £* m ™al Warfare 
SphoL hd^ewood Arsenal 
Md. Lower: Flame throw 
ers of the most modern 
type have been devel 
oped by the Chemical 
warfare Service. 

CW.S. Photos 

150 



needed in modern combat but more and 
more, hostile actions depend upon the accu- 
mulated knowledge of science to gain the 
advantage. Chemical Warfare is in keeping 
with this trend. It utilizes the principles and 
applications of many fields of science and de- 
pends upon a highly developed chemical in- 
dustry within the country to provide both the 
technical personnel and adequate production 
facilities. Wars are carried on to overcome 
and subdue the enemy. For this purpose 
chemical warfare is highly effective since it is 
capable of producing many casualties yet it 
does not maim or fatally injure as large a 
percentage as other weapons. Just as the in- 
troduction of other weapons met widespread 
disapproval, similarly modern chemical war- 
fare has been greeted as a fiendish invention. 
Improvements in artillery and gunpowder 
were characterized as "contrary to humanity 
and calculated to extinguish military brav- 
ery." Those who first used small arms were 
condemned as "cowardly and base knaves 
who would never have dared to meet true 
soldiers face to face." Yet history records that 
a weapon once proved to be efficient is not dis- 
carded until a more effective weapon is 
brought forth. Consequently, we may look for 
chemical warfare in all its phases as an of- 
fensive weapon which a desperate nation will 
employ to survive. 

Chemical warfare is not new. History re- 
cords its use at the siege of Plataea in Greece 
in the years 431-421) B.C. Burning pitch and 
sulphur were used by those besieging the city 
to produce fumes which would overcome the 
defenders. Sporadically through the Middle 
Ages we read of these agents being employed 
in attacks upon defensive positions. 

Chemical warfare faded into the back- 
ground during succeeding centuries probably 
because of two reasons: first, the increased 
range of other weapons made a successful 
approach for the purpose of using chemicals 
difficult and, second, the lack of a highly de- 
veloped chemical industry made it impossible 
to secure adequate supplies of chemical 
munitions. 

wi^h! 11 , ,°^ miCaI warf are, which began 
on April 21° Z* attSCk * the GermaDS 
mmif rln . , 77, ® scale, with modern equip- 
•ie , ^ ! i 0,1 b0th the ^amentl in 
h , J ? Ur - lng the P reviou * century and 

S-SSSS^ possibilities * a 

watfatp 6 ^ 81 War continued chemical 

part Thpl? ^ prominent 
gases iu thi?^ 6 ? S6CUred * the » se of 
tl 1 1 he ' ? makes " ^tremely likely 

scale RLrl- a - gain b ° ^oyed on a large 
G - Ke <' 0 f'*mg this fact our Government 
(Continued on page 158) 



Functions of the Provost 
Marshal General in the War 

(Continued from page 112) 

police. 

A function of The Provost Marshal 
General is to intern enemy aliens who, 
having been arrested and given a hear- 
ing by the Department of Justice, have 
been deemed dangerous to the war effort. 
Although internment camps for enemy 
aliens and prisoners of war are under the 
jurisdict ion of the Service Commanders, 
policies regarding the handling of in- 
ternees are prescribed by The Provost 
Marshal General who has been charged 
with carrying out the provisions of the 
Geneva Prisoner of War Convention of 
1929. The camps are guarded by Military 
Police Escort Guard companies trained 
for this type of duty. 

A prisoner of war information bureau 
was established in accordance with the 
provisions of the Geneva Convention. The 
Bureau, working through the Interna- 
tional Red Cross in Geneva, Switzerland, 
exchanges information about enemy 
prisoners of war in the hands of the 
United States Army and about United 
States citizens, civilian and military, held 
by the enemy. 

All of tliese functions are designed to 
aid the war effort. There remains one 
function which is concerned not with the 
period of actual lighting but with the 
period after the fighting has passed on 
to new areas or has altogether ceased. 

The Secretary of War has ordered The 
Provost Marshal General to institute a 
procurement and training program de- 
signed to produce the military personnel 
and the civilian technical and advisory 
personnel necessary for military govern- 
ment. The initial steps for setting up mili- 
tary governments are to be taken now 
rather than to wait until the actual mo- 
ment of occupation. The Provost Marshal 
General has been instructed also to inte- 
grate tinder War Department leadership 
all agencies, military and civilian, con- 
cerned in making broad plans for mili- 
tary government in occupied territories. 



To provide training of top administra- 
tive officers for future detail in connec- 
tion with military government a School 
of Military Government has been estab- 
lished at Charlottesville, Virginia, the 
first school of its kind ever organized in 
the United States. On August 29, the first 
class, from the grade of Captain to Col- 
onel, completed the sixteen weeks' course. 
Later on, according to plans, junior com- 
missioned personnel for military govern- 
ment and enlisted men for occupational 
police will be trained at two new schools 
to be established at The Provost Marshal 
General's School Center. Civilians with 
special technical and advisory skills in a 
variety of professional fields will be en- 
rolled and ear-marked for duty in special 
areas. In cooperation with a number of 
colleges and universities it is planned to 
give them some brief training in the back- 
grounds of those areas in which flaw will 
ultimately serve. 



The Bureau of Aeronautics 

{Continued' from page 115) 

sands of subcontractors, have put us, in a 
comparatively few months, ahead of any 
other nation in aircraft production. It 
will be an easier job now to increase pro- 
duction to 10,000 planes a month than it 
was to bring it up from 400 to 5,000 per 
month. 



The response to our program of pilot 
training has been equally encouraging. 
Cadets are now being taken into our four 
great pre-fiight training centers at the 
rate of 30,000 per year. When these men 
progress through the carefully planned 
stages of preliminary, advanced, and, 
finally, operational flight training, they 
are ready to uphold in the Fleet the finest 
traditions of the naval aviators before 
them. 

The record of naval aviation in this 
first year of the war has shown what can 
be done. From now on, with more equip- 
ment, and with improved types of equip- 
ment, the record will speak for itself even 
more loudlv. 




PRODUCERS OF | 
MATERIALS for the THEATRE of WAR 



TRIUMPH EXPLOSIVES, Inc. 



ELKTON, MARYLAN 




OVER HILL, OVER VALE! And ^ 



tough jeeps take terrain as it comes! Tires on 
these cocky bantams are also made stronger, 
better with rayon cord. 



RAYON SERVES AT HOME! -in 

hundreds of ways. It also is helping many 
American businesses through transition peri- 
ods, with supplies cut off from abroad. In 
clothing, house furnishings, and essential 
equipment, rayon is fighting on all fronts. 





THE VOICE OF AUTHOR- 



ITYf Fire-control mechanisms and other 
electric equipment aboard ship are safe- 
guarded with rayon insulation on wiring. 



AMERICAN VISCOSE CORPORATION 

Producers of CROWN* Rayon Yarns and Staple Fibers 



Sales Offices: New York, N. Y.; Charlotte, N. C; Providence, R. I.; Philadelphia, Pa. 
Plants; Marcus Hook, Pa.; Roanoke, Va.; Lewistown, Pa.; Nitro, \#. Va.; 
Parkersburg, W. Va.; Meadville, Pa.; Front Royal, Va. 



-American VIhcosc Corp. *T. M. ItcfT. U. S. Pat. Off. 




151 



The Finance Department 



by 



Major General H. K. Loughry 

Chief of Finance, United States Army 



HP HE Finance Department was created by 

the Act of June 4, 1920, as a separate 
branch of the Army to account for and dis- 
burse funds appropriated for the military ac- 
tivities of the War Department. The duty of 
preparing regulations governing property 
accounting was also assigned to the Chief of 
Finance; and personnel of the Finance De- 
partment make the annual audits of Army 
property accounts prescribed by these regu- 
lations. The creation of a separate branch to 
perform these technical functions was the re- 
sult of the experiences of the first World War. 
The wisdom of the consolidation of fiscal ac- 
tivities into one Branch of the Army is at- 
tested by the facility with which the disburs- 
ing and accounting functions in the Army 
have been handled during the present war and 
the emergency which preceded it. 

The Finance Department disburses funds 
through the agency of field Finance Officers, 
who perform their duties in accordance with 
law and administrative requirements as pub- 
lished in Army Regulations, but who are di- 
rectly accountable to the Treasurer of the 
United States for funds placed to their credit 
by that officer. These Finance officers are also 
personally responsible for the legality of pay- 
ments made by them, and for the correctness 
of the vouchers they pay, insofar as it is with- 
in their power to determine the facts. 

Disbursing Finance Offices are of three 
types: (1) Finance Office, U. S. Army, which 
serves a number of War Department agencies 
located in the same region, usually in and 
near a metropolitan center; (2) Post, Camp, 
or Station Finance Office, which serves the 
post, camp, or station where located, less any 
tactical division or comparable unit having 
its own Finance Officer which may be sta- 
tioned there; (3) Finance Office of a tactical 
unit, such as an Army Corps, or Division, 
which serves the unit of which it is a part. 
Administrative supervision of Finance De- 
partment activities in the field is decentral- 
ized to Service Command, Department, Army, 
Corps, and Air Force Finance Officers. 

The tremendous quantitative problem that 
the Finance Department has had to solve dur- 
ing the current emergency is illustrated by 
the following figures. Whereas, for the fiscal 
year 1934, a total of §277,000,000 was appro- 
priated for the military activities of the en- 
tire War Department, in March of this year 
one Finance Officer alone disbursed $475,037,- 
840. During the fiscal year 1941, $3,950,000,- 
000 was disbursed by Army Finance Officers; 
for the fiscal year 1943, disbursements are ex- 
pected to reach $43,000,000,000. 

This quantitative problem has been met 
both by expansion of established facilities, 
and by the establishment of new disbursing 
oifices as the need arises. The Finance Offices, 



U. S. Army, which bear most of the disburs- 
ing load for the procurement program, are 
manned by civilian employees. At the present 
time there are forty of these offices located 
in Boston, New York, Baltimore, Washing- 
ton, Philadelphia, Atlanta, New Orleans, 
Pittsburgh, Buffalo, Detroit, Chicago, Omaha, 
Denver, Seattle, San Francisco, Los Angeles, 
and other key cities throughout the country. 
Several are in the process of activation with 
many more to follow. The civilian force, 
which totaled less than 1200 during the, fiscal 
year 1940, has expanded to 14,500, and will 
further increase to over 20,000 in 1943. 




To meet the demands for finance service 
with the field forces, the enlisted strength of 
the Department has expanded from GG9 in 
July, 1940, to the present 8,900. Key men re- 
ceive their technical training at the enlisted 
section of the Army Finance School located 
at Wake Forest College, Wake Forest, North 
Carolina. The Officer Candidate and Officers' 
Sections of the Army Finance School are sit- 
uated at Duke University, Durham, N. <J. The 
Finance Replacement Training Center is at 
Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indiana. 

The major objective of the Finance Depart- 
ment in war as in peace is to insure that every 
War Department obligation is correctly paid 
immediately it is due. To this end, every ef- 
fort has been and is being made to simplify 
procedure and to assist all personnel and 
creditors of the War Department to comply 
with requirements of law so that payments 
may be made promptly. Upon the recom- 
mendation of the Chief of Finance, the War 
Department recently removed the require- 
ment for officers to obtain transcript state- 
ments of account when changing station, and 

152 



substituted an officer's pay data card, which 
together with the officer's identification card 
will enable all officers, warrant officers, and 
Army nurses to draw pay promptly wherever 
they may be located. A similar card for en- 
listed men has been approved and will be is- 
sued to the service shortly. 

The Chief of Finance has initiated action 
to simplify the War Department procurement 
code, and for the appropriations under his 
control, this simplified procedure has been 
placed in effect. The result is to remove a 
great amount of the overhead burden in ad- 
ministering fiscal procedure, with no lessen- 
ing of proper accounting for funds. The prop- 
erty accounting system has also been greatly 
simplified to meet the demands of war con- 
ditions. 

The problem of disbursing for task forces 
overseas is much more complicated than 
finance operations in the United States and 
its territories, since all troops abroad are, 
where possible, paid in the local currency of 
the area in which they are operating. Many 
monetary exchange and other fiscal problems 
which have arisen have been solved through 
the splendid cooperation of officials of the 
Treasury Department with officers of the 
Finance Department. As activities of the 
Army overseas increase, new methods and 
procedures are evolved to meet new problems, 
and to insure prompt settlement of obliga- 
tions abroad. Several other government 
agencies are utilizing the service provided by 
the Army disbursing net overseas. 

The Finance Department administers the 
Army pay allotment system, through which 
personnel of the Army may make provision 
for dependents, and be freed of all concern 
(Continued on page 158) 




f j j j 1 - s - Army Signal Corns Photo 

/ on, " huTtr, "' e Army Fin " nce °# cer °f' en P er " 
<Z L dutles under difficulty. Shown above 

j'T"* Officers preparing one half million Kronur 
J»r me payment of troops in Icelandic currency. 



War Activities of the Office 
of the Judge Advocate 
General of the Navy 

(Continued from page Vlij) 
due course the legal problems connected 
therewith were submitted to the Judge 
Advocate General for solution. Jttemetiial 
steps were initiated in the nature of 
changes in regulations and legislative en- 
actments to facilitate the requirements of 
the war eifort. 

The whole impact of the increased tem- 
po within the Navy Department eame 
with the declaration of war. War powers, 
as distinguished from previous emergency 
powers, changed the complexion of many 
naval Acts and activities. 

Contracts for construction of ships and 
planes were required to be adapted from 
the peacetime contracts involving the con- 
struction of single ships of one type and 
a few planes, into contracts that were 
suitable for mass production. It was nec- 
essary to obtain contracts from experi- 
enced contractors that would adequately 
protect the Government and yet not too 
greatly hamper the expeditious comple- 
tion of the work involved. 

There were many new questions and 
many variables involved in each type of 
contract. The experience of the last war 
with cost-plus contracts resulted in the 
Congress placing necessary restrictions 
in authorizing legislation. The profit ques- 
tion became important with contracts for 
enormously increased quantities of naval 
material, yet with the ever present neces- 
sity of speeding. up production. 

The Office of the Judge Advocate Gen- 
eral was faced with the problem of draft- 
ing contracts to regulate these profits in 
the face of a labor and material market 
that was ascending in an unpredictable 
curve. It became necessary to relax many 
formalities and yet to maintain safe- 
guards. Escalator clauses to fit variable 
costs of labor and material had to be de- 
vised for many varying situations. 

The question of taxes enormously com- 
plicated the drafting of contracts. The re- 



Lations between the Federal Government, 
the contractor and the State Government 
became exceedingly complex because of 
the necessity to safeguard against the de- 
pletion of appropriations for war mater- 
ial by deflecting too large sums in tax 
payments. 

The secrecy attached to a great por- 
tion of the materials manufactured for 
the Navy involved the maintenance of 
security of this information in the numer- 
ous contractors' plants. This requirement 
raised the question of the employment of 
aliens, and the conflict of legal questions 
with policy resulting therefrom. 
^ The greatly increased activity of the 
Navy Department and the multiplication 
of all naval problems necessitated prepa- 
ration and presentation of a vast volume 
of legislation requested or proposed to 
meet each situation as it arose. 

One of the important functions of the 
Judge Advocate General that required 
considerable adjustment with the advent 
of war was the handling of courts martial 
and naval prisoners. 

The Regular Navy and the Naval Re- 
serve were expanded to keep pace with 
the building program. Without the bene- 
fit of longer periods of training and in- 
doctrination of personnel, minor military 
offenses increased. The changed situation 
required a changed policy with regard to 
such offenses. 

Although the establishment of such 
policies and the recommendations as to 
sentences are the province of the Bureau 
of Personnel and the Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, it is the function of the 
Judge Advocate General to review all 
courts martial and the action of conven- 
ing and reviewing authorities thereon in 
order to insure that no illegal or unau- 
thorized action has been taken with re- 
spect to any person in the naval service. 

The policy that each and every court 
martial tried in the Navy is reviewed in 
the Navy Department insures the safe- 
guarding of the legal rights of the per- 
sonnel of the naval service. An equitable 
maintenance of justice is also obtained, 
variances in punishment due to varying 
personalities of courts martial are leveled 



off to uniformity in the case of similar 
offenses. 

It has been appreciated that the loss of 
services of officers and men caused by 
trials by court martial should be reduced 
as far as is compatible with the main- 
tenance of a high standard of discipline. 
Likewise the conduct of investigations 
has been streamlined and reduced to con- 
form to the exigencies of war service. 

The realization of this situation, cou- 
pled with the necessity of more ex- 
peditious handling of all disciplinary 
cases in time of war, has resulted in fur- 
thering the policy with respect to assign- 
ment of punishments for certain minor 
military offenses. Whenever practicable, 
punishments are assigned by the Captain 
"at mast" which in normal times, under 
the regulations, would call for either a 
deck court or a summary court martial. 
Convicted offenders are given lightened 
sentences at Receiving Ships, whenever 
consonant with good wartime discipline. 

Offenders while serving sentences, in- 
stead of being treated as ordinary prison- 
ers, are given intensified military train- 
ing to test their eventual usefulness and 
fitness for retention in the naval service. 
As a result of this policy, many good lead- 
ers are being developed from men 
who otherwise might be further punished 
or discharged but who now are returned 
to serve in the war. 

Whenever possible, sentences are miti- 
gated and the offender restored to duty 
on probation with an opportunity to wipe 
out his sentence of discharge. 

It is necessary that the Navy as a whole 
must make an all out effort for the suc- 
cessful prosecution of the war, and it is 
the high endeavor of the Judge Advocate 
General not to permit legal processes to 
hinder and delay any prosecution of war 
and yet to guide the Navy's legal course 
in the channels of justice. 

The Army Engineers 

{Continued from page 131) 

neer mission in modern war depends 
squarely on the efficient functioning of 



Engineer supply. The problem of keeping 
the How of engineer equipment up to ade- 
quate levels is a vast and complicated 
one. Hut, his bulldozer or his dump truck 
is as vital to the Engineer as his rifle or 
his mortar is to the infantryman. Recent- 
ly, the Secretary of War announced the 
completion of the pioneer road which En- 
gineer troop units pushed through the 
Canadian wilderness to Alaska. Chief 
credit for that undertaking, completed in 
one short working season, goes without 
hesitation to the 10,000-odd American 
troops concerned. But, anyone who gives 
it a moment's thought knows that those 
troops were able to accomplish their mis- 
sion only because a good supply organi- 
zation gave them the tools and the equip- 
ment with which to work. 

Nothing comparable to the problems of 
supply presented by the present global 
war have ever occurred before or imposed 
such heavy responsibilities upon the 
Army Engineers. Never before has the 
United States been compelled to raise, 
equip, transport and supply troops to all 
quarters of the earth. The issues of logis- 
tics and maintenance in World War I 
were simple when contrasted with those 
of today. In but few instances do these 
problems fail to enlist the services of the 
Engineers. Their diversified activities be- 
gin with the construction program un- 
derlying the entire war effort and carry 
through to the field of combat and beyond. 

American Army Engineers are today 
stationed all over the world. Along with 
their comrades in other branches of the 
Army they have distinguished themselves 
in action and have gallantly upheld the 
traditions of this old and honored mili- 
tary organization. It is part of their rou- 
tine task : to clear the w r ay, bridging 
streams, blasting obstacles and prepar- 
ing the path for assault and occupation. 
After that they must repair and restore 
the havoc created by bombs and shells. 
In this or any other war, the work of 
the Engineers is never ended. There will 
still be war-born duties for them to per- 
form long after our victorious troops come 
home. 




All 

Out 



"FOR VICTORV 



AUTOMATIC SCREW MACHINE CO. 

LOS ANGELES, CALIF. 



BRIDGEPORT FABRICS, INC. 

MANUFACTURERS OF 

GOVERNMENT 
WEBBING 

• 

Established in 1837, Bridgeport Fabrics, Inc., is one 
of the oldest and most prominent manufacturers of 
narrow woven fabrics in America. With the skill and 
knowledge born of long experience, we are today 
producing an ever-increasing supply of materiel for 
the armed forces of the United States ... an out- 
standing job in narrow fabric production, quality and 
efficiency. 

• 

WE ALSO MANUFACTURE 

INNER-SEAL 

Waterproofed 

WEATHER STRIPPING 

Used on airplanes, tanks, military vehicles, 
U. S. Naval vessels and merchant ships. 

• 

BRIDGEPORT FABRICS, INC. 

Operating 7 Plants in U. S. and Canada 

Executive Offices 



BRIDGEPORT, 



CONN. 



153 



Army Dentists' Part in the War 



by 

Brigadier General R. H. Mills, D. C. 

Assistant to the Surgeon General of the Army 



HP J I E induction of millions of men into the 
Army of the United States from all walks 
of life and varied economical backgrounds 
presents a tremendous challenge to the 
Dental Corps. Dentistry has as- 
sumed a major role in the present 
emergency in thought and func- 
tion, since a large percentage of 
the selectees require extensive 
dental treatment before they can 
efficiently perform the varied 
duties incident to military life. A 
soldier must not only be able to 
see, hear, and walk, as well as pass 
other physical requirements, but 
he must also be able to properly 
masticate the Army ration. Infec- 
tions in the oral cavity have also 
been of major significance in pro- 
ducing lowered resistance, as well 
as, secondary involvements in va- 
rious sections of the body. 

The initial standards of Dental 
Requirement at the beginning of 
the emergency presented too high 
a mortality in rejections, and 
therefore the dental requirements 
for entrance into the Army by the 
select ees was lowered drastically. 
The most recent ruling states: In- 
dividuals who are well nourished, 
of good musculature, are free from ' 
infections, and have a minimum 
requirement of an edentulous upper jaw 
and/or an edent ulous lower jaw, corrected or 
correctable by a full denture or dentures will 
be acceptable. The various departments, par- 
ticularly prosthetics, were thereby faced with 
a tremendous increased load and function. 
Recently, September 10, 1942, a change was 
made in Army Regulations 40-510 stating 
that those individuals with insufficient teeth 
to masticate the Army ration would be 
placed in an emergency classification which 
indicates that the patient should have imme- 
diate treatment. 

The demands of the Dental Corps have 
been largely met by the assignment to duty 
of all available Reserve Officers and the pro- 
curement of a large number of civilian den- 
tists. Extensive clinic and laboratory facili- 
ties have been set up in hospit als and stations 
in this and foreign countries. Double shifts 
of all dental personnel have been instituted 
in many of the camps, thereby utilizing 15 
hours of the day. Some of the laboratories 
are now on three shifts, thus working twenty- 
four hours a day. 

Special chairs, and equipment have been 
designed for held service so that proper emer- 
gency attention may be a Horded those in 
combat. Collaboration with the Medical 
Supply Service, manufacturers and priority 



agencies has enabled the Dental Corps to pro- 
cure much equipment and supplies to conduct 
its professional service. The entire program 
has, however, given every consideration to the 




Army Air Forces Photo 

A toothache is a toothache, whether you are in the city, jungle, Arctic, or 
on the sea. Here an Army Dentist with the Air Force has his dental clinic 



set-up in a jungle 



background. Note the foot 
Brigadier General Mills. 



operated drill. Beloiv: 




needs of civilian dentists to the fullest extent 
possible under the existing conditions. 

Another advancement is the new mobile op- 
erating unit which is now being developed at 

154 



the Medical Equipment Laboratory at Car- 
lisle Barracks, Pennsylvania. This unit is to 
be used in the smaller posts of the Army in 
this country where a regular dental service 
is not available or practical. 

The primary objective of the 
Dental Corps is to prepare the in- 
coming selectees dentally for field 
service. It is necessary that opti- 
mum service be given to the great- 
est possible number of men dur- 
ing the interim permitted. It is 
further essential that each soldier 
delegated to field duty be free from 
all oral infection, and be able to 
masticate the Army ration. It al- 
so has a secondary mission in that 
it assists the Medical Corps in the 
care and exacuation of battle 
casualties. The plastic and maxil 
lo-facial surgical procedures will 
in a large measure be delegated to 
the dentist, as well as, the many 
facial and oral reconstruction 
problems incident to the war. The 
training of large numbers of den- 
tal officers in field service and in 
tactical maneuvers at Carlisle 
Barracks has been in anticipation 
of such service. They are schooled 
to serve as auxiliary medical offi- 
cers when the situation requires, 
and may be depended upon to ren- 
der valuable aid in that capacity. Duties of 
this character ; particularly in the combat 
zone, where virtually no dentistry may be ac- 
complished, consist of emergency treatment 
of wounded, supervising the collection of cas- 
ualties and admissions to the forward 
echelon medical stations, and similar activi- 
ties that the unit surgeon may request. In the 
event that the medical officers become in- 
capacitated, the dental officer assumes their 
authority, responsibility and duties until 
properly relieved. 

In addition to giving the necessary dental 
services in the home camps and stations the 
men are instructed in the proper care of the 
teeth and surrounding soft tissues V large 
percentage of soldiers have had little, if anv, 
dental experience in the past, and the officers 
are therefore delegated to creating a dental 
health consciousness in the minds of the men. 
The attitude of the average soldier concern- 
ing dentistry and dental service will be re- 
flected m his life in subsequent years alter the 
war. | he opinions of the civilian of tomorrow 
~ i? a 14 V' e,llemlous influence upon the 
tHome ° f ^ nati ° n for ^rations 

The administrative problems of the Dental 
U>rps have been many and varied during this 
{Continued on page 158) 



Submarines in the War 

(Continued from page 111) 
any other activity. Whether it be attack, 
escape from anti-submarine measures, or 
repairs t<> damaged hull or machinery, it 
is strictly ''on its own" and, being thou- 
sands of miles from its own forces, can 
expect no outside assistance. Submarine 
duty therefore tends to breed a sense of 
responsibility, initiative and resourceful- 
ness. About twenty of our present day 
admirals have had experience in subma- 
rines. In addition to those now command- 
ing' submarine forces, Rear Admirals 
Daubin, English and Lockwood, the list 
includes such prominent names as Ad- 
mirals E. J. King and C. W. Nimitz, Com- 
manders in Chief of the U. S. and Pacific 
Fleets respectively. We had but a few 
submarines when these oflicers were serv- 
ing in that branch of the service and con- 
sequently they constituted a minute per- 
centage of the total officer personnel in 
the Navy at that time. That they now 
comprise such a large proportion of those 
to attain flag rank in wartime demon- 
strates the value of that early training. 

Submarines are the only branch of any 
service able to operate continuously in 
enemy controlled waters. They maintain 
their offensive patrols for weeks and 
months and have prowled the seas in 
search of enemy from Alaska to Aus- 
tralia and the East Indies, and from the 
Mandated Islands to the Philippines and 
China coast. They have penetrated, liti 
erally, to the very doorstep of Japan 
where ships have actually been torpedoed 
in such close proximity to the beaches 
that the sinkings could be witnessed by 
observers ashore. They have even de- 
stroyed ships under the very guns of Jap- 
anese forts. 

The potentialities of submarines are far 
from exhausted and there are many other 
tasks which they can accomplish besides 
their primary mission of attack. They 
can act as "eyes of the fleet" by recon- 
noitering enemy ports and can get in- 
formation regarding ship movements 
that would be otherwise impossible to ob- 



lain in many cases. As far back as World 
War I submarines were employed to 
evade blockade and carry cargo of great 
value. It was repeated again in this wwv 
when a submarine made a memorable 
voyage to besieged Corregidor and re- 
turned with tons of gold and securities 
before that fortress fell to the enemy. 

For many years Japan has longed for 
the oils, metals, food and other material 
wealth of the countries which lay to the 
South. It now possesses these vital re- 
sources in abundance, but they are prac- 
tically worthless unless they can be de- 
livered to the factories and war indus- 
tries in the homeland. Such deliveries in 
important quantities over the long lines 
of communication would be impossible 
had we sufficient fleet submarines to 
maintain one hundred or more constantly 
encircling her ports. Although the latest 
issue of Janes Fighting Ships lists well 
over one hundred U. S. submarines, it will 
be noted from this publication that less 
than half are suited to make the long 
cruises which successful operations 
against the Japs require. It is no mili- 
tary secret either that, of the total num- 
ber available for this work, a certain 
number must be engaged in making the 
long trek to and from the Orient while 
others are in a refit or overhaul status 
prior to making another patrol. The exact 
number engaged in offensive action on 
station can not be divulged but it is quite 
obvious that they are only too few. 

We have several million men in our 
armed forces but a small fraction of a 
percent of this total man our submarines. 
They have accounted for over a million 
tons of supply ships and combatant ves- 
sels of all types, they have disrupted 
enemy commerce and flow of essential 
war materials, they have compelled diver- 
sion of war ships to convoy duty, they 
have forced Japan to devote a consider- 
able measure of manpower .and industry 
to anti-submarine measures, and last, but 
not least, they have destroyed thousands 
of Japanese — all this without fanfare or 
publicity. The governments investment in 
this branch of the service has most cer- 
tainly paid high dividends. 




We are oroud to be working on eight AA-I Army and Navy Contracts and doubly proud that 
we can fa to the men in tne armed forces of the United States, that every employee of this 
company is buying Defense Bonds, and that our payroll deductions for this purpose exceed 
eleven percent. 

AMERICAN BANTAM CAR COMPANY 

BUTLER, PENNSYLVANIA 



What to DO for 

COLDS 

TO RELIEVE PAINFUL SYMPTOMS FAST 
JUST FOLLOW THESE SIMPLE DIRECTIONS 




i 



TO RELIEVE HEAD- 
ACHE, body discomfort 
and aches, take 2 Bayer 
Aspirin Tablets and drink 
a full glass of water. Re- 
peat treatment in 2 hours. 



2 



FOR SORE THROAT 
from a cold, dissolve 3 
Bayer Aspirin Tablets in Vz 
glass of water and gargle. 
This eases pain and raw- 
ness very quickly. 



3 



TAKE YOUR TEM- 
PERATURE, and if you have 
a fever, go to bed. Then call 
your doctor and follow his 
advice. This is important. 



Aches, pains and sore throat all eased this way, very quickly 



This quick, easy way to relieve 
your painful cold symptoms can 
make an amazing difference in the 
way you feel in a mere matter of 
minutes. Just do as these pictures 
show and relief starts almost at 
once ! 

Your aches and pains, the dull- 
ing headache and the rawness in 
the throat due to your cold are all 
relieved quickly. That's because 
genuine Bayer Aspirin is ready 
to go to work almost instantly 
you take it. 

Recognized as one of the fastest 
methods of relieving painful cold 



symptoms science has yet discov- 
ered. To get the fast-acting article 
you want, always ask for it by its 
full name "Bayer Aspirin. " Now 
in new easy-opening boxes. 



WHY BAYER ASPIRIN 
"TAKES HOLD" 
SO QUICKLY 

Almost instantly you drop 
a genuine Bayer Aspirin 
Tablet in a glass of water, 
it starts to disintegrate. Thus it's ready 
to go to work almost instantly. 




15< 



FOR 12 TABLETS 
2 FULL DOZEN 25c 




155 



Canada's War Effort 



by 

The Hon. Leighton Goldie McCarthy 

Canadian Minister to the United States 



OlNCE September 10, 1939, when Canada 
^ entered the war, this peaceful, pastoral 
nation of 11,500,000 people 1ms built its army 
to 89 times its prewar strength, multiplied 
its navy 27 times and its air force 38 times. 

Prom ;i pre-war strength of 15 ships, the 
Royal Canadian Navy has been increased to 
a tough, battlewise force of nearly 500 ves- 
sels which patrol the North Atlantic a third 
of the way across and extend their hunt for 
searaiders as far south as the Caribbean. 

In three years the Dominion has built an 
"airdrome of democracy" where young fliers 
of all nations are trained to fly the sky 
armadas of the United Nations and ultimate- 
ly to blast the enemy in nearly every hole and 
hiding place in the five continents. 

In the same period Canada has expanded 
her munitions industry like magic, to a point 
where war orders total nearly 8(>,000,000,000, 
and ( !anada-produced weapons, including 
great naval guns, tanks, airplanes, small arms 
and ammunition are helping to blast the axis 
on all fronts. 

Canada's vast agricultural resources have 
been thrown to the Allied Nations on a scale 
that guarantees wartime and post-war sus- 
tenance for the fighting free peoples of the 
world; in making both food and munitions 
available to Allies, the Dominion has extend- 
ed extensive financial aid, including an out- 
right gift of §1,000,000,000 to Britain. 

In the desperate struggle at Hong Kong, on 
the flaming beaches of Dieppe and in the 
glorious raid on North Africa, Canadians 
have played a permanent role. 

Their precise numbers secret, many thou- 
sands of bronzed, toughened and highly 
trained Canadian soldiers are impatiently 
awaiting in Britain the Battle of Europe. In 
Great Britain there are three Infantry Divi- 
sions, one Armoured Division, and one Tank 
Brigade. A second Armoured Division and 
second Tank Brigade are now being sent to 
complete the Overseas Army. 

Canadians at home are flocking to the vital 
war services and manning munitions fac- 
tories in ever-increasing multitudes. There 
are 19,000 Canadian women in the three wo- 
men's services and more than 200,000 Air 
Kaid Precaution workers; a round million 
Canadians, 185,000 of them women, are now 
engaged in munitions production. 

Despite these achievements, the Canadian 
War Effort goes on expanding daily in every 
branch and a steady progression of govern- 
ment restrictions, all calculated to intensify 
War Effort, extend to where Canadians may 
work, how much money they may earn, what 
they may eat, where they may travel, what 
they may buy and how much they may pay 
for goods. 

With 000,000 of her people in the lighting 



services, 1,000,000 engaged in some form of 
war production, 1,250,000 engaged on farms 
in vitally important food production, 300,000 
in essential utilities and mining, and 2,000,- 
000 remaining in Civilian Industries, Can- 
ada's man and womanpower resources are 
feeling the strain. A program of National 
Selective Service, which directs men and wo- 
men into jobs where their services will be of 
greatest value to War Effort, is being 
launched. War Restrictions are hitting 
pocket books, the dinner table and denying 
old-time luxury living standards. Wages and 
salaries were fixed in the Canadian Economic 
Mobilization, and a system of bonus payments 
instituted to bring wages into line with war- 




time living costs. Prices were frozen at De- 
cember 1, 1941, to choke off a threat of infla- 
tion. Gasoline, sugar, coffee and tea have 
been rationed. Commodities such as rubber, 
t in and silk are being denied civilians. Pro- 
duction of automobiles, radios, washing ma- 
chines, electrical appliances, are either cur- 
tailed or entirely eliminated. Wartime taxa- 
tion upon Canadians has been raised with 
each successive budget and the exactions ac- 
cepted without protest throughout the coun- 
try. The objective in 1942-43 is for an expendi- 
ture of $3,200,000,000 for the war, the equiva- 
lent of $278 for each Canadian, and about 
twice the entire cost of the first Great War, 
to which Canada sent (500,000 of her fighting 
men. 

Great energy and enthusiasm is being 
thrown into voluntary war organizations op- 
erating on the Home Front. More than $52 - 
000,000 has been contributed to more than 

15G 



5 000 organizations in all parts of the country. 

' Not one of the largest or wealthiest of the 
United Nations, Canada is straining her 
finances to the last degree to be of the utmost 
aid to Her Allies. In the current fiscal year 
alone, the Dominion is spending almost twice 
as much as she spent on war plus demobiliza- 
tion from 1914 to 1920. She is spending $9,- 
000,000 a day on her War Effort, and for every 
dollar she spent in peacetime 1938 she is now 
spending §100 for war. 

Canada has planned her Wartime Econ- 
omy so that no one can get rich out of the con- 
flict. The tax on Excess Profits is 100 per 
cent, of which 20 per cent is refundable after 
the war, and a single Canadian earning $500,- 
000 a year has $27,000 remaining after paying 
his Income Tax. 

A tabulation of Canadian food products 
being sent Britain this year is as follows: 
000,000,000 pounds of bacon and products; 
125,000,000 pounds of cheese; 45,000,000 
dozens of eggs; 31,480,000 one-pound tins of 
condensed milk, besides great quantities of 
wheat and flour, fish, dried fruits and 
vegetables. 

We are not smug or complacent in Canada 
about what we have done, but we hope that 
our effort so far will be considered by our 
friends and allies as a not unworthy contri- 
bution for a nation of 11,500,000 people. 



Canada's Part 

by 

J. L. Ralston 

Minister of National Defense 



66 



PAXADA\S pattern of total war has 
^ three main parts. Each one is essential. 
Ihe three are complimentary parts of the 
whole, and that is how they ought to be re- 
garded. 

"One of the three parts is the production 
ot lood ; another is the production of weapons 
ot war; and another is the raising of armed 
torces to combat on sea and on land and in 
the air. Supporting all these activities is the 
great civilian effort of this Dominion which 
expresses itself chiefly in the twin essentials 
ot services and morale, and in which no 
anadian is too old, too poor, or too humble, 
to have a place and a duty. 
J k So that, put in briefest form our pattern of 
total war is a pattern consisting of food, 
^Pons, and armed forces. You cannot take 
u e and leave the others in a country like 
aiiacla and the duty of the government is to 
eu>£inze that each of these three parts- 
ood, weapons, and armed forces-is essential 
to the total war by Canada." 




157 




The Coast Artillery Today 

(.Continued from page UH) 
Coast Artillery Board 
J " ae se P ar atlon'of functions, the 



Commanding Gen 

Forces, retained &n „T« 

sibilittes for the aiTiS n 'T"!" 

include the develonS - y V ,d ,' 

training doctrine ' "' " ** u ? 1 f* a 

tables of basic al , u ' ^ ?°Zf?T &t £ n ' 
„.,..„,„,.,„, l °wances, military char- 
actonslics ol Wi..., ....... ' , • ., 

chang^in e.uipStWe sTcS 

The professional education of enlisted 
men and officers ,„,. Seacoast Artillery 

h!^" Tvwm Mlnln e ts carried ou a 
theCoasl Ai I lllcry s.-hoo! at. Monroe. Un- 
der the control of the Commanding Gen- 

f »• A "»» , Gi ;"""<i Forces, the Coast 
Ar Ulery School i,,,.,,,,,,., br ^ lning mate . 

rial o„ the totes tactical and technical 

subjects through Qe diums of field and 

technical manuals, training bulletins, 
training films, and aim strips. The 
School, through i te 0fflcer c ^ ndldate 
Course continues to prepare student of- 
ficers for commission and through the 
Enlisted Specialise r)e|)arlnient. trains 
enlisted men as specialist in seacoast 
an lllcry. 

The Coasl ArtiU ery Board has for its 
purpose be consid,.,..,,.^, of such guD . 
Jects p«.rlami.iy; i„ S( ,. |( . ();ist artillery as 
mnj he referred |„ h , ,,,„ C(miInall(]lng 
General, Army (!,.„„,„, F) an(1 t( , 

originate and sui„ uil recommendations 
for improvement ,„• the Coas , ArtUlery 
Corps. llie Board makes tests and rec- 
ommends modihcaii,,,, in 1I0W ( . (111 i])ment, 
and ideas seal in ,,,„„ 111W1 in , he flela 
ihc Hoard also i s .s U( , s ,.„„,,.„, t . harta 
ami scales as needM by Beld units. 

In the reorganigation of last winter, 
the antiaircraft functions of the Coast 
Artillery < orps. ,. X( cntrol of units 
assigned to the liel.i forces, were placed 
under the Conm,,,,,,,,, 0wicrul of the 
Antiaircraft Ari lU( ,, v c«.iiiniaiid. with 
station at Bichmpna vii jxi n i.-i. The Com- 
manding (.eneral, Antiaircraft Artillery 
command, suDmits his reeonunondat ions 
as to basic allowa nces and tactical ;md 

training doctrine ot the antiaircraft artil- 
lery to the OomBa audin General of the 
Army (.round 1m m , vs Th(i Antiaircraft 

ArtiUery Oommana Includes also the con- 
trol and supervise of the barrage bal . 
loon activities except for nni|s assiini0(l 
tothefieh torces. The Ant iaiivra I t Art il- 
lery School and tta Anl iaiivi , lf r Artillery 
Board are now lo 0a ted at Camp Davis. 
North Carolina The Barrage Balloon 
School and the Barrage Balloon Board 
are located at ( :u Tyson, Tennessee. 

^Innrt.onsot t h.sc schools and hoards 
ares, 1 nilart«.thns 0()r fche Coast Artillery 
School and Board at Fort Monroe, Vir- 
ginia. 

c£Tf<^VT'> formerly in the Office, 
Chief of Coast ArU Uer ^ b , ; 

f erred to t he Serv Uvs ^ s ly ftnd ? 

now centered m a Coast Artillery Advis- 
ory Committee in , ho onu , 0 of t j Chi £ 
of Engineers Tin* committee gives tac- 
tical and technical atlvk . 0 nn(1 ; lssistan a £ 
on matters pertain^ to tno preparation 
and accoinpiishment of seacoast defense 

The coordination of the traini 
handling ^.replacements for seacoast 
artillery units has become the respon- 
sibility of the Replacement and School 
Oommand.of the A ni Gr(mnd Fo * 
Birmingham. Alah^ The Toast Artil- 
lery (SO) 1 -Placement and Training 
Center is touted at 0amp McQuaid * 
ah.orma and is ^ de r the (?olulll m(1 0 
Brig General Frank S. Clark, formerly 
C ommandant ot fcbe Q t ArtUte J 
School. Replacement training centers for 
antiaircraft artille^ units are located at 



Wort Fustis, Virginia; Camp Wallace, 
Texas; and Camp Callan, California, 
('oast Artillery units that have completed 
their training and have been assigned to 
harbor defenses oi" to other tactical com- 
bat uints are integral parts of higher ac- 
tive commands. 

Regardless of his duties or the chain of 
command under which he functions, the 
wearer of the crossed cannons and pro- 
jectile insignia, more than ever, com- 
mands the respect of his fellow man. 
Nothing more is needed but to repeat the 
title of our Coast; Artillery Corps march, 
"CRASH OX! ARTILLERY," and to 
read General Orders No. 62, which ap- 
pears below. 

General Orders No. 62 

November 7, 1942. 

Airurrfx of Distinguished - Service 
Medal. — By direction of the President, 
under the provisions of the act of Con- 
gress approved July 9, 1918 (Bull. 43, 
W. D., 1918), a Distinguished-Service 
Medal was awarded by the War Depart- 
ment to the following-named officer : 

George F. Moore, major general, 
United States Army. For exceptionally 
meritorious service to the Government in 
a duty of great responsibility as com- 
mander of the Harbor Defenses of Manila 
and Subic Bays from December 8, 1941 to 
March 13, 1942. The outbreak of hostili- 
ties found his command prepared and on 
the alert. The controlled mine fields cov- 
ering the north channel at the entrance 
to Manila Bay were effectively installed 
and these, as well as the Navy mine field 
protecting the south channel, were cov- 
ered by the guns of the seaward defenses. 
The antiaircraft, batteries engaged the 
enemy effectively throughout sustained 
and repeated high-level and dive-bomb- 
ing attacks, maintaining an extremely 
high percentage of destroyed and dam- 
aged hostile aircraft. Seacoast batteries 
repeatedly engaged land targets on the 
Cavite shore of Manila Bay and on the 
west coast of Bataan. By daily personal 
visits to the most heavily engaged ele- 
ments, General Moore largely influenced 
the effective action and high morale of 
his command. Entered military service 
from Texas. 



Additional co£fe s of this ^ United 
States nt War be obtained 

from your P Qst Exchang ^ 
Serv,ce Store, ^ Qg (){ ^ 
American New s Company loca , 
book, dealer or ordered direct from 
the Army and Navy Journal, 1711 
Connecticut Av enue Northwest, 
Washington, D. 

l>rice $3.00 per copy. 



Chemical Warfare Service 

(Continued from page 150) 

established the Chemical Warfare Ser- 
vice as a component part of our Regular 
Army in 1920. 

The Chemical Warfare Service is 
charged specifically with research and 
development for both offensive and de- 
fensive purposes, the production of chem- 
ical warfare materiel and protective de- 
vices, the training of personnel and the 
operation of chemical troops. Such a di- 
versified program presented a challenge 
to the officers and men of the Chemical 
Warfare Service during the peacetime 
years between the first world war and the 
present conflict. In my opinion the 
Chemical Warfare Service has met that 
Challenge. 

At first the going was hard. Despito 
the experience of the last war, the Chem- 
ical Warfare Service received little rec- 
ognition in the intervening years of 
peace. Scanty appropriations limited the 
activities for many years. Even after the 
Italians had used gas against the 
Ethiopians in 1930 our Service failed to 
receive full appropriations and personnel 
to adequately perform its functions. Then 
came our own national emergency. The 
Chemical Warfare Service had to expand 
almost, overnight. 

At the beginning of the national emer- 
gency the available supply of gas masks 
for our Army was woefully inadequate. 
However, the quality of the gas masks 
which we had issued was excellent, equal- 
ling or exceeding the efficiency of any 
Other military masks in the world. This 
achievement by our Research and Devel- 
opment Division coupled with a fore- 
sighted program organized by our Pro- 
curement. Planning Division made it pos- 
sible for us to get into product ion without 
delay. 

These factors, together with the mag- 
nificent cooperation of American Indus- 



try enabled us to provide a gas mask to 
each soldier as soon as he was inducted 
into the Army. The Chemical Warfare 
Service is proud of that record ! We now 
have millions of masks in reserve ready 
for issue to our troop-s. 

The Chemical Warfare Service Arsenal 
at; Edgewood, constructed during the 
first world war and maintained in a 
standby condition during the peacetime 
years, was put on a war basis long before 
the Pearl Harbor attack. Buildings were 
renovated, new construction started and 
production facilities were increased at 
Edgewood as soon as the national emer- 
gency arose. Sites were chosen for addi- 
tional facilities at strategic locations 
which combined nearness to sources of 
raw materials, adequate power and 
transportation facilities, and freedom 
from possible air attack. 

The new Arsenals at Huntsville, Ala- 
bama, Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and Denver, 
Colorado, provide production facilities 
adequate for the prosecution of a global 
war. The Dugway Proving Ground, lo- 
cated in the Utah Desert, far from popu- 
lated cities, makes it possible to carry 
out tests under ideal conditions. 

The Development Laboratory at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
and the Chemical Warfare Service Lab- 
oratories at Columbia University supple- 
ment the work of our Technical Division 
at Edgewood. 

In addition to these facilities the col- 
laboration of the National Defense Re- 
search Council has proved invaluable. 
More than one hundred of the country's 
leading scientists are engaged in confi- 
dential research problems at various 
colleges and universities scattered 
throughout the country- 
Many responsibilities have been added 
to this Service. In July, 1941, the in- 
cendiary bomb program was transferred 
from the Ordnance Department to the 
Chemical Warfare Service. The part 
which incendiaries play in modern war- 
fare became evident to everyone follow- 
ing the tremendous air attacks on Lon- 
don and other English cities during the 
winter of 1940-41. Many thousands of in- 
cendiary bombs were dropped by the 
German planes during a single night at- 
tack. Besides the development of new 
types of incendiary bombs, our Service 
had to solve difficult problems connected 
with the supply of materials and the 
manufacture of unfamiliar items in pro-- 
digious quantities. In addition haste was 
imperative ! 

The Chemical Warfare Service met 
this challenge as borne out by the testi- 
mony of General Doolittle, who obtained 
such satisfactory results with our incen- 
diary bombs in his attacks on Tokyo and 
other Japanese cities. Today we have 
magazines stock with millions of various 
types of incendiary bombs ready for de- 
livery to our armed forces. 

The increasing use of obscuring smoke 
in modern warfare places an important 
responsibility upon this branch of the 
service. Increased fire power of modern 
weapons makes it difficult for an attack- 
ing force to come to grips with the enemy. 
The generous use of harmless obscuring 
smoke not only makes it possihle for an 
attacking troop to advance across open 
terrain but it also provides a protective 
blanket for slower movements such as 
river crossings. 

Many thousands of casualties will 
doubtless he avoided by our troops in tho 
battles yet to come through the use of 
smoke. Our Service is charged not only 
with the production of suitable smoke 
munitions hut also with the operation of 
troops whose specialty is the firing of 
smoke. 

Thus we have assumed the responsibil- 
ity of providing instruction to all of the 
armed forces of our country in chemical 
warfare. In addition we have established 
seven civilian protection schools, located 
at colleges and universities, for trainino- 
leaders in methods of civilian protection. 

The civilians who complete the course 
at one of these schools are expected to 
teach civil defense workers in their home 
communities. 

To recapitulate, the Chemical Warfare 
Service is charged with research, produc- 
tion, training and combat functions. I be- 
lieve we are carrying out our mission 



The Finance Department 

(Continued front page 152) 

for their financial welfare while the offi- 
cers and men may be serving at distant 
posts. Legislation has been secured to 
permit continuance of allotments when 
military personnel is missing in action or 
beleagiircd or besieged by the enemy. A 
family allowance bill has been passed by 
Congress, and disbursements, as provid- 
ed therein, are being made by the Fi- 
nance Department. 

The Chief of Finance, with the ap- 
proval of the Secretary of War, has es- 
tablished a system by which all members 
of the Military Establishment, officers, 
enlisted men and civilians, may purchase 
War Bonds by reservations from their 
pay. Service Command and similar com- 
manders have been made responsible for 
the dissemination of the necessary in- 
formation to all personnel within the geo- 
graphical limits of their commands. In 
Washington a new division has been es- 
tablished in the Office of the Chief of 
Finance to coordinate operations in the 
field and to handle the financial and ac- 
counting procedures incident to the 
program. 

The Army Dentist 

(Continued from page 154) 

emergency. It: is a responsibility requir- 
ing a complete understanding of its mis- 
sion, its relationship to Medical Depart- 
ment activities as a whole and the prob- 
lems encountered in the fulfillment of its 
duties. It is organizationally and tech- 
nically vested in the Medical Corps. In 
practice, however, this has been reqular- 
ly accomplished by designated members 
of the Dental Corrxs acting in their ca- 
pacity as advisors to the surgeon and, 
with his approval, exercising the func- 
tions of supervision, coordination and ad- 
ministration of the specific duties of the 
Dental Corps. 

The transition from a civilian dental 
practice to the routine requirements of 
the Army has necessitated special in- 
struction on the part of many officers and 
enlisted personnel. The establishment of 
the Army Dental School in Washington, 
D. C, in 1921 was an early step in the 
training program. It has provided courses 
of instruction in professional procedures, 
and practically all members of the Regu- 
lar Army Dental Corps have taken one 
or more periods of instruction there. 
Hundreds of enlisted men have also been 
taught the duties of the dental and X- 
ray technicians. 

The Medical Field Service School at 
Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania, estab- 
lished in 1921, has also afforded regular 
scredules of field training. Further, ex- 
tension courses in dental administration 
prepared and conducted by the medical 
field service school, have added greatly 
to the knowledge and usefulness of dental 
officers. 

The Reserve Officers from time to time 
too have been assigned tO>active duty for 
periods of fourteen days or longer. Many 
have served on extended active duty with 
Civilian Conservation Corps Units in the 
period from 1934 to the s declaration of 
war. 

Army dental internships have also been 
afforded to a limited number of recent: 
graduates from debtal schools. Such in- 
ternships permit a year's post graduate 
study in the Army Dental Schools and as- 
sociate centers in preparation for a ten- 
ure of service with the Army. 

In addition to the above cited program, 
one montb courses in nmxillo-facial sur- 
gery and procedures have been instituted 
at the Army Dental School, Armv Medical 
< enter, Washington, D. C. General Hos- 
pitals and large Station Hospitals have 
conducted scheduled classes for dental 
!isfed 11Ul ' b(>Ul commissi °oed and en- 

The Dental Corps is encouraged and 
enthused with the response received at: 
every hand by the officers and enlisted 
personnel of every component within the 
armed forces. It is cognizant of its mul- 
tiple problems and shall extend every of 
rort through organization and training 
to accomplish its mission. 



158 



The Operation of the Jud*re 
Advocate General's 
Department 

(Continued from page 126) 

ble to an army, punishments must be im- 
posed for crimes and military offenses 
and the imposition of punishment must 
be prompt, certain, uniform as between 
offenses of like decree, and neither too 
light nor too severe. Punishment must 
not be inflicted upon the innocent nor 
must the guilty escape. If the disciplinary 
system seriously fails in any of these 
respects, the Army's efficiency will be 
much diminished. The internal adminis- 
tration of the Army, the enlistment, in- 
duction, commissioning, transfer, promo- 
tion, retirement, and discharge of Army 
personnel, are all regulated by and must 
be conducted in accordance with law. The 
same is true of its external business re- 
lations, such as its contracts for the pur- 
chases of supplies and construction of 
buildings. These external relations are of 
enormous magnitude and complexity. 
There are many claims, some of them 
for large sums, by and against the Army, 
and much litigation in which it is con- 
cerned. The Army is vitally interested 
in hundreds of patent matters. It con- 
trols a great many reservations covering 
all together millions of acres of land. 
Questions are constantly arising, with re- 
spect to these lands, as to titles, rights 
of way, and boundaries. The work of the 
Engineer Corps of the Army in improv- 
ing rivers and harbors and in building 
and operating canals involves many legal 
questions. The relations between the 
Army and the governments of our own 
states, territories, and cities must be man- 
aged in accordance with law. Since the 
day of the attack upon Pearl Harbor, the 
Army has controlled the government of 
Hawaii under martial law. The declara- 
tion of restricted and prohibited zones, 
the control and evacuation of actually 



or ^tentially dangerous persons, and the 
i^to(b of prisoners of war and civilian 
ternees raise many legal questions The 

torrid ? UV tr °° 1W? in nm,, - y Mendly 
foieign countries and the conduct of joint 

Ttet^^T ---luesfions 
of international law. Even combat oper- 

fn on!t n i U ' St be planne(I and carried out 
K r e mtb the Ha -" e and Geneva 
Conventions and the rules of land war- 
fare. Finally, when we invade and occupy 
enemy territory, the military government 
to be set up there must be planned and 
conducted in accordance with law. For 
an these numerous and important tasks 
lawyers are necessary. 



How does the Judge Advocate General's 
Department discharge these responsibili- 
ties? Before the declaration of a national 
emergency it consisted of 105 Regular 
officers, headed by The Judge Advocate 
General with the rank of major general, 
about 5f>0 Reserve officers, and a much 
smaller number of National Guard offi- 
cers. Then the allotment of Regular offi- 
cers was increased to 115. all the National 
Guard officers were called into service 
with the divisions to which they were 
assigned, and the Reserve officers were 
called as needed. These sources of supply 
were exhausted last spring, and since 
then many persons have been commis- 
sioned in the department who were pre- 
viously officers of other branches, enlisted 
men, or civilians. At the moment of writ- 
ing the department consists of 820 offi- 
cers, The Judge Advocate General with 
the rank of major general, four temporary 
brigadier generals, and others in rank 
from colonel to second lieutenant. All 
these are lawyers by profession. Their 
number will of course increase as the 
Army increases. There are a number of 
warrant officers assigned to the depart- 
ment, many of whom have now been com- 
missioned. The department contains no 
enlisted men, though men of other 
branches are often detailed to duty in its 
offices as clerks and otherwise. 

The Army may be compared to a cor- 
poration whose operations extend over a 



large area, such as the Southern Pacific 
Kailroad, the Ford Motor Company, or 
(he Pan American Airways, though it is 
now much larger than any of them. Kvery 
one knows that such a corporation needs 
and has a general counsel with assistants 
at its main office, and division counsel 
at various other places where it operates. 
The Army does the like. The Judge Ad- 
vocate General is the general counsel of 
(he Army, with station at Washington, 
where he has a considerable number of 
officers under him. There is also a judge 
advocate, usually with one or more as- 
sistants, at the headquarters of every di- 
vision, corps, army, service command, ter- 
ritorial department, every overseas force 
or base of importance, and in many other 
units and places where particularly 
needed. In all there are 326 commands or 
stations at which one or more judge ad- 
vocates are now serving. 

The Judge Advocate General's Depart- 
ment, like other staff departments, exists 
in order to assist the rest of the Army, 
in particular the combatant arms, the 
better to perform its duties. It fur- 
nishes a particular professional skill for 
that purpose, as does the Medical Depart- 
ment. Hut the most valuable services of 
a physician are rendered in preventing 
disease rather than in curing it: and, if 
the call for his services is too long de- 
layed, the disease may have become in- 
curable. Similarly, a lawyer's services 
are more valuable in preventing his client 
from getting into trouble than in getting 
him out; and, if the call is too long de- 
layed, he may be unable to extricate his 
client. Though Army personnel untrained 
in the law can not be expected to solve 
legal problems and should not attempt to 
do so, they should recognize such a prob- 
lem when they meet it in the course of 
their duties and should make timely re- 
quest of the judge advocate of the com- 
mand in which they are serving for his 
advice and assistance. 

The Judge Advocate General's Depart- 
ment has no reason for existence or pur- 
pose except to put the professional skill 



o| it s members at the service of the rest 
of the Army. That is their duty and is 
their pleasure. 



Wartime Tasks of the U. S. 
Public Health Service 

(Continued from page 132) 

elude ars enals, airplane and munition 
Plants. A doctor and engineer of the Ser~ 
vice have been assigned to the OhMee of 
on nance of the War Department. Their 
tasic is to follow through on compliance 
with recommendations resulting from 
these industrial hygiene surveys. 

Scientific research in the Public Health 
service has also been geared .to the de- 
mands of war. The National Institute of 
Health, research arm of the Service, is 
carrying on many confidential studies at 
the request of the War and Navy Depart- 
ments and the National Research Coum 
oil. Upwards of 100 projects are directed 
toward health hazards in the war Indus-* 
tries The Institute also certifies the 
manufacture of typhus vaccine used by 
the armed forces and manufactures yel- 
ow fever vaccine for the Army. Labora- 
tories where blood plasma is processed 
for military and civilian use are also cer- 
tified by the National Institute of 
Health. 

Prominent in the assistance given bv 
the Public Health Service to the health 
measures of other war agencies, has been 
its active role in the Emergency Medical 
Service of the Oilice of Civilian Defense, 
and its contribution to the National Nu* 
trition Program. 

All these special wartime tasks are 
part of the total rearguard action which 
the Public Health Service and hundreds 
of State and local agencies are lighting 
against disease and preventable deaths. 
Their objective is to see that: our military 
forces are given all possible cooperation 
and are supported by a healthy, vigorous 
civilian army. 




**★★★*★★**★ 

★ 
* 



★ 
★ 
★ 
★ 



r 




DE LAVAL 

POWER EQUIPMENT 

for Mechanized War 



THE De Laval Steam Turbine Company manufactures steam 
■ turbines, speed reducing gears suitable for use with steam 
turbines, centrifugal pumps and compressors, worm gears, and 
rotary displacement oil pumps. Parts are made accurately to 
gage to be interchangeable. 

To date many millions of horsepower of De Laval turbines and 
speed reducing gears have been delivered, or are under con- 
struction, for the propulsion of destroyers, cruisers and mer- 
chant vessels, as well as large numbers of auxiliary turbines, 
turbo-generators, centrifugal pumps, De Laval-IMO fuel and 
lubricating oil pumps, centrifugal compressors and worm re- 
duction gears. 




* 
* 
* 
* 
★ 
* 
* 
★ 
* 
* 




T7 xr 




BUILDERS' HARDWAR 



LOCKS - SCREWS - SHIP HARDWARE 
AUTOMATIC MACHINE 
SCREW PRODUCTS 



P. & F. CORBIN 

RUSSELL & ERWIN MFG. CO. 
CORBIN SCREW CORP. 

CORBIN CABINET LOCK CO. 

THE AMERICAN HARDWARE CORPORATION SUCCESSOR 

NEW BRITAIN, CONN. 



159 



We Understand War 

(Continued from page 134) 

unable to convert to war work, were 
forced to shut their doors for the dura- 
tion, perhaps forever. We saw automo- 
bile dealers and other distributors of 
civilian goods go out of business. We tried 
to help them with every means at our 
disposal. We called their plight to the 
attention of the authorities in Washing- 
ton. Individual cases of distress among 
non-war business concerns are being 
given individual attention through the 
National Chamber's service facilities. 
But we did not go to Congress and ask 
that they be subsidized or otherwise given 
special treatment by the government. 

We saw regulations and orders issued 
from Washington, directed in almost 
every instance to some form of control 
over the operations of business and in- 
dustry. Never once have we complained 
that the rights of business were being 
usurped. Rather have we assisted the 
government, wherever and whenever 
possible, in the orderly administration of 
its wartime rules and regulations. This 
we will continue to do. 

We know full well that we will return 
to our traditional principles of freedom 
with the return of peace. The people will 
see to that. "Governments derive their 
just powers from the consent of the gov- 
erned." So it has been in America for 1GG 
years; so it will continue to be. But in 
time of war we must modify our prin- 
ciples. Swift decisions are necessary to 
speed the war effort and save lives. To- 
tal war demands that there be soldiers of 
the home front as well as soldiers of the 
battlefront. 

The United States Chamber of Com- 
merce does not intend, however, to sit 
supinely by if we see errors in the plan- 
ning or administration of the war effort. 
The stake of our membership in the se- 
curity of the United States is as great or 
greater than that of any group or groups 
in the country. 

I want to stress the fact that the Na- 
tional Chamber consistently has cham- 
pioned the cause of freedom — freedom of 
the individual as well as enterprise. We 
will continue to champion the cause of 
freedom, the basic principles for which 
the nation fights. And under freedom we 
have a right to criticize constructively. 
We have more than a right; we have a 
duty to question any action or lack of ac- 
tion which we consider detrimental to the 
prosecution of the war effort. For the 
record, I want to add this promise : Any 
criticism coming from the National 
Chamber will be constructive ; its sole 
purpose a contribution to the winning of 
the war. 

The government's organization of the 
war effort on the production front has 
lately met with sharp public criticism. 
Chief complaints have been that there 
is confusion and wasteful overlapping in 
the functions of federal war agencies; 
that political considerations have inter- 
ferred with the enactment and adminis- 
tration of measures designed to control 
the upward sweep of inflation, and that 
the allocation of materials used both for 
war and civilian production has been 
badly mishandled. 

Some of these complaints are valid — 
many are not. I should like to recom- 
mend that we look with a degree of tol- 
erance upon the government's truly epic 
efforts to organize and speed production 
and to harness our economic forces. 

We must remember that we started our 
production effort virtually from scratch. 
And, as Donald Nelson has reported, pro- 
duction has increased 350 per cent since 
Pearl Harbor. In other words, in less 
than a year American industry has in- 
creased its average productive output of 
guns, ships, tanks and planes three and 
one-half times. Such a great acceleration 
in the rate of war production, exceeding 
all expectations, has placed a tremendous 
strain upon those charged with the im- 
mensely complex task of administering 
the war effort on the home front. 

Mr. Nelson said that the increase in 
the rate of production since Pearl Har- 
bor is good — but not good enough. Amer- 
ican industry agrees with Mr. Nelson. 
Even though the managers and tech- 
nicians and workers of industry have 
toiled night and day, have invented new 



processes to speed production, and conse- 
quently are building weapons of war bet- 
ter and faster than our enemies can pro- 
duce them, we agree that "it is not good 
enough." It will never be good enough so 
long as a Jap, a German, or an Italian 
raises a gun against a soldier, sailor or 
airman of the United Nations. 

The only thing that can defeat Amer- 
ica is disunity. The only thing which can 
slow down production or impede the or- 
ganization of our economic forces for 
maximum efficiency in the prosecution of 
the war effort is disunity. Unity will 
hasten victory, and the National Chamber 
recognizes the pressing need for a com- 
pletely united home front. 

The National Chamber has worked and 
continues to work for harmony with la- 
bor, agriculture and government. The 
men on the fighting fronts must and will 
be supported by a home front whose 
every thought is with them. 

When I came to Washington upon my 
election as president of the United States 
Chamber of Commerce last April, I im- 
mediately called upon and was cordially 
received by the leaders of our great na- 
tional labor organizations; I talked also 
with agricultural leaders and with men 
high in government, men responsible for 
the direction of the war effort. 

Since that time, we have come to know 
one another as friends rather than as 
strangers. We have found that the other 
fellow doesn't wear horns. And we have 
discovered that our areas of agreement 
are much broader than our points of dis- 
agreement. 

We are all working and fighting for the 
same objectives — for a world where free 
men can live in peace, for the well-being 
of ourselves and our fellow man, for a 
progressive and virile democracy. 

A full-fledged unity of our economic 
forces is fast being realized. I cannot 
give the details at this time, but plans 
are underway for a unity of action as 
well as words. And I can assure you that 
Hitler and Hirohito are sadly mistaken 
and very bad judges of the American 
character if they think a united economic 
front is not possible in the United States. 

And our enemies are mistaken, indeed, 
if they cannot foresee the inevitable out- 
come of the world-wide conflagration 
which they started and which we will fin- 
ish. For . . . We understand war ! 



Field Artillery 

{Continued from page 13.G) 

Since the artillery is a supporting arm, 
it must know the situation and needs of 
the supported arm. In order that an 
artillery commander may know how to 
employ his units properly to furnish the 
needed support, close intimate liaison is 
established with the supported arm. 
American artillery has made great strides 
in successful liaison. Radio communica- 
tion, important everywhere, has served a 
great purpose in artillery liaison. It has 
solved the increasing problem of contact 
with other mobile units. The new and im- 
proved radio sets have made it possible 
for supporting and supported command- 
ers to know the plans and capabilities of 
each other. Higher and lower units have 
been brought in close coordination by 
liaison, much of it dependent entirely 
upon radio. In support of armored forces, 
radio is the primary means of communi- 
cation for artillery. In other actions of 
rapid movement artillery depends upon 
radio for the early opening of fire. All 
other available means of communication 
are established as the situation permits. 

The Field Artillery has long felt the 
need of a "flying observation post." That 
need has been supplied by the assignment 
of organic, slow-llying airplanes. These 
liaison-type planes, commonly known as 
"grasshoppers," are manned by artillery- 
men. They enable artillery observers to 
locate targets concealed from ground ob- 
servation and to bring prompt fire upon 
these targets. The planes are able to op- 
erate from small, unimproved fields in the 
immediate vicinity of the battalion posi- 
tion. The low landing speed of the planes 
makes it possible for them to land on 
short, cleared strips or roads. As pilot 
and observer are members of the artillery 
battalion, they are constantly available 
when needed ; they are familiar both with 



the local situation and with the tactics 
and technique of artillery. As they work 
day after day with the firing members or 
the team on the ground, they become ac- 
customed to the play of that team and are 
able to work in complete harmony with 
the personnel handling the fire. They are 
designed as an elevated observation post, 
and normally fly only over our own 

troops. . t-- i i 

For long range artillery missions, I< ieici 
Artillery depends upon air force person- 
nel for observation over the target, as 
they can operate with high-speed, armed 
aircraft over enemy territory. Mutual 
knowledge of firing methods, character- 
istics and abilities of the weapons and 
aircraft is necessary to accomplish suc- 
cessfully these long range missions. Air 
forces and Field Artillery have the com- 
mon mission of supporting other arms, 
therefore they must be closely coordi- 
nated to achieve maximum effect. 

Field Artillery is an arm of close sup- 
port Perhaps more than any arm it is 
conscious of the need for complete co- 
ordination among the various components 
of the Armv. Its role in this great war is 
a supporting role, not an individual one. 
U the Field Artillery School where thou- 
sands of voung officers are trained and 
more experienced officers given advanced 
courses in the most improved methods or. 
artillery, the field artilleryman is con- 
stants' told that we all are part of one 
Armv,' and that we exist solely to support 
the other arms. That vital principle is 
taught in everv artillery unit in the ser- 
vice. Every artilleryman is striving to 
give his brother arms, the same efficient 
support as did the gunners of Bataan. 

The Electrical Distributor 

(Continued from page 140) 

distributor's office for price and delivery 
information on an order of 57 items at 
3 :30 one afternoon and at 4 :30 received 
the information. An order with a priority 
was immediately put through, and all the 
required items arrived in a solid truck 
load at 10:00 the next morning. 

Too many people, who do not know the 
facts, are ready and willing to speak on 
the subject of the wholesaler's place in 
the war effort. Above are the facts ; each 
and every one of them can be verified by 
talking to the men who handle electrical 
problems for the Army, Navy, and many 
other Government departments, by ask- 
ing the manufacturers who are produc- 
ing war goods, and by questioning the 
architects, electrical engineers, and con- 
tractors who plan and install electrical 
equipment. 



U. S. Cavalry Today 

(Continued from page 142) 

man and horse units can leave the road 
and its vicinity with much greater speed 
than the dismounted man or units ; horse 
units can inarch on roads or move cross- 
country dispersed so as to present unre- 
munerative targets to air. 

These jobs prescribed for U. S. Cav- 
alary which have dictated its present or- 
ganization, equipment, and training, de- 
mand versatility. Horse and mechanized 
Cavalry must be able to go where others 
cannot; must have the means to move 
with the speed of the fastest enemy 
ground vehicle. It must be and is able to 
communicate with our own supporting or 
cooperating air units, with other units 
and headquarters, nearby or at great dis- 
tances. Our Cavalry today, both types, is 
expected to, and is equipped and trained 
to be able to go deep into enemy territory 
by stealth or by fighting its way if re- 
quired, either on foot, on horses, or in 
vehicles. It is able to establish ob- 
stacles ; to overcome or destroy enemy ob- 
stacles ; it is able to build or blow up a 
bridge; it is able to cross streams when 
there is no bridge nor means to construct 
it — to take animals, vehicles, and wea- 
pons across. Your U. S. Cavalry of today 
is equipped and trained to do these jobs 
as their recent battle rehearsals in the 
field have so strikingly demonstrated. 

And whether the Cavalryman moves on 
a horse or in a vehicle, he must be able to 
fight as his team mate, the Infantry sol- 
dier ; he must be able to fight on the plains 



or the mountains, in woods or in villages. 
So in addition to a horse or a vehicle, 
voiir Cavalryman has most of the wea- 
pons and equipment that the Infantry has, 
and several special items m addition. 

Vll of this demands versatile indi- 
viduals—whether buck privates, noncom- 
missioned or commissioned officers; re- 
quires individuals and units capable of 
performing at speed any of the varied 
iobs expected of Cavalry. And be assured 
that your U. S. Cavalry is equipped and 
trained as never before to perform its 
designated battle missions as a member 
of 'the combined arms team. Recent ma- 
neuvers in this country have demon- 
strated to our higher commanders the tre- 
mendous versatility and value of our 
Cavalrv units today. 

And, if there remain any "Doubting 
Thomases," let them look at the imper- 
ishable pages of glorious history written 
in a few short weeks in northern and cen- 
tral Luzon and Bataan by the 26th Cav- 
alry ! There you have a preview of the 
performance our higher commanders and 
the Nation may expect of their Cavalry 
today and an heroic example which every 
IJ. S. Cavalryman can and will emulate on 
the future battlefields of this war. 

The motto on the coat of arms of the 
Cavalry School translated proclaims— 
"We Conquer by Mobility !" Today, with 
its tactics, equipment, and weapons in- 
corporating the latest lessons of the pres- 
ent conflict, a new motto of U. S. Cavalry 
may confidently be inscribed on its coat 
of arms — "By Versatility and Mobility we 
Conquer !" 



Manufacturing Miracles 

(Continued from page 144) 

use them. In a war of machines it is of 
course essential to maintain all mechan- 
ical equipment at peak performance. 

Industry's main task, from here on to 
final victory, is principally a question of 
expanding still further the production of 
the war materials and supplies of all 
kinds, of feeding and maintaining the 
vast number of machine tools that are 
doing the job, and of keeping up the 
health and stamina of the men and wo- 
men who run them. This includes turning 
out the ships that will solve the problem 
of transportation of men and munitions 
and supplies. The weapons that roll off 
America's assembly lines must keep right 
on rolling into the camps of the enemy. 
American industry is determined to see 
that what the American Army and Navy 
need is produced so soon, so well, and in 
such great quantities that the enemies of 
freedom will be overcome. 

This nation is fighting essentially for 
freedom. The management of industry 
knows what industry owes, what the na- 
tion owes, to the freedom maintained 
now for more than a century and a half. 
And it has realized that to preserve that 
freedom, to meet the demands of the pres- 
ent emergency, it must make sacrifices — 
even give up temporarily much of free- 
dom itself — along with every person and 
group among us. 

Industry has expressed willingness to 
abide by this necessity. It has practiced 
what it has preached. It has pledged it- 
self not to profiteer. It has kept that 
pledge. An NAM study of profits of some 
2,S00 companies proves this fact conclu- 
sively. And out of industry comes a large 
part of the government revenue that pro- 
vides the sinews of war. Industrial man- 
agement has recommended the heaviest 
taxes that industry can stand. 

Indeed the industries of America have 
asked only to retain after taxes about 2.7 
per cent of their total receipts, in order 
to maintain present operations and to 
continue the expansion necessary to win 
the war, to pay minimum dividends to 
investors and to set up protective re- 
serves. They would keep only the means 
for making the tremendous adjustment to 
peace. They wish to do as great a job in 
post-war production and employment as 
they are doing in this war period. 

For the American people want to have 
after the war what they are fighting for 
now — freedom to use their initiative and 
energy and productivity in their various 
enterprises to keep this a land of oppor- 
tunity and to reach new levels of national 
well-being. 



100 



The March of Freedom for 
the Common Man 

{Continued from page IS) 

superior and that all other races or 
classes are supposed to be slaves. The be- 
lief iu one Satan-inspired Fuehrer, with 
his Quislings, his Lavals, and his Musso- 
linis — his "gauleiters" in every nation in 
the world — is the Last and ultimate dark- 
ness. Is there any hell hotter than that 
of being a Quisling, unless it is that of 
being" a Laval or a Mussolini? 

In a twisted sense, there is something 
almost great in the figure of the Supreme 
Devil operating through a human form, 
in a Hitler who has the daring to spit 
straight into the eye of God and man. 
But the Nazi system has a heroic position 
for only one leader. By definition only 
one person is allowed to retain full sov- 
ereignty over his own soul. All the rest 
are stooges — they are stooges who have 
been mentally and politically degraded, 
and wbo feel that they can get square 
with the world only by mentally and po- 
litically degrading other people. These 
stooges are really psychopathic cases. 
Satan has turned loose upon us the in- 
sane. 

The march of freedom of the past 150 
years has been a long-drawn-out people's 
revolution. In this Great Revolution of 
the people, there were the American 
Revolution of 177;!. the French Revolu- 
tion of 1792, the Latin-American revolu- 
tions of the Bolivarian era, the German 
revolution of 1S4S, and the Russian Revo- 
lution of 1017. Each spoke for the com- 
mon man in terms of blood on the battle- 
field. Some went to excess. But the sig- 
nificant thing is that the people groped 
their way to the light. More of them 
learned to think and work together. 

The people's revolution aims at peace 
and not at violence, but if the rights of 
the common man are attacked, it un- 
leashes the ferocity of a she-bear who has 
lost a cub. When the Nazi psychologists 
tell their Master Hitler that we in the 
United States may be able to produce hun- 
dreds of thousands of planes, but that we 



have no will to fight, they are only fool- 
ing themselves and him. The truth is that 
when the rights of the American people 
are transgressed, as those rights have 
been transgressed, the American people 
will fight with a relentless furv which will 
drive the ancient Teutonic gods back 
cowering into their caves. The Gotter- 
ttammerung has come for Odin and his 
crew. 



The United States Coast 
Guard in the War 

(Continued from page 42) 

anti-submarine patrol. Service personnel 
are manning transports and auxiliaries 
tor the Navy and some of them have been 
killed fighting alongside of Marines. The 
entire Coast Guard is operating on a war 
basis and the Service is definitely in the 
war. 



Petroleum and the War Effort 

{Continued from page 51) 

however, that reserves of petroleum fuels 
and lubricants have become so reduced 
in Germany as to greatly hamper its war 
effort and that the massive war machine 
of the German army is beginning to 
squeak and break down, seems to be 
more apparent with each day's reports 
from the lighting fronts. No longer do we 
hear of submarines in the Gulf of Mex- 
ico and western Atlantic, nor of mass air 
raids on the British Isles and the lack of 
a large German-Italian air force in 
Africa all seem to point to a definite 
shortage in petroleum lubricants and fuel 
supplies rather than to a lack of planes 
or submarines. 

It is, therefore, my opinion that now 
the German high command has been 
forced to decide whether diesel oil shall 
be used in submarines or tanks and 
whether gasoline supplies should be used 
in planes or in trucks and cars. Time 
must, inevitably, make these decisions 
more and more important and the side 
w 7 hich controls most of the earth's black 
blood — petroleum — must win in the end. 



i© 



• • . from an industrial fighter 

He's in the Army ... in the Navy . 
Force . . . and with the Marines. 

You'll find him roaring into battle in speedy 
new tanks. Or helping direct field maneuvers from 
Signal Corps' communication trailers. Or racing 
through the water in trim, swift fighting craft. 

You'll find him in camps and shipyards, trucks 
and factory production lines, and munitions plants 
... in fact, wherever America's great fighting line 
extends. For "he" is the familiar Masonite* Man 
—symbol of Presdwood* products, "The Wonder 
Woods of a Thousand Uses." 

*TRADE-MARK REG. U. S. PAT. OFF. MASON ITE ' ' IDENTIFIES ALL PRODUCTS 
MARKETED BY MASONITE CORPORATION. COPYRIGHT 194a, MASONITE CORP. 



MASONITE 

PRESDWOOD PRODUCTS 







Never in the field of human conflict was there 
so much owed by so many to so few," said 



MASONITE CORPORATION. Ill West Washington Street. Chicago, Illinois 



Winston Churchill. For the fate of England— if 
not the whole world — was determined by the men 
of the Royal Air Force between August 8 and October 31, 1940, 
when they turned back the Luftwaffe in the Battle of Britain. 

As the records of that epochal struggle are revealed, we learn 
more and more of the gallant sacrifices made, the courageous deeds 
performed, during those eighty-five days of furious fighting. We 
learn, too, of the little details that sometimes play a part in deciding 
the fate of nations. 

One of those "little" things is pictured above. 

It is a molecule of an ingredient in the gasoline that helped the 
RAF win the Battle of Britain. It is called iso-octane. The atoms 
of hydrogen and carbon which form iso-octane hang closely together 
like a bunch of grapes, as shown in the chemist's model above. 

Maybe that peculiar bunching of the atoms is the reason why iso- 
octane has such a high antiknock quality that years ago it was con- 
sidered "perfect' ' and was adopted as the scale for measuring the 
antiknock quality of gasoline. Possibly iso-octane's remarkably 
high antiknock quality is due to some other reason. 

Whatever the reason, this clear-cut superiority over ordinary 
gasoline was enough to start the research laboratories of the Ameri- 
can petroleum industry working, developing manufacturing pro- 
cesses that changed iso-octane from a forty-dollar-a-gallon curi- 
osity to a twenty-cent-a-gallon ingredient of aviation fuel for the 
planes of the United Nations. 

The Battle of Britain might have been won without iso-octane. 
We cannot say. All we know is that the British had it for their fight- 
ing fuel in quantity— the Germans did not. For that we are indebted 
to the peacetime research and developments of American oil refiners. 

This development of iso-octane has been only one of countless 
chemical achievements of petroleum technology in the long search 
for better fuels. Ethyl fluid is another of those achievements. It, 
too, is a prime ingredient in the fighting fuels that power the planes 
and mechanized armies of the United Nations. 



ETHYL CORPORATION 

Chrysler Building, New York City 

Manufacturer?, of Ethyl fluid, used by oil refiners to improve 
Die antiknock quality of aviation and motor gasoline. 




161 



Special Services to the 
American Soldier 

{Continued from page 106) 
youthful energy. 

The Largest motion-picture chain in the 
nation, for the entertainment of men in 

camps and overseas. 

A facilities program which has been 
instrumental in the design of and equip- 
ping of more than 10,000 recreational 
buildings of various types. 

Educational service and materials, to 
supplement Army training and to broaden 
the experience and capacities of the sol- 
dier by making available to him a wide 
range of correspondence instruction, to 
lit him for advancement. 

A comprehensive library service for 
recreational and educational reading. 

A program of professional and amateur 
theatrical entertainment, in cooperation 
with USO-Camp Shows, Inc. 

Soldier-participation music and art 
programs. 

A research service to aid Special Ser- 
vice in directing its programs, and to aid 
the general and field staffs in measuring 
problems concerning the broad welfare of 
men. 

An informational and orientation ser- 
vice to inform the citizen soldier in the 
background and conduct of the war; util- 
izing radio, motion pictures, and the writ- 
ten and illustrated word. 

Publication of the all-Army Newspaper 
Yank; advice to and supervision of more 
than f»00 soldier newspapers in camps and 
units: publication of a monthly maga- 
zine to inform officers in the held con- 
cerning Special Service programs and 
activities. 

A welfare service to assist and advise 
enlisted men and their families in eco- 
nomic; matters. 

The training and instruction of ade- 
quate personnel to carry out these pro- 
grams inn sound way. 

Maintenance of close liaison with other 
branches and divisions of the Army and; 
with civilian and governmental agencies 
•concerned with the welfare of the citizen 
soldier, as the American Red Cross, 
United Service Organizations, Inc., and 
the Federal Security Agency. 

This brief summary would not be com- 
plete without acknowledgement of the 
valuable assistance and advice of the 
Joint. Army and Navy Committee on 
Welfare and Recreation, a body set up bv 
the Secretaries of War and Navy at the 
request of the President, to facilitate and 
coordinate Army, Navy, governmental, 
and civilian programs relating to the well 
being and efficiency of the enlisted man. 



The General Board of the 
Navy 

(Continued from /xn/e :\(\) 
need resulted in the creation of the Gon- 
eral Board. 

George Dewey, Admiral of the Navy, 
was appointed president of the original 
Board and retained that position until 
his death in 1017. There has never been 
a president of the Board since, the senior 
member being designated Chairman. 

The purpose of the General Board, as 
stated in the creating order, was 

"to insure efficient preparation of the 

fleet in case of war and for the naval 

defense of the coast." 
With the establishment of the Office of 
Naval Operations in 1915, however, plan- 
ning and operational functions were 
placed under that office and the General 
Board became a purely advisory body to 
the Secretary of the Navy. It retains that 
status, having neither executive nor ad- 
ministrative powers. 

The general function of the Board is 
to advise the Secretary on any matter 
that he may direct. In view of the di- 
versified character of the Navy and its 
many and varied interests, matters re- 
ferred to the Board naturally cover a 
wide range o{ subjects. Additionally and 
specifically, it is charged with the con- 
sideration of naval policy, that is, the 
system of principles, and the general 
terms of their application, governing the 
development, organization, maintenance, 
training and operation of the Navy: the 
naval building program to provide the 



number and types of ships and aircraft 
proper to constitute the fleet; the mili- 
tary characteristics that should be em- 
bodied in the designs of new ships and 
aircraft; ; and the shore establishment, the 
number of naval districts, navy yards, 
naval stations, operating bases and other 
shore activities necessary for the support 
of the fleet as well as the general policy 
to be adopted towards these. Recommen- 
dations of the Board on all of these sub- 
jects are subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Navy. 

It is thus seen that, contrary to state- 
ments so frequently seen in the press, 
the General Board is not to the Navy 
what the General Staff is to the Army. 
The two bodies are quite different, The 
General Board neither plans nor directs 
operations; it; exerts no direct control 
over either material or personnel of the 
Navy. Neither is it directly responsible 
for the acceptance or rejection of inven- 
tions or ideas and considers such only 
when presented for consideration by the 
Secretary of the Navy. 

The General Board is composed of such 
Officers not below the rank of Captain 
as the Secretary may designate. Navy 
Regulations require that there shall be 
not less than live members who are line 
officers of the Navy, a majority of whom 
shall be of Hag rank. A general officer of 
the Marine Corps may be designated as 
a member and at times officers of the 
Marine Corps have been members. 

The specified composition of the Board 
thus insures a body composed of experi- 
enced officers of mature judgment, un- 
encumbered by administrative duties, 
available at all times to consider such 
questions as the Secretary of the Navy 
may direct. In the consideration of any 
question the Board avails itself of all 
sources of information, civil and naval, 
foreign and domestic. Technical experts 
are freely consulted as are others having 
Special knowledge on any subject before 
the Board. 1 Tarings are conducted on vari- 
ous subjects at which opinions on the 
numerous aspects of questions are pre- 
sented by those considered best qualified. 
I lence. recommendations made to the Sec- 
retary of the Navy by the General Board 
are based on the best available informa- 
tion and represent considered opinion of 
all phases of the question involved, and 
the best interests of the Navy and the 
country. 



Labor, Management and 
the Navy 

(Continued from page 103) 

radio detection equipment : makers of lip- 
stick cases were working on bomb fuzes; 
lingerie houses were turning out camou- 
fiage netting; producers of beer cans 
were fashioning hand grenades, and add- 
ing machine builders were concentrating 
on automatic pistols. 

Our great textile mills took on the job 
of supplying uniforms and blankets; 
packing houses undertook to store in cans 
the huge quantities of preserved victuals 
necessary to feed our fighting men. 

Prom river bottoms and marshlands 
sprang new shipyards. We began to hear 
of such incredible feats as the launching 
of 10,000-ton cargo ships in inland cities; 
of entire Liberty Ship hulls being invert- 
ed to be worked on by a new welding 
process : of a full-sized prefabricated 
ship sliding down the ways only 4-2/3 
days after her keel was laid. 

In pushing its wholesale change-over, 
management even threw overboard its 
cardinal principle of peacetime policy- 
competition. Thus we find executives, 
production experts and engineers meet- 
ing around the conference table with men 
from other companies, tackling and solv- 
ing mutual problems. Facilities and ma- 
chine tools are pooled or loaned : coveted 
patents are exchanged freely. Technical 
secrets, long monopolized, are made avail- 
able to erstwhile competitors and produc- 
tion short-cuts are worked out jointly to 
give momentum to the common effort. 

Many of the larger manufacturers have 
adopted the sub-contracting system, 
whereby small business may assume its 
share of the production load — a practice 
heartily endorsed by the Navy. A plant 
with a small crew of workers can not 



build a bomber, but it can make one of the 
30,000 different parts of a bomber. And 01 
plants employing less than 100 workers, 
there are at least 170,000 in the nation. 

Management has also set its engineers 
to collaborate with Navy specialists to de- 
vise revolutionary ways of fabricating 
war goods, improving performance of cer- 
tain products and averting critical short- 
ages of materials. While innumerable in- 
stances might be cited of the saving of 
time and cost resulting from this constant 
search for new and better methods, one 
will perhaps suffice : The discovery that 
the barrel of a famous anti-aircraft gun 
of foreign design could be broached in- 
stead of processed by the traditional 
rifling method cut the manufacturing 
time for this part from 3% hours to 15 
minutes. 

While management, in these and other 
ways, enlisted its resources in the Navy's 
gigantic program, labor rose to the occa- 
sion no less quickly and patriotically and 
assumed new responsibilities in our vic- 
tory drive. 

Even before Pearl Harbor, labor had 
demonstrated its fighting spirit when it 
pitched in and repaired in 5 days the 
damage done by fire to a $2,250,000 de- 
fense plant at Cleveland, Ohio. It rushed 
const ruction of the immense naval base 
at Corpus Christi, Texas, to completion 
far ahead of schedule and smashed build- 
ing records in putting up defense housing. 

Upon our entrance into the war, labor 
voluntarily discarded its time-honored 
right to strike, and the score since then 
is 2,000 strikes prevented for each one 
that has occurred. Labor is trying man- 
fully to eliminate even this small fraction 
of work stoppages. 

Unions affiliated with the Congress of 
Industrial Organizations and the Amer- 
ican Federation of Labor have of their 
own initiative waived double - time rates 
for holiday and Sunday work in all con- 
tinuously operating war industries. The 
building trades unions have done this in 
the stabilization pact with the govern- 
ment and war contractors. The metal 
trades unions have done the same thing 
in the shipyards. 

Despite the overtime provisions of the 
40-hour week law, seven out of ten work- 
ers are now putting in 48 to GO hours per 
week. In the machine tool industry, labor 
is working from 50 to 70 hours a week ; in 
most aircraft factories, 44 to 54 hours 
weekly: and nearly 70% of the nation's 
shipyard workers are on their jobs from 
40 to 52 hours a week. 

In the production of ships, steel, ma- 
chine tools and other materials, labor is 
setting new records regularly, only to 
smash these records in short order. In 
everything from driving rivets and weld- 
ing seams to laying wartime oil-pipe lines 
and building Naval barracks, labor has 
exceeded any previous standards of ac- 
complishment. 

The battleship Alabama was completed 
nine months ahead of schedule. The 
mighty Iowa hit the water seven months 
in advance of the contract date. The 
greatest mass launching in history was 
staged by the shipbuilders of America last 
Labor Day. when no less than 174 naval 
and merchant vessels were launched in GO 
different yards throughout the United 
States. The keels for 49 ships were laid 
the same day in these same yards. The. 
achievement, gained additional lustre 
from the fact that many workers donated 
their Labor Day wages as contributions 
toward the purchase of bombers, new 
ships, and more arms for our fighting 
forces, and toward Navy Relief. 

In other ways labor has shown itself 
equally generous with its money as with 
its skill and sinews, notably when AFL 
Building Trades members recently 
presented to the Navy a new $62,000 
archives building for storing micro-films 
— one of ten buildings contributed by the 
group to the war effort with wages earned 
on extra days and holidays. 

In recognition of the splendid service 
of both labor and management, the Navy 
instituted the Navy "E" award for 
presentation to plants that demonstrated 
their excellence in producing ships, wea- 
pons and equipment for the Navy. A 
total of 221 plants were so honored, with 
the privilege of flying the Navy "E" 
burgee at their mastheads. The present 



Army-Navy Production Award was in- 
augurated in order that all our fighting 
forces could join in paying tribute to 
exceptional performance on the produc- 
tion line. Thus far. the Army-Navy Pro- 
duction Award has been made to 200 
plants which are producing for the Navy. 
Over each of these plants flies the red- 
and-blue pennant with its wreath of oak 
and laurel leaves ; and each individual 
employee wears the distinctive silver "E" 
pin as a badge of meritorious service to 
his country. 

An honor not lightly bestowed, the "E" 
floating above a plant means that the 
workers in that building have earned 
their award with the same caliber of ef- 
ficiency, skill and loyalty as the sailors of 
the warships that in times past won the 
right to display the identical symbol on 
their turrets or conning towers. 

It means : "Well done to all hands." 



Army Exchange System 

{Continued from paye 107) 

the strictest attention is paid to the qual- 
ity of the student officers. They are uni- 
versally men of superior mental attain- 
ments and proven capability in mercantile 
pursuits. They are carefully selected and 
their course of study stresses the essential 
ethical qualities of modern business con- 
ducted on its highest plane, as well as the 
essentials of exchange operation from the 
military point of view. Similarly, the 
fundamental principles of their high 
fiduciary position as officers of the United 
States forces and as exchange officers are 
highlighted, and the student officers com- 
plete their course with amazing skill and 
enthusiasm. 

The Army Exchange Service Purchas- 
ing Division is located in New York City. 
Here a vast quantity of exchange mer- 
chandise is purchased and received for 
overseas installations and sent on its 
way; and here also advantageous price 
agreements are entered into and copies of 
such agreements are distributed to all ex- 
changes to permit them individually 
within the United States to purchase 
their needs of merchandise on prices and 
terms that result in great advantage to 
the military personnel. At New York also 
is installed the fiscal officer of overseas 
installations. He functions by appoint- 
ment as agent and attorney in fact for 
such exchanges in all matters relating to 
finance and payment for acquired mer- 
chandise. 

Army Exchange Service is organized 
with Executive and Control Divisions, 
Finance, Personnel and Service each has 
its own division head. Each of these Divi- 
sions functions as its name indicates. The 
Chief of Army Exchange Service and his 
Division heads meet and confer on mat- 
ters of policy, practice and administration 
at frequent intervals. There is also pres- 
ent on such occasions the General Counsel 
of Army Exchange Service whose func- 
tion as a staff officer is to advise the Chief 
and the Division heads on matters of law, 
procedure and policy. 

Problems of personnel, property and 
finance that arise daily are in constant 
process of solution. As applied to Army 
Exchange Service, these problems differ 
from those of other branches of the Ser- 
vice for the reason that, except for pay- 
ment of assigned commissioned person- 
nel, neither Army Exchange Service nor 
the individual exchanges operate with 
appropriated funds. The entire System is 
self-supporting and self-contained. Thus 
the questions considered are more of a 
business, financial or managerial type, 
than they are of a strictly military na- 
ture. The mission to be accomplished is 
regarded as one of practical mercantile 
performance, which will be judged by the 
results obtained, rather than by the 
strictly military standard of the bene- 
ficiaries or the military processes essen- 
tial for their proper administration. 

This combination of mercantile and 
military mission gives rise to many novel 
situations, but the personnel has been 
found equal to the task, and the results 
have been remarkably swift and compre- 
hensive with a view, not only to satisfac- 
tory performance, but to the establish- 
ment of policies and practices that will 
be found sound and useful in the days 
to come. 



162 



Panama's Importance in 
World War 

{Continued from page 24) 

dreams of the world during the previous 
400 years. 

Last World War served to emphasize 
the significance of the Panama Canal to 
national as well as continental defense. 
It facilitated greatly the transportation' 
of certain essential raw materials to the 
production center, and, it doubled the ef- 
ficiency of the Naval Forces, increasing 
the mobility of the Allied Fleets from one 
ocean to the other. 

The Panama Canal has reduced the 
distance from New York to Valparaiso, 
Chile, in 3700 miles; from New York to 
Honolulu, in G600 miles, and from New 
York to San Francisco. California, in 
71X10 miles. These facts afford important 
savings in time and costs of shipping op- 
erations, which mean a considerable eco- 
nomic gain. Through these means it has 
promoted generally the trade of goods be- 
tween nations, while particularly it. has 
benefited the peoples of the Western 
Hemisphere in their trade with one an- 
other and with various parts of the 
world. 

No other single enterprise has done 
more than the Panama Canal to facilitate 
the readiness of movement of the Armed 
Forces from ocean to ocean as circum- 
stances require, increasing, thus, the se- 
curity of the United States, as well as 
that of the nations which comprise the 
American Continent ; to augment the effi- 
ciency of the operations of the merchant 
fleets and to increase the industrial po- 
tentiality of the United States. No other 
single enterprise has done more for the 
prosperity and welfare of the Republic of 
Panama. Being so vital to the interests 
of both nations, it must be protected and 
kept away from the hands of the enemies 
of the things which we love most : free- 
dom and integrity. 

The treaty of 1903 entered into between 
Panama and the United States was wise- 



ly revised by another agreement pro- 
claimed on July 27, 1039, more in accord- 
ance with the spirit of true friendship 
and mutual understanding between these 
two countries and based upon the prin- 
ciples of Good Neighborliness advocated 
by President Franklin Delano Roose- 
velt. 

The policy manifested in this document 
has served a great deal in making the 
defense of the Panama Canal a cause of 
concern and close cooperation between 
Panama and the other American Repub- 
lics with the United States. 

Today Panama stands arm to arm. 
shoulder to shoulder with the United 
States in the defense of the Isthmian 
Canal. 



The Department of Justice 
and the War Effort 

(Continued from page 27) 
fort to plant the seeds of disloyalty in our 
soldiers and sailors, whether in "vermin 
sheets*' which used considerable ink on 
avowals of patriotism, or the out-and-out 
pro-Nazi screamers which printed little 
notes up in the corner such as : "Not in- 
tended for circulation in U. S. Army 
camps." 

In solving the unique war problem that 
arose on the West Coast with our entry 
as a belligerent, the Department of Jus- 
tice and the Army were again brought 
into common ground. From certain parts 
of the Coast all alien enemies had to 
move. But a considerable number who 
were not aliens — xVmerican-born persons 
of Japanese parentage — also lived there. 
Among them was a number still loyal to 
Japan. That much we knew. Who they 
were, or how to distinguish them, nobody 
knew — probably not even the other indi- 
viduals in their own group. And because 
the United States cannot risk espionage 
or sabotage, no matter what the source, a 
series of enforced evacuations was de- 
cided on as the only feasible scheme. 

That order, being within the province 
of the military rather than the civil au- 



thorities, was for the War Department to 
execute. The Alien Enemy Control Unit 
of the Department of Justice assisted the 
Army in setting up the necessary ma- 
chinery for such a program. Evacuation 
has been accomplished with a minimum 
of hardship to those involved. The Army 
has done a fine job. 

These are a few of the incidents of war 
that can be cited to show how closely tied 
in is the work of the Department of Jus- 
tice with that of the men directing our 
armed forces. Others could he mentioned. 
The work of the Lands Division in speed- 
ing up acquisition of tremendous tracts 
Mi rough the country — room for the Army 
to grow in — is a story in itself. So is the 
assignment given the recently formed 
War Frauds Unit, which is working with 
Army and Navy procurement men to 
crack down on irregularities and spot- 
light profiteers. 

In all these endeavors the teamwork 
of the various offices in my Department 
with the branches of the armed service 
has been most effective. This teamwork 
will continue, will be improved in every 
way possible. In total war, strength in 
any one spot may be communicated all 
down the line: weakness anywhere is 
hard to isolate. In our contact with the 
enemy, whether by the armed forces in 
battle or by the Department of Justice in 
civilian life, we are hitting hard, and be- 
hind the blows that are struck is the 
weight of coordinated effort. Our enemies 
will feel that weight increasingly. In time 
it will crush them. 



Agriculture and the War 

(Continued from page 30) 

It now appears that 1943 will be an all- 
nut, year for every phase of our war pro- 
gram. All our efforts must be thrown be- 
hind our military forces in the field so 
Chat the United Nations can successfully 
pert orni the vital assignments before 
them. Y\ e are on the offensive, and offen- 
sive war means that we must meet vastly 
greater needs, for food as for the other 
materials of war. American farmers 
know this. That's why the Nation can de- 
pend on them to produce up to the limit 
of t heir resources. 



Resources for Victory 

(Continued from page 20) 

limit. Questions immediately arose of 
food supplies and labor supplies which 
were met to a large measure by Depart- 
mental and Congressional action, while 
the administration was so carried for- 
ward that the civil officials assisted in 
every way possible the military and naval 
officers responsible for the protection of 
these possessions. 



All-Out Mobilization for 
All-Out War 

{Continued from, page 70) 

We know that within the next six 
months the problem of supplying men to 
the armed forces and workers to indus- 
try will grow much more difficult. We 
are moving rapidly into a situation where 
the Government, must intervene increas- 
ingly in the labor market. 

The War Manpower Commission would 
be derelict in its duty if it did not study 
carefully the need for National Service 
Legislation, and if it did not have plans 
prepared well in advance of actual need. 

The term National Service often raises 
in people's minds the spectre of a dicta- 
torial government, moving people about 
with no regard to their convenience, and 
forcing them into jobs which may be con- 
trary to their training and interests. I 
should like to point out that this notion is 
entirely false and contrary to all experi- 
ence in Great Britain and other demo- 
cratic countries. The object of a uni- 
versal service system is to answer the 
Question which every patriotic person is 
now asking himself — where do I best fit 
into the total national effort? 



to be 

REMEMBERED 

MeARL HARBOR, of course, 
■ will always be remembered. 
Communications officers will re- 
member, too, the important part 
that Strowger Automatic Tele- 
phone Systems are playing in the 
inevitable march to victory. The 
steadily increasing use of this 
equipment in all branches of the 
fighting services testifies to their 
efficiency in furnishing rapid, de- 
pendable communication under 
any and all circumstances. 



• This advertisement has been reviewed and re- 
lensod for publication by the War Department. 



Private Jones . . 
know 
WHY you re the best 
soldier in the world? 




\4 

1\ 



15 

11. 



\6 



\0 
\1 



78 



W 



11 



\1 
\9 



20 
J.1 



AUTOMATIC SELECT RIC 




TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION AND SIGNALING PRODUCTS 





RESEA 



You've got everything it takes, in courage and determi- 
nation. And you have something else that's all-important: 
the finest of fighting equipment. 

We know because we're in the army too. In fact, this 
is our second hitch in twenty-five years. Our job is making 
precision electrical devices, like the portable field tele- 
phone equipment which enables you to get the jump on 
the enemy in communications. Army engineers have seen 
to it that you have unsurpassed equipment, and this tech- 
nical superiority makes you "tops" among fighting men. 

Connecticut is one of many industrial plants which are 
doing what you are doing, Private Jones . . . putting every- 
thing else aside until this war is settled . . . settled our way. 
Like you, we're thankful for the chance, and we know we 
can count on our peacetime customers to bear with us. 

CONNECTICUT TELEPHONE & 
ELECTRIC CORPORATION 

MERIDEN * ★ CONNECTICUT 
RCH • ENGINEERING • PRECISION MANUFACTURING 



163 



-bo Ixt«l 2UUS ao Su * AOra »W jo axqBd 

X» ^op Sui^ooqs jo aoalios 
tuU Uo ^°^ iea «*I 04 uoiqppu at 'uoijbz 

Ul P u «*8 souio.Mq ^up A 'q jo uiSiu £q 
(8SI 000(1 wto^/ p9nuniwo) 

iJBJoareiiuy uBJuauiy 

"UOj )i;.js jo diqs .11044 
joj Appo.iip sasBqaand oquui puu ssauisnq 
op 04 qsiAv A'oqj qoupvv qjiM Suuu 0114 ioBl 
-uoo s.iooujo aoiAjeg s,diqs pub jaDgjo Sm 

-pUUUUUOJ tULipiAipUL ^UOUlJ.lUdOQ 001 A 

^leg s«diqg 01(4 qiiM uoipouuoo ai A'ouaiis 
SuiSBqojnd pazixBJiuao ou si ajaqj, 

si ajojuoaui stqa aeqM 4u0s0.nl o.iu puoq 
SutAetxoj oi[4 puu poAoip.i uuiu oi[4 1140U 
•posop 411110001: S|q puu 110^1:4 sr A.104110AU1 
uu poAoiio.i si oq aeqM aouaSixxp puu 
0.1 uo oup osp.ioxo 04 4.1U1I siq uo ojiqiuj 
04 oup gsoi a'ub joj o[i[U4uuoooc ppq'si 
puu 05Muqo 111 st oq qoiqA\ jo A41A140U oq] 

(COL ^'©tf uiojI pjnmjuojj) 

S9UlAU0y 9DTAJ9g s^cliqg 

■5uiaoiu 41 doo^i uuqs 
puu isnra oav *4soj .10 ooai.ious'jo sseipjBj* 
-0.1 4uq : uiqaiAi uio.ij apujjadaui ao 4SO.104 
-ui jo y\OB\ Aq .10 4uoq4iAi iuojj uoiusoddo 
a'uiouo Aq UAvop poavo[s oq Auui 41* \vM04 
-oia 040UI1U00 jo 4.ioqs poddo4s oq 401111U0 
U0140LU ui 40s OAUq oav qoiqAv JOAVod oq4 
41UI4 poouiAiioo uiu J ssopipniOAOX *4.ioqs 
Si ouiij puu 41105.111 puu Au u 111 0.1 u s puu 111 
-op oqjL *eqo|3 0.114110 oq4 .ioao puojds 
o.iu 4ju.10.11u .mo puu sdiqs .mo 'soiiu.iv 
jliq 'WJ jiosji o:quiu 04 5uiuui5oq 
avou A'pio si uoi.ioury jo 1145110.14s oq'jL, 

•o.iujjuav jo s 11014 
-doouoo podA'4oo.i04S uiojj uiopoojj Jioqj) 
jo puu 'ssouinjoo.inosoj puu o5u.inoo Jioq4 
jo 'saopuoi siq jo A'4i[iqu oi[4 jo poouiA 
-uoo A'liuubo uiu 1 Apuo.i[U OAuq iuoq4 jo 
auuui os *poopui su 'uuq jo puoad oq 04 uos 
-uo.i a.ioao A'ajunoo siq4 OAii; 1[iav oq 'iuoq4 
osu 04 4ipuu4 ueeq suq puu suoduoAv oq4 
suq oq uoqAv 4uq4 puu 'oui.iuiu .10 40ipuf 
-ou[q UBOiaamv 0114 uui[4 JOjqSy .10440(1 
OU SI o.iOi[4 4Ui[4 UOIJDIAUOO Aiu si 41 *4uq 
-moo IUU40U ui a'iuo puq oq 04 si 4uq4 i5'ui 
-uosuos oqj uoaiS xouuos.iod .1110 jo A41.10L' 
-uui oi[4 puu 'poqsiiqujso sosuq 'pouiu.14 
•oq 4SUIU uoiu Aiou 'pouuuiu oq )snui 
sdiqs puu somqd avox 'uiu.i^'o.id SuiuiBjq 
suopuouio.14 u ui posus'uo 'uoisuudxo 

4SUA juo 1141 AV A*I4UO.I.IUOUOO 'AV0U O.IU OAV 

•soi4i[[q!ssod 

uuuuixuui S41 04 poA'oiduio 0([ 4SIUU puu 
5110.14s oq 4siuu 41 4uq4 Suiouiauod spoou 
oqAi pi.ioav oq4 u 1 oidood 4SUI oq4 jo ouo uiu 
I puu *uoi4UiAU [uauu .1110 jo A4nunb Ol[4 
joj ouo ou 04 ozpoiodu oav aopBlAB jo 
ODUU4.iodun 4UO.I5 1 oq4 jo o.iua\u auuj '011114 
SUOI u .ioj uooq suq puu 4 avou si a'aux 
oq4 'A*.iOAo.)sip avou B opuui puq .1041.IAV 
oq4 q5uoq4 su possoadxo a'i4uouIjojj si 
qoiqAv 'uomido sun jo qoiuu 04 A'au.quoo 
'ssoupopuiui-.iiu jo ^Defqns aq? uo 'ouqud 
oq4 jo sSnipaj oq4 Snpoagai A'lpe^qnopun 
4 noiUidO iuiao)ipo qonui uooq suq o.ioqx 

•uoo5.ins 

4iodxo ut; 4011 si oq 'AOuonbo.ij oiquuosuo.i 
q4iAV 9JIU5I oqj paiI<KiB suq oq 1141m Jliq 
•41101100x0 0([ AUUI 05'poiAVOu^i iuoi40^iooq4 
sttt -ttonBJado uu 5u1u1.10j.10d 4uoq)iA\. 
siBe^ oo'.iq4-A-4u3A\4 Joj ^jaSjns poipms 
suq oqvv JO^Dop B o>in o.iu oouod ;b soo.ioj 
5uio5uos oill -unq-y ^ si V&y <» Avoq 
u.n'.-oT 04 auav ;saq 4 onsiiuo.i Suiuibj? 
ouin-eouod mo o>iuui 04 A.14 oav p.iuq A\oq 

J044UIU OU MOAOO.IOIM S.IUAV SU01A0.UI III 

uo\o.id aaaq OAuq qoiqAv soidpui.id IU4110U1 
-rpun-T JO uoi4t?Dilddu oq4 JOj s\\t3D aopno 
-osoid intssooons s^i ^nq Mossooopo.id S41 
U10.1J 4U0.IO4HP Aipunojo.id si JBM aMoa^ 

^ f -4UH4 ;snf Sui4diuo44^ 

ejB evv A'upo4 suouioios oq* u l V uli ^ mv * 

-stiJi siduioru: snopiquiB-jaAO osoq4 Sni 

-ABU 10 jmS8J B SB SUO.I05UUP O.lOlll UOAO 

*jb &m pv* pouossoi uoo(i 4011 suq e.iuj 
-xbm JO u ioj SU14 ui oouopodxo opiav puu 
n ms ■> uuui .110114 ^n,i 'Moip pmoo A'oiu 

-do Loin mvm ^ 

Tom viVuniuoAO puu Mojjns uoi4isoddo 
en? pub Jsuox o.ioav saui T XpXdns .uo.kl 

Juuq oiv oil) ui puu A'UAVPIK W 'UOUlUf) 

MOV ui s4ooCo.id snoptquiB o.ioiu poipunui 



A*oq4 'sossojous penuiq.uoo jo 4inso.i 
u sy *s4.iodxo o.iu 's.iuoa' oau .ioj 4s uoo 
uuiqj 0114 ihuop puu du uoijisoddo 4suiu5u 
oo.ioj ui sSuipuBI Sup^Diipuoo ui oouo'i.iod 
-xo .uoi[4 04 s>iuuq4 'osouudur ip'iqAv 
4U 'SUOlJBJedO suoiqiqdiuu Aq poziaopu 
-.iuip sba\ oypua 0114 Ui .iuav 0114 '^au' 4y 

MUAi Oq4 JO OAISUOJJO OII.14 4S.U) .1110 

— suoyu.iodo uouiotos oqa Aq 05U4uuApu 
sii[4 du SuiAionoj ui 011114 ou 4soi oav 'ouiuo 
Aup siq4 uoqAV 'SSeooilS jo S4oodso.id oiqu 
-U0SB9J qu^vv SUOLUUOdo OAISUOJJO uo ^.iuq 
-uio 04 su 411U.101I 04 A'uuopiuus oypBj 
oq4 ui .lOAvod jo ooiiuquq oq4 poijipoui Auav 
-V\K W puu Bag [BJOQ oi[4 ui suoi4U.iodo 
OAisuojjo-oAisuojop .mo puu soipu'i JSU^ 
0114 ui 110141-144^ U4uu qiuoAOs '.io(iiuoooq 
U10.1J o5-puu-ipuo4 suav 41 4uq4_4i gtnso[ 
UIOJI doo^i 04 o.ioav smoi(io.id ojuipoiuuu 
.1110 4Ui(4 015511.14s 4iioso.id oi[4 jo sq4iioui 
5uiuodo 0114 SuiJlip pozilUOJ oidood avoj 
4uq muav u uiav 4011 UlAV SUOl4U.lOdO OAISUOJ 
-op juq4 1 uui[4 .10440(1 sozi'iuo.i ouo 0& 

•suo|4isod puu sdiqs 
A'uioue uo o5uuiup suoijos pe^oinui oaui[ 
soo.ioj jeijjBO juo suoju oypuj .101140 ui 
puu :.i04uoq4 siq4 ui soq^u .1110 qjiAV 11014 
-u.iodooo ui soApsiuoq4 jo 41111000U pooS 
u 110A15' OAuq s.iOA'o.i4sop puu sjosiujo .1110 
: .lUAv-jo-uoiu puu 5'uiddiqs osouudui* jo 
II04 oiquoouido.1.11 puu A*Ai:oq u U9^B3 oaui[ 
4s5U[j[ jb^ oq4 ui souijuiuqiis .1110 'uiiu.14 
-suy puu SOipui jsu^ ip4U(J, 0114 pjUA\04 
soo.ioj osouudux* oi[4 jo 4uouioaoiu p.iuavjoj 
a'joao pojsejuoo A'iu.ioqqn4s 4001^ oiiBisy 
Uuuis .uiQ •po44uqiuoo Aisno.io5iA Supq 
si oouuoui oui.iuiiiqiis eq4 puu : qStiOjq? 
oS 04 01111141100 SA'OAUOO .1110 tSUISUOJO 
-111 si sdiqs juuip.iom pop.iojju 1101400 jo.id 
oqx *ouop uooq OAuq sSuiq; osoi[4 jo \\y 

•suopisod ao>[ 41: 1145110.14s 
.1110 SuionpOJ A[upuu 4iioq)iAv ouop 
oq 04 puq sjisu4 osoq4 jo uy 'punoj oq 
Pinoo oq jOAO.10q.vv 'Aiuouo oq4 uo spiBJ 
5ui5uuiup 4onpuoo 04 soo.ioj 5u pi 1.14s jo 
5uipuos oq4 poApAiu .ioi[4ouu 1114^ 'ssau 
-isnq OAisuodxo uu oo.ioj 4uq4 jo oouua 
-pu oq4 5un[Uiu 'uoipu SiiiA'upp u 4q5y 
04 uoq4 puu oiqissod su 5uoi su 4suy jb^ 
oq4 ui 00.10 j osouudux* Joi.iodns u 4siuu5u 
4110 pioq 04 suav .ioq4ouy "SOSBq 5iua'[ 
-4110 uavo .1 no 04 puu uissn^j puu aiB^ijg 04 
soiiddns puu 4uoiudiubo *suiju 'somqd jo 
avou 0114 UIU4111UIU 04 suav mo[(io.id puooos 
y •souuuiiiqns uuuuo£) jo uois.inoui oq4 

4SUIU5U SOUUl UOS OSIAVJSUOD .1110 4O040.UI 
OJ SUAV OUO 'UOI4OU 04i:ipOllUUl 5'lUpUUlll 

-op suiojqo.id jo .loquinu u i[)iav poouj 
suav a'aux oq) muav jo 4110APU oq) q4LVV 

: suopuAJOsqo 5uiavo] 
-l°J oq4 jojjo 1 *ojup 04 suoijBJado ibabu 
.1110 jo so.iojo.ioqAV puu sAqAV oq4 jo oiuos 
( 12 oOdcI tuouf ponuiiuoQ ) 

199[j S9jeig pajtiiQ 91^ 



•saitlV 

OAU.iq .1110 jo puu a'aux Puu Aiu.iy pidojjui 
.1110 jo OA14U141111 oaisso.i55u puu 05U.IU00 
oq4 q5nojq4 puu 'sosoduu juav sdiqsp.iuq 
oq4 ojnpuo 1[iav oav qoiqAv qjiAV opnqj 
-.ioj oi[4 q5uo.iq4 : soo.ioj juo \\u jo U01JUJ8 
-dooo puu uopuuipJOOO oq4 q5uo.ii[4 :soq 
-XV -uio jo 4uq4 puu oidood juo jo siuuo5 
0114 q5uo.iq4 oiuoo uiav ^BqjQ -ajo401a 
jo ao uiu 1 4 pi oq4 04 su sjuoj ou OAuq x 

•puuiuuioo 

Jpq4 4U oq uiav qoiipvv SIB|J9JBUI puu uoui 
oi[4 uodn puodop uuo oav sppuoiJJBq oq| uo 
diqs.iopuoi 4ii04odiuoo 1141AV puu 'S4U0JJ uos 
pUB oiuoq juo uo s.iopuoi poAo.id puu P040A 

-op guiABq Ul 04UUU4.10J O.IU OAV UKl *OIl.l| 

oq a'uui 4uq4 'sduq.iod 'puu -pojopuniq suq 

OUOOlUOS 4UII4 AUS 04 ASUO SI 41 'SO^lUjSUll 

eqBUl uiav uoiu .ioj 'qiuoiu A'q qptoiu 9[qB 
-41AOUI si 11014.10do.1d UIU4.100 u :s.ioq40 oq 
XUav 0.10114 puu 'sossoi jojjus 04 su posnuo 
suq Aoiiod siqi jo oouuus.iiij 'juojop uuoiu 
PluoAv'41 .ioj axqB3[uiqjun si ^Bqq puu 'saiq 
-[A140U .1110 fuuil pun oonpo.i 04 OAuq ppioAV 
oav 'osiAv.ioiuo 's>isi.i uu.i puu soinuqu 
-([o.id oouiquq 4SIUU oav AOipd siq4 uj '814 
-\va[ uioqj oai5 puu 'oq a'uiu A*oq4 JOAO.ioqAV 
uioq4 3[99S 04 si soiiuouo .1110 4^'ojop 04 A'UAV 
0.1ns xv'pio oq4 i^qi puu *IB^BJ si soini poij 
-14.10J puiqoq osuojop 4uq4 uossoi oi[4 avouu 
pon.iuoi OAuq oav oouu.i^i Suipooiq uioj^ 

•so.ioqs 

jno uio.ij sopui jo spuusnoin ?qSnoj juav 
jo s4iioiuo.iinbo.i 4sua eq4 400ui 04 ui^.iuiu 

i B q°io 

•uioii4 uo 411S14 pui; iuoq4 uuiu oqAV 
uoui oii4 puu 4 iuoq4 pnnq oqAv uoui oq4 
'sdiqs 0114 uSlSOp oipvv uoui oq4 WAV os 



puu 'uioqi qpAv oo.i5u A'uoqAV qiAV 1 iiuod 
OlSuis no pay -pi.ioAv oq} ui 4so)suj 

0114 si \\ q^aoq^XB 'avois 00 1 [\vys si oiui| 
.1110 4uq) JOOUS uiav s.iopuij-.quuj oqj, 

'JOSSeOOpOJd .loq opldiuo.) 0} 
pojinboj 'sA'up .inoj siqd '011114 oq} jp.-q 
A'l4ouxo ill 4111UI suav agBiCoA uopuuu .104 
uo 4110s oav joijj uo 4so)iq oq| puu 'oiijl 
ui >loo4 41 01U14 0114 JIBq uuiu o.ioiu SA'up 
avoj u 41U1 ui s.iOA'o.i4sop Suipxpiq o.iu oav 

'p.lOOO.l SUOlAO.Hl 

4Soq 0114 jo puoqu Sq^uoui uoaos ai.iuou 
40014 0114 ufui diqsoi4|i!(i u qqSaojq 9ABq 
OiVi 'JOqJBH [JUOJ o.niis 's.vup ooaqj puu 
S114110111 .inoj A(i seuiJBuiqus punq 04 qooq 
41 Oiuij 9SUJ0AU oq; pOOnpOJ OAuq o \v 
'Su^qsuduiooou o.iu oav .juipu jo uopi araos 

UOA' 0AI5" UUO 1 '.lOAOAVOIJ 'A'OOJOOS ,)\?><)\ 

-u.ijs jo A*JO3O4U0 (I04 044 iu -os.moo j('» *si 
'pom.iu puu pouuuiu Auuj'qi.ioj puos oj 
4uo(iu o.iu puu pouoissuuuioo 9Auq oav juq.vv 
'Suipxinq o.iu oav 41ULVV 'L^GL '1 JaquiQoea 
uo puq oav uuiu 4oon .lojsirj puu 51114) iq 
-aop.iuq Mo5.iiq XBJ u q)iAV Aupoj su pop'iA 
-o.ul Apuo.qu suq qoiqAv '04U.1 po4u.iopoou 
Ai4uu.|suoo u 41; siossoa XBABa SuiqpuiiBi 
o.iu sp.iu.v'diqs uavo .1110 oiiqAvuuoxvr 

MUAV pOJUpOp 

-uu A\i s.io)uav osouudur ui poddu.14 uoiu 
-4uuqo.ioiu .101140 puu 110411a 'qsi^ijg miuo 
-uoiuy jo O5uuuo4 suoui.iouo oq/ ojidsop 
siq) pny ; 111044 j.iodsuu.q 04 sdiqs jo'^ouj 
0114 .ioj — soiiddns luoipoiu puu' uorpuniu 

-IUU 'SllOdUOAV MOAVOd-UUUl Ul S4U0U100U[(I 

-0.1 jo qoBi .ioj jojjus ihav oijiouj 0114 jo 
spuiqsi poidnooo 0114 ui soo.ioj osouudiq- 
0114 uoqAv -osop a'uuu4ou si 011114 oqj, 

•A'iddns x>uu U014U011UUU 
-moo jo sonii popno)xo sjioddi\: SuiJXBd 
-mi A"i04U.iodsop jo 4.ioqs SUO^ puBSlloq | 

AVOJ U 04 II4SUO.14S OUII4IJUIU S,UBdBf 5UJ) 

-4110 ui soo.ioj xbabu iiuoijomy jo ssooons 
oqi 04 A'lo^uq omqijuioo 04 'sonuiiuoo 
A'lSuisuo.ioui pun 'suq ipiq.vv s.iop.wv 'osou 

-BdBjC III 51J0A\ OUOp OAUq SOUlJUUKlUS JUO 

.iuav oq4 jo osuqd pozioiiqiulun siin uj 

-3[0X 04 PU0.I p.iuq *«U01 0114 5U0[U 40U0A*U(| 

puu qnioq 1141AV op 04 OAuq uiav uoiu ino 
JISU4 oin jo opii4iu5uui 0114 suossoi 'uud 
-V£ 'A'luouo omnium juo jo q4guo.i4S diqs 
0114 jo A^UAVU-5'uii44iqAv 4uoi)u f x 'seup^Bui 
SuiSSnxs ui a'uiouo 0114 1141AV 004-04-004 ?>u\ 
-pnuis A'q uoav oq Apio 4011 uiav juav oqj, 

•sooiAJOS uuoijouiy 0114 uooAvjoq \u>\) 
-u.iodooo-uou puu a'suoiuoC jo souo js sdu.14 
-A'qooq .ipqj 5'uiauoav oiuoq 41; SJaSuoui-XBp 
-uuos 0114 01 11014110441; auu oai5 04 opis A'q 
apis Sui;qSg Asuq 004 nu 'soui.iuxm ; uoiu 

-SpJBtlS 3SBO0 'SJOXIBS 'SJOippS unoi.iomy 
qilAV MUAV 8 ( U0WVU pdtfun u A"x[BopBqd 
-rao osxb Si 41 'si SupqSg 044 joao.ioi'iav 

•aMoioia S11014UX pojin^i 
U 04 SuipBai 'XBAIAJUS JOJ JUAV SUOljus; 
1)04111!! u si siqj, -uos 044 pjuavoj auav .11044 
51114454 o.iu oipvv oooo.ii) puu BfABXS-oknf 
puu Buiqo ui sapBJuiod pojpoi-puui ino 
oup asiBJtl ssotpunoq 044 jo Auu P104441AV 
04 4UU01U d14s.10u4.1ud ouirq.ufiu 044 jo 
UUO uo.i S144 si .1011 'sppo 4U0.15 4suiu5u 
S.104UAV 4ui.'4sip in spo4 aauu joiao^ \nn 
•1111:04 .1110 no 51114454 o.iu qr/u.nj puu 00 
-\^K Jo 'puiquo/ avox 'uiiujjsuy 'upuuuj 
jo sd14s.1u.vv oiix -oouu.i^ aaj^ pnu spuBj 
-.10440X oin 'puujoj 'ai.'avjox 'QTOg jo 
uoiu puu sdiqs 044 Aq poijiKkuu puu papiB 
uoo([ OAuq sj.iojjo s\a'aux oijj, 'papuBq 
-axSuis popoooous 4011 OAuq oav 'piny .10 
paxg 'S4U0.1J 51114454 044 uo 'suo^bajos 
-qo avoj u 441.W s.i04duqo osoq4 oonpo.uui 
0111 4o^x 'iioi4uoii(ind siq} jo so5ud duipaao 
-ons ui s.iooyjo oiqisuodso.1 s)i A'q paqijos 
-op si .iuoa' juav s 4 Aaux oq) Jo qonjv] 

'sajxiB s q 

puu 11014UU 044 ui 4.10J11100SIP puu iqnop 

SupUBXdU!] A'4 A'UIOUO O44 04 4.IOJIUOO puu 

piu soai5 4014AV ^uipuu-unuj qsgxas 5ui 
-loofo.i puB Suyixanb ui auqdpsip-jps si 
A'pouio.i aqx *4ou uiav oav qoiqAV 'a'uiouo 
oi{4 04 oiquiquAUi sjouj qjiAV luniupj A'oid 
-uio .10 4 40u nuqs oav qoiqAv 'diqsjosuoo 
DpsBjp osn 04 OAuq ppioAV oav 41 \\dxib ox 
Mouui.i 5ui5u.inoosip puB disso5 suo[up 
-uuos spoo.iq 'joo.id A'q pa^joddnsun 'suop 
-BsnaaB a'[s 'ooia .11044 ui aSxnpui siapuu 
-qnuj 5ui55uu 044 0.1044 uoAt) 41UJ -111044 04 
A'l4Soo a'14uu5uau.i)xo uooq suq — jr oao(|U 
puu 41 Japan 'uos 044 uo — S4004 a'uiouo 044 
jo uo>[U4 M'H a'au\ t 044 i\o:\ 044 puu ^Bq 
-uioo uodo ui iiAvop ouo5 OAuq A'aqjj Joqjt?H 
XJBaj 4U dn.14 sno.1040no.14 044 oouis 411(4 
lsjaq40 osof quqs oav 4U44 axqB^iAaui si 41 
laSJUOO jo 'sdiqs 5ui4q5i; 4S01 OAi?q oav 

•osii.Md jo s.iOAVod A*ui puoA*oq si .iuoA' 
siq4 jo sqjuoui xiS 4s.11; 041 ui oui.nnu 
4UBqDjara unoi.ioiuy aq^ jo juoz puu 004 
-ijous-jjos aqjQ •>|OU44U-.io4unoo jo auij js.nj 



.mo uo po4i.M|noouoo v)av 0114AV .iojjus 04 
pBq rmuldiqs osiav-|suo.) .1110 "uoiuq 401AOS 
044 puu iuop5iu\i X>04iuix 0U4 'uissnjj puu 
uiujijg Moiun Pub su uooAvpq soqouaj4 
01111-4U0.IJ oq) A'dUDOO 41U14 suoijuu 0.W4 
oq} puu A'.ipiuoo S144 uooAV4oq iiodo A'ld 
-dns puB uoiiuoiunuuuo.) jo sou 1 1 044 doo?[ 
04 suav (ioj' js.uj .mo 'oi|uui4y' 044 ui 

•4004 uuoi.iomy 
uu A'q p.iUAVouioq a'isuoiuiiuou^i x^siiip 
ajaA\ spu.Muuo.i paja^Bq sqi puu 'oojoj 
ll ! s oiu4g poqua 044 pajpB^B a'auu osou 
-BdBf oin )uiu siuuiuo.i puod oqx \ soiaqd 
-JIB JOJ paddBJOS 04 piuoqs sdiqs.iUAV ojoj 
-o.ioqj pnu 'oiniui OAispop sduqjod 

puu a^Bjadsap )m[} ui diqs ijo5u5uo diqs 
on 4U44 4110 piiod A'nisnvood sjopuq^piuj 
snoin.ionl) 044 p'x -a-i.-avpiim 41: AM04S14 U| 
4uonio5u5no lu.vun 4S04UO.15 044 uoav oav 
'poqpi noui puu u.vvop 404s somqd '^uns 
sdiqs jo puodpuujs 044 iiuu^ *adojna 111 
soo.ioj sixy 044 441AV o.injounC P04.1UAV44 
.11041 uio.ij jaqaJBj asauBdBf aq^SuiAijp jo 
.uxpq A'pooiq 04) ui opnio.id A'.iussooou u 
Muav jo .io)uoii4 4U44 ui 0Ai)iU4iui 044 uiuS 
-0.1 o) iMjnuq 0AU4 A'oqx 'Oqpu r ] 44110s 
041 ui asauBdBf 044 jo qsna -iuoipuoq 
04} 5uiddo4s ui sppo 4uo.i5 4suiu5 , u 400jja 
51111104 441AV pax^Bq 'uoiu juo 'souuid .1110 
^sdiiis .iuq 'uoi4iqii4iduoo.i spoou A'poiBOS 
'a'jo4si4 .1110 111 ja^SBSjp IBABU 4S04UO.13 
oin A'q po4u.in5nuui juoa' 044 ui paqsnd 
-tuooou SBq a'aux uuoi.iomy 044* 4U4AV 

JOSOXO 0(1 04 UIOOp 04UUI14111 

.11044 avou>[ ppioAV ouio>x Puu OA^OJQ hi 
saSoo^s S14 pnu .101411 [ '4140.nl ppioo 4.10440 
juav jo juauiaSBUBui 041 441AV i)oS.iuiio 

UOIU 4014AV UIO.IJ 'SISA'IUUU IU0I4U0 

'injosn 'punos 04 pauuaj aq ppioo inuoaq 
puu y[ui Modud poo5 jo gujanodano 04US 
-igojd 044 uu ji ^'11111105111 uuoi.iomy jo 
joupojd .10440 a'uu ui UU44 5uipii4-4inuj 111 
uor40npo.1d-.1OAO .104UO.15 u puq OAuq oa\ 
•111S10141.10 jo A'uiunh 044 osuojoui osiAvojpq 
ppioo oav pun jjBaq a'iu uu u^iav qs?A\ 1 ' 
•A^nuunb axqBqoaBuiun 04 A'uiuni) oiqu 
-4U0qun 5uippu o.iu oav '$89Q oq) Supnp 
-o.id uo A'uoqAV 04U.141100U00 04 axqB oq 04 
puojuui poo/i qSnoua po.iinbou o.vuq o.vv 
'paaunouuB SBq juopiso.ij 044 su 'avox 

*S4J9dxa su uopouuj 04 
paiinbaa opipw .iuav jo ssauisnq 044 ujBax 
04 pBq oav 'sunso.i papjsdoi paonpojd 
uiujSojd juin s;oadsaj auios uj -s.iuoa' puu 
S41U0U1 .ioj 14^4 .mo 51114454 uooq puq 
04AV sapBJOouiap aqq jo [BuasjB 044 su 
uoi j.mnj .mo Sux^dnjsip uu>4![av saAxasjno 
ulib <n pBq .).\\ 'A'si.ioodA'q jo qsnquiB siq 
uio.ij A'uiaua 044 jo 05.1U40 044 'os.ioaoj 
11044 puu 'do)s oj po.iiniM.i 5uii|4aMoao jo 
1- > - Piu«).» 3a\ [xb popoou oav 'uopBJBdaJd 

04 p04OA0p IMoq OA l.'4 PIU04S 4U44 S.Il.'OA 

04) ui jspl 011114 JOJ du <>}[i:ui 04 pooaoj 
o.ioav o.vv 'a' 4 1 [ uo.i 5uiuun4s n .iuav 441AV 
•SOI.IOS04UO uiuj.ioo ui 110140npo.Kl-.1OAO 

1100(1 °A1M( A'UUI S0>|U4SIIU O44 JO OUQ 

5III55UU oi.i juoooSo .10 
Suidius iuoiqiod joj sosnoxo su posn aq 
04 4011 0.1 0 A041 4U44 ?sa3Sns i -pozpn^o 
oq 04 4011 o.n: so>[U)siiu 044 A*us 4011 op 1 
'A'xXBOpBqduia o>[i:us snouiouoA u XIP1 04 
4110 SuiqsBi opipw oojjoo jo duo 1: SunndS 
111:44 oom.'j.ioduii o.ioiu ou jo o.iu A044 
Muoa* 4sud 044 jo S4uaraqsr[duioooB 044 
4jiav pajBdmoQ 'axqBpuB^sjapun o.iu A'oq} 

11:41 a'us op 1 -oiqusnoxo o.iu SJ0JJ3 044 
ai:s jou op r 'sisi.io 044 o.iojoq [XB sn A'q 
poiiiuiuioo so>|i:|siui 041 A'q UU-)[IUP 3J0U1 
opuui >[si.q 1: qsxxduiooDB oj SuiAMg u] opum 
uaaq aABq so^uqsiui 044 41:44 uiujuiuiu 1 

•poods 4inoi)-.io-oju 4U 
>|SU4 pojuoiidiuoo A'piuujui pun .iuiiuunj 
-uu UB jo uni jnooxo 044 SPU044U A'xqB^lAau] 
41:41 SnnSimq 044 441AV 'uiojsa's A'jpnx-oS 
-A'ddBq .mo ui pojuoouoo 04.104414 soiouoioq 
-joui 041 411AV 'opuui aABq 3A\ soiiujsuu 
aqq i(|iav |[ui:j Suipuu a'( ( uoiii.qu.ii .11044 
iuoa oi SuioS ajB suosjad* paA*ouuB jo 404 u 

'Og -so>iU4siui auuui 41:0.15 u 5ui>[i:iu 4110 
-441AV ssooo.nl oi[) os.ioao.i ijiuo A'iuiU4.ioo 
uoA puy -oiuos 5uiA'ouuu puu 'suos.iod 
a'uuui 41:0.15 u 5ui(|.ui4SU) 4110441AV sossa 
-oo.nl asaq4 os.ioaoj 4011 111:0 no/ 'avox 

•4 uoui 

-dinho osuojop jo uoi|oiq)o.id 041 .ioj P04404 
-|i: suav soipBJ ^uiunj-jps puu sosso.i44uiu 
SuiJds-jauui 'o.injuunj pojjuismoao jo 
o.uqoujnnuui 041 .ioj po.iinho.i 4011 oouds 
A'.io4ouj aq k x 'SunS pun sdiqs.iUAV iqinq 
04 posn aq ppioo sp>|suq-o|si?Av puu saxoq 
o>[uf 'spuno.i-o5-AM.ioiu joj paau 4011 pip 
oav pois oqx 'A'ui.iy 044 puu A'aux 044 joj 
qSnoua suav suupos 5111.11104 .1110 joj poou 

(8S Qflnd uwuf powu/tfuoo) 

Xb P o X ^ AB M *S 0 9 m 



Modernization of the Army 

(Continued from page 35) 

the properly equipped infantry officer or 
the rank officer or the tank destroyer offi- 
cer must know the force and limitations of 
what is really a new form of artillery 
support — that of die airplane — and by the 
same token the air officer must know the 
force and limitations of the various 
ground forces if he is to render the full 
aid of which he and his weapons are 
capable. We can no more be considered 
modern in this war until we achieve this 
condition in relation to air power than 
we could be so considered in the last war 
before our artillery and infantry were 
fully integrated. Many have theories of 
the proper coordination of this ground- 
air work and many have made studies or 
seen demonstrations of it. but 1 do not 
believe there can be any serious conten- 
tion that our Army has yet solved this 
phase of modern operations. Actually the 
ground forces have yet to learn what they 
can really do with or without air support. 
With all our automatic weapons, tanks, 
and vehicles, our combat officers, ground 
and air, will have to learn this new art. 
As the enemy applied it, it was per- 
haps the chief factor in the original Ger- 
man and Japanese successes. 

Very frequently and many times some- 
what sententiously one hears quoted the 
statement that the principles of war 
never change. The repetition of this 
bromide, even though it is always accom- 
panied by the qualification that methods 
of war do change, tends, I fear, to limit 
our military thinking and to develop re- 
sistance to new and far-reaching con- 
cepts of warfare. The statement may be 
true, but for it to be true the principles 
have to be so very broadly stated that 



of gunpower. We are seeing the tactical 
use of air develop before our eyes— great 
striking forces against enemy cities and 
industries, battles at sea without a hori- 
zontal shot tired or one ship seen by an- 
other, the airborne troop attack, and such 
minor phenomena as the use of fighters as 
bombers and bombers as fighters. The in- 
finite possibilities of air, I venture to sug- 
gest, are not yet and cannot vet be gen- 
erally realized by our armed forces as a 
whole. 

The developments are too swift and 
there is so little time for contemplation 
in the pate of war that much of what we 
could do is passed over in the accomplish- 
ment of what seems more pressing; Many 
feel, for example, that the infantry, artil- 
lery, and the armored forces have thus 
far not made full use of the airplane in 
connection with their command, com- 
munications, and observation work. While 
it may require an extraordinary mixture 
of qualities to make a good fighter pilot, 
any normal healthy person can learn to 
fly, and some, including the writer, be- 
lieve that large ground units might al- 
most as well operate without motor ve- 
hicles as part of their regular equipment, 
as without airplanes. 

Whatever one may think of giving air- 
planes to the Ground Forces, no one can 
deny that the Ground people must know 
the force and effect of air. More than a 
smattering of commanders must be air 
conscious — all must be air sensitive. 
There was a time, a trifle difficult now to 
recall, when a lawyer could draw a will, 
approve a transfer of property, or give 
advice in any transaction without think- 
ing of anything but the law which related 
particularly to the subject matter at hand, 
but today a Lawyer who before doing any- 
thing else does not first ask himself what 



they are not of much practical use. The. effect the tax laws will have, should be 



German Army was modem in the real 
sense because it was part of a grand (in 
the sense of great) new concept of war 
—the weapons for such an army came 
afterwards and were adapted to the 
thought. The army itself was forged to 
fit the pattern of the nation at war in 
which every psychological and economical 
factor was marshalled for service. None 
of the United Nations except possibly 
Russia prepared for such a military revo- 
lution. Some individuals, if is true, saw 
new tactical developments ahead, but only 
occasional prophets spoke out — a de- 
Oaulle, a Douhet, a Fuller, or a Mitchell, 
but in Germany there was more than a 
mind or two — there was the acceptance 
of the entire philosophy. 

It. has been centuries since such an im- 
pact as that which the airplane imposed 
on the military art has occurred, and no 
high command or staff commander can to- 
day act intelligently without constant 
reference to the force and power of air. 
How profound a change it will effect in 
warfare or what effect it may have even 
on.some of those supposedly immutable 
principles of warfare remains to be seen. 
There is not much doubt that air power 
will produce at least as great an effect as 
any of the historic developments of the 
past such as the introduction of the dis- 
ciplined infantry formations of the 
Greeks and the Roman", of cavalrv and 



disbarred. So today Limoges and Blois 
are too good for commanders who under- 
take operations without knowing and 
considering the influence air will or might 
have on their plans. 

Rut there are other forces than air 
which we have to appreciate and utilize 
in order to make an army modern. The 
internal situation in Europe today has 
great significance from a purely military 
point of view. The bitter hatred of the 
Nazi oppressors held by the oppressed 
minorities of Europe affords fields on 
which our staffs can plan. In a sense we 
have already landed our parachutists, 
many of them in Germany and Italy. To 
move on a large scale without consider- 
ing how these great forces may assist us 
would not he sensible. 

There are some aspects of this war 
which test our weaknesses, but in so 
many more important fields this war 
plays into our strength. The development 
of the plane and tank as military weapons 
fits into our airplane and automobile in- 
dustries; our great journalistic and ad- 
vertising capacities together with the 
unique position that the United States 
has always held and still holds as the 
hope of oppressed peoples give us an 
enormous advantage in the field of psy- 
chological warfare. Ln the very im- 
portant realm of the air we not only have 
a great asset in the quantity and quality 



Gun-on*,^- 9 

cast armor or hin ery, h ea J 

equipment, rolls ond jne wo rk 

, ~A nrecision mu Rinw-K" 0 * 
duty and pr seven ° laW 

countless more Th ine .«, *° 

plants, its hundreds o are proud 

sands of men and w of th .,r hand* 
to contribute the .* ^ hea rts 

America's v.ctory P 



BUW-KSOX 

PITTSBURGH, PA. 



Lewis Foundry & Machine Division 
Union Steel Castings Division 
Power Piping Division 
National Alloy Steel Division 
Pittsburgh Rolls Division 
Blaw-Knox Division 
Martins Ferry Division 
Blaw-Knox Sprinkler Division 



of our materiel, hut we have the even 
more important strength which our edu- 
cational system and population afford us 
in terms of eligible pilot and airplane 
crew material. Apart from this national 
advantage, we are now entering the war 
after many thousands of the best pilots 
of our enemies have been destroyed. 
Properly utilized and conserved, this pool 
of pilot strength can be almost a decisive 
factor in itself. 

These are only a few of the elements 
of this war that aid us. They must be 
joined with the power that well trained 
and well equipped troops can deliver, and 
above all they must be integrated into 
plans which enable our great strengths 
to be brought fully to bear upon the 
enemy. The need is for more than coor- 
dination of our weapons and our strength; 
as difficult and vast a task as that is: it- 
is for a full realization of the strengths 
we possess and an imaginative skill in 
employing them. 

With all our power it is quite possible 
for us to dissipate our st rength among a 
variety of widely dispersed points, just as 
it is possible for us to destroy ourselves 
by concentrating everything against an 
Impossible barrier. The opposition is too 
great today for us to prevail with merely 
a strong army, — it must also be a smart 
army. 



The Army Air Forces 
in Action 

I Contiimed from pageSd) 

can out-shoot, out-last, and out-maneuver 
any comparable aircraft in any air force. 
Bristling with guns, heavily armored, 
fast and long-ranged, these bombers have 
demonstrated their amazing ability to fly 
through heavy anti-aircraft lire, repulse 
attacks by enemy lighters, drop bombs 
with great accuracy, and get back safely 
to base over hundreds and thousands of 
miles of trackless ocean. They have, in 



effect, created a new concept of aerial 
warfare, and richly justified our em- 
pbasis on aircraft of this type. We have 
accomplished wonders, so far, with only 
a rraction of our potential air strength 
that will be available in the near future. 
A large proportion of the Army Air Force 
flyers that took part in the Midway tri- 
umph were in combat for the first 'time. 
We may indeed say to our enemies that 
they ain't seen nothin' yet !" 

«J'?v ine wi f h ? ur P la *s to build up the 
worlds greatest air power, the Army Air 
forces were reorganized on Maivb !» '\<)V> 
As one of the three main elements of the 
Army— Air, Ground and Supply—the \ir 
Forces have (heir own Air Staff, under 
the Commanding General, which is con- 
cerned with policy: an Operations Staff 
mcluding o Director of Military Require^ 
ments, Director of Technical Services 
and chief of several administrative 
agencies; a series of Commands among 
which are the Flying Training and Tech- 
nical Training Commands, out rusted with 
the training of the hundreds of thousands 
of men who will shortly be in the Air 
Forces, a Materiel Command for procur- 
ing aircraft and equipment and which 
conducts research and experiment an Air 
Service Command which maintains air 
depots and distributes aircraft equipment 
and supplies, and the famous Air Trans- 
port Command which maintains air 
transport of men and materials all over 
the globe: and. finally. Combat Forces in- 
cluding all units of military aviation sucti 
as Bombardment, Interception, and 
Ground-Air Support. In this way, the 
four functions of the Army Air Forces: 
Policy. Operations. Commands, and 
Forces, are combined under one head to 
work smoothly among themselves and in 
close conjunction, not only with the other 
elements of our Army, but with our Naval 
forces as well. We have the airplanes and 
the men for world Air Supremacy in the 
near future, and we have the organiza- 
tion, too. Wo have far outgrown the con- 
fines Of an "Ail" Corps." We are now I lie 
••Army Air Forces !'* 



SERVICE 



IN PEACETIME AND IN WARTIME 




Gar Wood Industries, Inc., was among 
the first group of manufacturers to convert 
its various plants info war production. 
The diversified products produced by 
Gar Wood, include War Equipment, 
Truck and Trailer Equipment, such as 
Dump Bodies and Hydraulic Hoists, 
Cargo and Troop Bodies, Mobile Ma- 
chine Shop Bodies, Winches, Cranes, 
Derricks, Refueling Tanks — Road Ma- 
chinery, including Scrapers, Roadbuilders, 
Bulldozers, Tamping Rollers and Rippers 
— also Heating Equipment, and Motor 
Boats for the Army and Navy. 

One of Gar Wood's contributions is the 
all-enclosed Load-Packer. Its hydraulic 
compressing action packs greater loads 
of garbage and rubbish than any other 
type of collection body 




165 



The FBI At War 

(Continued from page 00) 

fche lire of war. The great benefits of this 
mission were made available to over 7,000 
law enforcement officials in the United 
States in Civilian Defense and War Traf- 
fic Schools conducted by the FBI 
throughout the nation. A second mission 
has just returned and American law en- 
forcement is receiving the benefits of their 
observations. 

It can be truly said that FBI prepared 
Cor war on September G, 1030— over two 
years before Pear] Harbor. On December 
7, 1941, when our blood flowed from a 
treacherous stab in the back, the coordi- 
nated machinery of t he FBI was ready— 
ready \<> <ro into action with the coopera- 
tive-efforts of over 300,000 police officers 
— with the reoperation of Naval and Mili- 
ary Intelligence — with a militant and 
alert citizenry. On that very afternoon 
the FBI went to war — to secure this coun- 
try internally, to preserve our home, in- 
dustry and nation. 

Within a few hours after this tragic 
attack, Agents of the FBI, working quiet- 
ly throughout the nation, had appre- 
hended more than 1,000 enemy aliens. 
At the present time approximated 12,000 
alien enemies have been apprehended and 
where evidences of Americanism could 
not be substantiated warranting outright 
release, they were afforded hearings be- 
fore impartial Alien Enemy Hearing 
Boards made up of reputable citizens, 
these Hearings Boards passed on the 
internment, parole, or release of the alien 
5 nem 7« They make the recommendation 
'<» the Attorney General of the United 
States who renders the final decision. 

In the first ten months of 1942 Special 
Agents <»f the FBI and cooperating law 
enforcement officials searched approxi- 
mately 20,000 premises and dwellings of 
enemy aliens. Thousands of contraband 
articles wore seized, including firearms 
explosives, daggers, dirks, ammunition 
and short; wave radio receiving sets. 

The files of the Identification Division 
grew by leaps and bounds. With an av- 
erage of 100,000 cards being received daily 
I hero are at present over H-t.nnO.OOO linker- 
print cards on tile. They are the prints 
of our boys in the armed foroos, the prints 
of our workers in war industry, the prints 
of our people in government 'service, the 
prints of aliens resident here and the 
prints of our citizens who are guarantee- 
ing themselves a positive moans of identi- 
fication. The FBI will always thus serve 
the honest citizen as it has always served 
law enforcement against the criminal. 

I am happy to say that today the great 
esl service of this FBI activity is toward 
securing our national defense— protect- 
ing it from the influx of international 
criminals. Its daily accomplishments are 
challenging material for the most imag- 
inative writer. Hie individual who ap- 
plied for a position with the Navy De- 
partment in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, as 
an Associate Inspector Engineer Mate- 
rials, could testily to this. He admitted 
in his application an arrest in 1931 for 
violation of the Prohibition Act but he 
failed to mention that he was arrested 
and fingerprinted as a foreign spy on De- 
cember 5, 1017. by the Police Department 
in Huntington, West Virginia. 

Our Technical Laboratory today stands 
out as the greatest scientific ami of law 
enforcement. It is manned by almost l>oo 
skilled technicians who have at their com- 
mand every known scientific facility. 
This Laboratory's true value is shown 
today in its scientific analysis of evidence 
compiled in cases involving our internal 
Security. Thousands of matters of pos- 
sible espionage and sabotage value have 
been examined. The 33 members of the 
Gestapo espionage group, commonly re- 
ferred to as the "Frederick Joubert Du- 
quesne Gang."— the nine members of the 
German spy ring, described in court cir- 
cles as the "Kurt Frederick Ludwig 
Case.'' — all of whom are looking out on 
the world today from behind iron bars 
— bear silent witness to the tremendous 
might the FBI's scientific laboratory is 
exerting today. The eight German sabo- 
teurs who submarined their way into this 
country intending to havoc our produc- 
tive efforts and our internal security 



—those until who were rounded up within 
14 days of their landing on our shores 
by Agents of the FBI — learned fatefully 
that science and modern American law 
enforcement cannot be contradicted. 

The National Police Academy proved 
to be the reserve force of the FBI. Many 
of its members were inducted into our 
service and are working shoulder to 
shoulder with our Agents in the field. 
Others are leading law enforcement 
agencies in their close cooperation with 
the FBI today. The Academy is still func- 
tioning in Washington, serving represent- 
ative police officials throughout the coun- 
try. We recently completed our twent ieth 
session. At this time 702 men have gradu- 
ated from this West Point of Law En- 
forcement and approximately 100,000 
local police officers are through local 
training schools receiving the benefits of 
their attendance. 

The activity of the FBI with cooperat- 
ing law enforcement agencies throughout 
the country has been vast and extensive 
—many of the accomplishments, of 
course, cannot be spoken of at this time 
due to their highly confidential nature 
but I can say that law enforcement on 
the home front is fully mobilized and on 
the alert each hour of tbo day for con- 
tact with the enemy. 

The FBI has enjoyed its close collab- 
oration, cooperation and exchange of in- 
formation with the Intelligence Services 
of the War and Navy Departments. It 
has been a pleasure working with them 
and assisting in many complex problems 
and our desire for continued cooperation 
is assured. 

The Army and Navy are courageously 
proving to our Commander in Chief that 
the nation'* will to live burns within 
them. The tempo of ' that same spirit 
beating within the heart of the FBI has 
set the pace for law enforcement. 
A united and vigorous law enforcement 
profession assures the preservation of 
all American homes from the legions of 
Hitler and Hirohito. 



The General of the Armies 
Speaks 

(Continued from page 10) 

that it will be spread around so as to pro- 
vide for all. 

Shipping, which we lacked in 1917, and 
which we labored feverishly to build, is 
as essential as Armies and Navies. It is 
my confident expectation that our ener- 
getic construction, plus diminished sub- 
marine sinkings, will assure the trans- 
portation that will be required. 
t With unity existing amongst the United 
Nations, with coordination of their agri- 
cultural, industrial and military pro- 
grams and operations. 1 am certain that 
our enemies face final, inevitable defeat. 
For them the tide has turned. In a time 
not too distant, the peoples whom they en- 
chained and the territories which "they 
despoiled will be liberated, and the civili- 
an lion they are attempting to destroy will 
be rebuilt upon a basis which will move 
us toward that goal desired by all men, 
a lasting peace. 



The Exacting Test of War 

(Continued from page 00) 

ditions which may be anticipated in the 
particular theater of operations to which 
they are assigned. Further, the surgeon 
of such a force receives the complete 
analysis. 

Great assistance has been received 
from the studies of the National Research 
Council and the gathering and evaluation 
of the most recent advances in medical 
science for publication and use by Army 
medical officers. 

In all previous wars, and again in the 
present conflict, venereal disease has 
proved one of the most troublesome con- 
ditions to control. If introduces an ad- 
ministrative and social problem as well 
as a medical one. The recognition of this 
fact has led to the placing of responsi- 
bility for the conduct of a campaign of 
control on military commanders as well 
as military surgeons; upon the civil popu- 
lation as well as upon the military. 

The present program has been enlarged 
to include considerations of this nature. 



Venereal disease control officers are as- 
signed to headquarters of large tactical 
units. The civil authorities are incorpo- 
rated by the inclusion of the Division Oi 
Social Protection of the Federal Security 
Agency, the United States Public Health 
Service and by inviting the attendance 
of representatives of the American bo- 
cial Hygiene Association. 

Naval authorities participate as a mat- 
ter of course. The May Act was brought 
into being in order that the Federal Gov- 
ernment might assist communities unable 
to cope with the problem. It was not an- 
ticipated that the use of this measure 
would be required often, nor has it been. 
In localities of two states only has this 
law been invoked. 

The control program has succeeded 
very satisfactorily. There was an initial 
rise which has been followed by a moder- 
ate decline so that in the first six months 
of the current year the average rate per 
thousand has been 3S.2. The current rate 
represents an achievement beyond the 
most optimistic hopes of the military 
surgeons of high attainments who were 
most closely associated with the inaugu- 
ration of the Army's long term campaign 
against these diseases in the earliest 
years. It should be clearly understood 
that with the change of policy in ad- 
mitting infected cases to the military ser- 
vice the statistical rate of Venereal Di- 
sease will rise. This, of course, will not 
evidence a break-down in the program of 
control. 

Special facilities have been set up at 
the Army Medical School to study virus 
diseases, the importance of which has 
come to the fore in latter years. An in- 
teresting, though not dangerous, virus di- 
sease is atypical (virus) pneumonia. The 
death rate is exceedingly low. However, 
due to the fact that it is a virus disease, 
a special commission has long been 
charged with the duty of making a de- 
tailed study of this condition. 

RESTORATION. The hospitalization 
facilities and materiel have undergone 
expansion paralleling that of the Army. 
The Medical Department is now operat- 
ing one of the greatest and most far flung 
chains of hospitals in the world. An im- 
mediate and pressing difficulty is that of 
the procurement of professional person- 
nel. 

During the year many medical supply 
depots have been established in localities 
convenient to serve areas where there are 
great troop concentrations. The weight 
of medical supplies which was formerly 
in New York City has been shifted to St 
Louis with the result that the establish- 
ment at the latter city is the largest sup- 
ply depot of any branch or arm of the 
military service. 

The decisive importance of mobility 
has been one of the supreme lessons which 
have emerged from the present conflict 
As a consequence the Medical Department 
has been occupied with the problem of 
increasing the mobility of military equip- 
ment. Mobile pack equipment "for the 
transportation of supplies of a battalion 
aid station has just been designed and 
is being subjected to test. 

A Mobile Optical Unit which is able 
to replace broken lenses immediately in 
the field has been developed. Each* one 
of these units is designed to serve a tvno 
field army. tL rjpc 

The Modern Field X-ray Unit which 
is the product of several years work it 
the Army Medical School is an article of 
highest importance. This unit is designed 
to be readily portable and may be put 

lalf 
ittlefield. 



into operation within one half an hour 
alter arrival on the battlefield 

Special medical packs or kits have been 
developed for use with parachute troons 



troops 

service and for use in the 



for arctic 
jungle, 

The transportation of wounded by air 
plane ambulance is another important de 
velopment in medical field service T o 
tact that properly selected patients can 
be transported vast distances from the 
battle area to the homeland in a short 
spare of time is the distinct advance 
Of airplane evacuation. uge 

Grim realities confront the nation 
which no longer seeks appeasement for 
peace but has girded itself for war To 
the predatory states who would destrov 
us we say, "I have no words. my y^icl 
is m my sword." * 



Naval Communications 
In Wartime 

(Continued from page 100) 

flexibility of movement which such com- 
munication speed permits has changed 
Sip strategy of modern war. Surprise 
-lids have become the custom rather 
ban the exception, and the need for 
soeodv reinforcements makes radio an 
essential weapon of defense. In both of- 
fensive and defensive tactics, the effi- 
ciency of a communication system gen- 
erally determines the success or failure 
of an operation. It may be said, then, 
that in the triumphs of Coral Sea and 
Midway, Naval Communications was able 
to do its share. 

The first vear of war has put the meth- 
ods as weli as the equipment of Naval 
Communications to the test. Neither has 
been found wanting. The success of such 
a widespread organization, involving 
dozens of stations and hundreds of ships, 
was achieved only by constant teamwork. 
Such coordination was realized by the 
efforts of the thousands of men in Naval 
Communications. Key men of long ex- 
perience were able to train Reserves 
called to active service. Communications 
schools were organized in important 
cities, and their numerous graduates are 
now pouring in to fill the personnel re- 
quirements of the expanded service. To 
supply the needs of jiew bases and recent- 
ly commissioned ships, reserve stores of 
equipment are ready. Research has been 
continued even in war so that the Navy's 
high standards of performance will be 
maintained. Constant inspection of ma- 
chines and men make it certain that the 
efficiency of the organization will not de- 
crease, since the burden would be too 
much to bear if one link of the chain grew 
weak. 

Looking back on the first year of this 
difficult war Naval Communications can 
find a good deal that is encouraging and 
a good deal that may be improved. Two 
hemispheres have been traversed, oceans 
have been spanned, and close contact with 
distant lands has been established. Con- 
tact with our lighting forces has been and 
will be maintained until the final Victory 
is won. There are problems of supply yet 
to be worked out and overcome : the cor- 
rect personnel in the correct job must be 
placed : in a few instances some overlap- 
ping occurs and must be eliminated. There 
must not be a moment of complacency; 
there is always room for improvement in 
every organization and towards this end 
Naval Communications must and will 
strive. When victory is ours, and peace 
comes again, then, and then only, will it 
be time to say whether the job has been 
well done. 



The Army Signal Corps 

(Continued from par/c 101) 
so by its production of training films, 
which give the trainee an insight into his 
equipment and tactical problems, and 
thus create better soldiers in less time. 
These educational motion pictures are 
made partly on location at maneuvers 
and elsewhere, and partly in the anima- 
tion studio. A number of former Holly- 
wood writers, directors, cameramen and 
technicians are now engaged on the Sig- 
nal Corps film program, which has been 
multiplied repeatedly as the result of the 
great demand for the product. And. out 
on the battlefield. where the fighting is 
t hickest, cameramen of the Signal Corps 
are and will be on band to take action 
shots for the information of the Army and 
the record of history. 



The Coast Guard Aoademv 
at War 

(Continued from page 92) 
dilions of the Service in living and study- 
ing alongside the regular cadets. 
«-«3? e i a £ itud e Of (he reserve cadets 
,t I Z i t h , oir work leav.es nothing to be 
oesired. They know what they are here 

£w « Wh , en thoy leav e 1 her will know 
what they have to do. 



166 




What Happens when a Plant Slows Down ? 



In modern warfare, as never before, the fate of 
the fighting man at the front depends on the 
production man at home. 

For total warfare requires vast quantities of arms 
and equipment, and the resources of a whole 
nation to make them. And unless we make them — 
"enough, in time" — and deliver them to our forces, 
we are sacrificing lives as surely as if we sent soldiers 
to battle with hands tied. 

That is why it is vital today to avoid anything, 
however small, that might slow up production. 
That is why the prevention of interruptions caused 
hy valve fail ures assumes new importance. 

Because of this, and because many valves in 
P^sent use arc practically irreplaceable until after 
the war, wise management will revise and improve 
standards of valve maintenance. 



Regular inspection of valves by competent men 
replacement of worn parts before destructive 
deterioration takes place . . . proper installation of 
new valves . . . careful instruction of new workers 
... all will reduce slow-downs due to valve failures, 
and help to assure "enough, in time". 



You are invited to consult with Jenkins Engineers 
on any phase of the problem of valve conservation. 

Jenkins Bros., 80 White Street, New York City; 
Bridgeport, Conn.; Atlanta, Ga. ; Boston, Mass.; 
Philadelphia, Pa.; Chicago, 111.; Houston. Tex. Ju^^ 
Jenkins Bros., Ltd., Montreal, Canada; London. 




JENKINS VALVES 

For every industrial, engineering, marine and power plant service . . . in Bronze, 
Iron, Cast Steel and Corrosion-Resisting Alloys . . . 125 to 600 lbs. pressure. 



This is one of a series of advert isemc 



ats In TIME, BUSINESS WEEK, FORTUNE and other ii.du.tml p. 



I publications - deigned to promote the war effort, and iponsored l>y Jenkins Hros. 



Science and the Navy 

{Continued from page 93) 
So much for the facilities and arrange- 
ments provided by the Navy, itself, in 
bringing science to participate in the so- 
lution of its problems during normal peace 
times. There are now more than three 
thousand scientists and Qualified research 
assistants employed in the research es- 
tablishments operated l>y the Navy De- 
partment. Before Looking at the picture 
of scientific participation Ln these mat- 
ters as altered by the country ;it war, ;i 
brief review of the prganizations that 
have been set up during past wars to 
bring the scientist int<> the war effort 
will he helpful to an understanding of 
the overall contribution that: science is 
making in the present war. 

During the period of the Civil War a 
movement was brought to culmination 
which had been under consideration for 
a number of years among scientific men 
<»f the Dnited states for the establishment 
(.i n national scientific organization which 
would have official governmental recog- 
nition. This was accomplished by Con- 
gressional action, approved by President 
Lincoln on March 1S(M. incorporating 
a National Academy of Sciences. The 
principal purpose of the Academy, as 
specified in this enactment was ". . . 
whenever called upon by any department 
of the Government (to) investigate, ex- 
amine, experiment, and report upon any 
subject of science or art . . ." Under 
ibis mandate the agencies of the Gov- 
ernment have called upon the Academy 

repeatedly Cor advice upon special sci- 
entific problems such as the alloys suit- 
able for coinage, the determination of 
certain standards in weights and meas- 
ures, the cause of early slides in the Pan- 
ama Canal, the conversion of forest lands, 
etc. 

With the extension of scientific organi- 
zation in the United States during the 
ensuing fifty years, it was recognized dur- 
ing the year prior to the entry of this 
country into the first World War that 
additional facilities would be required in 
order to make the research resources of 
the Tinted States available to meet the 
technical needs of the Government in pre- 
paring for its unavoidable involvement 
in that conflict. Accordingly, in the early 
summer of 1916 the Academy proposed 
the organization of a National Research 
Council, implemented by Special commit- 
tees, as an active agent to coordinate 
scientific facilities for technological mili- 
tary purposes. This was accepted by Pres- 
ident Wilson, and the Research Council 
served during the next two years in co- 
operation with the Council of National 
Defense and bureaus of the War and 
Navy Departments in scientific work upon 
technical problems of warfare. 

Before the close of the World War, it 
was realized that a coordinating agency 
such as the National Research Council, 
widely representative of scientific inter- 
ests and organizations, could be of defi- 
nite use in peace as well as in war time. 
Accordingly, President Wilson requested 
the National Academy, by an Executive 
Order, dated May 11. 1918, to perpetuate 
the National Research Council, and out- 
lined a wide variety of functions in which 
the Council should serve in the progress 
of science and in assistance to the Gov- 
ernment in the application of science to 
the public welfare and the national de- 
fense. Under this directive, the Council 
has developed contacts with the major 
scientific organizations of the country, 
and — in its status as an operating agencv 
of the National Academy which is itself 
a government created institution — is able 
to make the research resources of these 
private organizations available to the 
Government in a selective and coordi- 
nated way. 

The administrative expenses of the Na- 
tional Academy of Sciences are largely 
met from the income of a sift Of $5,000,- 
000 made to the National Academy of 
Sciences by the Carnegie Corporation of 
New York! The charter of the Academy 
provides that the Academy shall receive 
no compensation for its services to the 
Government. The Academy is reimbursed 
by the Government only for actual ex- 
penses incurred in conducting investiga- 
tions for the Government. Neither the 
Academy nor the Council receive main- 
tenance funds by direct appropriation 



from Congress. The costs of scientific in- 
vestigations which it. makes or sponsors 
for others than the government; are de- 
frayed from special gifts or financial aid 
received from time to time from various 
sources, such as the Rockefeller Founda- 
tion. The General Education Board, the 
National Foundation for Infantile Paral- 
ysis, etc. In most of its activities the 
primary function of the Council has been 
to provide the auspices under which sci- 
entific men of the country may join in 
the promotion of research. The Council 
is not an institution for the maintenance 
or operation of scientific laboratories, but 
rather an organization which attempts 
to integrate the work of individual sci- 
entists and to assist in coordinating their 
efforts. 

The National Research Council is in 
a position to provide assistance in any 
Scientific field. For example, the Army, 
the Navy, and the War Production Board 
all have urgent problems connected with 
metals. To assist in the solution of these 
problems the National Research Council 
has set up rbo War Metallurgy Commit- 
tee. This committee, serving as a nerve 
center, has made available to these de- 
partments, the services of all of the per- 
sonnel engaged in metallurgical research 
in industry and in academic institutions 
totaling not less than 10.000 persons. 

The fighting unit in war is not, a weap- 
on alone nor a man alone, but a combina- 
tion of man and weapon. With, the in- 
creasing complexity of modern weapons, 
it has become vital to select the right 
man for each weapon, and to train him 
in its use. A joint request from the Army 
and the Navy to the NDKC resulted in 
the National Research Council setting up 
a Committee on the Selection and Train- 
ing of Service Personnel to advise the 
armed services in these matters and to 
set up procedures to give effect to the 
recommendations made. This Committee 
consists of some of the most eminent 
psychologists and educators in the coun- 
t ry. 

In order to coordinate the war activi- 
ties of certain of the executive depart- 
ments ef the government the Council of 
National Defense consisting of the Secre- 
taries of War. Navy, Interior, Agricul- 
ture, Commerce and Labor was set up by 
Act of Congress in August. 1010. The 
Council filled an important need during 
World War T. but became inactive after 
the War. When hostilities broke out in 
Europe which led up to the present world 
conflagration, the Council of National 
Defense again became an important piece 
of government machinery. In June, 1040, 
the Council, in an order anproved by 
President Roosevelt, established the Na- 
tional Defense Research Committee. The 
order briefly described the duties of the 
committee as follows: "The Committee 
shall correlate and sunport scientific re- 
search on the mechanisms and devices of 
warfare, except those relating to prob- 
lems of flight included in the field of ac- 
tivities of the National Advisory Commit- 
tee for Aeronautics. Tt shall aid and sup- 
plement the experimental research ac- 
tivities of the War and Navy Depart- 
ments ; and may conduct research for the 
creation and Improvement of instrumen- 
talities, methods, and materials of war- 
fare — ." 

This Committee functioned for about 
a year under the Council of National De- 
fense, when it became apparent that the 
('a hi net officers composing the Council 
could not give it the administrative at- 
tention that if needed in order to carry 
on its work effectively. Tt was felt also 
that Medical Research should be spon- 
sored by the Government in the same 
manner ;is the mechanisms and devices 
of warfare. President Roosevelt, accord- 
ingly, in June. 1941, established as part 
of tiie Office of Emergency Management, 
the Office of Scientific Pesearch and De- 
velopment and placed the National De- 
fense Research Committee under this new 
office. At the same time he established 
also a Committee on Medical Research 
under the new office- r ^^° Office of Scien- 
tific Research and ^Development is headed 
by a Director which gives it the benefit 
of one man control. The Director derives 
his authority directly from the President 
and is responsible only to him for the 
proper performance of the work of the 
office. 

The National Defense Research Com- 



mittee consists of eight members, , four 
of whom are appointed by the President 
on the recommendation of the + Direc^i 
of OSRD; two are officers of theAnW 
and Navy designated by their J^ect^i 
secretaries, and two are ex officio mem 
hers, namely, the President 
tional Academy Of Sciences and the Coin 
missioner of Patents. 

Requests for research work » s £^J. y 
originate with the Army orllW-*W 
ects can also be origina te< I by to re ig 
governments as the President s exec tne 
order provided that such work max < 
done for "any country tbe defense 
which is considered by the President to 
be essential to the defense of the Upitea 
States." Some projects originate with itne 
National Defense Research Committee, 
itself All projects must be approved DJ 
the Committee before they can be under- 

' Appropriations are made by Congress 
to the Cilice of Scientific Research and 
Development for carrying on this work. 
The actual research is done under con- 
tract for OSRD by existing academic 
and industrial laboratories. As closely as 
practicable, these contracts are made so 
that the work shall he done without profit 
or loss to the contractor. A few labora- 
tories have been expanded with funds 
provided by OSRD, but in general exist- 
ing facilities have sufficed to carry on 
the work. The Office of Scientific Re- 
search and Development does not operate 
directly any laboratories or facilities of 
its own. 

The extent to which science is con- 
tributing to the war effort as represented 
by the Office of Scientific Research and 
Development can best he illustrated by 
a few figures. The OSRD has entered 
into a total of more than 1300 contracts 
for research work since its establishment. 
The work covered by these contracts is 
being clone in about 300 research labora- 
tories and establishments scattered 
throughout the United States. These con- 
tracts represent about ninety- four mil- 
lion dollars in probable expenditures. For 
the fiscal year 1041 the OSRD appropria- 
tion for research and development 
totalled approximately eight million dol- 
lars. For the fiscal year 1042 this amount 
rose to forty-five million dollars and for 
the fiscal year 1043 the appropriation is 
seventy-three million dollars. 

It will be noted that in the order de- 
scribing the duties of the National De- 
fense Research Committee quoted above, 
the following appears: — "Except those 
related to problems of flight included in 
the field of activities of the National Ad- 
visory Committee for Aeronautics." Ad- 
vances in the field of aeronautics have 
almost from the beginning of the art 
been made by the scientific method rather 
than by the trial and error method. This 
has been due primarily to the fact that 
the first successful flight was achieved 
at about the same time that science began 
to get into its stride as the servant of 
the inventor, and secondly, because it was 
obvious from the beginning that the vari- 
ous goals of aeronautics had no chance 
of being reached, except by way of the 
scientiflc approach. These considerations 
led to the creation by Act of Congress 
in 1015 of the National Advisory Com- 
mittee for Aeronautics. The Act provides 
that the Committee shall "supervise and 
direct scientific study of the problems of 
flight with a view to their practical solu- 
tion" and "to direct and conduct research 
and experiments in aeronautics." Rasi- 
cally. the functions of this Commit t ee are 
intended to coordinate the research needs 
of civilian and military aviation, prevent 
duplication of effort in that field, and 
unify control of scientific aeronautical 
research. 

The Committee is comnosed of fifteen 
members appointed by the President to 
serve without compensation, and consists 
of one representative from each of the 
aeronautic branches of the War and Navy 
Departments, one from the Civil Aero- 
nautics Authority, one reprcsentati vo 
each from the Smithsonian Institute the 
U. S. Weather Bureau, and the National 
Pvp^aH of Standards, to-other with aiv 
additional persons who are acquainted 
with the needs of aeronautical science or 
have skill in aeronautical engineering and 
its applied sciences. 

The Government actually owns and op 
erates the principal aeronautical research 



. research work is done for 
laboratories. < ^ . . at these laborator- 
tne aviatuin ig alg0 dQne 

ieS %* 0 ?nknS itself, but not by any 
^ the i* Extent that the automobile 
means to cne le doe s its research 

ilM T in its own territories. The princi- 
W ° rk , ical research laboratories of 

1)1,1 V n ent are the Langley Memo- 

% ( S " 2.1 Laboratory at Langley 
r- i,i I V r inia". the Ames Aeronautic;,] 
[ ield ' / i Moffel Field, California,— 
^^Z^r^^rih station designed 
! Ml T, r a ran engine development is 
,() ( v i on at Cleveland, Ohio, 

K& < S^hSr& by Act of Co, 

gl lt wHlhavo b^n noted from the above 
that Research Ls carried on by various 
bureaus and branches of the armed ser- 
! by several other agencies of the 
Government, and by a number of quasi 
governmental agencies. Frequently each 
of these activities contributes something 
to a research project or a number of 
branches of the armed services have an 
interest in the projects. In order to insure 
that on the one hand all interested groups 
are brought into the picture and on the 
other hand that there is no duplication 
of effort the Office of the Coordinator of 
Research and Development was estab- 
lished in July, 1941 to function directly 
under the Secretary of the Navy. This 
office was established particularly with 
a view to facilitating the relations be- 
tween the scientists mobilized under the 
Office of Scientific Research and Devel- 
opment and the Navy. A similar coor- 
dinating office has been established in the 
War Department. These two offices keep 
in close touch with each other and have 
representatives who sit in on all con- 
ferences involving research affecting both 
services. 



The Army Transportation 

Corps 

(Continued from page 94) 

problem facing the Transportation 
Corps. It is the problem presently being 
attacked by the Transportation Corps, 
and it is the problem that will be solved 
by this Corps. 

To sum up the functions of the Trans- 
portation Corps, it handles movements of 
troops from training camps to the front, 
and movements of war material from the 
factory door to the theaters of operation 
and overseas commands. There the 
Transportation Corps turns it over to the 
Commanding General and comes back 
for more. 

The movement of our rapidly growing 
army, its equipment, material, and sup- 
plies to the theaters where it will be able 
to attack the enemy and keep on attack- 
ing until the Nazis and Japs are crushed, 
is a gargantuan task but one essential to 
accomplish. The fulfilling of this vital 
mission will be the contribution of the 
Transportation Corps to the victory which 
must be ours. 



The Operation of AGD 

(Continued from pfoge 146) 

classification and machine records. 

Many field establishments are main- 
tained and operated, among them the Re- 
cruiting Publicity Bureau, Machine Rec- 
ords Units and Army Postal Service In- 
spection Units. 

Officers of the Department are as- 
signed to the staffs of commanders at the 
larger headquarters, such as armies, 
corps, service commands, departments, 
divisions, and other independent com- 
mands, at home and abroad. These offi- 
cers perform duties generally similar in 
aatnre to those carried out by officers of 
the Adjutant General's Department with- 
111 the War Department. 

iho comparative facility and rapidity 
with which the peace time organization 
nl the Adjutant General's Department 
nas been converted and expanded to meet 
the tremendous demands of total and 
gionai war constitute convincing evidence 
°?™e fundamental soundness of the prin- 
ciples of procedure developed by experi- 
ence winch are responsible for the effi- 
™ or Sanigation and operation of the 
greatest administrative job in America. 



168 





The Army and Industry 

i Confirmed from page 32 > 

our economic structure because of racial 
or religious prejudice. 

Discrimination because of creed or 
color is indefensible at any time; When it 
presents workers whose ability is des- 
perately needed from entering employ- 
ment in time of war such discrimination 
is as bad as aid to the enemy. 

Even the sketchiest recital makes ap- 
parent the titanic* character of the task- 
that lies before us in achieving the max- 
imum effectiveness of our men. materials 
: i ml machines. It is important for us in 
the Army to remember that wo do not 
have all the answers to the problems in- 
volved. 

Far from setting ourselves up as ex- 
perts in fields about which we are rela- 
tively inexperienced, we must cooperate 
with and rely upon those whose previous 
training has given them greater under- 
Standing of the intricacies of modern pro- 
duction. It is the Army's job to make 
known what it needs and to see to it that 
the civilian agencies in charge of produc- 
tion do not fall down on their end of the 
job. The Army must act as watchdog and 
hurry-upper, spurring industry to ever- 
greater effort and intervening directly 
only when industry is not doing the 
things that must be done. 

It is easy for a soldier to sit back and 
criticize industry because there isn't 
enough copper, or enough steel, or enough 
munitions. It is easy for the civilian 
population to criticize the Army because, 
lacking munitions, there aren't enough 
victories. It is easy for labor to sit back 
and criticize employers for failing to an- 
ticipate the needs of the war. It is easy 
for the employers to criticize labor for re- 
fusing to relax standards that stand in 
the way of increased output. It is easy 
to criticize. It is much more difficult to 
get things done. 

Squabbling among ourselves will not 
win this war. We must respect one an- 
other's abilities and contributions. Onlv 



by pooling all our energies and all our re- 
sourcefulness and all our determination 
can we wipe out the black forces of to- 
talitarianism and build a brighter world. 

Norway's Part in the War 

(Cvntmued from page 44) 
don. seat of the Royal Norwegian Govern- 
ment in Exile. 

Numerous Norwegians are also doing 
their bit in the war as members of the 
lighting forces of Great Britain, the 
United States and Canada, It has been 
said, for instance, that for every man in 
the Royal Norwegian Navy there is an 
other Norwegian in the British Navy. 
During the past years a large number of 
Norwegian men and women have escaped 
from Northern Norway into Northeastern 
Russia and have there found satisfaction 
for their long-cherished desire to come to 
grips with the Germans on equal terms. 

Matching the courage and determina- 
tion of the tens of thousands of Nor- 
wegians who are fighting the enemy from 
abroad are the hundreds of thousands of 
Norwegians at home who, cost what it 
may. steadfastly resist every new Nazi 
encroachment. In two and one-half years 
of occupation they have had to endure 
untold hardships and humiliations. Bui 
they have not lost faith, nor will they. 
They have proved themselves unconquer- 
able. 

In a greeting sent to King Haakon on 
his 70th birthday, August 3, VM'2, the 
people of occupied Norway expressed 
their purpose and courage in these 
words : 

"The Norwegian home front has one 
line of action, and only one. We have 
chosen to live or die in a right for our 
native land, and there can be no thought 
of compromise. This line of action of our 
Norwegian home front is independent of 
any aid from our Allies — yes, even of the 
war's outcome. Let it be said today : The 
Norwegian home front will never give in. 
Other occupied countries may carry on 
their struggles for liberation along other- 
lines. We have only this one." 



★★★★★★ 



Serving every serr^ 

CORPORA 

llui to major ■« ^^alUedu^ 

Z. We have taken fO* rf „ s e,,.ce, 

I „f ou. products ^f t'ose'e .hearmedfo.ee, 
^cday.ourorimarya.ro.s ^ e 

We are ^^T^ rank and army <*£ 
subcontract for • j ^ent. I» 

"«s small arms and parts fo d ete.mmed 
P f ' 1,, is dependent upon us, ^ 
SOf " * diet or sailor shall eve. lack, 
that no sold.er 

t oo.sfo.«innmgth CORpORA T»ON 

HOODAIUH-HW*".,, ^.f^ froJ ,„- 

„j ,<« ^^^^^^^^^^ 



J 




In Our 106 th Y< 



ear 



WE arc proud that the nation's fighting forces 
have honored the employees of our Com- 
pany with the Army-Navy "E" pennant for 
their outstanding record of achievement on the 
vital production front. 

The award comes to us in our 106th year of 
continuous progress in arms manufacturing. 

This is the fifth major war in which Colt arms 
have played an important role in backing up our 
fighting forces on the field of battle — on duty 
where the fighting is thickest. Today Colt experi- 
ence and craftsmanship are turning out the finest 
weapons in our history. 

Our target is the most important since the birth 
of our country. Our production must aim true and 
hard. An unbroken flow of arms must be kept 
moving to our fighting fronts. 

Until the dawn of peace, the only guns to come 
off our production line bearing 
our trademark will be Colt 
machine guns, cannon, auto- 
matic pistols and revolvers . . . 
all for the United States and 
our Allies. 




COLT'S PATENT FIRE ARMS MFG. CO. 

HARTFORD, CONNECTICUT 



169 



Naval Ordnance 

(Continued from page 87) 

Each division is further divided into 
sections and subsections, each under a re- 
sponsible officer or civilian. The bureau 
policy is decentralization of authority 
and responsibility, in all bureau activity, 
both internal and external. 

Frequent conferences, attended by the 
six division directors and the senior 
aviator, are called by the Chief and As- 
sistant Chief, to acquaint all these offi- 
cers with current progress in the major 
problems of the bureau. 

Some standardized naval ordnance 
equipment and material is obtained from 
the Army Ordnance Department, such as 
small arms, certain small caliber machine 
guns, and ammunition for these weapons; 
some of the Navy's smokeless powder, and 
most of its TNT; and certain shell fuzes. 

On the other hand, Navy Ordnance sup- 
plies a number of standard items of equip- 
ment to the Army. 

The general policy is for one service to 
produce all of a certain item for both ser- 
vices, instead of having the two services 
competing in the market for the same 
product, as was the case in the last wai. 

Most of the Navy's ordnance items, 
however are manufactured in its own 
plants or by private industry. The pres- 
ent gigantic production program has re- 
quired the establishment of new facili- 
ties on a huge scale. Nine new naval ord- 
nance plants have been built, all of them 
being located in the interior of the coun- 
try for strategic reasons. More than two 
hundred and twenty-five companies have 
had their facilities increased, some by 
many millions of dollars. Over four thou- 
sand prime contracts for naval ordnance 
have been awarded to private industry, 
and the number of subcontractors exceeds 
twenty thousand. 

As a stimulus to production, in com- 
pliance with a directive of Secretary 
Knox, the Bureau of Ordnance evolved 
in July, 1941 an incentive plan utilizingthe 
time-honored Navy "E." Companies and 
naval plants which were outstanding m 
production of naval ordnance received the 
Bureau of Ordnance flag and a blue pen- 
nant with a white "E." Lapel buttons in- 
scribed with the "E," the words "For 
production," and the company's name, 
were issued to each employee. 

The underlying thought was to make 
each individual in these plants feel that 
he or she was also in the service. The 
response was most gratifying. 

Companies receiving the award in- 
creased their production still further, and 
hundreds of those who had not yet "made 
the grade" have written or wired for full 
information as to what was necessary to 
qualify. This award plan was later 
adopted by the Navy Department as a 
whole, with a Board of retired Admirals 
receiving recommendations from the Bu- 
reaus and deciding upon the award. In 
July, this incentive plan evolved into a 
joint award made in the name of both the 
Armv and the Navy. The joint Army- 
Navy Production Award has been given 
to ever 500 companies and Government 
manufacturing establishments since its 
inception. Companies receiving the award 
may be nominated by either Service but 
must have produced to "E" standards for 
both where there is a joint interest. At 
the end of each six months' period subse- 
quent to the award, every company's rec- 
ord is reviewed and if satisfactory the 
award is renewed by the addition of a 
star to its pennant. In those rare cases 
where the record is poor, the award is 
withdrawn. A brief ceremony is arranged 
for the presentation with high-ranking 
oflicers as speakers. These events have a 
strong patriotic appeal to the entire com- 
munity as well as proven beneficial ef- 
fect upon production of the plant thus 
honored. 

While there is much still to be done, 
and this is no time to be complacent and 
"rest on our oars." I feel that we are well 
underway, and that with the fine cooper- 
ation of private industry and labor which 
we are now receiving, we will arrive, not 



too late with too little, but on time with 
plenty, both in quality and quantity. 



War Censorship 

(Continued -from page 75) 

sors cut out dangerous references to 
movements of troops and ships, details 
about the manufacture of planes, tanks, 
and munitions, and other bits of infor- 
mation which the Axis powers might be 
able to put to use. At the same time, the 
censorship process enables the United 
States Government to obtain from incom- 
ing mail and cables news of the enemy's 
operations and morale. 

About 12,000 persons are now engaged 
in this work. By contrast, the voluntary 
program of censorship for the American 
press and radio requires only a score of 
people and costs only one-half of one per 
cent of the Office of Censorship's $2G,- 
T>00,000 budget. This voluntary domestic 
program, however, is really the heart of 
censorship. If damaging information is 
kept out of print and off the air, the 
work of saboteurs and Axis agents in this 
country is made all the more difficult. 
What they cannot learn in the first place 
they cannot smuggle across our borders 
and into the hands of the enemy. 

It would be a simple matter for the 
censor to tell editors and broadcasters 
that they could print virtually nothing 
about the war unless it was carefully 
prepared by an official source. But that is 
the way of the dictators. They have to 
spoon-feed their people. Their news- 
papers are mere propaganda sheets. 
Their borders are sealed against the 
truth. 

If a free people is to be expected to go 
"all out" for the war effort, it must know 
what is taking place. It must be informed 
as to the aims of its leaders, the progress 
of battles, and the general success of its 
vast war production program. Details, of 
course, often must be withheld, but it is 
axiomatic that to be intelligent the peo- 
ple must be informed. 

The question often arises as to whether 
it is more important to withhold a 
specific piece of news so that the enemy 
cannot learn about it, or to make it pub- 
lic so that the American people can bet- 
ter judge the situation. The Office of 
Censorship does not censor the Govern- 
ment. If an official decides that certain 
information under his jurisdiction should 
be disclosed, we regard him as an appro- 
priate authority. The Office of Censor- 
ship, however, has issued Codes of War- 
time Practices for both press and radio, 
outlining types of information which 
should be withheld if no responsible Gov- 
ernment official will approve its publica- 
tion. Among these categories are composi- 
tion and movements of military units, ship 
movements, descriptions of new airplanes, 
details of factory output, movements of 
the President and other high officials 
whose safety might be endangered, and 
even certain weather information that 
might enable the enemy to pick a good 
night for a bombing raid. 

Since much of this material has to do 
with military information, it is only 
natural for the Office of Censorship to 
work closely with Army and Navy offi- 
cials. With their cooperation, for ex- 
ample, we have worked out a program for 
handling news about any air raids on the 
United States. This program is sufficient- 
ly restrictive so that the enemy could 
not learn details which might aid him on 
the next raid. At the same time, suffi- 
cient news would be distributed so that 
the people would not become panic- 
stricken by unfounded rumors. 

Thus it is obvious that censorship, in- 
telligently applied, can be an important 
adjunct to military action. But we must, 
also bear in mind that over-censorship, 
operating arbitrarily, could be detri- 
mental to public morale. The Oflice of 
Censorship, conscious of that danger, is 
endeavoring to apply common-sense regu- 
lations, as the President directed, "in 
harmony with the best interests of our 
free institutions." 



Naval Shipbuilding and 
Industry 

(Continued from page 60) 

which shipbuilding faciUties may 'be ex- 
panded is subject to restrictions izr less 
elastic than those merely geogra phicaL 
The extraordinary demands i to ■ *™* 
ment of all the kinds required for an an 
out war effort have strained the countrys 
productive capacity for materials ana 
tools to a point beyond anything that pre 
viously had been envisioned, necessitat- 
ing a pause for review and, in some causes, 
curtailment of expansion projects, blioi i- 
ages of manpower, while not as acute as 
needs for material, nevertheless offer an- 
other real problem. The training pro- 
grams which have been set up m all the 
principal shipyards of the country are 
managing to keep pace with the require- 
ments for new workers, but the nation s 
experienced shipbuilding talent has been 
stretched thin to the snapping point, in 
some cases it has been necessary to draw 
on the thin ranks of retired naval officers 
to supply the much-needed "know how 
which was lacking in some of the newly 
established or rehabilitated shipbuilding 
organizations. 

Important as are these restrictions 
there looms above them all an even more 
basic limitation, viz., the steadiness and 
continuity of the flow into the shipyards 
of the turbines, gears, generators, and 
other component parts without which the 
ship is but an empty shell. The time is 
long since past when such naval ship- 
building as was carried on in preemer- 
gency days could be concentrated in the 
several Navy Yards and in less than a 
half-dozen private yards, each of which 
was a self-sufficient unit capable of 
carrying the construction of a naval ves- 
sel, with all its component parts, through 
from start to finish with a minimum of 
outside assistance from a handful of 
highly specialized industrial sources of 
supply. Today there are approximately 
300 yards engaged in the current naval 
shipbuilding program. With but very few 
exceptions, the activities of these 300 
shipyards have been concentrated almost 
exclusively on the functions of hull as- 
sembly and installation of machinery 
and other component parts drawn from 
outside sources of supply. The extraordi- 
nary work load which has thus been 
thrown on the forces of industry would 
be enormous even if it were generated 
solely by the naval shipbuilding program. 
When to it are added the comparable 
burdens imposed upon the same branches 
of industry by the emergency programs 
of the Maritime Commission and the War 
Department, the job assumes proportions 
of sheer stupendousness. 

When it is understood that the hull of 
a subchaser, for example, can be assem- 
bled in somewhat less time than is re- 
quired for the manufacture of the ves- 
sel's intricate propelling machinery, it 
can be appreciated why it will be difficult 
to keep the shipyards in constant high 
gear until industry can be correspond- 
ingly stepped up to a rate of production 
synchronized with that of the yards 
Herein lies the explanation of the* ques- 
tion oft-repeated of late as to why it is 
that all our shipyards are not working 
around the clock. The reason is that as 
yet it has not been possible to build up a 
flow of materials and machinery suffi 
cient to keep the yards going full speed 
ahead for 24 hours a day. P 

The achievement of such a flow has 
been the constant objective of the Bn 
reau of Ships for the past two years" 
Where at first the facilities expansion 
program was concentrated on the build 
ing of new shipways, docks and nier*— 
that IS the facilities of the shipyards 
as such — an ever-growing emplmk 
has for many months past been pS on 



of industrial expansion. 





than 'marched Tolto ™&^^ 
amounts allocated for the ell ^ 
privately-owned industrial i t^tuF* °1 
the expenditures wntSfi2 lt » 
immediate future will even Z£ JSL?* 



170 



inning at a volume sufficient to keep the 
running , «* . t a maximum capacity 
^fShouSadIy a Already the productive 
o/uv of the major sources of naval 
SSfflSrf^ been blown up to many 
Ernes their greatest peace-time achieve- 
ments While specific examples may not 
nronerlv be cited, mention may be made 
of one producer of marine engines which 
is now operating at a rate of production 
eighteen times greater than its normal 
mSnnt This striking accomplishment has 
been achieved in two ways principally: 
m Bv a large-scale expansion of plant 
facilities, financed in part by the pro- 
ducer and in part by the Navy Depart- 
mmt-' ( 9 ) Bv an elaborate utilization of 
the services and facilities of sub-con- 
tractors in every part of the country. 

This one concern alone is now employ, 
in" more than 250 subcontractors and 
suppliers spread throughout approxi- 
mately ISO communities in 25 states. The 
dollar volume of work represented by 
these sub-contracts is 100 times the 
amount let out in the pre-emergency pe- 
riod Nearly 60% of the total volume of 
work required for the production of an 
engine is thus derived from sources out- 
side the prime contractor. 

The enormity of this accomplishment 
cannot be comprehended from a mere re- 
cital of figures. It requires an under- 
standing of the intricacy of detail that 
goes into the creation of a large-scale 
marine engine to appreciate the co-ordina- 
tion of activity that is involved in an 
operation participated in by 250 concerns 
in widely separated parts of the country. 

This is a demonstration of what can be 
done by an intelligent utilization of the 
services of sub-contractors. In its effec- 
tiveness it cannot be approached by any 
other form of the "spread-the-work" 
policy. Other methods have been at- 
tempted by the British, even to the extent 
of making it mandatory for a prime con- 
tractor to let out a stated percentage— as 
much as 50% — of the work to sub-con- 
tractors without regard to their avail- 
ability or suitability to produce in an ef- 
ficient manner. In the end, however, they 
have been forced to return to the method 
whereby the selection and control of sub- 
contractors is left to the prime contrac- 
tor, with the Government rendering every 
possible assistance in discovering and 
publicizing new sources of supply. 

The magnificent team-work which is 
evidenced by this one example is rapidly 
becoming the rule throughout all indus- 
try. Day by day our industrial strength 
is being forged more and more compactly 
into a coordinated mechanism, operating 
as a single unit for the attainment of a 
common end. Cooperation is the theme of 
the day and it is being demonstrated on 
every side in a great variety of ways. Re- 
cently the Bureau of Ships was confront- 
ed with the impossibility of securing a 
sufficient source of supply for geared tur- 
bine propulsion machinery which was re- 
quired for a newly-developed type of 
naval vessel. It was determined that the 
design of the vessel could be altered to 
permit the utilization of a non-conven- 
tional type of reciprocating steam engine 
for which an available source of supply 
was discovered in Pennsylvania. The 
castings to be used by the 'Pennsylvania 
producer were to be machined bv a sub- 
contractor in Virginia, but the latter 
lacked a certain type of planer required 
to do the job. With the assistance of the 
War Production Board, representatives of 
the Bureau of Ships located a suitable 
and unengaged planer in a plant in Kan- 
sas, and immediately undertook to have 
it made available for the use of the Vir- 
ginia concern. 

Limitations of space preclude any 
review of the multitude of instances 
which could be cited to illustrate the 
heartening fashion in which the various 
branches of industry are "playing ball. 
How so many concerns, capable of tak- 
ing on war work, have cleared the way 
for assuming the jobs by passing their 
commercial work-loads on to other com- 
panies which lacked the capacity to un- 
dertake war production work for them- 
{Continued on Next Page) 




Navy Ship Building 

(Continued from Preceding Page) 
selves ; how other concerns, choked to the 
bursting point with war orders for prod- 
ucts of their own devising and develop- 
ment, have made their plans and tech- 
niques and general "know how" available 
for other concerns to get into production 
of the goods ; the detailed recording of 
these, and the many other illustrations 
of industrial team play which are of al- 
most daily occurrence, must be postponed 
until some future date. The sum total of 
these efforts may, however, be shortly 
stated as spelling the complete and final 
doom of the Axis Powers. Notwithstand- 
ing the fact that at the time it was orig- 
inallv set up the Navy's emergency ship- 
building program was felt by many ex- 
perienced shipbuilders to be hopeless of 
attainment, in view of the shortness of 
the period established for the completion 
of a wholly unprecedented volume of 
construction, latest available reports dis- 
close that in most of its aspects the pro- 
gram is well ahead of schedule. Never- 
theless the remarkable progress that has 
been made to date will be as nothing com- 
pared to what will follow once our in- 
dustrial machine gets into high gear. The 
shift is now very nearly accomplished and 
results should soon be forthcoming. 



The Netherlands Navy 
Fights On 

(Continued from page 43) 
discussion whatever about the fact that 
when Java itself, the key-point of the 
great southern barrier, was threatened 
with invasion, there was only one thing 
for Admiral Helf rich to do. The Supreme 
Command had already decided to hold 
Java at all costs ; and therefore the naval 
sacrifice was too great to prevent the is- 
lands from falling to the enemy. Forced 
to battle with a Japanese Armada con- 
voying 60 troop carriers, Helf rich ordered 
Admiral Doorman to go out and meet a 



force alarmingly superior. At that 
moment the Japanese had more than 100 
warships in East Indian waters; and a 
large proportion of these was concen- 
trated for the attack on Java. Neverthe- 
less, Karel Doorman unhesitatingly sent 
up his grand signal; "I am going to at- 
tack. Follow me." 

It appears that his daring was reward- 
ed. For in the afternoon battle he un- 
doubtedly, by amazing seamanship, pun- 
ished the much heavier Japanese fleet 
severely. 

Then fate took a hand. During that 
night the Allied cruiser squadron ran into 
what was probably a submarine flotilla, 
with the result that the two Dutch 
cruisers, including the flagship were sent 
to the bottom. 

A defeat? Yes. But a glorious one ! For 
not only did it show the stuff of which 
the Dutch Navy is made, but in its very 
nature inspired the Netherlands Kingdom 
to carry on, to maintain, until victory is 
won. The policy of great wars is not 
guided by the question of what appears to 
be more immediately profitable. Our own 
Dutch history as well as that of many 
great nations gives ample proof of this. 
A policy of great wars implies the courage 
to stand by the side of justice, no matter 
what the cost. 

But the Dutch do more than merely 
stand. Just as Doorman sent his attack 
signal fluttering over the Java Sea ; just 
as De Ruyter fantastically threw London 
into an uproar when he forced the boom 
of the Medway river and sailed up to 
Chatham with the same signal at his 
masthead ; just as Boisot literally sailed 
a Dutch fleet overland to the relief of 
Leyden ; just so will the Netherlands 
Navy continue to attack until the whole 
Kingdom is once again freed from the op- 
pressor. 



( 



CHECKED IN THE LABORATORY 

4* ^ 



CHECKED ON THE GROUND 



CHECKED IN THE AIR 

Produced with watchmaker-like precision... tested in the labora- 
tory, on the ground and in flight. . . Aircraft Accessories equipment 
is serving today to assure top efficiency and flight security for 
some of America's mightiest bombers and most powerful fighters. 

AIRCRAFT ACCESSORIES CORPORATION 





ZLl 



04 amp puu aoj 9doq oav 

Sniaq axB nam a sa ^ Jn saos % gg 
-04 os •s,umu U(M i ( lu avou jo e^ i' 
o^u) 04 oam paddpiba xb vv pt 0 u n > , i 
SUWP aau X oqj ur l>u^u 0 y ^ ^ * 

UI SuiUlU.14 lUOlJOU.ld SU 

j T f>q; in pezuxoxpe^ sooia.ios ptoSSS 
-op Mi oas i1T av Aupo) j G aam Suxill 
aq* os 'seouBprddB p T oqasnSq Xmmi u 

04 Poaii sxaq^Bj xxaqj puB saaqrar auo Ib 
m£ otno^oa la ai „ J0 pxoqsaxq} oin 
no Avoir oav pax. 'j ib^ Pr?Q^ 
9§V oipuH oq.) paaejuo ^^0^9^ 

aq) 04 IBDSBSBpBli UlO.lJ ^pULnu'^UM'oi 

AUAvpiK uio.ij 'pmnnoz avo X 01 puujooT 
uio.ij ^ag .§111.109: 04 B9 S iiuoo 014 uio.il 
•uo 1 aoo poB SnSBDtlBO oii4 04 'aorr .10 vim 
pnB oilv oqj ssoxdb 'idA^r pxre ufciri 
jo spubs aiu 04 'u n u.i4sny P ob inatin 

aq} 04 qSBn SOTB9q OABAY-j.ioqg 'SBOTJainv 
aq4 Suorau A^iXBpjxos oiaoqdsuuoq 04 oiu 
■qujnoo pirasiionBN P04111Q aq} ^aq 
•upuu2udoad a'iuouo ^OBJe^unoo ^trr -Aim 
-DiA jo spBaqxBads a.iu smuoq oipua ubo 
-i.iamy aaiOA aSuu.i Suo\ smiopaa.ij a.iu 
saABM poqs svoipu.i < A-nimoi4inuo4u I 

'4aojja auAV aq) 04 11014110 
-1.141100 t«4ia u SniAojcI st qoiBasaj uoisiv 
-e[04 jo s.iuoa* uiojj Sux^nsaj a^paxMotra 
pa4ummiioou eqi 'axiqMUBajfl ubai oq4 
.134 ju aoiAjas ojiqncl *UBixodan ob aiuooaq 
04 sasiraojcl uoisiAaiax mib 9144 uo pjBaq 
ptre uaas sxorpnxisui Aq pouiuaj uoaq 
aABq suapjBAV piBx-xiB jo spoBsnoqa puu 
s.iaAiaoaj q4iAV paddmba uaaq OAuq S4aoio 
-aici aoipod %xO£ avom «T 'Oiiqnd aq4 64 
aoiAjas 1? Suiraooaq jo pioqsa.iqj aq4 uo 
suav uoisiAaiaj 'paxBxaap sba* auAv uaqAV 

•scIjoo xty 

pun 'auTjBK *trBqaiej\[ ( a'ai:\t aq4 'scIjoq 
p?uSis aqj ui moq4 JO Auuiu jo ^uaui 
-4sipia aqj in pa4iuso.i SBq ja^uannjaid 
-xa ina^BinB eq4 SnigBJiioatra in Aa'qocI 
pa^qSjsjBj s t BDTJ9uiv •siioi4i;oriiiiuiiuoo 
jo p{ag aqj ui saapuai jsaiqii aqj jo ainos 
auioo aAnq s.ina4iuiiB oq4 raojji -84111.10 
-a.i 401U4SUI oj pm; 'juoinduiba 0114 ooia 
-jas 04 oipc.i oiut4.ii;av 04i?.iodo pnu joa.iip 
04 uaiu puc s.iaoijLjo parjsrrua OAi?q sa^B^s 
pa4uiQ aqj jo saoiAjas pamjB 0114 4 uiaq'4 
pa4c.iado oqAv 110111 ScmoA* jo cIiiojS pauiBj^ 
-jias A'ipipiiotds oq4 mo.ij 'SJBM qjoq uj 
'OOO'S 4noqu ojoav aj9q; f-xoL 111 : sa4U4S 
pa^iufi aqj in snopB^s an9;BXHB posuoon 
000'92 9J^av e.10114 'oiuuo .icav oq4 uaqAV 

•I .iuaV. PI-ioAV 
jo spuog; QjBqvj eq4 9;ouiojd 04 pasn 
spoinoui aStBduiBa .ioavois qonin aq4 1141AV 
paJBdmoa ^panrsne^xn uaaci oAuq sa^BS 
puu aidoad oq^ a.iojaq ^nd A*ppmb uaaq 
s'uq uMvsduvsD ptiog ibm aqj^ 'sduiuo Sui 
-unr.14 aq4 q4iAv puB pB^idBO s\uoi4L'u aqi 
1141AV '4.10JJO .ii?av aqj q)iA4 40U41100 4oa.iip 
tn si aopBindod ubtjiaio oqx -puuiooi 04 
i?ip 7 -i4suy uio.ij 'iqioQ 04 uopuoi mo.ij 
A\o.)s'oi\i 04 ojiBQ uio.ij — s.iojBjuoininoo 
pin? sjaAjasqo aBOTjaury A^q 4si?opuo.iq 
S4.ioda.i 4S04U1 .ioj ppoAv oin pnnoJB 
paddies a.n? S.101104S11 *so4iiunii naa4JS u \ 
-WW 'saianaSB savou puB s^uojtj savou sno 

(roc Qitod iffo.tf panmpuoQ) 



si?q pure '>\mi\ raatpara janxBa jo ^Saixnoo 
-4.ioqs oq4 soiimuuno >pu;i loijadtlS siqj, 
•>pu:4 umtpara f-\± aq^ pa^Baao ^aiiiaoqq 
-nu }pu?4 .ioqio q ^iAv puB 'p.ii?oa Vo.io^ 

((JO ofwd uiouj: ponuiiuo'd) 

pajorajy aqj^ 



•aaaSop qSiq u 04 soi4iH Ill o asaqq ssas 

-SOd S.TODllJO pi'lU UOIV: '9JBJJBM pa.K >UI.I B 
40 so4?smI)o.[ o.iu o^i.Miioo pm? Hiav 
a^iuiiuiopui 'aDuaSnia^ui 'xauaosjad *\\ 
jo 4udso in punoj aq a'uiu aajoj pajoauy 
aq4* 111 aauap^aoD pappB a'himii^i 

" •uoi40940ad Vdojju OSIB .lOAVodo.nj 
puu paods *asxnoo jo 'aiiqA* la^Bid xouijb 
— uoi40O4oad si 0.11141M4 Jaq^oav , s«un 
ao.ioj pajoraaB jo saan^Baj ^iiB^JOdra] aj^ 
laAiodaxg puB ^4HIQ ora 'P^ads •A'jo^dia 
[BDiSa^BJ^s b 04111 ssaaons iBDi^aB^ puo4xo 
04 puB soBqo a4t?aJ0 04 ^unioA.iopn arooj 
soa.ioso.1 4U0AO.id 04 'otnj Aiuauo ,>qi 04 
-111 daap a^BJ^anad 'asudans jo aS^u^A 
-pb aq4 4ioxdxa 04 japjo ui paads ifia^^a.TS 
aq4 qiiAv'p<M.>iipuoo si ^v.\\\: aqi mo*} 
oqi (o')uiod pa;oaiasf Siun^ivo b jo uop 
-Bi4auad b jo 4naxndotaAaa jaq^ta lAiatnis 
pa4T?4s aq ubo aoJoj pajoxajy aq; jo 
Ampuls aqjc SJ04DUJ [Bdpuud oq 4 .40 auo 
paia^B AHT.'i.ianMii OAuq aUBld aq) pm: 
mm aqa iras f a.tBjJBA\ nxapoiti aj pa^uBqo 
athmJ on suq A.^MM)s n.suo.niy 

•Bi.iai?tV ^•>-> <> -^ , I^ ? s l lJ > ll< 
uiqAT pub 4<Ia.^i ui A'pio ;oa ^joiaad 

r,s sir paAOXd PHB pa4Sa4 uaaq M0T1 



; spoojs' 0114 jaAixap 
lll^ oav • a^paxd siqi sa^uiu sd.ioj jaisBin 
-ja4.iuu() aqi ';oinuoo iBapiaa siqi ui 4.iud 
•mo sb puu -unq suisoddo ajiB v)av : Amaua 
a ly snipftg o.iu oav 'unq P^u uu.) oav 
.lOAO.ioipvv puB lOAauaqAv A'uioua oqj asoddo 
Uiav oav 'pius SBq 4jOAasooH Miai)iisa.ij 

•iua4SA's uoiiuqiaisip 
lOTjadms u puu uoi^jodsuBj; * aoijadns 
t sat[ddtls aouadns m\ jba\ supi iuav hjav ,>av 
•paiiddns aq isiuu sdooo) oqi ibav aq} uiav 
OX 'paSuBqaun si uoiiuiLqs [B^U9inuputij 
oqi A'nuaisuq 4nq •xaidiuoo a.ioui suiai 
-qo.id 0114 puu iaSStq si >isui jiio Aup«)j, 

•110140U 0401 s^aS 41 

00110 'op uuo A^nqaSui puu oaiiuii'iui uuai 
-jaray 4uqAv saaAvod [Boanaa poB paqiu aqi 
paAvoqs puBSUTqsJLaj lu.iauajj Aq paqyriq^ 
-sa suav juqi uia^sAs A'xddns aq4 4U pa[OA 
-auui ppioAv aqi muav PI-ioaV oqi ui 411^ 

aaora in is paaaputixq s^uauoddo .1110 
asuBaaq a'.ioioia 04 paiqumis v>av •paapui 
: sjapnuxq }J0dsuBJ4-A*xddns .1110 qiiAv .u.»av 
uuoi.ioiuy-qsiiiudg oq4 4so[ 4Souqu o\{ 

•A'.io4aiA uoiu-i 0114 04 .iojouj .rju14iKi1.11 
-uoo u A104111110P suav Aiddns jo saotAaas 
11.10q4.10x oq4 jo A^i.ioi.iodns 0114 A'piiui.Mj 
muai IIaiq oq) ^uiuuiAv luo-ij A % DB.iapajnoo 
aqj ida^i iua4SA*s A'xddns sii jo UAvop^ua.iq 
oqj A'juo juq4 OAaipq suuLioisiq a'uujv: 

•u.1114 opi4 aq) pip aiag; a^u'j jo ax4 
-4uq aq4 iioav qoiqAV )aag s^Jjaj pMiiupy 
4Iinq uiu)duo .1a4su1u.1a4.1unO u uaqAi £\UQ 
•dn 4nnq saun A'iddiis Jtaq; daa>{ 04 pauuj 
oipvv suuai.ivHUV oqi suav 41 uoqAv ^ISl 

111 paujtq isouqu saxq^4 aqx jbav a'.iu 
-U0141110AOH aqi qtav sxBtuoxoo aq4 padxaq 
s.iapuniq 4.iodsuu.i) - Aiddns qspiJa 
•uissiiH jo uoisuAin pa}Bj-XXI s Pl u \ A'lddus 
jo soin.i aqj pa4iiog aq asxiBoaq " a Jidxna 

(GS zOvil uiojf ponutpWQ) 
9 l°H S 6 J3JSBlUJaiJBtl^) 9l[JL 

*axqissod su 

Appiiib su juav sun jo SmauiAi aqi stream 
stsAtbub iBug aq4 ui 4uqj puu ssauisnq 
s 4 a[dood oq4 si ss9Uisaq s\a'aux aqx 

•aiiLpio.i 9mp-9aB9d avoi 
-ioj 40UUUO 4uau1a.u1ao.1d juav 4uq4 avou>[ 
Iioav siunoaay puu sar[ddng jo nB9Jcng aq) 
puu s.ia.iii4aujuuuiu 4iiq 'A'auoui s ( J9A*Bd 
-XI14 oq4 jo uoi4aa40.id aq4 .ioj dn 40s uaaii 
aABq spjBnSajBg 's^dbj^uoo pa^Bpodau 
£q pasBqaand a.iu 'aanjuu papij^saa u jo 
siua4i sno.iauuui SB naAV su 'asn uouuuoa 
in juaiudmba puu saixddns jo sma^i 000 
-'09 Aia4uunxo.iddy •so.1upaao.1d Suiipuuq 
laxpaads puuuiap nua.iua aq4 jo uoisiaiq 
Suisuqa.iuj aq4 jo saijiAijou guisuajoux 

•sjuujunooou 4Jadxo puu 
soi4i.ioq4uu luiauuuij 's^srrepads Aiipoiu 
-uioa pmr Scn^a^xBai 'spia^'u SuisuqD.uid 
4Souia.ioj SJ1014UU aq4 jo ainos sapniPni 
saaoujo jo dnojS stqx 'sppg pazipuaads 
ui Aiinqu puu aauai.iadxa jo sisuq aq^ no 
apBin Stnaq aoi^09xas 'A.r4unoa 0114 jo suop 
-dos uu uio.ij pauoissiuinroD uaaq a.vuq saai) 
-qjo aAjasa^ sdjoo Apidu^ aqx 'sapiOBd 
-bo uui[iAp ui SaiAjas a.iu sjaqjo axxqA\ 
s.iaaqjo panoissimmoa su Suiajos o.iu 
amog 'Mojja siq) ui 4sissu 04 uaiu joj ssan 
-isnq 04 pau.ui) aAuq A'uu.uquu aAv 'pay 
•ssaaisnq 3iq si a'ai.'x oq; SaiA*xddns 

'spanj s)i jo 4uaraas.mqstp aqq 
puu 4iiaiuu.iaAoj ) aqj jo A^.iodo.id aq} joj 
.T>'ui)iuioa.)u xadojd i[4iAv a.ioj.iaun 4011 \\ia\ 
41:144 4ua-).ioqs A'.iaAa aSujnoaua a \\ -saij 
-1A140U Suni4-.iuj .1110 jo uu in luiiiuiuira 
aq4 04 paanpaa uaaq SBq qjOM jadBj 

•jxas4j iauj aq} 
sb snotaaid su si sauiqd puu sqassaA jo asp 
.ioj .ia4UA\ puu pxiBX A'q no jo 4iiaiuaAoui ui 
4iiauia[a ami) aqX *s4uuoaoy puu sajxddns 

( S'S >>t>Ml IHO.ff y.)i\ IUJHO t ) ) 

ssguisng s 4 A"ab|^ ai[X 



s).H)dx») guxputiojjns suoDoi.qsa.i aq} 
PUB Sdjqs JO A)io.iu.)s aq) su na.w su 'uuaq 
■qi.iBQ aq) ui u^juduiu.) auuumqiis sixy 
0 U1( *pooS a'.ioa )ou si U014U1141S uuqno 
aq) }uip,dpuB}S Diuiouooa oq) uio.ij 

•suoi)ux pouuil aq) jo )sa.i aq) 



•)SO0 

aq} jo ssaip.iu.t?a.i aouad }Bq} uiu)uiuui 
04 A*pBdJ aq uiav aq puu aouad uoAv-p.n:q 
oq4 .ia)ju .iap.10 04 pjjoav oq) SuiJOJSOJ di 
}jBd siq op 04 paiBdaJd aq xxja\ Aiuopuav 
A.iu)i[ijv aq) uio.ij 11014 uupu.i^ siq uodu 
}apBQ )uioj 4S0AV oq) 41U] uaasa.ioj aq 
.v'lp.iuq uuo soi)iu)soq 4uoso.id aq} jo 11014 
-ussao .oiiiAvonoj iiuao.uI uiav suoi}ip,noo 
)uq av 'puaqB an 4mi4 s.iuoa* aq} in puuui 
-raoo qSjq .10 suopisod araussu 0} pouiu.i) 
puu pa.1udo.1d oq uiav Aoq) )uq 'Aiiuy Avail 
aq} ui s.ioaqjo .loiuui' su oup.'A [BdiS jo aq 
A'pio )ou UtAA Aiqio) jo sa}npBJS aq L |, *SX61 
oauis .iuav juasa.id oq4 aoj 3ai.iBda.id uaaq 
suq'41 su }snf }onjuoo }xau aq} ioj SutaBd 
-a.id si 41 aouad jo s.iuaA aq) Saijna muav 
jo A'pujs oq} o) j[OS)i SapOAap s.v'uaviu si 
)iiio 4 i }«aA\ '}o«j 01 "p.ioAv oq) jo asuas 
A.iaAa ui .iuav 41: si 41110 j }soav r }Jpqs 114 

•uiiodpu u)s A.iu)!iuu u uio.ij su uoav su 
luoiqiod U uio.ij q)oq '.iuav oq) JO S}aaui 
rdoxakap }sa}BX aq} jo pamaojqi oiaq} daa^i 
04 opum si 4.io t yo AaaAQi "Sjuoaj oaijou 
uio.ij paujn}aj aABq oqAv smooiuq Aiu.iy Aq 
ua.vii? sa.uqaai Aq pa}uaoiSnB 'suSiBdtaBO 
}aaajna uo posiui sixoj paaoBApB — as.moo 
oimapBaB aq} ui s4oaL'qus auinSa.i aq} 
04 uoi4ippu ill — A'piqs upvv S}9PB0 'AUAV 
lapun uibSb auaA* oiraapuou ain iiuav avo\ 
•£miy aq4 jo s)iuu 4uquioa oq) q}|AV uoi} 
-Bjadooo asoxo oi suoi)U)s iaq}o ju paupj} 
-qo suav SoiuiBj} siq) 40 qonj;\[ 'piinoaS 
oq) uo puu .iiu oq4 111 q4oq 'suudua.vv U.T9 
-pom ipj jo asu aq4 paB sautJ}00p [Bpt)DB} 
)sa.)ui aq) uo pasuq Suiaq uoponijsui 0114 
q4iAv Sotoibj} pioij jo 0S.11100 snojoSui }som 
u qSno.1114 }nd o.ioav s4opuQ uu Momuius 
4sud oq) Sui.iuq 'uopisuu.i) A'.iussaaau 
aq4 a^um 04 uo>iu4 ^ipidu.i Stqaq a.iu sdajs 
puu 'uaasa.inj uaaii puq sa.ruiuq.) asoqx 

'mnxnpijjna aq} ui saSuuqo oiB}jao a.i us 
-saoau apum suq mu.i^o.id ^uiuiu.14 SiqAy 
0114 su uoav sb 0S.U100 111 ao|}onpaa siqx 

a q}Suai iBai moj puu 
-.1011 S41 04 ujnjaj uiav 41 uoq.vv .iir.vv aq} jo 
uoi4u.iup aq} .ioj A'pio si asaiioa jo dotjonp 
-aj siq4 4uii4 sapiAo.id uopBisiSai aqx 

•911114 ouo Am: )i: 
A'uiopuoy aq4 4U }uasa.id (}SJ{^ puu p.nqj, 
'qj.iuo^i) sossup 99jq} A'pio aq hjav a.ioqi 
puu 'auaA* qoua jo &jri£ ui .104110 \\i\\ ouo 
puu aim i* 111.pa4unpu.1S aq npw ssup auo 
.ia4jua.iaqx 'KfGI JO amii* ui ssu|j puo 
-aag aq) puu AiBnnBf 4xau SSBXO ) s '- l K4 ®qi 
a4unpu.1T; 04 apuui Sniaq a.iu suiqd 'ami) 
4iiasa.ul aq4 }y *}sx aaqo400 uo [BAOJddB 
IBpnopisajj nodn avui omuaaq puu ssaarJ 
-1103 aq} A'q poiouuo suav aoi}BxsiSaj sxqx 
•aidoad .1110 puu Aiu.iy .1110 04 si 41 juq.vv 
41110,1 4S0AV apuui OAuq qanpvv sifuiq) asoq) 
jo a'uu gupgijous jnoqjiAA 4.10.14a .iuav 
.1110 04 opum o([ pxnoo noi}nqii}noa .1a4ua.1T; 
u s.iua.v aajq} 0} anoj uiojj aoponj}sni 
jo as.moo aq} ui uoponpaa u A'q 41:1(4 4110 

(Qfyo'ffvd luouj. poimwuoQ) 



•sdo.io jjii4spooj 
.1110 jo osuo.ioui aq} puu 11014UU41S Said 
-diqs oqi 'oTfuj.ioqs puj oq | 'do.i.) iBSns 
£FGt 0144 jo oius oq) a.iu ami} Mioso.id oq) 
iB eqnQ jo smaxqo;id Diraonooa Sa|paB}s 
-)uo aqx •A'.iuutoa aqi 40 ajn [BiojaramoD 
aq4 pa)uaoisip aABq puu U(pij JO s)dia.) 
-a.i smo)suo aqj AxqBjaptsaoa qsianaip 
0| papua} aABq 'sa}B}g pa}ian oq) mo.ij 



III pilU IBM Ul UOI4UU SU{} JO A)I.lll.).)S 

puu A'jiuSip aq) Suippqdn 40 ^niqisuods 
-0.1 ijaq} nupij sarai} ip; )u a : uui A.iqi 
}uq} aapjo ui '4uosoad oq} jo su uoav su 
ainjnj aq} 40 saoijipuoo aq} 0} saAxasmaq} 

}dBpB A'upua.i uu.) iaq} )uq| q.ms U99q suq 

Tjuiuiu.i) puu nopuonpa asoqAv saapuai 

fCABU a.llipij S}T aOjAjag aq) 0} TfU[AIT> 

jo noissim ojaojsiq S41 Avoqoj poB inn} 
-uium A'mopuay [Babn aq} w>\[\ aouB}aod 
-un IU41A jo o.iojo.ioq) si 4i '.vvopoj piAv 
4uq) aouad aq4 puu s.iuaX JUM-}SOd 4ino 
-ijjq) aq) Tjui.mp A.ipiiioo .uaq) pun a'aux 
aq} aA.ias 04 anui}U0D uiav s.ioqjo aqx 
•saijnp .iioq} jo 00uum.1oj.10d 4unnnS aq} 
u[ saAix «naq4 asoj uiav maq} 40 Xnv.ui juqj 
po)dooou si 4x 'A'tuaua aq} j.i.uu 0} aajsap 
Sniuanq u puu ap^iom q.iodus u 40 possas 
-sod S9}BUpBj3 SunoA. S}i aonvjag aq} 04 
q).ioj puas 04 sonuipio.) A'luapujy aqx 

•A.10401A 0)umi4pi aq} uibS 0} puu stspo 
}aasaad aq} }aam 04 papuBdxa Axxiljssa,') 
-ons os suq aau\- oqi qoiqAi uodu >|.io.vv 
-omu.14 aq} a^n}i}saoo 'A'uiapuoy aq} raojj 
pa4unpu.1T/ dABq uioqAV jo [sora 'aau\' 
iBXtiSaa aq} jo saaarao ajxi mba\ spfl 
jo nopnoasojd pxjssaaans oqi AxsnojAqo si 



Aiuopiroy aq4 JO maxqoxd v))i:ipouiuu v)i[4*i 
•AiOJJOrao) puu A'upo) jo s.ioaqjo iuauu 0114 
gaxraooaq jo osod.uul oqi apg poiuui.qoop 

-III* ApiTJlHUOq i PUU IKipiOUl 0(( 0} pOAlO.M.l 

BJB ajXX uuouoiuy JO s>ni:.vv aq} uu mo.ij 
aiqnuiBjqo nam tjhuoa' }saug oqi aiaqA\ 
uoi|ii)i|sui puioiiuonpo tjuioos-.iuj u 
oil i^issaoaa jo jsnui u -.io)uo.) Tfuuuu.ii u 
uuq| o.ioiu qonui si A'uiopuoy [BABjsj aqx 

•snoiAiio A'lajuip^uiuti aai3 s).u:^ 
-uoo qans jo oii).iia A*q aaradiqspxra oqi 
0} uoi \ u.iidsui Sa|}SBX puu )so.io)iii poppu 
AtyBaaS aqx "4uquioa iuii)au ui saoi}UA.ias 
-(10 puu saouauiodxa Jtaq} aqjjosap 0} puu 
uomdiqspuu oin ss,uppu 0} po)i.vui o.iu 
spoiiad aABdj }ioqs uo amoq s.iaq}o opipw 
•A)np .ioj A'uiopuoy oq) 0} pa.iap.io o.iu 
sjaagjo asaq} jo araog *S}ao.ij Sux}q3g aq} 
uio.ij pou.inio.i A'uuaoa.i aABq oipvv s.iaoujo 
A'mapBoy [Babnj aq} 04 tjuiSui.ui A'q ouop si 
SiqX "n 9AV su s'aiupuih asaq} 04 }qSuo.iq si 
uisiiuo.i puu .10)00 jo sisuqduu) poppu aq4 
'ajiX s iiuuuUqspuu u jo asuqd A'.ia.va 04m 
uoaoav A'i)iiu)suoo o.iu dpis.iopuoi reABa jo 
soi |ipqiSUOdsa.l pm.' soiiuunh oqi opqAV 

•)aorqus oiraapBau axSujs 
a'uu uuqi oidiiium [Bag S]q ao }qS|9AV 
.iojuo.iT; u suq SfjBm .iiqnoi4.iud siq) uoqAv 
.iuoa iBiig spi u)uu muoa" }s.ig Siq Saxahp 
.1040UJ Hums A'lOAiiiqo.i u mo.ij sasuoao 
-ui A'uuupu.iTl ooiA.ias aq) .ioj apu)i)du ui 
j[JBm s t uuui(Uqspuu u 0} paiiTussu 4q.Tjf1a.vv 
oqx 'AiT;uip.iooou pa}0n.i}Sai puu pasi.v 
-pu uaq) si oq.vv oBmdiqspim lunpi.vipui 
qpBa jo soiiuup; }aa.iaqai aqi jo oavb.ip a'q 
uuo a.m}aid a}B.mooB ^iqBii.iBma.i u sa}Bui 
-1 )so osoqi mo.i v x 'p.iooo.i uuuKliqspiiu siq 
jo }.iBd u aiuooaq 0} a'pjooav aouo isuoj iu 
pa}}imqns A'pi uinTfo.i a.iu sa}Bmi}sa apn}|} 
-du uoiii.i.w puu 's.iaoujo .<<\ su uaA\ su nam 
-diqspim .louios .Cq paAxasqo si hBmdiqs 
-pun qairx • iuaui|.iuda< [ o.vi iu.)o\;.f oqi 
04 pauSissu sjaorao pa}aaxas A'puioods uo 
A'uudiaui.id suuj soiiipuil) osoqj nuii.iud 
-mi .ioj A'ujiqisuodso.i oqj t sai}IAI}DB uum 
-diqspim 11 u 40 odoos 0.1 uuo oqi nui.io.voo 
opq\\ 'Aiuopuoy pjAB^ oqi jo noqounj 
}iiB}.iodmi jsom u oq o j pa.iapisnoo si .10101: 
-.iuqo ]u\uu paB d|qs.TapB9i 10 sarwrmn 
ajnj-.iaoajo pimos jo iuouido|o^op aqi pnn 
001AJ9S aqi .ioj opu|i)di: JO .19}lBm aqx, 

*saopB}s 

uTjia.ioj uo suoiiuuiis snoi.iBA Sapaam 
ui oiquA o|(iuuii)soui jo o.iu sofhikii: qons 
•ai:s oj SS9XP99& M0iuisuu.il .10 J3 lo.id.iomi 
BSVX\3W3\ n su .v'juunl) 0} .viimn.ioddo 
oq) pa.iajjO si uuuKUqspim A.iaAa uomuu 
-PBjS 0} .iot.ij *as.inoo o.umo Jiaq} Snunp 

P9AV0XI0J oq 04 , S9SBnSaBl asoq j 40 auo 

40 .cpms oqi 0} paoSissu naq} o.iu pan 'is.) 
-.104111 puu apnii}dB DT}sinSari .104 pouuuu 
-xo o.iu uomdiqspuu tIuiiuoout 'osouu 
-dBp puu aBTSsn>T miuiiuix ^sanSnwo^ 
'unm.ian 'qouo.i.x ^siaBdg apniaai /Caqx 
■A*raapBav aq} iu uonan.usui .104 pa.iajjo 
Avon o.iu saSnnSaBT uoaoq; *a'it;uip.toooit pa 
-puudxa au saSBnSoBT uMia.104 40 A'mns aq) 
luqi aiUT.ido.iddu .CiqTliq si ii 'odoos api.u 
-pl.ioAv .Cpi.Ti XI 40 .iuav ui naSuTma Tluiaq- 

•)uomoAo.ulmi puipu.iT; 
puB sarai} .uoqi a}ou 0} puu 'aiiuouI) 
-o.ij os.iuo.) pa33na spii uu.i 0} paSB.moo 
-aa o.iu uoui(Uqspuu \\y o.nr.i axao}8qo 
joopjno pjbA*-oo9 >! sanixiOBj D|^axq}u 
jo }uaraaSaBXua siqi ui papnxoui osxy 

auaA oqi Supnp auxj} 
amos }B .loqiodiuoo oi|o[q|u uu amoo 
-aq jsuui auo qono 'uomdiqspuu puBSnoq} 
oo.iqi jo pasudmoo Sa^aq 4uoiuit/o>i aqj; 
suiuoj Aiis.iu.v oqi uo noijijadraoo ap|S}no 
.ioj papaau asoq} OAoqu puu .ioao '.iuoa oqj 
jo asanoo oqi inoqSnoaqq saaqmam area} 

puBSnoq} .iuoj .ioao so.iuiho.i u noisiA 

-xadns [njaauo lapun sanoq uoijuoaoa.i tuu 
-.nip 4110 paia.mo si mBoSoad sxqx 'saxag 
-0.1 paua>xaxnl) puu uuum.vis pappu dojaA 
-op uamdiqspim \\v, AqaaaqAV saox}X}ad 
-moo 9ui}saaa}ai sapiAoad puu \)Aii.n:m 

A'puoisA'qd t)(| 0} pOUllOUl o.iu oq.vv osoqi 

T/uiqouo.i A(j uoissuu lUBjaodra] uu saqsxxd 
-mooou snqi n 'urea} oiiapun amos uo 
piudioi j.iud o.vjiju uu amooaq uuuidjqspiiu 
a.ioao |uqi a.iudia.i 0} si ranoSoaj S}JOdg 
oqi jo asod.md aqx '-iuav jo sdjqspjBq oqi 
Supaam aj ou[ua }sa}Baa3 oqi jo a.iu juqi 
4iaids a.vijriodiuoo paB aouBanpua 40 sojj 
-Uunl) dOXdAap smuo) a'iis.iua .nquTfo.i oqi 
jo s.iaqmam o.iu uq.w sojapnu juqj po/ui 
-Sooa.i naaq gdo] suq if 'ranxSoaj s}.iodg 

oqi su Aiuopuoy [BAB>J aq} )u u.vvou>[ AV0U 
uoijiioduio.) |u.iuuiu.i |ui uo po.uqd aaaq 
suq sisuqduio po.vvouo.i A"[)uo.iTf f uamdiq§ 
-puu uu jo popuumop S4S04 juoma.iinbaa 

( in .)/ii>(f wo a I poimi}uoo ) 



India's War Effort 

( Continued from pa$e 4\l ) 

leather goods is now valued at approxi- 
mately 60 million dollars a year. 

The Indian Army 

Even before Hie outbreak of war with 
Germany in Sept. 1939, India had sent 
reinforcements both to Egypt and to 
Malaya. The strength of the Indian 
Army at the time was approximately 
170,0(10 Indian and 60,000 British troops. 
The Indian portion of the Army has, dur- 
ing the three years of war, been raised, 
by purely voluntary recruitment, to l 1 - 
million. The recruitment figure, last 
July, touched the hi^h figure of 75,000 
and now averages 70,000 monthly. In- 
deed, the limit to new enrolment is set 
not by lack of volunteers but by shortage 
of equipment and of training stall". 

At least 300,000 Indian soldiers have 
been sent overseas. Indian casualties in 
killed, wounded and missing, number 
nearly 90,000. Indian troops have fought 
in every theatre of war from Narvik to 
Singapore. In line of battle, in garrison, 
or watchfully poised for attack or defence 
on the battlefields of the future in Asia, 
they are to be found everywhere today 
from Cyprus to the borders of Burma. 

A Distinguished Record 

Some account of actual fighting by In- 
dian troops may not be out of place. In 
1 December 1940. the battle of Sidi Barrain, 
which made possible General Wa veil's 
firsl advance to Benghazi, was won main- 
ly by the 4th Indian Division. The Con- 
quest of Eritrea and Kthiopie was simi- 
larly the work of the 4th and 5th Divi- 
sions. Keren, the Kritrean fortress which 
the Italians had regarded as impreg- 
nable, was captured by Indian forces 
against odds of more than two to one. 
When Raschid Ali sought to deliver Iraq 
to the Axis, early in the summer of 1041, 
it was troops from India which success- 
fully foiled his treacherous conspiracy. In 



the following campaign in Syria, which 
was necessitated by the collaborationist 
attitude nf the local Vichy authorities, 
Indian forces played an important part, 
Indian units formed a considerable pro- 
portion of the forces that defended 
Malaya and Singapore. When these ter- 
ritories had been lost, Indian regiments 
along with British units, resisted the 
Japanese advance from Burma against 
India until the onset of the monsoon had 
made a Japanese invasion of the sub-con- 
Inient impossible. Today, the 4th Indian 
division, seasoned by years of campaign- 
ing in Egypt, is in the vanguard of Gen- 
eral Montgomery's forces now attacking 
Marshal Rommel in Libya, in Sir Archi- 
bald Wa veil's phrase this is "a stirring 
and impressive story." 

To quote the same high military au- 
thority : "On and off the field the discipline 
and soldierly bearing of the Indian troops, 
their good humour and kindliness have 
everywhere aroused admiration." The In- 
dian forces now in garrison in the Middle 
Bast or Eastern India or under training 
in their own country, are men of the same 
stock and the same fighting quality as 
those who have already distinguished 
themselves in the hard-fought campaigns 
of Eritrea, Syria and Egypt, As Ameri- 
can correspondents in India have recent- 
ly testified, Indian units have been re- 
ceiving intensive training in jungle war- 
fare so as to he able to heat the Japanese 
at their own tactics. 

All that they need is modern equipment, 
aeroplanes, tanks and heavy artillery 
which India cannot manufacture. 
Equipped with these, they may he relied 
upon not only to hold India for the United 
Nations but, when the hour strikes, to 
roll hack Japanese invaders from Burma 
and, ultimately, with the co-operation of 
their gallant Chinese allies and the"r 
American and British comrades, to en- 
sure the final defeat of Japan. In courage, 
endurance, valour and steadfast loyalty, 
the Army of India is not unworthy to 
take its place in the far-flung fronts of 
the United Nations. 



"My war job, son? 
Why, I help 
make these 





"You want to know what your dad's 
doing to help win the war ? 

"O. K.> I'll tell you. See these? No, 
they're not bombs nor bullets. They're 
bearings! 

./'Know what helps a plane streak through the air at 400 
miles an hour? Bearings! Know what helped that mosquito 
boat snatch MacArthur out of Bataan, while a thousand Japs 
were watching? Bearings! 

/'Yes, sir, son, bearings! You can't have modern speed with- 
out 'em. And I help make 'em. Over at SCSLF, along with 
thousands of other folks, and every last one of 'em wide awake 
to the importance of his job. 

"We're making 'em fast, son, but we're making 'em good. 
They're rolling out from our plants — can't tell you how fast — 
and into tanks, planes, guns, ships and the machines behind 
these fighting machines. 

"What am I doing to help win the war? Come right down to 
it, my boy, old 
is one of the reasons 
we're going to win." 



SKF INDUSTRIES, INC. 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 

5110 




BALL AND ROLLER 
BEARINGS 



.73 



SILHOUETTES 



in the! night 




Two silhouettes against the glowing sky, so similar in appear- 
ance and purpose, yet so vastly different in character. 

The one is a factory, with chimneys belching smoke and fire, 
evidence of the productive energy beneath, working night and 
day to feed the cannons of our fighters. 

Much more difficult a task, with many lives held in the balance, 
is that of the men behind the gun. Every flash, every rumble 
echoes a unity of purpose supported by the greatest single group 
in the history of the world. One object! Simply stated, but of 
colossal import. "Win the war!" 

Two silhouettes against the sky. One is a symbol of the 
country's productive effort of which you and we are a part.. We- 
are pleased to place our facilities completely at the disposal pf 
our government. We are proud that it is in our power to help 
the boys whose forms are outlined in that other silhouette. 

"HANG THE LOAD ON HUBBARD HARDWARE" 

HUBBARD and COMPANY 

PITTSBURGH . . . OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA . . . CHICAGO 



CHICAGO 



Coast and Geodetic Survey 

[Confirmed from page 8G) 

ing oilier highly technical services where 
needed by military authorities. Among 
these are special studies of the earth's 
magnetism in certain strategic areasi 
Results of soismological and magnetic 
Studies and surveys being conducted, or 
made in the past, are also being utilized 
in preparation for war and defense 
work. Seismological studies have been 
particularly valuable in the construction 
of military and warplant structures. 

in the Coajsl and Geodetic Survey's In- 
strument Division, there are experts with 
years of training and experience who 
have long been developing and servicing 
the intricate equipment used by the Bu- 
reau. These men are contributing greatly 
to the war effort. Army personnel have 
been given instruction here in the use and 
care of precision instruments. Special 
equipment for military purposes has been 
developed or perfected and hydrographic 
and geodetic instruments have been fur- 
nished for further adaptation by the 
armed forces. 

Finally what might be referred to as 
personal services should be considered. 
The Coast and Geodetic Survey maintains 
a number of Field Stations, Processing 
< Offices, Computing Offices, and Compila- 
tion Offices in various parts of the coun- 
try. In charge of these are trained Coast 
and Geodetic Survey engineer officers 
who are always available, and are fre- 
quently called upon by military authori- 
ties for advice and assistance in local de- 
fense problems. These officers have also 
rendered many special services and have 
provided maps, charts, and other in- 
formation. 

The training and experience of Coast 
and Geodetic Survey officers tends to 
make them useful specialists in various 
military units. The nature and equip- 
ment of Survey vessels is such that they 
are of particular value to the Navy in 
coastal defense operations. The Presi- 
dent, by authority of the Act of May 22, 
1917 (U. S. Code, title 33, sec. 855) is 
empowered to transfer such personnel 
and equipment to the armed services in 
time of war. at his discretion. Up to the 
present time a total of fifty-six officers 
and nine ships have been so transferred 
to the War and Navy Departments. Some 
sixty other members of the Service, the 
majority of whom held commissions as 
reserve officers, have been called to active 
duty with the armed forces. 

This brief summary merely touches the 
larger outlines of the Coast and Geodetic 
Survey's present part in the war. As the 
Bureau has had an important place in 
every major conflict involving the 
United Slates, from the War with Mexico 
through World War I. it is now proud to 
fee taking its place again shoulder to 
shoulder with the armed forces in this 
mighty struggle to restore security and 
peace to the world. 

Civilians in the War 

{Continued from page 85) 
can be broken. The critical housing prob- 
lem, the wartime dangers to public health, 
the care of children whose mothers and 
fathers are doing war work, the educa- 
tion of the public in the meaning of this 
war, wartime food and nutrition training 
— all these extremely important matters 
are claiming the attention of Defense 
Councils in every part of the nation. 

The hundreds* of tasks performed by 
the U. S. Citizens' Service Corps are diffi- 
cult to break into well-defined units but 
they demand the same degree of plan- 
ning and hard work as do the task as- 
signed to the members of the U. S. Cit- 
izens' Defense Corps. They claim the 
spare time energies of over four million 
Civilian Defense volunteers. 

There is another very active division of 
Civilian Defense, the Civil Air Patrol. Its 
purpose is to mobilize the civil airmen of 
the United States, with their planes, 
equipment and auxiliary ground workers. 
Although national in chain of command, 
the state Wings, and their local groups 
and squadrons, answer state and local de- 
fense requests. Many members of the 
OAT have been called out from their local 
units to go on active duty assignments 
performed for the armed forces by spe- 



cial task forces manned and equipped 
by these civilian volunteers. This work 
includes the anti-submarine coastal patrol 
and extended courier-cargo service. Many 
other types of missions are performed. 
The patrol flies in blackout tests and 
mock air raids; takes over disaster re- 
lief in tlood or tornado areas ; searches 
for lost aircraft ; and acts as an aerial 
home guard. 

This then is the nature of Civilian De- 
fense in America — embracing both the 
actual protection of our cities and our 
shores and the mobilization of our civil- 
ian productive forces to meet the demands 
of modern war. It is indeed a tremendous 
program and has only just begun, for we 
must enroll more millions of volunteers 
to meet new dangers arising to the coun- 
try — new dangers from possible enemy at- 
tack, and from interior disruption as well. 
As our wartime economy more and more 
displaces our already shattered peace- 
time economy the task of smoothing this 
readjustment will fall to the lot of civil- 
ians everywhere, civilians who are trained 
civilian defense volunteers and civilians 
who work in war industries. 



The Navy Chaplain 

(Continued from page 81) 

One of the observed results of war is 
that people concerned give more thought 
to religion and spiritual matters than 
they do during times of peace. While our 
personnel has always been religiously 
minded our Chaplains have noted since 
"Pearl Harbor" a very marked increased 
interest on the part of all hands in spirit- 
ual and religious matters. Commanding 
Officers have urgently requested that 
< Chaplains be assigned to their commands. 
Reports have come of religious services 
being conducted on ships to which Chap- 
lains were not attached, — Commanding 
Officers and others leading the services. 

Home folks, together with the pastors 
and priests in the communities from 
which our personnel have come, have fol- 
lowed our officers and men with their 
prayers, ever anxious to believe that their 
Navy is always mindful of the religious 
welfare of their loved ones. This faith 
has not been misplaced. The Navy is very 
much aware of this concern on the part 
of others, which is the counterpart of its 
own deep concern with regard to this very 
important matter. The benefits of re- 
ligion, — the faithful and consecrated min- 
istry of devoted Chaplains in sufficient 
numbers to minister to all, insofar as cir- 
cumstances permit, is the plan and pur- 
pose of the officials of the Navy Depart- 
ment.. The Navy is resolved that with the 
adequate aid of the Churches, no mother 
need fear that her boy is being neglected 
insofar as his spiritual welfare is con- 
cerned. 



The Army Chaplain 

( Continued from page 81) 
to improve overall progress, efficiency and 
administrative management of office di- 
visions, branches and lower units. 

The Personnel Division processes ap- 
plications from civilian clergymen desir- 
ing appointment as Chaplain, Army of 
the United States. Qualified candidates 
are recommended for appointment in the 
chaplaincy and for assignment to duty. 
A liaison is constantly maintained with 
denominational bodies in regard to ec- 
clesiastical accreditation of all applicants 
and chaplains in the Corps. This division 
makes recommendations regarding the 
transfer of chaplains. Requisitions for 
chaplains to fill existing vacancies in the 
armed forces are given immediate atten- 
tion and denominational representation is 
given consideration in such recommenda- 
tions, circumstances permitting. Corre- 
spondence is carried on with chaplains in 
matters pertaining to official and personal 
problems. A volume of inquiries, widely 
diversified in origin, concerning the chap- 
laincy in general are answered daily. A 
constant contact is maintained with Ser- 
vice Commands and tactical headquarters 
relative to chaplains' professional mat- 
ters. 

In the Planning and Training Division 
a study is made of mobilization plans and 
policies as they are announced, and rec- 
ommendations are made regarding the 
number of chaplains required. Training 



plans and literature are prepared, re- 
visions are made to meet changing con- 
ditions and to incorporate improved meth- 
ods and suggestions which have been 
found successful in the field. The various 
activities of chaplains working in similar 
assignments are studied and technical cir- 
culars embodying the combined approved 
activities and procedures are distributed. 
Army regulations, field manuals, technical 
manuals, and proposed changes in them, 
affecting chaplains and their religious 
ministrations are studied and recommen- 
dations are made relative to their revision. 
This division supervises the curriculum 
of The Chaplain School and recommends 
purchases for the library of The Chap- 
lain School. 

The Planning and Training Division 
also maintains the Library of the office 
and keeps on display many current books 
of interest to chaplains. It studies and 
attempts to supply the professional needs 
of chaplains and administers the Chief of 
Chaplains' Religious Fund. Pertinent 
biographical and historical materials are 
collected and edited, information of a pro- 
fessional nature is furnished to chaplains 
and others, schedules of local religious 
activities for which the Office of the Chief 
of Chaplains is responsible are prepared, 
and the liaison necessary to carry out 
these activities is maintained. 

The Miscellaneous Division gathers and 
prepares for the Chief of Chaplains ma- 
terial on the activities of the chaplains. It 
processes the monthly reports of chap- 
lains and receives various, secular, and 
military publications. The processing of 
the reports includes the study, evaluation, 
analysis and consolidation of the facts 
therein recorded. The various publica- 
tions are scanned to keep abreast with 
public sentiment. Releases to the press 
and radio are accomplished in coopera- 
tion with the War Department Bureau 
of Public Relations. Interviews are given 
to members of the writing and lecture 
fraternity. 

The Air Forces Liaison Division per- 
forms duties incident to liaison and co- 
ordination of matters pertaining to chap- 
lains' activities between Army Air Forces 
and the Office Chief of Chaplains. 



Navy Relief Society 

(Continued from page SO) 

Relief duty, or an officer's wife, experi- 
enced in social service work, is responsi- 
ble for interviewing all people who come 
for assistance. Each Auxiliary has volun- 
teer visitors from among the officers' 
wives. A course of training, which con- 
cerns itself with social case work as 
adapted to Navy problems, is being pre- 
pared and each volunteer will be required 
to pass an examination before her ser- 
vices can be used. The course will be 
given to the District of Columbia Aux- 
iliary starting November 9th and will be 
sent to all Auxiliaries as soon as it is in 
printed form. 

A few of the larger Auxiliaries, in areas 
where a great number of Navy families 
have congregated, employ paid social 
workers to deal with cases beyond the 
ability of a volunteer. However, on the 
whole, the work is carried on by volun- 
teers, which insures small overhead ex- 
penditures. 

Many people ask what kinds of assist- 
Mnce come within the scope of Navy Re- 
lief. 

The most common request made is for 
help with hospitalization costs. This is 
given in various ways. Several Auxil- 
iaries have purchased endowed beds and 
others have contracts with local hospitals 
at low rates. Frequently, the dependent 
lives outside an Auxiliary area and here 
the Red Cross is called! upon to secure 
adequate medical care at moderate cost. 
Loans, without interest, repayable by al- 
lotment, are made by the Navy Relief to 
meet these bills and gratuities are given 
when the amount is too great for the 
family to bear. 

When delay occurs in the receipt of 
family allowances or allotments to wives 
and dependent mothers of men at sea. the 
Navy Relief gives or loans sufficient funds 
to meet the emergency. At the same time, 
the dependents are given instruction in 
the necessary steps to he taken to obtain 
the amounts payable to them monthly. 

Sudden orders, which find the "man 



financially unprepared to move his li m- 
iiv are a common cause for distress. This 

s particularly acute when the orders in- 
volve sea duty and it is thought best for 

he fai lv to live near relatives during 
thfs t me Again the Navy Relief assists 
gelt ng the family settled ma proper 
environment, thus affording the man 
peace of mind. . 

These are only a few examples of the 
many types of assistance given. They are 
as varied as human beings are varied, 
but in each instance the individual is 
urged toward his or her own solution of 
the tangle, which insures the preserva- 
tion of self reliance and self respect. 

Whatever the difficulty, the Navy Re- 
lief stands by to help— not in the spirit of 
charity— but rather as one member of a 
family rallies to t he assistance of another 
member in time of trouble. 



Army Emergency Relief 

( Continued from page 80) 

Commanding officers will assure them- 
selves that there is urgent need for relief 
and that the amount; allowed is not ex- 
cessive. The financial condition and other 
pertinent circumstances of applicants will 
be investigated, if practicable, prior to 
extending relief. In emergencies, imme- 
diate needs will be provided for pending 
complete investigation. 

Funds for Army Emergency Relief may 
be raised by entertainments or special 
events organized by Army Emergency Re- 
lief and featuring Army personnel. Prior 
authorization by National Headquarters, 
Army Emergency Relief, will be ob- 
tained in each instance. The number of 
benefits authorized will be strictly lim- 
ited. The solicitation of prizes or cash 
contributions from persons outside the 
Army is prohibited in connection with 
authorized fund raising benefits and there 
will be no general solicitation among audi- 
ences beyond the collection of admission 
fees and normal program costs. Special 
events for wTiicb commitment was made 
before September 2;"5, 1042, and which will 
take place prior to November 15, 1942, 
may be held without regard to the fore- 
going. Entertainments and other activi- 
ties at Army stations under local auspices 
are authorized in the discretion of com- 
manders concerned. Officers and enlisted 
men of the Army may secure membership 
in Army Emergency Relief through volun- 
tary contributions but there will be no 
solicitation for military membership 
without prior approval of National Head- 
quarters. Life military membership is 
given for contributions of $100.00 or 
more. Military membership at large is 
given for smaller contributions. Finan- 
cial aid will be granted on the basis of 
actual need whether or not recipients are 
members or contributors. Army Emer- 
gency Relief is permitted to accept en- 
tirely voluntary and unsolicited contribu- 
tions from civilian sources other than 
War Chests whose public campaigns com- 
mence after the date hereof. 

The Army Relief Society is affiliated 
with Army Emergency Relief for the pe- 
riod of the present war and six months 
thereafter. Collections for the Army Re- 
lief Society from Army personnel are sus- 
pended during this period. The Armv Re- 
lief Society will continue to administer 
separately the cases of widows and or- 
phans of Regular Army personnel now 
pending or originating prior to September 
lb, 1040. and such other appropriate 
cases as are referred to it by Armv Emer- 
gency Relief. 

The Army Air Forces branch is located 
in W asbington. D. C, under the supervi- 
sion of the Commanding General, Armv 
Air forces It operates and distributes 
aid through its own echelons of com- 
mand under policies approved by Na- 
r o iol H S* d «?**tew, Army Emergency 
"1 1 ,„<. 1° insure complete coverage 
mthout overlapping, the closest cooper* 
1,^ enjoined between adjacent 
blanches and sections regardless of the 

K^dW Meh has esShed ««L 
Commanding generals of service com- 

» Air Forces comnnuS 
concerned will assure themselves that the 
cooperation necessary to insure coorm- 
nated coverage is maintained between ser- 

«** air force %£££ L 
men respective areas. 



174 



South Africa and the War 

{Continued from page 47) 

jaarecl to play in the war. The Union at 
first suffered from the fact that while ex- 
peditionary units from the other Domin- 
ions hastened to Europe, the South 
Africans were not seen in the United 
Kingdom and many people unthinkingly 
concluded from this that South Africa 
was not going to pull her full weight in 
the War. Actually South Africa's forces 
have been almost continuously in action 
simv the middle of 1040 and the Union 
maintains armed forces in the held which, 
relatively, represent as big a contribu- 
tion in manpower as that made by any of 
the Allied countries. 

General Smuts correctly foresaw from 
the outset that it was only a matter of time 
before South Africa would be called upon 
to play an important role in the war on 
the African continent itself. For South 
Africa there were two vital strategic con- 
siderations — the safeguarding of the all- 
important sea route around the Cape, and 
the Axis threat in North Africa — a threat 
as closely directed at the Union with its 
rich natural resources as at any of the 
British States lying more closely under 
the shadow of Mussolini's former 
African empire. 

For the protection of the Cape sea lanes 
and of her own long coast line South 
Africa created the Seaward Defence 
Force, recently rechristened as the South 
Africa Naval Forces. In cooperation with 
the Royal Navy, South Africa has main- 
tained constant watch and ward over the 
waters surrounding her shores. The 
Union has as yet no navy of her own, but 
her small fleet of minesweepers, patrol 
vessels and examination boats took a big 
burden off the shoulders of the Royal 
Navy, the South African Air Force assist- 
ing with unceasing coastal reconnaissance 
work. Not only has invaluable work been 
done in Southern waters, but the Union 
also found it possible to send mine- 
sweeping flotillas to the Mediterranean 
where they have won high commendation 
from Allied commanders. 

When operations commenced against 
Italian forces in Abyssinia and Somali- 
land the Union had in readiness in North- 
ern Kenya the strongest and best- 
equipped fighting forces that had ever left 
her borders. The South Africans played 
a major role in that campaign and were 
the first to enter Addis Ababa. The 
Springboks, as the South African sol- 
diers are called, displayed throughout the 
dash and initiative which marks the 
commando type of fighting with which 
South Africa has so long been familiar, 
and their rapid advance through some of 
the most difficult fighting terrain in the 
world should fall into perspective as one 
of the classic episodes of the war. 

From East Africa the South African 
forces were transferred to North Africa 
where they have engaged in some of the 
bitterest fighting in the desert. The South 
Africans have had notable successes in 
the Middle East, including the capture at 
one stage of this ding-dong campaign of 
Bardia, Solium and Halfaya Pass. They 
also had their setbacks, at Sidi Resegh 
and Tobruk. These have been answered 
by fresh streams of volunteers to join the 
army— for every South African in uni- 
form is a volunteer — and the Springboks 
are steadily meeting every call that is 
made upon them. 

The South African forces in the Middle 
East are more than expeditionary units. 
They represent a small but complete army 
in the field, with its own Air Force and 
all those ancillary units comprising an 
army in the field. More recently the 
South Africans have extended the scope 
of their operations and have participated 
in the occupation of Madagascar, and 
mention should not be omitted of the sev- 
eral thousand South African Royal Naval 
Reservists engaged in the war at sea, and 
of some 700 South Africans serving with 
the Royal Air Force in Britain. The 
South African airmen have won many 
awards for gallantry in this war and some 
of their names, including that of John 
Nettleton. the Augsburg V. C, have be- 
come household names in Britain as much 
as in the Union. 

Nor should reference be omitted to the 
notable part played by South African 
women in the war. They are serving in 



their thousands in the Women's Auxiliary 
Army Services and the Women's Aux- 
lliary Air Force and many were drafted 
to East Africa and later to the Middle 
East. The batteries protecting South 
Africa's harbors are partly "manned" by 
women who are skilled artillerists. 

If South Africa has clone well in the 
field she also has notable achievements 
on the home industrial front. Having due 
regard to her limited resources of skilled 
labor and her dependence upon America 
and the United Kingdom for certain spe- 
cialized manufactures, the Union's prog- 
ress in the industrial field during the past 
two years has been equal to the advance 
which, by peace-time standards, she 
would have made in 25 years. At the out- 
set of the war South Africa had no great 
industries which could immediately be 
classified as being unnecessary to the war 
effort and geared down to give preference 
to more important work. Another serious 
drawback was that South Africa had no 
machine tool industry and was compelled 
to improvise when it laid down plans for 
the manufacture of all those war-time re- 
quirements which it could no longer im- 
port from Britain and the United States. 
But South Africa improvised brilliantly 
and the workshops of the Union are 
mobilized for war service under a Direc- 
torate of War Supplies which has a note- 
worthy record of achievement. The quan- 
tities and variety of armaments, muni- 
tions and other technical equipment that 
have now been produced for Union and 
Allied forces would have seemed a rather 
wild impossibility but for the fact that 
the task has been accomplished. The 
Union has also come to be known, quite 
rightly as the repair shop of the Middle 
East. Damaged ships have been made 
seaworthy again and hundreds of tanks 
and other armored vehicles that might 
have been rusting in the desert have been 
put back into effective service. 

The spirit of the people in the factories 
and workshops that have to be maintained 
on a war-time basis has been one of sus- 
tained determination to meet the demands 
and needs of the hour. South Africa is no 
sleeping partner in this war but will con- 
tinue to play her part in full in meeting 
the demands that may lie ahead and in 
the common task of the United Nations. 



American Labor in the War 

{Continued from page 52) 

tion. With few exceptions, however, 
unions now are accustomed to settling 
such disputes by the use of the elections 
machinery of the National Labor Rela- 
tions Board. In the 12 months from June 
1941 to June 1942 the Board settled more 
than six thousand such representation 
disputes. It conducted 4,212 elections by 
secret ballot, or check of union member- 
ship records against company payrolls, 
and counted 1,067,037 valid votes. When 
a representative was selected by a ma- 
jority of the workers involved, the Board 
certified the representative, and normally 
collective bargaining on established pat- 
terns followed. . 

Where workers have been discrimi- 
nated against, or otherwise have been 



TAYLOR, STROUD & CHRISTY 



Incorporated 



INSURANCE 
SURETY BONDS 



Tampa, Florida 



the victims of anti-union practices, the 
National Labor Relations Board gives 
protection by serving as a court for the 
hearing of such cases. In the absence of 
machinery of this sort, again in many 
cases unions would regard themselves as 
under the necessity of resorting to strikes 
for their own self-preservation. 

The National Labor Relations Board 
thus acts in cases of disputes over repre- 
sentation, and of charges of unfair labor 
practices by employers. The War Labor 
Board, on the other hand, deals with dis- 
putes over wages, hours, or other condi- 
tions covered by the terms of union con- 
tracts. Since both types of disputes are 
often involved in the same case, the two 
Boards work in close cooperation. The 
National Labor Relations Board coop- 
erates also with the Army, Navy, and War 
Production Board by holding elections 
promptly where disputes arise affecting 
war production. 

Good morale on the part of the work- 
ers is essential for the successful prose- 
cution of the war. Increasing acceptance 
and use of the traditional procedures of 
collective bargaining is important to this 
end. The prompt settlement of disputes 
over representation and elimination of 
anti-union practices by government action 
reduces the danger of direct action by 
labor and promotes the constructive use 
of collective bargaining to remove causes 
of poor morale. The National Labor Re- 
lations Board therefore, because of its 
functions, is essentially a war agency, 
making an important contribution to the 
war effort. 

The WAVES 

{Continued from page 79) 

of being given a chance to carry their 
share of the war load. 

American mothers and their daughters 
want to join their husbands and fathers 
in making the world a place worth living 
in and they are willing to go anywhere 
or do anything they are called upon to 
do to achieve that goal. They are glad the 
Navy asked them to join a service they 
are honored to serve. 



Since 1884 
Tampa's oldest 
Mill Supply 
and Hardware Store 



KNIGHT & WALL COMPANY 

TAMPA. FLORIDA 



Marine & Ship Supplies- 
Seminole Paint & Varnish- 
Ship Chandlers. 



Our motto — To strive at all times to 
please our customers with quality 
merchandise and a service equalled 
by few, surpassed by none. 



Tampa Marine Repair Gmpany 



INCORPORATED 



* ★ ★ 



SHIP BUILDING AND SHIP REPAIRING 



STEEL AND WOOD 



* * ★ 



Operating 3500-Ton Marine Railway 



* * * 



TAMPA, FLORIDA 



175 




Pioneer Parachutes are on the "advance front 
line" in America's fight for Victory. Flyers and 
paratroopers confidently place their faith in our 
'chutes. Army and Navy Officials are placing 
their faith in the Pioneer Parachute Company, 
knowing that our vast resources, and our ability 
to produce are at their beck and call. A loyal 
organization of men and women is working 24 
hours a day establishing unprecedented pro- 
duction records. "Availability, dependability 
and safety 11 are Pioneers by-words in America's 
fight for Victory. 



H PIONEER PARACHUTE COMPANY, INC. 

^Wk^jfj MANCHESTER, CONNECTICUT, U. S. A. 

^JjCiJUtt^/ CABlE ADDRESS: PIPAR, Manchester. Conn., U. S. A. TELEPHONE: Manchester 4157 



The New World United 
For Victory 

{Continued from page 72) 

freedom than faced the Kaiser's Germany 
during the entire First World War. 

Axis subversive activities have long 
jeopardized the liberties of the American 
continent. At inter-American conferences 
carrying forward the recommendations of 
the Rio Charter, the New World repub- 
lics have taken steps to root out eco- 
nomic sources of the Axis fifth column 
and to end the aggressors' commercial 
penetration into the New World. Uni- 
form methods for identification, registra- 
tion and expulsion of Axis agents also 
have been worked out. That program, I 
might point out, is developing rapidly. 

Especially during the past year have 
t he other American republics turned their 
efforts toward supplying the United 
States and its allies with the sinews of 
war. Mobilization of the vast natural re- 
sources of the American continent has 
long bulked large in hemisphere defense 
plans. But the pressing need for more 
raw materials became apparent after 
Japan overran Malaya, the Netherlands 
East Indies and the Philippines. Short- 
ages in rubber, tin. libers and other mate- 
rials have shown that even a nation as 
rich as the United States cannot operate 
as a self-sufficient arsenal of democracy. 

The United States today looks to the 
other Americas for many of the strategic 
materials needed in our great war pro- 
duction program. The complementary 
role of the mines, fields and forests of the 
southern republics to the war industries 
of the United States is graphically illus- 
trated by the following figures: 

Each United States Flying Fortress 
bomber that rolls off the assembly line 
requires 80.000 pounds of aluminum. 
Each tighter plane requires 5,000 pounds 
of that metal. The principal commercial 
source of aluminum at the present time is 
bauxite ore, which we have imported 
chiefly from South America. 

A heavy tank needs nearly two tons of 



rllhber Rubber represents almost two 
1 n ; p V erv 10-ton pontoon bridge used 
S n our armed forces and the raincoat of 
lloh United Nations lighting man requires 
* 1 M Kg of rubber, Add the rubber 
needed for tires for "jeeps, trucks and 
mot orized and mechanized equip- 
() f the United Nations armed forces 
a we see that we have only scratched 
the surface of rubber requirements for 
the war effort. 

The tropical Americas, particularly 
Brazil's Amazon Bason, can supply an im- 
portant part, of the rubber the United Na- 
ns lost in the Far Fast. The United 
States has made agreements with the 
rubber-producing countries of the hemi- 
sphere to expand their rubber production 
and to purchase all their exportable sur- 
plus for the next five years. 

The other American republics also are 
cooperating wholeheartedly in other pro- 
grams to harness the hemisphere's eco- 
nomic might: to the war effort of the 
United Nations. According to the United 
States Vrmv and Navy Munitions Board, 
this country lacks sufficient quantities of 
14 strategic materials which are available 
in varying amounts in the other Amer- 
icas. 

More important in the long-range pro- 
gram, however, is the fact that North 
American technicians, including health 
and sanitation specialists, have been in- 
vited by their neighbors to the south to 
aid them boost production of metals, 
fibers, rubber and other materials. 

Copper, nitrates, manganese, zinc, 
bauxite, lead and other metals from the 
southern republics are flowing to the 
United States war plants. Vegetable oils, 
libers, mahogany, balsa wood and other 
materials also are reaching this country 
in quantities commensurate with avail- 
able shipping space. In return, the 
United States has established a basic 
policy of sharing scarce goods, including 
steel, machinery and chemicals, with the 
other republics. 

The economies of our southern neigh- 
bors are feeling the repercussion of war- 
(Contiwwd on next page) 



ROCKBESTOS 

the wire with permanent insulation 

FLAMEPROOF 
SHIPBOARD CABLES 

ALL-ASBESTOS 
WIRES AND CABLES 

ROCKBESTOS A.V.C. 
WIRES AND CABLES 

ROCKBESTOS AIRCRAFT 
AND RADIO HOOK-UP WIRES 

TPVESIGNED for applications in which 
wire is subject to attack by heat and 
moisture, corrosive fumes, grease, oil, 
vibration; or where a potential fire hazard 
exists. Rockbestos wire will not rot, bloom, 
swell, dry out or become brittle, because of 
the permanent character of its insulation. 

ROCKBESTOS PRODUCTS CORPORATION 



New York Buffalo 
Los Angeles 



NEW HAVEN. CONN. 

Cleveland Chicago Pittsburgh St. Louis 

San Francisco Portland, Ore. Seattle 



176 



The New World 

(Continued from preceding page) 
time shocks. Until Pearl Harbor, the 
United States had been able to fill ade- 
quately the gaps in hemisphere markets 
and supplies caused by the loss of Eu- 
ropean trade outlets. Conversion of 
North American industries to war produc- 
tion and the shift of shipping from inter- 
American runs to transporting men and 
supplies to the fighting fronts have 
worked hardships on the other republics. 
But they are accepting these hardships 
cheerfully and realistically, firm in the 
knowledge that their sacrifices are help- 
ing to speed the day of victory. 

The hemisphere's first year of war, 
therefore, has been marked by momentous 
progress in creating a powerful American 
front against Axis ambitions for world 
conquest. But the heights of inter- Amer- 
ican achievement are still to be reached. 
The unity which the free peoples of the 
Western Hemisphere have attained to 
protect their freedom today will play an 
even more important role in the world of 
tomorrow. 

The WAAC 

{Continued from page 7S) 
officer candidates will come up through 
the ranks. 

In addition to their backgrounds of 
civilian training, Officer Candidates get an 
intensive training program which in- 
cludes all the basic courses as outlined for 
auxiliaries and also covers, leadership, 
mess management, property accountabili- 
ty, company administration, inspections, 
relationship of WAAC officers and Army 
officers and much of the ground taught in 
Army O.C.S. programs with the exception 
of tactics and weapons. WAAO Officer 
Candidate Schools are of two months 
duration. The successful candidates are 
commissioned as Third Officers, the 
equivalent of 2nd Lieutenant, in the 
Army. 



Their function in the field is to admin- 
£ter the yjelfare and discipline of X 
WAAO units in their charge, under the 
supervision of the (Vmin.andin^ ()m CO r of 
the Post to which they are attached 

All members of the WAAC, officer can- 
didate and basic auxiliary alike im e 
stood the test of review and ^spectton 
under the eyes of seasoned Arny^ ice's 
They have realized that the step thev al e 
m joining the WAAO is not an easy one 
They are aware of the seriousness of the 
adjustment they must make to the mili- 
tary way of going and of the brief and 
concentrated space of time in which they 
have to do it. They bring with them a 
will and energy which has won the re- 
spect of every Army officer who has co- 
operated in their training. 

Today the Corps is close to 10.0(H) 
strong in enrolled members. They are 
women between the ages of 21 and 45 who 
have voluntarily enrolled for the dura- 
tion to serve whenever and wherever 
they are needed. 

Due to the rapid expansion of the Wo- 
men's Army Auxiliary Corps as the result 
of increased requests from Army Com- 
mands for WAAC personnel to serve 
with them, a second training center has 
been activated. Some 85 hotels and apart- 
ment houses in Daytona Beach, Florida, 
have been leased to form this new train- 
ing center which opens December 1. Be- 
cause of this, WAAC units scheduled to 
go into the field were diverted for use as 
staff, faculty, NCO cadre, post headquar- 
ters companies, and station complement 
personnel for the second training center. 

The work of the WAAC is not glamor- 
ous. Much of it is routine and unexciting. 
But the spirit of the WAAC is that of all 
good soldiers — the will to win. As they 
do their duties well with the commands 
they serve, they cannot fail to contribute 
the efficiency of added skill and numbers. 
They are strong-willed and fighting- 
spirited and they offer these attributes 
to the total effort we must have to win 
through total war and win to total peace. 





So much... So qui 
BY RADIO! 



.0- 



For outstanding achievement in 
the production of vital radio 
equipment, these awards have 
been presented to RCA plants: 




Navy "E" to 
RCA Manufacturing Company 
(Radio Apparatus) 




Army-Navy "E" to 
RCA Manufacturing Company 
(Radio Tubes) 




Radio is the voice and ear of modern war. 

Radio follows the flag and the fleet- 
locates the enemy — flashes urgent orders 
— safeguards the convoy — guides the 
bomber — directs the artillery — maneu- 
vers the tank. 

From submarine to flying fortress, 
from jeep to anti-aircraft gun, radio is 
on watch, always ready to speak and to 
listen — to give warning and to guide. 

Radio brings information and relaxa- 



Army-Navy "E" to 
Radiomarine Corporation 

of America 
(Marine Radio Apparatus) 



tion to the free — courage and factory 

; BUY 

understanding to the oppressed. <3 



Radio fights on every front! 



RADIO CORPORATION OF AMERICA 

PIONEER IN RADIO, ELECTRONICS, TELEVISION 
RCA Building, New York, N. Y. 

The Services of RCA: RCA Manufacturing Co., Inc. • R. C. A. Communications, Inc. 
Radiomarine Corporation of America • RCA Laboratories • Blue Network Co., Inc. 
National Broadcasting Co., Inc. • RCA Institutes, Inc. 



177 




INDEX TO ADVERTISERS 

"United States At War" Edition 

Army and Navy Journal 

advertiser page 

Add Precision Products Corporation 7 

Aircraft Accessories Corporation 171 

Air Reduction Sales Company 143 

American Bantam Car Company 155 

American Hardware Corporation 159 

American Steel Foundries 179 

American Viscose Corporation 151 

Guy F. Atkinson & George Pollock Company 141 

Automatic Electric Company 163 

Auto-Ordnance Corporation 121 

Automatic Screw Machine Company 153 

Bassick Company 147 

Bath Iron Works Corporation 139 

The Bayer Company, Inc 155 

Black & Decker Mfg. Co 147 

Blaw-Knox Company 165 

Bridgeport Brass Company Inside Front Cover 

Bridgeport Fabrics, Inc 153 

Bucyrus-Erie Company 131 

Colts Patent Fire Arms Mfg. Co 169 

Connecticut Telephone & Electric Corp 163 

DeLaval Steam Turbine Company 159 

Electric Boat Company 116-117 

Ethyl Corporation 161 

The Fafnir Bearing Company 171 

Gar Wood Industries, Inc 165 

General Cable Corporation 12 

Grace Line, Inc 143 

Graybar Electric Company 131 

Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp 137 

Hallicrafters Company 179 

High Standard Mfg. Co., Inc 177 

Houdaille-Hershey Corporation 169 

Hubbard & Company 173 

International Business Machines Corp 4 

Jacobs Aircraft Engine Company 6 

Jenkins Bros 167 

Jones & Laugh! in Steel Corporation 10 

Knight & Wall Company 175 

Masonite Corporation 161 

Merck & Company, Inc 141 

National Steel Corporation 129 

Norma-Hoffman Bearings Corporation 141 

Northrop Aircraft Company, Inc 145 

The Okonitc Company Back Cover 

Oldsmobile 119 

Pepsi-Cola Company 135 

Philco Radio & Television Corp 15 

Pioneer Parachute Company 176 

Radio Corporation of America 177 

Revere Copper & Brass, Inc 8 

Rockbestos Products Corporation 176 

Sears, Roebuck & Company 123 

Singer Sewing Machine Company 157 

SKF Industries, Inc 173 

Standard Oil Development Company 133 

Sun Oil Company 3 

Sun Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company 125 

Tampa Marine Corporation 175 

Taylor, Stroud & Christy 175 

Travelers Insurance Company 180 

Triumph Explosives, Inc 151 

Vickers Incorporated Inside Back Cover 

Vultee Aircraft, Inc 127 

The Wiremold Company 137 



The Merchant Marine 

(Continued from page GS) 

chine is now working equipment on an 
"around-the-clock" basis, a full seven 
days a week. 

Compared with the last war, the pic- 
ture for World War II is considerably 
different. To begin with, the alignment 
of nations involved has automatically 
charted a different course of action than 
that resulting from the circumstances 
surrounding the first World War. Amer- 
ica today is fighting a multi-ocean war. 
Again, the great expanse of the present 
fighting fronts has made it absolutely es- 
sential that all tonnage, both new and 
old, be allocated to the best possible ad- 
vantage for the over-all war effort, both 
from the standpoint of routing as well 
as loading. 

The Maritime Commission's activities 
in operation and procurement, war risk 
insurance, vessel repair and maintenance 
and the issuance of ship warrants have 
been transferred to the War Shipping Ad- 
ministration, as a result of an Executive 
Order of the President issued on 7 Febru- 
ary, 1942. 

During the first World War, trans- 
portation, from a military standpoint, 
consisted largely of maintaining a 3,000- 
mile shuttle service to France. Today 
the supply lines are stretched to all con- 
tinents in virtually every part of the 
globe. 

Consequently, today's war is essential- 
ly a war of transportation, and now, more 
than ever, the meaning of the words 
"ships and more ships" is brought home 
to the people of America. 

The War Shipping Administration is 
definitely making sure that every avail- 
able bottom is being put to the best prac- 
ticable use. In order to obtain a more 
direct control of shipping, the WSA re- 
cently requisitioned all American ships as 
well as those owned by American citizens 
and under foreign registry that had not 
already been chartered or acquired by the 
government. 

Our shipbuilding effort is constantly 
gaining momentum. Our shipping opera- 
tions, despite the present severe shortage 
of tonnage, are being expedited to the 
limit and as fully co-ordinated as possible 
with those of Great Britain and the 
other United Nations. 

The Navy is giving merchant ships 
more and more adequate protection 
against Axis submarines and raiders. 

We are headed in the right direction 
and, with proper future betterment of all 
factors involved, we will attain the goal 
of Victory. 

Of one thing the nation may feel as- 
sured — the men who build and sail the 
ships of the Merchant Marine will not 
be found wanting. 



The Selective Service System 

(Continued from page 71) 

by the armed forces for men — skilled and 
unskilled — drained increasing numbers 
of men from the available pool of men 'Tit 
for service" and "available for service " 

Early in 1942, Secretary Stimson an- 
nounced that the goal for the armed 
forces by the end of 1042 was 3,600,000 
men in the Army, 400,000 in the Navy and 
200,000 in the Marine Corps. 

This would have indicated a total in- 
duction into the Army for 1942, by Selec- 
tive Service, of 1,900,000 men— an aver- 
age of 158,000 per month. 

Actual inductions during the vear have 
many times exceeded that figure and on 
October 13 Secretary Stimson, testifying 
before the House of Representatives 
Military Affairs Committee, estimated 
that the army at that time numbered 4- 
250.000 men. 

The total was swelled, of course by 
volunteer recruiting by the Army, Navy 
and Marine Corps. 

For military reasons, the actual figures 
on inductions and the real size of our 
armed forces or on registration totals 
are not made public. 

Despite the tremendous pressure 



ereatly increased demands for men m es- 
sential war activities, and in our armed 
forces the Selective Service System has 
met every demand for men in military 
service and at the same time deferred the 
men necessary in war activities. 

In accordance with its original and 
fundamental charter the Selective Serv- 
ice System succeeded during 1942 m 
-procuring men for our armed forces-- 
of a number and kind and at the time and 
nlace they were needed with a minimum 
^/disturbance to the social agricultural, 
commercial, and industrial life of the Na- 
tion." 

The enormity of the 1943 job which 
faces Selective Service was brought 
home with telling force and realism by 
Secretary Stimson before the House 
Committee when he estimated that it 
would be necessary to build the army to 
a Strength of 7,500,000 men before the end 
of 1943^ with the forces classified as fol- 
lows : 

Air forces— 2,200,000 ; 
Organized ground units — 3,300,000 ; 
Services of supply and related units— 
2,000,000. 

The job ahead is a tough one but it 
will be done. 



Navy Public Relations 

(Continued from page 75) 

lie to get the very latest developments in 
our sea warfare. The other is the less 
well defined but no less substantial head, 
representing aid and comfort to the 
enemy. 

What constitutes aid and comfort to 
the enemy? First and foremost it is any- 
thing that reveals information concern- 
ins: the condition and movement of our 
forces. This is the reason for the Navy's 
occasional delays in announcing ship 
losses. 

The lapse of time is not, as some would 
have you think, based on a desire on our 
part to withhold news from the public. 
On the contrary we realize as well as any- 
one how vital complete coverage regard- 
ing the scope of battles won and lost is to 
the morale of those on the home front. 
But it must be remembered that when 
the enemy attacks our ships in the heat 
of battle the issue is often unknown to 
him. He cannot always tell whether his 
bombs or torpedoes have struck home, or 
just how badly damaged our units may 
be. If we were to issue communiques re- 
garding the immediate fate of our ships 
it would indeed constitute aid and com- 
fort to the enemy. We are constantly on 
the alert to guard against this, and it is 
a problem whose solution requires the co- 
operation of all concerned. 

There exists today a second front few 
people know about. On that front men 
are fighting a bitter, hotly-contested bat- 
tle. Their weapons are words, their goal — 
destruction of the enemy. In this new type 
of warfare we hold a tremendous advan- 
tage over the enemy. The great weapon 
in our hands is truth. For by telling the 
truth we hold the confidence and loyalty 
of the people of the United Nations. We 
have given them the bad with the good, 
and they have taken it in their stride. 
We have made the price of war clearly 
evident to them, and they have not 
llinched from accepting it. This loyalty 
will pay great dividends ; for when the 
moment of crisis conies, when the chips 
are down, when the enemy's spirit flags 
and his lies stand naked before the world, 
then integrity will prevail. 

No man can gauge this spirit or say 
when the turning point will come. But I 
firmly believe that when that clay arrives 
the confidence expressed by the American 
people in their leaders, and in the state- 
ments made by those leaders, will prove 
a decisive factor in winning the war. 
Navy Public Relations will spare no ef- 
fort to keep that confidence alive. It will 
be attained by simply telling the people 
of the truth. 



ITS 





3 ^ -1- h n 
a. o 



§ IS SB 5 13 2 

11 if *|B,&sSS?>&8B'3 



i ll i lf|If|||fPfP 

o y p r/i rt- ^ P * 



5* ^2.^2^5 



3 ft) 
P 7r ' 



POP 
. a »d P 




H 

• w 3 h cr o D r" El n - P C 



. w cjq P ^ 
^ . 5" Et cd » 



»— 1 ■ ^ hi r-K ^ ^ fc3 



cd o '< 5 « S ? S 2 © g 2. p g, g- 5 » B 
h I: » h,§ ft © $ & » ^ rf S 2 2 e 



^ p « s a. e » ?f e 




_ CO ^ fp 

PSpPP'Dcp^ 

P P 3, - ^3 £• O 



^ ^ CP 



~5 2 g-Og, 



pi p 



P 



" 2. p 3 



*i r o 7j 3 ^ 



o ° 

; 17 - ~ 3 ^ W 3 ~ 



^P3- C gl|&p 



" M, p 8 y & 5» (g M • 



(LP 



GTQ J" 3 



wigs' 



w 3 N - * 6 

13 r . (D ^ _ 



SB 

P (D 



O 

i 

o 



3* * OT P O B* p co 

— cd . 3' p 3 p o * «■ 



CD P. ,__| cd m 

Eg B' co" 3- g*W 

0 35 Q a -J 72 3 

c5 CfQ 35 P P O 7/2 q. 
O 3 J O M Ct it* g! ■ S 



H 

CD 

Q 



3 CT9 fjq* § p 5 

? I " o 9 3! ? j ^ 1 S & R 5 l» w o gi ^ DQ. BS to g 



5 qg p rt-orq b* & J2 g g 

3 3 h n, co m h» m» &o h ca 



!— CT 3 



3: p* 2 ' y c ^ 
g* <S S o <72 £. m 

p^3oP' rD P«-' 

2 S Q - r/q o 

^P 3 5 

^ i^s 2 2 p : 
o- J 3^n'PP 0 

p oq S-o S p: p: 5- 




fD ' 
QQ 



2 CP P P P CD 



0 CD 
H 7J 

1 CD 



111 



3 5 -3 p ^ 

P 3/ o Q o 

p- o ^ o 3 ^+ o 2 
p:- m. p p* 50 3* g 5* g. 

o p- 2 a CP § h. Pg-P 
!t> o w g p po 5 g ^ 

a dQ p o| rajo © <f 
£..„ o » ft £? 2- 3 * 

?0 ^ rf2 ^ p P og 



g H m CP m fiO S r\ " 





p S p >S b Saw ^ g 0^ p a P ^ 



-.3! ^0^-3 

"5 h p w p a 



3- fD CD 



CD P ■ M 

p o B 3 

2 s a o 

g ffl 01 2 2 

_ P^ 3. 73 f-t- 



£ S' P 



2 p* p. 

D^P'C-e^^^ 3 ^* 3 ^^ 
B P/P^^^ CDP' P ^P 4 ^ H ^ 
rt.rt-2 c*- ^ P pPffiOpw 
P' 3 O^OO^Q,^^-^^ 

:«.7iftfii:l B -8l^; ff 



S 2 S CD 3 P 

M? CD-CD 1 00 



CD ^ p 

" o <i p p 5 



2 <d 



i^MiCDCr^PipiCD CD ^ 



P < 
< P 






A Great Invention 




T.\ making a LIST of the importanl inventions of 
history, it is fitting that those inventions which 
- 1 - have contributed most to the progress of mankind 
should be given the highest rat inn. 

Almost all these inventions, 
yon will find, are importanl be- 
cause they extend man s own 
limited powers. 

The lens, for instance, in tele- 
scope and microscope, enabled 
us to examine the infinitely dis- 
tant and the infinitely small, far 
beyond our normal eyesight. The steam engine and 
the internal combustion engine have multiplied our 
speed in travel on land and sea. and even taken us into 
the aii' over both. Gunpowder 
enlarged our muscles so that w T e 
could dig deeper into the earth; 
it lengthened our arms so that 
we could deliver far-reaching 
blows to our enemies. 

The telegraph, telephone, and 
radio have extended to the ends 
of the globe the distance our voices can carry and our 
ears can hear. Mechanical power in factory and field 
lets one man do the work of twenty, and has freed us 
from the slavery of long hours and arduous labor. 
Electricity brought light, and printing brought en- 
lightenment. All were truly great accomplishments. 





But there is another invention which belongs near 
the top of the list, even though it involves neither 
metal nor mechanics. It is insurance, one of the most 
powerful extensions of man's abilities. 

More powerful than the lens, 
it enables man to pierce the veil 
from that world beyond and over- 
see the education of his children 
and the comfort of his widow. 

The engine, and the speed 
which it gives us, are as nothing 
compared to a device which can 
create an estate in the few seconds it takes to sign 
your name to an application for life insurance. 
Can you, even with your telephone, summon a 
thousand persons to help von 
rebuild your home as readily as 
a fire insurance policy collects 
the contributions of the many 
for the benefit of the unfortu- 
nate lew? 

Photography may capture and 
record the scenes of the day, 
bill can it; carry out your good intentions toward 
your family after you have "stepped out of the 
picture"? The compass helps in avoiding charted 
dangers, but of what avail is it in protecting you 
against the uncharted hazards of the future? 
' By what other invention can you pay for an acci- 




dent before it happens? Or buy time for the future, 
your own time for rest and recreation in retirement 
years? 

Power itself could hardly have been used in the 
great plants of today unless insurance had made safe 
the investment of the owners. 

Great projects could not have been undertaken 
without the service of insurance to spread the risk 
so that it would fall lightly on the many rather than 
heavily on the few . 

And whenever you want this great invention to 
serve you in a bigger or broader wav. let a Travelers 
agent or broker be your "consulting engineer " His 
training and experience can be of real service to you. 




MORAL: Insure in The Travelers Ml f r • 

ance Th& Tr i ,dN <'<^. Mi torms of insur- 



ISO 






fed*? 

FOR HIS COUNTRY 



wnn 




WW 



MOTIVE 
C01VTR01S 



The spirit of aggressiveness being shown by our fight- 
ing forces should be heartening to every American 
. . . and all Americans will want to do everything they 
can to help make the enemy "die for his country" in 
this war for survival. 

Vickers Incorporated is contributing to this effort on 
many fronts ... on the sea, in the air, and on the land. 
Vickers Hydromotive Controls on our war tools of 
many types and on the machines which build them, 
have helped compel many an enemy to die for his 
country. These high pressure oil hydraulic controls 
are dependable, accurate, easy to operate, easily ad- 
justed, insensitive to vibration and shock . . . reliable 
no matter how tough the going. 

We are proud to announce the addition of a second 
star to our Army-Navy "E" Production Award. 



VICKERS Incorporated 

1400 OAKMAN BLVD., DETROIT, MICHIGAN 





