initial reporton 

1978 

Manuel LQuezon 

NATIONAL CENTENNIAL YEAR 



fa 



' Rc P ub ^ of the Philippi nos 
|\ 19/8 MANUEL L. QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COMMITTFF 

NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE COMMITTLL 
National Library Building 
Rizal Park, Manila 



hair man 
io Pcdrosa 

o-Chairmen 

orgc B. Vargas 
.milio Al>cl!o 
macleto C. Alcala 

ice-Chairmen 

del ina S. Rodriguez 

uis S. Etcubancz 
jstrello T. On* 
ds6 A. Rono 
uan L. Manuel 

Umbers 
jesar Virata 
lan Ponce En rile 
.^naida Quezon Avancena 
paimel L. Quezon, Jr. 
aciiico Ortiz, S.J. 
prapio S. Canceran 
stoban A. de Ocainpo 

xtcutive Secretary 
lordeliza K. Miliiante 

sst. Executive Secretary 
rancisoo B. Alvarez 

ccording Secretary 

Lowcna R. Perez 



30 June 1978 



His Excellency 

The President and Prime Minister 

Ferdinand E. Marcos 
Malacafiang 

Sirs 

* h ?Y? the honor t0 submit this initial report on 
the activities undertaken by the Executive Committee of 

J?! ^ 7Q J^ me ^b ? uezon Na *ional Centennial Year, in 
coordination with the National Historical Institute, as 
directed by Executive Order No. 502 and Presidential 
Proclamation No. 1726. 

This report covers the work of the Executive 
Cormuttee and the Sub-Committees durinq the period ending 
June 30, 1978. A 





PIO PEDROSA 

Chairman, Executive Committee 
1978 Manuel L. Quezon 
National Centennial Year 



CONCURRED IN: 




ESTEBAN A« DE OCAfiF 
Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 



Tel. Nos. 59-06-46, 58*11*59, 57*26*44, 58-12*57, 58-26-60 



r 



30 Juno 1970 



Your Excellency: 

The Lhtecutive Committee created by Executive Order No* 502 dated 
31 March 1978 to formulate plans and devise ways and means for the 
successful execution of appropriate activities and/or ceremonies for 
the commemoration of the 1978 Manuel L. Quezon Centennial Year lias the 
honor to suDrait this initial report of the work it has so far accom- 
pli shed . 

The Executive Committee has worked in close coordination with the 
National Historical Institute which under Presidential Proclamation 
No. 1726 of 30 April 1978 is designated to take charge of the said cen- 
tenary activities, A copy of the executive order and presidential proc- 
lamation is herewith attached. (Annex A) 

The Executive Committee held its first meeting on Kay 23. Subsequent 
meetings were held on May 30, June 6, June 13, June 20 and June 27.. These 
were held at. the office of Mayor Adelina S. Rodriguez, Quezon City Hall. 
Herewith are copies of the minutes of the said meetings. (Annex BJ 

During these meetings, the Committee laid the groundwork of the 
various units that would handle the multifarious commemorative activities 
by creating the Sub-Committees, the memberships of which are herewith 
listed, together with their designations, assignments, and work so far 
accomplished. (Annex c) 

To expedite the work of the Executive Committee and of its Sub- 
committees, a request was made on Hay 31 to the Commissioner of the Budget 
for the release of the appropriation of ^500,000.00 authorized by Executive 
Order Ho. ?02 c The request is under processing by the Budget Commission. 

Enumerated hereunder are the tentative commemorative activities to be 
immediately implemented as soon as the Budget Commission releases the re- 
quested funds; 

1. Nation-wide contests on painting, music, sculpture, literary work 
and oratory; 

2 0 The publication of the Quezoniana documents available in the 

National Library, and of such other woiks by him and on him, for 
possible printing, subject to availability of funds; 

3o The promotion and direction of local commemorative celebrations 
throughout the Philippines, to be handled jointly by the Ministry 
of Education and Culture and the Ministry of Local Governments 
and Community Development; 

4, The improvement at least of the basement and mausoleum of the 
Quezon Memorial Monument. The over-all improvement and completion 
of the monument and the circle on which it stands vail be finally 
undertaken by the National Historical Institute and the Government 
of Quezon City; 

5. The issuance of commemorative stamps, in coordination with the | 
Bureau of Posts; the issuance of commemorative medals and the 
minting of commemorative coins in coordination with .the Central 
Bank of the' Philippines; 



REPORT . o 



- page 2 - 



6. The holding of a two-day Congress on President Quezon 1 s role in 
the building and progress of the Filipino nation, to be held in 
Quezon City; 

7. The fabrication, installation and unveiling of two historical 
markers in significant places recommended by the National His- 
torical Institute; 

8. The production of a documentary film on the life of President 
Quezon and the organization of Quezon City, in coordination with 
the National Media Production Center; 

9. * The transfer of the Presidents remains from the North Cemetery 

to the Quezon Mausoleum inside the Quezon Monument; 

10. The holding of a public exhibition of pictorial documentations 
of the life and political career of President Quezon, available 
Quezoniana memorabilia and mementoes; of the winning entries of 
the painting, music, sculpture, literary and oratorical contests; 
and of such available materials appropriate for exhibition at 
the Quezon Museum; 

11. To hold a commemorative program on the President's Bay, August 
19, in coordination and cooperation with the National Historical 
Institute, the Quezon City Government, the Ministry of National 
Defense, and with other Ministries (Annex D); 

12. To collate all the activities and tributes undertaken all over 
the Philippines and their recording and publication as a souvenir 
of the nation-wide concerted efforts to commemorate President 
Quezon's memory. 



very respectfully, 




At tachm ent s : a/s 



ATTACHMENTS 



Annex A 



Executive Order No. 502 dated 31 March 1978 
Presidential Proclamation No. 1726 dated 30 April 1978 



Annex B 



Minutes of the Meeting, May 23 

Minutes of the Meeting, May 30 

Minutes of the Meeting, June 6 

Minutes of the Meeting, June 13 

Minutes of the Meeting, June 20 

Annex C Page 



Annex D 



Sub-Committees on Painting- Contest 1 

on Music Competition 2 

on Sculpture 3 

on Literary Contest 4 

on Oratorical Contest 5 

on Quezoniana Papers 6 

on Quezoniana Publications 7 
on Local Commemorative Celebrations 8 

on Commemorative Stamps 9 

on Centenary Medallions 10 

on Congress on Quezon 11 

on Histo ileal Markers 12 

on Transfer of Remains 13 

13~a 

on Exhibits 14 

on Religious Ceremonies 15 

on Finance 16 

on Stage Construction 17 

on Parade 18 

on Invitations 19 

on Protocol 20 

on Publicity 21 

on Security 22 

on Souvenir Program 23 
Copy of letter to Sub-Committee Chairmen 
as regards fund requests o 



Program of Commemorative Activities 
for August 18, 1978 

Commemorative Program 

for August 19, 1978 



EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 502 
and 

PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION NO. 1726 



MALACANAITG 
MANILA. 

BY THE PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 502 

CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHiJRGE OF THE 

PLANNING AND EXECUTION OP COMMEMORATIVE ACTIVITIES 
FOR THE 1978 MANUEL L. QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL 
YEAR. 

WHEREAS, the year 1978 narks the birth centenary 
of the late MANUEL LUIS QUEZON, first President of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines and one of 'the foremost 
leaders and statesmen of our country; and 

WHEREAS , it is doomed proper and fitting to com- 
memorate his centennial year with appropriate activities 
ana/or ceremonies to impress our people of the invaluable 
contributions of this great leader to the political eman- 
cipation oi our nation and the enhancement" of our- rational 
growth; ~ 

r\^°yj J* mEF0RE > I* FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President 
oi the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in 
me by law, go hereby constitute and create an Executive 
Committee to formulate plans and devise ways and means 
l or the successful execution of appropriate activities 
ana/ or ceremonies for the commemoration of the 1978 
Manuel L. Quezon National Centennial Year. The Com- 
mittee shall be Composed of the following: 



Hon, 
Hon. 



Jorge B 



i-'io rearcsa 

V argas 

Korio iiteilio Abollo 

ftorto Aaiiceto Alcaic, Governor 
of Quezon Province 



- Chairman 

- Co-Chairman 



Horio Adelina Ii 0 Rodriguez, Mayor 
of Quezon City 



Vicc-Chairman 



Hon, 



H03 



Luis Etcubanez, Lieutenant 
Governor, Sub-province of 

Lstrello To Ong, Mayor 
of Baler. Quezon 



Hono Jose Rono, Secretary of Local - 
Government and Community 



Development 



EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 502, page 2 



Hon* Jfann L, ftot^l, Bocr'et^ey or - Vice~Ohairihan 
i^ducation and Culture 

Hen. Cesar Virata, Secretary - Member 

of Finance 

Hon. Juan Ponce Enrile, Secretary - " 
of National Defense 

Mrs. Zenaida Quezon Avancena - " 

Mr. Manuel L 0 Quezon, tfr« _ " 

Rev. Pacifico Ortiz _ " 

Mr. Serapio Canceran • n 

Hon. Esteban do Ocampo _ » 

Three other members appointed by 

bhc President of the Philippines. 

~ . T] r e Committee shall coordinate with the Notional 
Historical institute which is designated in a separate 
proclamation to coordinate with the Committee in the 
eoration oi the centennial year. The Chairman is 
iHSi!??^ t0 reG . uest °*V a £° nc y of the Government 
:V^-.o S h J d J sc ^ ar S Q of the Committee's functions 
ana duties and ro designate such personnel it may require 
for the purpose, J J -''^ UJ - L ° 

h : h V- 3ud£0t Commission is hereby directed to appro- 
priate the amount ox £500,000 out of the funds of the 
National Treasury not otherwise appropriated to carry 

ilj coia ?omorative activities and/or ceremonies the 
Committee will undertake.. 

. . . Donc in 0± P of Manila, this 30th day of April, 
in the year ei Cur Lord, nineteen hundred and aeve at-- 

Cj * - w o 



(SGD) PERDIK/i|TD E. Mi*RC0S 

President of the Philippines 

3y the President: 



(SG.D) jTLnl C. TUVERA 
Pr e s id cnt ial assist ant 



MALACAftAN palace 
I4ANXLA 



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

PROCLAMATION NO. 1726 

DECLARING 1978 AS MANUEL L. QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL 
YE All AND DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INS- 
TITUTE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION . 

WHEREAS, the year 1978 marks the birth centenary 
of the late MANUEL LUIS QUEZON, first President of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines and one of the fore- 
most leaders and statesmen of our people; 

WHEREAS, President Quezon had served our country 
with great distinction In peace and war from the Revo- 
lutionary period in 1898 to the time of his death in 
1944; 

WHEREAS, Quezon rendered signal service to our 
country and people as provincial fiscal, provincial 
governor, delegate to the First Philippine Assembly, 
Resident Commissioner to the United States, President 
of the Philippine Senate, and finally as President of 
the Philippines (1935-1944); 

WHEREAS, it is important that the valuable con- 
tributions of this great leader to the political eman- 
cipation of our people and the promotion of our nation- 
al progress during his stewardship of the government 
be inculcated in the minds of our citizenry, particu- 
larly the youth of the land; 

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the spirit of 
service and self-sacrifice demonstrated by. President- 
Quezon should always be remembered by the present and 
future generations of .Filipinos; and 

WHEREAS, it is- of prime importance that the heroic 
deeds and unquestioned loyalty and patriotism of this 
man from Baler should be projected and emulated; 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E , MARCOS, President 
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in 
me by law, do hereby declare 1978 as Manuel L. Quezon 
Centenary Year and designate the National Historical 
Institute to take charge of the celebration and to 
undertake the following activities in coordination with 
the Executive Committee created for the purpose: 

lV Prepare the general program of the centenary 
and' submit a copy of same to the President 
of the Philippines for his information; 

• 2. Promote and direct commemorative celebrations 
throughout the Philippines; 

. 3. Collect, edit and publish the important speech 
and state papers of President Quezon that have 
not yet been published; 



PROCLAJAATION-NO*. 1726, page 2 



4c Erect a fitting and inspiring monuments or 
memorial in honor of President Quezon in 
places where it should be erected; 

5* Conduct a nation-wide contest in painting and 
sculpture and in music that shall appro- 
priately and properly honor Quezon; 

6m Initiate and sponsor the holding of a three- 
day Congress or Convention in Quezon City 
• to the building and progress of the Filipino 
nation; 

7« Coordinate with the Bureau of Posts relative 
to the issuance of commemorative stamps and 
cause the issuance of commemorative medals 
for the Quezon Centenary; 

It is hereby authorized to accept or receive dona- 
tions ana other conveyance of funds, materials and 
services gratuitously for use in the furtherance of its 
purpose's and objectives as well as to conduct fund 
drives subject to the provision of Section 1 of Presi- 
dential Decree No. 373 dated January 9, 1974. 

The Institute is likewise empowered to call on any 
department, bureau, office or agency of the government, 
including government owned or controlled corporations, 
for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of 
its function relative to the . centenary celebration. 

IN WITNESS WHEP4EOF, I have hereunto set ray hand 
and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines 
to be affixed, 

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st of March in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight. 



(SGDO FERDINAND E. MARCOS 

Fresident of the Philippines 

By the. President : 



(SGD.) JUAN C . TUVERA 
Presidential Assistant 



Minutes of the Meeting of the 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
1978 MANUEL L« QUEZON NATIONAL 
CENTENNIAL YEAR 

MAY 23, 1978 
MAY 30, 1978 
JUNE 6, 1978 
JUNE 13, 1978 
JUNE 20, 1978 



MINUTES OP THE MEETING OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE ON MLQ CENTENNIAI 



ATTENDANCE: 



MAYOR ADELINA S. RODRIGUEZ, Quezon City Hall 
CHAIRMAN' ESTE3AN cle OCAMPO , NHI 
HON . CARLOS QUIRINO 

ATTY. AN3ELM0 REGIS , Coty Treasurer, QP 
GOV. ALCALA by F.A. HATIVIDAD 
LT. GOV. LUIS ETCUBAEZ by ATTY. A.C FOH 
DIR. PONCIANO PINEDA 
MR. REYNALDO MAG LAY A 
MRS. FLORDELISA MILITANTS 
HON. SERAPIO CANCERAN 
HON. EMILIO A3SLL0 
UNDERSECRETARY ISA3SL0 R. CaSTRO 
MR. HEMENEG I LDO BAUTISTA, DEC 
HON. PIO PEDROSA 
ATTY. MANUEL T. SANTOS 
J*?- ERATJCISGO 3. ALVAREZ 



+Ko m Hon * cit y Ma Y° r Adelina Rodriguez formally opened 

the .Mung at i:OC p.m. by -,elcor,ing the members of the Executive 
Coaaxttoe. one explained the reason why the conference was being 

£ir*^*c«E; 0nln ! thereia ' execative ^dors Proelaming this 

year, MI^ Centenary Year. Spearheading this centennial celebration, 

PocatfLT t " a i ° f . the -ypoairti on "Quezon's So.ial and Political 
Legacy to tne Fxlxpxno Nation" held last February 20, 1970. There- 
after, the Hon. City Mayor turned over the chair to Hon. Esteban 

campo, the Chairman of the National Historical Institute whose 
OTfxoa was appointed by the President to take charge of the centenary 



. _ Chairman ae Ocampo continued to explain the role of his 
?""3 in tne centennial celebration relative proclamation No. r?2G 
oy tne President of the Philippines dated March 31, 197o. He ela- 
borated on the various activities slated for the Executive Committee 
to ^wplsnont. He then read the names of those designated by the 
President to compose the Executive Committee empowered to undertake 
tne various aomaeaoraiive. activities lined up for the Centenary Year. 

. •■ . j 
Having been appointed Chairman of the Executive 
Committee created. Hon. Pio Pedrosz immediately took over and pro- 
sided the meeting. Knowing the voluminous responsibilities that 
this activity would entail, Hon. Pedrosa proposed to the aommitteo 
tne creation of sub- commit tee , to which the committee acecdedo 

Tackling the proposed program submitted the ff. a<&ti~ ' 
vitics were outlined for roaaittee* 1 s possible ompiomentation. 

a. Nationwide contest on Painting, Sculpture, Musia 

Dean do Joya was designated as Chairman on painting. 
The Dean of the Conservatory of Music of the Univcr- ' 
sity of the Philippines for the music contest. 
Mr. Napoleon Abuena on Sculpture and Dircator 
Ponciano Pineda was suggested to handle the JLitorary . 
and Oratorical Contests 5 In aonnoction with tho 
above contests, it was suggested that the theme for 
these contests 3hovAd depict the life of the late 
President Manulo L. Quezon. 



b. On tho Publication of the qc History Book, Mayor 

Rodriguez informed the Committee that V«ir* Carununga-a 
is presently working on the said activity. 

Chairman Podrooa suggested to keep tho Coimnittoo 
inf oruod on the progrcco of tho history book* 

c * On the collecting, editing and publishing of 

Quczonian Pcporc, it v/as suggested that Director 
Quiason of the National Library bo designated to 
take responsibility in this area* 

d. On tho documentary filming of Quezon and Quezon 
City, Chairman do Ocavvpo informed tho body that 
one National Media Produr.ctio:: Center has been 
convaisoionod to do Jrhc documentation, which activity 
if funded by the Na£ ioncl Historical institute 

in the &uount of ?13P t 000,.00« 

o. Or. the iaprovo^ent of the grounds of Moaorial Circle 
Atty* Santoe informed "Che b:>dy of the 5 year long 
re. go -program by the City Govcmuont* A £3® Million 

budget is beii.g allotod to complete the development 

of the whole area* An amount of ?1#3 M has initial- 
ly been appropriated by the Ci'cy Government for the 
f ollov/ine purposes s 

instant forest-tree planting and ornamental 
project at the front of the pylon, north 
V/e stern point sf the circle. 

kiosk to serve tho public for breakfast > 
luch, dinner and snacks; 

construction of rest areas for the public 



installation of rocteational facilities such 
as skating rink; and 

construction of tv/o (2) doep-v/cll pumps in 
order to maintain the needs and requirements 
of the trees and plants 0 

Atty, Snncos Z\irthcr stated that this project can be 
fully realized ^.z ~oon as tho plans are approved by the First Lady* 

f. On the improvement of the Quezon Memorial Jionuacnt 
and yiaueclcum, the b^dy v;as informed by Mayor 
P.^drigues of the Memorandum of ngrcenent between 
the national Historical Institute and the City 
Government, stating that the Kill will take care 
of the improvement of the pylon, ' basement and the 
surrounding area v/hile the rest of the circle will 
bo undertaken by the City Government. 

Mayor Rodriguez explained that the City Government 
has a commitment of 100,000*00 for tne construction of bhc base- 
Biont* An amount of ^200,000.00 is still needed to finish the pholo 
project. 

Mrs. Militants added that tho NHI has appropriated 
an amount of j>750,000,00 for the improvement of the basement and th< 
Mausoleum. So far, ^500,000.00 has been incurred as of this date* 
According to her, they have requested the assistance of the private 



1. 

n 



sectors for the construction of tho elevator, but they 
'■ •■'■■■*■/ " '••>•••• an npprqxXuct t pi ?3,dO0.OO. 

On this score, it was tho consensus of the body that an 
nt of ,210,000.00 bo ^propriated immediately for the coiLlotionof 
Ku;cra< ' nt auu " c " c <*»*=°loua. Said amount would bo obligated from the 
300,000 budget approved by the Prcsidoht. ' 

g. On the sotting up of the Quezon Muoucm, Mr. Jorgo Varna'- 
was designated as Chairman of this project. His committee 
will be likewise be responsible for cue "memorabilia." 

h. On tho issuance of Commemorative Medals, which will be 
silvor and gold plated. Mrs. Militantc informed the 
body that tho NHI will be responsible of securing tho 
approval of the Prosidnet concerning the design of tho 
commemorative medals. 

With the same end in view Ay. Ansclmo Regis submitted a 

poscl oi commemorative coins. In this connection, NHi was appointed 

• representations with the Central Bank for tho minting of these 
-vor and gold coins , 

i. On che printing of Commemorative P stal Stamps, Gen. 
Gcrardo Tan- be of tho Bureau of pogt, vac designated 
Chairmori of the committee. Tho Executive Committee 
would request that surcharge be aaded for tho sale of 
these stamps, the proceeds of which will go tho funds 
of the Executive Committee. It was agreed that the 
day for tho issuance of tho said stamps will bo left to 
tho discretion of tho Executive Committee. 



" 0n thc Pointing of Postcards, bookstores, like the 

.Uomars, tho Philippine Education Company and tho National 
Bookstores will bo tapped to take charge of the printing 
r.nd sale of those postcards, A certain percentage will 
90 to the funds of the Executive Committee to finance 
the completion of the Quezon Memorial Circle 

k. On the project for the historical barkers , the NHI was 
designated in- charge with this responsibility,, 

io On the 2-day Congress on Quezon, Don 3milio Abello 
suggested to hold this Congress on August 17 & 2o. 
Dr. Onofre 1>. Corpuz of UP was chosen as Chairman "of 
this activity. 

The committee also discussed various commemorative activities 

a. .'. military parade with floats, depicting the life of 
.Manuel L.. Quezon on August 19, 197^. Pres. Marcos will 
be invited to be the Keynote speaker during this 

ocacsioii o 

It was also suggestec that a centennial award should 
bo given to Pres. Marcos by the Committee during this 
activity. 

bo Coordination of local celebrations of Baler and Quezon 

provinces, v/ith the national celebration on August 19, 1973. 



It .was also suggested that the local goernmcnt of 
Baler and Quezon provinoes submit their proposed programs 
to the Executive- Committee for approval* 



Saco ftono was designated GhMrnmn of the various 
commemorative eclobrationd with S^Co Manuel ai> the 
co-chairman of this Committed 

Co Coordination with the mass media to aid the Executive 
Committee ii: dicuo;;;ia^tiriQ information and publicity 
Dii the Centenary Yoo.ro Kr 0 Doroy Valencia will be 
chairman of this activity with Mr « Grog Cendana as 
t. h ^ c q - c h a i rci n n , ; 

Other matters taken up were: 

lc Appointment of Atty. Anselmo Jlorie n S treasurer of the 
Executive Committee on the MLQ Centennial celebrations, 
which appointment v/ill be submitted to the Budget Com- 
mission for approvalo 

2. Uequcot for the full release of the -mount alloted for 
vh-o QMC c ..000 ruction by the liocutivc Committee a 

3o Next meeting will be on Tuesday at the Mayor 1 a Office, 

IT! noon« 

The mooting adjourned at 2:j0 p 0 i.u here being- no other 
• etero to duccuss« 



^^? n ?£. T ^ e ,? :CG ° u ^ V6 > Comnittco Meeting on MAMJEL 1. QUEZON CESTENEIAL 
CEIS37lA3JJOd hold at the Mayor's Office, -Quezon City Hall, May 30, 1978 at 
3.?. i'ooru- .. 



ATTEHDAHCE j 



Chairman 
Co-Chaimen 



Vico-Chaimonj 



Members 



OTHERS KDBSSHTi 



Hon* Pio Pedro sa 

Hon. Erailio Abello represented by 

Mr. Francisco dc Leon 
Hon. Aniceto Alcala ^presented by 

Mr* F.A. Nativida'd 
Hon* Adolina S. Rodriguez 
Hon* Jose Rofio rcprosontod by' 

Mr« Rone Maglaya 
Hon, Juan Manuel represented by 

Mr. Eormonigildo Bautista 
Hon. Juan Ponce Enrilo represented by 

Lt w Col* Bornabo Orofta 
Hon. Sera pio Cancoran 
Hon. Estoban A. de Ocampo 



Hon. Pohciano Pineda, Institute of National Language 
Hon. ijolizardo Tanabo represented by 



Hon, 

Hon. U'oixzardo Tanaco represented by 

Mr* Pedro Llarcolo, Bureau of Posts 
Hon* Sejrafin D a Quiason represented by 

Era* Luz CastaSoda, National Library 
Mrs. Flordoliza K. ia lit auto, Hat. Historical Institute 
Atty« Manuol Santos 7 Quezon City Government 



Mfca. Veronica Rca&os* 11 

Mr. Ansqlmo Regis, » r 

Hr. Francisco Alvarez i n 

Mir. Col so Carunungan 

Mr. Lambert o Ave liana 

Mr. Lamborto Avellana, Jr. 

Kr, Hqnecfco Vitu>? 



I! 
!? 
!( 



If 
11 
11 



•The meeting began at 1:00 o'clock in the afternoon with the Chairman 
presiding* . • '. ' ~ 

Mioses of the Meeting 

She minutes of the first meeting wore approved as submitted. 

. _'Zr.:_ Chairman informed the Committee that any remarks/sUggostion omit- 
L in one mxnutos mil still bo accepted as part of the minutes. 

Ocaaaaorativo Modal a 

The design of the commemorative medals duly approved by the NKI Chair- 
! an Bstoban Jo Ocampo, Dr. Galo B. Ocampo, Heraldry (technical Adviser and 
Presidential Asst. Tuvera was submitted to the Committee It was duly noted. 

Conmorao-rnt-ivn coin 



The design of the commemorative coin as suggested by Dr. Galo Ocampo, 
toraidry Technical Advisor, was approved as submittod to the Committee.- 



- 2 - 



With vognrds tho minting of the coin, C^Uraum Podrosa offered to see 
Central Bank Governor Licaros with BHI Chairman do Ocampo, If tho Central 
Bank will agree to tho proposition that it undertake tho minting they will 
broach tho possibility of a surcharge in favor of tho Commit too to bo' used 
in the improvement of tho Quezon Memorial Circle. 

Documentary Fi 1 m 

Mr. Lamborto Av nana who was invited to give a progress report on 
the developments of tho 20-minuto documentary film, informed tho Committee 
that tho National Modia Production Center commissioned him to direct the 
film. 

Ho further informod tho body that tho first portion is on tho late 
President -a biographical sketch, tho scones of which wore shot in Baler, his 
hometown, and in San Juan do tat ran College, Sto. Tomas University and 
othor places significant to the President. 

_ Ho showed photos which ho stated wore researched intensively from va- 
rious libraries, archives and museums, one of which was the President as a 
young boy. Mayor Adolina S. Rodriguez will give a short message and r 0T 
about 8 to 10 minutes Quezon City will be displayed in all its beauty. 

Tho documentary which is projected to bo ready by July will bo shown 

Zr S£S bv iZ? i it ia C11 th ° thcatrc3 and ™ television. This will bo 
arrangoa by inc EMPC. 

.yarning of the plan of tho Committee to transfer the remains of tho 
Aoe^Umt from the North Ccmotory to tho Quezon Mausoleum, he proposed that 

v air could bo held earlier he could incorporate the scone, if not 
a simulated scene with only a few people present. During the filming he ' 
requested that the area should bo without tho scaffoldings and laborers 

of Hon^J^Sf^ 0 / r?° r Rodricucz thc Committee of the prosonco 

of Honosto (Titug who had been invited because he has in his possession no/ t- 
uxves ot rare, unpublished photographs of tho President. Mr. Vitug inform. 

canang oy tho T^lnmc * 

Chairman Podrosa said that ho wants a s much of tho pictures with Mr. 
Vxtug -to appear in the documentary film and in tho book Mr. Carunungan is 
' llr ' /ltu C 8& y a that hc oan have prints of them with tho Stalls 
to do arranged. Mr. Avellana said that they vail bo in touch with each 
other on this matter, and he (Mr. Avollana) .all take care of selecting a,, 
enlarging Che pic cures, tho expenses of which will bo borno by tho MFC. 

of -.J: r ;^I G . ldana Wil1 b ° ad,/i30d b y thc Committoo as regards the transfer 



History Book on Quezon City 

Mr. Colso Carunungan who was invited to give a report on tho develop- 
ments of the book only stayed for a while duo to an engagement. However", 

l%fl. thc -vaiorna-cion to Mayor ilodriguoz that thc writing of tho boo 1 - 
xs oW.j finished. 

Chairman Podrosa asked Mr,. Alvarez to request Mr. Carunungan to submit 
tho book's table of contents and the inclusion of as many pictures as possi- 
ble m The boo]:. , 

Chairman Podrosa agreed with Hon. do Ocampo that since it is a center- 
nial odition it is but fitting to como out with a thickor book. V/ith tlie 



- 3 - 



motions .the book *ould bo r.oro interesting and increase it, sale- 
..nxlxty. Actxng xron Hon, Canooran's information cathorod f^nr m~ n^L 
nungon, Chairman Pfcdroea stressed that the book sho,ad £ve S* 2 ?0 
pa G cs. It could bo in two or acre volumes from 155 to 175 pases each. 

Chairman Pofiroea requested Mr. Alvarez to take care of the natter 
and make a report on the final arrangements between Messrs. Carunungan 
ana vxtug. 0 

Prizes For The Cogctogta 

, urr emotion with the nation-wide contests in painting, music, sculp- 
turo, .lxteraturc and oratory, Chairman Podrosa informed the body that the 
amount of P1CO,QOO.QO will bo allocated for the cash prizes. KO%M 
is outlayod for 3 ach contest. The body agreed on the allocation/ 



^yt. ^ th.e^^cgaajlttoo on lAtc^-fa,™ an d Oratory 

Dir. Pineda, chairman of tho sub-committoo, presented tho draft of the 
rules and regulations for the participants, The contest in T»S^bSLJS 
an, m Pxlxpxno. Ehc Chairman requested him to bring down the P47?000 

S'meeti^ 00 ^?? ^ f l0caticns and «« revised' amount 

n oc mooting. Drr, Pxnoda agreed. 

At this point, the Chairman asked how the contests wiU bo announcOd 
:C : name of tho Committee. Dir. Pineda said that it will STS 
tho^cartmont o* Education and Culture because of the involvement 
intermediate, secondary and collegiate levels. Hon. do Ocampo said that 

:LSndenL: oZ **" »° t0 a11 th ° Actors, su P e- j 

+rt ^JS^/S 0 ? 3 *? th ° T 0thor sub-committoo chairmen, hon.de Ocampo offered 
d J °3^ for painting, Mr. Napoleon Abuova for sculpture 
: auaiQ. Hu will reiterate their designation as 

aoch and tho rules and regulations, cash prizos to be rocommondod by them. ; | 

uur;-gonlana Payors 

. 

Heh. dc C .._ informed the Chairman that tho Ouozoniar nanors ia 
Lor the safekeeping of the national Library the director of which is 
Dxrcctor Scrafin Quiason concurrently chairman of the sub-committoo or 
Quezonian Papers. juj.i»mkj en 

Hrs. Luz Castaftoda representing Dir. Qaiason whom ho designated as 
one of the members of his sub-committee said that tho sub-commit toe's ta-k 
is the selection of tho most -significant of the speeches, mossaros and 
st ito papors fro-:: the voluminous, unpublished documents an- 1 their publi 
( - fcX ° n \ 3hc addo ? th ^ t auiason will make available all the' Ouozcnian 

cccumonts, xn reply -co the Chairman's desire that all should be pubHshod 
to afford everyone tho opportunity of reading tho late President's nauors 
Subscriptions vrlll be solicited to offsot tho printing coots. 

The Chairman pointed out that it would not do justice to President 
uozon if tho important documents would only be selected. Ho askod whether 
thoro xs a duncgr volume, and Mrs. Castafieda says there is. he requested 
her to report on the area of accomplishment as regards tho papers." Ho 
aonticned there could bo. an editorial committee later on to work on tho 
selection of documents that are most historically important. 

Mrs. CastaSoda cemmontod that it would bo quite sometime for all the 
ilccunonts zo be published. Eon. do Ocampo added that a listing coul^ be 

published. ' . 



CoanoKQ cat Lyo Co lobra ti.ons 

tw 8* ^ t^ntod tho motion of Mr. Maglaya ropro» e nt ineT Sec. Roflb 
that the Sub-Commxttoo on Commomorixtivo Colobmt.i nns bo amonded to- 
Sub-Commit too on Local n,-. ;i ,i. ,or<,;.iv.. Oololuvi toons. 

He informed tho body of a nemo circular to all local governments 
except that of Metro Manila, Baler and Quezon, specifically mentioned ir 
3xoeutxve Order Ho. 502. Tho memo contains: 

1. Announcement of the Quoson Centennial Year; 

2. Collect fron the citizenry the Quozoniara memorabilia and mo- 
montoos to fern part of their local museum or -library} 

The issuance of commemorative medallions for sale; 
4. Etc organization of a local committee tho set-up of which vail 
be patterned after the 3xocutivc Connittooj 
2ho sponsorship of symposia in coordination with the Dept. of 
education 6: Culture end Barangay officials. 

He stressed that the memo circular will only come out after all tho 
-.her sub-committee chairmen have presented their plans. This is. neces- 
sary no aaxd so there will be uniformity of all the local activities 
wxtbout necessarily using up all their resources. 

It this juncture, i!r. Bautista representing 3cc. Manuel, co-chairman 
of tno Sub-committee on Local Commemorative Celebrations informed tho 
body vf asxmxlar memo circular directing all regional directors, superin- 
tendents xn the holding of a week-long commemorative activities in accord- 
ance wxth one suggested thonos* A copy of tho Iraft memo was submitted 
to tno committee. 

n . VM ; ;r : **£*ya added that the DUG announcer.ont will bo embodied in tho 
LwJ) circular and will request tho local committee to submit to tho 
■^xorai Historical Institute of .at loast one picture of the highlight 
I ■ . act ^ v i^ xos th °y hQyo undertaken. Chairman Podrosa asked Messrs. 
• • - and Bauticta to coordinate with oaeh other ro.-nrdin- thoir re— 
poetivo programs. w 

-Jv.lalu^Iiitjv c Stamps 

n, ■ rf rcol ° ^P^eseatxng Postmaster General Tanabe informed the 

attee that the issuance of tho centenary stamps of Pros .. Quezon -had 
already boon included in the 1978 program of tho 'Bureau of Post. 

r ~- '^^.ChiorDosirmer had been assigned' to make an appropriate design 
of he stamps wxth tho year 1878-1978 mentioned. The stamps will come out 
on ..ugusu 19. Hioso will come out in different denominations from 300 up. 

m. Marcolo further informed tho body that the first issue of the 
lomoratxvo stamps mounted on .a narra frame is usually presented or turned 
* 'J ontxt 5 E concerned. Chairman Podrosa roquostod two frames- o«e ' 

or the Quezon City Mayor for the Quezon Museum and the other to the 
cSSS? It Ifatioml Historical Institute. Atty. Santos informed the 
onaxrman tna; the. mtom win be located at the Quezon Monument. 

She presentation was suggested to coincido with tho program propor 

■ ..--.u;t 19. Chairman Podrosa asked the local commit tee "chairman to ' 

■ ■ go the details of the program propor. 

5he Ciiairmn further" 'requested Mr. Marcolo to take the matter up with 
general ranabo regarding the possibility of a surcharge in favor of tho 

" 4 v °? ,° a Xh0 aulc 0f th0 stamps but not on a compulsory manner. This 
will bo taken up at the next meeting. 

Mr. Magiaya said his Office will further assist by requesting the local 
government to motivate the local citizenry in buying tho stamps. 



Report on tho Banemo nt 



UxocuUvo Soc^to^'of ^ho CoStoo ^S^ 0 *,* the imi concUrrontlj( 
in charge of tho improvement in III I lnfOMao <* the body that the MHI 
—t. .ho plan oon Sis t a a o? ^££2 ? th ° M 
SLo then boto a report on tho extent S T ihaao x * 11 » KI-o and Hl-n 
which is only 5 Q# finished. 0i tho ^aplishmont onPhaso Ill-a 



Other Mattor3 



Ofi^h of Of^ 'j^ - 2h.o c} 10 - 
of the Executive Cozanittoo my have^to J h ° SWOrnin S in of tho monbors 

not all of thorn arc present durin- tho ^ J? forr °d in view of the fact that 
just be printed to bo broutfrt by thoir mS*?" H ° snid that forns *U 
signature of the presidential appointors! P XVo ^Prosontativos for 

B « 0£fioo Space - m--. ^i-r • 
Lndness oftho-^^ Sbrary^S Siw" th ° that the 

office furnituro have been provided £or^ ° ffico s ^ co and soko 

Secretariat. It is locate-' at the A+w- , to ? p , 0rar y »so of tho Coiniaitteo 
Tol. No. 58-26-60. " 4th Al00r ' publications Division, 

C. Pinajtcia] /tQ-port — Th~> G 1 - • 
a prepared letter roquostinr tho Bi^^V** ? Pn ? d tho b0l ' y that there was 
L>500 ; 000.00 appropriated in % ™, ~ °J ? olmni ssionor to reler.se tho 
■ of Manuel L ouo.cn? £ *lio ? ?f° r IT °' 502 for ^o centenary aoti- 

ditures.for poroonal sor^*- *° tt0 f ma ^ioned the initial expon- 

.ri.es for tL eontos?^ ^fe?££S£ for"? IV >' ^ 

laneoua including travelling o^; 1 ^^^ «~. 
rentals, etc* iVnn,, » * >n%1 ••• o--, t*l<illouovy 9 

tarslS oS^JSIS' !TiT r C f QU °^ n City ^'dosignated Dis- 

ron tv' u' ^/^tructod to set up a special account separate 

J — • -<° I-iilBUSL It. .QUBZOT NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COKICETTEE". 

. D ° j^KSDSffiSft. i^^ojo^A.> iotivltloB In £Wnr» City - Mr. Ansolmo 
"f^ cha ^nan of the local c omit too, presented to tho body their pro- 
< ■ SW«a of activities to bo hold in Quezon City, for approval/ The 

^ponsoc ror the following activities will bo shouldorod by tho City: * ' . 

X. ITirit of Aucuot 18, 1978 - Chore will bo a cultural prosent- 
' ~'r 0r tno I ;u ^Xic at tho Aranota Colisoun. Tho two-hour drana will bo 
* wo signifioanf opiacxioaon tho lifo of tho President including Filipino 
: 3 b y Mb * Arnida Sigiiion Royna or Mr. Lino Brocka. Sponsors will bo 

v; s0 : 2 nation can viow it on thoir IV sots. Tho Chairmn roquostod 
••• local comcattoo to submit^ tho script of tho presentation for approval. 

2* .Day of August 19 ; 1973 - Thoro arc six activities linod up on 
J toys wroath-lcyixvj, nr.zz, civic and military parade (inc* floats do- 
: be of the public lifo of tho President), launching of 
j'jia history book, laainching of tho Quezon City Fund Drive and cappod by, 

" • 5po0ch of tho Pros* Ferdinand So Marcos. Thoro wore many stifffcostions 
^ the order cf the lino -up. Chairman Podrosa sugepstod that it start with 
k ^ r iort motorcade froa tho I;or!;h Conotery to tho Quezon Mausoloum, thou iuu 
^ u ^nsfor f tho remains, wreath-ILayintf followed by the mass and blessing, 
-n<l tho delivery of tho prcsi'tontial spooohp Tho civio-ailitary parado 
^'••y ? 0 XXov w In view of tho various surest ions, the Chairman roquostod 
™£* Bo^ifi to ••- ' • r n *? 4-i ir ^y»^ ^ .T.r- ft tv—. wUnhin plan. 



- 6 - 



Night of August 19, 1978 - The proposed KLmxlon do Honor to bo 
eld at the 383 Auditorium will bo discussed at tho next mooting. 

Security and Protocol Affairs - In anticipation of tho President 
•'• tody's accoptcaoo of tho invitation, Nr. Alvarez eraggostod that 

the Protocol Of. .Moor of MaiaccHang bo d&signatod chairman on tho protocol 
' ifpoemt of tho 3tago. The Committee conourrod with Mr. Alvaroz. Lb. 
Col. Bornabo Orofia representing Soc. Bnrilc was roquo3tod to consult with 
. Ver and Socrotary Enrilo as regards tho security matters. Mrs. Ramos, 
,, Secretary of the Mayor suggested that 0 roprosontativo from tho 
- )col office of tho Dept. of Foroign Affairs bo also invitod in case 
. .. re will bo diplomatic officials in attendance. 

Award to the President - Att. Manuel Santos rocommendod that a 
centennial award bo given to i resident Ferdinand E. Marcos for loading 

■ Filipino nation in vonorating tho nomory of tho late President on his 
centennial year. Chairman do Ocanpo asked him to prepare tho text of the 
award for approval of tho HEH board. 

Tho mooting adjourned at 2:50 in .tho afternoon. 



Certified Correct: 



00 MIM R. PEREZ 
Roco rding Secretary 



APT3STEP BY: 



?LGADELIZA K. MILIEAHEB 
Executive Secretary 



Q> 1978. ia " or 8 Ol - r ico, Quoaon City Hall, ig Koon 

ATOETOANCE:' ' 

Chairman - ;; nvi -d-? ~ n a 

n ^ ™ . • l1cn * Pl ° Pedro sa 

uazu ^milxo jidoIIo represented by 

Mr# Francisco do Loon 

ITxce-Chaxmoai Hon, Jose Ro fio represented by 

Members n & * A £"P ito Cruz 

• ; :i0n ' ^ Gn Pon co Enrilo represented- by 

Lt. Col. Bornabo Orcna • 
' Hen. Estoban dc Ocampo 

OTHERS PHES2NT: 

H*n. Ponciauo Pineda represented by 

' M ~ ' ^* , , z S ' Castafioda, National Library 

m , tju. m , °7 ' W-QZon City Government 

San 1 SXfir^'n^ 02011 Ci *y Government . . 
Jjoan.^on Santos, UP College of Music 

£i;:^ r Sr^f JMt ' * «»» * k» ** ... 

Mr* F.A, Natividad 

Prof. Alfredo Saulo ..... 

A'-r*. Honosto Vitug 

, s ^r ttns *••* at 12:45 in «*> a «°»« » i« oto, 

L " Mr^tC'S Of the ?'.-.r>ti r.f> 

She. miautog of the meeting hold or May '50 iQ7n ^+ 
■*J teyw Rodriguez vrore submitted. Ihere teinf no L£S Quezon 
>y the Committee. s amendment, it was approved 

P inancia 1 Mat tor s 

a* Request for Appropriation Release - The, ~- • ^, 

Podrosa that the letter to the Bud «p?2 rt " ' inforDOd ^ Chairman 
-lease of the P500,OOo!o6 «mEk£F?I «•* requesting the ro~ 

the initial exS^S,^^ * ^ °*t *• 502 mcntioncd 

.1. Salary of throe (5) casual employees • 
for three months (.Juno 1-August 3l) 

and honoraria of secretariat staff .... j> 10 000 ' co 

2. Improvement of the Basomont and iu,ooo,00 
M lusoloum of the Quezon Monument 

(Phase IV) _ ' 

3, Equipment (filing cabinet,, electric' * * * 210,000.00 
fans, stapler, puncher, etc.) .... c non nn 

4- Prizes for Contests in: ,5,000.00 
Painting P20,000.00 
Sculpture 20,000.00 
Music • 20,000.00 
Literary ' 20,000.00 
Oratorical J^OOJXOO 
. (Tentatively Estim^teTatl. ......... 1CO ,000.00 



- 2 - 



% Exhibit Matorial£3 for the 

Quos&on Musoum p 75,CCO.CO 

6 0 Miscellaneous (including tra- 
velling oxponsos, postage, 

supplioa, rontals, etc.) ........ 100,000,00 

TOTAL . I>500 ,000.00 

Tho body was also informed by Mrs. Flordoliza K. Militant© that as 
of now no personnel for tho secretariat staff had boon hired ponding 
the approval of tho budget release. Two of the Mil staffers wore 
temporarily detailed — -.'signments pertaining to the 

activities of the Committee. 

The contents of tho letter to the Budget Commissioned dated 
May 51, 1978, was ratified by the Coanitirao. The Soorqtariat staff 
was directed to furnish tho Quezon City Treasurer designated 

-1 Officer of tho Committee, a copy of tho letter for his 
records. 

b. City Government Funding Support - Tho Chairman presented to the Cpn- 
mitteo tho 5th indorsement dated May l f j, 1978 of Mayor Rodriguoz, 
forwarding to HHI Chaiman Estoban do Ocanpo, a portion, to nit: 
o . inviting attention to the preceding 4th indorsement 
which reci':os the circumstances that constrain the City Govern- 
ment frojn funding the amount of 1300,000. 00 tc comploto I-haso IV 
of tho Quezon Ifcmorial project in consideration of which tho 
City Government is constrained to hold this natter in abeyance 
until funis of this City would warrant appropriation of the 
said amount * 

It is hoped, however, that the National historical Institute 
could provide tho funds fron other sources. " 

.\vl Ldr/- there would have been a total alloca- 
ticn _ ^.w^oOoCO for the improvement of the basement alone: 
x"300,000*iCO from the Hity Govornmont and i'210,0C0.0C fron the appro- 
priation of Executive Order No« 5.02. 

Mr* Ansolao Regis , City Treasurer, howovor, said that there would 
still be a funding support fron the City Government for the Phase IT 
in tho amount of 5?100, 000.00 . 

Vfifch tho 'assurance from the City Treasurer of tho ?100 ,000.00 
fund allocation and tho 1*210, 000*00 fron B.C. No* 502, the outlay 
will take care of the finely completion of Phase IV, a portion of 
tho basement that will house the exhibits and Quczordan rie:;::rabilia f 
The letter transmittal was therefore returned to Chairman dc Ocampo 
for their records. 

3o Fintorio"! Har-r-ccr 

Copies of tho text of the historical marker on his centenary year 
wore distributed to thr momber3 for comment /approval. The marker will 
. : instal! ' r j - at tho fo > of this monument in front of the Quezon City 
hallo Chairman Pcdros* cemuented on the portion: "... may kinalaman 

.patibay ng mga bates Jones at Tydings-McDuff io . . ♦ should 
be improved considering the invaluable offorts the late President made 
in th€ ratification of these rignificant laws. There was also a sug- 
gestion that the tost should possibly concentrate on tho Presidents 
life* Another was that the "Champion of Social Justice " be included., 

NHI Chairman Bstcbcu do Ocanpo was designated to head tho c ommit tee 
on historical mar?cor&« The nonbors were requested by Chairman Podrosa to 
•t a the task of * coparin^ the text taking in consideration the 



- 3 - 



esUo of tho nurkor which whon fabricated 

tloaUar and tho also of tho toatl*? it ~ U ™ aoro or toss ' 3 f, '° 1 ' vor- 
. st contain the nest ai.pUfiXnt Lto SS iho " ^ bo C °^ Q « J 
l)o taken up again no xt mooting/ tho ri ^ont, Ihn matte* ^ 

4 . iitotajac qncl,. 0 jut oric/ q C onto at a 
Tho rules and ro^ilntimi^ 
Btcnvonido Itoyoa roBroooSttm, ~. " a ^P"»J> was subnittod by Mr. 

03AT0RY. 

Hich School Lovol . 

Collogxato Level 

First Prize $i ^ ; m 

Socond' " ' iVVm Pirst Pri2 ° 1-3,000.00 

' " ' 50 00 l JC ° nd " 1 500-00 

3 Honorable 5 *° ? ird " 1,000.00 

Montiona Sco 00 3 Honorable 

*°tai . l^ToTco :i0nti "; v; 300 ^ 9°°>0Q 

Total - - P6, 400.00 



ESSAY 



Thono 



SSffiJ 0 ! I ' a f im lrL Qu030n sa Sanaa" 

English : "Quezon's Legacy .to tho nation" 

School Level: . 

Collegia to Level 

First Prise LI. "500 00 ■>-.• 

Socond " i 500 0O P^stPriso 13,000.00 

Third » 'So 00 ' ^ C ° nd 1,500.00 

3 Honorable 5 ° 0 "° J J** " 1,000.00 

Mentions r*2o6 600.00 3 SSS^r 

Total - - - i^6o57oo Mentions^). 900.00 

rotal — i>e, 400.00 

allow ^ oakdo ? m of th0 cash prizes which did not oxcood tho P?n nnn 
alloted for each contest was approved by the Co^tSniito^ 

-nbo^rT^ th ° ^o^ittoe, the 

lone en a nationlSde scatf T^e^nnetf SouS^o^ " W±11 bs 
commute from their r-.sroo tivo" "vS^~ + • t 7 '™ aapl ° tird0 to 
acreod on the foll^^J^^ bo I*. She , * 

Int ra-regi cnal " ~ August 4 

Reform-"' f ~ - - - August 17 

-.^-uxng Coronony - - - _ August 13 

.- no - Tho venue for tho awarding corenonv „•„ +m 
^ovoral suggestions a, to whore tho cfromon? ~hou? f i t Thoro wore 

ll; /Ibolardo TTin +•*,• r T . .0. c °romony should ho held, thov were- ' 
\x; ADoxarao nan of the CBuversity of tho Ihilinrrfr^e fo\ ■ \ 
the Social Security System, (3) Carlos MW?T PP * 4 (2) Aud itorium of 



V , oa °* \ n ^^C woll-knOwn singers liko Hico Puno or Pilita Corralcs 
SlHSIt? 22 th ^^ommittoc on Literary and Oratorica^Cont^tT 
SSSiSl^. Doon Santos, concortists, pianists to render 
. maexerai works cf music during tho ceremony. 

to ™«c S?f J" a ' :rCOd *S thnt h0 could ilwite th0 ® Singers 
to craoo thy. occasion. It will take then only a wook to practice Tho 

^sUen was woll-takon. Chairman Podrosa requested Dean Santos to bo 
accopSdT* 01 ^ Gub ~ COEElittc ^ ' Tno designation was graciously 

, Chairman stated that said Sub-Comnittoo will be given a free 

band m organizing tho corcuony. 

Transportation Exponsoa - Tho body took up the problon of who will 
rf-Y::"' 0 bl * ns ?°f^ion oxponsos to be incurred by tho winners of 
-^i^r-regional, mtra-rcgional and regional winners. There were 

ifflH^? ena (1) that th0 winriQ1 - **y ho sponsored by their 

;■; --;-; : ':r - 1 ' ' cv f^ts through the Department of Local Government and 
a r • by Development, and (2) through the assistance of tho Department 
:ion .and Culture. This'mattor will bo taken up next mooting 
whon concemod sub-eonmittoo will givo rocoamondations on this regard. 

0 .,J!*?-Y.^ n ; 0 *? ~ Th ° Chairman inforued tho Ooamittoo that tho essay 
contest 1^13 do handled by the Department of Education and Culture. An 
official request •.•mil be made by tho Committee to this effect. 

Status of the Quozonian Panors. 

Hrs. Eus S. Castatieda represented Dir. Quiasor. who is presently at- 
tending a confuronco abroad. She furnishod tho members copies of a report 

tho sxatua of the Quozonian papers vailed to the National library by 
tho la to President himself on March 26, 1942 in Del Monto, Bukidnon. Tho 
aoctaaonta with the THE dates from year 1900 to 1944 approximately 180,000 
' l •;' consisting of letters, reports, memos, speeches, cable /yams, notes, 
c ° aoa financial reports and rocoipts, scrapbooko, newspaper 

clippings, pictures, etc. 

The report mentions that there is a finding guide to tho Papors 
known as the Kara ol L. Quogon; A Roaster of his Paaors in tho _|mho>^i 

11 ti ••-•> The re, later is divided into 6 series, namoly: Family Cor- 
respondonco, Con-. a pendent's Pile, Spooohos, Article statement, ro-ort 
of interview and book file, General Miscellany and Subject Pile. Portions 
Pi oho Quozon Papers have boon .microfilmed under the joint undertaking 
of the University of Michigan and the Till. As to tho condition of tho 
papers, a groat majority of tho documents are in tho advance. 1 state of ' 
deterioration. Tho book collection on Quoson numbors to 60 items. 

Suli-C oigmit too on Music 

Doan Ramon Santos of tho Univoroity of tho Ihilippinos' Coliogo of 
Music who was designated during tho previous mooting of tho Committee as 
Chairman of the Sub^Coramittoo on riusic, was prosont. Ho was briofed on 
tho various matters regarding his Sub-Committco. 

Doan Santos informed the body that tho setback for organising a 
contest country-wido is tho time element involved. Ho said that two 



Ho rrnd that tm montfta id not onou«h time to compose lar,;o scald musical 

In viow of *kU, ho recommended a choral composition. Chairman 
1-odrosa informed him that, thoro is a P20,000.0G allotment for the cash 
prists on music contest alone to be distributed in the boat manner as to 
attract worthwhile talents. Dean Santos stated that he will submit tho 
rules and (^clolinos for the contest and tho rocommondod cash pri zoo. 

^i^aillttpo on ?ai.htiiv; 

Dqan Jogo Joya designated chairman of tho Sub-Committoo on Painting 
presently abroad was roprosentod by Mrs. Virginia Plor Agbayani, Associato 
Lean of the OP College of Fine Arts who will act interim chairman until 
she leavoa for Australia in August. She vri.ll prepare tho rules and regu- 
lations and rocemmonded cash prizes for next mooting. 

.Sl^^mtt oc on 5cul7)ture 

For tho Sub-Committee on Sculpture, Dean Napoloon Abuova was desig- 
nated chairman. Mrs. Agbaynni offered to contact the Dean as regards the 
matter* Ho will be requested to recommended the rales and sidelines for 
this contest and in what form tho contest will be conducted. 

Publications on quozon . . 

a* MS. On "Quezon On His Centenary" 

•Tho Chairman mado known to the body the presence of Prof. 
Alfredo D. Gaulo who then submit toil to tho Executive Committoo • 
copios of his letter proposal and cost ostimatos pertaining to 
tho writing; of his manuscript on "Quezon On His Centenary" for 
tho Committoo 1 s favorable consideration. 

A dummy of tho book was also presented to the Committee. Tho 
lot tor dated June 4, 1978 offers the option to the Commit toe of 
publishing said manuscript as part of its centennial activities. 
Two alternative proposals wore presented therein* 

Eio letter mentioned that the writing of the ms. was commis- 
si o nod by tho National Science Development Board (NSD3). Irof. 
Saulo informed the Committee that tho National Research Council 
"n il shown interest .in publishing the work but there had been a 
change in plans. 

Thenceforth, a resolution was approved by the body creatine 
a committee to evaluate the proposals of Irof. Saulo. National 
Library Director Sorafin.D. 0;aias on was designated chairman with 
NIII Chairman Estoban A. do Ccampo and Irof. Alejandro Ilufana i a 
faembors. At the invitation of Chairman Pcdresa, a mooting had 
boon set for this purpose. 

,F !uczon On IJlm Centenary", which is scheduled to be published 
in December this year, will bo the main publication of the Com- 
mittoo for the centennial year. However, tho Chairman reiterated 
his desire to include in the forthcoming publication the oueson 
photos bolon^in,-; to Mr. Vitug. Prof, ;3aulo took note of the 
Chairman^ statement. 

b. Prc3. 'juesori 'Hn^nl^r h*r • ■ 

Hon. iJsteban de Ocampo brought to the attention of tho members 
that another book being offered to tho Committee for publication 
is the award-winning biography on President ^uozon written by 
Dir. Carlos Quirino. 



-6— 



According bo Hon. do Ooampo, Dir. C^irino who was present at 
the fiwit cored ttoo meeting presented his willin&noss to have 

oook publishod under the auspices of the Committeo for 
i-2,000.00. He further informod the monitors that the book if 
printed in offset process nay come out before AAugust 19. 

Cho Chairman with the concurrence of the members tontativoly 
arxooa to the reprinting of tho book. He designate I Dir. do 
Ocaupo as committee of one subject to the approval of Dir. 
^ ia8i / n uas designated over-all chairman on 'iuozonian pub- 
lications . He was requested tc look into the mechanics of 
reprinting, it boing a publication of the Filipiniana Book Quildj 
to inquire into conditions, costs, distribution and other prob- 
lems, in such a manner that it will cone out before AAugust 19. 

iioprosenting rostmaetor General Polizardo Tanabo was Atty. Baltazar 
; eabl0 ; Th0 b0(V S v/as infornod that the idoa of printing tho commemora- 
tive stmaps with a certain pcroontago that will r; o into inprovenent of 
the Quezon Honorial Circle was not feasible duo to so::;o logal restrictions. 

Atty. Afablo requested permission to attend the succeeding-; meetings 
of oho Comnittoc inasmuch as tho printing of the stamps had been agrood 

as regards the first issues of the. stanps. Chairman I'odrosa rei- 
terated that one of the two frames of stanps will bo presented by tho 
First Lady assisted by Postmaster General Tanabo to Quezon City Mayor tor 
exhibit at the Quezon nusounu Atty. Afablo took note of the arrangements., 

11. Qthor Mattoya 

a. Program of activities - HHI Chairman Estcban A. do Ootuapo reauostod 
tho Governor of Quezon Provlnco, Lioutonnnt irovarnar of Sub- 
Province of Aurora and the iiiyors of Baler and duozon to subiait 
their respective general program of activities to the national 
Historical Institute in conformance with Proclamation Ho. 1726. 

b. >C. Commemorative Activities - City Treasurer An3olmo Regis, 
Chairman of the « V .C. Local Committee, informed the body of the 
xlmC. Exocutivo Club's desire to include the civic-military parade 
on tho day of August 19. ?Jr. PcOgis stressed that the number of 
floats will not exceed ton representing d.C government, Sub- 
province of Aurora, Province of ducson, Ouozon Institute, among 
others. No one float will represent any corviercial concern. 

e« Stage - Mr. Alvarez presented to the Comittco the problem of 
putting up the stage that will seat tho First Couple, Cabinet 
monborc, members of tho diplomatic corp, etc. Ho roquostod the 
assistance of the Ccnnittoc to finance sail structure of which 
Chairman approved. Tho Chairman requested for cost estimates 
to be incurred. Mr* Alvarez inforned hin that the City Engineer 
will be invited to attend next meeting for this matter. 

d. Protocol/Security Hattors ~ The protocol officers and officials 
on security will be invited next mooting for consultation on 
nattors pertaining to proto^-x o,^^ ;ten ts on tho stage and 
for purposes of ^•^•J-V considering the wruconoo of the First 
CoupXo nich-ranking officials. 

mooting adjourned there being no other natters to discuss. 

Sniun-i ttod by: 
Rowena R. Peres 

PIG rSDRO&i 
Chairman 



Q - n City iiall, Juno 13* ?! "con ^ A(i ° Una C * 



ATTENDANCE: 



Chairman Hon. Fio I-drosa " 

Go-Chaxrmon - Hon. A naclQto Alcala represented by 

Mr. F.A. Natividad 

- Hoiio Jorge B. Vargas represented by 

Prof. Hauro Garcia 
/ice^Chairmen - Hon, Adelina S. Rodriguez 

- Hon. Juan Fonco Enrilc represented by 

Lt. Col, Bornabo Orcfia 

- Hon, Sorapio Canccran 

- Hon, Esteban A. do Ccampo 



Sub-Committees - 

Dir. Ponciano 3,1-. Pinoda (Literature and Oratory) 
represented by Mr. Bienvenido Reyes 

Dir. Sorafin D. Quiason (Quozoniana Publications) 
represented by Mrs, Luz S. Castafieda 

Ambassador Rafael Gonzales (irotocol) 

represented by Vice-Consul Antonio Pratt*, Jr. 

Dean Ramon i : < Santos (Music Competition) 

Associate Dean Virginia Flcr Agbayani (lainting) 

OTHER PRESENT: 

Mrs. Flordoliza K. Militante, National Historical Institute 
Mr. Francisco Alvarez, Quezon City Government 
Mr. Honesto Vitug 



The meeting began with Chairman Tedrosa presiding, 
1 • Approval cf the Minutes 

The minutes of the meeting of 6 June 1978 were approved with the 
word "competition" of Item Mo. 6, 2nd par. duly rectified to " c expo- 
sition" , upon the motion of Dean Santos, 

2„ Hi st ori ca 3 Marker 

Copies of the revised text were- submitted for comment. Approved 
suggestions for inclusion were* "President of the Senate (I9l6-193b) n 
nd "Champion of Social Justice". 

3» Sub-CoriTaitt ee on Liter a ture (Essay) and Oratory 

Copies of the report on the amount of cash prizes and other cxpon- 
tures relating to the holding of the essay and oratorical contests 
were furnished the members. The total amount, over by P27, 454^50 of 
the obligated amount for the two contests, was due to the expenses on 
transportation and accomodations of the winners and their respective 
chaperons and/or tx\ainors 9 and the honoraria of the board of judge*. 
Due to paucity of funds, the Chairman requested the subcommittee to 
•possibly bring down the amount to P40,C00.00 by revising the. amount 
of cash prizes. ' As to the honoraria, itrwas tentatively agreed to 



rr/vP° 1 P 0Ss f bility that thG Provincial governors sponsor, thru the 
DLGCb, the winners of the contest will be looked into. 

Q u c z o ni a no I ; h ot os 

Mr. Alvarez reported that arrangements had already been made with 
Messrs. Lairiberto Avollana and Cclso Alt Carunungan regarding tho 
inclusion of the photos in the book on President Quezon belonaina to 
Mr* Vitug. • 

S i -b-C emmr. t o o s 



a. On Painting Competition 

Associate Dean Virginia Flor Agbayani, interim chairman 
of tho sub-cenrnittco, read to the body tho rule-, and regu- 
lations of the paintin| contest. She also presented the 
. amounts of cash prizes for the winners totalling to 1*18,000, 
to witt 1st prize ~ P7 ,000.00$ 2nd prize ~ ?5,000.00s • 3rd 
prize - P3,Q00.00 and 3 other prizes P500.00 each. The 
balance of ^2,000*00 will be set aside for the incidental 
expenses and the putting up erf the painting exhibit at the 
. Quezon Museum, Quezon Monument. 

On her recommendation that honorarium be given to the 
members of the board of judges, gifts as token of appreciation 
was tentatively considered as a more permanent act of grati- 
tude < 

A copy of her recommendations will bo sent to the sec- 
retariat as soon, as they are mimeographed. 

bo On Music Competition 

Dean Santos , chairman of tho sub-cor : j.;ittee v in his letter 
to the chairman, presented to the committee the names of the 
members of his sub-committee, to vat: i'rof. Bayani M. do Leon 
of the Ministry of I-ublic Information and Dean Alfredo Bue- 
naventura o f the Centre Escolar University- 

* 

Thr ; amounts of recommended cash prizes totalled to 
P16, 500.00, the iM, 500.00 balance of the P20,000 for the 
contest was purposely set aside for the xerozing of the parts 
(scores; to be sung by the vanning choral group and the tl.T. 
Madrigal Singers, and other expenditures relative to the 
c o nt e st o 

The need to disseminate country-wide the holding of the 
contest was taken up. It was agreed that a letter signed 
by Dean Santos, attested by the Chairman of the Executive 
Con;ai'ctce, vail be written to the Ministry of Education and 
Culture, requesting for the circularizoticn of the contests, 
"* by division. The contest of the choral composition compe- 
tition will be circularized first. Dean Santos offered the 
machinery of the University of the I hilippines for the press 
releases to be sent to the dailies only within Metre Manila. 
Dean Santos and the secretariat staff will coordinate r;n this 
matter. 



On Sculpture Cohtcst 



Dean Napoleon Abuova, chairman of the sub-committee , 
was unable to attend the meeting. Ho was nevertheless 
competently represented by Associate Dean Virginia Flor 
Agbayani, She informed the body that the rules and r ovu- 
lations for the contest on painting will be adopted for 
the contest on sculpture. The sculptural work of the 
entrants may be executed in any form of medium, A relief 
may be considered also* 

d. On Exhibits 

Prof, Mauro Garcia representing Hen. Jorge Vargas, 
designated chairman of the sub-committee on exhibits, was 
informed that the exhibit will be located at the basement 
of the Quezon Monument, 

His recommendation will be taken up next mooting. 
Commemorative Coin 

The ^Chairman presented the letter from the Central B an k 0 f the 
Philippines signed by Governor Licaros informing the Coimiittee that 
its Monetary ooard has approved on March the minting of the 25-Fiso 
and 50-i-iso silver coins. It is now being undertaken by the Franklin 
Mint and are expected to be available before August 19. Photos of 
designs of I ho reverse and obverse of the coins were attached. 

The Comnattee, in appreciation! will write a letter thanking 
them for this enduring contribution to the Quezon centennial year. 

prot ocol and Security 

Invitations to attend the Executive Committee meeting were extended 
to Con. Fnbian Vor, 1 residential Security Command, to Dir. Cristobal 
Osotoo, Presidential Irotocol Officer and Ambassador Rafael Gonzales. 
Gen. Ver will be consulted on the security matters and while Messrs. 
Osotoo. and Gonzales , on procotol arrangements on the stage during the 
program proper on August 19. 

Vice-Consul /intonio irntts, Jr. , cane for Ambassador Gonzales, 
who is now abroad. The matter of who will be with the First Couple 
on the stage was taken up. But, in view of the absence of the afore- 
mentioned authorities on the subject, the discussion was deferred 
for the next meeting. 

Other matters 

a. 'Stage Construction 

During the last mooting, itv/was agreed that the City 
Engineer be invited to give recommendations on the cost rind 
construction plan of the stage for the program proper on 
August 19. Mr. Alvarez reiterated the need for the dofinito 
number of people to occupy the stage before such recommen- 
dation could be made. 



This 'matter will again be taken up when the authorities 
on the security and protocol could be in consultation. 



b. 



Publicity Work 



On recommendation of Mayor Rodriguez, Mrs, Mylah dc 
Loon was designated chairman of the sub-committee on 
publicity. She will take charge of the publicity work 
for the centennial activities of the Executive Committee, 

c. "The Voice of Quezon, 1904-1944" 

Another Quezoniana book being offered to the Committee 
for publication was the D-volume work entitled - !, Tho Voice 
of Quezon, 1904-1944" , authored by Irof, Juan F, Rivera, 

The proposal vias referred to the Sub-Committee of 
Quezoniana lublications, for evaluation and rocottmicndations 



There being no other fcattor to discuss, the Chairman and the member 
thanked Mayor Rodriguez for the lunch, and the meeting adjourned. 



Submitted by; 



ROiTENA R, 1 5REZ 
Recording Secretary 



ATTESTED BYs 



PIO rEDROSA 
Chairman 



THE SUB- COMMITTEES 



- Page 1 - 



StJB-COMrteEE Oil PAINTING COHTBST 

Chairman - Dean Jose Joya 

College of Pine Arts 
University of the Philippines 

Interim 

Chairman - Hra. Virginia Plor Agbayani 
Associate Dean 
College of Pine Arts 
University of the Philippines 

Members - p r0 f o Felipe Padilla de Loon, Jr. 

Department of Humanities 
College of Arts and Sciences 

- Prof* Plorencio Concopcion 
College of Pine Arts 
University of the East 

j^ncMons 

1 ° "° f e : : '-- ;:no and ^commend in what manner the contest on paintinr Trill 
oe undertaken nation-wide. * uXXX 

2. To recommend the rules and regulations of the contest. 

3. To recommend the amounts of cash prizes for the winners, the total of 
tihxca should not exceed 1=20, 000.00 x 

4. To request the Ministry of Education and Culture that it disseminate the 
contest to be conducted, the rules and regulations, the amounW cash 
prizes, bhrough the Memorandum Circular to be issued by the said LLnist 

% T0 . c . 0o i' di ^.° with th0 Subcommittee on Sculture Contest in puttin- an an 
exhibit of ohe onorios on painting and sculpture, for public vie winr i > 
cioso coordination with the Sub-Committee on Exhibits. 

Accc-">3 jj sa-yi 

1 . Recommended that any medium under the category of painting may be used. 

2. Recommended the rules and regulations to be followed by the entrant- for 
the contest. . ' 

3. Recommended the amounts of cash prizes: 1st Prize - P7,0C0- 2nd Prize 
: :3,C00; 3rd Prize - P3, 000 j 2 Honorable Mentions at P1 .000 each 
Total P1 7,000.00. _ ~ " 

Requested the Ministry of Education and Culture for the issuance of the 
erai r adum Circular, in its letter of June 29th. 

5. Recommended that the exhibit of the major vanning entries on painting 
and sculture be set-up at the Quezon Kuseura located at the b&seraent of 
the Quezon monuuieiit tentatively scheduled to be opened for public viewin" 
in the afternoon of August 1£. 

Pundin-r ?.o.-n;iro;no n t 

Cash Prizes P 17,000 

Por incidental expenses 3,000 

Total - - P 20,000 



-i>age 2 - 



SM^CQimfllES} OH MUSIC COKBSiq^QJI 

Chairman - Dean Ramon Pa Santos 
College of Music 
University of the Philippines 

Members - Prof* Bayani M* do Loon 

Ministry of Public Information 

- Dean Alfredo Buenaventura 
Centre ^scolar University 

Inunctions 

U to determine and recommend to the Executive Committee in what manner 
the congest on music will be undertaken nation-wide* 

2* To recommend the rules and regulations for the contest, . 

5* So recommend the amounts of cash prizes for the winners* 

4. To request the Ministry of Education and Culture for the issuance of • 
Ilemorandum^Circular disseminating the conduct of said contest, rules 
and regulations and amounts of cash prizes * 

5« To coordinate with the Sub-Committee on Oratorical Contest as re rds 

the program scheduled for the oratory finals (national level) including 
therein a musical number for the intermission August 1? at the Carlo- 
Albert Session Hall, Quezon City Hallo - 

6* To invite the U.P. Madrigal Singers to give first performance to the 
major winning entries of the ir.usic competition<> 

Acconrolished 

U Recommended to the Executive Committee that the contest will be a Chora] 
Composition Competition 0 

2. Recommended the rules and regulations to be followed by the entrants. 

3* Recommended the amounts of cash prizes: 1st Prize - 17,000: 2nd Prize 
£5,000; ;>rd rrize - Pj>,000; 3 Other Prizes at P500 each - PI .qoo - ~ 1 
Total E>16,500« ' 9J 

4* Requested the Ministry of Education and Culture for the issuance of the 
Hemorandum Circular to the effect* 



{ j« Coordinated with the Sub-Coirxiittee on Oratory Contest to include tl 
j%P, Madrigal Singers to provide the intermission number • 

jy. : n i i n* ; Itequi re:ao nts 



Prizes for the Contest PI 6,500 

Honoraria for 2 sub-committee members 

and 3 judges at P200 each - - 1,000 

Copying of winning scores ~ - 300 

Transportation for U#P« Madrigal 

Singers — — 5 00 

Sifts for the U*P« Madrigal Singers 1 ,000 

Miscellaneous (refreshments and other 

contigency expanses) 700 

GRAND TOTAL 1*20,000 



v mvwvv 



SWB-CCEKI2SS3 OH SC01PTUHE 

Chairman - Dean Napoleon Abueva 
College of Pine Arts 
University of the Ehilippinea 



Members 



- Prof, Solomon A« Saprid 
University of the East 



- Prof. Ed Castrillo 

university of the Philippines 

^■■notions 

2. To recommend the rules and regulations of the contest. 
5. To recommend the amounts of cash prizes for the winners. 

' h fl^f^l^ 8 aSSistance ° f the -^istry of Education and Culture bv 
sraj ox issuxng a Memorandum Circular on the contest. 3 

5a ;° J^SSS 5*?, ^ 3rib - COinraitteo on ***** Contest in putting . 
up an exhxbxt of. the major winning entries on sculpture and paintin 
for puolio vaewxng, in close coordination with the Subcommittee on 
_ Lts ' <° 00 loc * ted - the basement of the Quezon Mom ,ont! 

1. Recommended that any medium under the category of sculpture may be used 
i or the contest* 

2. Recommended the rules and regulations the entrants will follow, 

^° : tended the amounts of each prizes: 1st Prize - P7 f 000* 2nd Prize 
r5f000; 3rd Prize - P3,000; 2 Honorable Mentions at PI. 000 each - 
.2,0^0; 5?otal - - P17,000« 

4« Requested the Ministry of Education and Culture to issue a Memorandum 
Circular on the contest* 

5o Recommended that the exhibit of the entries on painting and sculpture 
be set-up at the Quezon Museum located at the basement of the Quezon 
Monument, tentatively scheduled to be opended for public viewing in 
the afternoon of August 18© 

IHrndigg ^con::.ro:..ont 



Prizes for the winners P17,000 

For incidental expenses > '5,000 

Total - ~ i'20,000 



- Pag§ 4 - 



sm^mmmm on literary contest 

Chairman - Minister Juan L« Manuel 

of Education and Culture 

Hpnbers - Mrs 0 Hortensia ? c Benoza 

Assistant Secretary 
Ministry of Education and Culture 

Hon. liicardo Trinidad 

Acting Director 

Bureau of Secondary Education 

Ministry of Education and Culture 

- director Antonio Duialao 
Bureau of Higher Education 
Ministry of Education and Culture 

- director Ainda Sutaria 
Bureau of Elementary Education 
Ministry of Jducaticn and Culture 

Functions 

2. To reco^end the rules and regulations of the contest. 

3. To reconanend the amounts of cash prizes for she winners. 

4. To recoKL-aend the place of submission of the entries,, 

^gcooplishad 

u snrsSiS!* the contest be an essay writin - ° ontest *» piii p-° 

2. Recorroended the rales and regulations to be disseminated in all the 
schools thru -.he Memorandum Circular to all the Bureau Directors! 
Regional Directors, etc., issued by the Ministry of Education and cm 
fare the place of submission of entires mentioned therein^ SubmittS 
-.ho draft Memorandum Circular, the contest on literary S oS f 

J. liecomiended the amounts of cash prizes, as follow: 

ili rh School Colgate 

1st Prize PI, 500 5?2 000 

2nd Prize 1,000 Two 

3rd Prize 500 - ^000 

:> Honorable 

Mentions © P200 e a* 600_ C>r3C0 oa* (Jqq 

P3t600 S>5,400 

<U Recommended that the entries for the essay writing will be submitted boi 
The Secretariat, MLQ Centennial Celebrations, c/o The Rational Historical 
Institute, National Library Bldge, Kisal Park, Manila "° 

':din;; Regu i rement 

Cash Prices for the winners (in Pilipino) ~ p<j,000 

Cash Prizes for the winners (in l^n^lis}}) 9,000 

For incidental expenses g, , 000 

P20,000 

vwvvw" 



- Page 5"- 



fgtg^mvr^ qti oratorical coirA;:* 



Chairman 
Members 



- Director Ponciano B .P. Pineda 
Institute or National Lan^ e 

- Director Gregorio 3 . Cendaua 
national uedia Production Center 

- Director Florentino Oaua 
Bureau or Broadcast 

- Director Lorenzo J e Cruz 

Bureau of national and Foreign Information 

- Mrs* La to la La^ic 

Chief, Materials Production and 

Publications Division 
Ministry of Education and Culture 



Functions 



U ?o determine and recommend to the Executive Committee how the oratorical 
contest shall oe conducted nation-wide and in what categories 0 

2rt To recommend the rules and regulations of the contest and the dates for 
the different levels -co take place 0 



To take charge of the ceremony for the finals (national), recommend the 
venue, time and da be* 



4« To rocoi.jucnd bhe amounts of cash prizes for the winners. 
M£2S£=3 §h ed 

io ftocc-.rjnonlod that it will be conducted in all schools, in tv/o categories 
in rilipiuo and in Jnjlisho 

2o ^Gco:r~:endcd t'. 




5. Recommended the Carlos Albert Session Hall at the Quezon City Hall £U 
the venue for the finals (national level; on August 17. Submitted bh< 



0 

dr 



of pro^;rara of said affair 



4. ilecoamenled the amounts of cash prises, as follows: 



. Secondary 

1st Prize 
2nd » 
3rd " 
3 Honor able 
Kentions at 2200 ea, 



Collegiate 



-1 ,500 
1 , 000 

500 

600 
>3 , 600 



P2,000 
1,-500 
1 ,000 



(at P300 eaU 9°.°, 



?5,400 



Cash Prizes (in pilipino) 
" " (in iinglioh) 
fepenaes for the finals 



P 9 , 000 
9,000 
2,000 

pioTooo" 



Page 6 



SUB-COMMITTEE ON QUEZONIANA PAPERS 



Chairman 



Membea 



- Director Serafin Do Quiason 
National Librae 

- Krs* Luz So Cac tailed a 
Chief, Publications Division 
National Library 



Functions 

i. 



To take charge of colleting the Quezoniana state papers, 
messages speeches, etc., and editing the same for possible 
publication*, 

2o To prepare a listing of all the Quezoniana documents as 
an imlaal publication of the papers until the needed 
xunas shall nave been available for their printing,, 

.Accomplished 

lc Submitted a report on the background of the Quezoniana 

papers willed by President Quezon to the National Library, 
their present status and total number of items available 
ao. the LiDraryo 



SUB-COMMITTEE ON QUEZONIANA PUBLICATIONS 



Chairman - Director Serafin D. Quiascn 
National Library 

Members _ p ro f . Esteban A. de Ocampo 

Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 

- Prof. Alejandrino Hufana 

Librarian, Cultural Center of the Philippines 

Functions 

1. To evaluate the written works on President Quezon submitted to 
the Executive Committee, for possible inclusion in the Quezoniana 
literature that is proposed to be compiled, subject to avail- 
ability of funds. 

2. To submit to the Executive Committee the recommendation/s of the 
sub- committee, for the Committee's final consideration. 

Accomplished 

It Evaluated the following: 

a) "Quezon: On His Centenary", (one-volume) 

by Prof. Alfredo B. Saulo 

RECC3MMENDATI ON - For possible printing, but defer until 
after the activities of August 19 shall 
have been over, in view of shortness 
of funds. 

b) "The Voice of Quezon, 1904-1944", (5-volumes) 

by Prof* Juan F. Rivera 

RECOMMENDATI ON - For possible printing, but defer until 
after the activities of August 19 shall 
have been over, in view of shortness 
of funds. 

2. "Quezon* Paladin of Philippine Freedom" by Dir. Carlos Quirino 

RECCMffiND ATI ON - That the Executive Committee authorize the con- 
tinued sale of the remaining 600 copies in the possession of 
the rilipiniana Bock Guild at a discount to be not less than 
30/o of the regular Guild selling prize of P35/copy. 

U na c c o mn 1 i s h e d 

1. To recommend the reprinting of "The Good Fight" by President 
Manuel L. Quezon, for possible reprinting. 

Fu ndi nq Requ irernont 

NONE 



- Page 8 - 



SUB-COI-IKITTEE ON LOCAL COMMEMORATIVE CELEBRATIONS 

Chairman - Minister Juan L 0 Manuel 

Ministry of Education and Culture 
(Asst. Minister Vedasto Suares) 

Co-Chairman - Minister Jose Rono 

Ministry of Local Governments 
and Community Development 
(liro Rene I&glaya) 



gunc lions 

lo To recoLviend a schedule of a set of conuaemorative activities 
to be undertaken by all schools and local governments all 
over the Philippines o 



2 



o To issue its respective memorandum Circular, to this effect 
for dissemination countiy~wide« 



Iceonplishc d 

1. The Ministry of Education and Culture has prepared a' schedule 
for the set of commemorative activities to be'undertakcn by 
all schools in the Hiilippines. 

-° Submitted to the Executive Committee the draft Memorandum 

Circular as prepared by the Ministry of Education and Culture 
for this purpose. 



yundinT Requirement 
None submit ted o 



- Pace 9 - 



SDB-OQKKEOTBB ON COMMEMORATIVE STAKES 

Chairman - Hon. Felizardo R. Tanabe 
Postmaster General 
Bureau of Posts 



Fonctiona 

lo To make available the first-issues of 'the Manuel L« Quezon 
centenary stamps in various denominations, mounted in three 
frames, to be awarded to: 

(a) the Quezon City Mayor for the Quezon Kuseum 

(b) the Chairman of the National liistorical Institute 
for its liistorical collection 

(c) Mr« Manuel Ac '<uezon, Jro, on behalf of tlie ! *>uezon 
children and grandchildren 

2o The Chairman of this Sub-Committee, in his capacity as Post- 
master General of the Bureau of Posts, shall assist the 
• First Lady and Minister, Madame Imeida liomualdez-Harcos 
during the awarding ceremonies as part of the commemorative 
program tentatively scheduled on the morning of August 19. 

Accomplished 

lo Included in the general program of the Bureau of Posts the 
issuance of the centenary stamps for President Manuel L. 
"iuozen, an appropriate design already prepared by its 
Philatelic Division* 

2o The Executive Committee was assured of the framed stamps to 
be ready for presentation on August 19 during the commemo- 
rative pro gram o 

Pun^i ::^ Requireme nt 

IConOo The printing of the said stamps is part of the program 
of the Bureau of Posts o 



Page 10 ~ 



SUB^CCKHHraSSB ON CENT2HAJR.Y IffiDALLIONS 

Chairman - Prof, Bsteban A. dc Ocampo 

Chairs n and Executive Director 
national Historical Institute 

Members - Prof, Galo 3« Ocampo 
Technical Consultant 

on Heraldry 
National Historical Institute 

- Kro lid^ar Lee 
Emblem Designer 
. National Historical Institute 

Z^CtiOllS 

lo To prepare an appropriate design for the Manuel L* Quezon 
centenary medalliono 

2, To submit the design to the authorities concernod in the 
approval of the design,, 

3o To make the necessary canvass of costs with the different 
printers <> 

4* To take all the necessary steps as to make available the 

said medallion during the awarding rites of the commemorative 
projra:/; on August 19. 



1. Prepared the design for the I«ianuel L<> Quezon centenary medallion* 

2. Submitted the design and the same duly approved by the National 
Historical Institute, the Technical Consultant on Heraldry and 
the Office of the President • 



Funding Itegv.irerecnt 

For 1,000 pieces of the medallions estimated at P20>000o00o 



- Pago 11 - 



SUB-COMKITTEE OH CONGRESS OH QUEZON 

Chairman - President Onofre D„ Corpus 

university of the Philippines 



.".''unctions 

1. To handle the two-day Congress the theme -of which shall revolve 
on the President's role in the building and progress of the 
iiiipino nationo 

2o To tcJce charge of the .venue which shall he located in Quezor 

CiuVo 

3, To take charge of inviting the speakers and participants to 
u ne Congress „ 

4. To prepare the reading materials to he distributed during the 
Congress. 

5o To take all other necessary steps to realise the said activity. 



• 



- Page 12 - 



SUB-COMMITTEE ON HISTORIC*! MARKERS 



Chainaan - Ifcof. Estefcaa A. do Ccanpo 

Cliairman and Executive Director 
National His toxical Institute 



Ti^ctioi-^ 

1. To prepare the tezt of the historical marker: 

(a) on his centenary to be installed at the foot of his 
monument in front of the Quezon City hallo 

(b) declaring the Quezon Memorial Circle as a National 
historical Landmark under Presidential Decree ho. 260 
to be installed at the Quezon monument* 

2« Jo take charge of the fabrication and installation of the 
same in time for their unveiling on an appointed date. 



Ac con plj shed 

1, Prepared the text of historical marker (a) and submitted the 
same to the institute of National Language, for final approval. 

2. Fabricated the historical marker (b) and ready for installation 
at the Quezon Monument in Jraeson City. The unveiling had been' 
tentatively scheduled in the morning of August 19. 

-.. ' ' ?", ~ -■■■-■■••■.•.iremont 

The- expenses for the fabrication and installation of the fr/o 
historical marker v/iil bo aofrayed by the National Historical Ins- 
titute, as part of the Institute's continuing function of markins 
significant nistorical places. * 



- Pago 13 ~ 



SUB-C0MKITT2E OH TRANSFER OF REMAINS 

Chaiiman - Eon. Serapio Canceran 
Co-Chairman - Atty« Ramon Valencia 
Members - Rev. Fr„ Pacifico Ortiz, 

- Jud^e Minerva Genovea 

- fiscal Jus tiniano Cortes 

- Judge Ulpiano Sarmiento 

- Dr« Consuelo Villarosa 

- Lto Col, Bernabe Orena 

Functions 

- 

lo The Quezon family shall be notified of this contemplated activity 
ana, upon their approval, the Sub-Committee shall be in constant 
^ftation with the family of the late President on the t^o 
■ I ule and arrangments to be made preparatory to the removal of 
t . ^resident's remains from the tomb at the North Cemetery; 

2„ To determine who will take care of opening the tomb, removing the 
casket therein, where it will be rbought later for the cleaSni 
and safekeeping, with the activities all to be properly undS^uard 

4o All the activities of the Sub-Cammittee shall be undertaken in the 
presence of or in coordination with the desires of the Queaon child- 
ren or their authorized representatives . * crnici- 

On the 18th of August, Horning: 

io Transporting of the casket back to the Worth Cemetery under guard 
from where the transfer ceremonies for the transfer to the Carlos 
Albert oession Hall, Quezon City Hall will begin. 

2o Exposition of the casket from the moment of its arrival at the r a ^ a 
Albert oession Hall until the following morning wheTit wilf be 
transferred zo the ..<uezon Monument for the ceremonies of placiL the 
cas.cc-c in the mausoleumo Pacing uie 

On the 13th of August, Evening: 

lo Take care of the facilities and the venue for the celebration of the 
Holy toass at 5:00 p.m., to be officiated by His Reverend, Pacifico 

On the 19th of August, Korning: 

lo Handle the ceremony of bringing the casket from the Carlos Albert 
Session Hall to the Quezon Konument, the placement of the casket 
inside the tomb« . 



(Continuation) r, ,, 

' - Pago 13-a - 



2. After the tomb is sealed, the Mass by Eis Qaiaence, Jaime Cardinal 

^ « S Sa±df and thc flower offe ring is finished, the task of 
the Suo-Committee will have been over. 

Accomplished 

1. The Quezon family have been notified and a report will be made by 
Hon. Serapio Canceran on the family's wishes regarding this contem- 
plated activities, 

2« Canvasses of cost and who will take care of the cleaning and other 
services had been made and a report will be made on this. 

3. It.. Col. Bemabe Orena will make arrangments as regards the honor 
guards and the security needed during the entirety of this activity, 

4. Made arrangements for the use of the Carlos Albert Session Hall as 
the place for the Holy Mass, exposition and vigil. of 

Fugd in/": Requireme nt 

The Sub-Committee has not submitted their financial requirements. 



-.Pace 14 - 



SJB-C0MHITIE3 Oi\T EXHIBITS 

Chaiiman - Hon. Jorge B. Vargas 

Members - Mrs* Avelina M. Castafleda 

Chief, Special and Commemorative 

Events Division 
National Historical Institute 

- Ill 0 3 Carolina Afan 

Chief, Pilipiniana Division 
National Library 

- Mr. Margarito Raymundo 
Museum Research Assistant ■ 
National Museum 

- Mr, Benito Cagahastian 
Supervising Architect 
National Museum 

Functions 

1. To recommend a guide for the exhibits to be put in the basement 
ox one Quezon Monument to be called Quezon Museum. 

To ascertain w hat other appropriate exhibit items shall be put 
up therein. * 



2 C 



3c To submit the cost estimate necessary to acquire/procure such 
exhibit materials. 



t° coordinatc with the Sub-Committees on Painting and Sculpture 
in puttxng up an exnibit of the aajor winning entires of the 
contest on painting and sculpture at the Quezon Museum tentatively 
scheduled to oe opened on the afternoon of August 18 



Accompli she d 



1 . . Recommended and submitted the proposed guide to the Quezoniana 
exhibits to be set up in the basement of the Quezon Monument. 



2« - 



.scertained and recommended- other appropriate exhibits items to be 
included in the proposed exhibit. 

3. Submitted the cost estimate or the amount needed to put utd such 
exhibit, 

Funding Requirements 

Reproduction of the Quezoniana Papers p 5 0 00 

Photographic exhibit on his political 

career and social life 25 000 

RLo-rama on any aspect of his life - 15*000 

Quezoniana memorabilia, mementoes 9 

thru collection/purchase -jc qqq 

Photologue of the histiric/tourist ' 

sites, structures and edifices 

in Quezon City thru slides 15 000 

175,000 

• VVVvVW 



if Page 15 - 



SffJMXBBttOTEE OK RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES 

Chairman - Fiscal Justiniano Cortes 



Amotions 

1. To take charge of inviting Ke Vo Fr 9 Pacifico' Ortiz to officiate 
the Holy Mass tentatively scheduled at 5:00 p.m. ? of August 18, 
at the (Jarlos Albert Session Hall, Quezon Uity Hall, vrtxere the* 
President's mortal remains will oe under vigil preparatory to 
its transfer to the Quezon Mausoleum in the morxiijig of August 19* 

2. 'Jo take ch~r,-e of inviting His imminence, Jaime Cardinal Lo Sin, 
say the Memorial Mass at the Quezon Monument tentatively sehe-' 
duled at 7:40 a.m., of August 19. 

5. To coordinate with their Eminences respective offices as regards 

the requirements necessary to celeorate said masses U*e., candles, 
and other altar fixtures). 

4. To invite their Imminences on the dates and time in accordance with 
the expressed wishes of the President's family. 



£\ i : "vl ±nr Re o \ \± rem on t 

This Sub-Committee lias not submitted their request for fund* 



- Pace 16 



STJB-COHMITTEE 01* FINANCE 

Chainnan - Prof. Esteban A. de Ocanpo 

Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 

Vice-Chairman - Atty. Anselmo 0. Regis 
City Treasurer 
' Quezon City 

Functions 

lo To take charge of allocating the available funds to all the 
Sub-Committee Chairmen regarding their requests for funds. 

2. To negotiate with each Sub-Committee Chairman to lessen 
their requests for funds o 

3* The decision of this Sub-Committee as regards the approved 
allotment for each Sub-Committee shall be finale 

4o To disburse such funds provided that the total allotments 

shall not exceed 1*600,000.00 of which £500,000.00 is expected 
from Executive Order No. 502 and the i : 100,000.00 from the 
Quezon City Government. 



Funding Requirement 



This Sub-Committee will not have need for funds. 



- Page 17 - 



^i>-CC^.;iTT£]E ON STAGE CONSTRUCTION 

Chairman - Engineer Celso Stallones 

Members - Ambassador Hafael Gonzales 

t Vice-Consul Antonio Pratts, Jr. ) 

- Director Cristobal Asoteo 

(Mr« Mauro tfustamante) 

- Gen. Fabian C. «er 

(Lt. Col. Piremon Agustin) 



Unctions 

U To recommend the construction plan of the stage to be occupied 
by the ?irst Couple, cabinet members, members of the diplomatic 
corps, and other dignitaries. 

2 0 To draft the construction plan for a roofed stage to occupy 130 
persons at the most, if possible. 

3o To submit the cost estimate for such a construction. 



Accomplished 

1. The subcommittee had been in consultation with its respective 
members regarding the protocol arrangements on the stage. 

2. Prepared the construction plan of the stage, the same will be 
submitted for final approval. 

5* The cost estimate already prepared for submission. 



j^mriin/: Ar^uirer.ent 

Submitted the cort during the meeting of June 27th: 

(a) By contract P1 30,000.00 

(b) By administration 83,000.00 



- Page 18 - 



sob-committee on parade 

Chairman - Minister Juan Ponce Enrile 

(Lt 0 Col. Bcraabe Greiia) 

Uo-Chairman - Col c Tenuis Karingal 

- Mr* Francisco Alvarez 



junctions 

U To determine the least number of floats to represent only the 
most significant of the various aspect of the President's life. 

2. To make arrangements with the Philippine Constabulary, Philippine 
Navy, Philippine Air Itorce, Armed Forces of the Philippines and 
the Philippine riilitary Academy for a continent from each of 
them to participate in the military parade, dressed up in their 
gala uniforms. 

'j. To take care of all other details as regards the parade. 

fundi ite n ui to me n t ( The Bub-Committee has not submitted their 

financial requirement.) 



- Pago 19 ~ 



soB-oaanTOBB on invitations 



Chairman 



Co— Chairman - 



Members 



Director Cristobal Osoteo 
Presidential Protocol Officer 
MalacaSang Palace 

(Mr* Maura Bustamante) 

Ambassador Rafael Gonzales 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

( Vice-Consul Antonio Pratts, Jr«) 

Honorable Pio Pedrosa 

Honorable Serapio S Q Canceian 

Professor Mauro Garcia 



^notions 

lo To P^Pare the list of names and addresses of government officials 
ana members of the diplomatic corps to be incorporated with the 
other lists available with the other agencies (Quezon City Governs 
National Historical Institute, etc e ) 

2o To prepare the list of the names and addresses of the living 

contemporaries of President Quezon ~ those who had clcselyknown 
ana worked with President Quezon. 



3. To submit a copy of the list/s to the Secretariat, for its 
records. 



Page 20 ~ 



SUB-COMKOTSE ON PROTOCOL 

Chaiman - Director Cristobal Osoteo 

Presidential Protocol Officer 
Halacafiang Palace 

(Mro Mauro Bustamante) 

Co-Chairman - Ambassador Hafael Gonzales 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

( Vice-Consul Antonio Pratts, Jr.) 



Inmctiona 

1. To advise the Sub-Committee on Stage Construction on the protocol 
arrangements of the seats, to guide said Sub-Committee in drafting 
•cue construction plan of the stage for the commemorative pro/ram 
on August 19. 

2. To advise the Executive Committee of the protocol procedures to be 
followed in the preparation of the invitations and the program of 
commemorative activities on the 19th of August, morning, where the 
presence of the President and Prime Minister Ferdinand E. Marcos, 
and ujc First Lady and Minister Imelda Homualdezr-Karcos, had been 
requested • 



Aacorroliohed 

1. Advised the Sub-Committee on Stage Construction of the protocol 
procedures to be followed for the seating arrangments on the 
stage o 

2o Recommended the proper protocol procedures in the preparation of the 
invitations and the program of commemorative program for the morning 
of August 19 • * 



?undirK; ^ecuironent 

This Sub-Committee has not submitted their request for funding. 



- Page 21 - 



SIJB-COKMITTEE ON PUBLICITY 

Chairman - Mrs- Mylah de Loon 
Office of the Kayor 
Quezon City 



?imctioKG 

1. To take charge of all the publicity works as regards the certo- 
• nary activities to be undertaken by the Executive Committee in 

cooperation/coordination with the various Sub-Committees. 

2. To prepare press releases to project the nation-vn.de efforts 
of paying homage to the President. 

Fundin g Rep uiremont 

This Sub-Committee has not submitted its requirements for funds 



- Page 22 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SECURITY 



Chairman _ Major General Fabian C. Ver 
Presidential Security Command 
felacahang Palace 

(ito Colo Pilemon Agustin) 



functions 

1. To prepare the venue appointed for the scheduled commemora- 
tive program on August 19, as a precautionary step. 

2. To enforce tight security measures during the commemorative 
program where the First Couple has been invited, tentatively 
scheduled in the morning of August 19. 



Funding Requireme nt 

The Sub-Committee has not submitted their funding need:: 



- Page 23 ~ 



SUB-COMKITTjSE ON SOUVENIR PROGRAM 

Chairman - Mr e Gerardo Magat 

Quezon City Government 

Vice-Chairman- Mr« Francisco Alvarez 
Cultural Affairs and 

Tourism Officer 
Quezon City Government 

Members - Kiss Ellen Lordecillas ' 

- Er e Luis To Cruz 

Functions 

lo To take charge of collating all the brochure materials for 
inclusion in the local Souvenir Program to be distributed 
during the Commemmorative Program on August 19 « 

2c To take charge of the preparation of the said brochure. ° 

3c To take charge of the printing job, and to take all other 
actions necessary for its timely completion for said date. 

Funding .leg uirement 

The Government of Quezon City will take charge of the orintinP- 
costs o - ^ 



MANUEL L. Q^^^W COMMITTEE 
CJ NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE 

National Library Building 
Rizal Park, Manila 



an 

edrosa 



29 June 1978 



B. Vargas 

Abello 
to C. Alcala 

airmen 

i S. Rodriguez 
>. Etcubancz 
> T. Onjr 
. Rono 
L,. Manuel 



Virata 

^nce Enrile 

i Quezon Avancena 
L. Quezon, Jr. 

> Ortiz, SJ. 
S. Cance.ran 
A. dc Ocampo 

e Secretary 

K. Mililante 

icutive Secretary 
:o B. Alvarez 

g Secretary 
R. Perez 



TO: ALL SUB- COMMITTEE CHAIRMEN 



Dear Sir/Madam: 

The Executive Committee, in anticipation of the 
3.-500, 000.00 appropriation authorized by Executive Order No. 
502 soon to be released by the Budget Commission, would 
like to request that the funding requirements of your Sub- 
Committee be presented to the Sub-Committee on Finance, 
composed of the following: 



Chairman 



Vice-Chaiman- 



Prof. Esteban A. de Ocampo 
Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 
National Library Building 
Rizal Park, Manila 

Atty. Anselmo 0. Regis 
City Treasurer 
Quezon City Hall 
Quezon City • 



Je would appreciate it very much if you could prepare 
the needed financial statements or requests at your earliest 
convenience. As approved by the Executive Committee at its 
meeting of the 27th instant, an initial release of 5($ of 
your approved funding requirement will be given upon recom- 
mendation of the Sub-Committee on Finance. 



Very truly yours, 



PIO FEDROSA 
Chairman 



Tel. Nos. 59-06-46, 58-11-59, 57-26-44, 58-12-57, 58-26- 



60 



EROGRAM OF ACTIVITIES 
for August 18, 1978 

COMMEMORATIVE PROGRAM 
for August 19, 1978 



BuOGRAII 0? AOTIVIIIES 
for August |B, 1978 



PROGRAM OP ACTIVITIES 
August 18, 1978 



Morning 



8:00 A.M. 



9:00 A.M. 



Transporting of the casket of the President 
from the North Cemetery to the Carlos Qbert 
Session Hall, Quezon City Hall, where it 
will be laid for exposition. There will be 
a vigil at the Session Hall preparatory to 
its transfer to the Quezon Mausoleum in the 
Quezon Monument the following morning, 
August 19. ^ * 

Unveiling of the historical marker installed 
at the monument in the quadrangle of the 
Quezon City Hall. 



Afternoon 



3:00 P.M. 



5:00 P.M 



Evening 



Opening of the Quezon Museum at the Quezon 
Monument. Together with the Quezoniana 
memorabilia, the major winning entries of 
the contests on painting and sculpture will 
be on exhibit. (This activity will be 
handled by the Sub-Committee on Exhibits, 
in coordination with the Sub-Committees on 
Painting and Sculpture.) 

Holy Mass 

at the Carlos Albert Session Hall ' 
Quezon City Hall 



Officiating . Hev. Pr. Pacifico Ortiz, S.J. 



7: 00, P.M. 



Awarding of Cash Prizes to the winners 
. of the contests on painting, music, 
sculpture, literature and oratory at 
the Carlos Albert Session Hall. 



THE 1978 MANUEL L 0 QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COMMITTEE 



in cooperation with 
The National Historical Institute 
and 

The Quezon City Government 

cordially invites you to the 
activities commemorating 



the Birth Centenary of 



PRESIDENT MANUEL LUIS QUEZON 



on August 19, 1978 
at the Quezon Memorial Circle 
in Quezon City 

(Invitation) ~ ~ ~~~ 



COMMEMORATIVE ACTIVITIES 
August 19, 1978 



7:15 A-M • • Transfer of the President's remains 

from the Carlos Albert Session Hall 
in the Quezon Monument. 

7:30 A. M Unveiling of the Marker , declaring the 

Quezon Memorial Circle as Historical 
Landmark under Presidential Decree 
No. 260. 



II 

7:35 A. M Placement of President Quezon's remains 

in the Sarcophagus, Quezon Mausoleum. 

7:40 A.M Memorial Mass and Blessing of the 

President's remains 

» 

Officiating His Eminence 

Jaime Cardinal L. Sin 



8:20 A - M Floral Offering 

a. The President and Prime Minister 
accompanied by the First Lady and Minister. 

b. Mrs. Zeneida Quezon- Avancena and 
Mr. Manuel A. Quezon, Jr. , accom- 
panied by their families. 



Ill 

8:40 A - M Military Parade 

(AFP, PN, PC, PMA) 

| IV 

9:20 A.M. . , COMMEMORATIVE PROGRAM 

With the President and Prime Minister Ferdinand E Marcos 
and the First Lady and Minister Madame Imelda Romualdez-Marcos , 
and Mrs. Zeneida Quezon-Avancena and Mr. Manuel A. Quezon Jr 
as the Guests of Honor. ' ' ' 



PROGRAMME 
9:30 A.M. 

Philippine National Anthem 

G. H. Q. Band 



larks 
rds 



Hon. Adelina S. Rodriguez 



H. E. Imelda Romualdez 
Marcos 



Presentations u 

...Hon. Anacleto'C. Alcala 

Assistance ^ ^ , 

. • . uen. Felizardo R. Tanabe 

Centenary Stamps: 

To Manuel A. Quezon, J r . 

Mayor Adelina S. Rodriguez 
(For the Quezon Museum) 

• " H on. EstebanA. de Ocampo 

(For the National Historical Institute) 

Assistance rr _ 

... Hon. Gregorio S. Licaros 

Centenary Coins: 

To Mrs. ZenaidaQuezon-Avancena 
Centenary Medal: 

To H. E. Ferdinand E. Marcos 



ss 



By.H. E. Prime Minister 
and President Ferdinand 
E. Marcos 



Presented by Hnn ... . 

y ••• Hon. Emiho Abello 

tion of Award r n w v v *■ 

... ToH. E. Ferdinand E. Marcos 

^resented bv u„„ T _ 

y • • Hon. Jorge B. Vargas 

ional . . 

GHQ Band 

Paster of Ceremonies. . . Hon. P io Pedrosa 



( 



