i 



{ 



Printed on 



spclOl 

DRAFT OF SPEECH 
BY 

MAJ. GEN. BASILIO J. VALDES 



PARSONS COLLEGE, FAIRFL1ED IOWA 
MAY 30 1943 



: 07/23/98 12:42 PM 



1 of 9 




Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



spclOl 



Some years ago, when I was a medical student at the University of Santo Tomas in Manila, l had to 

listen to my share of commencement speakers. As they poured their oratory over our defenseless heads - 

somewhat as I intend to do to you this afternoon -I used to recall a wise proverb that we have in one of the 

u 

provinces of the Philippines. We say, “K*ng salitang dakal la^lfo/fng kabalatungan,”' which I think can be 
translated this way: “Out of too many words comes error.”' In other words, if you talk too much you are 
liable to get into trouble. 

I hope you will not feel, by the time I am finished today, that 1 have talked too much. 1 do not want 
to get into trouble. 

First of all, 1 want to thank you, President Mayer, and the trustees and faculty of your college, for 
the honor you are paying today to the gallant leader of the Filipino people, President Manuel L. Quezon. 

And I thank you, too, for the honor you give to me. 

We Filipinos, I think you will agree, can be counted among the greatest friends that America has. 
Our homeland, which now lies under the heel of the brutal enemy, is many thousands of miles away from 
your shores. It might have been easy for us, perhaps, to have fallen into the trap of believing that America 
was no more than a group of Government officials in Washington, or a newspaper in Chicago, or a visiting 
journalist come to Manila on a flying visit. Fortunately, we knew better. We know America^ as a broad, 
prosperous land of honest human beings; a land that has come closest to learning the secret of human 
relationships; that has shown the world how a democracy can work, in practice as well as in spirit; that has 
proven that honest men can be good neighbors, living side by side in harmony and understanding^ And I 
believe the best examples of this revolutionary, yet simple, philosophy are the friendly folk of the American 
Middle West, people like you young men and women who are now to count themselves as alumni of this 
College. 



I am neither a politician nor a political philosopher, I am simply a soldier and physician. But I have 
seen America in action in the Philippines through the past generation, and I have learned to respect you as 
well as to like you. I have seen the operation of American policies, of American principles and practices, that 
are too little known to the American people themselves. And this afternoon I want to tell you something of 
your own history — a history of which you can be proud for all time. 

America first came to the Philippines in 1898, in the person of Commodore Dewey. There was 
trouble in those early years, trouble brewed out of misunderstanding and distrust. But gradually we Filipinos 

Printed on : 07/23/98 12:42 PM 2 of 9 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



spclOl 



began to realize that here was something new in the record of imperialism. Here was a great and powerful 
nation assuming control of a weaker people, not for the purpose of exploitation but for the purpose of 
liberation. You came with the desire to expand the democratic principles which have worked so well in your 
own country. You brought school teachers and engineers, able administrators and doctors; but you brought 
more than that. You brought the promise of freedom for the Philippines. You talked the language of liberty. 
You understood that we Filipinos had an undying faith in ourselves — that we were self respecting enough to 
desire self-government and independence. This was not so different from your own history. It made sense to 
you. And so, instead of treating our islands as a far-off slave-colony fit only to be milked of its riches, you 
worked with us, studied with us, advanced with us. You did not isolate yourselves from us, nor did you 
isolate us from you. And, in time, you set a definite time when you would redeem your pledge of Philippine 
independence. With your encouragement, we of the Philippines prepared our own democratic Constitution^ 
and established our own Commonwealth Government. We were on the road to complete and recognized 
independence when the treacherous Japanese attack came. 



On that fateful day in December 1941, your policy of friendship and cooperation was vindicated. 
The policy that had sometimes been attacked in this country as impractical and visionary turned out to have 
been hard-boiled and realistic. In American slang, you might say that it M paid-off ’ 

It paid off in terms of twenty thousand Filipino lives laid down in resistance to the common enemy. 
It paid off in the speed with which the whole Filipino people rose, as one man, to oppose the foe. It paid off 
in the continuing resistance which even Premier Tojo was recently forced to admit is still going on in the hills 
and forests of the Philippines. 



Perhaps that phrase, “Paid off’ is not the right one. No one in the Philippines considers his 
friendship with America to be a matter of paying a debt. America gave the Philippines her hand in good faith. 
And, when the crisis came, the Philippines gave her hand to America in equal good faith. Here, I believe, is 
the secret of sensible international relations in the future. Strip away the hollow phrases of diplomacy, and 
look beneath them for the warm heart of the people^. Fifty years ago, the statesmen of the world would have 
laughed at the suggestion that Americans and Filipinos could ever see eye to eye, could ever work out a 
healthy relationship. But there was no laughter, anywhere in the world, at the Filipinos and Americans who 
sweated and fought and died in the foxholes of Bataan, without discrimination or distrust, with only their 
mutual respect and their common faith in freedom to reinforce them through those long, terrible months of 
hell. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:42 PM 



3 of 9 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



spclOl 



qfSt me give you some of the figures of that Battle. Only 16,000 American troops were in my 
country when the Japanese attacked, 300,000 strong. Pearl Harbor lay shattered, a smoking, twisted mass of 
wreckage. The Japanese believed that the conquest of the Philippines would be a simple matter of a few 
days, strenuous only to the extent of wiping out a handfi.il of Americans. Then, they believed, the conquest 
of the entire Southwest Pacific would proceed apace — there was Australia and New Zealand ahead, and 
later Hawaii, and then - who knows? — perhaps the American mainland. 

But a bitter surprise was in store for them. The devotion of the seventeen million Filipinos linked 
them solidly with America. Ninety-two thousand Filipino soldiers rushed to the side of the Americans, all 
under the command of that great soldier, General Douglas MacArthur. Overnight, the Filipinos became a 
worldwide symbol of hard-hitting, dogged courage. Twenty thousand Filipino soldiers were killed in the 
Battle of the Philippines, lying in their jungle graves beside their American fellow-heroes. For months that 
Battle raged, and when it was done the United States and the other United Nations had been given a 
precious respite in which to mobilize their far-flung Pacific defenses. On the bloodstained peninsula of 
Bataan had been fought one of the greatest delaying actions in all military history. 

Those are the facts, simple, undeniable and understandable. They are the answer to those who do 
not have faith in international cooperation. They are an answer written in the blood of the Filipino and 
American martyrs to the cause of human freedom. 

A few days ago, one of your American naval officers said this to me: 

“General, when the chips were down and we desperately needed somebody to stay in there and help 
us stand off those Japanese sons of.... heaven, the Filipinos didn’t let us down, and, believe me, this country 
could use more of that kind of friends.” 

My answer to that now is this: You will continue to have that kind of friends, and more and more 
of them, if you deal with other peoples as you have dealt with us. Learn the lesson of the American- 
Philippine adventure, and you need not fear the voyage through the uncharted seas of future international 
cooperation. 

Suppose we take a closer look at that history. The American administration of the Philippines 
marked the beginning of a new era for the Filipinos^n era of hope, of progress, of self-realization. For, 
when the Americans came, they brought along with them the basic symbol of democracy - the schoolbook. 
No longer was the Filipino nation to thirst in vain for knowledge. At last we had attained our human right to 
freedom of speech, freedom of the press, universal education, the right to vote, and freedom of religion. The 
attitude of the Filipino people, and of such leaders as Manuel L. Quezon (who had fought as a major against 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:42 PM 
Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



4 of 9 



spclOl 



the American occupation forces), underwent a profound change as they realized more and more that 
America truly intended to give independence to the Philippines as soon as feasible. The spirit of Filipino 
hostility and skepticism was gradually replaced by a spirit of cooperation and mutual good will. 

The policy pursued by the United States is dramatically illustrated in a story told by Luther Parker, 
an American educator sent to the Philippines in the early years of the American administration. Parker 
landed at Manila on a transport bearing six hundred Americans school teachers, who had come to bring 
enlightenment to the great mass of the people. Parker arrived at a small village on the island of Luzon, where 
the children crowded about him crying in their native language “Teach us English ! Teach us English!” 

Parker took one of the children on his knee^j and the first four English words he taught that child were: “I am 
a Filipino.” Here is the epitome of the policy which America set out to accomplish in the Philippines. Parker 
did not teach the child to say: “1 am an American subject.” Instead, he began at once to create in the child’s 
mind the awareness of his own importance as a Filipino and of his own responsibility to prepare himself for 
citizenship in a free and independent country. 

That was the real symbol of American policy. It was made law in 1934, when the Philippine 
Independence Act was passed by Congress, and signed by President Roosevelt. This Act, the last step 
toward fulfilling the promise made by the United States regarding Philippine independence, provided that the 
people of the Philippines should draft a constitution and set up a democratic government capable of 
assuming all of the functions of an independent republic at the end of a ten-year transition period. 

Under the Tydings-McDuffie Act, the Filipino people proceeded at once to draft such a 
constitution and to establish the transitional Commonwealth Government. The Philippine constitution in 
most respects resembles that of the United States. On November \5y 1935, the Commonwealth of the 

Vv 

Philippines was inaugurated, with two true statesmen, Manuel L. Quezon and Sergio Osmena, as President 
and vice-president respectively. For the people of the Philippines, the long-standing aspiration for 
independence was finally coming to a happy conclusion, in a spirit of complete cooperation, friendship and 
mutual trust between the Philippines and the United States. 

About the middle of 1941, President Quezon, foreseeing inevitable war began to gear our country 
to meet all eventualities. On August 19, j^41, on the occasion of his birthday, he delivered a speech by radio 
addressed to Vice President Wallace and through him, to the people of the United States. On that 
memorable occasion President Quezon said: 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:42 PM 



5 of 9 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



spcIOl 



“In this great national emergency, the stand of the Filipino people is clear and unmistakable. We 
owe loyalty to America and we are bound to her by bonds of everlasting gratitude. Should the United States 
enter the war, the Philippines would follow her and fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our 
manpower and all our material resources, however limited these might be. We stand with the United States 
in life and in death.” 

Then came December 7, 1941; without warning at Pear Harbor, Midway and in the Philippines - 
Japan attacked. As President Quezon has said: “The Filipino people fought back because they knew that 
America had made a promise and that she would keep that promise. When we fought for your flag we knew 
we were fighting for our own freedom. When we resisted the invasion of our country, we did so because we 
knew the Philippines was our country not only de facto but de jure. And we were loyal to you, to your flag 
and to your country, not because under international law we owed you that allegiance, but because you have 
won our undying friendship and affection ~ because you did by us what no other colonizing power has done 
by the people who had fallen under their sway. The presence of your flag in the Philippines was a symbol of 
our freedom. It was there only to allow you to finish the work you had started to do — to help get up an 
independent Philippine Republic.” 

Much has been said and written about the magnificent stand made by the combined forces of the 
American and Philippine Armies in Luzon, Bataan, and Corregidor. I saw those boys fight and I can assure 
you that they deserve fully every bit of the praise that has been given to them. 

The Congressional Medal of Honor was awarded to Sergeant Jose Calugas, Battery “B,V88th 
Field Artillery, Philippine Scouts. The citation reads: “The action for which the award was made took place 
near Culis, Bataan,' ^Philippine Islands, on January 16, 1942. A battery gun position was bombed and shelled 
by the enemy until one gun was put out of commission and all of the cannoneers were killed or wounded. 
Sergeant Calugas, a mess sergeant of another battery, voluntarily and without orders ran 1 000 yards across 
the steel-swept area to the gun position. There he organized a volunteer squad which placed the gun back in 
commission and fired effectively against the enemy although the position remained under constant and heavy 
Japanese artillery fire.” 

And then there is the story of that memorable battle of February 15, 1942, in which the Filipino 
soldiers from the Mountain Province especially distinguished themselves. Let me quote General MacArthur’s 
communique: “During a recent enemy offensive, the 20th Japanese Infantry made an attack on a position 
held by a single Igorot company. To a man the lgorots died in their foxholes without flinching or thought of 
retreat but exacting a tremendous toll from the Japanese. To restore the situation, our high command 

Printed on : 07/23/98 12:42 PM 6 of 9 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



spclOl 



ordered an immediate counter-attack by a tank unit, supported by the Infantry. The Infantry soldiers were 
Igorots, eager to even the score of their lost tribesmen.'" 

“The bamboo jungles and the heavy, irregular terrain of the section of the front were almost 
impenetrable and apparently made it impossible for the tanks to operate. Without a word the Igorot 
commander hoisted his men to the tops of the tanks in order that they might guide the machines through the 
matted morass of underbrush, thickets and trees. The exposed Igorot soldiers on top of the tanks served as 
the eyes of the American drivers. The guides signaled the drivers with a stick, and with an automatic pistol 
fired continuously as the unit closed in on the enemy. Bataan has seen many wild mornings, but nothing to 
equal this. No quarter was asked and none was given. Always above the din of battle roared the fierce 
shouts of the Igorots as they rode the tanks and fired their pistols. When the attack was over, the remnants 
of the tanks and of the Igorots were still|there but the 20th Japanese Infantry was completely annihilated.” 

In recounting the story of the battle to a group of his officers. General MacArthur said: “Many 
desperate acts of courage and heroism have fallen under my observation on many fields of battle in many 
parts of the world. 1 have seen forlorn hopes become realities. I have seen last^- fditch stands and innumerable 
acts of personal heroism that defy description. But for sheer breath-taking and heart-stopping desperation, I 
have never known the equal of those Igorots riding the tanks. Gentlemen, whenever you repeat the story, 
stand in tribute to those gallant Igorots. v 

The young Filipinos and Americans who died on Bataan and elsewhere were brothers-in-arms in a 
battle that will live forever in the annals of gallantry* Their courage and their sacrifice will shine the brighter 
in the course of the years as we realize more and more how much they meant to us who have been left 
behind to carry on; especially, when we remember that they were fighting for democracy, peace and 
tranquillity of existence. 

I saw those men fight. I was with them through their terrible ordeal. I saw untrained Filipino 
soldiers, hardly out of their teens, turn into veteran soldiers overnight. 1 saw your American boys, most of 
whom had never been under fire, fighting like heroes. I saw the wounded suffering quietly, and the Japanese 
bombs dropping viciously on the field hospitals clearly marked with the red cross of mercy. I saw the 
Japanese planes roaring continuously overhead, and the shells from the Japanese artillery crashing 
everywhere, and the snipers' bullets whipping through the underbrush. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:42 PM 



7 of 9 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 12:39 PM 



