Philippines 



Export Control Ext«»iision 

/>v Sen. Robert R. Reynold* 



Tlio Philippine Irmv 

by Gen. lln*ilio V aides 



• 



by Dr. Hu Shih 




The Fight on l.oprosv 

hy Perry Burgess 





The Philippine Lcgfohiturv 



•»s ordered °' 





Top: President Quezon, recuperatinq 
from his recent illness, p| ays so| £ 
taire aboard the yacht Casiana, while 
Manuel Jr. watches. 



Center: Winsome Miss Carmen Pia- 
nos, Manila's coed councilwornan re- 
ceives the congratulations of friends 
on her recent sweeping reelection. 



Below: Play Day at the University of 
the Philippines in Manila included an 
exhibition of Filipino folk dances. 



,ooo 

In Sea 



i Head 
mocrat! 



Left: Esther Van Wagoner Tufty, Pilar 
N. Ravelo, Resident Commissibner J. M. 
Elizalde, Katherine Lenroot, Violet 
Sweet Haven and Dolores Abellera, at 
a recent Philippine luncheon given by 
Miss Ravelo at the Shoreham Hotel, 
Washington. 



Too Busy 
f in London 

May 27 Y. 
jAGittJtfia has 



. , I io% of tne ^r ft success 



lost its 



aad eVC vy other »* frp 

«Mch ^£ Nrt 

talnment— yet , 

^eaVc when wc 
indepcadence. v 
iviUy stood ofi ; l , 



Money for Philippine Defense 

An Editorial 



I\ his message to the Philippine National Assembly this 
year. President Manuel Quezon pointed out thai the exist- 
ing finances of the Commonwealth arc insufficient to cover 
the huge cost, of building an adequate modern defense for 
our Island democracy. To meet the emergency, he went 
on, be bad approached the Government of the United 
States with the request that a sum of approximately 

$54,000,000, due to Manila from the United States 

Treasury. **be appropriated to be spent exclusively for 

our national defense under the direction of the United 

States." The proposal was so unusual thai its full signifi- 
cance was overlooked by many. Even today, after nearly 
SIX months have passed, its importance is only gradually 
coming to be recognized. 

This money, $54,000,000, consists of funds authorized 
by Congress but never appropriated. About $23,000,000 
is the Philippine gold devaluation fund: the remainder 
constitutes collections on the sugar excise tax which 
Congress, in the Sugar Act of 1937. ordered returned to 
the Philippine Government, The significance of President 

Quezon's offer is that he is willing to put this $54*000,000 
at the disposal of the United States. Whereas, other 
American attempts to strengthen the defenses of its demo- 
cratic allies have involved turning oyer vast sums of 
money with little or no check on its expenditure, in this 
case the United States itself is asked to do the spending. 

All we ask is that the money be used to defend the 
Philippines. 

Few Americans realize that the Islands have had almost 
no financial support from the I nited States since they 
were occupied in 1899. Aside from the cost of maintain- 
ing the United Slates Army and INavy in the Far East — 
which should not be charged to the Filipinos any more 
than the cost of the Brooklyn Navy Yard should be 
charged to the people of New York — appropriations base 
been limited to $6,000,000 for relief and construction 
after the Insurrection ended. This is infinitesimal com- 
pared with Federal appropriations for any state of the 
Union. Indisputably, the Philippines has been a cheap 
dependency. This tradition of self-sufficiency is strength- 
ened by the proposal to use the authorized $54,000,000 
for defense under American supervision. 

The creditable nature of this situation is all the more 
apparent when the Philippine position is contrasted with 
the stand taken by many of the other nations requesting 
Varying amounts of American money for their defense 
and financial stability. Not only does Manila have an 
impeccable record as regards the payment of its obliga- 
tions, but it also has one of the lowest debts per capita 
in the world. The Philippine? has nctf found it necessary 



to finance its foreign trade with loans from the United 
States. In every respect the Commonwealth has been an 
excellent world neighbor — frugal, hard-working and 
honest. 

In view of these facts. President Quezon's request that 
the United States direct the expenditure of the money 
due Manila, and that it be used exclusively for defense 
purposes, is of great significance. We feel, naturally, that 
American military experts are best equipped to handle 
the job. since Philippine defense is inseparable from the 
strategy of the United States. Such men can assure the 
fullest possible coordination of the two systems. They can 
make certain that the money is spent to the greatest ad- 
vantage. They can presumably expedite delivery of mod- 
ern weapons from the American arsenal. From the 
practical standpoint, therefore, this arrangement will be 
of mutual advantage to Filipinos and Americans. 

Exactly how the S51.000.000 would be spent is nec- 
essarily confidential, but a few points seem obvious. We 
need planes and artillery. In the past we have obtained 
as large quantities of this material as our finances would 
permit, but the total is still inadequate. The greatly in- 
creased danger in the world today makes procurement 
a hundred times more urgent. In this we must depend on 
the heavy industry of the United States. 

Willi regard to small arms and infantry equipment, 
we are in a somewhat belter position, although here. too. 
the genius of American defense experts w ill be invaluable. 
Our grow ing arm> is well trained; w ith complete equip- 
ment it can be a decisive factor in the defense of democracj 
in the Far East. 

Another branch on which further expenditure is needed 
is the Off-Shore-PatrOl, the fleet of motor torpedo-boats 
designed for reconnaissance work and beach protection. 
Hie expenditure of a comparatively small amount of 
money on this arm will materially increase the effective- 
ness of our defense forces. 

All these improvements are. in the long run. pillars 
of the United Slates" own defense system. The Philippines 
is rapidly losing its character as an exposed American 
flank and becoming a well fortified bastion: what was an 
isolated garrison w ill soon be a unit in a chain of defenses 
across the Pacific Ocean. 

Thus President Quezon's suggestion is an important 
contribution to world democracy. Furthermore, it is an 
exceptional demonstration of the Philippine desire to 
cooperate with the United States to that end. From that 
Standpoint alone c\en if no Other existed — the action 
would justify the attention it is just beginning to 

receive. ^ 



DEFEND THEMSELVES 

By General Basilio Valdes 

Chief of Staff, Philippine Army 




A NATION about to become independent in a world 
where national existence is so dependent upon ability to 
withstand armed aggression is faced with the grave re- 
sponsibility of providing itself with an adequate military 
establishment. While the United States retains responsi- 
bility for Philippine defense until 1946 and is furnishing 
seaward and landward military forces, a logical question 
might be: "What is the Commonwealth doing to provide 
ultimately its own national defense?' 

Guided by the United States, President Quezon, the 
National Assembly and the Commonwealth Military Staff 
are combining their efforts to overcome die inherent 
obstacles to Insular defense. Definite financial, economic 
and industrial limitations: the absence of any martial tra- 
dition; and little appreciation of the dynamic character 
of modern waif a re — all these emphasize the colossal 
proportions of the task at hand. They have not. however, 
daunted those responsible for its accomplishment. The 
consensus among experts is that our efforts to provide a 
national defense for an independent Philippines have 
been highly fruitful. 

We do not yet have a "balanced" military organiza- 
tion. Gradually- however, elements of our final, complete 
army are being organized and trained. The rate is in pro- 
portion to the finances- equipment and facilities on hand. 
The whole project is based on sound long-range planning, 
competently conceived to utilize every ounce of available 
resources in the most profitable manner. Year after year 
the Philippine Army is growing in strength and experi- 
ence, an ever more potent factor in Philippine defense. 

The first session of the Philippine National Assembly 
in 1935 passed Commonwealth Act \o. 1* "a Plan of 
National Defense," Several months prior to the estab- 
lishment of the Commonwealth, President Quezon had. 
with the consent of the Government of the Tinted States, 
secured the services of General Douglas Mae Arthur, a 
veteran soldier and recognized military genius, to advise 
the government in I lie organization, training and supply 
of the Army and in setting up the defense structure- A 



staff of American Army ftfticecs was provided as as* 
sistants to (General Mac Arthur. 

1 he National Defense Act. requires compulsory mili- 
tary service for all male citizens between I lie ages of 20 
and 50. It recognizes the right of the government to 
utilize all the moral and material resources and the serv- 
ices of the inhabitants of tin- Philippines in the defense 
of the Archipelago, All men completing 2t) years of age 
must register every year. Their number varies from 
90.000 to 120,000/ From these arc selected 20.000 to 
4-0*000 men who undergo six months of intensive military 
t ru i n ing . 

Tin: first registration took [dace in April, 1936, just 
five months after the enactment of the law. By January. 
1937- onl\ nine months Inter, I In* fu st group of 20,000 
men was in barracks. These were followed by the second 
group in July of the same year. This process lias been 
repeated yearly. 

As the men are discharged after completion of train- 
ing they enter the reserves. Those from 21 to 30 belong 
Lo the First Reserve. The Second Reserve will be composed 
of men from 31 lo 40, and the Third Reserve will include 
men from 41 lo 50, Our task of training the men of the 
First Reserve will be completed in 1046, By that year, if 
the Philippine Army adheres to its present procurement 
program, we will have about 350.000 trained reserves of 
ages ranging from 21 to 30. By 1060 the Philippines ex- 
pects to have about 1.000,000 lighting men ready. 

Today the Philippine Army lias a total trained reserve 
of approximately 113,000 men. This does not include 
5.000 recently allotted to the United States Army to bring 
I he American-officered Philippine Scouts to full divi- 
sional strength. 

The Philippine Archipelago has been divided into 10 
military districts of approximately equal population, 
Functioning under decent ral issed control h\ Amu Head- 
quarters, the districts train their men and organize their 
headquarters, rifle, machine gim and I rench mortal' units 
of reserve divisions. Our organization program calls for 
the creation of three reserve divisions In each district 



• 4 • 



by 1946. a total of 30 reserve divisions. Today, 10 divi- 
sions are fully organized, with one division of approxi- 
mate h men in each district. 

From the beginning* the impossibility of the Philip- 
pine Government's financing the purchase of naval vessels 
and the maintenance of a naval forec and essential shore 
establishments has been obvious. Ideas of creating a 
navy were immediately abandoned and replaced by a plan 
to organize a Naval Corps under army control. Initial 
combat equipment, chosen with care and due considera- 
tion for lis role in the defense of the islands, consists of 
exceedingly fast motorboals eq nipped with torpedoes, 
machine guns and depth 
charges. The organization of 
several nine-boat squadrons 
is contemplated. 

Development and organi- 
zation of an air arm received 
immediate attention. The 
training of flyers and the men 
of the service echelon has 
been undertaken since the 
very beginning, with an air 
force of 500 first-line planes 
of all categories as our ob- 
jective. This branch of the 
army is expanding rapidly 
and is attracting mam of 
our best young men — pro- 
fessionals, college graduates 
and young officers of the 
Regular Army. Several fully 
equipped operating fields 
have already been established 
in strategic localities. In addition, the 
dotted with commercial fields available to military planes. 
Civil aviation, developing rapidly, is controlled by the 
Secretary of National Defense, through the Chief of the 
Army Air Corps, 

Production of officer person ti el has been expanded to 
meet our growing requirements* We have reorganized the 
famous old Constabulary Academy, which is now ex- 
clusively engaged in the production of officers for the 
army. Graduates average 85 a year* Philippine colleges 
and universities in which KOTC units have been estab- 
lished also supply officers. Military instruction in these 
schools was made eompulsorv this year. In 1942 we ex* 
peel 2,000 prospective reserve officers; in 19-13 and sub- 
sequent years approximated 1,000. A few reserve officers 
are commissioned in the special services of the Philip- 
pine Army each year because of special qualifications. 
They undergo three months of intensive basic military 
training. 

Mobilization and supply have received careful and 
thorough attention. All provincial, city, town and village 
officials know the functions the) will be called upon to 
perform in the event id an emergency requiring the 
mobilization of the reserve forces. These officials will dis- 




GENERAL BASILIO VALDE5, 
head of the Philippine Army, greets Captain 
James Roosevelt in Manila 



'\rchipelago is 



tribute mobilization orders to officers and reservists. On 
M-I)ay they can assemble their reservists and lead them to 
mobilization areas already designated by the Philippine 
Army* Warehouses have been constructed to store sup- 
plies and equipment. As each new company, battalion and 
regiment comes into being- supplies and equipment re- 
quired for extended field service go on the shelves of the 
warehouses- to be held in readiness for the M-Day, 

We have consistently received every assistance from 
the American forces. The training of our technical units 
in the coast artillery, field artillery, signal corps, and the 
air corps has been made possible as the result. When we 

lack material or capable in- 
structors- we have gone to 
the United States Army for 
them: our requests have 
never been refused. Ameri- 
can officers are rendering the 
Philippine Army the fullest 
and most effective service in 
all phases of the work of 
establishing a sound and en- 
during defense system for 
the Philippines. This spirit 
of cooperation and service 
which animates the conduct 
of the I'n i ted States Army 
officers in their relation with 
the armed forces of this 
c o u ii t r y has materially 
strengthened the bonds be- 
tween the United Slates and 
Philippine Armies. 

Until 1935 the Philippine 
Constabulary was the only native armed force in the 
Islands. Today Philippine Army troops are the boast of 
our citizens and are receiving many compliments from 
military observers on their increasing efficiency. Gradually 
the equipment necessary to maintain the more expensive 
branches of the service is being procured* Insofar as can 
be foreseen at this time, the picture in 1946 will be one 
of complete satisfaction. 

In spile of historical inhibitions, the Filipino is in- 
herently a good soldier. He is used to hardships, has 
moral courage and is accustomed to taking orders. In his 
native terrain he can outmarch and maneuver any alien 
soldier. The combination of this knowledge with the train- 
ing in sound tactical doctrine he is now receiving should 
make the individual Filipino a formidable military op- 
ponent. And with the fulfillment of the total provisions of 
the plan for organization, suppU mid equipment by 
1946, Philippine defense by Filipinos should become a 
practical reality. In Hie meantime, every unit and every 
Ml of equipment we have is at the disposal of the Com- 
mander of the Philippine Department of the I'nited 
Stale? Army, ^ 



• S • 




AERIAL HUB 

of the 

FAR EAST 



JVJaMLA — dailx growing more important as the huh of 
transportation in the Far East — recently added another 
spoke to its aerial wheel when the Civil Aeronautics 
Board in Washington approved Pan American Airwaxs* 
application to extend its trans-Pacific service 10 Singa- 
pore. The first through passenger flight from San Fran- 
cisco reached Britain's Malayan stronghold on May 27. 

"In view of existing world conditions, and the im- 
portance of the East Indies and Malaya to the United 
States.*" the Civil Aeronautics Board announced, "we 
found the service to Singapore necessary in the public 
service. The minimum time by ship from the United 
States to Malaya is 27 days; the maximum, seven week-. 
By air. the trip to Singapore will take less than a week. 

In the past. Pan American Airways* giant clipper- 
have been crossing the Pacific weekly to Manila. Hong- 
kong and Macao. China, with stops en route at Honolulu. 
Midway Island, Wake Island and Guam. Under the new 
schedule the weekly sen ice will continue as far as Manila. 
On alternate weeks, however, the big flying boats will 
head southward from the Philippine capital to Singapore, 
instead of westward across the China Sea to Hongkong. 

"Although the service to Hongkong will be cut in half," 
the Civil Aeronautics Board stressed, "mail for thai city 
delivered in Manila on the weeks in which there will be 
no service can be transferred to surface ships. It is esti- 
mated that the cost to the I nited States Government will 
l>< small, since the amount of trans-Pacific service will not 
be increased, ami the flights to Singapore will result in 
the cancellation of a similar number of flights to Hong- 
kong." 

I he Board's certificate of convenience and necessit) 
covers a period of five years. Pan American Airways 

officials ((.needed that the heavy volume of trallir antici- 
pated oh the Manila-Singapore run was large!) due to the 

war; and thai the\ had no assurance it would continue 



after the present emergency ended. Therefore, a time limit 
of five years was requested. 

"It is. of course, impossible to forecast precisely how 
long the proposed service would be required by these 
considerations.*" the Board painted out. "However, the 
five-year period requested does nut appear unreasonable/* 

Entirely aside from its relation to American policy in 
the Far East, extension of the air service to Singapore is 

of considerable importance to Manila. Commerce between 
the Philippines, on one* hand, and Malawi and the Nether- 
lands Indies, on the other, has long been hampered by 

indifferent mail service. Businessmen frequently have 
found it quicker to send a letter airmail to Katax ia bv 
wax of Hongkong. Rangoon and Singapore, than direct 
to Batavia by ship. I ravelers, formerl) forced to spend 
four days aboard a ship, can noxv make the hop from 

Singapore t<> Manila in 10 hours. The intrinsic im- 
portance of the new service is shown bj the fact that, for 
the past year, high Dutch and British officials en route 
to Manila to make the clipper connection to the United 
States haxe consistent!) chartered special planes to reach 
the Philippine metropolis. 

Connection is now made at Singapore with British 
Overseas Airways planes winging westward to India, tin* 

Near Bast, Africa and Europe, and with the Australian 

air liners threading the Kast Indies to Sydney and 
Auckland. At the \ew Zealand city, Other connections 
are possible with Pan American planes crossing the 
South Pacific to Hawaii and Lqs Angeles. 

**\\ e feel that the extension of Pan American Airxvays* 

service to Singapore will material!) contribute to Ameri- 
can trade and prosperity*" H. ML Bixby, Pan American 
vice-president, declared. "Its importance to Manila, al- 
ready a vital aviation center, is obvious. I expect thai in 
lime the Philippines will be the bub of the entire Far 
Eastern air transportation sxstem.** ^ 




• 6 • 



Stru09 le 
in asi; 

By Dr. Hu Shih 
Chinese Ambassador to the United States 

BeT\\KK\ the Chinese Republic and the Philippine 
Commonwealth there are innumerable ties of historical 
association, geographic proximity, trade, amity, and 
understanding. Yet the strongest tie of all today is our 
mutual dedication to the preservation of demoeraev. and 
the philosophy of democracy in the Far East. That is 
the same tie that aligns us with the United Stales in the 
present litanlic world struggle of ideologies. 

The Filipinos and the Chinese, among all the teeming 
millions in that section of the world, are fervently dedi- 
cated to the concepts of human dignity, of the funda- 
mental worth of the individual, and the right of the corn- 
men man to live a proper life, as he sees fit. That is the 
belief that binds us together, and makes our individual 
fates a matter of common concern. 

One of the basic concepts of the philosophy <>f Con- 
fucius, that much-abused philosopher, is thai of the im- 
perfect man, striving through self-cultivation to become 
a superior man. that is. superior to his own past. That 
thought underlies all democracy, in that the democratic 
society feels itself to be moving continuously forward, 
under the impetus of the individual, striving to improve 
himself. It is absolutely opposed to the philosophy of 
totalitarianism which carries the thesis that man is a 
Stupid animal who must be led by specially bred and 
inspired leaders .... the so-called "fuehrer principle**. 
Confucius formulated his philosophy of education for a 
democratic society in these words: "With education there 
is no class. 91 [Yu chiao wu lei.) 

The Chinese have long cultivated the philosophy of 
peace, human dignity and personal liberty. The Filipinos, 
in their own way, and under United States leadership, 
have developed that philosophy into a form of govern- 
ment which may some day be a pattern and an inspira- 
tion to all Oriental peoples. 

Trade has long flourished between the two countries. 
In the earliest times our merchants and Seafaring men 
had found the islands of the Philippines md laid the 
basis for a commerce that was to endure in one degree 
or another for long centuries. The Philippines produce 
much that China can use. sugar, hemp, and minerals, 
while the Chinese econoim has much to offer to the 
Philippines. There is an excellent basis for a constant!) 




increasing and expanding commerce between our two 
peoples. I have no doubt that one day that trade will 
have its chance to flourish as it should. 

The oriental world must be made safe for people to 
live and trade in. according to their own lights, and not 
at the point of a bayonet. China, and the resurgent 
Chinese people are engrossed in lighting a great battle for 
the preservation of their national integrity and identity, 
and for their right to live as a nation among nations. 
That light is not our light alone. It is the fight of all 
peace-loving and liberty-loving peoples, including the 
peoples of the Philippines and the United States. 

It has been shown only too clearly that the conflict 
between China and Japan is not an Asiatic struggle. It is 
part of a world struggle. Most Filipinos are swiftly 
realizing today that should China fall, their own fate is 
endangered. When a peaceful nation like China cannot 
live in peace and freedom, the future of the Philippines 
as a people is very precarious indeed. 

Democratic control of government and human izat ion 
of society are the products of the ceaseless toil, struggle 
and thought of nations and of individuals. The Filipinos 
and Chinese should together stand as representatives of 
such upward striving in the Far East. The great Filipino 
patriot, Dr. Jose Ri/.aL saw that ideal and fought for it in 
the nineteenth century. Dr. Sun Yat Sen. father of the 
Chinese Republic, conceived and upheld it in even more 

recent times. 

The Philippines is. in our \\a\ ol reckoning time, a 
young nation. It is a nation with vigor and courage. 
Representing at the same time values which are good in 
both the Orient and the Occident, the Commonwealth 
carries on Oriental shoulders the brave traditions and 
Concepts of American democracy. Together with the 
Tniied States, the Philippines constitutes a stronghold of 

good in the troubled Far Fast. Willi the influence and 
help of this united people the cause of democracy will 

certainly triumph. ^ 



7 • 



7^ 



wete 



tL 



WHO SET THE PACE 




Perry Burgess 



WrfEX the history of the 
an ti -leprosy campaign is 
written, there will loom big 
in that chronicle the story 
of the fight against the 
disease in the Philippine 
Islands. 

So much has been written during the last decade and a 
half about leprosy in the Philippines that the uninformed 
are likely to think of the Islands as having an unusual 
amount of it. That is not true. With the exception of 
recent surveys in three areas in the Philippines and two 
in the Virgin Islands, conducted by the Leonard Wood 
Memorial, there have not been, so far as I know, any 
attempts to survey whole areas, examining every person 
and following up family contacts. Therefore, the sug- 
gested number of victims in any particular area of what 
we are beginning to call Hansen's Disease is an estimate, 
pure and simple. Sometimes this estimate is made by a 
scientific worker who has been reasonably careful in ar- 
riving at the numbers: it is frequently made, as was 
true at a place in India where [ visited, by a native with 
no medical training. 

However, by these estimates it would appear that the 
Philippines has no more leprosy per capita than any 
other Malay or Oriental country. The author has made 
it a point to inquire of health authorities in Japan, the 
Netherlands Indies, Malaya and French Indo-China. Their 
estimates oT the number of eases are all very similar — 
not much less or more than one per thousand, That cer- 
tain i\ ran mil be considered excessive, since we find 
about the same estimate of incidence in certain countries 
in South America, notably Colombia and Brazil. We know 
by actual survey thai that proportion is greatly exceeded 
in some islands in the West Indies. 

Nevertheless, the Philippine Islands are in the spot- 
light in the fight against the disease. This is not because 
the\ have so much leprosy, hut because since the begin- 
ning of the American regime the Islands have largely 
taken the lead in the antr-lepmsy campaign. 

The Spaniards were not greatly interested 



The Philippine Contribution 
To Leprosy Control 

By Perry Burgess 

President, The Leonard Wood Foundation 
Author of Who Wo Ik Alone 




Ih 



e prot> 



Entrance to the Leonard Wood Memorial 
Leprosarium at Cehiu Philippines 

lcm. When the Lnited Slates look over the Islands and 
sel up first a military and then a civil government, 
leprosy came in for attention forthwith. Until that time, 
some 400 victims of this disease were cared for in 
special places or in connection with provincial hospitals. 
One of the most notable of these was San La^aro, in 
Manila, a hospital built by the Franciscan monks in 
1578. one year after Sir Francis Drake made his voyage 
of discovery around the world. Twice the building was 
destroyed because of war. The first was in ] 062, when 
invasion was threatened by the Chinese pirate. Hue-Sing. 
Exactly 100 years later the British entrenched themselves 
behind the hospital and from that point threatened the 
Spanish positions* When. 21 years Ialer. the Spaniards 
were again threatened by the British, the hospital was 
burned for the second time. The nexi year, in I 78 k the 
King of Spain, by royal decree, set aside the present site 
for a new "Sanctuary of Sorrow. 

On the edge of I he city of Oebu there was another 
hospital For the victims of this disease, A two-story stone 
building did sen ice for man> vears and finally was 
torn down to furnish material for a new skin clinic being 
built on the same site h) the Leonard Wood Memorial. 
The old hospital for lepers was at the same lime moved 



out into the country some eight miles, near the town of 
Concepciun. where the Memorial had erected one of the 
world's most modern leprosaria. 

During Spanish titties it was often customary to per- 
mit lepers Ut eurne into the city nue day a week to ;i<L* 
for alms. 

Not long after the Americans came into the Philip- 
pines, serious work was undertaken to cope with this 
disease which was a izreat social ami economic problem, 
both to the victim and the members of Ins family. Two 
years after the Insurrection ended a group of islands in 
the Calami an group, just off the northern tip of Palawan, 
was set aside as a reservation (or those suffer ins: from 
Hansen's Disease. The largest island. Culiom the one that 
was to become the site of the colony, had been a Spanish 
naval outpost and included a small barrio. All the private 
property was purchased, the people were moved off. and 
in August, 1901. construction of the colony was begum 
A year later effective segregation was instituted in the 
Philippines. By 191 3. Culion had a population of 3.500. 
Eventually it was io reach the staggering total of 8.000, 
Now its numbers are dropping because, true to its 
policies, the Philippine Health Service has moved another 
step forward in the combating of this disease and has be- 
gun building, as rapidly as practical, agricultural colonies 
located near the homes of the patients. 

It is a long, and of Lett hopeless, trek from some little 
barrio in the Visayas to Manila and down the edge of 
the China Sea to Culion. That journey, and the lack of 
information as to what actually happened to patients 
on Culion, caused many, in the earlier days, to leap 
overboard as their ship entered Culion harbor. The wise 
and kindly procedure of the Health Service in disseminat- 
ing information and in trying to give to their charges 
some semblance of normal life has changed all that. 

A decade ago I was taken through the Cehu provincial 




Clinic and bus, contributed to the Philippine 
Health Service by the Leonard Wood 
Memorial 



health center, situated in an old Spanish fort which had 
been set aside for the purpose. In one room the walls 
were covered with knives. Since I cherish a special 
interest in small knives and have a considerable collec- 
tion. I asked to see them. I learned that they symbolized 
the change in the attitude of the leper toward segrega- 
tion and particularly toward being sent away to Culion. 
These knives — scores of them — had been taken from 
lepers when the Health Inspector went to take them into 
custody. 

Two bolos are at the present time in my collection, 
sent to me by the then director of health. One- with a 
great nick out of the blade, had been used to revenge 
ihe owner on two neighbors whom he thought had re- 
ported him as a leper. The other had been used against 
an inspector of the health service. This inspector, inci- 
dentally, now lives in Cebu, A worker for the Memorial 
in its surveys in Talisay. he still carries the long bolo 
scar across his face. 

In those early days, almost every leper had to be 
taken by force. Today. 90 per cent volunteer for isola- 
tion, Tiie word has spread through the barrios of Luzon, 
the Visayas, even down through the Suit) Sea to Jolo, that 
in the Philippines the leper is getting the breaks, that 
American and Filinino scientists arc working at the 
mysteries of his disease, that in its many leprosaria he 
can find some degree of normal living and be certain that 
all that science can make available will be his for the 
taking. 

The spirit which ani mates the Filipino and American 
worker has permeated the world. Today, not in the 
Philippines alone but in most countries where this illness 
exists, conscientious men of science are at work trying to 
alleviate suffering. The glory of the Filipinos will be 
that they were the ones who set the pace. 




Mr. Burgess addressing youthful patients at 
Sau Laznrn Hospital at Manila. The institu- 
tion is nearly 300 years old, 

* 9 • 



CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 




THE PHILIPPINES lost a valuable 
friend and a Loyal supporter with the re- 
cent death of Charles Edward Russell in 
Washington. Author, crusader, newspaper- 
man, humanitarian. Russell throughout 
his long life was active in many causes — 
among them the Philippines, the Irish lie- 
public and the Zionist: movement. 

His interest in the Philippines became 
concrete shortly after the turn of the cen- 
tury with the Organization of an American 
Ant i- Imperial ist League, which advocated, 
among other things, independence for the 
Filipinos. In the early 1920's Russell made Charles E<hv 
a trip to the Islands at the request of 
Manuel Quezon and Sergio Osmena. The book he wrote 
on his return to the United States stressed the desirability 
of immediate independence and proclaimed the ability of 
the Filipinos to rule themselves. He later collaborated 
in a biography of the Filipino patriot. Dr. Jose RizaL 

Russell took a prominent part in the fight for Philip* 
pine independence, contributing a steady flow of news- 
paper and magazine articles. As president of the Philip- 
pine Civic Bureau in Washington, which urged immediate 
independence, he fought vigorously against the Hawes- 
Hare- Cutting Act to grant independence on the ground 
that it delayed consummation unnecessarily. He opposed 
the Tydings-MeDufTie Act for the same reason. 

Shortly before his death, Charles Edward Russell wrote 
a brief article for Philippines, expressing his hopes for 
the future of the Filipino people. We publish it here 
with our tribute to a great liberal, a clear thinker and a 
staunch friend. 



History in general may be criticized as larking in 
humor and therefore unavailable for entertainment pur- 
poses. Occasionally, however, it breaks out into a broad 
gufTaw r of merriment, and one phase of the relations be- 
tween the I nited Stales and the Philippine Islands is 
likely to have all of that aspect when the future philoso- 
pher c omes to review it. 

I mean the notion, sedulously fostered by certain 
Americans, that this country performed an act of con- 
spicuous altruism when it seized the Philippine nation 
and for forty odd years managed or mismanaged its 



affairs. According to this delectable doe- 
trine, we found the Islands largely peopled 
by ignorant savages that lived ill trees and 
gibbered, and at great expense "by slow 
degrees subdued tbern to the useful and 
llie good,' ? teaching lb em. above everything 
else, "self government," 

"'Self government." say we. with smug 
Anglo-Saxon superiority, as if we had 
discovered that recondite art and had a 
patent on it. An average American of that 
order would he proudly incredulous if 
told that when his own ancestors were in- 
arcl Russell deed hairy savages running about the 
woods of Northern Europe, the Filipinos 
had ordered government, towns and cities, written 
language, and culture that included ensemble music. 
Yet that is the fact. 

He would also be astonished to learn that his govern- 
ment's noble experiment in altruism for the Philippines 
had cost it nothing except for its military establishment. 
Yet that is also the fact. And if someone were to tell 
him that spiritually and morally, American tuition in the 
Islands has been nothing pridefully to write home about, 
indignation would probably supplement his ineredulitv. 
Yet that again is the fact. 

But about the joke of teaching self government to 
these lowly Islanders, the point of it is that we have been 
leaching them something they already knew. How do we 
manage to elude the historical fact of Apolinario MabinL 
Filipino of the Filipinos, and easily the corn peer in 
democratic philosophy of Jefferson and Mazzini? How do 
we ignore the Philippine Republic, by Filipinos designed 
and founded in cleanest democracy more than forty 
years ago? How avoid the Malolos constitution, Filipino 
made, and one of the best democratic documents extant? 
And how about the excellent order in the barrios wholly 
under Filipino management? Instead of needing inst tui - 
tion in self government, these people seem rather in a 
position lo teach it. Compare homicide records, for 
instance. 

But what I am pleading for now is less of the Ameri- 
ran condescension toward "'the little brown brother." He 
is no foundling child. He needs no wet nurse, lie ean 
lake care of himself. All he wants is a chain c, 



10 • 

9 




The Philippine 
Summer Capital 

By Pilar N. Ravelo 

was where Americans and 
Filipinos joined hands to make a city; Bagnio 
today is where Americans and Filipinos have 
bridged the differences of race and eusluni. 
and have worked together to make the most 
progressive place in the Islands."' 

The only really temperate spot in the Philippines, the 
city of Bagnio clings to the pine-clad Bcnguet mountains 
300 mile* north of Manila. Five thousand feet ahovc 
tropical sea level. Bagnio is the coolest, the most pro* 
gressive city in the Archipelago. Pure, forest -seen ted air. 
cooled by lofty peaks; broad paved streets with wide 
sidewalks: an excellent drainage system: modem build- 
ings and homes; and weather thai is perpetual spring — 
all these contribute to the phenomenal attractiveness of 
Baguio, the summer capital of the Philippine Common- 
wealth. 

Forty-one years ago, when Dean C Worcester, author, 
historian and then a member of the Philippine Commis- 
sion, discovered the potentialities of Baguio. he and his 
party hiked over red clay footpaths. The present site of 
Burnham Park and the lagoon was a carahao wallow, 
kept In I go rots living in scattered nip a shacks. Only one 
white man lived in Baguio then; he was Otto Scheere. 
whose house stood where the famous Pines Hotel stands 
today. 

The construction of highways and roads into Baguio 
and nearby Trinidad Valley began in December, 1900. 
Not until January, 1905, however, did Coh W. V. Ken n on, 
after vrhom serpentine Kennon ftoad was named, drive 
the first wagon clear through. 

Today, speedy air-conditioned trains run from Manila 
to Damnrtis. at the foot of the Benguet hills. From there, 
large, comfortable buses wind up the famous Zigzag 
through narrow canyons to inviting Baguio, By airplane, 
the resort city is an hour from Manila; by automobile, it 
is five hours of eas\ driving over first class roads. 

Baguio V temperate climate has made it a welcome 
haven fur thousands during the sweltering heal of sum- 
mer. The average temperature is 64.4 degrees, with an 
annual variation of onl> 1 degrees. But Bagnio's weather 
offers sur [irises loo. especially during the rain) season. 
Oft Jul) 1-5, 1^1 1 - in a single 24-hour period, 4.WJ 
inches of lain folk Two feci of precipitation in 21 hours 




is not infrequent. In 1938. the city had a total of 213 
rainy days. Two other common weather phenomena are 
the heavy mist that veils the city in the early morning and 
late afternoon, and the hail storms that send everyone 
scampering. 

Camp John Hay, founded in 1903. is probably the 
most unique and beautiful army post under the American 
flag. The camp has all modern facilities: well-built quar- 
ters, playgrounds, a well-kept golf course, beautiful 
gardens and. best of all. the Bell Amphitheater. Situated 
near the summer headquarters of the commanding gen- 
eral of the Philippine Department of the United States 
Army, the latter attracts tourists, vacationists and candid 
camera fans because of its natural beauty. Camp John 
Hay has a steak fry at the Army and Navy Club every 
Saturday night; the occasional outdoor programs feature 
I go rot dances. 

A junior branch of the University of the Philippines — 
popularly known as the Baguio College — prepares stu- 
dents from northern Luzon for their degrees in liberal 
arts. Thus. Baguio is something of a college town* be- 
sides being a health resort and a convention city. 
Furthermore, every summer, in addition to the students, 
^Ittrtjsfltnds af school teachers from all parts ©T the Philip- 
pines gather for two months of rest, study and social 
aclivitv at the Teachers' Camp. The scattered school build- 
ings and dormitories are connected by improvised native- 
made canopies for the convenience of the teachers during 
the summer rains. 

The Philippine Military Academy- the Common- 
wealth's "West Pornt." an important new altrartion ot. 
the city. Hundreds of Filipino youths, future officers of 
the Philippine Army, receive their training here. The 
Academy's summer dam es have an irresistible attract ion 
for debutantes and other summer visitors. 

High Dominican Hill, site of a famous Grotto ot 
Lourdes. is accessible hv motor car. From this \ ant age 

i Turn to Page IS) 



° II • 




Igorot Alitor 




Bagnio Market, a riot 
of color anil activity 



12 




v 1 




Igorot Woman 



Bagnio's Business District 
anil Market 



■s Hotel, 
Government 



1 to Bagnio 




Build in^s of the 
Government Center 



Modern Bagnio and 
its cathedral 



in ~Tou.cn with 

VARGAS 



President Quezon has a 
Secretary who is becom- 
ing a Manila Legend. 




W HEN EVER President Quezon is away from his desk 
— whether on a visit to the United States, an inspect ton 
trip in Mindanao, a tour of low-cost housing projects on 
the outskirts of Manila, or at home under doctors 7 orders 
—the routine business of running the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines falls to Jorge B« 
Vargas, the Presidential secretary. So efficient is Vargas 
in performing his manifold duties that his name appears 
in American newspaper dispatches with a frequency 
exceeded only by that of Mr, Quezon himself. In Manila 
he has become something of a contemporary legend. 
4 'Get in touch with Vargas," is the answer to innumerable 
queries. 

During his recent illness. President Quezon had to 
rely on Vargas to handle many of the burdens of State* 
The secretary increased in stature under the load of serv- 
ing as eyes, ears, mouth and hands for his ailing chief. 

Democratic and unaffected, a hard worker and a self- 
made man. Secretary Vargas sets a pace around the 
Presidential office that w f ears out most other officials. 
Rising at 6, he remains on duty until late at night, usually 
with only brief interruptions for meals or relaxation. 
Paradoxically, though, he maintains his social contacts, 
finds time for tennis and bowling, and has established 
a reputation as a model husband and father. 

Vargas' days are as diversified as his talents, Before 
breakfast he putters around his orchard and poultry runs. 
He I urns nn the radio for the news broadcasts and thumbs 
through the morning papers while he eats. He is off to his 
office at Malacanan before most of Manila is fully awake. 
From then until 2 uYlock in the afternoon he devotes all 
his attention to the amazing variety of juris that fall to 
a successful Presidential secretary . 

If the President is available, appointments must be 
made, H not, Vargas may undertake to speak for his chief. 
Dozens of cniniiH.nnalioMS mn>i be dispalrhcd on all 



sorts of governmental business* Inquiries from the press- 
are answered. Visitors are greeted and political grievances 
soothed. In all these and a hundred other activities^ 
Vargas submerges himself. 

By 2 o'clock the rush has subsided and Secretary 
Vargas goes home for lunch and a siesta, Hark at bis desk 
by 1 or 5 (/clock, he plunges into the "paper work" 
thai has piled up on his desk. Often it is well past mid- 
night before he switches off the lights and goes home, 
Supper has consisted of a sandwich Or Iwn and a glass of 
milk. 

Despite the constant press of business — complicated 
\i\ a crowded soc ial and oflieial schedule — Vargas usually 
manages to get in some tennis or bowling at the Loang- 
Laan Tennis (Hub, of which he is president* If the day 
has been too busy for a game, he will leave his desk 
during the evening, rush to the club for a set under 
lights, then hurry back to Malacanan and bis job. 

The Presidential secretary finds occasional relaxation 
in dancing or a show. Good tennis thrill? him. A bang-up 
boxing or w + restling bout is a treat, too* Vargas belongs 
to the Manila Yacht Club, Los Tamaraos Pol > Club, the 
W ack \\ ark (rolf Club, and half a dozen social organiza- 
tions. All somehow get a measure of his attention. 

Vargas' interest in sports even extends into his hobby 
of collecting books. Sporting editions have a prominent 
place among the 2.500 volumes of bis steadily growing 
private library. However, the selection has both variety 
and richness. Currently he is developing the Filipiuiana 
section through the acquisition of rare Philippine manu- 
scripts. Stamps go into another collection, and to date 
his serapbooks exeeed 100 volumes. A genuine lover of 
books. Vargas is meticulous in their care: no minor 
faults in design- printing or binding escape his eye, and 
he is equally critical of grammatical or typographical 
errors. 

An efficient executive. Secretary Vargas is just as suc- 
cessful as a family man. He and Mrs, Vargas are both 
busy, but their home life follows the orderly pattern of 
a typical Filipino household. Five boys and three girls 
assure pleasant distractions from the cares of official life. 

Convent-educated, Mrs. Yulo Yargas is a sea'soned 
home-maker. Furthermore, her friends will tell you she 
is a good cook, an excellent interior decorator, and a 
successful manager of the family business interests. Like 
her husband, she is fond of sports. Mrs. Vargas bowls 
occasionally, goes in for gymnastics and dances we lb 

Today, Secret an Vargas is one of the most popular 
men in the Common wealth administration. He performs 
a difficult job wcll s without ostentation or favoritism. 
Sure indication of his ability is the manner in which be 
has maintained Hose liaison between Malacanan Palace 
and the Filipino people during the President's recent 
illness, A job like that is not easy. Manila often calls 
Secrctan Vargas I he "little President." ^ 



• 14 * 




THE FILIPINO WOMAN has 
physical traits in common with many 
peoples of the Far East. She is, in 
fact, often mistaken for a Chinese. 
Japanese or, most frequently, a Ma- 
layan. This is easily explained: 
Chinese, Japanese and Malayan blood 
all flows in Filipino veins. 

Three races of men migrated from 
Southeastern Asia to populate the 
Philippines — the Negritos, the In- 
donesians and the Malays. The Ma- 
lays, with the most highly developed 
civilization, are still dominant and 
their influence on the Filipino, both 
physical and cultural, has hern the 
most marked. Because of China's 
proximity to the Philippines, Chinese 
have migrated to the islands in large 
numbers. They have intermarried to 
such a great extent that almost every 
Filipino has a few drops of Chinese 
blood. Spanish influence is also very 
evident. 

Small in stature, usually not taller 
than five feet five inches, the Filipino 
woman has straight hi ark hair, clear- 
cut features, dark eyes and a light- 
brown complexion. Strangely enough, 
she looks like a tint* Filipina only 



Clothes Make 

the 

Filipino 



Woman 

By Flora Y lagan 

How Filipino clothes have 
changed in the past two decades, 
LefU the traditional Marin Clara 
drees, product of Spanish rule, 
Rijrhu modern style, lighter and 
freer p 



when she wears her native dress. Her 
costume, like her own personality, has 
undergone many transformations: 
her clothes today mark the transi- 
tion from the old order to the modern. 

In the early days, the Filipino 
woman was secluded in the home, and 
her daily excursions went no farther 
than the market r>r the church. Walk- 
ing slowly and with dignity, she 
could not raise her eyes to a member 
of the opposite sex* The Filipina ? s 
lack of freedom was reflected in the 
style of her clothes. The bulky Maria 
Clara costume prevailed, for etu^ueite 
required that a woman's clothes 
should not r"eveal the feminine form. 

The Maria Clara dress concealed 
the figure well. First, there were three 
or four petticoats, very full, gathered 
and ru filed. A waist, the "eamisa , \ 
made of closely woven pineapple 
liber or Canton linen, came next. 
Usually embroidered, its long gath- 
ered sleeves hung loosely to the 
wrist. A collar which resembled a 
mt »nk"s cowl was folded over the 
breast and partly covered the high, 
broad neckline of the fc "camisa". 

A full, loose skirt fell to the floor 




and covered the feet. In the Tagatog 
regions, an apron-like iapiz of 
thick black material was worn over 
the skirt, reaching the knees. The 
'"tapis" was a symbol of modesty and 
no Tagalog woman dared to go into 
the streets without one. When she 
went to church, the Filipina wore a 
black veil which covered her face. 
To see to the side, she had to turn 
her head. She was modesty personi- 
fied. 

Today, women of the FhilippinVs 
have yielded to new influences, and 
Uhe native dress has also undergone a 
change. The "caiiusa" is now very 
sheer — the sheerer it is. the more it 
is admired. The sleeves, which for- 
merly hung loosely and covered the 
arm- com p letch . have become 
shorter, wider, and art 1 starched stiff 
to resemble wings. The neck line is 
lower and broader, while the '"monk's 
cowT" m> longer hugs ihc neck 1ml 
falls lower in three folds that lea\e 
the shoulders hare, extending across 
the hack of the "eamisa" in an in- 
verted triangle, with the tip reaching 
the waislline. The collar and w ide- 
i Turn ft} Pagf 23 I 



• 15 ■ 



The Philippines Has a $4,000,000,000 Nest Egg 

By Ivan M. Elchibcgoff 



THE Philippine Commonwealth is 
predominantly an agricultural coun- 
try, and forests comprise one of its 
most important natural resources. 
With the advent of economic and po- 
litical independence, the exploitation 
of these forest resources is expected 
to play an increasingly valuable role 
in domestic and international 
economy. 

When they withdraw from the 
Philippines, Americans can leave no 
liner monument than their work in 
Insular forestry. American foresters 
— men such as George Ahem, founder 
of the Philippine Forestry School, 
and George Fischer, adviser on 
natural resources to the Common- 
wealth—will be remembered grate- 
fullv for what they did in establish- 
ing sound forestry in the Philippines. 
The knowledge they gained there has 
I M-rn invaluable in spreading appre- 
ciation of Latin American forests, as 
well as those of the Malavan an -hi- 
pel a go. Furthermore. American 

Forestrj influence has been dissem- 
inated ' throughout China. Japan. 
Malava and the rest of the Far East 
bj graduates of the Philippine School 
of Forestry. 

Philippine forestry has a history 
older than the American occupation. 
Long before the Spanish- Anieriean 
War. the Spaniards organized a Bu- 
reau of Forestry in the Philippines 
and enacted Forestrj legislation that 

actually handicapped development. 
The old feudal regime COUld not meet 

i he requirements of contemporary 

industrial exploitation of timber 

stands, although the Spanish laws 
were fashioned after those <>! their 
neighbor- in western Europe. Despite 
these handicaps, local conditions 
Favored the development of a lumber 

industry that could satisfy the local 
demand and meet export require- 
ments. \\ fill the end of Spanish 
domination, American capital and 




Modern sawmills handle logs 
of Philippine mahogany 

technique soon permitted large scale 
utilization of the magnificent forests. 

Philippine forests are officially 
computed to occupy 43.700.000 acres, 
approximately 59 per cent of the 
total land area. Standing timber is 
estimated to total 464,700,000.000 
feet, worth some $4,000,000,000. This 
is about $250 worth of standing tim- 
ber for each Filipino man, woman 
and child. When the logging, manu- 
facture and transportation costs are 
added, it can be seen what a tremen- 
dous factor in Philippine national 
economy lies in the limber resources. 

The Islands contain about 3,000 
species of merchantable trees attain- 
ing one foot and more in diameter. 
For (he present, however, only 20 or 
so are known commercially in export 
markets. I nder the names 4 *Philip- 
pine mahogany" and "Philippine 
hardwoods", they account for be- 
tween 85 and 00 per cent of the lum- 
ber exports. Although the Philippine 
forests are predominantly hardwood, 
some species are capable of substitu- 
tion lor soft woods. This is an im- 
portant technical factor in die compe- 
tition between Philippine and Ameri- 
can lumber in the Japanese market. 

Nowhere is the contrast of old 
and new in the Philippines better ex- 
emplified than in the technological 

set-up of the lumber industry. Next to 
the Mom splitting off tin' most ac- 



cessible parts of the log. the traveler 
finds an up-to-date sawmill using 
high-powered American logging and 

cutting machinery, producing hun- 
dreds of thousands of board feet of 
lumber a day. 

Statistics offer the best measure- 
ment of the industry's growth in the 
past 10 years. Production in 1900 
totaled about 20,000,000 board feet: 
the output was approximately 1.000- 
000,000 feet in 1938. Progress has 
been steady, with American money 
and skill playing a most significant 
part. The backbone of this advance 
has been the local market, which con- 
sumes 75 to 85 per cent of the 
yearly output. Exports increased from 
6 to 9 per cent during the first decade 
<>f the century; between 1930 and 
1940 they rose from 15 to 25 per 
cent. These figures may not seem im- 
portant to the layman, but in terms 
of standards of living they mean 
that the yearly consumption of lum- 
her increased from about 10 board 
feet per capita in 1900 to 60 or 70 
board feet in 1938. American con- 
sumption in 1988 was 161 board 
Feet. The increase in total production 
indicates a 100 per cent growth in 
agricultural population and produc- 
tion. It also signifies the development 
of skilled machinists and other in- 
dustrial workers. 

As is normal at this stage of Philip, 
pine economic development* the i n . 
dustrv is controlled to a considerable 
extent by foreign capital. Recent 
figures show that 12 per cent of the 

rnone) is American. 30 per cent 
Philippine, 10 per cent Chinese, 5 

per cent British and 1 per cent 

Japanese. The remainder, about 9 
per cent, is mixed foreign and Philip, 
pine capital. The American invest- 
ment may increase further, depend- 
ing on the industry's decline in the 
Pacific Northwest* on the one hand, 

i Turn to Page 23) 



• 16 • 




Above: 

Modern tractors snake 
the big logs from the 
woods to the logging 
railroad, 




17 



Varona, Labor Aide, 
Returning to Manila 




Francisco Varona 

AMER three years of service as labor assistant to the 
Philippine Resident Commissioner in Washington, Fran- 
cisco Varona has been granted an indefinite leave of 
absence and will leave for the Philippines early in July, 
Commissioner Joaquin M. Elizalde has announced. Mr. 
Varona expects to seek a seat in the Philippine Senate 
ne\t fall. 

As aide to Commissioner Elizalde, Mr, Varona has 
been instrumental in the organization of Filipino Execu- 
tive Councils throughout the United States, and under his 
direction the Nationals Division of the Resident Commis- 
sioner's f)[Itee is attempting to register all Filipinos in 
I he f nltcd States. Mr. Varona has been particularly ac- 
tive in mediating labor disputes involving Filipinos. He 
is familiarly known to Filipinos everywhere as ^Don 
Faro. ^ 



Letters From Our 

Interested Readers 

Resident Commissioner of the Philippines 
Washington, I). C. 

Ju.-l today I received a copy of Pn ]UeriM-:s and I 
can hardly tell you how much 1 appreciate it. It seems 
almost impossible that the Islands have improved and 
advanced as they have during the past 41 years. 

I look back at the time when it was dangerous for 
one man or even two to be away from the barracks. I 
recall that we established a guard post at the river cross- 
ing north of San Isidro. The post was some distance from 
the town- One side of the road was covered by a dense 
growth of bamboo and other tropical vegetation- — 
bananas, mangoes, etc.; the other side was not covered 
so densely. 

One day, one of the men on guard al the river post 
came into the "cook shack" for dinner and afterwards set 
out for his post again. Apparently he was overpowered 
by skulking natives and murdered, for he never showed 
up again. A thorough search failed to rev eal anything. 
As long as we were in that neighborhood — San Isidro, 
Gapan. Cabiao, Cahanatuan — nothing ever gave up a 
clue as to the cause of his mysterious disappearance. 

Now, here comes your splendid magazine which gives 
me a different vision of the Philippines, The cultural ad- 
vancement is something to marvel at! The splendid archi- 
tectural improvements make one wonder if it is really so. 

Many, many thanks for the wonderful magazine. 

Louis Collins 
Baker. Oregon 



Buguio (from Page 11) 

point, one commands a complete view of Baguio and its 
environs— the Mansion House, summer home of the 
United States High Commissioner; the summer residence 
of the President of the Philippines; the city auditorium 
at Burn ham Park, where the younger set gathers for 
dancing; the Country Club with its popular golf course; 
the Baguio Catholic Cathedral atop a nearby hill: seven 
large hotels at vantage points around the city; and at- 
tractive modern residences with beautiful gardens. 

But the most colorful spot in Baguio is the Market 
Place, where the mountain people, the Igorots, gather 
from distant villages to sell their wood carvings, hand- 
woven cloth, baskets, curios, jewelry and fruits and 
vegetables. 

Baguio is. finally, a very interesting paradox. Located 
in the mountains of northern Luzmik whose inhabitants 
are among the oldest but least advanced of the Filipino 
people, it symbolizes the success of the joint e (Torts of 
Americans and Filipinos in the c real ion of a resort city 
whieh is. to mans minds, the plensautest and most modem 
in the Far East. ^ 



Philippine Laws // eyt , <Jfifc ce to Did 

To Control Aliens West Coast Filipinos 



Go Into Operation 



THE first comprehensive restriction of aliens in I ho 
history of the Philippine Islands began on January 1. 
1941. with enforcement of the 1010 Philippine Immigra- 
tion Ail. The Commonwealth legislation closely follows 
American patterns with only a few notable exceptions. 
For instance, the Philippines, unlike the United Slates, 
makes no distinction as to race or nationality. Secondly, 
the Philippine definition uf an alien does not include 
citizens of the United States, while the United Slates 
considers the Filipino an alien. Finally, the Philippines 
has established an absolute quantitative limitation, in 
contrast to the American proportional system. 

The Philippine law distinguishes between immigrant 
and non-immiiirant aliens. i\on-hnmigrants include per- 
sons in the Islands temporarily, tourists, seamem inter- 
national traders and students. They are restricted quali- 
tatively, but nut quantitatively, The second classification, 
immigrants, is subject to both quantitative and qualita- 
tive restrictions. 

Denied entry to the Philippines, regardless of pur- 
pose, are persons found on the non-admission list of most 
countries — paupers, the insane, polygamisis, criminals, 
etc. 

From the international standpoint, the most signifi- 
cant feature of the new law is its quota figures. An abso- 
lute limit of 500 of any one nationality, or without na- 
tionality, can he ad milled for an y one calendar year. 
This feature brought a diplomatic protest from Japan, 
which felt that, in practice, it was being discriminated 
against. \o limitation is placed on nonquota immigrants 
—approved employes, the immediate family of Philip- 
pine citizens, women who have lost their Philippine 
citizenship through marriage to aliens, to mention sev- 
eral categories. 

Fingerprinting of incoming aliens is handled by immi- 
gration officials at ports of entry. Persons ahoiit whose 
status there is any doubt are referred to a board of 
special inquiry. An alien who has been excluded by a 
local board may appeal to the Board of Commissioners 
of the Bureau of Immigration in Manila. 

Another bill passed hy the Philippine National Assem- 
bly requires the registration and fingerprinting of all 
aliens resident in the Commonwealth. This new legisla- 
tion is v ery similar t* i the Alien Registration Act of I 'HO 
in the I nited States, 




Dr. Macario D. Bant i si a 



THE opening of a branch of the Office of the Philip- 
pine Resident Commissioner in San Francisco was an- 
nounced June 1 hy Commissioner Joaquin M. Elizalde. 
Primarily an extension of the Nationals Division of the 
Washington office, the new agency was made necessary 
by the concentration of Filipinos on the Pacific Coast 
and the growing need for a greater solidarity among 
them. 

Dr. Macario 1). Bautisla. physician of Stockton. Cali- 
fornia, is director of the agency. Mr, C. T. A If afar a. 
popular president of the Filipino community in San 
Francisco, has been named secretary. 

The primary purpose of the San Francisco office is to 
act as liaison agent between the Filipino communities 
on the Pacific Coast and the Office of the Philippine Resi- 
dent Commissioner in Washington. The staff, for instance, 
is charged with advising the Commissioner on all pend- 
ing state or local legislation affecting Filipino interests, 
and any cases of discrimination. Filipino travelers will 
be aided in their dealings with immigration officials, and 
the issuance of visas and re-entr\ permits will be facili- 
tated 

At least one jnter-comniunih Filipino conference will 
be arranged by I lie branch office each year. 

"We hope by this step to extend more elTeetiveh the 
service? and protection of the Philippine Commissioners 
Oilier to the Pacific Coast/" l)t\ Haulisla declared, "The 
agency stands read\ !o assist both Americans and 
Filipinos in am problem that legitimated < ;on< > uilhm 
our sphcie, ' ^ 



19 * 



Export Control (from Page 3) 

Philippine Government and Filipino leaders, both in 
Washington and in Manila. They rose to the occasion 
magnificently, throwing their full support behind a propo- 
sition which was sure to mean a real sacrifice to then?. 
That made the task of the sponsors of the legislation much 
lighter. 

It was my privilege to have been a member of the 
congressional party which visited the Philippines six 
years ago for the inauguration of the Commonwealth 
Government and of Manuel Quezon as its first President. 
I saw the Philippines at first hand, and my observations 
of economic and social con- 
ditions there gave me a deep 
appreciation of the impor- 
tance to the Filipinos* as well 
as for us, of export control. 

I was pleased to be able to 
introduce this bill In the Sen- 
ate where it was considered 
and acted on within l wo 
days. The identical bill in- 
troduced in the House by 
Representative May. chair- 
man of the Military Affairs 
Committee, was also given 
prompt approval in commit- 
tee. On the floor of the 
House. Representative May 
offered my bill as a substi- 
tute for his own- facilitating 
its final passage. 

The administration departments strongly favored 
the legislation- The proposal was. in fact, submitted to the 
Congress by Secretary of War Henry L, Stimson. The 
staled objective was to prevent the leakage to foreign 
countries of essential resources produced in the Philip- 
pines. It was felt highly desirable that these resources be 
husbanded for the defense of the United Slates and of the 
Philippines. Testimony was presented in the hearings be- 
fore our committee that considerable amounts of these 
vital materials were being shipped to Axis nations. Ob- 
viously such a situation was not consonant with our na- 
tional policy. To understand its existence and develop- 
ment, however, it is necessary to understand the general 
background of our original national export control legis- 
lation. Then we may see how the problem of the Philip- 
pine was gradual!) impressed upon us. 

The Congress in July, 1940 passed legislation to apply 
export licensing control to all essential products, com- 
modities, and materials produced in continental I nited 
Slates. 1 nder thai law, expo its of high -octane gasoline, 
steel, iron* aluminum, tin. robber and a long list of other 
essential materials were placed under supervision and 
restriction. Congress had intended, and the Administration 
carried out a program whereby all such shipments out- 
side the borders of the I nited States were made* to nm- 
form strictly lo I he necessities of national defense. Dis- 




Copra, 



dried coconut meat, now requires 
for export from the Philippines. 



eretion in issuing licenses for export was left in the hands 
of the Export Control Administration, an < irganization 
representing the State and the War Departments, anion? 
others. This was as it should be. Losses of vital defense 
materials were immediate!) rurt ailed. \\ hat shipments 
were permit Led went Lo countries in whose economic wel- 
fare we were especially interested, in further a net* of our 
national policies, including the Good Neighbor policy in 
South and Central America, 

Bui Washington soon observed that some vita) ma- 
terials continued to pass put of American jurisdiction 
through the Philippines. Of (nurse, there was nothing 
improper about this at the lime. The Philippines had 

nut been mentioned in the 
original export font ml law. 
because it had not been 
thought cither necessary or 
fair. To have pinched off the 
Commonwealth's e x p d r t 
trade without first consulting 
the Filipinos who would bear 
the chief burden of that 
polit'} would undoubtedly 
have been grossly unjust. 
After all, it was our national 
defense that we were seeking 
to improve. Moreover, at the 
time of the original passage 
of the export control act* 
man\ responsible people had 
on idea that the Filipinos 
were willing to stand beside 
us in the diplomatic tug of 
war that was going on in the world. 

Yet the queer paradox of the question was the fact 
that the Philippines was scheduled to remain under the 
American Flag until 194-6. Despite the Independence Act 
of 193-1. the Filipinos were not yet independent. In an 
international sense we were still responsible for them and 
for their [dace in the world. That complicated the question 
of export control. 

At first the contradiction was not especially apparent 
to us. We passed the export control act for continental 
L nited States and were willing to let the matter rest 
there. Our unwillingness to presume upon the delicate in* 
ter national position of the Philippines, combined with 
our tack of information as to the probable extent and 
importance of "leakage"' from the Islands, made the ques- 
tion fairlv academic anyway. But then two changes oc- 
curred. First, both our experts and the Filipinos began 
to notice an important increase 1 in shipments of vital 
Philippine vegetable oils, base melals and hemp to Japan, 
Russia and similar markets. These were highly important 
materials, and our officials were frankly disturbed. 

The second change was the growing consciousness that 
the Filipinos were on con -ido in I lie world ideological 
conflict. Th<?3 had deliberately chosen, we understood, to 
throw their lot in with us, regardless of the menace to 



a license 



• 20 * 




Manila hemp exports 
may now be curtailed 



themselves, A coiiiwierit real- 
ization was that, iititi 1 1946. 
we wo plainly responsible 
fur the defense of the Philip* 
pines as well as the I ruled 
Slates. 

These two realizations 
combined to suggest Ui holh 
official and non-ofhYiaf cir- 
cles thai export eonlrol lie 
applied to the Philippines, 
Aetualiy. according to test i- 
ruonv presented to us. I he 
Filipinos themselves were the 
first to make the surest ion 
and to offer to aet upon it. 

A cling under inslr net ions 
from President Q u e /,n n, 
Joaquin M. Elizalde, Philip- 
pine Resident Commissi oner in Washington, contacted 
Administration officials and offered to apply export eon- 
lrol in whatever form the I tilled Slates thought best. 
Filipinos, he dee hired- were willing and ready to make 
whatever s aerifies were necessary. That offer was deeply 
appreciated in Washington. A hill applying export eon- 
lrol to the territories and possessions was immediately 
drafted and submitted to Congress. 

When Mr. Elizalde appeared before our Senate Milb 
tary Affairs Committee, he reiterated the Common* 
wealth's full and unqualified support for the proposed 
legislation, even at the expense of a national economy 
completely dependent upon exports. Dean Acheson, As* 
sistant Secretary of Slate, and Brigadier-General Russell 
Maxwell. Export Control Administrator, appeared on he- 
hdf of the Administration io present basic testimony 
concerning the need for the legislation and to urge its 
adoption. That was done in record time. 

This commentary, however, would not be complete 
without again emphasizing the gracious cooperation of 
President Manuel Quezon, who unquestionably reflected 
the attitude -,/f the 16,000.000 Filipinos in his desire to 
work closely with the United States on these propeets of 
benefit to us both. President Quezon has not taken ad- 
vantage of the situation. Instead, he placed the matter at 
our discretion during the discussion of this important 
matter. 

Great credit is likewise clue to the Congressional repre- 
sentative of the Philippine Government. Co nun iss inner 
"Mike" Elizalde. who has in this, and in all other matters 
been a v igorous, aide and active advocate of his country, 
able to w*nk in closest h a in ion \ with his colleagues in 
Congress. Elizalde s personality and personal popularity 
have gained him an entry into main high circles to the 
ultimate benefit of his country. That, added to the deep 
appreciation which we have developed here for the en- 
operation and patriotism of President Quezon, has made 
it a pleasant lask to cooperate with the Philippine Com- 
monwealth in our legislative function. ^ 



Service in the Philippines 
By 

Major Alexander Sydney Lanier 



I HAVE HAD the privilege of seeing each cop\ of 
Philippines since its first issue. The magazine is of 
particular interest to one who spent more than four 
years in the "Sun Kissed Isles 7 ". The photographs show 
the great progress of the Islands since I was there 30* 
odd years ago. The whole is of interest also because it 
revives memories of most pleasant experiences and of 
happy years I spent in the Philippines, and of the 
friendships I formed among the Filipinos and Americans, 
Tn fact, the ties between those who served in the Islands 
in the earlier days are comparable only to those formed 
in combat service or those of our school days. 

1 went to the Philippines in 1906 at the request of 
General Clarence R. Edwards. Chief of the Bureau of 
Insular Affairs in Washington, as assistant to the Insular 
A Homey General. It was my privilege to serve under Gov- 
ernors General Henry C. Ide and Cameron Forbes. Com- 
missioner James F. Smith, and more immediately under 
Attorneys General Wilfley. Gregoria Areneta and Igiiacio 
Yillamur. I consider Areneta a man of uncommon ability. 

It was my privilege during that period to draft many 
vital Philippine laws. Among the legislation I helped 
prepare were the laws creating the University of the 
Philippines, segregating the lepers at Culion. creating the 
Commission to regulate railroads and public utilities, and 
pensioning the Constabulary. I also aided in preparing 
the habitual criminal act. and wrote the opinions of the 
Bureau of Justice. 

1 liked the Filipinos, and always found them courteous 
and hospitable. I sympathized with their political as- 
pirations, and had faith in their capabilities for self- 
government; and in those early formative days it was 
within my sphere of activities to preserve and protect 
Filipino civil rights. Whenever there was presented to me 
a question of law involving Filipino rights, and any 
doubt existed. I always resolved the doubt in favor of the 
Filipino. 

As long as I live. I shall always cherish happy memo- 
ries of the Philippines and its peoples. 1 can only wish 
for I he in unmolested freedom to develop to the fullest 
their undoubted ability and their capacity tor self- 
government. May I hey be blessed with happiness and 
prosperity, and with perpetual peace and security at 
home and abroad. ^ 



21 



P. I. HEWS 



SECRETARY of National Defense Teofilo Sison in a 
recent report to President Quezon and the Philippine As- 
sembly submitted a series of recommendations "for the 
maintenance of a strong and efficient air force in the 
Philippines." The plan called for: 

Expansion of the Philippine Army air corps and off- 
shore patrol: Government aid in training civilian pilots; 
appointment of Filipino pemionados to take special 
courses in aeronautics abroad ; consolidation of Philip- 
pine commercial airlines and their operation under 
government supervision or control; establishment of an 
adequate central airport in Manila; complete Filipimza- 
tion of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey; ac- 
quisition of an additional survey ship; acquisition of a 
new and larger site for the Philippine nautical school. 

Coincident with these recommendations came an an- 
nouncement that 100 officer-aviators will be detailed this 
year to speed the training of Filipino pilots. 

• • m 

»r\CE Ihe Philippine census was taken in L939. the 
population has increased by 770,597, bringing the total 
to 16,771,900, the Bureau of Census and Statistics has 
announced on the basis of estimates made on January 1. 
1941. Manila had 673,000, Cebu is still the most densely 
populated province, with 1,085,400. 

• • • 

SHIPPING difficulties have failed to curtail the Philip- 
pine export trade, contrary to earlier fears. The total 
value of shipments in the first quarter (840.167,220) 
was ahead of the 1940 figures (§37,282,721) by 7.7 
per cent, A sharp recovery in Philippine purchases 
abroad was also noted during this period. 

i' m ■ 

President Quezon has issued an executive mm 

regulating the reappointment and reinstatement of gov- 
ernment employes who resign to engage in politics. Such 
persons hereafter cannot return to the public payroll 
until six months after the elections in which they tlirecth 
<>r indirectly look part. 

• • # 

I ML training of volunteer guards for civilian de- 
fense in the event nf emergency wilt be started soon in 
all Philippine towns and cities by the Philippine Con- 
stabulary V (dun leers will receive instruction in first 
aid. repair and construction work- police, traffic and 



guard duties, gas decontamination and fin* prevention. 
In Manila alone a guard unit of I 7.01 HI Filipinos and 
Americans between the ages of \l\ and 60 is planned. 

* • * 

General emilio aguinaldo, leader oi the fa* 

surreelionists of 11199 and 190I). and still a strong advo- 
cate of immediate independence, recently recommended 
that Manila be designated an open city immediately upon 
the outbreak of any hostilities involving the Philippines. 
General Aguinaldo expressed full confidence in the ability 
of Insular defense forces. "All veterans of t lit" revolution 
are with me,' : he declared, "and we are reach to fight 
again, this time with our American friends at id bene* 
factors." 

# • m 

ACTING immediately to carry out a set of recommen- 
dations on civilian defense issued by President Quezon, 
the National Assembly passed a bill appropriating 
85,000,000 to cover the costs. As the hist step to provide 
cash for defense purposes. President Quezon has author- 
ized the release of SI .0,000,000 from the fund given him 
under emergency legislation to cover the purchase of seeds 
and short-season crops, the acquisition of poultry and 
livestock, and the production and storage of other food- 
stuffs. Discussion has already started on means of meet* 
ing emergency food requirements. 



VlCE PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMENA recently told 
the Manila press that, as far as the Filipinos are con- 
cerned. Independence is a closed matter which can only 
be reopened by the United States. He declared that 
the Filipinos are willing to fight for the United States 
if necessary; and although they will rely on American 
naval and military aid until 1946, Filipinos will handle 
civilian defenses. 



TflE devastating fire which swept the Tondo district of 
Manila in May, leaving 30,000 homeless, has forced 
adoption of a number of government measures for re- 
lieving fire sufferers and rehabilitating the burned area. 
Mayor Eulogio Rodriguez announced establishment of 
a $2,500,000 revolving fund to urbanise Tondo and 
help prevent a repetition of the $2,000,000 conflagration. 
A modern town, without nipa shacks and the old slums, 
is planned. Model tenement houses will he leased or sold 
on the installment basis to Tondo residents, preferably 
fire victims. 

• i • 

PRESIDENT QUEZON has issued an executive order re- 
quiring all government offices and entities to acquire and 
store a four-month reserve of gasoline, lubricating oil, 
grease, kerosene and Diesel oil. These supplies, in cans, 
will he stored in safe and convenient pi aces. 



• 22 



Treasure in Timber 

(from P;ige 16) 

arid political developments itt tlie 
South Pari fie. on the other, Philip* 
pine capital is certain to increase. 
Total investments at present are alio nt 
815.500,000 — a relatively small 
amount in view <*f the over-mature 
timber available for immediate 
cutting* 

The lumber industry has developed 
mainly on the basis of the domestic 
demand from expanding agricultural 
export industries, such as sugar, 
copra and abaca. Nevertheless. 
Philippine woods have already at- 
tained an enviable position in world 
markets. The first South Sea tropical 
timber to reach Europe in substantial 
quantities came from the Islands, 
with the possible exception of teak 
from Southeastern Asia. In technical 
properties and adaptability- they have 
proven their ability to compete with 
hardwoods from other parts of the 
tropical world. 

In the past 20 years the percentage 
of Philippine limber sold abroad has 
increased until in 1937 not less than 
25 per cent of the national cut was 
exported. The trade is predominantly 
with Japan, the United States- the 
British Empire and China, but more 
Lb an 25 other countries received their 
quota. 

Although exports have been sub- 
stantial and are still growing in 
value- compared to such products as 
su^ar, copra, coconut oil Manila 
fiber and canned fruit they are insig* 
nifieant. of course. But the interna- 
tional timber trade in the Pacific is 
expanding and the Philippine share 
will continue to grow in quantity 
and value, with a further increase 
in its relative importance to the na- 
tional economy. 

Of individual markets. Japan is 
the most important and is still grow- 
ing. The United States is the most 
profitable- This is because America 
imports finished sawmill products, 
while Japan takes rough timber and 
does the manufacturing at home. 

Since 1929. Japan has sought to 
limit its purchases of taw and semi- 
manufactured products in the T inted 
States. American lumber exports to 




Lumbermen use modern equip* 
in en t at every opportunity 



Japan have probably suffered more 
than any other product from this 
policy. One of the reasons the 
Japanese were able to do this was 
the presence in the Philippines of a 
readily available source of timber. 
Therefore, in the event the Philippine 
Government decided to protect its 
woodworking industry by imposing 
an export lax on rough timber, Japan 
would probably look for another 
source in Malaya or Siberia. In fact, 
the Japanese already hold several 
concessions in the Netherlands Indies 
and British North Borneo, which 
supply about as much as the Common- 
wealth does. A policy of protection 
for the domestic Philippine sawmill 
industry is therefore of questionable 
value unless other markets capable 
of substantial improvement can be 
found. This is the next task of the 
Philippine lumber industry. 

The Islands have been regular im- 
porters of American softwood since 
the end of the 19th century. United 
States Government statistics show 
that the first purchase of American 
lumber, valued at SI 10, occurred in 
1824-25. In ] 842- If, the Philippines 
took $4,500 worth. In the first decade 
of this century. United States lumber 
exports to the Philippines averaged 
about 20.000.000 1 >oartl feet a year. 
They have dot lined now to between 
3.000.000 and 5,000,000 board feet. 
These Philippine imports are "ha- 
bitual" rather than economically 
necessary : for we are told b\ the 
foresters that the Islands have wood 
for e^ ery conceivable use. 



Clothes (from Page 15) 

puffed sleeves give the garment the 
graceful lines of a butterfly. 

The skirt has also adopted new 
styles. The fullness has disappeared 
and the design now conforms with the 
"eamisa". Fitting the hips closely as 
an American or European dress does, 
it falls in graceful folds to the floor, 
ending in a train in the back. Philip- 
pine dresses, whether for ordinary 
use or special occasion, morning or 
evening, always have a train. It is 
easily managed, however. During 
the day it is pinned to the side; at 
tea it is held in the left hand: and on 
formal occasions it is allowed to trail 
gracefully behind. The trimming and 
material of the train vary according 
to the occasion. Those for daily use 
are made simply, of inexpensive 
material, while those for evening 
wear are of costly materials, elab- 
orately embroidered with silver, gold 
or silk thread. 

Until the modern era, Filipino 
dresses came in black or white or dull 
shades. Now of every conceivable 
combination of colors, they are gav. 
flamboyant. Dresses in the modern 
style no longer include the "tapi/./" 
which only members of the older gen- 
eration still wear. Even this modern 
version of the native dress is being 
replaced by the short Western dress, 
especially in die schools and offices, 
where it is less expensive and more 
convenient. The native dress, how- 
ever, will not completely disappear, 
for it is a creation of beaut y and a 
real part of the Philippine tradi- 
tion. 




• 23 * 




FILIPINO AUTHOR 

By P. C- Morantte 



w HEN the winners of the First Commonwealth Literary 
Contest were announced on November 15, 1940, the 
Philippine public showed special interest in the prize 
entries. Letters from all over the Islands poured Into 
Malaeanan Palace, asking where copies of the books by 
the winning authors could be procured. 

Having been awarded a prize, I received my share of 
inquiries from those interested in reading my hook. 
Filipino Life. 1 had to admit to my correspondents — 
fellow writers, teachers, editors, students, librarians and 
one Assemblyman — that my work was still in manuscript 
form and that they would have to await publication be- 
fore they could read it. 

In order to meet the public clamor for the winning 
literary works, a number of authors who received sub- 
stantial cash awards were prompted to publish their own 
books. The result of their private ventures in the pub- 
lishing field was far from satisfactory* Success was 
literally impossible. For lack of capital, the author- 
publishers were forced to print only limited editions, 
which meant a high price per copy to meet production 
costs; the price being prohibitive, few books could reach 
the Filipino reading public. 

The i Philippine ) University Press and the Philippine 
Book Guild, both of which publish literary works in 
English, fared no better than the author-publishers did 
when they undertook the publication of some of the prize 
winners. 

Obviously, book publishing in the Philippines is a 
luxury. But it is a luxury that needs encouragement — 
intensive and extensive cultivation — if the basic purpose 
of the Commonwealth Literary Contests — "to help writ- 
ers to help themselves and put the nation on the cultural 
map of the world"' — is to be fully realized. This ultimate 
aim will not be realized if the winning authors use their 
cash prizes to publish their own works. They certainly 
make no m<>ne\ fur themselves. To the contrary, such 
ventures drain away the material resources of which all 
young writers are badly in need. Their hope of reaching 
the widest possible reading public is defeated by their 
complete lack of experience in the publishing field. 
Furthermore, writers who publish their own books are 
almost always regarded with suspicion by critics, despite 



the distinction their works have acquired through the 
Commonwealth Literary Contests. 

It is apparent, therefore, that our main problem is to 
have well-established publishing firms undertake the 
publication of winning literary works. Sue!) firms can 
give us a chance to make money and at the same time 
create an extensive reading public for their books. Un- 
fortunately, no such publishing house exists in the 
Philippines, particularly as far as publishers of English 
w o r ks a re Co 1 1 ce r n ed . 

For a satisfactory solution of ibis problem, I believe 
Filipino authors should turn to American publishers. 
For instance. New York, the recognized literary capital 
of the world, has numerous reputable book firms. Very 
probably, one of them could be interested in a contract 
to handle exclusively the publication of winning English 
entries in the Commonwealth Literary Contests, The 
Commonwealth Government or the Philippine Writers" 
League, or both, should take the lead in promoting such 
an arrangement. Perhaps a publisher's contract could be 
mafic part of the Contest prize. 

There is an alternative. A Filipino publishing house 
might be established in New York to deal exclusively 
with the publication of winning works in English (if it 
were feasible. Spanish and Tagalog works could be trans- 
lated into English. Loo). Should this firm be affiliated to 
an American publishing house of good standing— under 
conditions similar to those governing the business rela- 
tions of The Virginia Quarterly and E, P. Button & Co., 
Inc. or between The Atlantic Monthly and Little 
Brown & Co.— so much the better. But the main thing 
is to have the winning entries I especially in English ! 
published in America, Methods of furnishing capital 
could be worked out by, for instance, the Philippine Book 
Guild, which might act as sole distributing agency in the 
Philippines. A subsidy from the Commonwealth is not out 
of the question, though it is preferable to have the project 
in willing private hands. 

There are some compelling reasons why winning liter- 
ar> works should be published in America, It would have 
the great advantage of giving Filipino books a better 
rhanee of being read widely by Americans. Secondly, 
publi cation facilities are the best in the United States; 
book publishing is a highly specialized trade, involving 
wide experience, sound judgment, salesmanship, public- 
ity, and other attributes we still lack. Furthermore. 
Fili jiino writers would have a better opportunity of mak- 
ing a name for themselves in America. And with their 
names established, ihey could better express to the Ameri- 
can people the issue confronting the Philippine nation. 
Fourthly, with the help of distinguished American editors, 
the quality of Filipino writings would be improved im- 
mensely. Finally, the most effective way to put our na- 
tion on the cultural map of the world is to have excellent 
literary works by Filipino writers published in America. 
For America has now become the cultural center of the 
world, ^ 



• 24 • 





PLEASANT 
AROMA AND 
MELLOW 
FLAVOR IN 
EVERY 
PRICE 
RANGE 



Feature genuine Manila long- 
filled cigars for more repeat 
sales. Your customers will 
recognize at once the richer, 
milder flavor and aroma of 
famous Philippine tobacco, 
grown in the valleys of eter- 
nal summer and sunshine. 
Manilas give more smoking 
enjoyment and pleasure for 
the money. 



T^Jf PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

2362 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. Washington, D. C. 



