Commonwealth of the Philippines 
ARI,!Y HEADQUARTERS 

DEPARTI.EKT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE AND COMMUNICATIONS 



APO 501 

6 January, 1945. 



SUBJECT : Assignment 

TO j The Chief of Staff, Philippine Army, and 

Secretary of National Defense and Communications. 



1. Reruest that in addition to my present duties I be attached 
to the Office of the President for the following purposes: 

a. To coordinate the plan of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines for the rehabilitation of the communication 
system of the Philippines with that of the United States 

The telegraph lines and radio stations of the 
Bureau of Post will be reconstructed by the United 
States Army to the extent reruired by the military 
operetions. It is, therefore, highly necessary that 
the rehabilitation program of the Commonwealth Govern- 
ment in regards to the conmnmication system should tie 
in with the reconstruction work to be laidertaken by the 
United States Army on this communication system, 

b. To give official status to the plan that I am pre- 
paring for the complete rehabilitation of the govern- 
ment communication facilities. The Office of the Pre- 
sident has created a section to make E^lrvey8 of war 
damages and plans for their rehabilitation. By being 
officially connected with the Office of the President 
and directly functioning as part of it, my work auto- 
matically becomes the official plan of the section 
concerned . 

c. To utilize the technical staff, draftsmen and clerks 
of the War Damages Survey section of the Office of'the 
President for the purpose of making dla^amS, estimates 
and maps required in making the plan stated above. 



Lieutenant Colonel, 

Acting Chief Signal Officer 
Phi!) ippine Army 






• # 

Coranonwealth of the Philippines 
AEfiT HEADQUARTERS 

DEPART?.iENT OF HATIOHAL DEFENSE AND COJUUDNICATIONS 



APO 501 

6 January, 1945. 



SUBJECT : Assignment 

TO t The Chief of Staff, Philippine Army, and 

Secretary of National Defense and Communications. 



1, Reruest that in addAtion to my present duties I be attached 
to the Office of the President for the following purposes; 

a. To coordinate the plan of the Commonwealth of the 

. Philippines for the rehabilitation of the communication 
system of the Philippines with that of the United States 
Army. The telegraph lines and radio stations of the 
Bureau of Post will be reconstructed by the United 
States Army to the extent rerulred by the military 
operations. It is, therefore, highly necessary that 
the rehabilitation progrom of the Coraionrealth Govern- 
ment in regards to the ccmnunication system should tie 
in with the reconstruction work to be undertaken by the 
United States Army on this communication system. 

b. To give official status to the plan that I am pre- 
paring for the comrlete rehabilitation of the govern- 
ment communication facilities. The Office of the Pre- 
sident has created a section to make surveys of war 
damages and plans for their rehabilitation. By being 
officially connected ’rith the Office of the President 
and directly functioning as part of it, ory work auto- 
matically becomes the official plan of the section 
concerned. 

c. To utilize the technical staff, draftsmen and clerks 
of the War Damages Survey section of the Office of the 
President for the pvTpose of making diagrams, estimates 
and maps reruired in making the plan stated above. 




Lieutenant Colonel, Sig C 
Acting Chief Signal Officer 
Philippine Army 



