COMMONWEALTH OP THE PHILIPPINES 
Department of National Defense 




General 

No. 



Order ) 

1 ) 



Melbourne, Victoria 
April 15, 1942. 



AWARDS OP DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT STAR 



1. For extraordinary coolness in the face of danger, 
the DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT STAR of the Philippines is, by or- 
der of His Excellency, the President of the Philippines, 
hereby awarded to Lieutenant John D. Bulkeley, United States 
Navy. During the trip of the motor torpedo boat that trans- 
ported from Dumaguete, Negros Oriental to Oroquieta, Misamis, 

His Excellency, the President, his family, members of his Ca- 
binet and other members of his party, the heavy sea broke the 
retaining pins of both aft torpedoes leaving them partly out 
of the torpedo tubes and with their mechanism set into action. 
With extraordinary coolness he directed the immediate release 
of both torpedoes thus saving the persons on board the motor 
torpedo boat from an impending death. His timely action in 
holding Torpedoman, First Class, Houlihan prevented the latter 
from falling overboard while disengaging one of the torpedoes 
with a hammer. 

2. For extraordinary coolness in the face of danger, 
the DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT STAR of the Philippines is, by or- 
der of His Excellency, the President of the Philippines, 
hereby awarded to Ensign George E. Cox, Jr, United States 
Navy. During the trip of the motor torpedo boat that trans- 
ported from Dumaguete, Negros Oriental to Oroquieta, Misamis, 

His Excellency, the President, his family, members of his ca- 
binet and other members of his party, the heavy sea broke the 
retaining pins of both aft torpedoes leaving them partly out 
of the torpedo tubes and with their mechanism set into action. 
With extraordinary coolness he assisted in the immediate release 
of both torpedoes thus saving the persons on board the motor 
torpedo boat from an impending death. 

3. For extraordinary coolness in the face of danger, 
the DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT STAR of the Philippines is hereby 
awarded to Torpedoman, First Class, John L. Houlihan, United 



1 



States Navy. During the trip of the motor torpedo boat that 
transported from Dumaguete, Negros Oriental to Oroquieta, 
Misamis, His Excellency, the President of the Philippines, 
his family, members of his War Cabinet and other members of 
his party, the heavy sea broke the retaining pins of both aft 
torpedoes leaving them partly out of the torpedo tubes and with 
their mechanism set into action. With extraordinary coolness 
Torpedoman, First Class, Houlihan succeeded in disengaging the 
torpedoes thus saving the persons on board the motor torpedo 
boat from an impending death. 

4. For extraordinary coolness in the face of danger, 
the DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT STAR of the Philippines is hereby 
awarded to Chief Torpedoman James D. Light, United States 
Navy. During the trip of the motor torpedo boat that trans- 
ported from Dumaguete, Negros Oriental to Oroquieta, Misamis, 
His Excellency, the President of the Philippines, his family, 
members of his War Cabinet and other members of his party, 
the heavy sea broke the retaining pins of both aft torpedoes 
leaving them partly out of the torpedo tubes and with their 
mechanism set into action. With extraordinary coolness 
Chief Torpedoman Light succeeded in disengaging the torpedoes 
thus saving the persons on board the motor torpedo boat from 
an impending death. 




Secretary of National Defense 



