oomnuR iimLXoxHox corps ouisiiia school 



APO 501 
19 Sept 191*^ 



SUBJIKXT: Cotmter Intelligence Co'orae for 2nd Filipino Battalion. 

(2^ Aog te 16 Sept 19^) 

TO : Comanding Officer, H4lat CIO Bet, Hq USAPPB, APO 501 

1. The class ef 20 officers, and 30 enlisted men of the 2nd Filipino 
Bn eoiq)leted their Counter Intelligence Conrse at onr school with highly 
satisfactory results. 

2. For the first few days of the school there seemed to he doubt in 
the minds of some students as to how they could fit into the Counter Intel- 
ligence picture, hut as the class proceeded and it was shown to them how 
important a part they could play, throu^ the medixim of Counter Intelligence 
Corps, in the liberation of the Philippines and the restoration of a demo- 
cratic goremment in the Islands, they developed into the most attentive and 
receptive group that has yet attended the school. 

3. The Coaeanding Officer of the Battalion selected this group of stu- 
dents with the thought of extending the training to his unit. Consequently 
with the thought in mind of having the responsibility of passing on to the 
ether members of their organisation the vast amount of information that they 
were here to receive, they asked endless questions, took copious notes, and 
were oonstrinlly aski^ for more material to study. 

4. Klmeogra^ed outlines of most lectures were passed out to the stu- 
dents, together with other material which will aid them in instructing meis- 
bers of their Battalion, and it is thought that those in this grouu will suc- 
cessfully get across to their fellow soldiers the Job which the CIC has to 

do in the coming operations, and the pert that they will be likely to have in 
this work. 

0 

5* Our course for the Filipino Bn consisted of a straight CIC curricu- 
lum, although Tagalog was included as an additional subject for the American 
officers. The Bn has had extensive training in Infantry field work so the 
qualifying ef those who have the educational requirements as CIC personnel 
is not difficult. The laws which the CIC enforces were stressed, as well as 
observation and diserftptlon Investigation and report writing. 

6. Attention was likewise centered on investigative proeedxire, preserve 
ation of evidence, informants and informerssearches, selsrares, the law of ar- 
rest, and other subjeeta sqi^ertaining to the Philippines, which will have a 
direct bearing upon our duty as Counter Intelligence agents. Lectures and 
discussions were supplemented with training films. A rspressntative from 
each of the seven CIC CoAat Teams to date comltted, from the Admiralties to 



Sansapor, gore a talk on M« Bloaion and hov hit duty was parfonaod, 

7. Of particular intorest 1* the high morale existing among the offi- 
cers and men of this class. Op to the present, they explain, they had had ^ 
no definite mission assigned to the them except infantry. But now that they 
an outstanding job to do. keen coiQ)etition for key assignments is anticipated. 
All of those attending at Balmarosa were found to be highly enthused, eager 
for this type of duty, and to hare ability. This high enthusiasm may be 
attributed to the fact that the students represented every rank from the Bn 
commanding officer. It. Col. Sdwln L. Sallman, down to Private Andres de Gus- 
man. each showing an eq,ual interest in preparing himself for his future work. 

g. Staff members of the Counter Intelligence School are proceeding to 
jjpO 503, location of the 2nd Jillplno Bn, to assist the 00 in preparing his 
schsdules and pro j ecting the training. 

9, Graduation exercises were conducted 16 September 19 ^, with Major 
General Baeilio Taldee present*^he dlplonaa, and addressing the students and 
reminding them of their responsibilities to the governments of the Ghited 
States and the Philippines. Also the fact that their assignment to thp Counter 
Intelligence Corps ha.a placed them in a position to render an importav t service 
to their country. 



carl h. googbkx. 

Major, C. A. 0., 
Commandant. 



