FBOJPPINE DELEGAliilv 



r : u^.R.Kh'f,::: of r 'V: r..T' TK i'Af'JMc; KM.ATJOW. 



MONT T 





REPORT 
of the 
PHILIPPINE DELEGATION 
to the 

CONFERENCE OF THE INSTITUTE OF PACIFIC RELATIONS 

held at Mont Trenblant, Quebec, Canada 
December 4th to 14th, 1942 



Submitted to 

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON 
President of the Philippines 



Confidential 



C ONTI NT S 



Page 

I DELEGATES TO THE CONFERENCE 1-4 

II THEME AND PLAN OP DISCUSSIONS 4 - 6 

III OPENING SESSION 6-14 

Mr. Jessup*s Opening Statement 6 

lord Hailey*s Keynote Address 6-11 

Dr. Sze^ Remarks 11 - 13 

Commissioner Elizalde's Statement 13 - 14 

IV GROUP I ROUND TABLES 14 - 20 

Existing United Nations Machinery 15 - 60 

Atlantic Charter 17 - 19 

Third Party Control and Other Subjects 19 - 20 

V GROUP II REGIONAL ROUND TABLES 20 - 39 

A. China 20 " 2L > 

B. Japan 2 ^ " 28 

C. India 28 " 31 

D. Southeast Asia 31 - 35 

E. Other United Nations 35 - 39 



VI GROUP III TOPICAL ROUND TABLES 39 - 49 

A« Social and Demographic 40 - 41 

B. Economic 41 - 44 

C. Political and Military Questions 44 - 47 

D. Military and Political Problems 47 - 49 

VII FINAL SESSION AND BUSINESS MEETING 

OF THE INSTITUTE 49-53 

Final Plenary Meeting 49 - 51 

Report of the Secretariat 51 - 52 

Financial Report 52 - 53 

Board of Governors and Officers 53 

VIII COMMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS 54 - 67 

United Kingdom 54 - 56 

United States 56 - 58 



58 - 59 

59 - 62 
62 - 63 



India 
China 

Netherlands 

Malayan Confederation 63 - 65 

Canada, Australia, and New Zealand 65 - 66 

Philippines 66 " 67 

APPENDIX A 

The Development of American-Philippine 
Relations by J. M, Elizalde, Resident 
Commissioner of the Philippines to the 
United States 



January 19, 1943 



His Excellency, 

Manuel L. (Quezon, 

President of the Philippines, 
Shorehani Hotel, 

Washington, D. C. 



Sir: 

Pursuant to your instructions, the Philippine 
Delegation, composed of the Honorable J. fit* Elizalde, 
Chairman, the Honorable Francis Burton Harrison, Dr. 
Arturo B. Rotor, Mr. Sebastian Ugarte, and Mr. Urbano 
A. Zafra, attended the Eighth Conference of the Institute 
of Pacific Relations, held at Mont Tremblant, Quebec, 
Canada, during the period from December 4 - 14, 1942, 
both dates inclusive. 

The following report of the observations made 
by the members of the Delegation during the delibera- 
tions of the Institute is respectfully submitted to 

Your Excellency. 

I. DELEGATES TO THE CONFERENCE 
The conference was attended by approximately 
two hundred persons from twelve countries which are 
either situated on the Pacific Basin or have major 
interests in the Pacific area. Many of the delegates 
are recognized leaders in their respective countries 
and have held high government positions. The follovang 
were chairmen of the different delegations: 



- 2 - 



Australia 

R. J. F. BOYER. Member of the Australian 
Broadcasting Commission since January, 
1940. Director of the American Division 
of the Commonwealth Department of In- 
formation, 1941. President, Graziers' 
Federal Council of Australia. Member, 
Commonwealth Meat Commission. Australian 
Delegate to League of Nations Assembly, 
1939. 

Canada 

EDGAR J. TARR. President, Monarch Life 
Assurance Company. Director, Bank of 
Canada. Honorary President, Canadian 
Institute of International Affairs. 
Chairman, Program Committee of the 
Mont Tremblant Conference. 

China 

SAO-KE ALFRED SZE. Acting Chairman, China 
Defense Supplies, Inc. Minister of 
Communications, 1912. Formerly Ambassa- 
dor to London and Washington. Head of 
the Chinese Delegation to the Washington 
Conference, 1921-22. Chief Delegate to 
the Opium Conference. Chief Delegate 
to the Assembly of the League of Nations, 

1931. 

India 

SIR A. RAMASWAMI MUDALIAR , E. C. S. I. 
Member, Madras Legislative Council, 
1920-26 and parliamentary secretary, 
1920-23. Mayor, Corporation of Madras, 

1928- 1929. Member Council of State, 

1929- 30. Member and Deputy Leader 

of the Opposition, Indian Central Legis- 
lative Assembly, 1930-34- Member, 
Indian Round Table Conference, 1930^1933. 
Member, Indian Tariff Board, 1935;36. 
Member India Council, London, 1936-39. 
Indian Delegate, Nine Power Conference, 
Brussels, 1937. Member, Imperial 
Economic Committee, London, 1936-39. 
Commerce Member, Government of India, 
1939-42. Member, British War Cabinet 
and Pacific War Council, London, 1942. 



- 3 - 



Korea 



YOUNG-HILL KANG. Principal Economic Analyst, 
Board of Economic Warfare. Professor, 
Department of English, New York University 
(on leave of absence) and staff member, 
Metropolitan Museum of Art (on leave of 
absence). Formerly, Editorial staff 
member of Encyclopedia Britannica. 
Guggenheim Foundation Fellow on Creative 
Literature, 1933-35. Author: "The Grass 
Roof," "The Eappy Grove", "East Goes West." 



Netherlands-Netherlands Indie s 



RADEN LOEKMAN DJAJADININGRAT . Director of 
the Department of Education and Public 
Worship. Member of the Board for the 
Netherlands Indies, Surinam and Curacao 
in the United States. Held several 
positions at the Department of Education 
and Public Worship in Batavia. Elected 
Deputy for the Province of West Java. 

Fighting French 

PAUL RIVET. Formerly Professor at the Paris 
Museum and head of the "Musse de 1' Homme" 
in Paris, 1928-40. Head of the Ethnolo- 
gical Institute of Colombia (Bogota). 



New Zealand 



WALTER NASE. New Zealand Minister to the 
United States, and New Zealand's Member 
of the Pacific War Council, Washington. 
Member of the New Zealand House of 
Representatives since 1929, of the 
Cabinet as Minister of Finance, since 
December, 1935, and of the War Cabinet 
since its formation in July, 1940. 



Philippines 



JOAQUIN Ui ELIZALDE. Resident Commissioner 
of the Philippines to the United States. 
Chairman, Elizalde & Co., Inc. industrial- 
ists and financiers. Member, Joint 
Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs 
and Chairman of the Sub-committee on 
Finance, 1937. Philippine Delegate to 
the International Sugar Conference, 



* 4 - 



■London, 1938-42. Major, Cavalry Reserve , 
Philippine Army. Resident Commissioner 
of the Philippines to the United States 
since September 29, 1938. Member of the 
Cabinet, Commonwealth of the Philippines 
since 1941. Member of the War Cabinet, 
1942. 

Thailand 

M. R. SLNI PRAMOJ. Free Thai Minister to 
the United States. 

Other distinguished delegates included Captain 
L. L>. Ganmans, Member of the British Parliament; A. C. 
Jones, Labor Member of the British Parliament; Air Chief 
Marshall -^ongmore, Inspector General of the Royal Air 
Force until he retired in 1942; Owen Lattirnore, Political 
Adviser to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek; and Senator 
Elbert D. Thomas from Utah. 

There were also several eminent economists, social 
and labor leaders who attended the Conference as "observers" 
for the International Labour Office, League of Nations, 
Carnegie Corporation and the Rockefeller Foundation. 
II. Tiilh. r AND PLAN 01' DISCUSSIONS 

The main purpose of the Conference was to answer 
the following questions: 

(1) "What steps can jointly or severally be taken 
by the United Nations (particularly those 
with major interests in the Pacific area) 
to aid in the better prosecution of the war 
and in the establishment of conditions of 
racial, political and economic justice and 
welfare?" 



- 5 - 

(2) "How far and by what means can the conclusions 
drawn from the discussions under point (1) 
be made the basis of a practical program 
for the United Nations during and after the 
war?" 

In seeking answers to these questions, the Conference 
examined specific problems in a succession of round table 
discussions, arranged in three groups: Group I - General 
Round Tables; Group II - Regional Round Tables; and 
Group III - Topical Round Tables. 

In addition to the regular round tables, there 
were three special round table discussions: (1) Special 
Round Table on the U.S.S.R.; (2) Special Round Table 
on North West North America; and (3') Special Round Table 
on Relief Problems in Southeast Asia. 

The proceedings of each regular round table were 
kept by stenographers and became the basis of a report 
by a rapporteur to a plenary session called for this 
purpose at the end of each round table meeting. The 
proceedings of the special round tables were not re- 
ported , 

To assist the delegates in their participation 
in the round table discussions, the Secretariat of the 
Institute had distributed pamphlets, documents and other 
literature prepared by experts. Moreover, the Institute 
had made available to the delegates its library which 
contained very comprehensive material on the Pacific 

Area. 



- 6 - 

Under the rules and regulations of the Institute, 
the sessions and round table discussions were conducted 
strictly in an informal and private manner. No conclusions 
or opinions were made on any specific questions or issues; 
in the reporting of the deliberations of the Conference, 
personal references were avoided; and no information was 
given to the press on any matters or subjects discussed 
at the Conference* These rules and regulations were 
adopted to protect delegates from any embarrassments in 
their respective countries, 

III - OPENING SESSION 

The Conference was formally opened at a plenary 
session in the afternoon of Friday, December 4, 1942 

iKR* JESSUP , IBS Philip C, Jessup, chairman of 
the Conference and Chairman of the United States Dele- 
gation welcomed the delegates and spoke briefly on the 
main issues and problems -before the Conference. He 
stressed the fact that the Conference was strictly an 
informal gathering of students in Pacific and Inter- 
national Affairs and that no press releases would be 
issued or resolutions passed on any of the questions 
discussed. He urged each delegate to participate 
freely in the round table discussions and thus con- 
tribute to an intelligent analysis $na examination of 
war-time and post-war problems. 

LO RD HAIL^Y . Lord Eailey, chairman of the United 
Kingdom Delegation, delivered the keynote address of the 



- 7 - 

Convention. 

Coming from an unofficial spokesman for the British 
Empire, representing perhaps the popular consensus of 
sentiment among the English people and undoubtedly the 
views of the British Government, Lord Hailey's statement 
was received with great interest. It provided the leads 
to the discussions that followed in the Round Tables. Eere 
are the highlights of his address. 

The necessity of attaining collective security as 
a prerequisite to the attainment of the Kour ii'reedoms 
was stressed at the outset by Lord Kailey, saying, 
"Without it the promise of freedom can only be illusory." 

Referring to China, Lord Kailey stated that the 
United States and the United Kingdom had agreed to give 
up completely without reservation all their extra- 
territorial rights in China and that the large British 
Investments there would not be an impediment to the 
abolition of extra-territoriality . 

The future status of Hongkong should, in the 
opinion of Lord Kailey, depend on the general settle- 
ment to be made between China and the members of the 
Pacific group. On this subject he said: 

"In my view, the future of Hongkong must 
denend on the general settlement to be maae 
between China ind the members of the Pacific 
„ ! to whom I shall afterwards refer as to 
??p Provisions of key points to be maintained 
the P rov ^J° n ^ f security and for the continuance 
f S r pU ^?ftrade Sere should be no disposition 
on tlfpart of ?he United Kingdom to allow 

Ha interests to stand in the way of any 
V ni?S?oal disposition of Hongkong which a due 
^charge of Its functions in this respect may 
indicate." 



- 8 - 

Lord Hailey considered the problem of the 

Chinese emigration as a matter for settlement by the 

combined nations, saying as follows: 

"Restoration of peace to China will 
doubtless restore that upward surge of population 
figures which marked her pre-war history* The 
problem of emigration will reassert itself not 
only in regard to Mongolia and Aianchuria, but 
in regard to a large number of overseas areas , 
both sovereign and dependencies. It is not 
only the sovereign states such as the United 
States and the British Dominions which have a 
nationalistic outlook in this question. The 
people of Burma, Malaya, the Netherlands Indies 
and the Philippines all have their national- 
istic or racial outlook on it* They view, and 
are entitled to view, the matter with, concern. 
Here again is a matter which it will, perhaps, 
be difficult to leave to individual action, and 
which demands the combined counsels and the 
guidance of some intermediate authority. !T 

Turning to Japan, Lord Hailey stated that Japan 

must surrender the territory she had seized since about 

1930 onwards. However, he said that neither the 

neighboring countries nor the rest of the v/orld could 

afford to forego the consumer market represented by 

the seventy-eight million Japanese who should be allowed 

to exist without any serious reduction in their standard 

of living. As a safeguard against placing Japan in 

the same undeserved position of advantage as Germany 

held at the end of the last war, when she organized 

her industries at the expense of the other countries, 

thrown out of industrial gear by the war, Lord Hailey 



saia: 



8-A 



proposed that part of Japan's industrial equipment 
be handed over to China or to some of her neighbors 
To wean her back to the family of nations, Lord 
Hailey believed that Japan should have full access 
for her light industries to the world markets in 
accordance with the spirit of the Atlantic Charter 
and Article VII of the Lend-Lease Agreement. But 
this, as Lord Hailey pointed out, would involve 
sacrifice of the British quota system and the re- 
duction of tariffs in the British Dominions and in 
the United States. 

In discussing the problems of Southeastern 
Asia, Lord Kailey made a very significant proposal 
which was considered by most delegates as con- 
structive and liberal in the light of past British 
colonial policy. He began with the statement that 
post-war settlement must see the liberation of 
the peoples in Southeast Asia and that, if cir- 
cumstances required some protection and tutelage 
in the meantime, their liberation should be 
guaranteed at a determined date. 

Cn this point, Lord Hailey said: 



- 9 - 



"It is wrong that the existence of control 
in the hands of the ruling power should enable 
it to claim a privileged position for Its own 
nationals at the expense either of the people 
of a dependency or of those of the outside 
world. It is maintained in consequence that 
the post-war settlement must see the liberation 
of dependent peoples from the control exercised 
over them. If circumstances require that some 
protection and tutelage should be given them 
until they can stand by themselves, it must be 
accompanied by a guarantee of their liberation 
at a determined date, and safeguarded by the 
supervision of some organization, international 
or otherwise, which will see that the protect- 
ing power performs its obligation both to the 
people ruled and to the civilized world at 
large." 

On the question of the preparation of certain 

dependencies of the Eritish Empire for self-government, 

Lord Hailey referred to the Philippines as an exceptional 

case, in the following vein: 

"It was very seldom indeed that any of 
those dependent units has presented a basis 
on which any system of self-government could 
be erected. America found such a basis in the 
Philippines; but every student of Colonial 
history acknowledges that this was an excep- 
tional experience. We have sought, therefore, 
to promote a graded education in self-government 
by the triple process of establishing institu- 
tions of local self-government by the progressive 
substitution of natives of the country for the 
European element in the official administration, 
and by the creation of legislatures which at the 
outset are only of a representative character, 
but are given increasing responsibility as their 
capacity develops." 

He emphasized the fact that there is today a new 
outlook in Great Britain on the relations of the dependen- 
cies to the British Empire and that this new outlook has 
for its ultimate objective the partnership between the 



mother country and the dependency. Here are hi 



- 10 - 



"There is now in Great Britain a general 
acceptance given to a new outlook on this aspect 
of our relations with the Dependencies. Where 
the issue of political status arises, the ruling 
conception must he that of partnership. If at 
the outset the relationship is that of senior 
and junior partners, that is a situation which 
can and must adjust itself as the experience 
and capacity of the junior partner grows." 

To give effect to his proposal for self-government 

for the dependencies, Lord Hailey suggested the creation 

of a Council for the Pacific Zone, the functions and 

composition of which he explained in the following words: 

"I suggest that there should he created a 
Council for the Pacific Zone, consisting of the 
representatives of the sovereign powers concerned. 
It" would have a double function. It would, in 
the first place be the local agency of whatever 
organization may be established by the United 
Powers for safeguarding the peace of ^sia in 
common with other parts of the world. The pres- 
ervation of peace demands, as I have already 
observed, not merely the provision of air, naval 
and military forces, but of a wide range of civil 
activities ancillary to them. These civil 
activities would be the direct charge of the 
Pacific Zone Council. 

"Its second function would be to secure, 
bv loint consultation, and by cooperative action, 
a common policy, so far as may be, in the economic 
development and of the tariff and customs arrange- 
ments within this Zone. It would maintain a 
technical staff, available for advising the ad- 
ministrations concerned, on health, agriciuture, 
economic or cultural problems. It would be the 
a^enc^ through which areas unable to finance 
their ov/n development, would obtain the 
assistance required. It would receive regular 
reports from the different national aominist ra- 
tions in the area, and be empowered to require 
information and explanation from them. It 



- 11 - 



would receive regular reports from the different 
national administrations in the area, and be em- 
powered to require information and explanation from 
them* It would finally - and I desire to empha- 
size this point - he charged with the periodic 
review of the progress made in the promotion of 
self-governing institutions in the Dependencies, 
and in the improvement of their standard of living." 

DH«. SZE ^ following Lord Hai ley's address, Dr. 
Sze, speaking on "behalf of China, expressed the hope that 
the post-war settlement would include: (l) abolition of the 
"unequal treaties" imposed upon China; (2) return of terri- 
tories and possessions taken from China; (3) security against 
foreign aggression; and (4) end of discrimination against 
Chinese nationals in foreign countries. 

On the abolition of the "Unequal Treaties" Dr. Sze 



"In the forefront of China's expectation is 
the determination that she shall henceforth be 
completely freed from those limitations upon the 
full and free exercise of her sovereign rights 
which, in the past, have been imposed upon her 
by what are known as the "Unequal Treaties*" These 
treaties, which include a great variety of agree- 
ments or alleged agreements, have been termed 
"unequal," because they have created rights and 
interests upon the part of other nations within 
China without reciprocal rights and interests 
accruing to China in those other nations- Con- 
spicuous among the foreign rights in China of 
which I speak are the extraterritorial or juris- 
dictional rights," 

Dr. Sze then went on to say that, because of her weakness, 

China had lost control of some of her territories and 

therefore, f, it is but reasonable and just that when the 

present war is victoriously ended, she should expect the 

return of such of her possessions as have been taken from 



her by the threat of force-" 



Notwithstanding China's experiences with the League 

of Nations, Dr. Sze believed China would support all measures 

for the creation of a new world order as a means of attaining 

security against foreign aggression, saying: 

"China's experiences with the League of Nations 
have not been uniformly happy, but she is aware that 
the failures of the League in the field of inter- 
national political relations have been due not so 
much to the structur e of the League as to the un- 
willingness of its dominant Members to subordinate 
what appeared to them to be their immediate national 
interests to the greater interest of world order, 
It is believed by China that, when the present war 
is over, the victorious United Nations will have a 
fuller realization than they have previously had 
that an international organization must be establish- 
ed which will have adequate authority and power for 
the maintenance cf world peace and justice." 

Dr. Sze touched upon the treatment of Chinese 

nationals in foreign countries with these words: 

"Another matter of deep concern to our people 
is the treatment of the many Chinese residing and 
doing business in foreign countries and in the 
various territories in the Southeastern Pacific. 
China is deeply solicitous for the welfare of 
these people, and this concern is increased because 
of the great and loyal support the nation has re- 
ceived from them for over five long years m which 
she has been fighting Japan. It is certain then 
in the post-war years to come that China vail 
make every effort to end any discrimination in 
anv part of the world against her nationals on 
account of their race. In short, while not asking 
for any special favors for them, China will ask 
that they be treated by other powers on as favor- 
able terms as are other resident or traveling 
Aliens It is believed that this expectation is 
in conformity with the general principle of equality 
of treatment of all nations. 

Stating that the people of China were anxious 
to see the immediate effectuation of the principles of 



the 



n Ph«-ftPr Dr. Sze closed his remarks in the 

Atlantic Charter, 



following vein: 



- 13 - 



"There is a widespread desire in China to 
see put into practice at an early date some of 
these ideas and ideals, inherent in the principles 
of the Atlantic Charter, before there is a chance 
for them to become cold. For example, there is a 
proposal for the formation of an Executive Council 
of the United Nations. It is hoped that such a 
body will bring about greater unification and 
closer cooperation in the formulation of a more 
effective war strategy, a clearer understanding 
of war aims and a more regular exchange of 
views on the post-war world for which we are 
fighting and working. It is further hoped that 
such a body may also help to evolve an inter- 
national instrument capable of dispensing justice 
and enforcing law and order in the post-war world. " 



OOIfoHSSIOHER TCLIZALDE . On behalf of the Philippines, 
the Honorable J. Iff* Elizalde, Resident Commissioner of 
the Philippines to the United States, submitted a state- 
ment entitled "Development of American-Philippine Re- 
lations" which was distributed to the delegates on the 
opening day of the Conference. Commissioner Elizalde 
concluded his statement with the following words: 



"As I said before, the Independence Act 
passed 'in 1934 provides for the absolute and 
complete independence of the Philippines not 
later than July 4th, 1946. Y/hen the present 
war started, we were in the process of an 
economic adjustment intended to prepare us 
for the time when our preferential trade 
otatus with the United States would cease, 
and our foreign commerce w&Uld become more 
extended . 

t'Witto the occupation of our country, 
al l these plans were disrupted 

ff Sa^MIoe 'maL possible 'the 
that is that gggg^ r . on and hls VTar 

cXnet r ?ro! tSe Philippines, thas permitting 



- H - 



establishment of his Government in the United 
States to carry on the functions of our Govern- 
ment from Washington. Its most important duty 
today, however, is to continue the fight ana to 
assure the prompt liberation of our country 
from the hands of the invader, at the earliest 
practicable time. 

"When this has been attained and our liberty- 
has been established, our Government will co- 
operate with other peoples of the world, and 
particularly with the peoples of the Pacific, 
in the support of measures upon which future 
world relations must be founded. 

"We expect, therefore, to take full part 
in such councils as may be held to attain tins 
purpose and expect also our country s repre- 
sentation will be commensurate both with our 
status and with our contribution to this world 
struggle 

The members of the Philippine delegation reiterate 
the above statements at every opportunity in the round 
tables as well as in the plenary sessions. It was 
gratifying to note the sympathetic reaction of the 
delegates to this Philippine attitude. 

The Opening Session was followed by a dinner 
giTe n by the Canadian Delegation, at which all the 
Chairmen of the various delegations, including 
Commissioner «**M* -re revested to give brief 



remarks* 



IV „ rr^EL T pnTTTTO TABL " S 

• , riav Saturday, December 5, the 
On the following day, -a 



- 15 - 



delegates were divided into four round tables, each of which 
was given for discussion a set of nine questions on general 
war-time and post-war issues and problems. The purpose of 
these preliminary discussions was to give emphasis to those 
specific issues or questions which should be given further 
consideration in the succeeding round table discussions. 

The adequacy of existing United Nations machinery 
was the first question considered. It was brought out that 
the existing machinery consisted of the following: 

(A) Pacific War Council . This is composed 
of the United States, United Kingdom, China, 
Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the Netherlands and 
the Philippine Commonwealth. It was pointed out 
that India, while a member of the Pacific ;Var 
Council which sits in London, was not a memoer ot 
the Pacific War Council which sits in Washington, 
and which, to all intents, had superseded tne 
London body. India, however, was frequently con- 
sulted by the Council through its representative 
in Washington. It was also pointed out that the 
U.S.S.H., while not a member of the Council, was 
also consulted by it. 

(B) ■ T ni + *"ng_^g™ ents ^oard, the Combined 
r^n.intio a and Resources ho&ru , Combined 
•--Mpr.i n.q- ■allocati on boara, uombinea Jooa 
Board. Combined Saw Materials Boaro.. 

All f i ve of triese agencies were described as 

to them arose. 

tn\ p^hinP(i Chiefs of Staffs. This body, 

(C) -^S?i£ a Britis h and iumuHMM organization, 
again P^J^J JJ t £i. £ Washington. Other members 
holds regular ^etings in fi i?ectly representea 
of the J^JuLSS their representatives in 
Washington. o^era ^ 3outh gagt 

S wesf Pacific, is well Known. 



- 16 - 

(L) Various liodies for Information . It was 
indicated that there was now effective coordination 
of information between United States and Great 
Britain and that serious efforts were under way 
to secure the same coordination between the United 
States and China. Coordination among other members 
of the United Nations was presumably undeveloped. 

(E) Diplomatic Channels . The members of the 
British Commonwealth, maintained their own special 
Commonwealth channels which were part of the exist- 
ing United Nations machinery for carrying out the 
war in the Pacific. 

Criticisms were heard on these bodies, namely: 
(1) the unsatisfactory functioning of the Lend-Lease 
machinery as far as India was concerned and here a 
specific example was cited of a high-power short wave 
radio station which India had for more than two years been 
requesting from the United States and with regard to which 
no deliveries had yet been made; (2) the problems arising 
from the fact that no United Nations body is located in or 
near tne actual theatre of military operations in the 
Pacific war and that, further, the Pacific Council and 
other parts of the machinery are not sufficiently responsive 
to immediate needs; and (3) the delegate illustrated the 
latter point by indicating the well known ignorance existing 
in the United States with respect to India and the similar 
situation in India with respect to the United States. 

The following suggestions were offered to correct 
,he above difficulties: (1) establishment of an Allied 

•n o subsidiary of the Pacific War Council 
War Council as a suosiaia^ 

t ,4o. (2) a more effective Lend-Lease aid; 
in or near India J UJ a - flUi 

. Mrm of information and propaganda, 
and (3) coordination oi 



- 17 - 

Atlantic Charter 
Of all the questions presented before the conference 
that of the application of the Atlantic Charter provoked the 
oiost heated discussion, no^ only in these round tables but 
*lso in the succeeding ones and even in the final session. 
Members of the Canadian, Australian, New Zealand and the 
United States delegations were most vocal in pressing the 
question to the British delegates of whether the Atlantic 
Cnarter means the same thing to the british as it did to 
the people in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the United 
States. Typical of the questions asked were: Does the 
British Government believe that the Atlantic Charter applies 
to all people? Do the British interpret it as applying 
only to the European theatre of the war ana not to the 
people of Asia? Have the various Churchill statements 
indicated serious qualifications? Did the speech made 
by the leader of the British delegation at the opening 
of this Conference indicate an attitude on his part and 
on the part of the other members of the delegation similar 
to that alleged to be held by Mr. Churchill? 

One Churchill statement referred to was that he 

.p^-r. thp qi^ning of the Atlantic 
made three montns after the Signing 

Charter in the Eouse of Commons when he said: 

♦ 4-i .m-M^ meeting we had in mind 
«At the &l*f n ll t f* %FMe sovereignty, 
primarily the restoration 01 life of the States 
f elf -government and the Nazi yoke, 

and Nations °? J^ 0 ^ erniri g any alteration 
and the principles govern ^ ^ ^ 

in the terriooiial °o & separate prob- 

to D e made ^ O ^f ssive "evolution of the 
lem from the pro 0 i 



- 13 - 



self-governing institutions in tne regions and 
peoples which owe allegiance to the British 
Grown." 

In another statement, Prime Minister Churchill 
referred to this document in the following vein: 

"The Joint declaration does not qualify 
in any way the various statements of policy 
which have been made from time to time about 
the development of constitutional goye rnment 
in India, Burma, or other parts of the British 
Empire. tfe are pledged by the declaration ox 
Xt, 1940, to help India to obtain free and 
equal partnership in the British Commonwealth 
with ourselves, subject, of course, to the ful- 
fillment of obligations arising from our fong 
connection with India and our responsibilities 
to its many free races ana interests. 

In addition to these statements, Churchill re- 
cently was quoted as saying at the Mansion Rouse in 
London to the effect that he had not become the Prime 
minister of the Empire to preside over tne liquidation 
of the British Empire and that "what we have we hold." 

Under Secretary of State Hells, on the other 
hand, referred to the Atlantic Charter with these words: 
^principles of the Atlantic Charter must be guaranteed 
to the world as a whole - in all oceans and in all 

continents." 

One of the Indian delegates stated that Mr. 
Churchill is a master of the English language and, if 
* had wanted to, he could have used such simple wards 
in interpreting the Atlantic Charter as to leave no 
doubt about what he meant. 

However, the British group insisted that the 

4, world wide in its application without 
Atlantic Charter is world win 



- 19 - 

any geographic limit and that there are no British res- 
ervations whatsoever with regard to its applicability and 
that the principles of the Atlantic Charter refer specifi- 
cally to India and Burma. Moreover, they said that public 
opinion in the House of Commons and in Great Britain as a 
whole is irrevocably committed to the application of the 
Charter to India and Burma after the war. 

Third Party Control and Other Subjects 
Out of the discussion on the applicability of the 
Atlantic Charter, came a proposal for a third party adminis- 
tration of peoples still unprepared to govern themselves. 
The proposal consisted of either one of two categories: 

(1) A commission appointed by the United Nations 
to oversee the administration of the colonies 
by their present rulers; or 

(2) In International Body to which the sovereignty 
of the present rulers is entrusted for tne pur- 
pose of preparing the colonies for self-govern- 
ment , 

On the question of propaganda, it was pointed out 
that lack of candor and information leads to rumors which 
are helpful to the enemy and damaging to the morale of the 
peoole in the United Nations. It was deplored tnat those 
Wfco Know are not consulted. The broadcasts to The Nether- 
lands indies were referred to as example of this, whereby 

a* in low class Javanese language when 
the broadoasts were mane in low oiaas 

those wh0 owned radios belong to tne high class Javanese and 
therefore did not understand the radio dialect. 

o flincussion on the effects of the 
There was some ni sous si on 

+ q in the pacific War upon race relations in 
developments m ^ne r<* 

_ les jt was anticipated that the 
the Pacific countries. 



- 20 - 

principle of restriction of immigration would be accepted 
by all parties but applied without racial distinction. 

The discussions in this Group I Round Table ended 
with the consideration of the post-war mutual economic 
relations of the countries of the Pacific. It was recog- 
nized that the end of the war will find all the nations in 
a state of almost hopeless economic unbalance and that the 
adjustment must be made through some international organiz- 
ations or machinery. 

V - GROUP II REGIONAL ROUND TABLES 

Group II was divided into five regional round 
tables: (A) China , including "occupied" China, Manchuria, 
and Hongkong; (B) Japan , including Korea, Formosa and the 
Mandated Islands; (C) India ; (D) Southeast Asia , including 
the Netherlands Indies, Philippines, Indo-China, Thailand, 
Burma, British Malaya and British Borneo; and (15) Other 
United Nations, including the United States, U.S.S.R., 
United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Netherlands, 
Pighting Prance and Mexico. Three days, December 6, 7, and 
8, were allotted to each regional round table for the dis- 
cussion of its own set of questions. 

A. CHINA . 

The outstanding fact repeatedly emphasized in this 
round table was the . "desperate" military and economic 
position of China today which, the members deplored, was 
not given the proper attention it deserved. For this . 



- 21 - 



latter fact the natural preoccupation of the western powers 
with the menace of Nazi Germany was responsible. It was 
repeatedly made clear by Chinese speakers that they did not 
wish to advocate the merits of the China front against any 
other, but rather to expound its proper position in global 
strategy. 

In general, it was agreed that China offered the 
best base for counter attack against Japan, possessing 
as she did a war-hardened army of three millions, and 
offering the possibility of securing land, air and sea 
bases from which blows might be struck at the very heart 
of Japan. However, use of China as such at present is 
considered gravely reduced as a result of the loss of 
Burma. Consequently, the only really effective means of 
supplying China would be to reopen the Burma Road. In 
the light of this discussion it was felt that the re- 
capture of Burma should rank high in the list of military 
priorities, some speakers placing it second in importance 
to the North African campaign. 

Repeatedly the round table was reminded of the 
danger of letting Japan make her dispositions unchecked 
wfalle the western powers disposed of unfinished ousiness 

Tt was felt most important to keep Japan 
in Europe. It wab xcx^ 

■K^t qhe mis-ht not consolidate her 
"off balance" so tnat she *ugi 

^...nt politicai or MXltary position: — she 
would he aoie to eonsoiihate her gains anh « 

„, fort to such an extent that she 
strengthen her war effort 



- 22 - 



to such, an extent that she might prolong the war in the 
Pacific indefinitely. 

It was expressed by the Chinese delegation, in no 
uncertain terras, that the one marked difficulty which 
prevented the China front from being seen in its true 
perspective was the lack of adequate machinery for co- 
ordinating the war effort on all fronts. At present China 
had no representation on the numerous boards in Washington 
for allocating raw materials, shipping and munitions. These 
remained of an Anglo American character. It was remarked 
that to some officials in Washington aid to China appeared 
to be placed on a relief and humanitarian basis rather than 
for sound military reasons. The combined Chiefs of Staff 
Committee, the real center of Allied strategy, remained 
^nglo-American in composition. It meets about once a 
month with the military, naval and air missions of some 
Other United Nations for the purpose of presenting infor- 
mation r.ther than for discussion. Such meetings were 
unsatisfactory both from their unwieldy nature and from 
their technique. Because of these conditions a feeling 

+ Q nn nnr ertainty was being created in 
of disappointment ana uncer^m j 

, if unchecked, might tend to destroy 

Chinese circles wnich, it uncne 

Tt was hard for a Chinese soldier who 
mutual confidence. It was nara 

vainly scanned the skies for ten 
had for five years v^inxy 

protection to hear of a thousana- 
olanes to give him some protection 

/ on Cologne and other Axis cities in Europe, 
plane raid upon Cologne 

, +4ese , if ficulties, it was suggested that a 
To remeay these 



- 3.3 - 

a United Nations Council consisting of the United States, 
the United Kingdom, Soviet Russia and China, be formed 
to draw up war plans and to allocate supplies on a 
global basis. One stumbling block to this proposal is 
the fact that Soviet Russia has definitely stated, that 
she will not participate in any act of commission or 
omission that could be construed as violating the terms 
of her neutrality with Japan. 

Not only is China facing a difficult situation 
on the battlefield but also on the home front. Although 
Chinese nationalism had rapidly increased during the war 

inorale remained high, economic difficulties were 
rapidly increasing until there was a real danger of 
what has been called in China "hyper-inflation." The 
lack of goods and the expansion of currency had forced 
her into a period of inflation, with note circulation 
increased fifteen times While prices had risen sixty 
times. In these circumstances the intellectual, the 
civil servant and the professional man suffered most. 
As an instance, rice in pre-war China used to cost $5 
or 36 a picul: the price was now $600 in Chungking and 
from fSOO to $1,000 in Shanghai. 

Faced by these desperate difficulties on the 
military and economic front it was hard for China to 
consider in detail post-war policies of reconstruction. 
One thing was certain. The Chinese Government was de- 
termined never again to be dependent upon a Burma 



- 24 - 

Aoad for its armaments. It therefore planned in the 
post-war period to establish heavy industries for 
munitions purposes in the interior. Jfor their creation 
it would require both domestic and foreign capital, 
always provided that no attempt was made to infringe 
on Chinese sovereignty. In reconstructing China the 
Government expected to receive as war indemnity the 
industrial plant controlled by Japan in Manchuria and 
elsewhere . 

In the political sphere of post -war reconstruction 
China was prepared to enter into any effective system of 
collective security, whether universal or regional, 
despite her disillusioning experience with the League 
of Nations. But, above all, China expected adequate 
recognition cf her strength and importance in the jfar 

B. JAPAN . 

In this round table, the first part of the dis- 
cussions centered on the prosecution of the war against 
Japan. In the field of political warfare, the effective 
ness of propaganda, not only to the people in Japan 
proper "out also |q the peoples in occupied areas was 
recognized. While there was some skepticism of any 
breakdown of Japanese morale, in advance of the collapse 
of the Japanese Army, it was believed that the United 
Nations should do everything they can to soften up the 
Japanese, to confuse them, to undermine their confidence 



- 25 - 

in the success of Japanese arms by telling the truth 
about Japan's defeats, to appeal to war weariness and 
stimulate the hope of their decent treatment following 
a United Nations victory. It was suggested that a United 
Nations Board be created to unify and coordinate a political 
warfare and to formulate a positive policy regarding the 
treatment of a defeated Japan and the rehabilitation of 
the conquered peoples. 

Attention was called to a grave problem which has 
arisen with respect to the treatment of Japanese in the 
United States and in Canada. It was pointed out that in 
the United States Japanese nationals have been evacuated 
from California and sent to eastern states, notwithstanding 
the fact that these Japanese are American citizens. It 
was also pointed out that in Canada, Canadian nationals 
of Japanese birth, who were previously allowed to volunteer 
into a separate unit, had been disbanded and that a move- 
ment is now being made to repatriate all Japanese in 

Canada after the war. 

It was recognized that any discrimination against 
one minority is potentially a threat to all minorities 
and the treatment meted to the Japanese would provide 
a precedent for all minorities and therefore give cause 
for vengeance and retaliation in their countries of 
origin, moreover, such a discriminatory action against 

, ka Tinited states and in Canada contributes 
the Japanese m the United era* 

- tn their own people and the peoples 
powerful propaganda to tneir aw 



in Southeast Asia. The Japanese will no doubt distort 
the record and charge the western Powers with racial 
prejudice and persecution. 

As a political gesture, the Chinese and Korean 
delegates suggested that the Korean independence move- 
ment be immediately recognized. 

The round table tnen went into the question of 
economic warfare, it was felt that for the past five 
years Japanese economy has been under terrific strain 
and that Japan is undoubtedly suffering from serious 
shortages of railway equipment, of clothing, of many 
minerals, of machine tools, and, above all, of shipping. 
It was believed that Japan is very vulnerable in her 
shipping and that, at the rate her ships are being sunk, 
she will find herself unable to supply her distant out- 
posts and to bring into Japan the raw materials from the 
occuoied areas. It was therefore thought important that 
concentration in the destruction of her shipping be given 
serious consideration by Allied strategy both for its 

pffect upon the Japanese war effort, 
military and economic effect up< 

rt f unified command came up again m 
The question of unni^ 

... tl - e -prosecution of the war against Japan 
connection with the pr^ 

*i acceptance of the view tnat tne 
but there was general -occp division 

f a global war required a division 

aiUtary »-o*t*« Qf ^ sus£ested 



of command in the MX&- 



t of manicurms bar tentacles, a direct blow 

sh onld ,e aimed at ner ^ 

* nth9T military ^ a 
Kobe and o^nex 



- 27 - 

The members of this round table felt that Japan 
must never again be allowed to become a military threat 
to the world. It was thought advisable for moral effect 
that, when the time comes for a military occupation of 
Japan, the forces of occupation should include tne native 
army units of the various occupied areas so that the 
people in those countries should realize that they have 
conquered the Japanese army and actually occupied their 
territory. 

As to the disposition of the territories to be 
forcibly acquired, the round table believed these should 
be given up by her. A British delegate proposed that 
the United States should take over the mandate of Korea 
but this proposal met with considerable opposition by 
the American, Chinese ana Korean delegates. The American 
Jection was based on three points: 

1. It would be a difficult assignment technically 
for the United States; 

2. It would be regarded as an extremely retrogress- 
ive step, as it would appear as if we were reverting to 
straight imperialism and the colonies were being parcelled 
among the victors; and 

3. It woulc be inconsistent with American war aims 
and independence for Korea should only be supplemented by 
an international guarantee and aid in rebuilding Korea's 
national life, if she requested such aid. 

However, while they took the above positive position 



- 28 - 

with respect to Korea, the American delegates took a 
rather different view with regard to the Japanese man- 
dated islands in the Pacific. They indicated that for 
American security and for the development of air transport 
and communications there would be strong influence in the 
United States for a strong nationalistic and aggressive 
policy as to the disposition of these islands after the war. 

As regards Manchuria, there was general agreement 
that it should be returned to China but as to Formosa, 
the Chinese demand for its return to China was not re- 
ceived with enthusiasm. It was felt in some charters that 
Formosa night be a strategic base for the United Nations 
to carry out its program of collective security and 
therefore Formosa might be internationalized, so to speak. 
But this theory was rejected by the Chinese delegates on 
the ground that any use of Formosa af^er it has been re- 
turned to Cnina should be a matter for negotiation with 
the Chinese government . 

Having been assured of the impassibility of recur- 
rence of Japanese aggression in the future, the round 
table felt that the Japanese people should he allowed 
natural development and snoula be won over to cooperate 
in the maintenance of a better world. 

G. INEIA • 

Of ..11 the round table discussions, that on India 
u „ tM ^elieat ann most controversial question. 
Si nce .he opening of the Conference, rndia-s relation 



- 29 - 

with Great Britain had been the uppermost suoject in the 
Bind* of most of the delegates. In American garters it 
was felt that the problem of India daring the war emergency 
no longer concerns only Great Britain and India but vitally 
affects the whole war effort ana therefore should be 
settled immediately in order to secure the utmost cooperation 
of the Indian people for the effective prosecution of the 
war . 

The round table discussion centered on the proposal 
made by the leading member of the Indian Delegation which 
consisted of three steps, as follows: 

(1) The first step would be to Indianize the Executive 
Council. At present the Council of eleven members has an 
Indian majority, but three of the portfolios, Finance, Home 
Affairs, and Communications, are still held by Britishers. 
While the Viceroy still retains veto powers, the Executive 
Council in reality conducts the government of India. 

(2) The second step would be for the Executive Council, 
once indianized, to form itself into an Exploratory Commission 
together with other Indian leaders representing the points 

of view of the various political parties in India. It was 

rh-*ndi who dominates the Congress party, 
pointed out that Ghanai, 

i - decline to nominate a representative to the 

would orobably aecii-^ 

\ hxlt Ln that event the Executive Council coula 
Commission, bu. in 

- , individuals or ex-members of the 
invite distinguished inaivi. 

u • Rflla^epaohri and Maushi. 
Congress, such as Ba^a„ y 



- 30 - 

(3) The third step is for the Exploratory Commission 
to study all the questions requiring consideration in 
framing a new constitution. In this task an allied advisory 
committee may be established to advise the Exploratory 
Commission. 

The Indian delegate stated that the Exploratory 
Commission could, under the above procedure, be able to 
examine and adjust the various differences among the parties 
and find a basis for settlement acceptable by all groups. 
In this connection it was pointed out that the three main 
conflicting ideas to be adjusted in the Exploratory Commission 
would be: (1) the Moslem demand for prior assurance on the 
right of self determination (2) the Hindu Mahasaba demand 
for prior assurance of a unified India; and (3) the probable 
Congress demand that the Commission's recommendations be 
binding and that Congress should have a majority of votes. 

There were at first some expressions of doubt as to 
the practical value of the proposal. American and Canadian 
delegates believed tnat a formal mediation or arbitration 

cy the United Nations would be more desirable. Such a 
mediation or arbitration board could urge Congress leaders 

to suspend civil disobedience in return for a release of 

Coxigress leaders from restraint and for some measure of 

self government. But the Indian delegate replied that 

tnis would create a belief that tne arbitration body was 

really for the purpose of appeasing Congress and would 

immediately arouse the hostility of the Moslem and other 



- 31 - 

minorities which already feel that the United States and 
China have an undue partiality for the Congress p^rty. 
To this the American, Canadian and Chinese delegates re- 
plied that they were primarily concerned about breaking 
the present deadlock and finding a way to restore the 
possibility of cooperation in India. 

After a lengthy discussion which further involved 
the already much discussed subject of the applicability 
of the Atlantic Charter to India, the round table finally 
felt that the plan offered perhaps at least one means of 
starting the process of resolving the present deadlock. 

The round table then took up other problems which 
had already been covered by the other round tables. 

D. SCrT^BAST_ ASIA. 

The heart of the discussions in this round table 
naturally centered on the political status, together with 
if related questions of social and economic problems, of 
t,e various countries composing the vast and ricb region 

Some of the delegates felt the necessity 
of southeast Asia. ^ome 01 

adva nced statement of war aims than heretofore 
of . far more advanced ^ ^ 

unl versal self <o ^ ^ ^ 

, v ere <**«.. however, . ^ ^ ^ 

■ 4-v, assurance of iai 
to speak wxth ^ countries in 

*u + now govern a large pax 
relations that now b measuX e of collective 

, a there was some measure u 
this region unless 

security. 



3y\ 

Philippin es: The round table took: cognisance of 
the Independence Law and the statement made by the 
President of the United States on December 28, 1941- 
"1 give to the people of the Philippines my solemn pledge 
that their freedom will be redeemed and their independence 
established and protected." 

1'hajia nd: The round table assumed that its indepen- 
dence will be regained after the war. 

Burma : The opinion was expressed that this country 
was so far on the road to self-government that it offered no 

real problem. 

The Netherlands East Indies : The Dutch and Javanese 
delegates revealed the plan which was later disclosed in 
Queen Wilhelmina's speech for political reorganization of 
the Netherlands Kingdom according to which the Indies would 
attain full and equal partnership with the Netherlands after 
the war. The pertinent portion of the radio address of t^ueen 
Wilhelmina on December 7, 1942 is as follows: 

"I am convinced, and history as well as reports 
fTOTn ooeuoied territories confirm me in this, that 
*??ar the war it will be possible to reconstruct 
a i t rm a solid foundation of complete part- 



the Kingdom on a sol 
rhicii vail ra 
has been developed in the past 

X X X 3C 



. ..IJiB which vail mean consummation of all that 
j; ' " ■ ->peo. in the «* 

x x x x 



vears have proved that both peoples 
•ii "pnd ability for harmonious and 
possess will ratlon . Political unity, which 
volunoerj oou.- uniatio]l) mQves far towards 

rests on^tixto ^ e purp0 se for which the United 
realization o ^ as it h&B teen embodied, 
nations are - - y" the Atlantic Charter, with which 
for instance, tly agr ee because it contains our 
we could i 11 ?" 0 Q f freedom and justice, for which 
own conception blood and possesion in the 

we lavejaon- stor 
course of our 



- 33 - 

"I visualize, without anticipating 
recommendations of the future Conference, that 
they will be directed towards a Commonwealth in 
which the Netherlands, Indonesia, Surinam and 
Curacao will participate, with complete self- 
reliance and freedom of conduct for each part 
regarding its internal affairs but with readiness 
to render mutual assistance. 

"It is my opinion that such a combination 
of independence and collaboration can give the 
Kingdom and its parts strength to carry fully 
their responsibility both internally and ex- 
ternally. This would leave no room for discrim- 
ination according to race or nationality; only 
ability of individual citizens and needs of 
various groups of the population will determine 
policy of government.'* 

Notwithstanding the acknowledgement of the plan 
above referred to, the round table proceeded with the dis- 
cussion of the colonial policy of the ruling powers toward 
French Indo -China, North Borneo, the Netherlands Indies 
and Portugal-Timor, a synthesis the view of the members 
in this round table may be stated as follows: (l) that the 
basic object of policy in these areas should be to secure 
at the earliest possible moment conditions which will permit 
self -government for the peoples concerned. There should 
be general recognition in the degree of racial and national 
homogenity of the different areas, differences in the levels 
of cultural development and differences in economic structure 
so that while some areas may be ready for complete self- 
government considerably in advance, others may not be so 
Prepared and require a longer period for preparation. (2) that 
colonial powers were not only accountable as trustees toward 

* i B ««q but also owed a moral obligation towards 
the colonial ath--^ 

the rest of the world for their stewardship. (3) to check 



- 34 - 

such stewardship there should be an "intermediate authority," 

f T * 

internet! onal supervi si on, " or a "third party interest," 
Such international authority should include not only the 
colonial powers directly concerned but also representatives 
of the indigenous peoples and in addition, representatives 
of independent powers as the United States, China and the 
U.S. -ft. Whether or not this international body should 
share the power and responsibility with the colonial power 
for the security and economic development of the areas con- 
cerned, the feeling of the round table was that the colonial 
powers should and would be prepared to grant wider than 
merely advisory powers to the international authority, pro- 
vided such authority would share responsibility. It was 
stressed that such assurances are essential for it would 
be just as unreasonable for the colonial powers to determine 
alone the development and emancipation of the colonies as 
it would be unreasonable for the no n- colonial powers to 
determine the development of such colonies on the basis 
of the state of public opinion in the non-colonial powers, 
as for instance, in the United States. 

The round table was strongly of the opinion that 
the international authorities should be set up at once 
without awaiting the termination of hostilities. If the 
great powers, and particularly the United °tates, are un- 
willing to share in the responsibility for the security 
and economic development of the colonial areas, then such 
body should be endowed mainly with advisory and consultative 
f unctions. 



- 35 - 

The round table then went into the discussion of 
the economic problems and the general feeling was that these 
vdll be largely dependent upon the willingness of the great 
powers, particularly the United States, in assuming their 
responsibilities in a system of security and economic co- 
operation, not only in Southeast Asia, but in other parts 
of the world . 

E„ OTHER UNITED NATIONS. 

This round table devoted considerable time to 
the discussion of the relations between the United States 
and the Pacific countries. A synthesis of the expressions 
of the members of this round table or the present American 
relationship with each of the countries in the Pacific is 

sumro ari zed b el ow . 

United States Relations with China. It was indicated 
that the United States had traditionally supported a 
strong and unified China and this policy was recently 
implemented by the relinquishment of American extra- 
territorial rignts in China and the universal feeling in 
the United States that other inequalities against China 

*a Tt was moreover, indicated 
would be eventually removed. It was, 

■ relations were further implemented by 
that Chinese-American re^i 

v t - r the declaration of the United Nations 
the Atlantic Chart. 

" ,n the reopening of 

United States wa* vexy ^ m ir& s of the Chinese 

the Burma Road which M 



- 3© - 



United States Relations with the Soviet Union 
American relations with Russia are said to be in a state 
of flux and unpredictability. While there had been admiration 
for the magnificent war effort of the Russian Army and citizen- 
ry, there has been still a considerable uncertainty in regard 
to the future policies of the Soviet Union. It was jointed 
out, however ,that Russia after the war undoubtedly would be 
occupied with internal reconstruction and therefore would 
not bother about Communistic propaganda in other countries 
so that it was expected that American-Russian relations in 
the future would improve because of the mutual interest in 
the defeat of the common enemy, mutual concern for human 
welfare and common provision for security in the future. 

TTnT +, fifl states Rel°+* ™° jflfl Australia. It was 
minted out that American-Australian relations have been 
very satisfactory. The presence of American troops in 
Australia has created good will for the United States. With 
the peculiar geographical position in which Australia finds 
herself there has been a greater realization that the future 
of Australia demands closer political and economic relations 
with the peoples of Asia. 

Vni*eZjm$£Z^^^ New Zealand . With the 

- , the war New Zealand, like Australia, has im- 
out break of the w^r, 

.-i.tions with the United States. It was pointed 
oroved her relations 

7 _ nd fcas endeavored to maintain high 
out that New Zealand na~ 



- 37 - 

standards of living among its population and has had 
liberal trade policies, having maintained the lowest 
tariff in the world. It was pointed out that while the 
war has brought closer cooperation with the United States, 
no one has given aid to New Zealand greater than that by- 
Great Britain. 

United States Relations with Canada. United States 
relations with Canada have been most cordial before and 
luring the war; trade and cultural intercourse have been 
very close. The unfortified boundary between the two 
countries has been referred to as "an object lesson for 
the whole world." Despite this close relationship, however, 
the idea of possible annexation of Canada by the United 
ctates has been generally regarded with amusement. It was 
pointed out that Canada's contribution to the war effort 
has be'en extensive and that Canadian soldiers are now found 
in every theatre of the war, including the Aleutians, where 
they are serving under United States command. 

United States Relations with India.. United States 

relations with India have been increased in scope during 

the past year. The presence of American troops in India 

has not raised any serious pDblems and their relations 
the 

with/Indian people have been good; however, the attitude 
shown toward colored troops in the American forces has 
been a source of perplexity as regards American attitudes 
on racial issues. There is in india a feeling that the 
Lend-lease M has been somewhat inadequate. At the same 



~ 38 - 

time, the Indian people recognize the warm sympathy of the 
American people with their rational aspirations. India 
expects that after the war she would have the status of at 
least equal to that of the dominions and that as such India 
would v/ el come reciprocal economic arrangements with the 
United States. The Indian delegates, however, pointed out 
that racial discrimination applied to immigration or other 
issues will not be tolerated and if it persists, will be 
met with count er- discrimination. 

United States Relations with the Netherlands East 
Indi es. During the last forty years the United States 
has shown increased interest in the Netherlands East Indies 
as evidenced by some two hundred million dollars of invest- 
ments, large imports of rubber, tin, quinine and palm oil, 
and by cooperation in industrial research, social hygiene 
and agricultural development. The members of the Netherlands 
delegation look to a re- establishment of the Netherlands 
East Indies on a joint basis with Indonesians under the 
rule of their revered Queen. They anticipate a basis of 
full equality between the units of the Netherlands Kingdom. 
In their view, the destruction of relations between members 
of the Netherlands would be a step backward rather than 
forward. They look to the future for full cooperation 
with the United States and Australia, New Zealand, China , 
India and the whole world in order to attain security. 

United gt. w t. ft fl Re]-** "™ vHt - h Fighting France. Reference 

, +n . declaration by the State Department in the 
was made to a aeciw" 



- 39 - 



following words: 

"The policy of the government of the United 
States as regards French territory has been based 
upon the maintenance of the integrity of France 
and of the French empire and the eventual restora- 
tion of complete independence of all French 
territories. M 

Commenting on the above statement, the Fighting 
French delegate interpreted it to mean that when the war 
is won, the first step will be restoration of the territo- 
ries occupied to French sovereignty. Thus, France would 
have an equal right with, say, the United Kingdom, to 
discuss the future status of the dependent areas. The 
statement of the American government was not interpreted 
as being inconsistent with any developing United Nations 
ooiicy respecting what are now colonial areas. 

The round table then proceeded to take up subjects 
which had already been fully discussed in previous round 
tables . 

VI. m mJM TQPICAL BOUjjD ^Aj&ES 
Group III was divided into four round tables 

* rti mussed: K Social and ^.ographic; 

according to the topic discusseo. , 

- n PdLltl cnl-Military Questions; % Military- 
B, icononac; C, ^oj-i^-^ 

Two days, December 10 and 11, were 
Political Prohlems. Two W», 

^•r the discussion of general topics 
allotted to this group for the ox 

„ eific oroblems already considered in 
in relation to the specific pr 

the previous round tables. 



- 40 - 



A. Social and demographic 
This round table devoted itself to the examination 
of the broad and diversified problems related to the social 
well-being, the good life of the peoples of the Pacific. 
The discussions developed around the framework of paragraphs 
V" and VI of the Atlantic Charter, the first referring to 
improved labor standards and economic security and the 
second to freedom from fear and want. There was at once a 
universal acceptance of the view that many of the common 
people of the world regard the war as something more than 

a war as a great upheaval out of vAiich will come something 

much better than they have been accustomed to in the way 
of life. 

The round table laid down the following basic 
principles as expressing the considered opinion of the 
members: 

"The Round Table envisioned no perpetual 
feast for the -peoples of the Orient, but there 
vas a unanimous and humane recognition of the 
basic right of these people to a decent and 
dignified existence - a right they have never 
realized. It was recognized, too, that the 
continual denial of this existence to them 
will eventually have not merely political, 
social and economic importance but even 
material implications of a most serious nature. 

The round table then went into the discussion of 

the means of attaining the above mentioned objective. 'We 

was 8 proposal for the industrialization of Asia, to raise 

the standard of living of the Oriental people, drawing 



- a - 



lessons from the experience of Japan. In other words, 
industrialization of the Pacific area should be properly 
controlled in order to assure that the product of industry 
which is not exported is devoted to Increasing consumption 
at home, thereby assuring a higher standard of living. It 
was pointed out that one of the benefits of industrialization 
is the destruction of the twin evils in agricultural countries — 
landlordism and usury — by offering competition to the 
monopoly of land and labor and thereby weakening the hold 
of the landlord through higher wages and better social 
conditions. 

The rapporteur eloquently expressed the sentiments 
of the round table in the following words: 

"Schemes of international organization, 
regional or global, devices for polishing the 
world, economic associations or any inter- 
national organisations, are only the means and 
not the ends. They are useful instruments only 
if those who employ them never lose sight of 
the real objective; the realization of the hopes 
if not the clamorous demands of the vast millions 
who struggle tragically to eke out a meager 
existence. The real objective must always be 
the good life for all of the people, internation- 
al machinery will mean something to the common 
man in the Orient, as indeed to the common man 
throughout the world, only when it is translated 
into terms that he can understnad; peace, bread, 
housing, clothing, education, good health, and 
above all, the right to walk with dignity on 
the world's great boulevards." 

B. Economic 

This round table started with a general dis- 

At,tiolp VII of the Mutual Aid Agreement as 
cussion or Article vu 



- 42 - 

the most binding commitment by the two senior partners 

of the United Nations, the United States and Great Britain. 

This commitment is now shared by many of the United Nations. 

The article of the Mutual Aid Agreement, signed February 23, 

1942, reads as follows: 

"In the final determination of the benefits 
to be provided to the United States of America 
by the government of the United Kingdom in return 
for aid furnished under the Act of Congress of 
March II, 1941, the terms and conditions thereof 
shall be such as not to burden commerce between 
the two countries but to promote mutually advan- 
tageous economic relations between them and the 
betterment of worldwi de economic relations. To 
that end, they shall include provision for agreed 
action by the United States of America and the 
united Kingdom, open to participation by all 
other countries of like mind, directed to the 
expansion by appropriate international and 
domestic measures, of production, employment, 
and the exchange and consumption of goods, which 
are the material foundations of the liberty and 
welfare of all peoples, to the elimination of 
all forms of discriminatory treatment in inter- 
national commerce, and to the reduction of 
tariffs and other trade barriers, and, in 
general to the attainment of all the economic 
objectives set forth in the Joint Declaration 
maae on August 12, 1941, by the President of 
the United States of America and the Prime 
Minister of the United King com. At an early 
convenient date, conversations shall be begun 
between the two governments with a view to de- 
termining, m the light of governing economic 
SiSons, the best means of attaining the 
«Snw stated objectives by their own agreed 
tc?ion "JS of seeking the agreed action of other 
like-minded Governments. 

In the course of the discussion, some doubts were 
expressed about the attainment of the objectives of the 

* The=e doubts were particularly from the 
above Agreement. mebe 

+ • .like Australia, Canada and New Zealand 
small countries like &ue 



- 43 - 

who wanted to be assured that the United States and the 
United -Kingdom really intended to carry out the commitment. 
These delegates wanted first an assurance of political 
security and then of economic stability, stating that every 
Pacific country has its Burma Road, its life-line that may 
be cut by a sudden attack and this is an important factor in 
considering future economic policies. 

The delegates from Australia , for instance, frankly 
stated that if they could not rely upon precise and adequate 
guarantees of collective security, they would try to re- shape 
their economies so as to insure their own security no matter 
what it cost. Moreover, they pointed out that Australia is 
very much concerned with the prospect for its export 
products, stating that if they could not rely upon stable 
and adequate outlets, that they would be compelled to pursue 
self sufficient policies and to aim at the best living 
standards that they could secure by diversifying production 
within their own boundary. 

American delegates, of course, could not give any 
assurances as they felt that they could not foresee accurately 
the trend of policy which the "united States would likely 
follow in the future. They warned that the people of the 
United States, as distinct from the A drninistration, had not 
made up their minds on the domestic aspects of this 
ouestion and it would not be safe for the other countries 
to rely upon indications or trends of public opinion. It 



- 44 - 

was pointed out that it would not be easy to foresee what 
form of new economic nationalism would take place. It could 
be restricted or it could be liberal and worldwide in scope. 
C. Political and Military Quesions 

Two major questions were discussed in this round 
table: (1) political requirements for the development of 
a system of collective security in the Pacific are; and 
(2) the political problem arising over the restoration of 
territories now under the enemy. 

On the first question, it was indicated that a 
Pacific Regional Council may be set up, subsidiary to 
a world-wide political authority. This Council may 
have three functions: (1) to establish the conditions of 
peace, (2) to resolve disputes, and (3) to exercise police 

power over the area. 

It was suggested that the Council should be 
composed of the sovereign nations of China, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, France, The Netherlands, 
the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Union of 
Socialist Soviet Republics, with the Philippines joining 
only after it had achieved independence. In regard to 
*i membership of the Philippines, a Philippine delegate 
panted out that President Quezon now sits with the United 

n , io a member of the Pacific 7/ar Council. The 
Nations and is a meiuuc 

, ifl therefore be allowed membership in 
Philippines should tnereiox 



- 45 - 

this proposed Pacific Council even before achievement of 
her independence. 

With respect to the establishment of the conditions 
of peace, the Council vrould be expected to see that Japan 
adheres to the terms of the armistice and to a subsequent 
peace treaty. It would moreover be expected to cope with 
the problem of immigration, trade, communication, the 
questions of minorities, fisheries, labor and social problems 
and other allied questions affecting the Pacific area as a 
whol e . 

In resolving disputes, the Council should not permit 
them to develop to a dangerous situation pending arbitration 
and provide for a system of controlling such disputes by 
adopting a process of tearing, appeal and final judgment. 

In the exercise of the police power, the Council 
should be provided with an armed force which should be a 
part of a global force under world-wide organization. Tne 
armed force for the Pacific region, as for other regions, 
might wear the uniform of the United Nations, thus symbolizing 
the fact that their authority derives from the United Nations 
as a whole » 

The question of political restoration of territories 

, <rn „ fully discussed in previous 
now under the Japanese was fully 

round tables. 

W1 t* respect to Formosa, the Chinese delegates 
iasis * e d that it should he returned to China without any 
conJ-i^xorio anu- 



- 46 - 

desirable to establish military, naval or air bases on 

this Island, the question should be a matter for negotiation 

with China. 

In regard to Korea, the Canadian and English 
delegates were vocal in their advocates for its mandate 
by the United States to prepare that country for self- 
government perhaps along the lines of the preparation of 
the Philippines for independence. 

As to the Japanese mandated islands, there was a 
strong feeling on the part of some Americans that this Island 
should be under some control or supervision of the United 
States. In any event, it was recognized that these islands 
should be under some world-wide control and authority, in 
view of their strategic positions in the Pacific area. 

It was recognized that the Philippines will have 
its indeoendence in 1946 and perhaps before that time. 
The round table took cognizance of the fact that President 
Hooseveit, in his message to the people of the Philippines 
b efore the fall of Eataan, pledged their independence, a 

- *. K-r* ftoHsi&ered as assurance of 
step which the rouna table oonsiae. 

, 4 .< on m the security for the Pacific area. 
American participation m 

* , nof TTiflies the rouna table 
Hegarding Netherland £ast Inaies, 

wiihelmina's recent declaration for equal 
felt that Queen rtilneiuiin* 

, . Q ± tU various, components of the Netherlands 
partner snip of zne van 



- 47 - 

Kingdom provide the foundation for self-government for 
one East Indies. 

On the status of Outer Mongolia, it was believed 
that this would not present a serious problem. Chinese 
delegates stated that any questions respecting Outer 
Mongolia affecting Russia and China could be settled bi- 
laterally between the two countries. 

D. Military-Political Problems 

This round table attempted to examine the situation 
that would develop as the war was being won. It v/as pointed 
out at the outset that as the areas under Japanese control are 
regained by the United Nations' military forces, the immediate 
problem was to provide for a local administration. The members 
felt that it would be advisable to utilize the local organi- 
zations already in operation, since the officials participating 
now in such local organizations in the occupied areas are not 
all Quislings but persons who have the best interests of 
.heir people at heart, -it this instance, an Indian delegate 
stated that when Japanese invasion of India was imminent, 
the Indian Government Worked out a plan for the witharawal 
of all military and police forces from the invaded regions 
and for the continuation of civilian administration by local 

,1* ,«rrv on the local government as far as 
citizens who woula carry on 

. «. nv affected with their obligation to tneir 
can be consistently dlxecoe 

country. no- 
The round table «M> too* up th. * °° 

T ranese oolonles and of Japan proper, 
cupation of former Japanese 



- 48 - 



It was generally thought that the knock-out blow would 
come from the air and not from an Invasion of the Japanese 
islands. There was some opinion, as already indicated in 
previous round tables, that Tokio should be occupied by 
a °nited Nations force in which there should be units 
from all the countries of Asia. 

The question of post-war armaments control re- 
ceived considerable discussion. It was felt that the 
victorious powers might get tired of enforcing them, 
pointing out the fact that any interest in control and 
inspection is at its height when it is least necessary, 
that is, right after the war. Moreover, it was feared that 
jrolonged control would arouse strong reaction among the 
defeated peoples. 

The round table also -went into the question of 
the composition of the military force under world-wid e 
authority and it was generally agreed that such a force 
should compose of all the military branches - the air, the 
sea, and the land forces. At this point, it was suggested 
that American cooperation could be obtained much easier 
if the United States would be asked to contribute an air 
or naval force rather than a land force for the reason that 
Americans, as a whole, are averse to sending their boys 
away from home. x t was pointed out that at the and of 
this war there would be only three great powers: The 
united states, Great Britain and *ussia and that the long 



- 49 - 

term problem would be to prevent the rise of a new major 
aggressive power. Russia would, in the round table's opinion, 
present the real problem particularly as respects Europe. A 
i.ritish delegate ventured the opinion that Britain would get 
along with the Soviets "if the kind of Europe they want is 
the same kind we want." 

Finally, the round table discussed the establishment 
of a United Nations machinery and suggested that such machinery 
should at once be set into motion by the calling of a conference 
of representatives of the various United Nations to meet some- 
where in the We stern Hemisphere. 

VII. FINAL SESSION AND BUSINESS KEETING OF 

THE INSTITUTE 

On Sunday, December 13th, the Conference held its final 
plenary session. It was the most interesting session of the 
Conference. As the delegates reviewed the entire situation and 
took up the specific controversial questions affecting the 
Pacific area, they "opened up" and spoke their minds. 

As in all round tables, the applicability of the 
Atlantic Charter to India and to dependent countries con- 
tinued as the favorite subject of oratory. The fireworks were 
started by the Minister of New Zealand, Mr. Nash, with the 
statement that there should not be any doubt as to the 
applicability of the Atlantic Charter to the whole world, 
for to quote him, "Twenty-nine nations had already accepted its 
principles and had already signed the document." Mr. M. I. 



- 50 - 

Coldwell, member of the Canadian Parliament, accused the 
British delegates for their complacency and for taking a 
defensive position at the Conference. Moreover, he ad- 
monished the American delegates for contributing to the 
doubts by not giving the Conference a more categorical state- 
ment of American position. At this instance, Mr. Tyler 
Dennett, member of the American Delegation, rose and said 
that the people of the United States are a free people and 
should be free to go to the Conference with free hands, with- 
out any restraints from expressing their views. 

Mr. A. C. Jones, Labor Member of the British Parlia- 
ment, delivered a most impassioned speech in defense of the 
position taken by the British delegates at the Conference. 
He admitted that the British Delegation assumed a defensive 
position throughout the Conference but this was because 
they caiiie to the Conference with a concrete program and 
suggestions , which in their opinion would contribute to 
the effort of the Conference in discussing the problems of 
war-time and post-war questions. Mr. Jones stated that in 
Great Britain, as in the United States, there are different 
.lews and sentiments on any vital question, but out of 
these conflicting views has come a trend of liberal thought 
on the relations of the dependencies with Creat Britain. Be 
emphasized the fact that not long ago, a liberal policy 
vras adopted under the leadership of the liberal and the 
bead of the British Delegation, Lord Bailey. 

On this occasion, a Philippine speaker took the 



- 51 - 



opportunity of stating that the Philippines would soon 
join the family of Nations, as a result of the benevolent 
and wise policy of the United States towards the Filipino 
people in the past forty- four years, during which period 
they west through the school for self-government. In that 
preparation, the Filipino people had utilized American history 
and experience as a guide in their struggle for freedom. 

He then expressed his fervent hope that when all the 
international organizations that the Conference had been dis- 
cussing shall have been organized and established, the 
Philippines will take its seat as a Republic. &e closed 
his remarks with the expectation that before the Institute 
meets again, three years hence, the Japanese invaders will 
have been driven from Philippine shores, and that Manila may 
be then considered as among the prospective places for the 
next Conference of the Institute of Pacific Relations. 

At the business meeting of the Institute, the 
ooerations of the Institute since the last Conference were 
examined and reviewed. A preliminary report of the 

* r.t was submitted, wherein the following reference 
Secretariat was suoiuxm , 

t0 the Philippines appeared: 

****** t 1? e «^o^ssra^ 

the return to ^^jflp.. Council 

Mangahas, the . mt when the -Japanese 

was modestly expanded , ^ lth few of the 

fury swept across th « ^ Thg 
I pr members had trie p President Quezon 

to arrange for ^gg^/ The President asked 
Mont Tremhlant Com ereao Residen t Commissioner, 

Mr * J °^Se ^iiioino group at Mont Tremblant. 
to lead tne ± — 



- 52 - 

"smf^ij had participated in 

+ , Conferences formerly and was thus 
acquainted witfc the work of the Institute. 

h > f? ite of the financial difficulties 

°t p n ? Filipino people, the full financial 
contribution to the Pacific Council for 1942 
ma been received from the Philippines.* 

"It is the hope of the A 'iliuino leaders 
tnat wnen the enemy is driven out, the Philippine 
Council may enter a new period of intensive study 
of the economic and social problems of the Common- 
wealth as a whole to whatever program of inter- 
national, economic and political collective effort 
issues from the United Nations war and post-war 
cooperation. " 

The financial report of the Institute showed that 
approximately $100,000.00 is received annually as contri- 
butions from various sources for carrying out the 
activities of the Institute. The national councils con- 
tribute each year approximately twenty-five per cent 
or V2 5 ,000.00 of the total funds available to the Institute. 
Of this, the Philippine National Council contributes *500.00 
per annum. 

The uresent Governing Board of the Institute is 



COHK 



oosed of the following: 



R.J.F. B0YER 

Australia - EDGAR J. TARR 

Canada ALFRED SZE 

China PHILIPPE BAUDET 
lighting J ranee 

He th erl ands g . H . C . HART 

Neth, Indies WALTER NASH 

New Zealand j. M. ELLZALDE 

Philippines ' LORD HAILEY 

United Kingdom - PH ILIP C. JESSUP 

United States y. E. MOTYLEV 
U. S. 9- xi ' 



- 53 - 



The following officers were elected for the 
coming year: 

Chairman — EDGAR J. TARR (Canada) 

Vice Chairmen — ADMIRAL H. E. YARNELL (U.S.A. ) 

CHIANG MON-LIH (China) 

G. il. C. HART (Netherlands-Neth. Indies) 
I. CLUNIES ROSS (Australia) 

Chairman 

International Finance Committee 
Chairman 

International Program Committee 



Chairman 

International Research Committee 

Secretary-General 

Research Secretary 
Assistant Treasurer 



— K. C. LI (China) 

— SIR FREDERICK 
WHYTE (U. K.) 

- J. B. CONDLIFFE 
( U. S. A. ) 

. EDWARD C. CARTER 

( U. S. A. ) 
■ W.L.HOLLAND (N.Z. ) 

- HILDA AU STERN 
( U. S. A. ) 



-54- 

VIII. COMMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS 
As already stated, the Conference was attended 
oy citizens of the various Pacific countries in their 
private capacity. The proceedings were informal and were 
essentially a means for the discussion of international 
afrairs in an entirely unofficial way. Because of the war 
situation the Institute departed from its former practice 
of limiting Conference membership to private citizens by 
including members in governmental service from the various 
countries. 

Under these circumstances, -wherein delegates were 
confined in a winter resort, free from both the prying 
eyes and the anxious ears of the newspaper reporters and 
isolated from a curious public, the Conference was indeed 
in a favorable atmosphere to consider and discuss the 
problems of the Pacific without restraint, fear or favor. 
The delegates spoke their minds, made suggestions and 
offered criticisms freely and unhesitatingly. 

UNITED KINGDOM - The United Kingdom were fully 
prepared for the task of the Conference. In the face of 
attacks and criticisms from all sides, they stood like 
the rock of Gibraltar. Lord "alley's handling of the 
attacks hurled at the British was masterful, ^ere is an 
example of his defensive attacks: "If the peoples of 
India and i^urma or of our dependencies seek today to pluck 
the fruit of the tree of liberty, let it be recalled that 
that tree was not native of their soil, it was we who 



- 55 - 



planted it there." *ow and then the British delegates 
would agree to a more literal colonial policy and even to 
hand over British colonies to an International Body if the 
United States would become an active member of that Body, 
Yet, with all their resourcefulness, eloquence and evident 



yjl ,v,,,v .v, . 

sincerity, many expressed grave doubts about British policy . 

India is, of course, most vitally important to 
Jingland ! s economic life. To quote Mr. Churchill, "Two 
out of every ten Englishmen depend on India." The safeguard 
of British economic interests in India and the income 
derived by the British people from that country are un- 
doubtedly most important considerations in British policy 
toward India. Any solution to the Indian question must, 
therefore, provide some safeguardsto Great Britain's 
interests in India. 

On the matter of the dependencies, the British 
view may be summed up in the Rapporteurs report: 

"(1) That there has been an increasingly liberal 
tendency in British colonial policy and 
that the war has greatly intensified this 
trend (particularly as reflected in present 
British public opinion relative to colonies 
and colonial policy) . 

"(2) That in the British view (which contains the 

hard realism which goes with long experience), 
there are stubborn and difficult problems 
which can only be overcome gradually if 
colonial peoples are to reach the stage 
that they can become genuinely self-governing 
bodies. 

"(3) There is a strong realization that in actual 



- 56 - 



broadest^nd^oS ^ Pire has bee * ^ 
toward KiMiSf?/ 0 *?* te ^ di ^ 

which has dPr,ni!^ ^ Zatlon a real for ce 
and taS; i"*f^ f taelf repeatedly), 
the United Kin ^ 5 een 110 empire, 
have contfnn 6 ! m COUlc not possibly 

T ° oe e a U vie?^ Kln ^ 0m th ^' if i« to 

must R ^ ?g ° f lm P ei '^l authority, it 

aTTeast ^ e -^I 1S ° f a certainty' (or 
InteSSS^ dec ^ed probability) that the 
inter national organization which takes 
over tins authority shall be sufficently 
strong capable to really carry the 

puraen thus thrust upon it. This assurance 
is necessary because the very existence of 
the United Kingdom depends upon it. 

" (4) The most fundamental consideration in this 
connection is the fear that the United 
States will pull out of any new inter- 
national organization which is the 
equivalent of destroying its effective- 
ness. It is no accident that the 
recent elections in the United States, 
interpreted as indicating a strong 
isolationist sentiment, was followed by 
an increase in nationalist tendency in 
other parts of the world." 

UNITED STATUS - The American delegation, too, was 

subject to a continuous barrage for an expression of 

assurance or guarantee that the United States would take 

an active part in world affairs after the war. The 

. _ n + tftB ^st was cited again and again as a 
experience oi one pa ^ ^ ™ & 

+ *hP resiliency of nationalism 
possible indication oi the iesur 0 oi j 

■ Tpfir a nd doubt were expressed 
in the United States. J ear «na 

„ lo «fmpnt iray do now with 
that what the Sxecutive Department a y 

i Pooceration would be undone 
* +r, t international cooper 
respect to intent k-h^vp 

^ Many delegates believe 
later by a hostile Congress, ^ny 

ancles while at present are 

that the isolationist ten 



- 57 - 

not as evident as before the war, are still strong in some 
quarters, as evidenced in the last election. However, in the 
view so f some Americans, after the international organization 
"t;s been established and has shown satisfactory results while 
the war is still in progress, Congress will not dare undo 
what the Executive Branch has already done in this respect. 

American delegates stressed the difficulty in pre- 
dicting the course of American policy and warned that the 
acid test is not necessarily to be found in Executive Acts 
but rather in treaties ratified by Congress, or in the con- 
Li nuance of a policy following a change of the party in 
power. Willi© the American delegates felt that the Atlantic 
Charter is in harmony with the prevailing trend of American 
public opinion, there is no certainty that it is an assured 
statment of permanent American policy. 

This Conference clearly showed that international 
cooperation and collaboration in the future will depend 
upon the policy which the United States will pursue. As 
a Canadian delegate remaned, "the United States has the 
,ey and there isn't any *ey.» Xt is very interesting to 
note the tactics of the delegates of the two ma^or powers. 

the British delegates endeavored at every opportunity 
W commit the United States to ta.e mandates over Korea 
.- n d the Japanese mandated islands, the ^erican delegates 

. , to secure from the British assurance of 
in turn tried to seoux 

n + nf the Indian question and self- 
mediate settlement of 

" t for the dependencies and threatened that ^er.ca 

government ioi 



- 58 - 

would not be a oartv 

^ to an ^ international organization to 

Perpetuate British imperialism. 

The American said to the British: "The burden is on 
you - if you want our help, say what you want to do - if 
it meets with our approval we will probably do much to 
help - if not j we won't," 

IKBIA - The Indian delegation was composed of many 
prominent Indians who are holding high positions in the 
Indian Government. One notable criticism of the Indian 
delegation was the fact that it did not include any 
representative of the Confess party, the largest and the 
most influential party in India. The Indian delegates, as 
a whole, were not antagonistic to the British, although 
all of them had independent opinions and agreed in desiring 
a definite settlement of the Indian problem. They all said 
that the Indian people are anxious to do their part in the 
war effort and pointed to the fact that today India has 
1,500,000 soldiers on the fighting fronts, although it was 
admitted that this army Is in its bulk: professional. 

The consensus of sentiment of the Indian Delegation 
on the question of British-Indian relations is expressed 
in the following words of U*. Kharma, leader of the 
Kindu-Sikh Nationalist Party in the Legislative Assembly 

of the N. W. Frontier Province: 

i tmtb is that in spite of sweet words 
"The real truth i~ " * surr0 unds the horizon, 
a deep distrust still ■gggg^ duty is simple 

At this ?"IJ°^ a rd if s ^ e x ' eally meanS that 
and straightforward ^ ^ aU 

Indians shoula ng« 



- 59 - 



her strength, there must be a clear declaration 
as regards the free status of India after the 
war, without any reference whatsoever to the 
mischievous possibility of breaking India into 
fragments. As regards the present, the National 
Government should be so constituted as to function 
in close collaboration with Great Britain and. 
the Allied Powers during the War. The call should 
go forth to all the political parties to help in 
the formation of such a Government which must be 
trusted and given complete authority to administer 
Indian affairs according to India's needs. There 
may be sections here and there who may not come 
forward to join such a scheme. But there is not 
the least doubt that such a proposal will be 
welcomed by the people at large, and those who 
will soon disappear into the limbo of oblivion 
as persons who failed to play the game when their 
country was in dire need of their loyal ana de- 
voted service. Heal transfer of power and mutual 
trust, these are the needs of the hour, 11 Inaia 
is to fight and win a total war. V/ill Britain 
respond even at this late hour?" 

j, : , -he Chinese delegation was one of the 
largest at the Conference. The Chinese took active part 
in the discussions and, in some Instance, assumed ag- 
gressive tendencies. For instance, they demanded the 
return of Formosa without any strings attached and in- 
sisted upon liberal treatment of Chinese nationals in 
, oreign countries, particularly in Southeast Asia, At 

tine they wanted capital and the transfer of 
the same time T>ney 

Japanese heavy industries to China. 

oitl0 n toward Southeast Asia was smmea 
Phins 1 s position 

t the People's Political Council 
UP by I,r. Chow, member of the Peop 

aS f ° 11C ^ S: + of senera i principle, China 

« A s a matter of &ene g of the im- 
sti&ir stands for an e^rxy reg ion. as 

of the old or ^ e * ^^.ned, China will 
P erlB St interests are concerne , 
far as her m 



- 60 - 



SLiS^LSSS ln . the P° rt -W»r settlement, 
special consideration be given to Ml deace 

securitro'/l 0 ' - her ^tlers^U) 
security of lana passages to the South Seas, 
13 J protection of the economic interests as 
well as minorities rights of the Chinese 
resident in the region." 

Chinese delegates insisted that China cherished 

no design on territorial expansion beyond her original 

frontiers and referred to the following declaration by 

the G-eneralissimo Chiang Kai-shek on this point: 

"Y;e have been fighting this war or re- 
sistance with purity of motive and consistency 
of principle - not for any selfish purpose but 
for the salvation of the world through first 
saving ourselves. Towards Asia as towards 
the whole world we wish only to do our duty to 
the exclusion of any lust for power or other 
desires incompatible with the moral dictates 
of love and benevolence that are characteris- 
tic of the Chinese national spirit The aim 
of the Revolution is, so far as the ^erests 
of Cnina herself are concerned, the restora 
+ nf hpr original frontiers ana, m regard 
IbthS re5t of the world, a gradual advance 
o? ali na^ons from the stage of equality to 
that of an ideal unity. 

■ „ , Q +hPrpd in the Conference 
One notable impression gathers 

, , fpfi , felt by the, delegates of the 
was the ill-concealed fear lei* y 

• ife-rt of an imperialist China that would 
rise in the tfar ^ast oi 

would be much more dangerous by 
supdant Japan and vouia 

nrious population and superior re- 
reason of her tremendous pop 

„ ln spi te of their repeated protestations 

30UrGeS " ' lflfl such a political development, 

and „ents disprovi » ^ ^ ^ ^ 

it ^ be c — ^ ^ dispei such _ ^ 

~«" ••«•« — " 

aware of « ieu 



- 61 - 

conflict, militarily and politically, the Chinese 
members suavely but firmly alternated requests for 
assistance and equal representation in the conduct of 
the war with suggestions of being forced to drop out 
of the struggle. Time and again the statement was made 
that "we will never make peace with Japan," coupled with 
the qualifying "buts" that "we cannot go on forever 
fighting with our bare hands," that the Chinese soldier 
is only made of "flesh and bone, not iron." To the 
charges that China would develop into an imperialist 
power, the Chinese delegates repeatedly emphasized that 
by reason of temperament, education and religion, China 
would never develop into a military imperialist power. 

.mother impression obtained, too, is that there is 
lacking a clear agreement between China and Great Britain 
as to now to dispose of some of the latter' s possessions 
in China, particularly Hongkong. While it was evident 
that China expected to be returned Hongkong and every 
other possession, although she was willing to negotiate 
with ->reat Britain about military bases for her in the 
China Coast, it was also evident, if the United Kingdom 
delegates in any way reflected tneir country's thought 
on the subject, that Creat Britain was not disposed to 
return Hongkong if she could help it. V/hich fact suggests 
ti e idea that differences of this nature between the 
United Nations, unless threshed out during the unifying 



- 62 - 



comradeship in arms, might lead to conflict at the end of 
the war. 

NBTCERLANDS. The Dutch-Javanese delegation was, 
since the beginning, the object of close observation. 
At first the members of the delegation were very in- 
articulate , saying very little indeed. However, they 
assumed a more aggressive attitude after the radio address 
of ^ueen '.'ilhelmina announcing the plan of equal partner- 
ship of all the components of the Netherlands Kingdom, 
^y using the Javanese delegates as their spokesmen at 
-he Conference, they tried to create the impression that 
the Dutch really treated their colonies without dis- 
crimination or prejudice. 

It was quite evident to all that the real motivating 
power behind the delegation was I..r. Hart, who has had con- 
siderable experience in international conventions. Ex- 
plaining ;ueen Wilhelmina's Plan for equal partnership 
between the Netherlands and the colonies, Mr. Hart said: 

from the Netherlands, but manage> their 

that in a Z oin * r ?f r h »S recently been doing, corn- 
own affairs as *W ***** °l ^ore adequate ballot 
bineo. on the one nana w ^ n ons . me government, 
s VS tem and "J^er lor » satisfactory, 
*nd on the other hand ^ w . in the conduct 
i e., completely equal snaz £ 

at the general at '*iJ S ° d no less. It is in the 

lip n fact, no '*ore and no ten &n& ^^cally 
SJ!t these aspirations People's 
pressed "a? one should read the 

tloTJot,etU Which the ^ueen of the 
several P^ uuu 



- 63 - 



Netherlands, fully conversant with these desires, 
has recently mane on future relations of partner- 
ship and on the plans for a conference to be 
convened by her immediately after the liberation 
of the oppressed territories, when Hollanders 
and Indonesians will once more be able to express 
in freedom their desires and opinions on their 
future status and will be able to prepare the 
arrangement of their future constitutional 
relations . tf 

One ihilippiiie delegate had the opportunity of 
seeing a telegram sent by Governor General Van Moofc to 
r. Hart, wherein the scope of the proposed concessions 
contained in the speech of C.ueen Wilhelmina was amplified. 
The telegram stated in effect that under the plan the 
Governor General of the Dutch East Indies "probably would 
. £Ve reduced powers." Consequently, despite the apparent 
Uber ai tone of ~ueea '.ilhelmina < s address, some doubt 

be entertained as to whether the Dutch object ives for 

*6 liberal as announced, 
the *ast indies will in practice be as 

r*A«mmffH fflOK One of the subjects which 

" * +. +hP Conference was tne 

^*t»flble interest at tne oom 
aroused considerable xi 

x for the creation of a new Indonesran state. 

. . the fortune" magazine of August, 
plan was discussed i & ^ ^ ^ 

Wfi, in Which it was aavoca cori3isting 0 f 

a • n the Indonesian area, 
be establishea in British and Dutch 

„U tne cT± ^j-^ 
_ . + , «vi Malaya > ^ LJ - 
Tnailand, British * e Tifllor . The 

•a and portufeuebc 
islands in lndonesi3, ^ ^100,000 

4-« vill have 
proposed new state - milli on. 

„H « TjODUlsT-1*-^ 

square miles and a P . 



- 64 - 



A similar proposal was also suggested by one of 
the delegates, Ur. Bruno Lasker, in a paper distributed 
to the delegates, T&e proposal, however, did not 
receive support at the Conference. On the contrary, the 
plan was strongly opposed not only by the Dutch-Javanese 
delegates but oy the English, Chinese, Fighting French 
and Siamese delegates on the ground that there was no 
practical "basis for such a confederation. 

The opposition views were eloquently expressed 

by Mr, h-art of the Dutch- Javanese delegation as follows: 

"The advantages of such an incorporation 
would have to be extremely evident both for the 
Indonesian population and for the world at large, 
if they are" to offset the advantages of a de- 
velopment as presented above. 

"Does such an incorporation offer real 
advantages? The reply should be emphatically 
in thp negative. Fundamentally, there is 
f ft tie in common between the Netherlands Indies 
little 1 ^„ c ? l /-„ ti . ier parts of Southeast Asia, 
and any of the otne r par ^ ^ 

Such meager affimt i£» a» . L countries 

the ^llPfAnw aaA^ftlag. ^ u ^?oL In 

with an original ; I* a °£®^|* i n % Indian immlgra- 

Malaya, larg ^f^f ^original Indonesian 

tion has oilatea the abori inhabitants 



found 
and 
syst 
vote — „ 

from necessity » 
the ages. 




«In the 



hA1 , TPirer the Spaniards 
Phlll ppines, 3 ^..ever, izat . on 




arr 
rea 



and 



- 65 - 



language. Therefore, when the Americans took 
over, they found a situation which considerably 
laciiitated the introduction of a uniform 
education in a foreign language, i.e., English, 
consequently, there is between the Netherlands 
indies, Ualaya and the Philippines only a 
certain affinity of race, but there the con- 
nections end, except that the Ealay language, 
even though it is in rather divergent dialects, 
is used both in Malaya and in many parts of 
the Indies. 

"With the other territories which are 
sometimes associated with such amalgamation 
schemes, there are neither racial, religious 
nor cultural ties. In passing, it may be 
noted that such affinities do not appear to 
exist betv/een the other territories either, 
if one excludes, perhaps, certain similarities 
between upper Thailand and upper Indo-China. 

"There is not and there never has been a 
state, nation, country or federation called 
"Llalaysia , " any more than there is or has been 
an "Atlantis." 

"As far as can be ascertained by those 
who intimately know all the countries involved, 
none of the peoples living there has ever 
P-iven the suggested union a single serious 
thought. There would be violent opposition 
to it in practically all the territories. 
For the Netherlands Indies, one even dares to 
sneak with conviction. The racial connections 
between tSe several gantries are much weak er 
than those between Germany and Scandinavia , 
Holland and England. There is no similarity 
hOiiana hhu & h«T-rins what has been 
in the languages, ^^f^ln^ are mostly 
mentioned above The ^£f ns in the Ne ther- 
rtoman catholic , ±± x in Malaya are 

SSSaf tMtnf are Bu^ist,' 

- ~~7fa^a S criticisms end frankness 
vo cai debates, i» ^ 

Mew Zealand. Tney supple 



- 66 - 

the Conference and went after both the Britishers and 
the Americas ruthlessly, so to speak. A member of the 
State Department accurately observed the attitude of 
tiy>se delegates when he said that from these small western 
democracies came the fears and doubts as to the future 
actions of Great Britain and the United States. These 
three members of the British Commonwealth of Nations 
were most aggressive in their demands for political 
security and economic guarantee. 

PHILIPPINE 5 . Realizing the strength of the 
Philippine position, which even Lord Hailey referred 
to as an "exceptional experience" in colonial policy, 
the members of the Philippine delegation took part in 
the discussions only when the Philippines was mentioned 
or directly affected. In the rouna tables and in private 
conversations, the delegates of the Conference recognized 

a mcTi PHn-PhiliPPine relationship 
the magnificent success of American mui^ 

as proven by the .pic of Eataan and the stand on Corregidor. 

and again delegates congratulated us for the resistance 

• f the enemy and the patriotism and loyalty 
we put up against the enemy 

r .. 1imines to the United otates, 
of the people of the PhiUPP^s 

\, , bv their leader and President, —1 L. 
as symbolized by tnen 

' iU8Z0n- „. our retxoenoe in over Playing 

Notwithstanding aohlevemen ts, we had many 

Philippine accomplish d iscussions, explaining 

•-MPs to participate in 
opportunities ^ v 



- 67 - 

anci elaborating references to Philippine progress and 
achievements. 

The Philippine delegation has brought from the 
Conference for the Office of the President copies of the 
pamphlets, documents and other literature that were dis- 
tributed to the delegates. 

In closing, we take the opportunity of expressing 
to you, Mr. President, our heartfelt appreciation for 
giving us the privilege of participating in this interesting 

and instructive Conference. 

Respectfully submitted, 

THE PHILIPPINE DELEGATION TO THE 
COHERENCE OE THE INSTITUTE OP 
PACIFIC RELATIONS AT MONT^EMBLANT , 
CANADA 




"Arturo^B. Rotor 





J 



APPENDIX A 

THE DE VEL 0 FHENT OF 
fSILIPPINE-AMERICAN RELATIONS 



JOAQUIN k. ELIZALDE 

Resident Commissioner of The Philippines to 

the United States 

A MEMORANDUM 
SUBMITTED TO THE EIGHTH CONFERENCE 



mternational Secretariat 

r, TD.rTTTTC RELATIONS 
INSTITUTE OF PACIFIC K 



The problems of the Pacific are multiple and many sided, 
hey are of very great importance, not only to the peoples 
irectly affected, but to the general peace and welfare of 
he world. Though they do not, perhaps, affect us all alike, 
all are of general concern. We of the Philippines welcome 
this opportunity of presenting a brief resume of our success- 
ful relations with the United States of America which will 
reach fulfillment in the establishment of the Philippine 
Republic not later than July 4, 1946. 

It is to be noted that the relations which started 
with a war between us in 1899 are drawing to an end in 
another war in which we have fought shoulder to shoulder 
this year in the defense of the same ideals in the epic 
Battle of the Philippines. 

How could a bond between two peoples starting as 
enemies be welded so solidly in so short a period of time? 
It was chiefly because the aims of the American Government 
were always generous and liberal. The beauty of those rela- 
tions has always been the honest approach of both sides when 
seeking the solution of problems that confronted us. This 
brought about increasing faith in the American Government, 
as gradually the Filipinos became convinced that the United 
States was not taking root to exploit them but rather to 
benefit and to assist them. 

Of course the American forces aid not upon the occupa- 
tion find a country undeveloped either politically or 



economi- 



cally. In fact, I cannot do "better than to quote here extracts 

from a most eloquent sermon recently given in Washington by 

the Reverend Robert I. Gannon, President of i? or ah am University. 

£ef erring to the education and development of the Philippines 

wiieh the Americans arrived, he said in part: 

"Their civilization was not an Oriental civilization*. 
It was Western civilization, and this they had to a re- 
markable degree long before Admiral Dewey sailed into 
Manila Bay — so that the Americans had only to build 
on a strong basis of understanding which was well estab- 
lished centuries before they came." 

Ke said further: 

"It is natural that we have always thought of the 
T^nilippines as an outpost of Western Civilization. It 
"•as as a Christian people, therefore, rather than as 
-ere Allies of the United States that they sprang to 
arms spontaneously when Japan attacked It was became 
?£ev loved everything that we lovea ana hated Ytoat 
iSe'japZJlese admired, that Wey fought ana a.ed as 
heroes t& the foxholes of bataan. 

This basic Christian civilization which the United 
States found there had, like that of the countries of latin 
series, the imprint of hundreds of years of contact with 
S P ain. It also closely associated us with the Western 
Hemisphere. 

* of Philippic-American relations 
The development of PhiiiPP flpclara - 

•^i-ified by following the aeclara 
D «n to some extent, be simplified dj 

t diffe rent stages of our relationship during 
tions made at diff« McK i^ey in the year 1900 

the past four decades. Comfflission , and I quote 



established the second ******* 

f his instructions. 

• * ertinent POrtl ° fl ' 0 o, e rnment and administra- 

tiTe provisions £*£ -l0B should bear 
prescribe j tne 



that the Government which they are establishing 
is designed not for our satisfaction or for the 
expression of our theoretical views, but for the 
happiness, peace, and prosperity of the people 
of the Philippine Islands." 

President Taft in the year 1901 set the stage for 
the orderly processes of development in self-government which 
may be said to have lasted from the inauguration of the 
civil government, in July 1901, until the dawn of the new 
era coincident with the administration of President 
Woodrow Wilson. President Taft inaugurated the era of 
peaceful cooperation between Americans and Filipinos. He 
affirmed MoKinley's fundamental policy and made it popular 
ty the adoption of the slogan: "The Philippines for the 
Filipinos." 

Following the election, in 1912, to the Presidency 
o, the United States of Woodrow Wilson, the Filipinos were 

♦ „i of the Philippine Commission. In explaining 
given control or tne xa-^-vv 

his action, President Wilson: 

1 believe that in this W^l'SSFttoir 
mal ce proof of their capacity in couns^ p 
sense of responsibility in of thls step will 

oal cower, and that tne J= u th s teps which are 
b. bSS. to clear £™ f LoSw «W «f PggJ* 
to follow St in the Islands making 

s«jsg£--?gr^ i g So yjsss&Siu 

native citizens 01 tbelP local » interest 

K^tf SS.'SrS'" oou - - experience 
- SKS SfeVoee affaire under their 

be suitable to a P 
own control. 



new 



In 1913, upon his arrival in Manila, the 

Governor-General sent out by Mr. Wilson, the Honorable 

Francis Burton Harrison, delivered to the Filipino people 

the following message from the President; 

"We regard ourselves as trustees, acting 
not for the advantage of the United States, but 
for the benefit of the people of the Philippine 
Islands. 

"Every step we take will be taken with a 
view to the ultimate independence of the Islands 
and as a preparation for that independence. And 
we hope to move toward that end as rapidly as the 
safety and permanent interests of the Islands 
will permit. After each step taken experience 
will guide us to the next. 

"The administration will take one step at 
once, and will give the native citizens of the 
Islands a majority in the appointive Commission, 
anHnus in the upper as well as in the lower house 
of the legislature a majority representation will 
be secured to them." 

With the control by the Eilipinos of the two 
branches of the legislature, the Government evolved from 
a government by Americans assisted by Filipinos into a 
government by Filipinos assisted by Americans. 

In 19 16, with the passage of the Philippine Auton- 

.<-u» Ton ps Law, another and 
omy Act, popularly known as the Jones Law, 

„. taken In the direction of self- 
more decisive step ^ ° » „ explalned lB 

— "I;!!: ale U the han. „ the people o f 
Its preamble, was P ^ dofflestl0 affalr s 

the Philippines as large a con ^ lmpalr in g 

as oan be given them wlthou , g Qf 

, rhts of sovereignly x 
the exercise of the righ ^ ^ exerclse 

■« order that, D Y 
the United States, xtt ox 



of popular franchise and governments 

governmental powers, they may be 

the better prepared to fullv a^cmm- +u 

"-tiy assume the responsibilities 

and enjoy all the privileges of C nmm u t a t j 

s«o ui complete independence." J 

quote the preamble of the Jones Law: 

"An Act to declare the purpose of the Peo^i « 
of the United States as to Ihl future SSiti 
cal status of the People of the PhUipp?ne 
Islanas, ana to provide a more autonomous 
government for those Islands; 

"Whereas it was never the intention of the people 
of the United States in the incipience of the 
War with Spain to make it a war of conquest for 
territorial aggrandizement; and 

"Whereas it is, as it has always been, the purpose 
of the People of the United States to withdraw 
their sovereignty over the Philippine Islands 
and to recognize their independence as soon as 
a stable government can be established therein; 
and 

"Whereas for the speedy accomplishment of such 
purpose it is desirable to place in the hands 
of the people of the Philippines as large a 
control of their domestic affairs as can be 
given them without, in the meantime, impairing 
the exercise of the rights of sovereignty by 
the people of the United States, in order tnat, 
by the use and exercise of popular franchise 
and governmental powers, they may be the better 
Snared to fully assume the responsibilities 
and P en!oy all the privileges of complete mde- 
pendence ." 

[ On torch 23, 1935, in the cabinet rccm cf the 

a i^^nnnxr officials of the Philippine 
White House were gatnered leading oinoi 

Before affixing his signature, 
and American Governments. tfeiore 

. ~* tn President Quezon: "This is 
President Roosevelt remarked to Presia 

, tMqlsa gr eat historical document." After 
a great day, and this is a greu 

. g , be read the following message: 



signing 



"I am happy to state that th B n 
fitted to me on behalf of the Philip- ^ S S ltutioa - sub- 
Convention for certification under t hi I 5? nstltuti °nal 
conforms with the provisions of the Act gS_McDuffie 

"The members of the Convention 
la ted on the satisfactory completion ofa ^ask^? 0 ^^" 
tance and significance in the life of their peopLT^" 

"In the event of ratification of thi ^ mn^n.f 
th e authority granted to the CommonweaL^Gove?n m en^ tl0n, 
will permit the exercise by the Filipino people of 
general control, suoject only to a fev; important excep- 
tions, of their local affairs. 

"During the period of the Commonwealth, there will 
remain with the Government of the United States authority 
commensurate with and necessary for or appropriate to the 
ultimate responsibility of sovereignty. 

"Animated solely by feelings of cordiality, sympathy 
and loyalty, the people of the United States and the 
neople of the Philippines have been conducting together 
an experiment , and during the period of the Commonwealth 
Government, this experiment will continue until tne ulti- 
mate withdrawal of the United States sovereignty and the 
establishment of complete independence. 

But the most important of all the public statements 
made and the one that has touched the heart of all the people 
or the Philippines is the message of President Roosevelt 

ion to Presiaent 
transmitted by short-wave on December 28, 1941. 

of rorregidor. sent at a time 
M durins th. s ieS e of 0«r^ ^ & ^ 

wne, our troops and our peop ^ ^ blood of the 

losing battle, this message is ^ 

a ~ nf freedom. 1 
men who died for the cause 

this proclamation: 

r the PhiliPP 3 - 1163 - 
"To the people 01 against the 

1lHT1 t struggle d a d- 

pie on this solemn occasi 



United States, of the p,.< + , 
Netherlands East IndLo lsh E *Pire of +v 
nave been' dedicated* b^thSfJ* 6 ^i^sfi^*. 
and complete defeat of ? people to theStw' 

this great struggle of Jgj Pa???? Se War lords? 6 *!* 
Americans of the PhiiipniL ? C ^ flc > the loyal 
upon to play a crucial rS?e IS i H nds ^ called 
they are playing tonight th^. y J . nave Played and 
est gallantry. f« President^? fi2 ? ith srea?- 
them my feeling of sincere acuniSt Z ° ex ** Q ss to 
they are now making. The oeoni* ^°?u :t ' or the fi Sht 
States will never loraet wh«? P +H ° f the Un ^ed 
Philippine Islands arl doTnf th 6 P ? ople of the 
do in the days tS co£e\ T|ive To tK - and , wi11 
the Philippines my solemn DledL ?h«+ +? e ? pl ! of 

and protectee rhe entire resources in men and 
materials of the United States stand behind that 
pledge. It is not for me or for the people of this 
country to tell yon where your duty lies. V.e are 
engaged in a great common cause. I count on every 
Philippine man, woman and child to do his duty. Y/e 
v/ill do ours." 

A review of Philippine-^mierican relations thus 
discloses that the provisions of the Atlantic Charter, only 
recently set forth as the torch of hope for the peoples of 
the world, were in effect established in the Philippines 
long ago, and its objectives were followed there practically 
from the very first day that America set foot in the Phili- 
ppines. The fundamental objectives of the Altantic Charter have 
been in operation in the Philippines throughout the whole 

forty-five years of American occupation. 

+ hp Tnaeoendetice Act passed 
As I said before, the xnaep^u 

in 1934 provides for tne absolute and complete 
of the Philippines not later than ,uly 4th, 1946. 

4n the orocess 01 an 
tne Presen t war started, we were in the p 

« for the time when our 
abetment intended to prepare us cea se, 

t+h the United states 
Preferential trade status with 



and our foreign commerce would beccv^ 

Xa beco ^ more extended, 
with the occupation o-p ~ 
,. , . OU1 ' ° OUllt ^. *11 these plans 

^disrupted. tore W fortunate, however l 



j in one 



joint, and that is that Providence made possible the de- 
parture of President Quezon and his War Cabinet from the 
Philippines, thus permitting establishment of his Government 
in the United States to carry on the functions of our 
Government from Washington. Its most important duty today, 
however, is to continue the fight and to assure the prompt 
liberation of our country from the hands of the invader, at 
the earliest practicable time. 

When this has been attained and our liberty 
established, our Government will cooperate with other 
peoples of the world, and particularly with the peoples 
of the Pacific, in the support of measures upon which 

future world relations must be founded. 

tak-P full part in such 

We expect, tuereioxe, 

^4- «n this purpose and expect 
councils as may be held to attain tnis purp 

+ QHnn artil be commensurate both 
also our country's representation win ^ 

with our status and with our contriou on 
struggle. 



