PRESIDENTIAL INAUGURAL 

June 30, 2010 



Official Program 
Of the Ceremonies Attending 
The Inauguration and Induction into Office 

Of 

Benigno S. Aquino III 
As President of the Philippines 
and 

Jejomar C. Binay 
As Vice President of the Philippines 
Wednesday, the thirtieth of June 
two thousand and ten 
Quirino Grandstand 
Rizal Park 
Manila 



Arrival of the Presidential Party 
Wednesday, 30 June 2010 



9:00 A.M. Departure of President-elect Benigno S. Aquino m from his residence at Times 
Street, Quezon City, for Malacahan Palace. 

10:15 A.M. Arrival of the President-elect at Malacahan Palace. 

10:30 A.M. Departure of President Gloria Macapagal- Arroyo and President-elect Benigno S. 
Aquino m from Malacahan Palace. 

10:45 A.M. Arrival of President Gloria Macapagal- Arroyo and President-elect Benigno S. 
Aquino m at the Quirino Grandstand. 

10:50 A.M. Honors for President Gloria Macapagal- Arroyo. 

(A twenty-one gun salute, accompanied by the honor guard presenting arms, and four 
ruffles and flourishes and the playing of the presidential anthem, "Mabuhay, " will 
accompany the arrival of the President and the President-elect.) 



11:05 AM. 



Departure of President Gloria Macapagal- Arroyo. 



2010 Inaugural Day Ceremonies 
SCHEDULE OF EVENTS 
Wednesday, 30 June 2010 



6:00-9:00 A.M. Prayer services by different Religious Faiths throughout the Philippines. 

9:00 A.M. Assembly of the general public at Rizal Park. 

Arrival of officials and distinguished guests at the Quirino Grandstand. 
Departure of President-elect Benigno S. Aquino HI from his residence at 

Times Street, Quezon City, for Malacahan Palace. 

10:15 AM. Arrival of the President-elect at Malacahan Palace. 

10:30 A.M. Departure of President Gloria Macapagal- Arroyo and 

President-elect Benigno S. Aquino in from Malacahan Palace. 

9:45 AM. Officials and distinguished guests with assigned seats will occupy their respective 

places at the Quirino Grandstand. 
10:05 A.M. Arrival of Mrs. Jejomar C. Binay at the Quirino Grandstand. 

10:25 AM. Arrival of the Aquino family at the Quirino Grandstand. 

10:35 A.M. Arrival of Vice President-elect Jejomar C. Binay at the Quirino Grandstand. 

10:45 AM. Arrival of President Gloria Macapagal- Arroyo and President-elect Benigno S. Aquino HI. 

10:50 A.M. Honors for President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. 

11:05 AM. Departure of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. 

11:10 A.M. National Anthem 

11:15 A.M. Ecumenical Invocation 

Songs: Bayan Ko by the Madrigal Singers 

Minamahal Kong Bayan by the Apo Hiking Society 

11:30 AM. Reading by the President of the Senate of the Proclamation by the Congress of the 
Philippines announcing the results of the elections in the Philippines. 

11:35 AM. Musical Ensemble: Inaugural Song Bagong Pilipinas by Ogie Alcasid, Noel Cabangon, 

Christian Bautista, Jed Madela, Mae Paner, Jim Paredes, 
Gary Valenciano and Gail 

11:50 AM. Administration of the Oath of Office to the Honorable Jejomar C. Binay, 

Vice President-elect of the Philippines, by Associate Justice Conchita Carpio-Morales. 



12:00 NOON Administration of the Oath of Office to the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, 

President-elect of the Philippines, by Associate Justice Conchita Carpio-Morales. 



(Four ruffles and flourishes, and the March, "Mahuhay, " and all- gun salute will 
im media tely follow) 

Inaugural Address by His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III, 
President of the Philippines. 

Panata sa Pagbabago. 

Honors for President Benigno S. Aquino III 

(Upon concluding the Panata sa Pagbabago, the honor guard will -present arms and 
the President will proceed to Malacanan Palace, preceded by a motorized escort. 
Outside the gates ofMalacanang, the motorized escort will be relieved by the 
Presidential Guards.) 

Recession of the President of the Philippines. 
Recession of the Vice President of the Philippines. 
1:00 PM. Working lunch with the Cabinet and other officials, Rizal Hall, Malacanan Palace. 

2:00 P.M. Induction into office of the Cabinet and various officials by the President of the 
Philippines, Rizal Hall, Malacanan Palace. 

2:30 PM. First Cabinet Meeting of the President of the Philippines, Aguinaldo State IDining 
Room, Malacanan Palace. 



4:00 P.M Start of Street Program, Quezon Memorial Circle. 

6:00 P.M. Inaugural Reception, Reception and Rizal Halls, Malacanan Palace. 



8:30 P.M. 



Inaugural Concert, Quezon Memorial Circle, Quezon City. 




HIS EXCELLENCY 

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III 
PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



PRESIDENT BENIGNO S. AQUINO III 



On June 9, 2010, Benigno Simeon C. Aquino 
III was proclaimed as the duly elected 
President of the Philippines by the Senate 
President and the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives. He obtained more than 
15 million votes, winning by the largest margin 
in recent political history. 

Only nine months earlier, he launched his 
candidacy at Club Filipino where his mother, 
Corazon C. Aquino took her oath as President 
after the historic EDSA People Power 
revolution in February 1986. The launching of 
his candidacy was also the 40 th day after his 
mother's death. 

A few days earlier, he visited the Carmelite 
sisters in Zamboanga City as he sought 
discernment on what turned out to be the most 
crucial decision in his life: to seek the 
presidency of the Philippines. 

"Noynoy" Aquino has always viewed politics 
as a necessary vehicle for change, a perspective 
he formed early in life through the examples set 
by both of his parents. 

In 1998, he ran for a seat in the House of 
Representatives and won. He served as 
Congressman of the 2nd District of Tarlac until 
2007. 

In his nine years at the House, Noynoy 
focused on the fiscalizing role of a legislator. He 
felt that there were already too many laws, and 
good ones at that, but they seemingly lacked 
proper implementation. He concentrated on 
crafting laws that would help create 
opportunity rather than impose additional 
burdens to those who are already 
disadvantaged. He actively took part in budget 
deliberations to ensure that government 



initiatives do address the plight of the people 
who need help the most. 

His commitment to continue the legacy of his 
parents was evident in his performance. In 
November 2004, he became Deputy House 
Speaker of Luzon, but he relinquished the post 
when he joined leaders of the Liberal Party (LP) 
in calling for the resignation of President Gloria 
Macapagal- Arroyo at the height of the "Hello 
Garci" scandal. To him, it was easier to give up 
the position than abandon his duty to hold 
accountable those who do wrong. 

In May 2007, he ran for Senator and won, 
placing 6th in the national elections. He chaired 
the Senate Committee on Local Government, 
and is also the vice-chairperson of the 
Committee on Justice and Human Rights. He 
had been determined to ensure that his key 
legislative initiatives would bear fruit and to 
see them through until the end of his term. 

However, fate had other plans for him. The 
passing of his mother, former President Cory 
Aquino, stirred a long-dormant yearning for 
good leadership. Filipinos from all walks of life, 
here and abroad, began to look at Noynoy as 
the new hope for a better Philippines. The 
groundswell calling for him to run for 
President became too loud to ignore, and 
eventually overcame his reluctance. 

In the first-ever automated national elections held 
on May 10, 2010, the Filipino people voted to give 
him an unprecedented landslide victory. 

Noynoy is an economist by education, a 
lawmaker by vocation. He is an audiophile, 
history buff, marksman and self-taught 
billiards sharpie. He is a loving brother and 
uncle, and a steadfast friend. 



DEFINING MOMENTS 



Excerpts from Sen. Benigno S. Aquino Ill's speech 
on February 25, 2010, at the 24 th anniversary of the 
EDS A People Power revolution, Quezon City: 
a personal account and ref elections on his 
adolescence and passage into adulthood. 

In the early morning of September 23, 1972, 
armed soldiers arrested my father. Our mother 
roused us from sleep and told us what 
happened. 

I was only 12 years old then. My father was 
imprisoned without trial, even if he had done 
no wrong. The nightmare that was martial law 
began, dashing the people's hopes for a bright 
future. 

During my grade school days, I was always 
in the top ten of my class. I was preparing 
myself for an auspicious future. But martial law 
made this impossible. It became extremely 
difficult to study for a future without hope. 

My mom had to assume the role of both 
mother and father to her children. 

In order to visit and be with our father, we 
needed to seek permission from the martial law 
authorities. Every time we visited him, my 
mother and sisters were subjected to a strip 
search. They were forced to take off their 
clothes and I stood and watched helplessly by, 
unable to do anything as all of us were 
dehumanized. 

In 1977, when I was 17 years old, the time 
had come for the military commission to render 
its verdict. As he knew that the outcome had 
been predetermined and that he will, for sure, 
be found guilty, my father decided to go on a 
hunger strike to protest the injustice. 

Every day, I witnessed how the hunger strike 
sapped his strength. His life was being snuffed 
out, slowly, like a burning candle. I asked 
myself: Why did his life have to reach this 
point? Why does an innocent man need to go 
through extreme suffering? 

The trials and difficulties we 
experienced, the pain and suffering we felt— 
these served as the anvil upon which my 
character and values were shaped. 



It is true that my father was born into relative 
ease and comfort. But it is also true that he 
chose the path of truth and righteousness, even 
in the face of enticement by the dictator that he 
could enjoy power and wealth if only he would 
turn back on his principles. He chose to stand 
by our people. He offered his life for our 
country. 

I remembered a letter that my father wrote to 
me while he was in prison. 

This is part of what my father wrote me in 
that letter: 

"The only advice I can give you: Live with 
honor and follow your conscience. There is 
no greater nation on earth than our 
Motherland. No greater people than our 
own. Serve them with all your heart, with 
all your might, and with all your strength. 
Son, the ball is now in your hands." 

It is also true that my mother was not born in 
difficult circumstances. But she chose to live 
simply, serve our people, and lift them out of 
poverty — and she, too, offered her own 
measure of sacrifice for the freedom of our 
nation. 

My parents gave to our country what was 
essentially priceless: their selfless sacrifice, their 
uncompromising commitment to protect and 
defend those that were being oppressed. Their 
message to our countrymen: We are with you. 
You are not alone. 

Our people reciprocated with their own 
measure of love and affection for my parents. 
When my father was martyred, millions 
joined his funeral. When my mother fell ill, the 
entire nation prayed for her. Millions also 
joined the procession to her final resting place. 

Through all our sacrifices and suffering, you 
expressed your solidarity with us. You never 
abandoned us. You made us feel: We are with 
you, you are not alone. 




THE HONORABLE 
JEJOMAR C. BINAY 
VICE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



VICE PRESIDENT JEJOMAR C. BINAY 



Jejomar C. Brnay has gained recognition for his key 
role in leading the rise to prominence of Makati, the coun- 
try's financial and business center. In the listing of Top 10 
World Mayors in 2006, he ranked 4 th overall and number 1 
among all mayors in Asia. 

His potential for leadership was clearly evident as a 
member of the University of the Philippines Student 
Council. 

He stood up against the dictatorship during martial 
law and was put into prison for defending political 
prisoners. He had just gotten married then to the former 
Elenita Sombillo, a medical doctor, who bore their first 
baby while he was in prison. 

A defender of human rights, he became active in 
different groups and organizations seeking justice for the 
poor and the marginalized sectors of society. 

He joined the August Twenty-One Movement, so 
named after the date of the assassination of Ninoy 
Aquino, and was one of the founders of MABINI, the 
Movement of Attorneys for Brotherhood, Integrity and 
Nationalism, Inc., with some of the prominent figures in 
the anti-dictatorship movement. 

Humble beginnings 

He was born on November 11, 1942 to Diego Binay of 
Batangas and Lourdes Cabauatan of Isabela. Orphaned at 
the age of nine, his uncle Ponciano of Culi-Culi, Makati 
took care of him. 

He grew up in poverty and studied in public schools. 
He graduated with honors from the Philippine Normal 
College Training Department, and the University of the 
Philippines Preparatory School. He was a working 
student. 

Recognizing the value of education, he built in Makati 
the best equipped public schools in the country and insti- 
tuted a comprehensive education program up to the 
university level. Before he became mayor, he was a 
lecturer and professor of law, political science and public 
administration. 

He has taken advanced courses in management, public 
administration, national security, urban planning, 
environmental management, and governance. 



Heart for the masses 

As a student activist, he deplored the lack of access to 
basic health care services. As Makati mayor, he instituted a 
comprehensive health care program that enables residents 
to avail themselves of free medicines and first-class health 
care services. He has also established a best-in-class senior 
citizens program. 

Known to be a man of the masses, he personally visits 
wakes, an average of eight a day. He mingles with the 
people, at street corners or carinderias, everyday. His day 
starts with jogging and brisk walking on city streets with 
his constituents in Makati's barangays. 

He was the first local official to be appointed by 
President Corazon Aquino after the EDSA Revolution and 
was awarded the Outstanding Achievement Medal for his 
role in the defense of the Constitution. 

When he assumed office in an acting capacity after the 
triumph of People Power, Makati was bankrupt, its 
employees demoralized. He buckled down to work, 
increasing the city's revenues by implementing pro-people 
and business-friendly programs. 

He was elected by his constituents in 1988 and he 
stayed as mayor until 1998. He took a break after three 
consecutive terms, but remained active in the political 
arena as National President of PDP Laban, and the United 
Opposition. He served three more terms as mayor from 
2001 to 2010 and holds the record of having the largest 
margin of votes in election history of the city. 

He became Chairman of the Metropolitan Manila 
Development Authority in 1998 and is currently the 
National President of the Boy Scouts of the 
Philippines 

Devotion to family 

He and his wife Elen are blessed with five children: 
Maria Lourdes Nancy, Mar-len Abigail, Jejomar 
Erwin, Marita Angeline, and Joanna Marie Blanca. 
Abigail was reelected to a second term as Makati 
representative. Only son Jun-jun is the newly elected 
Makati City mayor. 

He is not only a good father to the people of Makati 
City. He has become an inspiration and a model to 
other leaders of the nation. He has triumphed over 
adversity and he is ready to take on greater challenges 
as he assumes the position of Vice President. 



The Oath of Office of 
the President of the Philippines 



"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfill my duties 

as President of the Philippines, 
preserve and defend its Constitution, 
execute its laws, 
do justice to every man, 
and consecrate myself 
to the service of the Nation. 
So help me God." 



In Filipino: 



"Mataimtim kong pinanunumpaan 
na tutuparin ko nang buong katapatan 
at sigasig ang aking mga tungkulin bilang 
Pangulo ng Pilipinas, 
pangangalagaan at ipagtatanggol 
ang kanyang Konstitusyon, 
ipatutupad ang mga batas nito, 
magiging makatarungan sa bawat tao, 
at itatalaga ang aking sarili 
sa paglilingkod sa Bansa. 
Kasihan nawa ako ng Diyos." 



PANATA SA PAGBABAGO 

Composed by: Sonny Coloma and Marian Pastor Roces 

Pilipino ako 
Namamanata 

Na tutulong ako sa ating pamunuan 

Sa pagtataguyod ng marangal na pamamahala 

Sa pagpapalakas ng isang lipunang makatarungan 

At sa pagpapatingkad ng ating demokrasya 

Upang gummhawa ang pinakamamahal nating bayang Pilipinas. 

Gagampanan ko 

Ang lahat ng katungkulan 

Ng isang mabuting mamamayan 

Na kasmg-tindi ng paghamon ko sa ating mga pinuno 
Na sumunod sa landas na matuwid. 
Makikipag-kapit-bisig ako sa aking kapwa Pilipino 
Sama-sama nating babaguhin 

Ang takbo ng kasaysayan upang umiral ang kagandahang-loob. 
Ipinangangako ko ito sa ngalan ng aking mga ninuno at mga apo 
Patnubayan nawa ng Poong Maykapal ang sambayanan. 

BAGONG PILIPINAS 

Music & Lyrics: Ogie Alcasid and Noel Cabangon 

Anuman ang iyong kulay 

Ang Pilipinas ay nagtagumpay 

Kahit galing sa dilim 

Alam natin ang araw ay sisikat din 

Tayo ma'y hiwa-hiwalay 
Isa ang ating mithiin at pangarap 
Bahagharing abot-tanaw 
Mula ngayo'y ating mararating 

Bagong Pilipinas 

Sama-samang ihayag ang tagumpay 
Bagong Pilipinas 

Salubungin natin ang bagong umaga 
Muli nating itanghal bayang nagkaka-isa 
Simulan na natin ang Bagong Pilipinas 

Bridge: 

Sa tulong at patnubay ng Panginoon 
H'wag na nating sayangin ang pagkakataon 
Lubos na pagtitiwala sa isa't isa 
Ang s'yang maghahatid ng bagong pag-asa 



INAUGURAL OF PRESIDENT BENIGNO S. AQUINO III 

June 30, 2010 



Overall Chair : Atty. Paquito N. Ochoa 
Overall Co-chair : Maria V. Montelibano 

Event Coordinators 
I. The Inaugural, Quirino Grandstand Rizal Park : Maria V. Montelibano 
II. First Cabinet Meeting and Inaugural Reception, Malacanan Palace : Sonny Coloma 
III. Inaugural Concert and Street Party, Quezon Memorial Circle : 
Gerry Esquivel, Lito Nadal, Eddie Galvez 

COMMITTEES: 



Mobilization 
Rep. Bernadette Herrera-Dy 
Dodot Jaworski 
Mari Oquinena 
Sandy Quiwa 
Joey Mendoza 
Ric de Guzman 
Tady Palma 

Councilor Armand Padilla 
Protocol 

Ambassador Miguel Perez Rubio 
Ambassador Albert del Rosario 
Ambassador Eduardo Maglaya 
Manolo Quezon 
Eduardo Paraan 
Rodillo Catalan 
Bruce Borres 
Ian San Juan 

Invitations 
Ambassador Narcisa Escaler 
Ballsy Aquino Cruz 
Rochelle Ahorro 
Dr. Alex Ayco 
Susan Reyes 

Rep. Mar-len Abigail Binay Campos 
Jose Benjamin Angeles 
Marita Angeline Alcantara 



Invitations Printing & Delivery 
Bettina Osmena 
Camille Samson 
Ann Blythe Tia 
Ronisia Gosiengfiao 
Diona Javate 

Mikee Cojuangco Jaworski 
Allan Capulong 
Olive de Guzman 
Cholo Kawada 

Banquet 
Bettina Osmena 
Bettina Aboitiz 

Ways & Means 
Pinky Aquino Abellada 
Pete Prado 
Jeffrey Ng 

Ambassador Albert del Rosario 
Maria Lourdes Nancy Binay Angeles 
Gerry Esquivel 
Gene Manalastas 
Eddie Galvez 
Paul Cabral 

Arch. Manny Dimaculangan 

Finance 
Atty. Paquito N. Ochoa 
Usee. Mario Relampagos 
Viel Aquino Dee 
Odette Ong 



COMMITTEES: 



Physical Design & Construction 

Usee. Romeo Momo 

Peachy Prieto 

Tady Palma 

Zaldy dela Rosa 

Boyet Montiel 

Dindo Sanchez 

Dir. Ed Tayao 

Jun Simon 

Program 
Maria V. Montelibano 
Kris Aquino Yap 

Mayor-elect Jejoma Erwin Binay, Jr. 

Manolo Quezon 

Marian Roces 

George Syliangco 

Ambeth Ocampo 

Vic Badoy 

Production 
Lito Nadal 
Cindy Ebron 
Paul Montano 
Bolet Vidanes 
Ten Mariano 
Charisse Arguelles 
Alvin Gonda 
GKom Team 
Anavision 
Ubert Cruz 

Media & Publicity 
Jing Magsaysay 
Lynette Baldovino 
Christopher Tio 



Military & Police for VIP Security 

& Tr office Management 
Gen. Angel Honrado 
Gen. Robert Rosales 
Col. Chito Dizon 
Col. Ivan Samarita 
Rico Puno 

Gen. Rodolfo Magtibay 

Souvenir Program 
Sonny Coloma 
Ward Luarca 
Marian Roces 
Jan Co Chua 
Alma Tuason 

Medical & First Aid 
Joe Fabia 

Dr. Angeles de Leon 

Dr. Warren Sarmiento 

Dr. Ruben Flores 

Philippine National Red Cross 

Quezon City & Manila Chapters 
Department of Health 

Emergency Management Services 
Quezon City Health Department 
City of Manila Health Department 
Makati Rescue Team 
MPD & QCPD Medical Teams 
Sparks for Change 
Edgar Zaragoza 



