x HILI1 TINE EXECUTIVE COMMISSION 
PROVINCE OF LEYTE 
TACLOBAN 



Office of the Governor,, INSTRUCTION NO. 4. 

(iTovincial) 

September 19, 1942. 

'Sirs; 

For the information and guidance of all concerned, 
there is quoted hereunder Department Administrative Order 
No. 4, dated July 14, 1942, of the Department of Agricul- 
ture and Commerce to wit. 

Philippine Executive Commission 
Department of Agriculture and Commerce 
Manila 



iUR ) 



July 14, 1942 



• 'DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATIVE OpiDE 

o 

No. 4 ) 

SUBJECT i Rules and Re gu 3 ^tiqnsjlqyernij]£ 
the Opening a nd Ope.ratipn._qf .Factories. 

Pursuant to informatio n No. 26, dated May 30, . 19-A2 
of the Director General of the Military nchninistra ion -- 
+inp . the execution of the provisions of p roclcJi^tion 
d-tea February 5, 1942 concerning the opening’, reopening 
and liclnSnl y of factories, the following Rules and re- 
gulations are hereby promulgated for the inform, ion c, 
guidance of all concerned; 

"1. The following shall not operate 
permit therefor issued by the Commissioner of agriculture 

and Commerce; 

Manufacture of batteries 
Manufacture of bricks 
Manufacture of tobacco products 
Manufacture of wines 
Manufacture of ice 
Manufacture of matches 
Manufacture of sugar and alcohol 
Manufacture of leather and 
rubber shoes 

Manufacture of cotton and cloth 
Brewery of beer 
Manufacture of candles 
Manufacture of coconut oil 
Canning of food products 
Manufacture of steel products 
Rice mill 

Manufacture of other products which may 
heneciftex* D6 included herein* 

„2. Ho industrial establislunent or factory ensued 
+ not listed in the preceding -h 

1 lt?on a shrll be opened or reopened nor start by Notifi 
oner^tion^ without^ previously notifying- the . cation 
operation of Commerce and industries, in 

Director^Borcc.u qi « prescribed in Section 

writing, c-n . ' t d s -p e f 0 re the start of opera- 

tions? Me Aquired in this section shOl 



Authori ty 



2 



be sufficient authority for the applicant to open ££22£...Q£ 
or reopen the factory, but the fact of notifies- ljp^f ic...-- 
tion must be established by the production of a tion 
written acknowledgement by the Director of the 
bureau of Commerce and Industries of the receipt of such 

notification. 

3. Applications for authority to open or reppen and 
to start operations of industrial e s^l^tonts c.nd fo.c 
tories falling under Section 1 hereof shall addressed 
to the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce ,.nd shc.l 
be submitted thru the Director, Bureau of Commerce end 
Industries. It shall be in the form Prescribed by the 
said Commissioner. Such applicationssha.il stete the ncme 
and address off the applicant, his or its 'if 

citizenship, shall bear his or its signature (and sea it 
the same be available) , and shall give tne following in- 
formation! 

1. Name of the factory 

2. Address and telephone No. of the factory 

3. Amount of paid-up capital . . 

4. Nationality and citizenship of the majority stock- 

holders or of the controlling stockholders 

5. Name , nationality, and citizenship of the person 
who shall be responsible for the operation ox 
the factory 

6. Kinds of products to De produced 

7. Monthly output 

8. prices at which the products shn.ll be sold 

9. Expected chief buyers of the products 

10. Number of laborers to be employed, classified 

to sex , , „ 

11. Materials and fuel which will be required xor 

operation 

12. Estimated consumption of the above 

1 a i resent stock on hand 

14*. Sources of materials end means of transporting 
them 

15. Operating capital per month 

16. Amount of needed circulating capital 

17. Is the factory sealed? _ . 

18 Has the internal revenue license oeen pa.ia. - 

If Aid give the number of the license, the date 
when paid, and the place where it was issued 

19. Is the factory old or new? 

If new, date of opening . . 

If old, how many years has it existed*" 

Application blanks may be furnished by the Director of the 

Bureau of Commerce and Industries at cost. 

4. Notifications for the opening or reopening and 
start of operations of factories and industrial est^blish- 
nents coming under Section 2 hereof shall also oe m the 
form -prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture and 

and shall give, in addition to the name, Fprmpf/ 
address ’ nationality°and citizenship of the owner, |otifica- 
f 11 5 other information regarding the _ factory , tion 

reauired in the preceding section. Notification +r . n+0 

blanks may be furnished by the Director of the Content^ 

Bureau of Commerce and Industries at cost. 

5 No permit will be issued unless the _ Hequiy . SE & + * 
Director of the Bureau of Comirierce and Industries sm. 1 
Hit first certified that he has verified, by 
himself or thru his duly authorized repre- of_AirU 






- 3 - 



sentative, the correctness of all information given 



.on; 



£3 - 

by the applicant in his or its application, end 
that, according to the investigation (a) the 
factory premises are adequate and in good 
sanitary condition 5 (b) the equipment to be 
used is adequate and in good operating condi- 
(c) the capital available is sufficient 
the immediate needs for operating expenses 
the factory; (d) there is an available supply 
of the necessary raw materials and motive power; law Materi als 
(e) the prices at which the goods to be produced 
shall be sold are reasonable, and that such be 
distributed thru buyers calculated to serve the 
best interests of the general public; and (f) 
the operation of the factory shall not consti- 
tute a nuisance to an established residential 



1 or 
> 

-L 



Veracity cf 
Informat i on 

Machinery 

Capital 



i rices an d 
Distribute .! 

hot a nui - 
sance 



2 one or to the people 
which it is located. 



of the neighborhood in 



Application for the opening or reopening of 
any factory or industrial establishment in the Opening of 
province shall be accompanied by a certification 
of the local military commander that he has no 
objection to the approval thereof, and a certi- 
fication by the Governor of the province or by 
the Mayor in the locality duly deputized for 
purpose by said Governor that the f?,ctory 



Factories 
in the 
x rovinces 



(a), (b), (c), 
preceding paragraph. 



(d) 



the 

satisfies the conditions 
(e) and (f) in the 

6 . No factory or industrial establishment 
authorized to operate by notification, a.s pro- 
vided in Section 2 hereof, sha.ll be allowed to 
continue to perate, unless it satisfied the 
conditions (a), (b) , (c), (d) , (e) and (f) in 
the preceding section. 



Condition 
for conti - 
nued Oper a- 
tion 



7. Without the previous approval of the Director t rior 

Approval of 
Director 
General of 



General of the Military Administration, the 
Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce may 
not issue any authority for the opening or 
reopening of (a.) any fa.ctory or industrial 
establishment which is owned or controlled by 
a Chinese citizen or Japanese subject, and (b) 
printing presses and such other factories or 
establishments which may be specifically desig- 
nated hereafter by the Director Genera}, of the 
Military Administration. 

8 . It shall be the duty of the Director, 
Bure a.u of Commerce and Industries, not la. ter 
than the 10 th day of each month, to report in 
such form as the latter may prescribed, all 
notifications to open or reopen factories fal- 
ling under Section 2 received by him during the 
preceding month. 



Military 

ndminis 



Reports orf 
Notifies- ' 
tions re- ' 
ceived 



Duties of 
Licensees 



9. It shall be the duty of all persons, 

firms, or corporations authorized to operate 

factories or industrial establishments under the 
p xsjdLSMS. provisions of this Order, expressly or 
by notification- in due form properly acknowledged 
to submit to the Director of the Bureau of Commerce 
and Industries, not later than the 7th day of each 
month, a report covering the operations of the factory 
or industrial establishment during the preceding month, 
containing the following data; 



t 



- 4 - 

(a) Kinds of products turned out Monthly 

(b) Amounts manufactured or produced Reports 

(c) Routes through which the principal 

raw materia. Is are received and the amount 
of stock on hand 

(d) List of buyers and selling prices 

(e) Consumption of fuel and electricity 

(f) Number of workers (male , female ) and 

average wa.ges per day (male $ female ) . 

(g) Statement of accounts in the form which may 
be prescribed by the Commissioner of agricul- 
ture and Commerce. 

inspection 

10. It shall be the duty of the Director, Bureau of 

Commerce and Industries to inspect, from time to time, m 
person or thru his duly authorized representatives, all 
factories and industrial establishments authorized to . 
operate under this Order, for the purpose of ascertaining 
conditions existing therein and of determining whether or 
not the owners, managers, or responsible x : urpos e___qf 

officers thereof properly observe these Inspec tion 

Rules and Regulations. _The Director of the 

Bureau of Commerce and industries shall make 
appropriate reports on such inspections to the 
Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce. 

11. The Commissioner of Agriculture and Authority 
Commerce, the Director of the Bureau of Commerce of _ C ommis - 

-1 -r- -> 1 ! _ n ir rm+h T* O — on PT* n 



and Industries and their duly authorized re- 
presentatives sha.ll have the right of egress 
and ingress into the premises of any factory 
or industrial establishment authorized to 
opera. te under this Order, and shall have the 
authority to look into any books or accounts 
of the fa.ctory or industrial establishment related 
to its operation, and to require any pertinent in- 
formation about the factory, its operation, or any 
of its books or acdounts from the owner , manager or 
any responsible official thereof. 



Director 
and Repre - 
sentatives 



1, 1942. 



12. This Order shall take effect as of June 



Effectivity 



"(Sgd.) RAF . R. ALUNAN 

Commissioner " 



The Mayors are hereby reo_uested to give the contents 
of this Order the widest publicity possible. 




BERNARDO TORRES 
i rovincial Governor 




fr- q.yy J. 






TO ALL MUNICIPAL MAYORS, 
xROVINCE OF LEYTE 



LB Vci — 



