In Replying, Refer to 



COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

ARMY HEADQUARTERS 



MANILA 



January 8, 1937 



MEMORANDUM - 

For: Colonel Ord, 



I understand that Lieutenant Velasquez is going 
to remain a First Lieutenant inasmuch as he was not 
rated sufficiently high to jilace him among those 
eligible for promotion to the grade of Captain. The 
point by point system used in the grading placed too 
much stress on Constabulary work, naturally, Lieutenant 
Velasquez v/ith a relatively short experience in spite 
of his other qualifications could not overcome the 
loss of points incident to that system of rating. 

When I first graduated from West Point I was at 
a loss groping for that undefinable thing which every 
ambitious man looks forward .to, the opportunity to 
show what stuff one is really made of." My conception 
of duty, honor and country, as I understood them from 
’Jest Point, was so high that that conception was out 
of place in the surroundings I was thrown into and 
handicaj)ped me rather than helped me. Nevertheless, 

I have always insisted on the fulfillment of that 
conception of these three words, believing that the 
merit of the phrase "West Pointer" lies in them. As 
Filipino graduates we have formed some sort of an ex- 
clusive association and we know each other thoroughly. 
It is sad to report that several have failed to im- 
bibe the spirit that our Alma Mater imparts to her 
graduates. There has come into their lives a certain 
distortion of the shibolleth of the corps through the 
temptations of modern life, greed for lucre and fast 
living. These have lost their military character. 
Lieutenant Velasquez remains a standard bearer of what 
is best of the West Pointer. 

Lieutenant Velasquez functions under me as a 
member of the G-2 Section. He has demonstrated a 
manner of performance of duty, a norm of gentlemanly 
conduct, clear thinking and superior judgment unen- 
cumbered by political expediency or. personal favors 




- 2 - 



and a distinctly qualified military knowledge that 
should place him head and shoulders above officers 
in his rank in the military service. And he is 
ambitious and progressive, spending his leisure in 
furthering his military knowledge, something that 
very very few officers even of the United States Array 
do. 



Lieutenant Velasquez should be given a rank com- 
mensurate with his present usefulness in the military 
service at this period when there is a deficiency for 
personnel in that type of character and military know 
ledge needed at this stage of organization. I would 
not be shy to recommend Lieutenant Velasquez in the 
grade of Major. The Philippine Army will profit by 
it not only because of his military knowledge but 
because of what the "grip" imparts to the Corps. 







Colonel, PA. 
AC of S, G-2 



