
1930 



. L43 



Copyrights 1980 
By Rodrigo C. LlM 



V 



Sin mu Jfathrr 

(!)nr of thr pioneers among his coun- 
trymen mho haue settleb anb mafre 
homes fit thr pflipptes. 



"THE MAZZINI OF CHINA" 




Dr. Sun Yat Sen 

ufsJAME, fame, honor and wealth have never had any attraction 
for this great Chinese and even his enemies admit that he is 
one of the most selfless and reasonable men in China. 

He is not merely an idealist as some people think. He is most 
practical in removing the obstacles in the way of democracy, as e 
has so often proved in his career as a leader. 

He is a patriot in the truest sense of the term and like Mazzini 
is ever ready to help the fallen ones and to sympathize with the op- 
pressed. Dr. Sun hates secret diplomacy and is always frank in ex- 
pressing his opinions freely and fearlessly. His charming' manners, 
childlike simplicity and profound scholarship make him an unique 
figure in China. Dr. Sun prefers to work among the people as one 
of thpm. He therefore accepts an office only when duty dictates him 
to do so, giving it up to continue his democratic work among' the 
people as soon as he can be spared." 

j. B. Powell 



4 



Dr. Sun Yat Sen's Will 

For forty years I have devoted myself to the 
cause of the people's revolution with but one 
end in view, the elevation of China to a position 
of freedom and equality among the nations. My 
experiences during* these forty years have firmly 
convinced me that to attain this goal we must 
bring about a thorough awakening of our own 
people and ally ourselves in a common struggle 
with those peoples of the world who treat us on 
the basis of equality. 

The work of the Revolution is not yet done. 
Let all our comrades follow my "Plana for Na- 
tional Reconstruction'', "Fundamentals of Natio- 
nal Reconstruction", "Three Principles of the 
People", and the "Manifesto" issued by the First 
National Convention of our Party, and strive on 
earnestly for their consummation. Above all, 
our recent declarations in favor of the convoca- 
tion of a National Convention and the abolition 
of unequal treaties should be carried into effect 
with the least possible delay. This is my heart- 
felt charge to you. 



(Signed) Sun Wen 

March 11, 1925 



Written on February 20, 1925. 



STAUNCH ADMIRER OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE 




Message of Senate President Quezon On The 18th 
Anniversary of the Chinese Republic 

On this, the eighteenth anniversary of the Republic of 
China, I am deeply pleased to extend to my Chinese friends 
and to the Chinese people in general my whole-hearted con- 
gratulations. It is almost a decade now that the Chinese 
Republic had been established, and during this short span 
of time great things had been done under the able guidance 
of China's leaders. If the future is to be judged by the 
past, I am sure that greater things will yet be done. For 
such is the history of nations and peoples the world over. 
Either they progress or they go back. In the case of China, 
it has been a case of continuous progress, progress towards 
the goal of untrammelled freedom. 

At this instant, let me state that the future of China 
is bright and rosy, free as I see it from the clouds of out- 
side interference. Of course, much will have to be done 
before the goal is completely reached. The road to a 
glorious destiny is not strewn with roses, to be sure. It 
is beset here and there with the thorns and tumbles of dis- 
appointment, and at times, desperation. But happen what 
may, I believe that China will make her goal good, either 
soon or late. 



7 



PHILIPPINE-CHINESE RELATIONS 
By 

Prof. Austin W. Craig 1 

"History's first presentation of the Philippine Islands shows them 
to be a trade adjunct of the Chinese Empire." 

So wrote the exiled Filipino lawyer, Don Antonio M. Regridor of 
London, in seeking to have his countrymen understood by the United 
States thirty years ago. So, too, had written the earliest Spanish 
historians in introducing the Islands in Spain three and a half cen- 
turies ago. From time to time some publicity seekers #et into 
print about this or that other land as of greater influence on the 
Philippines but these ephemeral effusions are discredited as soon as 
their alleged authorities are investigated. 

A lecturer on China in a British university a dozen years ag;o 
placed the Philippines outside the line of lands known to China be- 
fore 1400, yet since then thirty undisputable dated references have 
been unearthed in Chinese records from A. D. 222 down to that 
year. Ten years later Manila had a Chinese governor whose name 
is stated and within that first quarter of the same century rulers 
from Sulu and from Pangasinan visited the Chinese court. The 
former died and was buried in China, the grave near a mosque and 
still remembered. 

The earliest myths of these Islands mention Chinese; the oldest 
relics are jars from China. The ancient traditions include by name 
the Chinaman who in the 13th century showed the Bisayan how to 
distill an intoxicating beverage from the sugar cane. Almost as 
early is the Chinese grave in Sulu still yearly decorated by the 
Chinese commercial colony, of the first merchant who established 
himself in that once commercial center. 

Some eighty Chinese families, exiles, had their homes in Manila 
when Legaspi first reached that city. The first printer and type- 
founder in the Philippines was a Chinaman. The most popular 
image, that of the Virgin of the Rosary, was carved by a Chinese 
artist, and the first Church paintings were their copies of the 
several originals brought from Spain. 

Chinese love of learning implanted in the Philippines caused 
the early establishment of the venerable University of Santo Tomas 
and had a large share in the Filipinos' zeal for schools. Chinese 
cookery made Filipino hospitality acceptable and numerous his- 

1 Prof. Oraig is the foremost living" Rizalisl and a recognizee] Philippine 
history researcher. He is the author of many valuable books on Kizal and 
other phases of Philippine history. 



torical references could be cited in support of this statement. The 
Chinese mestiza has ever been the Philippines* standard of beauty, 
admired alike by Europeans, Malays, Americans, and her father's 
countrymen. Chinese have fought for the Philippines, but better 
say, have worked for it. There is a large and creditable part in 
its past — they are the stabilizing* influence in its present, and with- 
out them there would be no hope for the future. Unlike the objec- 
tionable (because of his temporary or transient character) Chinese 
immigrants to America, here Chinamen have made their homes and 
established families. In the ancestry of every Filipino of any im- 
portance, whether called pure Tag*alog* like Rizal or Creole like 
many European mestizos, Chinese ancestors will be found when 
proper search is made. The new race being* built up here in the 
Philippines is Malay (that is, Dravidian, Indian and Southern 
Chinese), Caucasian (Indonesian or European or American), Ne- 
grito (not African but stunted dark Malay), and Chinese, and the 
last is not the least important element. It has added sturdiness to 
the build, increased the intelligence and enhanced the good looks of 
the Filipinos. 



9 



The Author 

HORN in Tagoloan, Misamis Oriental, Aug. 8, 1905. Finished 
secondary course, with honors, Misamis High School, 1923. 
Passed First Grade Civil Service examination, 1924 and Junior Com- 
mercial Agents' examination, 1925. Employed Bureau of Customs, 
1924-1927, while studying in Colleges of Liberal Arts and Law, Uni- 
versity of the Philippines. "Graphic" editorial staff, 1927-192 J; 
Manager, National News Service (SIN), 1929-1930. Author and 
Publisher, "Who's Who in the Philippines," 1929. 

Married to Leonida Manuel of Pampanga in 1929. 



10 



PREFACE 



INCLUDED in this volume, are the pictures and biogra- 
1 phies of over one hundred Chinese residents in the 
Philippine Islands. The author has endeavored to include 
herein representative types of Chinese businessmen of the 
old as well as the young generation, who have been, and 
are, contributing very much to the economic and industrial 
development of this country. 

The close relations between the Chinese and Filipinos 
date back to the earliest period of recorded Philippine his- 
tory. Before Magellan had conceived of his daring ven- 
ture to encircle the globe — which enterprise led to the dis- 
covery of the Philippines— Chinese and Filipinos already 
had commercial and trade relations. By reason of their 
geographical locations and racial affinities, China and the 
Philippines had and will always have intimate relations 
with each other. Chinese and Filipino leaders, among 
them Minister C. T. Wang and Senate President Manuel 
L. Quezon, have realized the value of close friendship be- 
tween the two peoples and have exerted efforts in the 
past to bring about such an understanding. 

It is with the desire to contribute what little he can 
to the promotion of Sino-Filipino relations that the 
author is publishing this Chinese edition of his "Who's 
Who in the Philippines." Although the relations of the 
two peoples in the past have been most cordial, except for 
slight frictions now and then, there is a great need for 
Filipinos knowing the Chinese more and the Chinese under- 
standing the Filipinos better. 

The author has traveled hundreds of miles to obtain 
the materials for this little book. He has had a heart-to- 
heart talk with different types of Chinese in Manila and 
the provinces in connection with this work. And always, 
each one of them has expressed a keen desire for closer 
relationships with Filipinos; always, each has wished the 
time will come when the present prejudices which some- 
times engulf the two peoples will forever disappear. A 
universal sentiment exists in the minds of the Celestials 



11 



residing in these Islands, and that is, they consider the 
Philippines their second home, their adopted country, 
where a great many of them have found their final resting- 
places. 

In picking out one hundred from among the thousands 
of Chinese residents in the Philippines, the author was 
partly guided by the lists kindly furnished him by the 
general secretary of the Manila Chinese Chamber of Com- 
merce and the honorary Chinese Consuls of Cebu and Iloilo. 
A great many of the Chinese whose pictures and biogra- 
phies appear in this book have spent more years in these 
Islands than in their native country. An overwhelming 
majority of them have climbed to the top of their careers 
from the very bottom, their life stories thus serving as an 
inspiration to the youth, Filipino and Chinese. These two 
things, rather than social popularity or financial standing, 
were the main considerations in choosing them to be in- 
cluded herein. 

I wish to acknowledge the cooperation given to me 
by everyone whose biography is included in this book, 
with special thanks to Consul General Kwong, Messers. 
Dee C. Chuan, C. C. Lim, Dee Hong Lue, Go Chioco, Dy 
Buncio, Albino Sy Cip, and Ecluardo del Rosario Tan Kiang 
of Manila; to Consul Manuel Go Tianuy of Cebu and Con- 
sul Yap Seng of Iloilo, without whose encouragement and 
support in this streneous and difficult enterprise, my work 
would not have been a success. 

Rodrigo C. Lim 

Manila, November, 1930. 



12 



( _ 7t ^ f ew words from Senate President Quezon about the 
WHO'S WHO IN THE PHILIPPINES." 



T. S. Form No. <2. 



9 

PHILIPPINE SENATE 



April 30, 1929 

Mr. Rodrigo C. Lin c to ^^ 
C/0 "Graphic" Editorial Staff 
Manila 

My dear Mr. Lin J 

This is to acknowledge the receipt of 
a copy of your WHO'S WHO IN THE PHILIPPINES 
which you have kindly sent me, and to thank 
you for the samo. 

I wish to congratulate you heartily 
for getting out this publication which, T be- 
lieve, will be very useful to everyone who wants 
to know the lives of the leading men and women 
in this country. As one who is very much interest 
ed in your career, I am, indeed a happy to see • 
you devoting your talents to important works. 
With your ability and industry you need further 
not fear the future. 

Wishing you success, I remain, I am, 



Sincerely yours, 



13 



1 




H. K. Kwong 
C hinese Consul-Ge n era 1 
1WIR. Kwong is a native of Canton where he was born in 1892. He 
attented St. John's University at Shanghai in 1907 and in 1909 
was awarded a scholarship by the Tsing Hua College to study in the 
United States, being second in the competitive examinations held that 
year. 

Mr. Kwong first entered Andover Academy where he studied for 
one year. He was graduated from Princeton University with the 
degree of Lifet. B. in 1914. He then entered the Graduate School of 
Columbia University, N. Y., specializing in economics and journalism. 
He received the degree in journalism in 1916. While at Princeton, 
Mr. Kwong served on the editorial staff of the Daily Princetonian 



15 



and during his junior and senior years was a contributor to the 
Springfield Republican, and later was editor of the Chinese Students' 
Monthly published in the United States. He was also active in stu- 
dent affairs being a member of the "Key and Seal" Society and the 
Students Municipal Club. In 1915 he was appointed by the Chinese 
Government as a delegate to the World Press Congress which met at 
the Panama Pacific Exposition in San Francisco. In 1916 he was 
elected president of the Chinese Students Alliance in the United 
States. 

Upon his return to China, Mr. Kwong became assistant editor of 
the Peking Gazette and also served as Peking correspondent for the 
New York Evening Post. The next year, 1917, he was appointed 
lecturer in English and International Law at Tsing Hua College, the 
school started for the purpose of training Chinese students for ad- 
mission to American Universities under the Boxer Indemnity remitted 
to China when Theodore Roosevelt was president. 

In 1918, Mr. Kwong came to Shanghai and was appointed secret- 
ary of the Government Kiangnan Dock and Engineering: Works which 
was at that time engaged in the construction of several cargo boats 
on behatf of the United States Shipping Board. In 1922 he joined 
the Ministry of Communications of the Peking Government and serv- 
ed on the Sino-Japanese Commission which handled the details of the 
redemption of the former German interests in Shangtung to China 
following the Washington Conference. In 1919 Mr. Kwong joined 
the staff of the Chinese Eastern Railway, a Sino-Russian enterprise 
operating in Manchuria acting as Chinese delegate on the Interallied 
technical Board and later assisted in the settlement of the Sino- 
Kussian problems. 

In 1926 Mr. Kwong went to Honan province and served as direc- 
tor of the Lung-Hai Railway. i n June , 1928 Mr. Kwong organized 
tne Intelligence and Publicity Department of the Ministry of Foreign 
Attain of the Nationalist Government at Nanking serving as the 
first director, from which position he resigned in order to accept the 
appointment of Chinese Consul General in the Philippines. 




16 



f 




GUILLERMO A. CU-UNJIENG 

Richest Chinese in the Philippines 

A brilliant example of the pioneering spirit of the industrious 
celestials is the life of the richest Chinese in the Philippines 
today— Guillermo A. Cu-Unjieng. Forty-eight years ago, he came to 
Manila a veritable soldier of fortune. He was then 17 years old, a 
fine young man with the ambition of an Alexander, but on a different 
line —business. He did not come with an imperial message to herald 
him as a business prodigy. He came with the proverbial pair of 
sandals with a clear purpose to work his way through, and succeed. 

But even with such a fine ambition as Mr. Cu-Unjieng had, he 
could not have made anything for himself if he did not have the 



17 



grit to stay on odd jobs that reflected nothing of his brilliant mind 
and wonderful character. He was confronted by a common barrier 
that threatened to upset his plans. He did not have the money to 
build sky-scrapers and operate banks. In fact, he hardly had enough 
to drive the pangs of hunger away and keep his head safe under the 
unrelenting heat of the tropical sun. 

After trying his luck on every available work, he finally landed 
a position in a Chinese textile office, as a clerk. After a few weeks, 
he was made bookkeeper, the position which he held for five years. 
The position did not pay much, but he was able to save a little money 
and at the same time obtained a good practical knowledge of business. 

On his return from a year's vacation in China, Mr. Cu Unjieng 
mas made manager of the Hap Hin Dry Goods store, which was also 
doing some direct importation business. For four years he tried his 
best to make his store one of the biggest concerns in Manila, and 
succeeded. He did not only establish a reputation for himself as one 
of the youngest and most successful office managers, but also saved 
sufficient money to run a business of his own. 

In 1893, Mr. Cu-Unjieng married a native of San Pedro Makati, 
Rizal, Dominga Ayala, and the following year, 1894, Cu-Unjieng & 
Co., with Mr. Cu-Unjieng as the principal owner and manager, came 
into being. This business was capitalized at F10,000.00 and organ- 
ized to engage in textile business. This same company is now capital- 
ized at P1,000,000.00. 

Not satisfied with his success as manager of the largest textile 
business house in the Islands, Mr. Cu-Unjieng, in 1896, founded Siu- 
liong & Co., together with the late Mariano Limjap and Edilberto Ca- 
lixto. This was capitalized at F75,000.00 and was organized to en- 
gage in an import and export business as well as in semi-banking 
operations for the Chinese community. 

The struggling Chinese lad of 25 years ago now endeavored to 
take great interest in the insurance and loan business. In 1906, he 
founded the first and only Chinese insurance company with a capital 
of £500,000, the Yek Tong Lin Fire & Marine Insurance Co. Ltd., 
and the Yek Tong Lin Loan Co, Ltd, also capitalized at F500,000. 

The unusual foresight of the Chinese Napoleon of business be- 
came more prominent when he took the initiative to establish the 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce immediately after the American occu- 
pation. He was also made its first president. 

In 1918, Mr. Cu-Unjieng came to realize that there was an urgent 
need for a bank owned and operated by the Chinese community. 
For years, the Chinese merchants had been fast developing them- 
selves into a most potent factor in Philippine business affairs, but 
their financial transactions had been made, for the most part, with 
American and British banking houses, or with the semi-Filipino 
financial concerns. The great Chinese business organizer conceived 



18 



the idea that a Chinese bank would probably provide Chinese mer- 
chants with better facilities than those offered by any other financial 
institution, specially in the matter of contracts, fees, and other ne- 
cessary things, as then it would be a case of a Chinese doing business 
with one of his kind who understands him best and can provide him 
with just the things he wants. 

A meeting of all prominent Chinese business men in Manila was 
called by Mr. Cu-Unjieng and for nearly a week they sat in careful 
deliberation at his country home at San Pedro Makati. People 
thought at first that the Chinese merchants were discussing plans 
for a country-wide campaign to secure financial aid for the home 
government among local Chinese residents. But after a few days, 
the real purpose of the get-together became apparent. With the 
aid of several other Chinese merchants, among them being Dy Buncio, 
Dee C. Chuan and Siy Cong Bieng, Mr. Cu-Unjieng finally drafted 
the plans for the foundation of the China Banking Corporation, which 
is one of the largest banks in the PhilipP ines today. 

Mr. Cu-Unjieng has always taken active part in Chinese poli- 
tics. He held the position of president of the Chinese community for 
several years and has always subscribed for every bond floated by 
the Chinese home government, for which the republic has given him 
several medals in recognition of his patriotic services. He is now 
president of the Yek Tong Lin Fire & Marine Insurance Co., and the 
Yek Tong Lin Loan Co., Ltd.; general manager of Cu-Unjieng & 
Co., director of the China Banking Corporation; and director of the 
Shanghai Commercial and Savings Bank, Ltd., Shanghai. At one 
time, he was also director of the Bank of the Philippi ne Islands. 

Mr. Cu-Unjieng is a Nationalist, the official party name of the 
great Kuomintang organization in China founded by the late Dr. Sun 
Yat Sen. He is also a Catholic. 

The Chinese millionaire has eleven children, four boys and seven 
girls. The boys are attending La Salle and the Ateneo while the 
girls are being educated at the Assumption college. One of his 
daughters is now a nun in Belgium. Mariano, the eldest son, is now 
taking charge of the vast financial interests of the aged business 
magnate, and is a veritable "chip of the old block/' as far as business 
foresight is concerned. 

Mr. Cu-Unjieng is a hundred per cent Chinese, having been born 
in Hokian, Chinkang, on November 20, 1865. 



19 




Dr. Albino Z. SyCip 



THE most prominent local Chinese lawyer and well-known business- 
man. Graduated from the University of Michigan, U. S. A., 
with the B.LI, degree in 1912. Passed the Philippine bar examina- 
tions in 1913. Conferred the honorary D.LI, degree by the St. John's 
University, Shanghai, in 1929. He has been president for several 
years of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, and is at present the 
vice-president of the China Banking Corporation. 
Residence: Manila. 



21 




Rafael Matchuca Gotauco 
CIFTY-EIGHT years of age and a native of Amoy, China. His 

lather was Goteco a prominent Manila lumber merchant, now 
deceased. Educated in China. Came to the Philippines in 1886. 
First assisted his father in business, taking the latter's place after 
Goteco\s death. Has been ever since head of the several lumber 
firms belonging to the family. 

He has been president and vice-president of the Chinese Chamber 
of Commerce of which he has been an active member for over 20 years. 
Director, Mercantile Bank, ex-president, "Chinese Community", and 
director, Chinese Educational Society. He is also the president of 
the Mindanao Lumber Co., Oriental Club, and manager, Gotauco & Co. 

Married Chiong Wok in 1890. They have fourteen children. 



22 




Go Jocco 



A man who talks a little but does much. Without the blare of 
trumpets, he has consistently helped civic and patriotic activities 
in his native country, most notable of them, his donation some two 
or more years ago, of three airplanes to the Chinese Aviation School 
and two to the Chinese Nationalist Government. In local charitable 
causes, too, his purse has always been open. 

Mr. Go Jocco was born in Amoy, in 1866, the son of Go Chong 
Jong and Ong Si. When 16, he came to the Philippines an' with a 
few thousand pesos as start, established a modest dry-goods .tore on 
the Divisoria market. After seven years of hard work, just w the 
business was getting prosperous, the famous fire in Tondo on Feb. ; 



23 



1899 destroyed everything that he had. Ruined but undaunted, he 
resigned to his unfortunate fate with a smile on his face. Four four 
whole months he wandered around the streets of Manila in search of 
a job. Soon thereafter, luck favored him, and he landed a position 
as manager of the well-known firm of F. M. Lim Tuico. When he 
resigned in 1905, his share in the firm's profits amounted to the huge 
sum of P400,000. 

With that money he put up the beginning of his present dry- 
goods business on Calle Rosario. His firm continued to grow until 
it reached the peak of prosperity in 1918 when, together with the 
amount of P170,000 he borrowed from his father in China, he was 
able to embark in other commercial ventures. Among these, were the 
oil and sack factories, the first located in Paco, which have for many 
years now been his principal business lines. Close to a million pesos 
have been invested already in these enterprises. 

Mr. Go Jocco is a Nationalist in Chinese politics. He married 
Haw Ni of Amoy in 1903. They have eleven children. 

He is a member of the Cosmos and Oriental Clubs, and a Mason, 
belonging to the Araw Lodge No. 18. He has been director of the 
China Banking Corporation since 1920; at present holding the same 
Position in the Mercantile Bank, and director for about five times in 
the past of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: Rosario, Manila. 



24 




\A f C 

Uy Yet 



A native of Chuanchio, China, Mr. Uy Yet came to the Philippines 

at a very early age. His father was Mariano Uy Chaco, a 
wealthy and prominent Manila Chinese, founder of the Mariano 
Uy Chaco & Sons Company, one of the oldest and biggest hardware 
firms in the Philippines. Mr. Uy Yet has been the president and 
general manager of the firm for over twenty years now. 

He married Paulina Lao of a prominent family in Cebu in 
1915. They have one child. Mrs. Uy Yet is very well known in 
Manila social circles. 

Member: Oriental, Cosmos, and Wack Wack Golf Clubs. 

Residence: 912 Benavi<fe:>, Manila. 



25 




Dy Buncio 

/^NE of China's "grand old men" in the Philippines. A native of 
Chinkang, Fukien, where he was born 57 years ago. His father 
was Dee Liok Ching and his mother, See Suat. 

Came to the Philippines in 1887. Was first employed in a Chinese 
firm, Se Queco, where he stayed nine years. In 1898 established his 
own' business with a capital of less than P3,000, this growing into a 
million-peso firm within twenty years. Dy Buncio & Co., Inc. is today 
one of the biggest importing and exporting houses in the Islands, with 
branches and offices in Cebu, Iloilo, Legaspi, and Tabaco, Albay. 

Mr. Dy Buncio married Hong Nong of Chingkang in 1896 and 
the couple have three children. He is a member of the Oriental and 
Cosmos Clubs and the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence : Manila. 

26 




J. J. Gochioco 

DORN in Chuanchio, 1866. Educated in China. Came to the Phil- 
ippines, 1885. Started as an employee in a Chinese firm engaged 
in leaf tobacco business. In 1905, associated with brother and formed 
Go Fay & Co. With Go Chioco & Co., firm is one of the principal 
leaf tobacco dealers in Manila. Mr. Gochioco is also one of the prin- 
cipal stockholders of the Germinal Cigarette Manufacturing Company 
and of the Mercantile Bank of which he is the vice-president. He is 
is the proprietor of the S. S. "Susana II" and "S. S. "Kua Tong," 
plying' between Amoy and Manila. 

Director, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Chinese Community 
and one of the founders of the Chinese Educational Associate n. 

Married Severiana de Castro of Pateros, Rlzal. They have three 
children. Residence: Manila. 

27 



C. C. Lim 

Youthful Millionaire and Philantrophist 

JW[R. C. C. Lim is a prototype of the modern, progressive Chinese 
youth who have wrought wonderful changes in the social, eco- 
nomic, and industrial life of their country during the last decade. 

C. C. Lim does not have more than 28 years of age today. But 
despite his youth he has been handling during the last seven years 
a business worth millions of pesos, and stands pre-eminent in the 
commrj Lty of his race in these Islands for his never failing generos- 
ity and bigness of heart that have always responded to every deserv- 
cause. There has not been any worthy community enterprise in 



28 



the past to which this youthful millionaire has not given his warm 
su pport. 

Mr. Lim was born in Manila, on October 4. 1901. His father the 
late F. M. Lim Tuico, one of the wealthiest, if not the wealthiest 
Chinese in this country in his time, came to Manila long before Ad- 
miral Dewey sank the Spanish fleet in Manila bay. When barely a 
year old, his father brought him to China where he spent the next 
ten years pursuing his early education. He came back to Manila in 
1911. 

While another boy of his age would have just spent his time en- 
joying the comforts and luxuries which his father could provide him, 
Chu Con was initiated in the hard school of life, evidently to be pre- 
pared for the responsibilities he was to assume several years later 
That training was invaluable to him. for his father died in 1920 and 
on him fell the task of managing the vast business into 
family. He has since acted as president of the Viuda E Hijos d 1 . 
M. Lim Tuico, one of the biggest and most reputable Chinese firms 
in the capital. 

One distinctive trait in the character of Mr Lim is 
trophy. For many years now he has been supporting P*"""*"^ 
different countries. What makes his generosity more 
noteworthy is the fact that he helps not only his own coun trymen 
but Filipinos as well. In other words, his bigness of heart does not 

x iiiymu pensionado in 

discriminate as to race or color. In ne naa one P 

Japan, two in Shanghai, one in Paris studying art, and tin ee m the 
United States, two Chinese and one Filpnno the latter, a former U. P 
student. All these young men were appointed on recommendatior lof 
his friends, and on their scholarship he does not f^^J* 
tion. After they finish their studies they are free to work an ywhere 
i i f l , &iw nhlio-ation to reimburse their benefactor lor 
without absolutely any obligation ■ 

, . . , „1 fm . thpm Already, three of his former pensiona- 

what he has spent toi tnem. •'» fi4 .„ui„ om 

dos to the United States have returned and are having profitable em- 

ployments. 

In memory of his father, himself a philantrophist, he built a 
gigantic stadium in Amoy, China. Chu Con also donated I several 
thousand pesos on the foundation of the local Chinese Y. M. C. A. 

Without doubt, there is no other Chinese who has done more 
for the promotion of athletics and sports in the Phihpp * £ 
Lim. Himself a crack player, he founded a Chinese basketball team 
which he has taken on already three tours abroad, in all cases _ - 
ning laurels and honors not only for the Chinese community but for 
the Philippines as a whole. The first tour of the team was in i - , 
when it participated in the Chinese National Meet m W uchung. . he 
second was to Japan in 1927, when it came back from the in- u.on 
without a loss to its credit. The third was to the United Sts.es in 
1928. All the expenses in these trips were borne by Mr. Lim alone. 

29 



Explaining his purpose in promoting the development of sports, 
Mr. Lim says : 

"I realize the tremendous benefits to be derived by those who 
indulge in wholesome athletics. It will make of our youths real men 
and women in the full meaning of the word — men and women who 
could be good winners and better losers. It will teach them coordina- 
tion and cooperation. It will teach them the good in others. 

"I am glad that a healthy portion of our youths in our community 
is today greatly interested in athletics of all forms. It is a good 
sign, for, in the end it is bound to result in untold benefifts in that 
we shall have men and women with strong minds in strong* bodies; 
men and women who will be in better position to cope successfully 
with the obstacles of life. 

"In lending my wholehearted support to athletics, I am only 
helping the great, if not patriotic work, for a virile manhood for our 
Motherland. I sincerely realize that athletics, in conjunction with 
academic attainments will in the long run place China among* the 
great countries of the world." 

On the occasion of the return of the team from the China-Japan 
tour, the leading members of the Chinese community in Manila paid 
Mr. Lim a deserved tribute. The Hon. Lingoh Wang, then Chinese 
Consul General, called him "the most enthusiastic promoter of athle- 
tic sports among the Chinese residents in the Philippine Islands"; 
while Dr. Tee Han Kee, president of the Chinese Y. M. C. A. said of 
him: "I shall take this opportunity to further express my appreciation 
of the fine, unselfish, voluntary service rendered to our association by 
Mr. C. C. Lim. Although a young man, he has evidenced a loyalty 
to the best 'nterest of his people, worthy of a man twice his years. 
Vv r e are fortunate to have a man of this type on our Board of 

Directors and Chairman of our Physical Department Committee. " 

, Mr ' Lir; * is a member of the Oriental, Cosmos, and Lim's clubs. 
He is also ex-director of the Chinese General Chamber of Commerce, 
Chinese Educational Association, and Mercantile Bank of China. Pie 
is a director and treasurer of the Chinese Y. M. C. A. and president 
of the Alumni Association of the Anglo-Chinese School. 

Residence; 200 Rosario, Manila. 



80 





EDUARDO DEL ROSARIO TAN KlANG 



o 



NE of the most prominent members of the Ghin.se community 
JN iii ot tne inuau P among his country- 

~ in the Philippines. Very popular ^ £*T JJ^ 
men but among Filipinos as well. Pro nlipn ^ ^ ^ 
ship in the first independence congress a prob l e ms 
admitted to sit in that solemn body convekea 
connected with Philippine independence. 

„, , riiintrkang forty-ttuee yeais >go. 

Don Eduardo was born in Chingkang ^ 
He studied first in his home town ^ then n 
father brought him when in his ear 7 teens 
soft and easy life under the care of his latner, y k 

i i fi„n„ •Rnsario as an all-around man — m»: - 

ed in a dry-goods store on Calle itosano a* 

senger, tendero, etc., staying in that job for three years. Flogging 

31 



along, conquering numerous difficulties as they came on his way, 
he was able to become independent in a decade, with a fortune enough 
to enable him to retire from active work. 

Nothing extraordinary accounts for his stupendous success ex- 
cept hard work, honesty, and perseverance. Mr. Tan Kianjr believes 
a man cannot rise up unless he is honest in private, business, or 
professional dealings. He also believes that unless a man has per- 
severance, the grit to stick to a determination, he is liable to fall 
by the wayside. 

The positions that Mr. Tan Kiang has been, and is holding in 
commercial and civic associations, bespeak of his standing in the local 
Chinese community. He was venerable master of the Batong* Bu- 
nay Lodge under the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodjre of the Philip- 
pine Islands for two times in the past, and for the third time 
holding the same position. He is the founder and first president of 
the Masonic Oriental Club; president of 32-degree Masons; director 
of the Plaridel Temple; commander, Malcampo Council (30°) ; wise 
master, Burgos Chapter, R. C. (18°); and venerable master, Lakan- 
dola Lodge of Perfection (14°). An unusual distinction was con- 
ferred on him this year by his election as Grand Treasurer of the 
Grand Lodge of the Philippines, the first time that such post has 
been given to a Chinese. He is also the president of the "Tan Club", 
an ass ociation of prominent Chinese bearing the family name of Tan; 
and of the Chinese Merchants' Club, an exclusive association of the 
most prominent Chinese businessmen. 

Mr. Tan Kiang is also a sportsman, with special liking* to bow- 
He was the manager of the team that won the championship 
m the Plaridel Temple Club tournament of 1926 

He married Luisa Villarica of Marilao, Bulacan, in 1913 with 
Wfxom he has six children: f 0U r girls and two boys, all of whom 
Wtrt ' ^™ in the Philippines. 

Residence: 615 Teodora Alonso, Manila. 



.'32 




Sy Yoco 

pORTY-ONE years ago a penniless twenty-year old Chinese boy 
w ^ arrived in Manila. A few days after he landed in the capital 

city he proceeded to Legaspi, Albay, where one of his countrymen 
willingly employed him as a cook with a salary of P4 a month. 
Today, he is one of Manila's prominent Chinese businessmen, a lead- 
ing importer and exporter. Mr. Sy Yoco's career is one of the most 
remarkable in the history of Philippine business. Born sixty-one 
years ago in Chinkiang, China, young Sy Yoco decided to come to 
the Philippines of which he had heard so much from his older country- 
men. 



33 



Mr. Sy Yoco did not stay long as a cook. He saved every cent 
of his salary for four months, and with sixteen pesos to his credit 
established a small sari-sari store in Oas, Albay. In the meantime 
then, he accustomed himself to local conditions, and his little store 
which was of the usual Chinese kind catering to the needs of the 
community, became very successful. After two years of hard strug- 
gle, he had earned enough to enable him to expand his business. 

His desire for better opportunities brought him to Tabaco, 
Albay. He left his business in Oas in the hands of his brother 
rnd when he arrived in Tabaco, he had but a few pesos in his pocket. 
With this little amount he managed to put up a sari-sari store. He 
plogged along in this business for about eight months only, however, 
for then a golden opportunity, which had been largely responsible for 
his stupendous rise in the business world, came to him. Realizing 
Sy Yoco's ability, the Smith Bell & Co., Ltd. appointed him its abaca 
agent. All in all, he remained as Smith Bell agent for twenty-five 
years. Throughout that period he made huge profits for himself as 
well as for the company. In 1905 he separated from the com- 
pany and established the Sy Yoco & Co., (incorporated in 1929 as 
Sy Yoco & Sons, Inc.), which is today one of the leading importing 
and exporting houses in the Philippines. Besides his interests in the 
Bicol provinces, Sy Yoco is also the controlling stockholder of Werder 
& Co., Ltd., importers and exporters. 

Mr. Sy Yoco is a member of the Chinese General Chamber of 
Commerce. He married Emeteria Pitaliano of Oas, Albay, with 
whom he has five children, all born in the Philippines. One of his 
sons, Arsenio Sy Yoco, is assistant manager of Werder & Co., Ltd. 
Residence: Economia No. 306, Manila. 



34 




Henry Uy Ciio-Yee 



]W|R. Uy Cho-Yee was born in Chuanchowfu, Fookien, China, on 
AVA May 27, 1891. His father was Uy Siuliung and hi mother, 
Tan O-Lua, both of Chinese nationality. He obtained his education 
at the Diocesan Boys' School in Hongkong which he attended for 
seven years. 

Mr. Uy Cho-Yee has not gone to a higher institution of learning 
than that. All his later education was made up through self -study., 
through reading of books, newspapers, and magazines. He takes 
pride in the fact that he has risen to his present position with- 
out a college diploma or an academic degree after his name. What 
was deprived of him in the university halls he made up with books. 



35 



What he missed in the college rooms he learned in the School of 
Hard Knocks. 

It was in 1910 when Mr. Uy Cho-Yee came to the Philippines. 
Hi, father was a well-known businessman in the Islands being the 
founder of Siuliung & Co., (co-partnership) and it was with the firm 
that the young Uy Cho-Yee worked as an apprentice after his ar- 
rival It was not a responsible position that he occupied in the begin- 
ning-' The father wanted him to begin at the bottom - He eventuall y 

became sufficiently prepared for the task when, a few years later, he 
stepped into the shoes of his father and managed the business as effi- 
ciently as the latter. He subsequently rose to be assistant manager 
and vice-president and ex-officio manager of the Yek Tong Lin Fire 
and Marine Insurance Company. Mr. Uy Cho-Yee is not only favored 
with business ability but with a literary gift as well. He has an 
excelle nt command of English, and this is indeed, remarkable when 
it it remembered that he studied the language only by himself. 

Mr. Uy Cho-Yee is an ex-Christian. He is at present an agnostic 
and a freethinker. To him no particular religion is bad; "every one 
was originally good, or well-intentioned". In other words, his is the 
religion f ;f humanity. 

He has been the president of the Chinese General Chamber of 
Commerce (1927-1928); Inspector of the China Bank (1920-1921); 
Director (1921-1928); and Chairman of the Board of Directors 
and acting president of the China Banking Corporation from 
February 9 to July 22, 1926. He is the managing partner ot 
the Messers. Peng Kee, Amoy, Shanghai, & Manila; president, Ca- 
ridad Estates of Cavite, Inc.; and president, Uy Cho-Yee & Co., Inc., 
Manila. 

Mr. Uy Cho-Yee married Yu Cuanty of Amoy on March 9, 1912. 
They have six children. 

He is a member of the Socieded de Tiro al Blanco de Manila, 
Oriental Club, Cosmos Club, Laong Laan Tennis Club, Inc., and the 
Chinese Y. M. C. A. 

Office: 113 Juan Luna, Manila 

Residence: 171 Buenavista, Sta. Mesa. 



36 



Dr. Tee Han Kee 



DORN in Amoy, China, on Feb. 4, 1880, the son of Te- Chit Gin ! nd 
Go Giok. Obtained early education in his native town, later con- 
tinuing studies in the Ang'lo-Chinese College of Foocho\ where be 
finished the secondary course. He then entered the Hongkong Mud • 
ical College and there obtained the L.M.S. degree in 191 \ Coming to 
the Philippines in the same year he took the governme: t m*d\ al 
examination, passed it, and thus allowed to practice his pi^i -ion 
in these Islands. Almost immediately after qualifying, h v.-: ap- 
pointed assistant surgeon in the Philippine Health Service with :.vn 
initial salary of P150 a month, with the privilege of free practice. For 
nineteen years he remained in that position, until 1921 when, with the 



37 



In 1917 he came to the Philippines again, this time not on vaca- 
tion, but to engage in business. He became a partner of his brother 
in the Dee C. Chuan & Co., Inc. In 1928, he established a firm of his 
own, the Dee Hong Lue & Co., Inc., capitalized at two million pesos, 
of which one million is fully paid up. Not many years ago he bought 
the concessions of the Zambales Lumber Company from Teodoro R. 
Yangco, Filipino millionaire. 

Mr. Dee is the vice-president of the Negros Philippine Lumber 
Corporation; director, Chinese Chamber of Commerce; president, 
Manila Lumber Merchants' Association; director, Philippine Lumber 
Manufacturing, Inc.; director, Dee C. Chuan & Co., Inc. He is a mem- 
ber of the Cosmos and Oriental Clubs, and of Mencius Lodge No. 93. 

Residence: 944 Juan Luna, Manila. 





40 



Jose G. Barretto 



R. Barretto was born in Fookien, China, on July 1, 1899, the 



iVA youngest son of Pio Barretto, one of the most pro in-zit Mani- 
la Chinese in his time, and Engracia Jacinto, a Filipino woman. 
Young Jose was brought to the Philippines when barely two ye ~ 4, 
and some time later was sent back to China for his element! ; educa- 
tion. Returning to Manila after several years stay in his native 
country he entered the Ateneo de Manila, remaining nine years in that 
institution, until 1918, when he was graduated with the degree of 
Bachelor of Arts. 

His studies terminated, young Jose was taken in as an employee 
in his father's firm, then known as Herederos de Pio Barretto. To 




41 



i , ^ * i nassport to an 

the older Barretto, his son's A.B. diploma was not a p» * prac tical 

easy and soft life. It was the latter's initiation int V __„__ 
i x. .f For nve years 

business world, and from the bottom he had to start. * „ 0 ; v infr no 

i \mo receiving no 

young Barretto dragged along as a common employee* hard 




more than sufficiently prepared. The lumber > ^ 
Hijos de Pio Barretto, which this young man has been manag 
seven years now, is one of the biggest in the country. 

t i » „ V)fiV of pleasure 

Instead of wasting his non-office hours in a careei ^ j wealth 
and enjoyment, as the majority of young men of his age an h ^ 
do, Mr. Barretto has devoted them to study. For severa l * q± 

endured the hard grind of the classroom at the Mapua 

mi-i mo awaroeci luc 

Technology, and as the reward of his efforts, he was a^v ^ 

degree of Bachelor of Science in Architecture last June, ea - 
distinction of being the first local Chinese to be graduated ro 
study in a Manila college or university. When asked why 
the course when he does not need it, he replied: "To me intellectual 
attainment is more than possession of wealth. Money is no every- 
thing in this world." Now this exceedingly promising young man as 
both. 

Mr. Barretto married Magdalena Cu Unjieng, daughter of the 
wealthiest Philippine Chinese, on Feb. 19, 1925. They nave tnree 
children. 

He is a Catholic and a member of the Club Filipino, Wack Wack 
Golf Club, Oriental and Cosmos Clubs. 
Residence: Manila. 



42 



S. C. Choy 



ANE of the most successful Chinese businessmen in the Philip- 
pines. Through industry, thrift, and ambition, he was able 
to rise from employee to a boss of himself in the space of scarcely 
ten years. 

Hails from Amoy, where he was born fifty-three years a^o. He 
spent a few years in the elementary schools of his to-.vn and there- 
after supplemented his education through self -study. Impelled by 
an adventurous spirit came to the Islands shortly after tha beginning 
of the Filipino-American war. Taking- advantage of wiia f ho plan- 
ned to be a temporary stay here, he engaged in a small i\ p 
business, exclusively dealing with Chinese goods. He remai . '. \i 



43 



Manila for a year or two at that time, then returned to his native 
country. Induced by the bright possibilities he had seen in the 
Philippines, he came back again to Manila. He thereby entered 
the employ of Don Rafael Matchuca Gotauco as superintendent of 
construction in Manila and the provinces. After saving enough 
capital he formed a partnership with a friend to engage also in the 
construction business. The firm became prosperous and on one oc- 
casion, it secured the biggest contract from the quartermaster de- 
partment of the United States Army at Fort McKinley, calling for 
the construction of 56 buildings at one time. When Mr. Choy and 
his partner split in 1912, he established the United Plumbing Com- 
pany. The Company has branches at present in Cebu and Iloilo. 

Mr. Choy has helped very much in the cause of education of the 
Chinese youth in this country. He is one of the founders of the 
Anglo-Chinese School Association, now known as the Philippine 
Chinese Educational Association. Previous to the establishment of 
the association, the standard of the Chinese schools in Manila was 
not high. What Mr. Choy did was to work out carefully w ith the 
other directors the improvement of instruction by importing the 
best educators available from the home country. He was for some 
time misunderstood and made the object of attacks from certain 
quarters of the Chinese community, but after the beneficial results 
were seen, he was more than anybody else the recipient of compli- 
ments. 

Mr. Choy is a Protestant. He married Go Si of Amoy in 1900. 
Out of the union were born three children. 

He has been the managing director of the Mercantile Bank 
since its foundation. He is a member of the Oriental and Cosmos 
Clubs and ex-director of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: Juan Luna, Manila. 



44 




Vicente Chan Quep 



TTAILS from Chingkang, Fukien, where he was born 42 years ago, 
A 1 the son of Chan Know and Go Yu, both of Chinese nationality. 
Studied for several years in his native town and came to th. Philip- 
pines when a little over ten years of age. When barely 14, h waj 
made cashier of a reputable Chinese firm in the province, capitalized 
at a hundred thousand pesos, that of Lucino Almeida Chantanco. 
Two years later he was promoted manager. Among the place, in 
the provinces where he had stayed long is San Fernando, La Union. 
It was there also where he studied under Professor U, S. Dreyden. 

Feeling that chances in the provinces were limited he came to 
Manila in 1912 where he became general manager of Enrique Lete 



45 



Chan Chuan, leaf tobacco, sugar, and maguey merchant, with about 
one million pesos capital. He did his best to win the satisfaction of 
his employer, and throughout the nine years that he stayed in that 
position, he saved as much as he could with the idea of establishing 
in the future a business of his own. His ambition was realized in li)21 
when, with two other Chinese, he organized the Philippine Aromatic 
Cigarettes Manufacturing Company. For the growth and prosperity 
which the factory has had during the last seven years, Mr. (Mian 
Quep was responsible. He acted as its general manager until Feb- 
ruary 1, 1930 when he quit the company to put up the Sweet Dreams 
Aromatic Cigarettes Factory at present located in San Francisco del 
Monte, Municipality of San Juan, Rizal. To Mr. Chan Quep belongs 
the distinction of being the first local cigarette manufacturer who 
succeeded in giving native cigarettes an aromatic flavor as those 
imported from Virginia, U. S. A. 

Mr. Chan Quep is a Nationalist in Chinese politics. He is 
married with seven children, six born in the Philippines. 

He is an ex-director of the "Chinese Community", and ex-pres- 
ident and founder of the Eni Chingkang Samseng School Society in 
China. He is a Mason, belonging to the Nilad Lodge No. 12. 
Residence: San Francisco del Monte, San Juan, Rizal. 



46 



Sabas E. Chuntianlay 



DORN in Manila, December 5, 1900, son of Buenaventura Chun- 
tianlay, one of the most prominent local Chinese merchants 
of about 60 years residence in the Philippines, and Flora Yotoco of 
Capiz. Studied in San Beda College for six years and when in the 
third year high school, went to China to continue studies. He return- 
ed to Manila in 1922. Since 1925 has been the manager of the firm, 
B. Chuntianlay, one of the biggest Chinese drygoods and general 
merchandise stores in Calle Rosario, founded over 70 years ago. 

Married Ng Siu Tin of Amoy in 1920. They have two children, 
both born in Manila. He is a Catholic and a member of the Cosmos 
and Oriental Clubs, and of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce 
Residence 177-179 Rosario, Manila. 



47 



Chas. C. Shau 

DORN in Amoy in 1895, son of K. H. Shau and C. K. Toh. Studied 
Chinese for eight years and English six years, in Amoy. Arriving 
ill Manila in 1914, he was appointed assistant manager of Li Sengiap 
& Co., one of the biggest Chinese firms in the Philippines. After five 
years service in that company he resigned to become manager of Dy 
Buncio & Co., another million-peso firm, staying there until 1921 when 
he quit to establish a business of his own, ever since, engaged in 
imports and exports in connection with Rockholt and Gartner of Ham- 
burg, Germany. He acts as agent of several big foreign manu- 
facturers with connections in the United States, England, France, 
Holland, Belgium, India, China, Japan, and Australia. 
Residence: 424-426 Salazar, Manila. 



48 



Dee Cho 



V. 



HPHEN a lad of eleven, Dee Cho came to the Philippines abo^it 
twenty years ago from his town, Chuanchu, Amoy, where he 
was born on Feb. 12, 1898. Shortly after his arrival he entered 
the employ of Dee C. Chuan, Chinese "lumber king*," who was then 
also struggling for a place at the top of the business world. For 
three years he worked with no other compensation than free board 
and lodging. While working during the day at that time he studied 
in a local night school to improve himself. After several years of 
service he was given a salary of P20 a month. He was subsequently 
promoted from one position to another until in 1919, after having 
saved enough, he quit his job and formed a partnership with ano- 



49 



ther Chinese in the lumber business. He was just completing his 
plans of establishing one of his own six years later when he was 
offered the managership of the Insular Saw Mill, which position 
he has been holding ever since. Mr. Dee Cho attributes his success 
largely to the fact that he had an early start with the right man, 
Mr. Dee C. Chuan. The firm has seen prosperity during the last 
few years through the able management of this young man. It 
is now handling foreign lumber such as the famous Oregon Pine 
as well as native lumber. The plant is equipped with a complete 
saw and planing mill. 

Mr. Dee Cho married Ang Bit of Amoy in 1918. They have 
two children, both born in the Philippines. He is the vice-president 
of the Philippine-Chinese Lumber Association, and a member of the 
Oriental Club and the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: 340 Canonigo, Manila. 




i 



50 



■ 

Justo Cabo Chan (Chan Teng Chuan) 



DORN in Binondo, Manila, the son of Francisco Cabo Chan Pongco, 
wealthy Chinese businessman, and Teresa Cabuntas, a Filipino 
woman. At the age of seven he was brought to China to be educated 
in the Thombon College, Amoy, staying in that institution until his 
sixteenth year. At the latter age, he joined the revolutionary forces 
then fighting against the Manchu dynasty, reaching the rank of 
lieutenant. Once during his two years service, he was imprisoned 
by the Manchus and released only through the good offices of ;ome 
foreign consuls. 

Returning to Manila with his mother, he was employed as book- 
keeper of the firm Chan Bondo & Co., in which post he stayed for 



51 



three years. Leaving that position, he went to Cabanatuan, Nueva 
Ecija, and engaged in the rice and general merchandise business, his 
firm then known as Justo Cabo Chan & Co. Since about two years 
ago, he has transferred to Manila, although he still has interests in 
Cabanatuan. 

Mr. Cabo Chan was for many years honorary Chinese consul in 
Nueva Ecija. His resignation from that post was accepted by the 
Chinese Nationalist government in 1929, only after it was presented 
for the third time. He has been recently appointed advisor on foreign 
affairs by the Chinese government. 

A testimonial to the diplomatic ability of Mr. Cabo Chan was 
his success in averting what would have been an unfortunate serious 
clash between Filipinos and Chinese in the province of Nueva Ecija 
in 1924. The trouble was precipitated by the differences between 
some Chinese and Filipinos in Manila, and it was only through the 
timely intervention of Mr. Cabo Chan that an actual clash was 
avoided. For this service he was highly commended by prominent 
elements of both peoples. 

He was president of the Nueva Ecija Chinese Chamber of Com- 
merce, 1919 to 1923, and of the Nueva-Ecijano Club, 1919 to 1920. 

He married Paula Paulina of San Miguel de Mayumo, Bulacan. 
They have eight children, all of whom were born in the Philippines. 

Recidence: 418 Sto. Cristo, Manila. 



52 




Vicente Gotamco 
DORN in Amoy, 1875. Came to the Philippines with his father, 
JJ Go Leo, brother of the father of Rafael Matchuca Gotauco, at the 
age of ten. Attended public schools known as Escuela del Pueblo 
in Tonclo under the Spanish regime. Assumed management of his 
father's business when 21 years old. Finding himself penniless after 
^ a disastrous fire shortly after the start of the Filipino-American war, 

he established another business with his brothers, the beginning of the 
present firm of Vicente Gotamco Hnos., one of the leading Manila 
lumber houses today. Mr. Gotamco donated a few years ago more 
than 2,000 square meters of land for market site to the Municipality 
of Pasay, Rizal. 

Residence: Calle Tanduay, Manila. 



53 



Ang Ban To (A. Y. Coe) 

A v To was born in Chuanchow, Amoy, China on March 7, 
1 A 1 ' 0. At the age of twelve, or in 1902, he came to the Philip- 
pines. Here he began his early education, enrolling then in the Chinese 
Psimary School on Calle Asuncion. From that school he transfer- 
red bo the Tondo Intermediate School where he stayed for six years. 

Later he went to Hongkong and continued his studies in Eng- 
lish at the St. Joseph's college. He stayed in that institution for a 
few months only, however, for he went home to China and got 
n:; ; In 1908 he returned to Manila and he was employed in 
the store of Buenaventura Chun Tianlay on Calle Rosario. Here he 
remained for two years. Two years later, or in 1910, Ang Ban To 



54 



joined his father as the latter's associate. The next seven years he 
was the right hand man of his father, until 1917, when the latter died 
and Ang; Ban To became the manager of the business. 

At present, the firm is one of the leading Chinese importing and 
exporting houses in Manila, dealing principally in the importation of 
matches and canned goods, and manufacturers of "Araw" soy (toyo). 
It also manufactures umbrellas and is the exclusive agent of the Sun 
Tuck Loong Yuen Kee of Hongkong* 

He is a Nationalist in Chinese politics. He married for the 
second time, after the death of his first wife, in 1925, Tan Siok Luan 
of Amoy, China. 

He is a member of the Cosmos Club and was treasurer of the 
"Chinese Community" from 1922 to 1928. He is a mason, being a 
member of the Araw Lodge No. 18. 

Residence: G22 Nueva, Manila. 





55 



Chong Su See 

QNE of the most highly educated Chinese in the Philippines. Born 
in 1890 in Chuanchow, Fukien, Mr. See was first educated in 
Hongkong. Went to Columbia University in 1912, obtaining* there- 
from the B. Sc. degree in 1915, M. A. in 1916, and the D. Ph. in 1918, 
majoring in economics. 

Dr. See was the author of "Foreign Trade of China", published 
in New York in 1919, and "The Chinese Question", published in 
Manila in 1927. 

He is at present manager of Siy Cong Bieng & Co., Inc. and 
director of the China Banking Corporation. 

He married Hong-koo Lim of Amoy in 1921, with whom he 
has three children. 

Residence: 120 Manga Ave., Manila. 

56 




Seguioc Yu Singco 

HORN on Feb. 6, 1895, the son of Alfonso Yu Singco, well-known 
Manila Chinese businessman. Educated in China. Came to the 
Philippine Islands, 1909. Has been manager of A. Yu Singw: Her- 
manos — shipowners, bank exchange, and general merchants — since 
1920. The firm has branches in Cebu and Surigao. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Cosmos and Oriental 
Clubs. 

A widower with four children, two of whom were born in the 
Philippines. 

Residence: 197 Juan Luna, Manila. 



57 



Benito La O 



JWj R. La O was born in Amoy, China in 1873. His father died when 
he was only six months old, and he thus had to face early the 
battles of life. Coming to the Philippines in 1891, he was first em- 
ployed as a clerk in the firm of Pablo Ortega where he stayed for 
eight years. When he had saved a few thousand pesos, he quit his 
job and founded the "Viva la Suerte" in 1899, one of' the earliest 
and most popular cigarette and tobacco factories in the city. Three 
years afterwards, Emilio Gonzales LaO associated with him as part- 
ner. After another three years, the latter sold his interests to his 
associate. He then went to the tobacco business. He still later 
switched to the dry good business, establishing a firm dealing along 

58 



that line on Calle Nueva for 14 years. In 1921, he was called again 
to manage the "Viva La Suerte", staying there until 1926. In 1927, 
he assumed his present position. 

The manner in which he has been running the "La Paz y Buen 
Viaje" factory is shown by the prosperous business its has been 
having during the last two years. With his ability and industry 
he has made it into a first-class establishment. Two of his sons have 
gone to college, one having graduated from the Jose Rizal College, 
and the other, a student in chemistry at the University of the Phil- 
ippines. One of his daughters is studying medicine at the govern- 
ment university and another is studying at the St. Escolastica. 

Mr. La O married Manuela Gonzales of Manila about 25 years 

ago. 

He has been baptized under Catholic rituals, his godfather 
being the late Don Julian La O. 
Residence: Manila. 




• 



f*\ NE of the few local Chinese who have been educated in the United 
States is Mr. Francisco Gochuico, secretary of the Dee C. Chuan 
& Co., Inc. and right-hand man of the well-known "lumber king". 

Mr. Gochuico was born in Caloocan, Rizal, on January 13, 1892, 
the son of Ricardo Gochuico, a Chinese businessman of long residence 
in the Philippine Islands, and of Petra Asistio. When barely nine 
years old he was sent to the St. Joseph's College in Hongkong where 
he stayed for four years. Among his classmates then were some of 
the prominent Manila Chinese now, one of them, Mr. Dee C. Chuan. 
Finishing his elementary education in that institution he went to 
Shanghai and attended the St. Francis Saviour School. He remained 

00 



i 



here for another four years after which, with a high school diploma, 
he left for the United States to take advanced education. He enrolled 
in the St. Mary's College in California, and after six years was 
graduated with the degree of bachelor of science in commerce. 

Returning to Manila in 1012, Mr. Gochuico soon after his ar- 
rival was appointed principal of the English department of the Anglo- 
Chinese School in Meisic and at the same time, secretary of the Phil- 
ippine Chinese Educational Association. In 1913 Mr. Gochuico was 
offered by Mr. Dee C. Chuan a position in his firm. Although only 
21 years of age then, he was made secretary of the former's firm, a 
position he has been holding ever since. He acts in the same capacity 
in three other organizations founded by Mr. Dee C. Chuan — the 
Negros Philippine Lumber, Dee C. Chuan & Sons, Inc., and the Phil- 
ippine Lumber Manufacturing Company, each of which is capitalized 
at more than a million pesos. 

Mr. Gochuico is the right-hand man of his employer. Whenever 
Mr. Dee goes abroad on either business or pleasure trips his business 
interests are left in the able hands of Mr. Gochuico to whom he has 
given ample power of attorney. For the last seventeen years Mr. 
Gochuico has been consistently working for Mr. Dee and he has be- 
come a very valuable man to the four allied firms. 

Mr. Gochuico married Amalia Ricerra of Sta. Cruz, Manila, in 
1912. Of the union have been born six children, the elaest of whom, 
Ricardo, 16, is a first year student of medicine and an alumnus of 
the exclusive Ateneo de Manila. 

He is a Catholic in religion. 

Residence: Caloocan, Rizal. 



61 






Mateo Goiti (Go Iti) 



DORN in Chinkang, May 12, 1876. Came to the Philippines in 
D 1892, starting as a "tendero" in a Chinese store in Iloilo known as 
La Ciudad de Peking. Subsequently became manager of the firms of 
Antonio Kwe, Pedro Marquez Lim (1903-1910) and Lim Ponzo & Co. 
(1910-1913). In 1914, established his own business, principally buy- 
ing and selling sugar, until 1929 when he was appointed manager of 
La Tondena, Inc., well-known distillery firm owned by Carlos Palanca. 

Mr. Goiti was elected president of the Chinese Chamber of Com- 
merce and Chinese Education Association of Iloilo in 1918 and 1926. 

Married to Maria Ferrer of Iloilo, with six children, all born in 
the Philippines. 

62 



Benito Go Sun 

DORN in Amoy, 1893, son of Go King. Educated in his native 
*-* town. Came to the Philippine Islands at the age of eleven with 
his father, proprietor of a grocery and distillery store in Manila. 
At present owns the following firms: "La Verdad", "Ang Tunay", 
alcohol distillery and factory, both in Manila; Hotel Sun Huat and 
Sun Kieu Exchange Brokerage in Amoy. 

Married to Sy Pang with 6 children, four of whom were born in 
the Philippines. 

Religion: Catholic. 

Member of the Oriental Club and Go Association, and a Mason. 
Residence: 518-520 Sto. Cristo, Manila. 



John E. Goo 

DO.RN on January 10, 1898. His father was Goo Tong Puan and 
*3 mother, Go Pok Ha. Studied in Anglo-Chinese College in 
Foochow for six years, and in Fukien Christian University, also in 
Foochow, for two years. 

Since 1925, he has been the general secretary of the Philippine 
Chinese General Chamber of Commerce. F rom 1922 to 1925, he was 
general secretary of the Chinese Y. M. C. A. of Manila. 

A Christian and married to Frances Woo. 

Member, Cosmos and Oriental Clubs and Mencius Lodge. 

Residence: Manila. 



64 




GUILLERMO DY BUNCIO 

DORN on June 25, 1905, in Chingkang, Fookien, the son of Dy 
Buncio, well-known local Chinese businessman. Educated in SaL 
Beda College, an exclusive private school, and in Jose Rizal College 
where he took a commercial course. He had to quit his studies in 
1924 when his older brother died and he had to help in the manage- 
ment of his father's business. 

At present, Guillermo is the treasurer of Dy Buncio & Co., Inc. 
and manager of Ong Long & Co., Inc. 

Married Amparo Limgenco of Manila, daughter of the late 
Chinese millionaire by that name, on November 21, 1926. They 
have two children, Edward and Frederick. 

He is a member of the Casino Espanol, Peha Iberica, and Wack- 
Wack Golf Clubs. 

65 



Dr. Francisco Go-Kee 



E> ORX in Fukien, China, on Feb. 10, 1892. His father was Antonio 
* Rhode Go Puco, brother of Rafael Matchuca Gotauco. Obtained 
elementary education in St. Joseph's College, Hongkong. After 
taking a special course in the University of the Philippines, 1913, 
he went to the University of Chicago where he secured the B.S. and 
M.D. degrees in 1918. During his last year in that institution he 
served as surgeon and accoucheur in the Englewood Hospital, Chicago. 
On his return to Manila in 1919, he passed the medical board exam- 
inations. He has been the chief surgeon and assistant director of 
the Chinese General Hospital since its foundation. 

Dr. Go-Kee married Chua Kim of Fukien in 1919. They have 
seven children, all born in the Islands. 



66 




Dr. Marcel;) Nubla 



HORN in Manila, Sept. 12, 1898, the son of Manuel Nubla, one of the 
oldest Chinese residents in the Philippine. Obtained secondary 
education in St. Joseph's College, Hongkong*. Attended Hongkong; Uni- 
versity, 1917-1918; University of the Philippines, 1918-1920; and 
Philippine Law School, with Ll.B. degree, 1922. In latter yeai . went 
to the United States, obtaining Ll.M. from Georgetown U n\ .>rsity, 
1923, and S. J. D. (Doctor of Juristic Science), 1924. Parsed P. L 
bar examinations same year. At present, practising attorney and 
legal adviser of the Chinese Consul General and Chinese Nationalist 
Party. He is a director of the China Banking* Corporation and Chi- 
nese Community. 

Married -Lourdes Limgenco, 1927. They have three children, all 
born in the P. I. 

Residence: 516 Sto. Sepulcro, Manila. 



(57 



Choa Cho Ching 

POR'CY-FIVE years of age and a native of Chuanchu, Fukien, 
* the son of Choa Tian and Chiu Ut. Educated in the Anglo- 
Chinese School in China. Came to the Philippines in 1897; fi rst 
employed in the firm, Hing Hong & Co. in Manila. Established own 
business with Tan Seng Guan in 1913. At present partner in Choa 
Cho Ching & Co. and manager of Tan Seng Guan & Co. 

Married Ong See of Chuanchu in 1905, with five children, four 
born in Philippines. 

A member of the Cosmos Club and the Lodge Luz Oceanica 
No. 85, Manila. 

Residence: Calle Barraca, Manila. 

68 




Tan Pho (Tan Bon Too) 

HORN in Chingkang, Dec. 5, 1885. Came to the P. I., 1895. Stu- 
died in local Chinese schools, four years. At 14, employed in 
the firm of the late Chua Piengco at a salary of P4 a month. Later, 
-jO promoted to salesman, then cashier. On death of his employer in 

1908, he was made judicial administrator. Five years afterwards, 
appointed "apoderado general" of Viuda e Hijos de Chua Piengco. 
The firm is principally engaged in real estate, cigars, cigarettes, aba- 
ca, copra, rice, and shipping business, with a branch in Sorsogon. 
He is also a general merchant by himself. 

Married Chua Jo of Chingkang, with eight children, two born in 
the P. I. He belongs to the Wala-na Lodge No. 13. 



69 




B 



C 

Lim An 

ORN in Lamoa, Dec. 29, 1883. Arriving in Manila in 1895, first 
worked as an employee in a Chinese store at P3 a month salary. 
After working in several establishments for about ten years, he was 
able to establish a store on Rosario street. Unfortunately this^ was 
destroyed by fire in 1911. Subsequently became manager of Cu 
Unjieng & Co., a textile firm, remaining there two years. Later 
held the same position with Khu Yek Keng until 1928. 

At present, vice-president, Philippine Aromatic Cigarette Manu- 
facturing Co. and Philippine Foreign Trading Co. Ex-Community, 
and Philippine Chinese Educational Association, and ex-president, 
Lim's Club; director, Chinese Merchants Club, Kong Li Po Publish- 
ing Co., and Koumintang Party. 

Married Niu Ku, with 10 children, 4 born in the P. I. 

70 




Lim Chay Seng 

DORN in Lamoa, April, 1871. Came to the P. I., 1886. Started 
as an employee in Lim Tuaco Distillery with P3 a month salary. 
In 1897, made manager of the firm. A few years afterwards, re- 
signed to engage in a dry-goods business on Rosario street, which is 
at present managed by his son, Lim Kim Kok (James K. Lim), a 
graduate in business administration of the University of Washington. 
In 1923, he was again appointed manager of Lim Tuaco & Co., Inc., 
the oldest and one of the biggest distilleries in the Philippines. He 
is the president and general manager of the firm. 

Ex-director, Chinese Community; ex-president, Chinese Textile 
Merchants' Association; ex-vice-president, Kong Li Po Publishing Co * 
ex-director and ex-treasurer, Philippine Chinese Educational Associa- 
tion; ex-director, Mercantile Bank; at present: vice-president, Chinese 
Merchants' Club, and director, Basilan Plantation. 



71 



1< 




Chua Yap 

HORN in Amoy, China, on Jan. 2, 1885, of Chinese parentage. 

Completed elementary education in his native town. Came to 
the Philippines in 1901. His first job was as an apprentice in tin 
works. Three years afterwards, joined the army building construc- 
tion in Fort McKinley, staying there for another three years. Quit 
that work and established a small store dealing with tin products, 
glasses, and picture frames. Five years later he succeeded in mak- 
ing an imitation of the famous imported Venetian mirrors which 
were then, and are, very costly in Manila. He was able to create 
a profitable market for his products, and a few years later he 
bought American glass machineries for manufacture. 
He is a Mason, belonging to the Luz Oceanica No. 85. 



12 




Go Langco 



DORN in Amoy, May, 1880. Educated in China. Came to the 
Philippines in 1895. First worked in the firm of his uncle, Go- 
teco, for three years. Upon the division of the family's interests, 
he associated with his brother in the lumber business, now known 
as Vicente Gotamco y Hermanos. 

He married Co Joe of Amoy, with seven children, six born in the 
Philippines. He is a member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, 
Chinese Community, and Go Club. 

Residence: 513 T. Alonso, Manila. 



r 

Lim Tiaw Ping 

IM TIAW PING was born in Pukien, China, on Sept. 12, 1900, 
the son of Lim Chow Bien, a Chinese businessman who had re- 
sided in the Philippines for about ten years. His early education was 
obtained in his native town where he attended schools for seven years. 
On his arrival in Manila in 1916, he first studied in the Anglo-Chinese 
School. He stayed several years in that institution, later transferring 
to the Instituto de Manila where he remained two years. 

At that time, Mr. Lim was already starting his business training 
as cashier of the Philippine Aromatic Cigarettes Manufacturing Co. in 
which his older brother, Lim An, is one of the principal stockholders. 
Realizing the need of advanced education in preparation for a greater 
responsibility in the future, he enrolled in the Jose Rizal College, 



74 



well-known Manila commercial school. Despite the pressure of work 
which did not provide him ample time for study, he stood high in his 
scholastic rating*. He was graduated with the B. S. C. degree in 1924. 

No sooner had he received his diploma than he was promoted as 
assistant manager of the firm. He filled that position for six years, 
and when the manager of the factory resigned in February, 1930, 
Mr. Lim was appointed successor. 

He is also treasurer and director of the Philippine Foreign Trad- 
ing Corporation, and director of the Manila Hitt Flashcrackas Cor- 
poration, a subsidiary of an American firm in the United States. He 
is the Worshipful Master of Hagdang* Bato Lodge No. 87, and 
treasurer of Lim's Club, an association of Chinese bearing the family 
name of Lim. 

He married Tinay Tee of Fukien in 1924. They have three 
children, all born in the Philippines. 

Residence: F. B. Harrison corner Concepcion, Pasay. 



75 



Tan Sio (Tan Sin Pun) 
L JAILS from Amoy, where he was born forty-three years ago. 

Educated in China. Came to the Philippines in 1906. Was em- 
ployed in his cousin's store in Laguna for several years. Moved to 
Manila in 1914 as assistant manager of Tan Sen Guan & Co., a re- 
putable Chinese firm. In 1919, became a partner and manager of 
Choa Cho Ching & Company. 

While president of the Chinese-Filipino Rice Association of Ma- 
nila, Mr. Tan Sio caused the immediate sending of P2,000 worth of 
rice to the typhoon victims of Mindoro in 1926. For this laudable 
act, Senate President Quezon sent him a letter of thanks and ap- 
preciation. 

Married Lim Hiam of Amoy in 1909. They have nine children. 



76 




C'IFTY years of age and a native of Amoy. Father, O. Tin Sing; 

™\ mother, Ko Sia Lio, both Chinese. Studied in Amoy High School. 

Came to the Philippines, 1906. On his father's death in 1908, he as- 
sumed management of the business. 0. Chu Cun & Company, of 

ft which he is a partner and general manager, is engaged in the buying 

and selling of rice, sugar, abaca, and other native products. He also 
has a grocery and dry-goods business store. 

He is a Mason, belonging to the Mencius Lodge No. 93. Married 
Tan Hong of Amoy in 1899. They have seven children. 

He is a member of the Oriental and Cosmos Clubs and the 
Chinese Y. M. C. A. He is also an ex-director of the Chinese Cham- 
ber of Commerce. 

77 




Ty Han Eng 



pOMES from Amoy, China, where he was born in 1888. His 
' father was Tee Chit Gin, and his mother, Go Giok. 

A self-made man, he rose from a simple tendero in a Chinese 
dry& 00( * s store with P10 a month salary, type composer in the "Kong 
Li Po", a Chinese daily, to manager of the Farmacia Central, Inc., 
one of the biggest drug companies in Manila. 

Married So Siu Kin with six children: four boys and two girls- 
Mr. Ty Han Eng is a director of the local Chinese Y. M. C. A. 
ai.q a member of the Oriental Club. 

Residence: 258 Rosario, Manila. 



78 



if 







Go Puan Seng 

DORN in Amoy, Aug. 12, 1906. Studied in native town, ten years. 

Arrived in Manila, 1922. First worked as a reporter of the 
defunct "National Tribune," a Chi nese daily; 1924 — editor, "Kong 
Li Po," 1926 — editor and general manager, "Fookien Times." From 
1926 to 1929 he was the general secretary of the Chinese Chamber 
of Commecre. In 1928, he was appointed by the Chamber i. : ih? 
leader of the anti-Japanese boycott movement in Manila. 

The "Fookien Times" is the only local Chinese paper which is p 
subscriber to the Associated and United Press Associations, two . 
nowned American press services. 

Residence: Manila. 



79 



Yu Cong Eng 

DORN in Lamoa, Amoy, in 1876. His father was Yu Su Jean, 
and mother, Liao Lee. Studied in China and came to the Phil- 
ippines on Nov. 22, 1892. First employed in a Chinese store on 
Calle Rosario, working there about five years. Went back to China 
and once returned to the Islands in 1902, established the beginning 
of the Yu Cong Eng & Co., lumber manufacturers and contractors, 
at present one of the leaders in its line. The firm has constructed 
many of Manila's finest edifices among them the Arias, Arguelles, 
I. Beck, Palanca, and Fernandez buildings. 

Married Lim Kuy in 1898. They have seven children, three 
orn in the Philippines. He belongs to the Araw Lodge No. 18. 



80 




Paulino P. Gocheco 



DORN in Manila, Sept. 8, 1888. His father, Go Checo, was a lum- 
ber merchant. First studied under a private tutor in Manila ; later 
went to China to enter school. Stayed in Chingkang for eight 
years. Since 1915, has been managing P. P. Gocheco Go Sing Goe 
& Company, lumber dealers and manufacturers. His father died in 
1916. 

Firm is also engaged in building construction, tobacco box manu- 
facture, and sells all kinds of native lumber. 

Married Co Cho of Amoy in 1908. They have eight children, six 
born in the Philippines. 

Member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and director of Go 
Club and Chinese Educational Association. 



81 



4 




Miguel C. Suarez TanunliOxNG 

DORN in the Philippines, Oct. 22, 1897, son of Tan Que Seng, copra 
merchant and proprietor, and shipping agent of the Canadian 
Pacific, China Mail, T. K. K., N. Y. K., and O. S. K. lines. Educated 
in Manila and China. When 15 years of age, began actively in busi- 
ness a sassistant of his father. On the latter's death in 1920, or- 
ganized the Tan Que Seng Sons, Ltd. He is also the general agent 
of the Luzon Industrial Corporation. 

Married Florencia Dy Tek of Manila, with five children. He is 
a Mason, belonging to the Araw Lodge No. 18 (32°). 

Residence: 720 Magdalena, Manila. 



82 



Simplicio Arellano Choa Siong 



native of Amoy. Born Dec. 5, 1892. His father, Cayetano 



Arellano Cho Siong, was a Manila Merchant, an "ahijado" of the 
late Chief Justice of the supreme court Arellano. Came to the 
Philippines in 1904. Studied English for three years in the Asun- 
cion Public schools in Manila. First joined his brother in a dry- 
goods business on Rosario street; later, associated with his father. 
Then became manager of the Velasco Lumber Factory, holding that 
position for ten years.* Established his present business in 1924. 

Mr. Choa Siong is a Nationalist in Chinese politics and a Catholic. 
He married Ong Oken of Amoy in 1911. The couple have five child- 
ren, all born in the Philippines. 

He is a member of the Philippine Columbian Association (first 
Chinese member of the club) and the Laong-Laan Tennis Club. 




83 



I 




Quirino Uy Quioco 

DORN in Lamoa, Amoy, Fob. 20, 1880, son of Uy Biu, a Chinese 
businessman of long residence in the Philippines. Came to Aparri, 
Cagayan, in 1893. Studied there for one year after which moved 
to Solana of same province to continue schooling. After his father's 
death he assumed management of former's business with his brother. 
In 1912, he transferred to Manila where he has since dedicated to the 
leaf tobacco business. He has branches in Cagayan Valley and Isa- 
bela. 

Married Tan Chiok of Lamoa with 10 children, all born in the 
Philippines. 

Member of the Minerva Lodge No. 41 and of the Chinese Chamber 
of Commerce. 

84 




Du Hunting 

DORN in Amoy, China, Juno 24, 1893. His father, Du Ching Lou, 
was a businessman of long' residence in the Philippines. Obtain- 
ed early education in his native town and arrived in Manila at the 
age of 15. Although his father had his own business in Manila, Du 
Hunting- was sent to Gasan, Marinduque to be employed in a Chinese 
store. He stayed in that position for eight years. His father called 
him to Manila in 1917, and since then has been managing the firm 
bearing his name, engaged in the copra and abaca business, and also 
in the buying and selling of other native products. The company has 
branches today in Gasan and Boac, Marinduque, and in the towns of 
Panaon and Pitogo, Tayabas. He is a 32-degree Mason. 



85 



L. HUANLIAN 

JgORN in Chuanchio, Nov. 1, 1898, son of Dy Chiao Cham, a promi- 
nent Chinese businessman of 25 years residence in the Islands. 
Arrived in Manila, 1906. Returned to China in 1910, staying' in the 
Tong Bon College, Amoy, until 1916. Came back to the Philippines 
in the latter year. Since his father's death in 1919, he has been 
the manager of the frm, Dy Chiao Cham-Sons — importers and ex- 
porters, shipping agents, and hemp, copra, rice, etc. dealers, with 
branches in Cebu, Carigara and Tacloban, Leyte, and Calbayog* and 
Catarman in Samar. 

Married Ching Quay of Chuanchio in 1916. They have five 
children. Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Cosmos Club, 
Abaca Dealers' Association, and Araw Lodge No. 18. 



86 



native of Fukien, where he was born in Dec. 1890. Educated 



in China. Came to the P. I., 1905. Was first employed in a 
Chinese store on Nueva street and later, in Rosario, for several years. 
With his saving, established in 1917, Han Guan Kong Si, Inc., of 
which he the general manager. The firm is engaged in importing 
and exporting, with a branch in Iloilo, and buying agencies in Shang- 
hai and Kobe, Japan. 

He is married with four children, all born in the P. I. 

Ex-director, Chinese Community and member, Mencius Lodge. 

Residence: 453 Nueva, Manila. 




87 



Go Tian Gee 

gORN in Amoy, Sept. 15, 1881. His father, Go Sico, was a pro- 
minent merchant in his time. Educated in China and came to the 

Philippines in 1905. Shortly after his arrival his father died and 

Go Tian Gee took charge of the family's business, formerly known 

as Go Sico & Company. Now, he is the principal partner of Go Tian 

Gee & Co., (Manila and Cebu). 

A Presbyterian, married Kho Lui in 1899, with whom he has 

eight children. One of his sons, Go To Wan, was educated in St. 

Johns University, Shanghai. 

He is a director of the Yek Hua Trading Corporation, Chinese 

Textile Merchants Association, and managing director, Go Tian Gee 

& Co. He is a member of the Cosmos Club. 



83 




Jose Tanyongquip 



A native of Lamoa, Amoy, where he was born on Oct. 12, 1899. 
*• *■ His father was Gavino Tanyongquip, and his mother, Ramona 
Mendoza of Pitogo, Tayabas. After finishing' the elementary and 
high school courses in Amoy, he settled in Pitogo with his parents. 

Succeeded his father in the latter's business when he was only 
17 years of age. In 1922 he came to Manila and formed a business 
partnership with another Chinese. Since 1927 he has been operating 
the Jose Tanyongquip & Co., engaged in buying and selling of 
native products as hemp, copra, and rice. His office has ag-encies in 
Tayabas, Marinduque, Mindoro, and Samar. 
Residence: Juan Luna, Manila. 

89 




Silvio Cheng Pan 



IDC IN in Amoy, May 26, 1904, son of Cheng Liaoco, prominent 
^ Manila Chinese. After obtaining his elementary education in 
China, was brought to the Philippines in 1918. Studied in the Anglo- 
Chinese School, three years; later placed at the San Juan de Letran 
where he pursued the commercial course for two years. In 1926, 
was made cashier of Cheng Siong Lam & Co., rice merchants, with 
mills in San Miguel, Bulacan; Baluarte, San Nicolas, Gapan, and 
Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija. Two years afterwards, promoted acting 
manager of same firm, and of the Pan Pacific Oil Co., gasoline and 
oil importers and dealers. 

Married Go Phet Chu, daughter of Go Langco, in 1926. They 
have two children, all born in the Philippines. 



90 



Eduardo Co Seteng 
OORN in Chuanchio, Jan., 1901. Studied five years in native town 
^ and came to the P. I., 1924. Learned English first at San Miguel 
Catholic School and later at the San Beda College where he stayed 
five years. His first job was in the lumber firm of Pablo Co Quinco 
& Co. with a salary of Po a month. While working during the day, 
he studied at night at the Anglo-Chinese School, transferring some 
time later, to the Liceo de Manila. Since 1926, he has been manager 
of the firm. Elected director of the Manila Lumber Merchants' As- 
sociation, 1927, and president, 1930. 

He is a co-author of a "Manual of Conversation in English. 
Spanish, and Amoy Dialect" and "Commercial Conversation in Span- 
ish, English, Chinese, and Tagalog." 



91 




Vicente Concepcion Tan Guiamco 



A native of Chuanchowfu, Fukien, where he was born on June 
19, 1882. His father, Tan Ka Sia, was a Manila merchant of 
long residence in the Islands. Educated in China. 

Came to the Philippines in 1898. Served as an employee in 
store of Antonio Osorio Tan Quimco for two years and manager of 
same for four years. After that, established Tan Guiamco & Co., 
on San Vicente Street— general merchants, dealing with kitchen uten- 
sils, hardware, etc. The firm is one of the principal government con- 
tractors in its line. 

Catholic in religion and baptized with ex-president Venancio Con- 
cepcion of the Philippine National Bank as sponsor. He is a Nation- 
alist in Chinese politics. 

92 




Tan Chaco 



c 



A 



native of Chuanchowfu, Fukien where he was born 63 Voa ,. s ...... 

His father was Tan Ka Oho and mother, Chua Siu Niu. Studied 
in native town until the age of 18. 

Came to the Philippines ill 1897. Worked in the office of late 
Carlos Palanea for four years; then established a dry goods store 
in the Divisoria market. Later transferred to Sto. Cristo. Present 
dry-goods establishment on 52 Rosario established since 1915. 
Married Chu Ang Lo in 1902. They have five children. 
Member of the Yu Uy Tong (Tan Club.) 
Residence: 52 Rosario, Manila. 

93 



Dn. Antonio Nubla 
DORN in Amoy, July 1, 1902, son of Manuel Nubla. Obtained 
elementary education in the Tondo Intermediate School and 
secondary, in the St. Joseph's College, Hongkong*. Finished A. A. 
at the National University and pre-medic at Sto. Tomas University 
(1923). Took up medicine in Kansas City University, two years, 
and in the University of Kansas where he was awarded the M. D. 
degree in 1927. On return to China he was apopinted to the staff 
of the Ministry of Health at Nanking, and later, named as Surgeon 
for the Shanghai-Nanking Railway in Shanghai. 

Married Soledad Caminas of Tuguegarao, Cagayan in 1927. They 
have two children. 

Residence: 516 Sto. Sepulcro, Manila. 



94 




John Lim Tiao Huat 



BORN in Amoy, in 1906. His father, Lim Dio Co, was the founder 
of the "Vicio del Mundo", tobacco factory, now known as "La 
Nobleza". Educated in his native town. Came to the Philippines in 
1919. Associated with his brother in dry-goods business for two 
years, later transferring to La Nobleza as assistant of another 
brother. Is now general manager of the company, at present one of 
the leading tobacco factories in the Islands. 

Married Juanita Tan Gioc Hong of Rosales, Pangasinan in 1927. 
They have one child. 

Residence: 409 Tayuman, Manila. 



95 




_ 

Juan Valera Ang Tuaco 

"pM 1 Chinese of longest residence in the Philippine Islands. Born 
in Chuanchu, on Dec. 4, 1850. His father, Ang Tico, also resided 
'n the Islands for a long time. Came to this country in 1861 or nearly 
70 years ago. He helped his father in business until the latter's 
death in 1872. Since then proprietor and manager. He has a hat 
factory and dry-goods stores in Manila and San Pablo, Laguna. 

A devout Catholic, he was baptized in Polo, Bulacan, under 
Christian rituals, with Colonel Valera, a high Spanish army officer, 
as sponsor. 

Married Maria Carmen of Baliuag, Bui acan. She died in 1903. 
Married again in 1909 and of the second wedlock has eight children, 
all born in the Philippines. 

9G 




GONZALO C. GO QUIOLAY 

DORN in Lamoa, 1878. Educated in native town. Came to the 
Philippines, 1890. Starting' with P4 salary he was able to put 
up a little store of his own after four years. In 1902, became 
manager of a store on Rosario street, capitalized by Go Jocco and 
others, the profits of which were spent for the maintenance of n 
school in China. Established own business in 1911. Ex-director, 
Chi nese Chamber of Comerce, and member, executive committee, 
Ch inese Nationalist Party. Married Perigrina Francisco in 1909. 
They have five children. 



Residence: Manila. 



97 




DORN in' Chuanchio, July 19, 1890, son of Dr. T. L. Huang', a well- 
kno^n physician in China. First educated in a Mission school 
in ChuaAqbio; later, in the Anglo-Chinese School of Changchow and 
Krlangsu. 1910- St. Paul's and St. Stephen's Colleges, Hongkong*; 
1911-1912- Anglo-Chinese College and Union Medical College, both in 
Peking; 1912- Portland Academy, Oregon; 1914-16- University of 
Oregon (pre-medic) ; 1916-20- University of Texas (M.D.) Passed 
medical board examinations, Texas, 1920. 1920-21- Lecturer in Chi- 
cago for the Brown Lyceum Bureau. 1921-22- Practiced in Houston, 
Texas. Returned to China 1922. 1923-24- private practice; 1924-26- 
Resident Physician, Hope & Wilhelmina Hospital, Kulangsu; 1926- 
27- Ship surgeon, Butterfield & Swire, English firm in Hongkong*. 
Came to the P. L, 1927, passing local board test in November of 
same year. 

Has been practising since 1928. Is also instructor in bacteriology 
at the Nursing School, Chinese General Hospital. 

Married Rosario Sy Cip, daughter of Eusebio Sy Cip, in 1923. 
Residence: 646 Gandara, Manila. 



98 




D ORN in Chingkang, June 23, 1899, son of Kui Suy Hong, a Chinese 
*-* businessman in Java. Studied eight years in Ching'kang. From 
his lGth to 19th year, was an employee and manager of the importa- 
tion and exportation business of his father-in-law in Chuanchio. After 
working for four years as cashier and secretary of the Manila Coco- 
nut Oil, he organized the Chinese Trading Co., Inc., an imp. 
and exporting house in Manila, in 1922. The firm has branches in 
Aparri and Davao. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and ex-director, Philip- 
pine Chinese Educational Association. 

Married Lim Tec Hui, daughter of a wealthy businessman in 
Chuanchio, with whom he has five children, three born in the P. 1. 

Residence: 437 Nueva, Manila. 

99 



: ^ 

Trinidad Jurado Te Quim Jua 
CIXTY-FOUR years old and a native of Lamoa, Amoy. Educated 
^ in China. Came to the Philippines, 1880. Began as a peddler 
of goods. After three years of hard work, was able to establish a 
sari-sari store on Nueva Street. In 1889, founded a drygoods busi- 
ness on Calle Rosario, existing to date. In 1926, he was appointed 
by the Chinese government Chief of Immigration of Fukien, holding- 
position until 1928. 

President, "Kong Li Po"; member, Supreme Council, Chinese 
Nationalist Party; Chinese Chamber of Comerce; and Chinese Com- 
munity of which he was a director for 18 years. He is a Mason, 
belonging to the Isla de Luzon Lodge No. 57. 

Married Josefa Mendoza Chungtiangco of Manila. 



100 



Dy Siu 



HORN in Amoy, China, June 23, 1894. Father, Dy Her Chan, a 
long Manila resident, and founder of firm bearing his name. 
Educated in China. Came to the Islands in 1909. First worked as 
an employee in store for two years. Rose to be manager at the 
age of 15, to date. Besides a general merchandise business in Manila 
and the provinces, Dy Siu has considerable real estate interests in 
the city. 

Married Ho Koa of Amoy in 1911. They have ten children, eight 
born in the Philippines. 

President, Chinese Bian Hap He, an association of Rosario and 
Sto. Cristo stores; member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Maso- 
nic Oriental Club; and ex-treasurer, Batong Buhay Lodge No. 27. 



101 



DORN in Chuanchio, May 9, 1902, son of Dy Lac. Came to the 
Philippines, 1914. Studied in Ateneo de Manila, eight years. 
Completed high school in 1922. Enrolled in the Philippine Dental 
College, graduating with the D. D. S. degree in 1927. Passed dental 
board examinations same year. 

Married Dolores Velasco, grand-daughter of the late Mariano 
Velasco, in 1925. They have three children. 

Member, Cosmos and Oriental Clubs. 

Residence: 565 Misericordia, Manila. 



102 




r 



Enrique Say Koc Chuan 
HORN in Manila, Nov. 14, 1884. His father was Say O Chiau, a 

Chinese businessman who had resided in the Philippines for over 
40 years. When six years old and during the Philippine revolution, 
was sent to China for studies. Came back, 1900. His father was 
then dead already and he assumed management of the former's busi- 
ness with his brother. Besides dry-goods, he is engaged in the lum- 
ber business. Say Kim Chieng & Bros, has a lumber concession in 
Aparri, Cagayan. 

Married Chua Poa in 1902. They have nine children. His son, 
Philip Z. Torres, is studying aviation in the United States. 

Member, Oriental and Cosmos Clubs, and Mencius Lodge No. 93. 

Residence: Rosario corner San Vicente, Manila. 



103 




Tan Chuan Loong 

DORN in Chuanchu, Amoy, May 19, 1898. Father, Tan Too Sing, 
resided in the Philippines for over 40 years. Came to the Islands 
1908. Studied in local public schools for six years. Continued stu- 
dies in China, staying there two years. On return was employed m 
store of Tan Min Liong & Co. in Atimonan, Tayabas. Later be- 
came manager of same, and at the same time elected first president 
of Atimonan Chinese Chamber of Commerce. Two years after- 
wards appointed buyer and agent for Tan Yee Sin & Co. in Cande- 

laria, Tayabas. Transferred to Manila as secretary of same firm. 

At present partner and manager of Bio Chuan & Company. 

Married, with six children. Member, Tan Club, Nilad Lodge 

No. 12. 

104 



m 




Paulino Uy Lao 

DORN in Lamoa, Amoy, August 1, 1898, son of Uy 0, a merchant 
of Aparri, Cagayan. Studied for seven years in his home town,, 
and two years in Aparri, where his father brought him at the age 
of 12. Came to Manila in 1910 and employed with Tec Bi & Co. for 
eight years. In 1918, he established the Uy Lao & Co., engaged in 
buying and selling (retail and wholesale) tobacco leaf, with offices 
in Manila, Cagayan, and Isabela. 

Director, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Masonic Oriental 
Club. He is Past Master of Hagdang Bato Lodge No. 87, San Juan, 
Rizal. 

Married to Hiao Kim Po, with four children, all born in the 
Philippines. 

Residence: 519 Alvarado, Manila. 



105 



•1 




Tan Chayco 



DORN in Chingkang, Aug. 1, 1886, son of Tan Tuam Pho. Edu- 
*-* cated in native town. Came to the Philippines, 1899. After hav- 
ing been employed with Tan Chong Say & Co., for thirteen years, he 
established his own business, principally buying and selling copra. 
He is very well-known in Tayabas and Laguna, and is the proprietor 
of a coconut plantation in Dolores, Tayabas. 

Married Ting Be of Chingkang, with eight children, seven born 
in the Philippines. 

Member, Taga Hog Lodge No. 79 and Masonic Oriental Club. 

Residence: 619 San Nicolas, Manila. 



* 

0 



106 




Florencio Go Co Co 

BORN in Chingkang, Jan. 15, 1874. Came to the P. U 1892. On 
arrival assisted brother who had a store in Victorias, Tarlac. On 
the death of the latter nine years later, he took charge of the business. 
He remained there five years after which he transferred to Tarlac. 
During the Philippine revolution he fought under Gen. Francisco 
Makabulos who was his "padrino" in Catholic baptism. Besides a 
general merchandise store in Tarlac, he owns a rice mill established 
in that town, with an office in Manila. 

He has eight children, all born in the P. I. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Philippine-Chinese 
Rice Association. 

Residence: 103 Meisic, Manila. 

107 



Go Cang Dio 



DORN in Amoy, 1871. Came to Manila at the age of 15. Stayed 
in Carigara, Leyte, for over 20 years, where he was branch mana- 
ger of the erstwhile powerful Y. B. Sontua firm. When he moved 
to Manila he founded the rice business of Tan S enguan & Co. Since 
1929 has been independent in the rice trade, with his own rice mill 
in San Quentin, Pangasinan. 

Married Yu See of Amoy in 1891. 

Residence: 43 Soler, Manila. 



108 



■ 

Yu Eng Sin 

BORN in Amoy, on March 11, 1898, the son of Yu Joaquin and Chi 
Chin, Educated in Amoy. Arrived in Manila on April 19, 1917. 
Studied in the Anglo-Chinese School in this city for two years. First 
worked in his father's store as salesman; later, cashier. Served in 
the latter position for eight years, after which was appointed man- 
ager. Yu Joaquin, successors to Gregorio Yu Choco y Herederos, 
is a 90-year old firm. 

Married Uy Gui Ka of Amoy in 1922. He has five children. 
Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Yu Club. 
Residence: 219 San Vicente, Manila. 



109 



Dee Chian Hong 



DORN in Amoy, 1880. Educated in China. Came to the Philip- 
pines, 1898. Started as an employee with a salary of P10 a 
month. At present president and general manager of La Fortuna, 
Inc., Distillery. He owns considerable real estate properties in the 

city. 

Married with eleven children, seven born in the Islands. 
Residence: 360 Sto. Cristo, Manila. 



110 




QORN in Chuanchio, May 16, 1902, son of Lim Chiat Chun, founder 
of La Confianza Wine Factory. Arrived in the Philippines, 1913. 
Finished the intermediate course in the Anglo-Chinese School and the 
secondary in the Manila North High School. In the latter, he gra- 
duated with honors with the first graduating class of 1922. Enrolled 
in the University of the Philippines, 1923, but was not able to finish 
the commercial course because of lack of time. He became manager 
of the firm in 1925. 

Married Gan Kan Chu, in 1923, with three children, all born in 
the P. I. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Anglo-Chinese School 
Alumni Association and Lim's Club. 



Ill 




i 



Cheng Leng (Ban Lee) 

O0: ,N :n Amay, April 30, 1898. Educated in China. Came to the 

Philippines, 1919. Starting' as an assistant of his father in the 
latter's store in Divisoria market, he is at present the proprietor of 
Cheng Ban Yek & Co., importers and exporters, rice dealers and gen- 
eral merchants, with a rice mill in Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Masonic Oriental Club, 
and Batong Buhay Lodge No. 27. 

Married So Boa Ty of Amoy in 1920, with three children. 

Residence: 525 Muelle de Binondo, Manila. 



4 



112 




JUSTO ROMUALDEZ Sy KEE 



pORN in Chingkang, 1896. Father, Sy Yinco; mother, Tar Tang-. 

Studied in Chinkang. Came to the Philippines in 1910. Estab- 
lished candle business several years after arriving in Manila, and 
he owns at present one of the biggest candle factories (Chi Seng) 
in the Islands. His products are distributed throughout the Philip- 
pines and also exported to Guam. 

He is a Catholic and baptized under that church's ritual with 
Justice Norberto Romualdez as godfather. 

Married Gan Suan Tee of Chingkang, in 1916. They have seven 
children. 

He is the president of the Candle Manufacturers Association of 
Manila. 

113 



Crispulo J. Co Co (Co Diong Kho) 

BORN in Chuanchio, 1897, son of Co Leco, well-known Manila rice 
merchant. He obtained his early education in his native country, 
and when thirteen years of age, was brought to the Philippines by 
J is father. After studying under a private tutor for some time, he 
,,as placed in the Ateneo de Manila, remaining there four years. 
Since 1925, partner and assistant manager of Co Leco, importers and 
rs, and rice merchants, with a mill in Santa Rosa, Nueva 

Ecija. 

Married Tan Chiam in 1915. They have four children. 
Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce; treasurer and ex-vice- 
president, Chinese-Filipino Rice Association. 
Residence: 912 Clavel, Manila. 



114 




Simeon Ong Suan 



DORN in Chuanchio, May 27, 1878. Came to the P. I., 1891. Begtv. 

as a "tendero" in the store of his cousin in Cabanatuan, N. E., 
at P3 a month salary. After three years work established own stoi\ 
in Divisoria market with P200 capital but this was later destroyed 
by fire. He became a laborer at the customhouse (PI a day), and 
after one year, again saved enough money to open another store. 
Discontinued business after some time. Later, employed in a Chinese 
store on Rosario; then transferred to Echague, finally buying the 
establishment in the latter place, now known as Simeon O. Suan, 
wholesale and retail dealers in hardware, paints, and construction 
supplies. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Chinese Community. 

115 




Poa Nguanco 

FIFTY-ONE years old and a native of Amoy. Educated in China. 

Came to Manila in 1893. Employed for fifteen years in dif- 
ferent stores. At present managing partner of Poa Nguanco & Com- 
pany, principally engaged in the rice business. 

Married Chan Nuy of Amoy in 1903. They have four children. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Filipino-Chinese 

Rice Merchants Association. 

Residence: 608 Tabora, Manila. 



116 



Co Pak 



DORN in Amoy, 1893, of Chinese parentage. Came to the Philip- 

pines in 1910. His father, Co Chia, had a soap business and 
this Co Pak expanded when he arrived in Manila. The beginning of 
his present factory was established in 1917. He is also engaged in 
oil and grocery business. 

Co Pak is the president of the Chinese Soap Factories As- 
sociation. He is a member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, and 
of the Oriental and Masonic Clubs. 

Married Go Bit of Amoy in 1912, with six children, five born in 
the Philippines. 

Residence: 426 Sto. Cristo, Manila. 



117 



Dee Tian 

FORTY-FIVE years old, and a native of Amoy. His father was Dee 
Hankia, brother of the grandfather of Mr. Dee C. Chuan. Came 
to the Philippines in 1900. Worked with Dee C. Chuan & Co. for 
three years, leaving- same in 1917. In 1918, established own lumber 

firm — Dee Tian & Co. 

Married Emelenciana David of Sta. Rita, Pampanga, in 1914. 
They have nine children. 

Member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence. 1518 Azcarraga, Manila. 

118 




LlM SlA 

piFTY-EIGHT years old and hails from Amoy. Came to the Philip- 
pines in 1886. Employed in firm of Mariano Velasco for over 
thirty years. Quit the job to establish Oriental Furniture, Inc., of 
which he is managing' partner. 

Married Du Ku of Amoy in 1892. They have six children. 

Member of Se Ho Tong, an association of Chinese with the family 
names of Lim. 

Residence: 342 T. Pinpin, Manila. 



119 



Alejandro P. Tan Gatue 

BORN in Chingkang, Dec. 11, 1870. Came to the P. I. when 15 
veasr old. First worked with his father in Carigara, Leyte, later 
transferring to Manila and Tuguegarao, Cagayan. After staying in 
the later place for several years he returned to Manila where he 
established his present business. Besides flags, he manufactures 
mattresses, cushions, bed sheets and spreads, supplies for steamer's 
cabins, etc. 

Married Braulia Sy de Jesus with whom he has three children. 
One of them, Dionisio, is a graduate in Business Administration from 
the U. P. 

Residence: 414 Misericordia, Manila. 



120 



Mariano Chong Tiaopoc 



DORN in Chuanchio, Dec. 1874. Arrived in Manila, 1895. First 
worked in a distillery store at P3 a month salary. In 1901 trans- 
ferred to Malolos, Bulacan, where he established with a partner the 
beginning' of "La Confianza", the only distillery factory in Malalo* 
of which he has been the sole owner since 1929. 

Married Emilia Bautista of Malolos with whom he has si> 
children, all born in the P. I. One of his sons, Jacinto, is a B.S.C. 
graduate of the U. P., while a daughter, Aniceta, holds the same 
degree from the Philippine Women's College. He is a member of the 
Kapang Lodge, No. 46 (30°). 

Residence: Malolos, Bulacan. 



121 



Tan Sam To 



DORN in Chingkang, May 18, 1872, son of Tan Quim Pong. Edu- 
cated in China. Came to the Philippines, 1884. Started as an 
employee in the firm, Tan Chico, founded by his grandfather over 
eighty years ago. Pie has been its manager for many years now. 

Married Su See in 1899. They have four children, three born 
in the Philippines. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce; Philippine-Chinese 
Educational Association, and Cosmos Club. He is ex-president of 
the "Fookien Times." 

Residence: 133 Nueva corner San Vicente, Manila. 



122 




Chua Lim 

A native of Amoy, where he was born in 1897. Brought to Manila 
by his father at the age of nine. Studied seven years in the 
Anglo-Chinese School. On his father's death in 1917, he assumed 
management of the former's business. At present, he is engag-ed in 
imports and exports, buying and selling native products, and is the 
sole distributor in the Philippines of several well-known American 
and foreign products, among them, the "Bell" and "Ranger" brands 
of flour. He is also the proprietor of the Central Bakery and of a 
soap factory. 

Married Go Sio Kim of Amoy in 1921. They have three children, 
all born in the P. I. 

Member, Wala-na Lodge No. 13. 

123 



Chua Lien Sun 



DORN in Chingkang, Fookien, Oct. 11, 1878, son of Joaquin Chua, 
lumber merchant. Educated in China. Came to the Philippines 
in 1896. At present, co-owner of the Insular Furniture on Calle Pin- 
nin and manager of the Insular Saw Mill on Calle Soler. 

Married to Uy Hian of Chingkang with 8 children, 7 of whom 
were born in the Philippines. He is a Catholic in religion and a 
member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: 20 Soler, Manila. 



124 




Ramon Fernandez Lu Song Hiap 
DORN in Chuanchio, Jan. 28, 1881. Came to the P. I., 1897. After 

dstruction of his father's store by fire, went to Cotabato where 
he had to engage in hard labor to earn a living'. While there he had 
several occasions to help Filipinos against the assaults of Moros. He 
returned to Manila after eight months and was employed as a cook 
and clerk at the same time, at P10 a month. After some time went 
to Iloilo to help his brother in business. Subsequently traveled in 
different provinces as an agent, finally establishing a store in Zam- 
boanga. Then came back to Manila and engaged in importing and 
exporting and commission agents business. 

Married Hilaria Flores of Inapacan, Leyte, in 1904. 

Baptized with Don Ramon J. Fernandez as godfather. 

Residence: 511 Pennsylvania, Manila. 

125 




Lee Sing 

BORN in Chingkang, May 19, 1897, son of Lee Hee. Studied in 
China for eight years. On his arrival in Manila in 1912, his 
father sent him to some night schools to study English. This was 
while working in the firm of Luis H. Gositco, a well-known Manila 
lumberman, with an initial salary of F30 a month. After staying in 
those institutions for about nine years he finished the third year of 
high school. In 1919. he established the Lee Hee & Co., lumber firm, 
which he named after his father. Since 1920, he has been the man- 
ager of the company. 

Married Chua Poa of Chuanchio, in 1920. They have two chil- 
( both born in the Philippine Islands. 

r ie is a member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and of the 
da Lumber Merchants' Association. 

126 




B 



Alejandro Ti Chim Chuan 

ORN in Chingkang, 1878. Came to the P. L, 1894, settling' in 
Salcedo, Samar, where he was employed in a Chinese store. In 
1905, established his own business in Guiuan, same province, with p 
capital of F10,000. He established his Manila office, Ty Amje lier- 
manos e Hijos, in 1927- general merchants, importers and exporters, 
with five stores in Guiuan and one in Salcedo. 

Married with five children, three born in the Philippines. 
Residence: 89 Rosario, Manila. 



127 




Lim Tong Tee 



DORN in Amoy, in 1893. Educated in native town. Obtained ele- 
■"^ mentary education in native town, and in 1915, came to the Philip- 
pines. Was employed as secretary in the office of Dy Buncio & Com- 
paq from 1915 to 1927. In the latter year established own importing 
and exporting business, particularly dealing with high-class tea pro- 
ducts and general merchandise. He is the sole representative in the 
Philippines of the well-known "Ki Lin Tong" medicines manufac- 
ired in Singapore. 

Carried Tiong Kiaw of Amoy in 1918. They have four children. 

Residence: 237 Soler, Manila. 

128 



Valentin Tan Lian Teng 

BORN in Chuanchio, Jan. 2, 1889. Educated first in Chuanchio. 
Came to Manila, 1901. Studied in Anglo-Chinese School, five 
years. Began to help his brother, Joaquin Tan Bon Liong, in busi- 
ness when 17 years of age. In 1921, became manager of the firm, 
at present taking turns with his brother in the management. 

Vice-president, Yu Uy Tong (Tan) Club; member, Chinese 
Chamber of Commerce and Chinese Community. 

Married Keang Hua Boan of Foochow in 1906, with ten children 
five born in the Philippines. 

Residence: 222-226 San Vicente, Manila. 



129 



Co Lu So (Kaw Ho Soo) 

DORN in Amoy, 1876. Father, Jose Co Kim Sien, a resident in 
the Philippines for a long time. Educated in China. Came to 
the Islands, 1892. Resided in Catubig, Samar, with his father, 
seven years. Then employed in a Chinese store in Manila, fourteen 
years. In 1915, established Co Lu So Hardware. 

Married, with ten children, five born in the Philippines. Pre- 
sident, Chinese Hardware Association; member, Chinese Chamber 
of Commerce, Chinese Community, and Chinese-Philippine Educa- 
tional Association. 

Residence: Plaza Calderon de la Barca Binondo, Manila. 



130 




OORN in Amoy, on March 6, 1877. His father, Jao Chek Tion£*. 

was a merchant of long residence in the Philippine Islands. Cam- 1 
to Manila when barely ten years old. Since more than 30 years ag( 
has been managing' the present business originally founded by hi 
father. He has a coconut oil milk factory located at Calle Cristobal, 
Paco, successors to Cristobal Oil Company. He exports coconut e\) 
to America and is also engaged in buying and selling native products. 

Married Tee Hio of Amoy with whom he has five children. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: 419 Juan Luna, Manila. 



131 




Ang Ban Chun 



T^ORTY-FOUR years old and a native of Kulangsu, Amoy. Edu- 
*■ cated in Amoy. Arrived in the P. I., 1914. At present, manag- 
ing partner of Tiong Hua Kongsi & Co., importers and exporters. 

Harried Tan Yek in 1914. They have five children, all born in 
the Philippines. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and "Ang Association/' 
Ri lidence: 223 Ongpin, Manila. 



132 




Uy Cong Him (N. C. Him) 

BORN in Chuanchio, Aug. 24, 1890. Studied in the Asuncion Pub- 
lic School for several years. Began as a messenger in the firm 
of the late Pio Barretto, later becoming in charge of construction. 
In 1922, left position to establish own office. He is one of the most 
well-known contractors in Manila, having constructed such buildings 
as Sta. Monica Apartments, Manila Hotel Annex, and Barrio Obrero 
in Tondo. 

Residence: 752 Echague, Manila. 



133 




Sy Seng Tong 



BORN in Chuanchio, Sept. 19, 1892. Educated in China. Arrived 
in Manila, 1907. Started as an employee of Sy Guan Juat & Co. 
of which his father, Sy Hai Tui, was a partner. Since 1915, manager 
of the firm. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Biaknabato Lodge No. 7, 
and Oriental Masonic Club, and ex-president, Chinese Grocers' Asso- 
ciation. 

Married to Tan Cham with four children. 
Residence: 543 Sto. Cristo, Manila. 



134 





Sy Seng Suy 

BORN in Shanghai, China, August 1, 1900, son of Sy Hai Tiu, a mer- 
chant of long residence in Manila. Came to the Philippines, 1915. 
Studied in Meisic Elementary School, 1916 to 1918. When his father 
died in 1920, he left for Hongkong. Entered St. Joseph's College 
in 1923, and following year, Shanghai University, taking com- 
mercial and military science courses. While a student at Shanghai 
University in 1926, he escaped from the institution to join the forcer 
of General Chiang Kai Shek, fighting under the latter's banner for 
several months. 

Since late in 1926, has been the proprietor and manager of 
Buena Fama", in Lucena, Tayabas. 

He is the founder of the Lucena Chinese Nationalist Pai 
Residence: Lucena, Tayabas. 

135 



■i 




ROSENDO DYCHAUCO 



BORN in Manila, 1889, son of Mariano Dy Ching Con, who had 
resided in the Philippines for about 50 years. Studied in the 
local Anglo-Chinese School, four years, and in China, six years. He 
founded his present business- glassware, porcelain, etc. importer- in 
1908. 

He has six children, all born in Manila. He was president for 
two times of the Philippine-Chinese Glassware Association, and is a 
member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Chinese Com- 
munity. 

Residence: 939 Fernando, Manila. 



13G 




Gan Cio Fan 

BORN in Chuanchio, 1899. Educated in China. Came to the Phil- 
ippines, 1914. First worked in the Dee C. Chuan & Company, 
owned by his brother-in-law. Remained there until 1921 when he 
established his own business- "La Connianza", lumber manufacturers 
and dealers, with its own sawmill. 

Married Lim Ke Ong of Chuanchio in 1922. They have four 
children, all born in the Philippines. 

Member: Chinese Chamber of Cemmerce, Chinese Community, 
and Manila Lumber Merchants' Association. 
Residence: 920 Azcarrage, Manila. 



137 



Go LlM J. MlCIANO 



A native of Chinkang and thirty-one years old. Educated in home 
town. Came to the Philippines in 1914. Studied one year in 
the Anglo-Chinese School (Manila) and then worked in his father's 
store. In 1924, joined "Chi Seng", local candle factory, as manager. 

Married Sy Kak of Chinkang in 1916. They have two children. 

He has been baptized as a Catholic with the late Dr. Juan Mi- 
ciano, famous Filipino physician, as godfather. 

Residence: Manila. 




138 




Choa Ke 

FIFTY years old and a native of Amoy. Arrived in the Philip- 
pines in 1895. First assisted his brother in business, assuming 
management of the same four years afterwards. At present, he is 
its sole proprietor. 

He has nine children, three born in the Philippine Islands. 

Residence: 502 Elcano, Manila. 



139 




Chan Keao 



CIFTY-SEVEN years old and a native of Eni, Amoy. Came to the 
P. L, 1898. Started as a clerk in the office of Pablo Ortega. 
After seven years of service he was made manager of the firm. 
Stayed five years in the latter position; left to establish own busi- 
ness. He is a reputable rice merchant, with a mill in Cuyapo, Nueva 
Ecija. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Chinese Community. 
Residence: 263 Juan Luna, Manila. 



140 




Tl KlMKEE 



BORN in Chingkang, 1900, son of Ti Chim Chuan. Educated in 
China. Came to the Philippines, 1912, Studied in Guiwan, Samar, 
public school, five years, and Chinese school in Manila, one year. 
Has been manager of Ty Amje Hermanos e Hijos since 1927. 

Married Maria Tan of Arayat, Pampanga, in 1924, with two 
children. 

Residence: 89 Rosario, Manila. 



141 




Tiu Pin 

DORN in Amoy, June, 1897. Studied in China, ten years. Came 
to the P. I., 1914. Employed for four years in a Chinese store. 
In 1918, associated as partner of Co Pak, in Co Pak & Co. 

Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce. He is a 32-degree 
Mason, belonging* to the Batong Buhay Lodge No. 27. 

Married with four children. 
Residence: 426 Sto. Cristo, Manila. 



142 




Uy HOO (Vy Hoo) 

BORN in Chuanchio, 1893. Came to the P. L, 1895. Educated in 
China and in the Asuncion Public School. After working* in dif- 
ferent Chinese stores as an employee for about fifteen years, he 
established the Uy Hoo & Co., electric store and supply — direct im- 
porters. 

Married Dy Seat, with four children. 
Residence: 629 Ongpin, Manila. 



143 




Tan Tay 

J^ORN in Chingkang, 1906. Educated in Manila and China. Ar- 
rived in the Philippines, 1916. Worked in Cebu for some time, 
1 tl$r transferring' to Manila as treasurer and assistant manager of 
Song Fo & Co., a distillery establishment. After three years, estab- 
lished Tan Tay & Co., also a distillery factory, with a branch in 
Cebu. 

Residence: 530 Juan Luna, Manila. 



144 



■V 




Tan Hong 



BORN in Amoy, March 20, 1905. Studied in China. Arrived in 
the Philippines in 1923. Was first employed in a grocery store 
for about one year. Transferred to Pangasinan Lumber in Da- 
gupan, staying there another year. Came again to Manila to work 
with "Tableria La Suerte." Three years later, established Tan Hong 
& Company of which he is partner and manager. 

He is married with one child. 

Residence: 635 Soler, Manila. 



145 



C. B. Ong Chun 

HORN in Amoy, July 25, 1876. His father, Ong- Cha, was a mer- 
^ chant in Manila for a long- time. Studied in Chinese schools in 
} is town. Came to the Philippines in 1890. After working- as em- 
ployee in a Chinese store for five years, established his own. He has 
two stores in Sto. Cristo at present and one on San Fernando. 
He is a Catholic. 

Married Ting- He of Amoy in 1898. They have eleven children, 
ni-ie born in the Philippines. 

President, Tay Guan Ong- Association and Chinese Glassware 
Association, and treasurer, Oriental Masonic Club. 

Residence: 1110 San Fernando, Manila. 



146 




Yu Chui 

BORN in Amoy 53 years ago. Attended schools in his native town. 
Came to the Islands at the age of 18. First stayed in Dagupan, 
Pangasinan, later transferring to Manila and joining firm of \ d 
Chuco y Herederos, where he has been ever since. He is sales mana- 
ger of the company. 

Married Yap Mia of Amoy with whom he has four children. 

Member, Yu Club. 

Residence: 219 San Vicente, Manila. 



147 




Te Chim Boo 



QORN in Chuanchio, Jan. 2, 1893. Came to Manila when twelve 
■-^ years -of age. Educated in the Manila Chinese schools. Began 
business in 1913. Besides being an importer and exporter he is an 
immigration broker. 

He is a member of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: 674 Nueva, Manila. 



148 




Teodoro Sandiko Co Bio 

A native of Chuanchio, born 48 years ago. Came to the Philippine 
Islands, 1900. Began as a "tendero" in Manila, later transfer- 
ring to Malolos where he is at present one of the leading merchants. 
Besides a general merchandise business, he is a rice dealer and pro- 
prietor of a distillery and soap factory. 

Residence: Malolos, Bulacan. 



149 



BORN in Chingkang, Apr. 19, 1894. Father, Francisco Chua Chi, 
a Philippine resident for over 50 years. Came to the P. L, 1905. 
Since 1902, has been the manager of Chua Chi Sons, owners of Sibul 
ring Mineral Water Factory Co., Inc. (Josan), Paco Hardware & 
Auto Supply, and lumber stores in Juan Luna (Co Bio) and Herran, 
Manila, and Libertad, Pasay. 

Ex-president, Chinese Grocers' ssociation and Che Yong Club. 
He is a Mason, belonging to the Luz Oceanica Lodge No. 85. 
Residence: 1106 Sta. Elena, Manila. 



150 



I r- 




C. C. Hwang 



HORN in Kulangsu, Amoy, Jan., 1905. Finished primary and ele- 
mentary education in Amoy. Studied high school in Nanking and 
Shanghai, 1918-1922. Came to Manila, 1922. Enrolled in the Na- 
tional University in same year, graduating with the B. S. C. degr< e 
in 1926. Began as an apprentice in the Mercantile Bank in 192*. 
Since two years ago, chief of the Foreign Department. 

Married Lim Chay Hong in 1926, with three children, all born 
in the Philippines. 

Residence: Salazar, Manila. 



151 



<lth 



152 



Manuel Go Tianuy 
Honorary Consul in Cebu 

A DMITTEDLY the richest and most popular Chinese in the pro- 
vince of Cebu, liked and admired by Filipino, American, ar ! 
foreign elements, Mr. Manuel Go Tianuy is equally acknowledged to b< 
the most influential member of the Chinese community in the South 

He was born in Chuanchio, Amoy, in May, 1888, the son of 
Go Tiaoco, one of the richest and most prominent Cebu Chinese in 
his time. After studying in the elementary school of his native 
town, Mr. Tianuy was brought to the Philippines by his father in 
1902. He enrolled in the Anglo-Chinese School in Manila and later 
went to Hongkong to enter the St. Joseph's college. In that institu- 



153 



tion vLev many of the leading Chinese in the Philippines have been 
educvte'i, Mr. Tianuy pursued a commercial course for three years. 

Mr. xianuy was not immediately entrusted with the manage- 
rs nt ')i his father's business once back in Cebu. He was assigned 
lifferent departments of the firm to gain experience and was 
tr ted no differently from the rest of its employees. It took three 
? s of strenuous work before his father considered him amply 

ared for the task of assuming* the direction of the company's 
Vh interests. The elder Go retired from active business in 1015 
>to his shoes stepped the son. 

ie rapid expansion of the business since he assumed manage- 
n» : a testimonial to Mr. Tianuy's executive ability. The firm 
is tod -i the forefront in its lines, among them in the importing, 
export] .m and shipping business. Besides being the president and 
general .nanager of the Gotiaoco Hermanos, Inc., Mr. Tianuy is the 
] reside, of the Hoa Hin, Inc., another million-peso Cebu shipping 
firm. Tile firm has just completed the construction of a huge drydock 
which rivals in size those in Manila. 

Mr. Tianuy's popularity and high standing in the cosmopolitan 
elements in Cebu have been demonstrated by his election as vice- 
president of the Cebu Chamber of Commerce. Being, a big-hearted 
man, he never is behind in extending his help i n social and civic 
movements. 

Besides his business affiliations already mentioned above, Mr. 
Tianuy is a stockholder in many other firms, president of the Far 
Eastern Club, and a director of the Cebu Y. M. C. A. 

He married Alicia Wong of Chuanchio, Amoy, in 1911. Out 
of the union were born seven children, two of whom are students in 
exclusive colleges in Manila. 

Residence: Cebu, Cebu. 



V 



154 



Yap Anton 



HE "grand old man" of the Chinese community in Cebn, 



A respected not only by his countrymen in the province but by 
Filipinos and foreigners as well. Mr. Yap Anton is one of the 
early pioneers in the Philippines from the neighboring Republic, 
having arrived in the Islands in 1882 when he was only 15 years old. 
His father, Yap Cham, was a businessman of long residence here 
during the Spanish times, and it was under him that the son ob- 
tained his elementary training in business. 

Following the usual custom and practice among Chinese, Mr. 
Yap Anton had to begin as a simple "tendero" in his father's store. 




155 



The training lasted over ten years, and when the father died in 
1894, the son succeeded him. 

As in the case of other successful men, Mr. Yap Anton met one 
of th • most unfortunate reverses shortly after he took charge of 
his father's business. The little fortune which the elder Yap built 
up through innumerable sacrifices for .score or more years was wiped 
out by a fire which took place on the arrival of the Americans in 
Cebu. What was then a flourishing store was reduced to ashes, 
and it seemed as if the .son who had hoped to see it become bigger 
and bigger, was destined to absolute ruin. No greater discourage 
ment coula indeed have come to a man. But as Providence willc 
it, there were three things that favored Mr. Yap Anton and whii h 
enabled him to build once more out of the debris left by the flames, 
a fortune that is now his pride as the reward of his untiring; efforts. 

When the ruins of the fire were removed it was found that a 
safe containing several thousand pesos had been spared. This money 
he invested in sugar and favored by high prices then prevailing: in 
Hongkong he was able to make big profits. Then he also had a 
branch store in Uoilo, and taking the stock to Cebu, he was helped 
a great deal in his first step at rehabilitation. But above all these, 
Mr. Yap Anton had a greater asset, and that was his good credit 
not only in Manila but also in Hongkong. 

Building on these little by little, through untold sacrifices and 
•'•ties against difficulties, he succeeded in regaining his previous 
mosses, and was able to put his present business which ranks in 
standing with any other firm of its kind in Cebu. Besides the 
Yap Anton Bros., the firm also operates the Yap Anton & Co., and 
the Yap Amping Grocery, both in the city of Cebu. 

Mr. Yap Anton has always taken active part in civic movements, 
notable of which was his help in the construction of the Chuang 
;7 ua Hospital and the establishment of the Cebu Chinese School of 
which he is one of the founders. Of the former he has been treas- 
urer and member of the board of directors and of the latter, vice- 
president and treasurer. He is also an active member of the Cebu 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce and of the Far Easte rn Club. 

Mr. Yap is married and has five children, three of whom were 
born in the PhilipP ines - He comes from Open, Amoy, China. 
Residence: Cebu. 



156 



Go Occo 

BORN in Chuanchio, Sept. 1876. Educated in China. Arrived in 
Cebu, 1891. While studying at night, he worked as a "tende:o" 
in a Chinese store for five years with a salary of P10 a mon-.ri. 
With P500 as capital he established a sari-sari store, but everytime 
he was on the verge of prosperity, a fire destroyed everything that 
he had. This happened four times, the last in 1910. Through good 
credit, industry, and perseverance, however, he has always been abi 
to stand up, and now, his firm is one of the biggest in Cebu. 

Married in 1899. He has 12 children, ten born in the P. I. 
Director, Cebu Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Cebu Chinese 
School, Association Benevola de Chinos, and member, Far Eastern 
Club. 

Residence: 111 Magallanes, Cebu. 



157 



r 0 




Go Chan 

A N inspiration for every young man struggling for success is the 
% the life of Mr. Go Chan, one of the most prominent and success- 
ful Chinese businessmen in Cebu. Thirty five years ago he arrived 
in Manila from Chingkang, China, where he was born in 1881. His 
first job was in a slipper factory at a salary of P4 a month. Doing- 
varied errands during the day, young Go then studied at night. 
For four long years, he dragged along with the four-peso salary. 
Then his first promotion came. He was given P6 and again two 
years later raised to P15. Six months afterwards, the amount was 
increased to P20 or P240 a year. 

He was satisfied, but the adventuring spirit in Mr. Go Chan 
took him to Cebu. There he was first employed in the firm of Ong 

158 



* 



Liong Hay, a Chinese hearse, with a compensation of P400 per an- 
num, and a participation oJ5 ten per cent in the profits. He st ; 2k 
to thai job for four years', after which he went back to China to 
spend eight-montli v.>c uion. 

Returning tu Ccbn if* 1004, he entered the employ of Go Occo 
& Co. 12 mana^' 1' At*, i sixteen years of successful r.ianagement 
of the f-rr.:, he 1 •: his V:\rAi 1, 1921, and taking* out all his 

-savings, formed 1 iC C> n i ( upany \yj 'I *vtH of P60,000. 

The g ov;«h • "- i , busii sir. -en may e f; ; that 

in 191'. j, the rm ncrer ei" its • «? :tal to 7 »0C ' ut 

eighty per cc »t ci . the r.mipar.. ^ ;ock. 

Mr. Go ( b'ui man .ed Tan Nay of A.noy, in ie> nave 

eight children four oj whom were born in the pine i '.uids. 

His oldest son is finding "/is commercial coursi l a well-: .own 
university in Shanghai. 

Mr. Go Chan is a member of the Far Eas' >i n Club, Chinese 
Chamber of Commerce of Cebu, of which he was once president, 
the Cebu Chinese School, and president of the Asociacion Benevola 
de Chinos de Cebu. 

Residence: Cebu, Cebu. 



159 



Uy Chu Lay 

q ORN in Amoy on October 22, 1877. His father was Antonio 
D Cosin Uy Chiaoco, a resident of Cebu for a long' time. Educated 
• n his native town. Came to Cebu in 1890. Started in his father's 
firm as an office boy. Later promoted as cashier. After serving 
• n latter position for fifteen years, was made manager. Firm's name, 
1 | death of his father, was changed from Antonio Cosin y Hermanos 
/Kin Sun Cheong Co.) to Joaquin Castro & Co., since its foundation 

ne of the biggest Chinese business houses in Cebu,— shipping agents, 
^porting and exporting, buying and seiling principal native pi* 0 " 
Lets with a £ encies in Mamb ajao and Catarman, Misamis Oriental 

n d Dumaguete, Oriental Negros. 
a Married in 1910 with five children, three born in the P. L 
Member: Far Eastern Club, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, 
Chinese School, and Asociacion Benevola de Chinos. 

Cebu 




LlM BONFING 



jWf R. Lim Bonfing was born in Chuanchio, Amoy, fifty-three years 
ago, the son of Lim Mah Teng. He landed in these Islands 
at the age of 18 without much money but with plenty of ambition. 
Like the beginning of many other successful Chinese in this country 
he has to begin at the very bottom. To a low job he stuck once the 
opportunity presented itself, and after staying in it for live years, 
he was able to accumulate enough money to start a business of 
his own. It was a very low start that Mr. Lim Bonfing had, a 
humble tendero's job at a salary of P5 a month. But the pay and 
the kind of job didn't concern him much. All that he wanted was 
to have a start. So throughout the five years that he kept on to 



161 



t,iat ■» >rk, he saved and learned all that he could, and then embarked 
on what subsequently became a very successful career. 

It v% not Mr. Lim Bonfing alone in the family who was en- 
(}- red 1 ■' such and adventurous and fi^htin^ spirit. He had ihree 
h*. ,b . Esteban Lim Jiaco, Lim Bonsine;, and Lim Bonjuy, who 
determined to make good. Thus pulling together, they 
»d modest business with a capital of about P<>,000. 

a 1- pse c? more l?*an a d< ci ,; i, the j rstwhi Uenda gro 1 */ to 
usir : . ' :zvf^k\'^Ti which at prese/J car. < nsijlered as 
le- c 1 i the province of Cebu. 

en Bt y He manos. i is engaged in general rnev- 
chan»;<se, importing*, axporv.ng, bu.\ »...•_; and selling native pro* lad • 
It hay several stores in the ity am: t >\ •. vinces and operates a Kapok 
factor; 

Mr. Lim Bonfing still .akes * .-i:vc- irt in the business, aided 
by his nephew, Y. S. Lim, yvho a-.. • as the manager of the firm. 

Mr. Lim Bonfing- marc-Jed Go >Suat mn of Amoy twenty-throe 
years ago, Twelve children nave been born, six of whom were born 
in tJ)3 Philippines. 

H> is r: member of the Far Eastern Club, the Cebu Chinese 
Chamber of Coir.merce, and other social and civic organizations. 

Residence: Cebu, Cebu. 



162 



T J . . fTO:: 




Severo Lo 

nORN in Tondo, Manila, 1881, son of Juan Lo, a Chinese busiik - 

man, and Crisanta Eugenio of Baliuag, Bulacan. He obtain, 
his elementary education in Iloilo where his father moved when h<« 
was scarcely four years old. At the age of 15, his father sent hi.ii 
to China for further studies, remaining there six years. Returning* 
to Iloilo in 1900, he entered the employ of F. M. Yaptico with a 
salary of P140 per annum. About four years later he transferred 
to Yap Sioco at P400 a year. He stayed in the latter job for two 
years only because the Yaptico firm once more solicited his services. 
He was now given a higher compensation, and so well did he show 
in his work that he was rapidly promoted, remaining with the com- 



163 



I'any urtil 1924 when he resigned to form a eorporation at the re- 
quest of prominent Negros planters — the Tanon Navigation, Inc., 
of which Don Esteban de la Rama, well-known Ilongo magnat3, is 
the president. Since then he has been residing in Cebu wl .-re a 
branch office of the company has been established. Beside?] being 
the treasurer and general manager of that firm, Mr. Lo is rtlso the 
manager of the Cebu Terminal Co., Inc. which ws formed in 1926 
through the initiative of Cebu Chinese businessmen 

He is ex-director and secretary, Cebu Chinese ( \*i rnber of Com- 
merce; director, Far Eastern Club; member, Cebu Chamber of Com- 
merce and Columbiano Club. He is a 32-degree Mason, b< \* gi ; 
to the Iloilo Lodge No. 11. 

He married Asuncion Co Pitco of Iloilo in 1903. They had two 
children. She died in 1917. He married Julia Ferrer in 1920, with 
r -hree children. 

Residence: Fuente Osmeria, Cebu. 



164 




Sy Jong Chuy 

HjORN in Amoy, December 1875, son of Sy Cheng Piao, a relative 
D of the Sy Cip family in Manila. Came to Manila at the age of 
13. From Manila he went to Dapitan, Mindanao, and worked in 
his uncle's store. Three years afterwards, he moved to Cebu and 
I became manager of Sy Joco & Co. In 1918, he transferred to Hoa 

Hin Co., Inc., a million-peso drydocks firm, as its manager. He is 
one of the principal stockholders of the company. He is also a 
heavy stockholder of the Leyte Navigation, Lim Tian Teng & Co., 
and the Ormoc Central, Ormoc, Leyte. 

Director, Asociacion Benevola de Chinos, and member, Cebu 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Far Eastern Club. 
Residence: Cebu. 

165 



Tan Unjo 

CJORN in Amoy, Dec. 18, 1877. Educated in Amoy schools. Came 
^ to the Philippines in 1898. First employed in Cang Suco, Chinese 
firm. Remained in position three years, after which, quit to estab- 
lish own business with brothers, capitalized at P30,000. Later formed 
another company engaged in importation of Saigon rice, with 
Benito Unchuan, Cang Suco, Cu Unjieng, etc. Firm discontinued 
1920, and following year, entered Hoa Hin Co., Inc. as assistant man- 
ner. On death of Benito Unchuan, left position to become manager 
•• Pastrano Unchuan & Co., one of the oldest and biggest firms in 
Cebu, engaged in importing and exporting, shipping, etc. 

Married Sia Manio of Amoy in 1904. They have 13 children. 
Member, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, president, Chinese School; 
director, Hoa Hin, Inc. 

166 




TlMOTEO YUTIONG 

BORN in Amoy, Aug. 15, 1871, son of Yu Uliong, brother of the 
mother of Yap Anton. Educated in native town;> Came to the 
Philippines, 1885. For five years he worked as an apprentice in a 
Chinese store without salary. On his sixth year of service, was given 
P40 a year, which was continually increased until 1899 he became 
the manager of Yap Anton Bros, with of course a very much bigger 
compensation. He has been holding that position ever since. 

Mr. Yutiong was the first president of the Chinese Industrial 
Society (1913); president, Chinese Commercial Benefiting Club, a 
Association Benevola de Chinos; director, Cebu Chinese Chamber v/x 
Commerce and Cebu Chinese School; member, Far Eastern Club and 
Maktan Lodge No. 30 (32°). 

Married Fe Giok in 1906. They have two children. 

167 



LlM Chiu 

f^ORN in Chuanchio, 1882. Educated in China. Came to the Phil- 
ippines, 1904. First worked as a "teridero" in a Chinese store 
In Manila, three years. Went to Cebu and was employed in the 
same capacity for ten years. In 1917, he established the first corn 
mill business there, subsequently followed by a coffee factory, both 
of which have been flourishing ever since. He is also the proprietor 
of a movie house in Cebu, the Cine Magallanes. 

During the Chinese revolution he was in constant communica- 
tion with Dr. Sun Yat Sen who highly appreciated his services to 
China's cause by securing the financial as well as moral support 
of the Cebu Chinese in the nationalistic movement in the home 
country. 

Married Susana Rama, sister of ex-Representative Rama, of 
Cebu, in 1918. They have five children, all born in the Philippines. 

168 



Go Lam 



HORN in Saiguin, Chuanchio, 1891. Educated in China. Came to 
D Cebu, 1904. First worked in a relative's store, Go Demco, then 
situated on Calle Alfonso, now known as Magallanes. After sev- 
eral years work without salary, was paid an annual compensation 
of P400. In 1913, transferred to Gotiaco Hermanos. Stayed there 
until 1923 when he quit to establish the Go Lam & Co., one of the 
biggest general merchandise stores in Cebu. 

Married Siy Wing of Chuanchio, in 1910. They have three 
children, two born in the Philippines. 

Member, Chinese Nationalist Party; and president, Tai Guan 
Ong's Association. 

Residence: Cebu, Cebu. 

169 




Go Bon Lee 

T^HIRTY-SEVEN years old and a native of Chuanchio, Amoy. Edu- 
* cated in China. Came to the Philippines, 1909. Began as an 
employee of Go Bonchio Hnos. at P10 a month. Later became man- 
ager and stockholder. Withdrew stocks in 1923, leaving' in same 
year for vacation in China. Returned in 1926 and established own 
business, Go Bon Lee Shoe Palace. 

Maried Sy Hong of Amoy with whom he has four children, 
three born in the Philippines. 

Member: Far Eastern Club, Chinese Commercial Club, Chinese 
Nationalist Party, and Asociacion Benevola de Chinos. 
Residence: Magallanes, Cebu. 



170 




Dy Te 



BORN in Chuanchio, Fukien, 1889. Educated in China. Came to 
the Philippines in 1902. After serving' as houseboy with P8 a 
month salary, started a small sarisari store with capital of P200„ 
By hard work and sacrifice, was able to accumulate enough money to 
establish the biggest soap and candle factory in Cebu in 1927. Beside 
% the soap and candle business, he is also engaged in importing and 

exporting- and in the rice business. He also owns the Visayan Hard- 
ware Company, Cebu. 

Member, Cebu Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Cebu Chinese 
School. 

Residence: Cebu, Cebu. 

171 



Juan Asan (Juan Kingche) 
' r RTRTY-SEVEN years of age and a native of Canton. Educated 
in Hongkong'. Came to Mainla, 1913, to join his father. After one 
jW.i' transferred to Iloilo and engaged in sugar business. From 
Iloilo he went to Cebu, in 1914. In the latter city he worked as an 
employee for five years, after which he established with a friend 
the Juan Asan & Co. The partnership was dissolved and in 1929, 
he put up his present importing and exporting business, wholly his 
own. 

He was the first president and one of the founders of the Cebu 
Nationalist Party and Cebu Sun Yat Sen School. In the latter he is 
a member of the board of trustees. He is also a member of the Cebu 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Married in 1911, with one child. 



172 



ft* %4 



.,4 



JUHo 



173 



Yap Seng 

jraORN in Amoy, 1874, son of the late Francisco Manzano Yaptico, 
a very wealthy and prominent Chinese in his time. Educated 
in native town. Came to the Philippines, 1888. Learned business 
.g ;der his father. At the age of 29 became manager of F. M. Yap- 
iiso & Co., until several years ago one of the most powerful Chinese 
fhms in this country, with head office in Iloilo and branches in Ma- 
r ila and Cebu. He has been honorary Chinese Consul for Iloilo since 
.1903. 

. During the rice crisis of 1919, he advanced money to the govern- 
ment to buy rice for resale to the people, thus avoiding "cornering" 
of the ceral. 

Ex-president, Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce, and one of 
the founders, Iloilo Chinese School. 

174 



! 




Ng Diong (Chin Sing) 

BORN in Amoy, Aug. 15, 1894, son of Uy Chiaoco. Educated i i 
China. Arrived in Iloilo, 1908. Studied under a private luic, 
and when 19 years old, worked as cashier of Ng Chin Beng Herairatos 
the biggest firm of its kind in Iloilo, founded by his brother ovc: ' 
years ago. In 1919, became manager. The firm has branches . : 
Manila, Cebu, Negros Occidental, and Antique. 

Married Lim Siu in 1912. They have seven children, five bo.'n 
in the Philippines. 

President, Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Iloilo Ch 
nese Drygoods Association; ex-director, board of trustees, Iloilo 
Chinese Commercial School, and member, International Chamber of 
Commerce of Iloilo. 

Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 

175 




Lim Julian 

HHHE "grand old man" of the Iloilo Chinese community. Sixty- 
seven years old and a native of Tongpi, Amoy. Arrived in Iloilo 
in 1880 and worked in a Chinese store at P10 a month salary. Four 
years later transferred to F. M. Yaptico & Co. Subsequently, peddled 
goods to different towns in Iloilo, this lasting three years. In 1890, 
established a sari-sari store in Jaro; transferring to Iloilo a year 
later to work in Lim Ponso & Co. In 1915, he put up the beginning 
:.his present business which has since been very flourishing and 
ow one of the leading in Iloilo. 

He was for three years president of the Iloilo Chinese Chamber 
of Commerce. He is married with 14 children. 
Residence: P. Arroyo, Iloilo. 



176 



Uy Bico 



BORN in Chuanchio, 1864. Arrived in the Philippines more than 
50 years ago. First engaged in carpentry work. Several years 
later organized a partnership with another Chinese; then formed 
Uy Bico & Co., at present one of the leading lumber firms in Iloilo. 
He resides in Kulangsu, Amoy where he also has a lumber business 
but takes periodical trips to Iloilo. The Iloilo company is managed 
by his son, Uy Ting Meng. 

Married Yu Tuan of Chaunchio. They have six children. 



177 





Yap Kai Hock 



DORN in Amoy, 1866. Father, F. M. Yaptico. Educated in native 
town. Arrived in Iloilo, 1881. In 1904, was manager of Cebu 

branch of his father's firm. From 1906 to 1911, was Minister of 

Canton. Stayed in China, representing his father's interests until 

3938 when he returned to Iloilo. 

Married, with four children. His son, Yap Tian Sang, is the 

Manager of the Amoy branch of the China Banking Corporation. 
Residence: 10 Aldeguer, Iloilo, Iloilo. 



178 





Tan Chiao 

FIFTY-SEVEN years old and a native of Chingkang. Came to the 
Philippines, 1890. Began as a carpenter in Tutuban, Manila, 
with a salary of P3 a month. Remained in that work for four year/, 
reaching the salary of P15. Went to Iloilo also working as a car - 
penter for one year at P25 a month. On the arrival of the Amer- 
icans, established a small sari-sari store in Jaro. In 1922, he trans- 
ferred to Iloilo city and founded Tan Chiao & Co., at present one 
of the leading importing and exporting firms there. 
Married with six children. 

Ex-president, Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce; member, 
International Chamber of Commerce of Iloilo. 
Residence: P. Arroyo St., Iloilo. 

179 



Pablo Uy Hiap Loo 

DORN in Fukien, 1905, son of P. A. Uy Yam, prominent Iloilo 
Chinese, and founder of the firm bearing his name. Came to. 
the P. I., 1914. Studied in Uoilo Chinese Commercial School, 1914- 
1918. In the latter year, went to the Chinan Institute, Shanghai, 
staying there until 1922. Returned to Manila and took up commerce 
*or one year at the Jose Rizal College. Was assistant manager of 
\ A. Uy Yam & Co. in 1925; manager, since the death of his father 
in 1929. 

. He is a director of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce of Iloilo. 
Residence: Muelle Loney, Iloilo. 



180 



Sua Bok San 

BORN in Chuanchio, July 15, 1899. Studied in native town, three 
years, and in Iloilo Chinese Commercial School, six years. Came 
to the Philippines, 1911. In 1918, worked as cashier of F. M. Yap- 
tico's branch office in Cebu, at P30 a month. After four years, pro- 
moted to Pl,400 per annum. Returned to Iloilo in 1912 and became 
manager of "El Naval", then owned by several Iloilo Chinese busi- 
nessmen. With his savings he was able to "buy out" the different 
partners, and now he is one of the two principal stockholders of tVe 
firm. "El Naval" is one of the biggest companies, if not the bigge 
in Iloilo, dealing on hardware, plumbing fixtures, auto parts, paint 
oil, etc. 

Ex-director, Chinese Chamber of Commerce, and Internationa 
Chamber of Commerce of Iloilo; member, board of trustees, Iloilc 
Chinese Commercial School. 

Married Aida Buon of Canton in 1929. They have one child 

181 




Uy Ting Ming 

DORN in Chuanchio, Oct. 22, 1903, son of Uy Bico, prominent Iloilo 
businessman. Came to the Philippines, 1912. Studied in the 
Iloilo Chinese Commercial School, 1912-1916. In 1917, went to Silli- 
man Institute, Dumaguete, Or. Negros, to study English. Stayed 
te fj at institution, four years. Returned to China in 1921 and en- 
■e-xl Sc. Jonhs' University. Because of the famous May 30th strike 

9d by Shanghai students, he quit and transferred to the Kwang- 

University, graduating therefrom with an A. B. degree in 1928. 

present he is the manager of Uy Bico & Co., lumber merchants 
d building contractors. 

He is the chairman of the board of trustees of the Iloilo Chinese 
' l r «qperdal School. 

Married with no children. 

182 




tig* • 




W. Wing Kee 

BORN in Canton, June 1G, 1888. Studied seven years in Canton. 
Came to the Islands, 1902. First employee in Wong Ahang & 
Co., Iloilo. Then worked as steward of General Carter, staying with 
the latter two years. In 1907, established a small restaurant. Since 
then, his business has grown tremendously. Besides the Eastern 
American Hotel, one of the best in Iloilo, he is the propria r of 
W. Wingkee & Co. which v;as opened in 1914, with a branch h 
Fabrica, Occidental Negros. 

He is a member of the Iloilo Lodge No. 11; director, I 
national Chamber of Commerce; vice-president, Chinese ChamDer 
Commerce; president, Cantonese Club; member, executive committ. 
Nationalist Party; president, board of trustees, Sun Yat Sen Schc 
Married with nine children, eight born in the Philippines. 
Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 

183 



Go Julian 

JgORN in Uoilo, Aug-. 3, 1899, son of Go Tiamting. Studied in 
China, eight years; Uoilo Chinese Commercial School, two years; 
and Silliman Institute, Dumaguete, Or. Negros, three years. Em- 
ployed in the office of Enrique Echaus for two years; then joined 
his father's firm as cashier. When the latter retired to China in 
1924, he assumed management of the business* 
> Married Uy Bon Ty, with seven children, six born in the Philip- 
es. 

^x-treasurer, Chinese Chamber of Commerce; ex-director, Chinese 
r .nmercial School and Sun Yat Sen School; member, committee on 
r eign affairs of the first organization ; and Chinese representative 
! th e board of directors of the Uoilo Y. M. C. A. 
Residence: 10 Arsenal, Uoilo. 

184 




J. Q. COOTENGHEE 



BORN in Pototan, Iloilo, 1893, son of a Chinese of long residence 
in that province. Attended the normal school in Iloilo from 
1903 to 1907. After quitting: studies, he began to help his father 
who was a business partner of another Chinese. In 1912, the 
Cookun & Sons was established, and two years afterwards, Cooteng- 
hee became the manager. 

Since 1921 he has been a director of the Iloilo Chinese Chaml 
of Commerce, and holding the same position in the Iloilo Int 
national Chamber of Commerce since 1923. 

He is married with four chidlren, all born in the Philippines. 
Residence: 4 J. M. Basa, Iloilo. 



185 



Chiam Ting Kee 



QORN in Fukien, 1901. Came to the Philippines, 1912. Employed 
in a shoe store in Manila at P6 a month. In 1914, went to Iloilo 
as a salesman in a Chinese store at P12. At night, studied in 
the Chinese Commercial School. In 1918, entered Chinan Institute, 
Shanghai, until 1922. On his return to Iloilo in 1923, he was ap- 
roi-ited a teacher in the Chinese Commercial School. Eight months 

erwards came to Manila and worked in the Mercantile Bank 

-ormation department. One year later promoted chief, loan and 
scounts department. Resigned in 1926 and established in Iloilo 
s present firm — Ting Kee. 

He is the secretary of the Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 
Married with no children. 
Residence: 7 P. Arroyo, Iloilo. 

186 



Yu Jecco 

BORN in Lamoa, Amoy, 1883. Arrived in Iloilo, 1900. First 
helped his brother in business, assuming management two years 
later. Besides his stores in Iloilo, he is engaged in the exchange 
business. lie has a branch in Antique, buying muscovado sugar, 
and a centrifugal sugar mill in Pasi, Iloilo, where he has his hacienda. 

Ex-vice-president and director for fourteen years, Iloilo Chino • 
Chamber of Commerce; member, International Chamber of Co 
merce; trustee, Chinese Commercial School of Iloilo. 

Married with 13 children, 10 born in the Philippines. 
Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 



187 




Jose Chu Suey 

DORN in Sulu, 1890, son of a Chinese businessman in that province. 

Went to China to obtain elementary education, coming back at 
the age of 14. When 21, was employed in different Chinese stores 
in Zamboanga and Capiz, afterwards transferring* to Iloilo as em- 
ployee in "La Manzana," a grocery store. In 1919, established his 
- isent business, La Pepita de Oro, which he has been managing 

er since. The firm has branches in Pulupandan and Villadolid, 

cidental Negros. 

Ex-director, Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce, director, Kuo- 
lintang Party, Iloilo; cashier and ex-president, Sun Yat Sen School; 
mber, International Chamber of Commerce. 
Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 

188 




Tan Yan Keng 



BORN in Amoy, 1893, son of Yam Keng, Iloilo merchant. Educated 
in China. Came to the Philippines, 1910. First employed in a 
Chinese store, becoming its manager after thirteen years. In 1927, 
quit to establish own business with a nephew, under the name Tan 
Yan Keng & Co. — buying and selling native products, imports and 
exports, and consignment agents. 

Married with two children, all born in the Philippines. 
Member, Iloilo Lodge No. 11. 
Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 



189 




Ong Guan Can, Jr. 

D ORN in Chingkang, April, 1900. Educated in native town. Came 
to the Philippine Islands, 1909. After undergoing* his business 
training- under his father, he assumed management of the firm, Ong 
Guan Can & Sons in 1921. The firm was established in 1907 and is 
principally engaged in the buying and selling of native products. 

Director, Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce; member, Iloilo 
Lodge No. 11. 



Residence: 2 Aldeguer, Iloilo. 



190 




Ng Be Chuat 



HORN in Engchow, Amoy, June 1, 1905, son of Ng Chin Beng, 
D brother of Ng Diong, reputed to be the wealthiest Iloilo Chinese. 
Ng Chin Beng was the founder of the firm bearing his name, for 
long now, the biggest of its kind in the Ilongo provinces. Educated 
in the Iloilo Chinese Commercial School. In 1923, went to Amoy to 
continue studies, finishing the high school course there. Has been 
assisting his uncle, Ng Diong, who is the manager of the firm, since 
1927. 

Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 



191 



Ng Sam Bok 



QORN in Amoy, 1903. Graduated Anglo-Chinese School, Kulangsu, 
Amoy, 1917. Came to Iloilo, 1918. Teacher, Chinese Commer- 
cial School, 1919-"20; Bookeeper, Enrique Echaus, 1920-'21 ; Manager, 
Yaptamco & Co.; Assistant Manager, Mateo Goiti, importing- and 
exporting; Chinese examiner, Income Tax Division, Bureau of In- 
ternal Kevenue, Manila, 1923-'24; Secretary, Honorary Chinese Con- 
sul of Iloilo and assistant manager, F. M. Yaptico & Co., 1925-'29. 

Ex-director, IJoiJo Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 



192 




Sy Yam Bio 

TDORN in Amoy, 1870. Came to the Philippines, 1893. First stayed 
*^ in Janiuay, Iloilo, where he was manager of a store. After a 
disastrous fire during the revolution which razed all that he had, he 
transferred to Jaro, putting up another store through capital bor- 
rowed from friends. In 1917, transferred to Iloilo where he is en- 
gaged in dry-goods and general merchandise business. 

Member and ex-director, Iloilo Chinese Chamber of Commerce; 
ex-president, Iloilo Chinese Dry-Goods Association; treasurer, Chi- 
nese Commercial School. 

Residence: Iloilo, Iloilo. 



193 



iMtsrellanenus 



IT/7/? fc j /'/y /ew exceptions, the cuts used in this book were 
made by the Star Engraving, 670 Avenida Rizal, Manila. 



194 



Francisco Arellano Sy 



HORN in Chingkang, Sept. 29, 1906. Father, Luis Arellano Sy, a 
Philippine resident for 30 years. Came to the Philippines, 193 3. 
Studied in Anglo-Chinese School, 1915-1920. Enrolled in the Far 
Eastern College, one of the leading private schools in Manila, finish- 
ing the high school course in 1927. Since March 1929, manager of 
Luis Arellano & Co., a lumber firm. He is a bachelor. 
Residence: 738 Echague, Manila. 



195 



Ramon Contreras (Tiu Chiengpuan) 

DORN in Amoy, Aug. 23, 1836. Came to the Philippines, 1880. 

After working as a "tendero" for about five years in Jimenez 
and Cagayan, established own business. 

Married Marta Maaliao of Cagayan, with four children, all 
born in the Philippines. 

He has been president for many years now of the Cagayan 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental. 



196 



SlA BONKIA 

CJORN in Amoy, March 13, 1897, son of Sia Simeon Velez, wealthy 

Chinese businessman of about 40 years residence in Cagayan, 
Misamis Oriental. Studied in Amoy, seven years. Came to the 
Philippines, 1910. Assisted in management of his father's business 
for several years, and in 1921 became manager upon the latter's 
retirement to China. The firm which was founded by the late Tori- 
bio Guitarte Sia Yoco in 1857, is the biggest Chinese business 
house in northern Mindanao and is engaged in general merchandise 
and buying and selling of native products. 

Married Loa Sinty of Amoy in 1920. They have two children, 
all born in the Philippines. 

Member: Cagayan Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental. 

197 



Go Bongco 



QORN in Chuanchio, 18G7. Educated in China. Arrived in the 

Philippine Islands in 1883. First employed in a Chinese store 
in Manila. After saving' enough capital during- twelve years of em- 
ployment, established a store in Balingasag, Misamis Oriental. Go 
Bongco & Co. is today the leading Chinese firm in that town. 

Married Co Tuan, with one child. 

Member, Cagayan Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Residence: Balingasag, Misamis Oriental. 



198 




Sia Quioco 



HORN in Chingkang, Dec. 21, 1858. Came to the P. I., 1878. Or 

arrival worked in a Chinese store in Manila at P6 a month salary. 
After a year, joined Sia Simeon Velez in Cagayan at P120 per an- 
numn. Became manager later, remaining with the company until 
1924 when he quit to put up his own business- Sia Quioco e Hijo?. 

A widower with three children, all born in the Philippines. 

Treasurer for many years of the Cagayan Chinese Chamber of 
Commerce. 

Residence: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental. 



199 



GO BONJONG 

OORN in Chuanchio, May 5, 1899. Educated in native town. 

Came to the Philippines, 1913, settling in Catarman, and later, 
Sagay, Misamis Oriental, where his father had his business. Trans- 
ferred to Cebu as manager of a Chinese store. In 1929, appointed 
manager of Cagayan branch, Go Tiaoco Hermanos. 

Residence: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental. 



200 




Go Ana 



OORN in Chingkang, May 1, 1894. Educated in home town. Came 
to the P. I., 1906. Worked as an employee in Go Pioco & Co., 
owned by his brother. From 1921 to 1927 he was the manager of 
the firm. Since the latter year he has been independent in business. 
He is also the president of the Mindanao Investment Corporation, a 
Filipino firm, and partner in the Surigao Ice Plant and Cold Storage, 
Surigao. 

Treasurer, Maguindanaw Lodge No. 40. 
Residence: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental. 



201 




♦ » 



y\ native of Chuanchio where he was born in Feb. 1896. Educated 

in home town. Came to the Philippines, 1915. First stayed in 

Zamboanga, then Iligan, Mindanao. Later worked in the firm, Go 

Pioco & Co. in Cagayan. In 1925, established own business. 
Married Chiu Soy in 1912, with one child. 
Residence: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental. 




202 



Ong Hing Lian 



HORN in Chingkang, May 5, 1904, son of Ong* Bon Pin, wealthy 
■—^ Surigao Chinese businessman. First educated in native town 
and in Hongkong. Came to the Philippines, 1911. Studied in the 
Manila Anglo-Chinese School up to 1914. Attended Surigao High 
School, 1914-1916; went back to Hongkong and studied there until 
1922. Since 1923, has been engaged in business independent of hi° 
father. He is the manager and controlling stockholder of the Pacn 
Lumber Development Co. and managing partner of the Surigao Ic 1 
Plant and Cold Storage. 

Married L. Sina Goh in 1923, with two children. 

Residence: Surigao, Surigao. 



203 



LlM CUA 



VV7EALTHIEST Chinese in Bohol. Born in Chuanchio, Sept. 25, 
1863. Arrived in Bohol, 1882. Began as an employee in a 
Chinese store at P60 per annum. After three years, became a travel- 
ing merchant. Put up the beginning of his present business in 1886. 
One of his firms, Lim San & Co., is managed by his son, Lim Pho, 
ft alumnus of the Silliman Institute. 

Married Juana Soriano of Tagbilaran, with eight children. 

Residence: Mansasa, Tagbilaran, Bohol. 



204 



Yap Son Leon 



HORN in Amoy, Nov. 2, 1886. Arrived in Calape, Bohol, 1902. 

For two years employed in a store in that town, later transfer- 
ing; to Tagbilaran as manager and industrial partner of another 
business. In 1923 he bought the stocks of his partner thus becom- 
ing: the sole owner of the firm. 

Married Pantaleona Tan of Jagna in 1911. They have r'" 
children, all born in the Philippines. 

Member, Dagohoy Lodge No. 84. 

Residence: Tagbilaran, Bohol. 



205 




Chan Yn Lam 

gORN in Chingkang, May 1, 1878, son of Chan Suy Tarn, once 
manager of Pablo Ortega's business in Calbayog, Samar. Came 
to the P. I., 1890. Studied in the San Roque, Cavite, Catholic 
School, several years. In 1906, appointed manager of Ortega Her- 
manos in Calbayog. Stayed there until 1921. Two years later, 
manager of the A. Yu Singco Hermanos branch in Surigao, remain- 
ing there until 1927. Since 1928, manager of the Ty Cameo Sobrino 
i • Tacloban, Leyte. 

president of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce in Calbayog 
12 ars), Surigao, and Tacloban. 
M ember, Araw Lodge No. 18. 
Residence: Tacloban, Leyte. 

206 



LlM TlAOCO Q 

HORN in Chuanchio, 1888. Educated in native town. Came to 

the P. I., 1902. Employed in the store of his uncle in Tagbila- 
ran, Bohol, 17 years. Established own business in Loay, same 
province, in 1919. 

Married Guy Nam in 1906, with eight children; six born in 
the Philippines. 

Member, Dagohoy Lodge No. 84. 

Residence: Loay, Bohol. 



207 



Go Yngco 



BORN in Chuanchio, Sept. 14, 1867. Educated in China. Came 
to the Philippines, 1887. First employed in the firm, Go Tiaoco 
Hermanos, the biggest Chinese commercial house in Cebu today, 
founded by his brother. Ten years afterwards, managed the Si- 
bonga, Cebu, branch of the firm. He stayed there for twenty-three 
years. From there he was transferred to the Tacloban, Leyte 
oranch. 

Carried, with four children. 

Member, Tacloban Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 
Residence: Tacloban, Leyte. 



208 




Tan Ta Chay 

i 

BORN in Chuanchio, Aug. 10, 1875. Educated in China. Arrived 
in the P. I., shortly before the Philippine revolution. Stayed 
in Calbayog, Samar for some time, helping* his brother in business, 
later moving to Tacloban, Leyte where he established one of his own. 

Ex-president, Tacloban Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 

Married with four children. 

Residence: Tacloban, Leyte. 



209 



Uy Ping Con 

TT^z™ zr^r* : rz ot Amoy - 

m Sj, Vy Pin, Con & SL^-^L^^^^ 
buying and .selling of native products. me »<*andi Sfi , and 

Residence: Tagbilaran, Bohol. 



Educated in 
At Present, 



210 



p A Kwong 15 

Gui • -'mo A. Cu-Unjieng 17 

Dee C . Chuan 20 

Albino SyCjp 21 

Rafael Matchuca Gotauco 22 

Go Jocco 23 

Uy Yet 25 

Dy Buncio 26 

J. J. Gochioco 27 

C. C. Lim 28 

EduarcV< del Rosario Tan- 

kiang 31 

Sy Yocco 33 

Henry Uy Cho Yee 35 

Tee Han Kee 37 

Dee Hong* Lue 39 

Jose G. Barretto 41 

S. C. Choy 43 

Vicente Chan Quep 45 

Sabas E. Chuntianlay ... 47 

Chas. C. Shan 48 

Dee Cho 49 

Justo Cabo Chan (Chan 

Teng* Chuan) 51 

Vicente Gotamco 53 

Ang* Ban To (A. Y. Coe) 54 

Chong" Su See 56 

Seg;uioc Yu Singco 57 

Benito La O 58 

Francisco Gochuico 60 

Mateo Goiti (Go Iti) ... 62 

Benito Go Sun 63 

John E. Goo 64 

Guillermo Dy Buncio ... 65 

Francisco Go Kee 66 

Marcelo Nubia 67 

Choa Cho Ching 68 

Tan Pho (Tan Bon Too) 69 

Lim An 70 

Lim Chay Seng- 71 

Chua Yap 72 

Go Lang-co 73 

Lim Tiaw Ping 74 

Tan Sio (Tan Sin Pun) . 76 

O Chu Cun 77 



1\ Hal- -ag 

Go Puan Seng 

Yu Cong Eng 

Paulino P. Gocheco . 
Miguel C. Suarez Ta?:i !.- 

liong 

Simplicio Arellano Choa 

Siong 

Quirino Uy Chioco 

Du Hunting 

L. Huanlian 

Te Pao (K. S. Tai) . .. 

Go Tian Gee • 

Jose Tanyongquip 

Silvio Cheng-Pan 

Eduardo Coseteng 

Vicente Concepcion Tan 

Guiamco 

Tan Chaco » 

Antonio Nubia 

John Lim Tiao Huat . . . 
Juan Valera Ang Tuaco . 
Gonzalo C. Go Quiolay . . 

Ho Sheng Huang 

Kui Hoasan 

Trinidad Jurado Te Quim 

Jua 

Dy Siu 

Jose Lee Dy Piao 

Enrique Say Koc Chuan . 

Tan Chuan Loong 

Paulino Uy Lao 

Tan Chayco 

Florencio Go Co Co 

Go Gang Dio 

Yu Eng Sin 

Dee Chian Hong 

Jacinto Lim Hoanchai . . 
Chen Leng (Ban Lee) . . 
Justo Romualdez Sy Kee 
Crispulo J. Co Co (Co 

Diong Kho) 

Simeon Ong Suan 

Poa Nguangco 

Co Pak 



so 






87 


■ 




88 






89 






90 






91 






92 






93 






94 
95 






96 




9 


97 






98 






99 






100 






101 




> 


10 . 
10: ; 






%o : 












106 






107 
108 




N v *** 


109 






110 






111 






112 




9 


113 






114 






115 






116 






117 







211 



