
Q. General Valdes, during the last few days, the attention of 

the newspaper public has been called to half -page notioes ap- 
pearing in various newspapers in Manila, in which the Philip- 
pine Tuberoulosis Society, represented by Basilio J. Valdes, 
Vice-President, appeals to the members of Congress not to ap- 
prove House Bill No. 2053. Are you the Basilio J. Valdes who 
has signed these appeals? 

A. Yes. 

Q. How long have you been Vioe-President of the Tuberculosis Society? 



Q. Since when has the Tuberculosis Society been authorised by law 
to hold charity races? 

A. Since 1928* 

Q» where did the Tuberculosis Society hold those races? 

A. In the San Lazaro track belonging to the Manila Jockey Club 

which, at that time, was the only track in existence in Manila. 

Q, Do you know when the Sta. Aha traok of the Philippine Racing 
Club first began to hold charity races? 

A. I think it was sometime in 1937. 

Q. When did the Tuberoulosis Society first hold any charity raoes 
in the Sta. Ana track? 

A. In 1937. 

Q. What percentage of your raoes did you hold in the Sta. Ana 
traok in 1937 and what percentage did you hold in the San 
Lazaro £rack of the Manila Jockey Club? 

A. In 1937 we transferred all our oher ity races to the Sta. Ana 
track. 

Q. Why did you do so? 

A. Because the Sta. Ana track was new, it had larger grandstands, 
it had better facilities and we believed that we would be able 
to earn more revenue from the Sta. Ana track than we had been 
earning in San Lazaro. 

Q. Did yonr expectations materialize? 

A. Yes. Our earnings in Sta. Ana in 1937 and 1938 were greater 
than our earnings in San Lazafo in previous year*. 

Q« For how long did you continue holding all of your races in 
Sta. Ana? 

A. As soon as we transferred our races to Sta. Ana, the manage- 
ment of the Manila Jockey Club began building a new grandstand* 
They also installed a new electric totalizator machine. My re- 
collection is that this work was finished late in 1933 or early 



A. 




2 





in 1939® Believing then that* with the new facilities and 
equipment in San Lazaro, our earnings in both olubs would 
be more or less the same, we decided to divide the races be- 
tween the two clubs* This I believe was done in 1939* 

Q» And what were your earnings? 

A* Our earnings proved to be more or less the same in both clubs® 
So we decided to continue dividing our races equally between 
these two racing institutions* 

Q* Was that the arrangement that you followed until the occupa- 
tion of the Philippines by the Japanese forces? 

A® Yes® 

Q* After liberation in 1945, where did the Tuberculosis Society 
hold its races? 

A* The prem^ises of the San Lazaro track were oocupied by the 
U. S. Army as a hospital for about a year after liberation® 
Therefore, we held all our raoes in the premises of the Sta. 
Ana track* 

Q* What did you do after the U» S® Arny had vacated the premises 
of the Manila Jockey Club? 

A. Wo again divided the races between the two clubs* 

Q* What were the earnings of the Sooiety in one track compared 
to the other? 

A* During the years 1946 and 1947 the earnings of the Society in 
both braoks were more or less the same. 

Q» And what your earnings in 1948? 

A* Beginning in 1948 we began to notice an appreciable decrease 
in the earnings of our Society whenever we held races in the 
premises of the Sta* Ana track* 

9® What happened during the year 1949? 

A® The situation did not improve® 

Q® Why didn't the Society do something about it? 

A* We wanted to give the management of the Philippine Racing Club 
every opportunity to improve their position® 

Q* What has been the difference in the earnings of the Tuberculo- 
sis Sooiety from races held in Sta. Ana compared to the same 
number of races held in San Lazaro during the last five years? 

A. Over half a million pesos or, to be more exact, P605, 000*00. 

Q* You mean to say that the Society has been deprived of earnings 

totalling half a million pesos during the last five years as a 
result of holding half its raoes in Sta, Ana? 

A. Yes. 



- 3 - 




Q» Oa a Sunday* s raoe in San Lazaro, how much does the Society 
ordinarily earn after deducting expenses? 

A* In round figures, between P20,000.00 and P23»000*00, 

Q» And how much does the Society earn when holding a Sunday 
whole-day race in Sta. Ana? 

A. Only around P10,000 to P12,000, 

Q* What has the Society done about it? 

A. The Board of Directors of the Tuberoulosis Sooiety discussed 

this problem because we realized thfct we oould not afford to 
continue suffering suoh serious losses whenever we held our 
races in Sta* Ana. We, therefore, oonsidered the advisability 
of transferring all our races to San Lazaro. However, before 
we were able to take action on the matter, the management of 
the Philippine Racing Club whioh evidently had heard of our 
plans, wrote us a letter. 

Q* What did the management of the Philippine Racing Club offer you? 

A* They told us that they would guarantee us a fixed inoome of 

Pl5,000 for a whole day's raoe and P6,000 for a half-day's race. 

Q. And was that proposal aeoeptable to the Tuberculosis Society? 

A. Of course not. Why should we be willing to accept P6,000 for 

a half-day's race and Pl5,000 for a whole day's race when, by 
holding said races in San Lazaro, we could earn as much as 
P12, 000*00 for a half-day's race and P23, 000*00 for a whole 
day' s raoe? 

Q* Did you make a counter offer to the Philippine Racing Club 
management? 

A* Yes*, Last Uarch we wrote them saying that we would be willing 
to continue holding half of o$r races in the Sta. Ana track if 
they would guarantee us P20, 000 for a whole day ' s race and 
P’12,000 for a half-day’s or Saturday afternoon raoe. 

Q. Did the Philippine Racing Club management accept your counter 
offer? 

A* No. They did not even answer cur letter* 

Q* And so what has been the Philippine Tuberculosis Society's final 
decision? 

A. Having had no reply from the Philippine Racing Club management, 
we decided to hold our next race which was then scheduled for 
April 11, 1954 in the promises of the Manila Jockey Club* I 
should explain that the TB race previous to this had been al- 
ready held in San Lazaro so that, were it not for the Society’s 
decision to hold all future races in San Lazaro, the April 11th 
re.oe should have been held in Sta . Ana. We filed with the Games 
and Amusements Board an application for a permit to hold our 
April 11th race in San Lazaro* 



“Why do you ha to to file on application with the Games & 
Amusements Board? 

Under the law, an entity, like ours, which is permitted to 
hold horse-raoes must file an application with the Games 
k Amusements Board stating where it proposes to hold the 
raoe and obtain a permit therefor. The idea baok of this 
rule is that the Games & Amusements Board will issue a per- 
mit only if it is satisfied that the premises where the 
races are to be held are in satisfactory condition. This 
is a precaution for the protection of the horses, the joc- 
keys, and thepublic who will participate or be present at 
the raoe meeting. 

Were you able to hold your April 11th race in San Lazaro? 

Ho* We were informed by the GAB that it had received an ord- 
er from the Office of the Executive Secretary in MalacafSang 
to the effect that charily races must be divided equally be- 
tween the two existing tracks in Manila and that, therefore, 
we must hold our April 11th race in Sta. Ana. 

What did the Society do when you received that information 
from the GAB? 

Since the law does not compel the charitable institutions to 
divide their races equally between the two raoetracks, we 
wrote a letter to President Magsaysay explaining our posi- 
tion. I also obtained an interview with President Magsaysay 
to whom I related everything I have just told you how. 

What did President Magsaysay decide? 

After President Magsaysay had carefully read our letter and 
studied the facts and figures which I submitted to him, he 
told me that he was very much impressed and he believed that 
it was up to the Board of Directors of eaoh charitable ins- 
titution to decide for itself where they deem it best to 
run the charity races which they are authorized to hold under 
the law. 

General Valdes, oan you ffer an explanation as to why the earn- 
ings of the Society are muoh less in Sta. Ana oompared to your 
earnings when you hold your races in the premises of the San 
Lazaro track? 

I am afraid I oannot give you a categorical answer. -^11 I can 
say is that the records show that the publio attendance and 
the volume of betting in Sta. Ana are less than in San Lazaro, 
end since our earnings depend on gate receipts and participa- 
tion in the gross volume of betting, it simply means that our 
earnings in Sta. Ana are muoh lower than our earnings in San 
Lazaro. 

Could it not be that the reason for this is because the Sta. 
Ana track is located outside of Manila, or in San Pedro Makati, 
and, therefore , is less accessible to the racing public than 
the Sen Lazaro track whioh is located in the heart of the city? 



*3 5 =» 



% 



+ 



Q. 

A« 

Q. 

A. 



Q. 

A® 

Q. 

Ao 

Q. 

A® 



I don’t think so because, prior to the war, our e%rnings 
in both tracks were more or less the same# Furthermore, 
during the years 1946 end 1947 when transportation facili- 
ties were very inadequate compared to what they are today, 
the attendance and the volume of betting in both tracks 
were also more or less the same. The decrease in betting 
and attendance began Only in 1948. 

Would you, therefore, say that the reason for the difference 
in the volume of betting is due to poor management on the part 
of the Philippine Racing Club? 



Now, General Valdes, turning to the half -page notices that 
have been published by the Tuberculosis Society urging the 
members of the House and the Senate not to pass House Bill 
No. 2053, will you explain to the radio audience why you 
object to the approval of that bill? 

Without giving the Philippine Tuberculosis Society an oppor- 
tunity to present its views, we learned late last week that 
the House of Representatives had approved this bill on sec- 
ond ready. We are opposing it because it will, in effect, 
deprive the Society of at least P100, 000.00 every year from 
its racetrack earnings. 

How is that? 

In effect, this bill proposes to amend the racing law by mak- 
ing it compulsory for charitable institutions to hold half 
their races in the Sta. Ana track even if it will mean the loss 
of considerable revenue to us. 

And you were not even given an opportunity to present your 
views on this bill? 

No, and as a matter of fact I understand that no one else 
has been given an opportunity. The bill was rushed through 
first and second reading without much publicity. It caught 
the racing public and the charitable institutions by surprise. 

Just exactly how does House Bill No. 2053, in effect, compel 
charitable institutions to divide their races equally between 
Sta. Ana and San Lazaro? 

The amendment proposed read6 as follows j ”All racing days 
hereinabove listed and assigned to private individuals and 
entities duly licensed by the Games and Amusements Board shall 
be apportioned and distributed equally each year among exist- 
ing racing clubs or racetracks duly authorized to conduct 
horse-races.” There are only 52 Sundays and 52 Saturdays 
each year and a oertain number of legal holidays on each of 
which days horse— raoos may be held. The law specifies that 
some of these Saturdays and Sundays shall be set aside only 
for the holding of races by charitable institutions® Sinoe 
there are only 2 racing clubs in operation here, namely , 
the Manila Hockey Club and the Philippine Racing Cly.b 9 it 
means that if all racing days are to be apportioned and dis^ 
tributed equally between them , it must necessarily follow that 
half of the races of all charitable institutions must be held 
in one club and half of the races in the other* 




r 






• t - 



G. Do vou know why the House has approved this bill on first and 
second reading if its effect is to deprive the Tuberculosis 
Society alone of approximately f 100, 000.00 earnings each year? 

A. Frankly, I do not believe that the members of Congress Jho ap- 
proved this bill on first and second reading realized the oig 

nifieanee of its proTisio^. 

«. The expiratory not. to Uou.e Bill No. 2053 ’hif .by tho -ay. 
too introduced by/Congressman CaetaSo, says tfc at it is y 
fair to apportion and distribute racing days equally among 

.xLti£ rwing olube because it mould be affording equal 
protection to said olube mhlch hold franchiees under the lan. 

TOhat do you have to say about that? 

. It is n ot true that racing clubs hold franchises. Neither the 

A * Philippine Racing Club nor the Manila Jockey Club has a fran- 

Phiiippine R o 6 des i D ous of building or operating 

f “;tr^Xd^ presided it constructs «i.r eon a suitable 

grandBtend, a o olectrio totalizator maohine^ a^olinlo^to^taka 

Td'a Ph S-«“ah f c^ S «r«cet?ao k that ia able to meet 
ttoM requirements may, under the lam, hold races . In other 
Sarde^he racing 1», as itle today, anoourages free oompa- 

titioxw 

Do you know why Congressman Castaho went to the trouble of m 
t reducing this bill? 

I don’t know, (i would be interested to hear what Congressman 
Castaito has to say %j 

believe Genoral Valdes, that the management of the Phi- 
lipplne^Racing Glub^had something to do mith the introduction 

of thisbill? 

hmould rather hot ansmSr that question even though I have my 
enh convictions. I mill let you, Kr,-3te«art, and the lieto - 
ing "public reach yoxKpwn conclusions. 

Do you know, General Valdes, who courses the Board of Directors 
of the Philippine Racing Club? 

ls-s irss. 

Are therq ajjy politicians who sit in the Board. 

Yes, there are two or three. 



Q. 

A. 

Q. 

A. 

A. 





ourself> J|bro. Stewart. 




