


I 




000356 - ' 


APR 2 h 1999 J 


/ he Philippine Revolution and Beyond 
\ olume 1 1 


\ 




i 


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
OFFICE CF TME PR LSiPL NT 
PHILIPPINE CENTENNIAL COMMISIONI 

THISCOPY IS PRESENTED TO; 


COMPLIMENTARY CGP'l 


NOT FOR SALE 


The Philippine Revolution and Beyond 


Volume 11 


Papers from the International Con fere nee 
the Centennial of the 1896 Philippine Revolution 


Elmer A. Ordonez 

l-orroR 

Bernardita Reyes Churchill 
Sera Fin D. Quiason 
Samuel K. Tan 

HD1TOR1AI. c;ONSUl I'ANTS 


PI 1ILIPP1NL CENTENNIAL COMMISSION 
NATIONAL COMMISSION l : OR CULTURE AND T HE ARTS 
MANILA, PHII IPPINHS 
inns 



9s 9 -7 02 f 
lc3? 



Copyright <ST 1 998 

Philippine Centennial Commission / Elmer A. Ordonez 


ISBN 97 1-920 18-2-7 


38 ORGANIZING COMMITTEE & 

CHAIRMAN 
Salvador 1 1. Laurel 


CO-CHAIRS 


Carmen D. Padilla 


Scrafin I) Ouiasnn 


conference: directc >r 

Samuel K. Ian 


BUDGET AND FINANCE 
Quintin P. Pastrana 
Ricardo V. dc Villa 


PRC )( i RAM C( )M MI I I I I 
Bernardita R C .hurt hill 
Emclita V. Alrnosara 


SPONSORS COMMITFEE 
LuisJ. Morales 


SOCIALS C( )MM IT I I I 
I Janny I . C iorpuz 


PROJ Herr COO R I ) I N A' I c ; RS 

Mat-Lien R. Quiaoit Pita Ang de Jesus 


38 PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE S’ 


CHAIRMAN 
Bias Ople 

VICE-CHAIRMAN 
Adrian E. Cristobal 


MEMBERS 

Enrique M. Fernando Carmen Cucrrcro-Nakpil 

Isagani A. Cruz Scrafin D. Quiason 

Florangel R. Braid Icodoro L. Locsin Jr. 

Jose David Lapuz 


38 SPONSORS « 

San Miguel Brewing Phils. 
MBf Mastercard 
Coca-Cola Bottlers Phils., Inc. 
Federal Express 
LaTondena Distillers, Inc. 


Book design and printing by Paragraphias® 


Contents 


REGIONS AND SECTORS 

Masonic Capitalism anil Resolution in Colonial Negros Ss9 

lilonteno l. Aguilar, Jr. 

To Sol \ll l aw at Defiance: Tlu* Puluhun Re\olt on Samar 

and l S. Pacification '•'>6 

Hr i an McAllister l inn 

The Butanes Quest for Freedom: The Ivatan Revolts and Revolution S82 


Cesar A. Hidalgo 

Pampanga Mews the Revolution: Imagination 

and Menton of a Time of Suffering and Sacrifice 590 

Joint A. l.arkin 

llocanos and the 1 <8% Revolution 002 

/.. Shelton U bods 


For Want of a City: Manila in the Balance 

of Resistance and Capitulation 020 

Ruby R. Paredes 


The Iglesia Sagrada ng l.ahi: 

l pholding the l nfinished Revolution Cal 

Motoe Peratni- Wada 


The Revolution in Mindanao 

Rufus H. Rodriguez 

Ang Dugo o Pagkakamag-anakan ng l.iderato 

at Pagiging Kasapi ng mga Magdiwang at Magdalo 
sa Rebolusyon sa Kabite, 1896-1 902 

Isagani R. Medina 

The Political Socioeconomic Milieu 

in Pangasinan on the Kve of the Revolution 

Rosario Mendoza Cortes 


6 52 


66a 


670 


V 


THK I’HII.IPPINK RFVOI.ITION AM) HI V< >’.!> 


The War in Northern Mindanao: Capistrano, Roa. 

and Velez as Heroes of the Revolution < » 

Francis C. Madigan, S.J. 

The Ethnic Chinese in the Philippine Revolution <>.s i 

Teresita Ang See and Juan ( io Hon 

THE MUSLIMS AND THE REVOLUTION 

Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu ~o~ 

Samuel K. Fan 

Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening: 

The Moro Problematics as a Factor ~ s< ) 

Michael O. Mastura 

Toward an Understanding 

of the Indigenous Concept of Bangsa/Bansa 

Nagasura T. Madale 

Muslim “Separatism” One Hundred Years Ago ~os 

Ghislaine Jeanne Loyre 

JOSE RIZAL 

Jose Rizal’s Impact on Bohemian Society ’3 

Zdenka Vasiljevova 

Rizal’s View of the Spanish Language 

Cristina Barron 

Rizal’s Utopian Society 

Rolando M. Gripaldo 

Rizal and the “Woman Question” SOS 

Albina Peczon- Fernandez 

A Hero, At Length! 834 

Antonio M. Molina 


VI 


( 'ontrnrs 


Jose Ki/al and ilu* \iew from California 8 ta 

/ inward A. llewttt 

Tlu* Philippines a Century <W illence: 

|om ; Ki/al and tlu* Philippine* t-c*nii*miiaJ(s> 830 

Sharon I h’lniendo 

\ Tu mini’ Point in the* Thinking of lost* Ki/al: 

Hu* l.iga I ilipina as tlu* Basis for a l ilipino National Project 883 

l L'll'H (' ( lOUfilt- ( t otl ft 

RELATIONS 

Cuba and tlu* Philippines: Knots and Common Struggles 803 

Ahelardo C.ueto So id 

Puerto Rican Autonomismo: A Secular Tradition 002 

Luis Agra it 

Philippine-Cerman Relations. Before and During the Revolution Oil 

Hermogenes /:. Hacareza 

japan and the Philippine Revolution 023 

( train k. ( loodman 

Mexican 'Infidentes" and the Philippine Revolts in 1823-1823 033 

Andres del C.tistdlo 

The Petition Submitted by Friends of Jose Ki/al 

to the German Hmperor, Wilhelm II on 20 Januarv 180“l 9a 2 

Karl- 1 1 emz Wio nzek 

ISSUES AND BEYOND 

The Pangulo Regime of the Philippines from the 

Philippine Revolution ( 1806) to the Present and the Future OS'’ 

Reniigio /:. Agpalo 

Authority and Power in the Philippine 

Political System of 1806 and 1006 

A . F,. Lap i tan 

vii 


060 


IHK PHII.IITINI. KHVOi.L'l l< )N V.l> HI K i'.I* 


The “Martyr Image" as Rallying Point 

in Nationalist Consciousness ‘ ,s ^ 

Cristina Evangelista Torres 

Spanish Companies in the Philippines After the Revolution 
Florentino Koclao 

Dean C. Worcester and the Philippine Revolution I • > I - 

Rodney Sullivan 

Class Conflict in Local Politics in Early American Times: 

Some Data from the Southern Tagalog I » » I ' ) 

Carl H. Lande 

Folklore, Science and Filibusterismo 

Between Empires, 1 879- 1901 I < >-<> 

Paul Kramer 

Organizing Committee, Participants, Moderators 1 ‘ ^ ^ 

Index 10 il 


viii 


REGIONS AND SECTORS 




* 




Masonic Capitalism and Revolution 
in Colonial Negros 

o 


I'll OMI NO V. Ac. Ill AR | K. 
James Cook University, Queensland, Australia 


O n 5 November 1<S 1 )H an offensive against Spanish rule was launched 
simultaneously in the different towns of Negros Occidental. Bv the dav's end 
onlv Bacolod and I limamavlan were still in Spanish hands. Bacolod, the provin- 
cial capital, fell late the following day, while 1 limamavlan surrendered two days 
later after the Spanish governor at Bacolod had signed the act of capitulation. There 
were no major military encounters. Spain bowed out of Negros more uneventfully 
than it did elsewhere. I he province today has no monuments to immortalize the 
martyrdom of any local personage. 1 he official memorials do not extend beyond 
naming a street here or there as “Cinco de Noviembre." Along the road stretching 
from Bacolod to Si lay' the agricultural landscape is interrupted by a roughly ex- 
ecuted monument to Aniccto hacson, oddlv cast in the 1 image of a Kattpunero. In 
Bago, a more imposing monument stands in the town center, depicting Juan 
Arancta astride a horse and extolling him, in Spanish, as a “hero of a one-day revo- 
lution. However, the citation on the plaque, which begins with the words “In 
Memoriam, gives the monument the feel of a pantheon. 

The memory of the revolution and its cultural significance, however, are to 
be found in the legends that Negrenscs narrate about Juan Araneta and other 
key personages of the province. While social memories are problematic, fragmen- 
tary, and often incoherent, and reminiscences, including those inscribed in myths 
and legends, are circumscribed by the social and political circumstances of the 
ethnographic present, they may nonetheless provide a critical route to under- 
standing the past and the meaning that the past holds for the present. 1 In seek- 
ing to unravel the popular understanding of the collapse of Spanish rule in Negros 


THE PHIUPPINh KhVOI.C I ION \NI > fif V< »NI > 


Occidental, I present in this paper an analysis of legendary storie s gather d : :* 
fieldwork in 1990. Attention to mythical “big men is here not mi nd< d 
iconic veneration of an elite, but neither is it meant to cast aspersions upon •: 
persons. Rather, folkloric narratives are analysed to help uncover the i ultur.d :» .* 
of ruling class hegemony and comprehend the symbolic capital of tlx plant * 

( hacendero ) class that dominates Negros. Because the wealths arc often p<*S <>: 
by ordinary people in terms of Masonry as well as in the language of indr* n«*u 
spirit beliefs, this paper examines the mythical symbolisms of the regions < •. p<>ri 
oriented sugar economy and their relation to the meaning of the fifth <>t ' 
ember.” 

Merchant Capitalism and the Inquisitorial Mentality 

Starting from around the time of the brief occupation of Manila In tlx British m 
the 1760s, the friar-dominated Catholic establishment in Spanish Philippines 
began to systematically denounce the extrangeros (foreigners, i.c., non Spaniards 
who engaged in mercantile activities in the colony as Protestants and Masons, 
sometimes denigrated as “Jews” — all enemies of Catholic Spain. I lowest r. the 
friars name-calling stratagem which relied upon medieval Inquisitorial labels, was 
rather anachronistic. Not only was the record of the I loly ( Jfficc of the Inquisit x »n 
against Heretical Perversity and Apostasy largely uneventful in the Philippines, 
but as early as the opening of the 18th century the threat of Protestant ideas had 
diminished and political coexistence with Protestant states had become the norm 
in Europe. 4 

In Mexico, from where the Philippines was ruled by the metropole, the In 
quisition had been moribund. By the 1 8th century, Mexico’s I loly ( )ffice had be- 
come lenient, eventually losing interest in sexual magic, witchcraft, and pacts with 
the Devil, “base superstitions” the inquisitors by this time had fully equated with 
the lower classes. Hie earlier racial and caste categories (mestizos, mulattoes, blac ks, 
pardos, etc.) that guided the Inquisition — from whose strictures the natives were 
exempted— had given way to sociocultural differentiation along class lines. ( !on- 
trary to earlier social classification schemes, the dregs among the Spaniards in 
Mexico could already be lumped along with the gente viL 

The resurgence of a new type of inquisitorial mentality, however, was trig- 
gered by the rise of Freemasonry in Europe, a movement marked by a cult of se- 
crecy. From the 1720s, the Spanish Inquisition began to sense the potential dan- 
gers of Masonry, which had spread to Mexico where the movement recruited mem- 
bers of the nobility and the professional and commercial classes/’ In the Philip- 
pines, the inquisitorial mood was heightened by the British occupation of Manila 
in 1765-1763 in conjunction with the Seven Years’ War. As attested to by Mexican 
soldiers stationed in the colony, lodges belonging to the Scottish Rite were formed 
in Manila, which was not surprising since British Masons of this era zealously vied 
among themselves in creating lodges in whatever part of the world they found 


540 


\ i , l ’ll \R .\f*isonti ( dptultstn .inti Revolution in ( o Ion id l Xegnu 


themselves. In .ill likelihood, the natives were excluded from those lodges, hut it 
did not stop the Inars from publicly denouncing the British as lews and heretics. s 
B\ the 1 WSOs. secret lodges affiliated \\ it h I tench Masonrw the dominant strain in 
the Peninsula, had become active in the colony, coincident with the incipient lib- 
eralized entrv of foreign merchants. 

l he inextricable assoc iation of C atholie Spains enemies with merchant capi- 
talism and political unrest was ev ident from the moment the metropole took for- 
mal notice of Masonry's presence within the empire. In 1 "’Su, the Spanish Inquisi- 
tion warned ( atholic bishops to guard against freemasons who might be in their 
sees lor reasons of commerce. foreign merchants were envisaged as engaged not 
si ni pi x in trading goods but in peddling dangerous ideas as well. All over Spanish 
America, f nlightenment ideas that fostered nationalist sentiments drew further 
inspiration from the American War of Independence and the french Revolution, 
two historic social movements with links to Masonrw In condemning a book 
published in Philadelphia, the Mexican Inquisition in 1 derisively referred to 
the writer as a bankrupt merchant who traded in ‘sublime goods which con- 
sisted of “impiety and insolence" toward both “royal authority' and “divine will." 
The resurgent inquisitorial mood engendered the blurring of conceptual bound- 
aries: foreign merchants, religious heretics, and treasonous agitators became inter- 
twined and indistinguishable. 

Couni/am of the complex linkages that connected international trade. Ma- 
sonrv, and political movements, the friars sought to block the economic liherali/a- 
tion of the Philippines. But alter the passing of the old order in the Peninsula in 
the 1 8.10s. especially in the wake of the excLtustmcion id' 1 83~, : ' the friar establish- 
ment could no longci directly obstruct the spirit ot the Bourbon reforms. None- 
theless, as is still quite evident in the Philippines today, the friars did succeed in 
disseminating a system of cultural categories in which the capitalist-eum-heretical- 
cum-political enemies of the Spanish empire were viewed as the evil opponents ot 
the Catholic eluireh. As the friars enemies, merchant capitalists were made to per- 
sonify an evil to be shunned: “It is necessary to keep the people away from every 
point of contact with foreigners, as even a peninsular official counseled in 182 
As late as the 1860s, economic reasoning" was condemned at a Catholic univer- 
si ty in Manila as a science of the devil." 1 ’ Given such colonial attitudes, the terms 
of opprobrium “Mason,” “Protestant," and even “Jew," became synonymous with 
the heretical and diabolical (but also monied and seditious), in contradistinction 
to the “Catholic (and supposedly loyal, though not as wealthy Spaniards). 

Diverging from the pattern in Mexico, the new theocratic terms in Spanish 
Philippines became surrogate concepts for class. Although ethnicity had recon- 
figured the colony's sociolegal classification scheme by the early 1800sC informal 
religious categories emerged to delineate an inchoate capitalist stratum. As a result, 
foreign traders who set foot in the Philippines, as well as the hacendero class that 
emerged on Negros Island after the 1855 opening of the Iloilo port, were appre- 
hended from within the inquisitorial matrix. Given its antithetical sign vis-d-vis the 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOUTION AND PI Y< » N I > 


friar establishment, I refer to the system of economic change that <» i urrrd is. 
century Philippines as Masonic capitalism. 

The Hacetidero as Masonic: Isidro de la Hama as Legend 

That the Negros sugar industry, dependent as it was on the foreign umimc!. . 
houses in Iloilo, was positioned in symbolic opposition to Spanish rule and tnar 
power might be inferred from local explanations of Isidro dc la Kama 
handful of Chinese mestizos who had amassed unprecedented wealth bv i\u 
of the 19th century. The indigenous representations of I )e la Kama arc <0 tv. <» . t 
rieties: a published portrait which first appeared in the late- 1 *MOs and the p<>pu 
lar mythologies surrounding the man. 

In Francisco Varonas hagiographic version, I )e la Kama is enshrined as a 
great magnate,” impetuous, aggressive, prescient, original, and shrewd. \ .<>n 
summate gambler, De la Rama supposedly began his career at IK -.cars <>t age 
when he became a leaseholder of a small farm in Min ulna n with only PSoo as start 
ing capital. He then proceeded to acquire vast tracts of land as well as a fleet <>! 
vessels that plied the Uoilo-Bacolod and Iloilo-Manila routes. Driven by a vaulting 
ambition, De la Rama, after barely seven years as a planter, was able to pene trate 
the exclusive circle of sugar merchants and warehouse owners at Iloilo. Alter 1 () 
years in the lucrative sugar trade, he moved on to the “most spectacular phase 
of his financial career as a large-scale importer of manufactured goods from 
Europe and North America. Ele reportedly used vessels of which he was the 
proprietor to transport his imports, which were then sold through “flamboyant 
shops he owned in Iloilo and Manila. He traveled twice “around the world ami 
sent his two sons to study in Europe, one in Paris, the other i n London. I le died m 
Manila in 1898 and left a fortune worth more than L2 million. I le must have* 
gloated at the feat of dying rich: some years back he had felt triumphant 
in knowing that Julian Hernaez, a close competitor, died with just LI million to 
his name. 

Varonas anecdotes about De la Rama suggest an extraordinary personalit v, 
one possessed of what Negrenses would call an extremely strong dioigcni, th e soul 
which fortified him in his endeavors and granted him enormous success. 1 le as- 
tounded not only inclios and his fellow mestizos but Spaniards as well, including 
Iloilo s harbor master who erected barriers to the movement of I )e la Rama’s goods 
at the pier. With the temerity to put himself above the law and exact his own form 
of justice, De la Rama publicly confronted the official with gun in hand. I )e la 
Rama had his way. His retort to Spanish abuses against their colonial subjects was 
encapsulated in a supposed quote: “Well, these injustices have never been commit- 
ted against me, and anyone who does so, I either beat up or kill.” 

Exuding the bravado of the ancient magical men that the indigenous data 
use to exhibit, De la Rama was also undaunted by the friar establishment even as 
e mingled fieely with the clergy. Varona recounts that, on one occasion, I)e la 


542 


\( .1 II \K Masonic ( 'iU'itti/j'W . 2 nd Rnvlutwn :n ( o!om*ii AV\ r n>> 

Rama was the on I v non Spaniard among dignitaries invited to a banquet hosted bv 
the- M mill nan curate. I ernando C uenca. One religious, who was new to the place, 
allegedly demanded in a loud voice w in an “ inAio dared impose his presence upon 
that august crowd. \\ ith "uv calmness and without asserting his wc.'Y/c/micss, Pc 
la Rama delivered Ins riposte: I am an mdio And vour rev erence holds me unwor- 

thy ot this gathering ot Spaniards, (dome down with me and, bv mv honor as a 
native, I assure you that I will smash vour lace. Onlv Cuenca's intervention was 
said to have prevented the situation from deteriorating further. 

In not succumbing to Spanish caste and racial discrimination. Pc la Rama 
must have taught the fledgling hact'ndcros of that period an object lesson: wealth 
meant the ability not only to be accepted bv the colonial masters but to resist Span- 
ish importunings and the various impositions of colonial society, l hc text ot 
Varona, who belonged to a later generation of that social stratum, exuded such an 
appreciation for IV la Rama. Animated bv linkages t o the global economy, mer- 
chant capitalist wealth signified parity with the Iberian colonizers. Indeed, wealth 
made Pc la Rama, the individual, simultaneously opposed to and intimate with 
the Spanish rulers. Manifestly, Pe la Ramas fortune acquired at the high point ot 
late I Mh century capitalism, gave him a foreign tinge; but in answering as well to 
being a native 1 V la Rama personified the possibilities ot an ambiguous and subtle 
anti-C atholic and anti-Spanish ethos. 

I hat I V la Rama was an emblem of opposition to friar hegemony is richly 
captured in folklore. Accounting for more than his awe-inspiring bravery and 
unsurpassed Amiran, folklore prov ides a popular explanation tor the enigma who 
supposedly said, I [began] selling goods in the streets and today 1 possess a for- 
tune. Io hacienda workers, Pe la Rama was the quintessential anti-C, atholic per- 
sona: a Mason with horns (sungay) jutting out of his head as in the image of the 
Devil. Io attain his tremendous riches, Pe la Rama was rumored to have sold his 
soul ( kiihig) to a supernatural entity known as Yavva, the “lord of the forest in pre- 
colonial \ isayas ls but commonly equated with at present to the Devil of huropean 
cosmology, bor allegedly selling his soul, Pe la Rama acquired magical power {an- 
ting-anting) and was equipped with the extraordinary ability to produce wealth. 
All he had to do was scourge with all his might the Santo Cristo, a large crucifix, 
using a whip fashioned out of a sea creatures tail {ikog sang ptigi)* and icon 
would vomit strength ( kusog) and money ( pihik ). 

In other versions of this myth, a mysterious person is said to deliver sacks of 
money to Pe la Rama on Tuesdays and Fridays, which coincided with the dead 
divine in the localized version of the Catholic rosary. I hese two days of the soi- 
rowful mystery had more than an air of remembrance of Christs crucifixion since, 
in the local view, the act of reciting the Passion signified a real diminution of 
power. I hus, on the days when workers did not plant for fear of malevolent s p i i its. 
Pc la Rama was reaping the rewards of his exchange relations with the Pevil. 1 he 
legendary tales end by saying that Pe la Rama grew a lengthy tail and his whole 
appearance was transformed into a likeness of Yawa. Embarrassed, his family sup- 


543 


THE PHILIPPINE RKVOI.l TION \ND HI V)S:> 


posedly locked him up in the basement of their Iloilo mansion < >ih<-r . 
that De la Rama actually became Yawa and never really died. 

If these representations can be taken as indicative of hov. Isidro 
was popularly perceived during his lifetime, it would appear that for hot:, 
and hacienda workers, De la Rama was a sign of opposition to tn.it <!«»: 
and Spanish colonialism. But while the elite version focuses c\< lusiw i . <*: i K a 

Rama’s character traits as instruments and weapons for fin.uu lal u< < *• . at ai 

lowed him to penetrate their inner sanctum of colonial power, the mvn.: ... r 

sion apprehends De la Rama’s historical significance more pointed!-, from t h. 
spective of indigenous spirit beliefs. In the latter. De la Rama was v. hat h< v. as :u 
cause he sold his being to the Devil. To a people for whom long dist an. e tragic 
antedated the colonial epoch, selling was a familiar idiom. Mnrmvc i m the 
talist epoch when merchant capitalists began to be seen negatively r: <i // ( nho 
lie power, selling was a potent act of connection with the anti ( at hoi u realm. 
Through the act of exchange with the fearsome Yawa, I )e la Kama was i magi tied as 
deriving his prowess from an alternative source of cosmic strength. 

The relationship to Masonic capitalism was underscored by the lac t that I V 
la Rama’s putative act of selling was unimaginable in relation to the < atholic 
church. Only the Protestant opponents of friar power had the capac ity. the re- 
sources, as well as the interest “to buy” adherents. I he Devil operated through the 
capitalist market. In contrast, the Catholic church was seen not so iiiik h as se lling 
but as extracting, forcibly or by means of compunction, from such an angle, myth 
offered a textured portrayal of the contradictions of colonial soe iet y. 

The mystical explanation of De la Rama’s success would seem to le as e- out 

native farm labor as contributory to the accumulation of wealth, folklore also le-ft 

hardly any complaint that he was a brutish hacenclero who maltreated workers. I he 
predominance of sharecropping in his farms probably blunted the con t rad ict ions 
in the planter-laborer relationship . V) Moreover, the peasantry’s more acutely felt 
injustice centered around the colonial state, particularly as personified by the friar. 
Through its religious and civilian bureaucratic tentacles, the Spanish colonial state 
exemplified the swallowing up” of money in the form of tribute, taxes, produce, 
and church offerings, and the “swallowing up” of human energy and strength in 
the form of corvee labor. Money and human energy were then, as suggested in the 
De la Rama legend, fed to the Catholic deity, the supernatural sphere which en- 
abled the reproduction of the colonial state and all its organs. Spanish dominance 
was characterized by gluttony, which contrasted with the cash advance and other 
remuneration offered by export agriculture. 

In this context, opposition to the colonial state entailed the reversal of the 
resource flow which De la Rama achieved by “whipping” the Christ image, com- 
pelling it to vomit both money and vitality — just as the native subjects paid taxes 
and rendered corvee on the pain of the whip. Flogging was the most potent act to 
release what the colonial state had extracted since, through its functionaries, the 
state performed the very same act on errant natives. At the same time, whipping 


544 


\i , l II \K \1.isonu ( >ind Rct'olutwn m ( o/owj/ Xripv* 

til C ( I Oss tullv identified IV la Rama with the Inquisitorial portrait of the heretic 
w he * w .is Relieved, in Negros as well as in the Peninsula, to have whipped the C Voss 
and assaulted it in other wavs. In the IV* la Rama legend, however, the heretic 
produced wealth. C apitalist accumulation was thus incidentally fetishi/ed. 

Km powered hv Yawa, the translated antagonist par excellence of friar power, 

1 )e la Rama was in a unique position to “whip hack at the Spanish colonial state. 
I t ill/ mg the indi\ uluah/ed at t ri Rules granted bv cosmic forces, l V* la Rama recov- 
ered the Rask elements of native existence which had Recn goRRled up by the colo- 
nial state- apparatus. Rut the vomited wealth was onlv tor himself: Pc la Rama was 
not expected to Re a social hRerator. Consistent with the indigenous world-view, a 
colonial era man of prowess had arisen from among the colonial subjects, his wt's- 
tizo ethnic 1 1 \ quictlv glossed over, folklore, nonetheless, took note of the fact that 
IV la Rama left the historical stage before the final demise of the Spanish regime 
In stressing that the dominant religious power managed to inflict retribution. Ac- 
cording to various legendarv sources, w hile alive Pe la Rama w as merely like \awa; 
in death he was Relieved transformed into Yawa. 1 he “failure to die a human death 
meant eternal suffering tor one who ought to have had his soul undergo purifica- 
tion in Purgatory in the initial stage of the afterlife as Philippine Catholics would 
generally expect. In death friar power exacted its ultimate vengeance. 

I he tales spun around Pe la Rama showed that elite opposition to Spanish 
colonialism was expressible, and probablv onlv so as a negation of the C atholic 
church. Rut like the subtle transactions with environmental spirits engaged in by 
locals even now, Pe la Ramas opposition to friar power entailed the concomitant 
bell lending of friars. \\ i t h Spams purported enemies residing in one man, Pe la 
Kama signaled a cosmic strength capable of engaging in cunning combat with the 
dominant power. Indeed, de la Rama personified the mestizo contests with the 
state. As I have shown elsewhere, beneath their appearance as loyal subjects, the 
IhiLiudi u)\ were carving out an enclave of resistance to the colonial regime thiough 
patent gambles against the state.' 1 Masonic capitalism located the emergent 
plants i class m symbolic opposition to friar power. Pe la Rama conveyed the sui- 
isal anti-C .atholicism that reverberated through the hdcauicvo class at the tutn of 
the century and beyond, in Negros as well as in other parts of the Philippines.” 

The Hacendero as Revolutionary: Masonic Might Triumphant 

I he hticcucicvi) class, however, did not engage in outright rebellion until S Noum 
ber 1808. In contrast, by the late 1880s, shamans ( bdbayLvi ) armed with spears, 
^^gg^' 1 ^ machetes, and had converted the Visayan Islands into a the 

ater of resistance. In Negros Occidental, the shamanic movement was led by Papa 
(Pope) Isio whose supernatural powers made him the epitome of what local spirit- 
ists call “the good man" ( maayo iigd laLiki). Isios core group, numbering some SO 
followers who camped in the village of Alabhid in the central mountain district of 
Isabela- Himamaylan, was bent, according to a Recollect pnest, on killing fnars 


54S 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOU ! K )N AM > 111 V< >M > 


and Spaniards.”" 1 After a relative of Isio, known as S.in Ju.it 1 Sr |olm , 
in an encounter with the Guardia Civil in December I 8VC the group rr ,■ a mi 
to the southern vicinity of Kabankalan. The following month government troops 
mounted an assault against Isio’s forces which had swelled t<> more t:..m 
men."’ Hie fierce fighting left some dead and countless injur cd an ion- I <• t » >1 
lowers. Despite this setback, Isio’s movement continued t<> control thc 
mountains of Negros until around February 1 899. when thev l.ium bed tin «>rnl 
phase of their struggle, this time against U.S. colonialism. 

While the shamans waged their uncoordinated but serums t lial It ih: s mum 
S panish power, the colonial authorities began to be alarmed by repotted n n <>t 
prominent individuals in Negros, among them the celebrated I eotloto Ncncd t, to. 
adversary of several penimulares who denounced him for land gt.ibbmg m tbe 
1870s, who in 1884 was suspected of spreading separatist propaganda I In p><> 
vincial governors of both Iloilo and Negros, in a rare demonstration ot i oops ta 
non, organized a joint secret police unit to undertake surveillance of IWiu-dn to 

wo was code-named “Z.” r ' Despite possibly covert planter opposition to . olomal 
ru e, however, the Negros elite, unlike the shamans, generally avoid. <1 dues t polm 
cal provocation. Nevertheless, the bacenderos eventually took the uppei band m 
y subduing friar power in one swift dramatic turn of events in I 8'LS. 

I \ C ^ ea °f revolution finally dawned upon the Negros elite .is tl K ' dnt c t it 
suit of Spanish paranoia in the wake of the uprising which erupted m I n/«»n m 
ugust 18%. Writing in the newspaper I. a Republic* III, pin*, Jose No explained 
n *11 k an ^ hacencleros'm Negros were arrested by the ( iiiardia < wil I"* ''“I’ 
y eing in league with Luzon’s revolutionaries. ' The arrests were instigated 
y e amatory letters written by Recollect friars who, terrified l>v tlic prospect of 
e ina ot on Spanish honor, began to denounce the pi anters for alleged 1 1 1 at h 
• ong those incarcerated were Juan Araneta, Carlos Zamora, Sabina vnul.i tie 

•ggins, and Ventura Magalona, each of whom carried a price of several ibons.uul 
E° S °, r 1 Clr relcase - lr > Zamora’s case, for instance, R 1 5,000 were demanded, 
in i°l 1§ a ttf sorne haggling the amount was reduced to P8,000. Many languished 
months 0 ^ ,ntentionall y» including Juan Araneta, who remained in prison for 1 <> 
scoured thT “ ° Ct ° bcr ,89 7. 27 The Guardia Civil also reportedly 

picion ofbeLTa r lV.Tsoan nd ;| kimn f 6SOn ; C ,5 ° ” "1" 

npnpr mn u lard confirmed in an anonymously written news 

LLnHrh j atSUSPCCK fr inSUrreCtionistsin Negros were tortured.'"* Such atroci 
I , 'Cr 1 ' 5 f' Fcred planters must have convinced llicm of i lie nm! 

LlndtflL'on,. ^ y ° ke ” ln a " ian “ » kh —» 1 

renJlTT* ‘"..T",*' traiCC '° ry ° f thc rev °l ut * on against Spain was dis- 
m V „ y he OUtb /“ k ° Spantsh-Amcrican War, which ramified in the im- 

medtate capture „f Man, la by U.S. forces on 13 August 1898. With the >1 

an.la to the Americans, the Spaniards tried maintain their hold over thc 
Visayas and Mindanao by moving the seat of government to Iloilo. They also of- 


546 


\i » l II \K \tihotui ( .;p;r.:!:*n} .nui Rct'olutton n: ( olofiul Xrqrvs 

fercd to implement the atitononiv reforms earlier demanded bv leading reformers, 
hut it was spurned. In Panav, an armed uprising was already being organized bv 
planters and other elite at the time of the l .8. invasion of 1 u/on. In October, news 
reached Negros concerning the outbreak of hostilities in Iloilo and in the neigh- 
boring islands of ( ebu, Bohol, and 1 evte where the revolutionaries were scoring 
successes. I he tun 'cndcros of Negros Occidental w ere finally emboldened to pre- 
pare for an armed confrontation with the small Spanish force on their island.' 1 A 
provincial Revolutionary C ommiuee linked to the C dural Revolutionary C io\ em- 
inent of the \ isayas was created, funds were solicited to acquire firearms, and farm 
tenants and workers were supplied with machetes and shotguns. \\ ith each planter 
under instruction to consider himself “the military superior of his men, '* the 
committee decided to launch the province-wide offensive on S November 1 S C )S. 

In Bacolod the Spanish forces were undermanned, with onlv about 75 C i\ il 
( iiiards, SO soldiers, and a handful of peninsular volunteers as against a native force 
of about 8,000 from the north led b\ Amceto 1 acson of Silav and nearly 2,000 
from the south captained by |uan Araneta of Bago. from middav of S November, 
Aran et as corps of fighters were steadily advancing to the capital, where pandemo- 
nium had brol sen loose in fear of heavy fighting, from the church tower Spanish 
soldiers reportedly noticed the movement of a huge column of men equipped with 
Japanese murata rifles strategically poised to attack Bacolod. bhe rumor spread 
rapidly that a Japanese vessel had landed near Pontevedra loaded with thousands of 
arms for the rebels, the governor of Negros Occidental decided to commission the 
Spanish mestizo planter Jose Ruiz de 1 uzuriaga to negotiate with the rebels. Believ- 
ing the Spaniards would lose, the emissary convinced the governor that an “honor- 
able surrender was better than a shameful defeat, bate the following daw 6 No- 
vember, an act of capitulation was signed, briar power was finally vanquished in 
Negros. 

With the Spanish forces disarmed and quartered in the convent, Aranetas 
troops made their triumphal entry into Bacolod. Onlv then was it known that, save 
for a number of shotguns, the troops actually had little ammunition. What ap- 
peared from a distance as Japanese rifles with bayonets attached to their muzzles 
were poles fashioned from nifui palms uniformly trimmed and cut to size, with 
polished blades of knives affixed to one end. A clever ploy that destroyed Spanish 
morale, the idea was reported I v concocted bv Juan Araneta. 

I he day after the capitulation, the Provisional Revolutionary Government 
was formed, with bacson — an affluent planter who owned Negros second most 
expensive house valued at $80, ()()() (Mexican) — as president, and Araneta an- 
other exceedingly wealthy man who was “looked upon as the greatest agriculturist 
in the island" — as delegate of war. u A struggle for superiority between the two 
men was resolved by invoking the state of war in the island which justified the 
concentration of statist powers on Araneta. Araneta was later designated brigadier 
general as well as interim governor of Negros Island by Emilio Aguinaldo. ‘One of 
Aranetas first official acts was to move 3 C ) friars who had been taken prisoners to 


THE PHILIPPINE REVO! r IK )N AN!) Ml Yc 


LaGranja (model farmj in I,a Carlota where they might. in Ar.mrta 
fulfill the “divine precept which they had been satisfied to prr.u h 1’ *. * 
your brow shall you eat your bread. 

The ingenuity of Aranetas role in the Spanish downfall w.i wide 
by planters and workers alike. Relying upon its elite version \m o > 

uted the Spanish surrender to “a series of diplomatic bluffing h*. \r m * . 
historical veracity of Aranetas role is not an issue here. I)iit rather the . >r 
of the popular interpretations of that role. The event wlm h \raneta r ui r 

servingly celebrated in a newspaper article as a brilliant national' e;>is<»d< 
“brought honor to the land”'' transformed him into a mythical he ro I lx inp.ii 
alleled feat earned Araneta a unique place in Negros historv for v. I un tin •,.!/// 

failed he succeeded marvelously. 

According to various legendary fragments, Araneta was a man of c • < prion 
ally strong dungan. In the league of the traditional yyuiuyn //'/</ LiLil'i. \i .n. m 
possessed a commanding voice and was full of knowledge and w isdom I (is re* 
puted powers included the ability to heal, to take giant steps and to s< < from afar, 
to vanish before ones very eyes and reappear in another place mstaniaiu <misK. t < » 
produce objects from nowhere, and to fly on his white magical horse. I I is l>od\ 
was invincible to bullets. Considered a kindhearted man ( bunt uy t t who 

treated his workers well, he used his talents for “the good of the people, pat n 
cularly in driving away the Spaniards. Harking hack faithfulh to the image- of 
the pre-conquest datu, Araneta was a man of prowess who received guidance from 
and enjoyed a special friendship with the spirit world. I I is spiritual rapj )ort w as m > 
ordinary one, for he was privileged in his relationship with a Sota (or Sma ), the 
preternatural being believed to have dominion over the magical mountain of 
Kanlaon. 

As Aranetas spirit-guide, the Sota was a composite power some e, reputedlv 
Spanish-looking but with half its body black and the other half white*, a feature* 
known in Ilonggo as kambang. Some informants suggested that Sota was Aranetas 
spouse or that Araneta himself was a type of Sota. ( )thers claimed that S< >t a was a 
spirit-being of small stature that regularly visited Ar aneta at his residence in Hugo. 
Most certainly linked to Aranetas mystique was a “white monkey he claimed to 
Have captured, such creature being, in the opinion of an American writer, the 
only one found in the islands. ’ M8 I he uncertainly gendered Sota stood for the 
combined forces of Hispanic and native wellsprings of other-worldl v [sower the* 

mestizo Araneta was enabled to tap to perform an unprecedented role in the island s 
history. 

To reciprocate Sota s friendship — indicative of the elites anti-C kitholic 
aura Araneta supposedly would scale the slopes of Kanlaon during the annual 
o y Week in order to, like the babaylan and the surohano , augment his [sowers 
commune with the spirit-world. Hewassaid to have collected medicinal herbs, 
roots, ar , and other objects that were later mixed with oil extracted from a [secu- 
lar coconut [bugtong nga lubi). Consistent with the present-day practice of sha- 


548 


II \R Musontc ( 4tpj:*ili>rn *imi Revolution in ( olontul Xrgni> 


ni '*n s 
oh 


( >n 

^K\ t s 
llivii, 

»lai 


rapidly. *" Whether Araneta was 
it, in various fragments ot 


lna v and Necros Islands, Araneta allegedly leathered Kanlaons matiical 
^ llI,n g ( ,ood | ridav when C hrist was believed dead and unable to exact 
Ul| hution. At Kanlaons summit, Araneta was said to have planted a white 

U) J. ‘ 

j. IUn, nce his [Presence on the tabled mountain. 

Ar aiH . ( lni niortali/e his triumph over triar power, legend has elevated Juan 
with | ‘ Un ° n g the venerable ancestors (/v//><//> //<///) who died ot “old age. Blessed 
s pa n , ,lgC ‘ vilv relative to the average life expectancy ot the period, Aranetas life- 
P as sed hito the first halt ot the American colonial rule. \ le was “*2 when he 

death h^ ^ * n * n contrast to the tales about Isidro de la Rama, Aranetas 

p (nv n ‘ Ullr al cause became the ultimate guarantee of the victory of hucendero 

tj ()n biar power, which ultimately was unable to avenge the utter humilia- 

^hied by the friars in Negros. 

( M i f , Ul,n g bis lifetime, Araneta amassed a total ot about ~\000 hectares of atiri- 
| n . i j . aiu * divided into several haciendas. He purchased land parcels, as vouched 
| () ^ ^ b°m several small owners and aggregated them into larger plantations.''’ 

workers such an explanation would be superfluous since the Juan 
p v ^ they knew ot mythical tame rightly utilized his powers to acquire land. 

^ | c (>lc l he end of Spanish rule, Araneta already owned substantial properties, 
^ 1 111 bulent /;;/ dr stcclc was also a splendid occasion when “certain planters 
i 1 c P ()r tedly “enlarging their plantations very i\ 

cannot be ascertained. \\ hat is telling is th 
ai Kta legend, the social setting is invariably one in which no one but the 
bcio had ownership of land, lb acquire the land he desired, Araneta would 
^ XSave bis magical /v/s-like sword and all occupants within its radius would 

bind. Described literally as merely “moving a bit ( /dog) to make way for 
j ; l be displacement of peasants was not portrayed as unjust or burdensome. 

^ fusing his exceptionally strong dunga/u Araneta had authority as signified by 
j c SU() id to issue directives which people in fear and awe followed. Araneta was 
e P 1( dccl as perfectly justified in using his spiritual endowments to accumulate land 
U ' l bcieby, wealth. No justification for social hierarchy could have had more cre- 
Ulu or va liditv for the ordinary person at that time. 

Reportedly already having a reputation among his own workers of having 
bis oiders obeyed even before the downfall of Spain, 11 Araneta catapulted himself 
into the historical stage as a mythical figure through the one decisive act of dis- 
mantling fnar power and in so doing fulfilled the desire of the repressed colonial 
subjects. I rcating farm workers kindly in the paternalistic guise which became a 
marked feature of Negros haciendas in the late 19th century, Araneta was also the 
feared planter whose supernatural powers, once confirmed by the Spanish surren- 
der, made him absolute master and overlord. His whips {ikogsangpogi) were reput- 
edly capable of lashing at an offending worker even though the latter might hide 
under water. Araneta meted out such punishment for offenses, such as theft, which 
were in violation of planter property rights. From the fear he generated and the 
spiritually sanctioned authority he wielded, Araneta was placed in a position of 


549 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOIL'I ION \NI) hi Y< )N I ) 


dominance akin to the men of prowess of old, yet equally posit i< >ncd to pr < >r : t from 
the capitalist age. 

Isio’s Inquisitorial Struggle 

Having outflanked the shamans in ousting the Spaniards, the planters imnu di.tu i\ 
sought to control Papa Isio’s group by making it toe the line of the elite tor < >n 
27 November 1898, Araneta reported that he had notified Isio to report •<> tru* 
cantonal government . 42 lour days later, Araneta issued a cm til.tr i<> ins mihtars 
chiefs and town presidents enjoining them to follow a polu% of attr u non to 
entice Isio’s followers to “return to their occupations. In a communique imntK 
signed by Isio and Araneta in Bacolod on 19 December 1898. the babay/*/?/ i< ader 
was designated “commandant of the mountain district between L.dui.i arui 
Himamaylan and required to order those in his movement with outstanding debts 
to leave camp and return to farm work to fulfill their obhgat ions \lt hough the 
sugar economy was virtually at a standstill, the planters sought to co opt Im<> to 
contain the festering problem of labor control which had plagued the* luu u-iui.is 
since the 1 870s.*' An officer of the U.S. -organized Philippine < onstahul.u \ Liter 
reported that Isio visited Bacolod like a “visiting potentate, was wined and dined 
by the cantonal president, and commissioned as “military chief of I a ( astcll.ma 
after which “his power” grew immense. 4 '' Phis evidently apoc ryphal stor e, wliuh 
could not have been peddled but by an angry elite, arose because Isio reneged on 
his supposed agreement with the planters. 

Toward the end of February 1899 — after the haceridi 'ros had voluntarily 
raised the American flag in Bacolod — Isio’s movement embarked on the* second 
phase of their struggle. In repudiation of (icneral Araneta, the babiiyLni organized 
a roster of military officers, with Isio as captain-general and two other leaders des 
ignated as generals. Isios followers differentiated themselves from the planters bv 
claiming to be the genuine revolutionaries, as they were the first to shed their 
blood in the Revolution against the Spaniards” and that “when the ( iuardia ( dvil 
and the Spaniards effected a blockade on the mountains,” they were the first mili 
tary leaders who rose in arms against the forces of the Spanish government. * A1 
though the planters had outwitted them in ousting the Spaniards, Isio and his fol- 
lowers were not cowed by mestizo power. They directed their fight, however, 
against the new colonial power rather than against the planters. 

In waging this battle, the babaylan adopted a stance of almost total idem id- 
eation with the Catholic church, with Isio’s group positioning itself in the vacuum 
created by the downfall of friar power. Deploying the lexicon of the Inquisition to 
resist U.S. colonialism, Isio’s movement denounced the Americans as “Protes- 
tants, heretics ( ereges ng mga tao), and “enemy Jews” ( judions enemigos) . ‘ s 1 ike 
the defunct Spanish colonial state, they labeled the Americans extra ngeros {) whose 
arrival disturbed the native quest for liberty. The American occupation was 
pictured as a temptation” to be resisted lest it result in the “loss of our body and 


\( ,1 II \R Mtisonit ( tipiu/j'W .nui Revolution m ( 'olonuil Xegivs 

soul . 11k* Spanish equation ot politics and religion had become the IwhiiyLins 

own. 

( onsequentlv, the simple against American rule was viewed as the defense 
ot the hoi v faith (><////«/ /<•). Isio launched his groups’ anti-American resistance 
from the same mountain site he rechristened Paradise (Paraizo). hoi a fee ot s() 
centavos. Isios followers pledged allegiance in a ritual in w hich, kneeling before a 
“hob cross, thev submitted themselves to Isios “seven commandments (pito <</ 
soi*o). Phev then took an oath, swearing bv a version ot the Philippine flag to de- 
fend the “hob fatherland (.*>////</ /><///*/</) and serve Papa Isio. lo a hob war and 
lovaltv to a religio-magical leader Isios followers committed themselves tor life. In 
the same vein, Isios group solicited contributions ot P30 to PA() from planters on 
pain of being considered spies of the heretics, but looked kindlv upon those who 
chose to unite “with the one hob faith. 

Scarce provisions, limited arms, and intensified operations bv colonial forces 
locked Isios group in a verv light situation. In earh 1899, to protect planters and 
quash the btibtiyLni , the t alifornia regiment was sent to Negros."' A more orga- 
nized force to defend the planters became available with the creation of the Philip- 
pine ( onstabularv in August I 90 1 , a native police force officered largelv bv Ameri- 
cans under the direct supervision of Manilas civilian government, bv mid-1902, 
the constabulary in Negros t Accidental had eight inspectors and 2^3 enlisted men, 
in add it ion to Negros Oriental s five inspectors and 1 23 enlisted men. Not only 
was Negros Occidental s the largest force in the constabularv’s Third Oistrict, but 
it also possessed the most number of firearms, with 200 shotguns, 1 12 revolvers, 
and 200 rifles for a total of 002 weapons.'" 1 he large arsenal of state violence sig- 
nified unprecedented militarv support never before experienced bv the planters. 
I lowever, Isio defied capture until, on 0 August 190~\ bowing to what he called 
the “mandate of Ciod, he surrendered in Isabela and was brought to Luzon 
where he died in prison in 1011. The planter class, in effect, remained 
unvanquished. 

As the vears wore on, the Masonic might of the hacoideros stunned and im- 
mobilized the farm workers whose ties of dependency on the sugar economy be- 
came even more difficult to unshackle. Some workers later attempted to retaliate 
against the oppressive conditions in the haciendas, but were overwhelmed on all 
fronts. 1 he deepening commodification of the economy, the shift to duum-dii 
wage-based labor relations from around the 1930s, and the strategic sponsorship 
of planter interests bv the American colonial state left workers with few options 
but to tolerate and defer to haccndcro power. In the sphere of the spirit-woi Id, the 
favors rested with the planter class whose mystified accumulation practices and 
mystique no magico-religious leader managed to undermine. Individually, the te- 
cotirse to sorcery known as hiwit proved inefficacious as well. By wealing a dia- 
mond ring, the planters were said to possess an insurmountable shield and povvet- 
f 1 1 1 antidote to hiwit. All that was left of the workers' weaponry was their Masonic 
discourse and other forms of everyday resistance. 1 he Negios sugai planteis w ith 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AM) HI Y< )ND 


their cultural hegemony and newfound political power, the suhstanci.il ar ,mai <>f 
state violence behind them, and the economic bounty opened up under th anus 
of Americas “benevolent assimilation" — marched on to consolidate their d«»rm 
nance as a class. Since the 1 970 s, the planter class has finally met genuine!. tor mi 
dable challenges, one of which was posed by the New People's Arms Whether tins 
movement, with its ideological materialists and C atholic priests, has been able t*> 
alter the cosmological foundation of power relations in Negros remains an open 
question. 

Notes 

1. Terence Turner, “Ethno-cthnohistory: Myth and History in Native South \mein an 
Representations of Contact with Western Society, m Rrthtnhmy lit for, anti 
Indigenous South American Perspectives on the Past, cd. Jonathan Hill M rhana and 
Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1988); Edward Thompson, folklore \ntlir«> 
pology, and Social History,” Indian Historical Review vc >1. L no 1 H9 7 * .’no 

2. Antonio Ma. Regidor, “Masonry in the Philippines, The ( Mhletou < )Hu ial < >rg.m 
of the Grand Lodge of the Philippines, vol. 59, nos. 7/8 ( 1 982: origin. illv \s r men in 
1896), pp. 4-5; and Conrad Myrick, “Some Aspects of the British ( )u upaimn of 
Manila,” in Studies in Philippine Church History , ed. Gerald Anderson i IiIku a: 
Cornell University Press, 1969), 123. 

3. Henry Charles Lea, The Inquisition in the Spanish I )ependeneic<> (Ness Sork: 
MacMillan, 1908), pp. 299-317. 

4. Richard Greenleaf, “North American Protestants and the Mexican Inquisition. 1 (vS 
1 820,” Journal of Church and State vol. 8, no. 2 (1969), 186-199. 

5. Ruth Behar, “Sex and Sin, Witchcraft and the Devil in Late-Colonial Mexico, 
American Ethnologist vol. 14, no. 1 (1987), 34-54. 

6. Lillian Estelle Fisher, “Early Masonry in Mexico ( 1 806- 1 828),” Southwestern l It start 
cal Quarterly vol 42, no. 3 (1939), 198-214; and Richard Greenleaf, “ The Mexic an 
Inquisition and the Masonic Movement: 1751-1 820,” New Mexico Historical Renew 
vol. 44, No. 2 (1969), 92-117. 

7. Bernard Fay, Revolution and Freemasonry 1 H60- 1 900 (Boston: Little, Brown, and 
Company, 1935), pp. 120-122, 216. 

8. Myrick, Some Aspects of the British Occupation of Manila,” 123; and C irccnleal, 
“ The Mexican Inquisition and the Masonic Movement,” 99. 

9. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition and the Masonic Movement,” 94. 

10. John Lynch, The Spanish American Revolutions , 1808-1826 (New York: W. W. Norton 
and Co., 1973), pp. 24-36; and Fay, Revolution and Freemasonry. 

11. Richard Greenleaf, Recent Historiography of the Mexican Inquisition: Involutions 
of Interpretations and Methodologies,” in Cultural Encounters: The Impact of the In- 
quisition in Spain and the New Worlcf ed. Mary Elizabeth Perry and Anne J. Cruz. 
(Berkeley, Los Angeles, Oxford: University of California Press, 1 99 1 ), p. 258. 


552 


\i .I II AK Masonic ( dpitalssn: and A 'evolution m ( olonial A egro> 


12. William Callahan. ( hurch , Politics, and Society in Spain, 1 1 8"*-} (Cambridge. 

Mass, and I ondon: I larvard University Press, 1989). 

1 v Manuel Bcrnaldcz. “Reforms Needed in Pilipinas i!8^2j. in l he Philippine Islands 
I ed. I mm.i Blair and lames Robertson vol. Si (Cleveland. Ohio: The 
Arthur 1 t. Park ( ompanv, 19(U), p. 208. 

l a. lames A. 1 cRov, "Philippine I ife in l own and Country." Book One in l he Philip- 
pines ( trea 1 1 )0() ( Manila: I ilipimana Book Cuild, UH>S), p. 1 10. 

1 5. 1 dgar \\ ickberg. l he C hinese in Philippine l tfe, 1 S^O I S^S (New 1 laven and 1 on- 

don: Yale University Press, 19(>5), eh. 1. 

1 6. I raneiseo \ arona, Negros: l 1 1 storm Anecdotica tie >ti Riqueza y dc s us Hornhrcs (N lanila: 

C ieneral 1 riming Press, 1938), trails. Raul 1 ocsin and serialized in the Western \ 'isavas 
C hronicle, |une-September (19(>5). Phis section draws from the 25 t h to the 28th 

installments. 

1 - Although l.irm workers served as sources lor tins reconstructed legend, beliefs in the 
spirit -work! are not restricted to the laboring classes as mans haeenderos and wealths 

people share in the same fundamental beliefs. I bis cultural legacy knows no class 
boundaries. 

IS. franc isco Ignacio Alcina. The I listorv of the B.savan Islands." Part 1. Book 3. pre 
liminary trails. Paul S. l ie./ (Chicago: Philippine Studies Program. Department of 

Anthropology. University of Chicago. I960 draft ms.; origm.tllv written in 166S). 
ch. IS. 

1 9. for an analysts ot sharecropping in Negros sugar farms, see my "Sugar Planter-State 
Relations and l abour Processes in Colonial Philippine Haciendas,” ./w/r/w/ of Peas - 
ant Studies vol. 22, no. 1 (October 1994), SO-SO. 

20. W ilham Christian, Jr., Local Religion i„ Sixteenth-Century Spain (Princeton, New 
Jersey: Princeton University Press, 19S1), pp. 190-193. 

“ I ' 1 i Ionic no V. Aguilar, Jr., Ot (. .ticks and Bets: Gambling, Class Structuring, and State 

1 or mation in the Philippines, in Patterns of Power and Polities in the Philippines , ed. 
James f.der and Robert Youngblood ( lempe, Arizona: Program for Southeast Asian 
Studies, Arizona State University, 1994). Cl. my “Sugar Planter-State Relations and 
Labour Processes." 

22. 1 he martyrdom of Jose Rtz.al was first memorialized in the shape of a Masonic-in- 
spired obelisk on which were written the titles of his two great novels. Erected in the 
throes of the revolution, the monument found in Oaet, Camarines Norte, does not 
contain Rizals image or statue. Benedict Anderson, “Replica, Aura, and Late Nation- 
alist Imaginings,” Qui Parle vol. 7, no. 1 (1993), 1-21. 

23. Libro de cosas notables por Hr. Angel Martinez, Jimamaylan 31 December 1897, 
Archivo de Marcilla Legajo 57, No. 4. 

24. Negros Governor Luis Martinez to the Governor-General, Bacolod 25 January 1 897, 
Philippine National Archives (henceforth, PNA) Guardia Civil Bundle No. 39 
(1897-A). Gf. Appended letter of Juan Adarves, Primer Teniente Comandante de 
Guardia Civil, Ilog 22 January 1897. 

553 




THH PHILIPPINE REVOI.UTH )N \NI > hi Y« m 


25. Negros Governor Fxluardo Subinza to flu* Governor < »cnr:.. 

1884, with rwo enclosures, PNA Sedtetones y Rebrimnr \<». vr*-. • 

26. JoseNer, “El Porque del Levantarnientode Negro < > id / .. v; ^ 

vol. 1, no. 54 (18 November 1898), 2. 

27. Angel Martinez Cuesta, History of Negros, tr.m \ih*r. i 
Sevilla (Manila: Historical Conservation Society 1980 p »o 

28. Ner, “El Porque del Ixrvantamiento tic Negros ( h uimf 

29. Anonymous, “Una Interview/ Dt Republic a Piltpmn • 

30. Ner, M E1 Porque del Levan tarn icn to de Negro ( ) id< nt 

31. I his account of the Spanish defeat in Negros is l>.»" d on t v. n 
Fuentes, Datos Para la Historia: Apuntes l )ocumrntadn fU • (*i !'• ’ ■ 
de Negros (Iloilo: El Ccntinela, 1919), ch. 5 and 0 and luar. 

Bakolod, La Independencia ( 28 December 1898/ 1 2 

32. Fuentes, Datos Para la Historia , p. 42. 

33. Aniceto I^acson to the Scfior Presidente del ( lolnerno 10 on i< ■: : • 

Bacolod, 7 November 1 898, Philippine Insurgent K<*< ord ir n tor'* i :*• 

Folder 315.1; and Alonzo Stewart, Agricultural ( ondmor. u. r: J 'in; , 1 

lands, in Senate and l louse Documents and Report, firmin'/ of mm < ■: 

Session, Doc. No. 535 (Washington, D.C.: Government Print it n ( >Mi 

185 and 199. 

34. 1 he appointment of Araneta as general and governor v.a r u< d L\ tlx /> 

Gobierno Revolutionario de Pilipinas on 12 November 1898. with Anti' t* 1 imtiu- 
the post on 8 December. Circular of 1 )iego de la \ i n. i , Delgado di la ( meira li 
local military chiefs of Negros Oriental, Dumaguete 1 December I 8 >.s I hilippnu 
National Library (henceforth PNL) Noble Collection , 29. U, 9 

35. Fuentes, /fcw la Historia , p. 72. 

36. Stewart, Agricultural Conditions in the Philippine Islands, 182. 

37. Araneta, “Rendition de Bakolod.” 

38. Stewart, Agricultural Conditions in the Philippine Islands, 198. 

32. Interview with Juan Araneta’s granddaughter I •,mma Arguclhs, HS vc.us <>ld. in 
Bacolod on 25 October 1 990. 

40. Statement of Gerow D. Bill, 25 June 1901, in Report of the Philippine < nnmu^ioii. 
Part 2, Appendix FF (Washington, DC: Government Printing )Hice. 190 1 ). \r SS i. 

41. Stewart, “Agricultural Conditions in the Philippine Islands,' p. I Hi. 

42. Puentes, Datos ]>ara la Historia , p. 1 22. 

43. Ibid., p. 149. 

44. Ynstrucciones o deheres de Comandante del sitio de Cambalav en medio del monte 
de Ysabela de Jimamalaylan [sic], Juan Araneta and Dionisio Segovela y Papa, 
Bacolod 19 December 1 898, PNL Noble Collection , 25, 4141 A 1 43. 

45. Lstadistica de las Causas Criminalcs, negocios civilcs y espedientes de C ,obierno, 
despachados por la Real Audencia de Pilipinas, 1871-1887, Archive) 1 lisiorico 
Nacional, Legajo 2238, Expedience No. 99. 


554 


\( A II \K \I,i>onte ( apitahstii and Revolution in ( olonial Nr\nv> 

i(). V ( Kivctn. Report of the District Director. third Constabulary District," in AY- 
port of the Philippine ( dm mission /9CJ7 Part 2 (W ashington, DC: Government Prim- 
ing C )ftu e. 1 90S). p. >11. 

a \ppointment ot C lenerals and formation of piantdla bv Pionisio Papa. Alahhid o 
Paraiso J MarJi IS 1 ) 1 ), PIR Si ) SS. Polder 9M).9 (also PNl Xoh/e Collection, J*L 
lOAA *<>A"N. 

aS. \cta of tiu- Republua 1 ilipmo de Negros, \lahhid or Paraiso 2 May 1899, and 
1 ilomeno \mt. ( onuiulante del Piercito, to Arcadio Maxilom v Molero. Jete de 
Oper.u lones en t elm. Kahalanan J(> April 1901. PIR. PR 91, Daily Aeeount of 
( Operations m Nemos l ohler; l ndated and unsigned circular requesting contribu- 
tions to the re\ olut ion (original llonggo in the PI R tile). PIR SP As, Polder 9 0.1 1 
also PNl Xoh/e ( olleetion . Pi. 1 AS~-JASS): and Pionisio Papa to Rutu Ovos, 

( ampamento t leneral 1 A lime 1*001. PIR. SP AS. Polder *0 0.-4 \ (also PNl A ol>le 
( olleetion, JO. a(vi(> KviS). 

i o 1 candro Pillion to the Ljercito Pxpedicionario para Negros, San luan de Buenavista 
J A September ISO 1 ). PNl Xoh/e ( olleetion , J(>, *4 J99-aA0(). 

A(). 1 Oiomsio Papa to lose de la Vina. Paraiso A August 10(H), PNl A oh/e ( olleetion , JO. 

a0(>9 «|0 ’(). 

SI. Acta of the Republica Pilipina de Negros, Alahhid or Parai/o J May IS*)*). PIR, PR 
01, “Pailv Account of Operations m Negros Polder. 

AJ. Sample pledges in llonggo by followers of Pionisio Papa, with Spanish translations, 
Parai/o 0 April 1001, PNl Xoh/e ( olleetion, JA, a l A J-4 1 AA. 

AS. l ndated and unsigned circular requesting contributions to the revolution (original 
llonggo m the PIR file), PIR, SP AS, Polder 0 0.1 1 (also PNl \ohle (.olleetion, 1*1, 
JAS~-JASS). 

Ad. |.G. Sehurman et ah, “Preliminary Report of the (Commission, J November 1S00," 
in Report of the Philippine L ommission to the President, hi fanuar\ 1 900, Yol. 1 , Kx- 
hibit I (Washington, PC': Government Printing Office, 1000), p. ISO. 

AA. W.C .. lavlor. Report of the I bird District, Philippines C'onstabularv, Cebu 1 1 Sep- 
tember 100J, in ! bird Annual Report of the Philippine Commission, 1902, Part l, 
hxhibit Ci (Washington, PC': Government Printing Office, 100A), pp. J1 T -J18. 

A6. Ibid., pp. J1S-J10. 1 he I liird District covered the provinces of Antique, Bohol, 
Gapiz, Cebu, Iloilo, Leyte, Misamis, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental, Samar, 
and Nurigao. 

57. Pionisio Papa to Jose de la Vina, Paraiso A August 1000, PNL Noble C. olleetion, JO, 
4670; Calistro Segubila to Rufu Ovos, Cartagena 0 November 1000, PIR, SP AS, 
Polder 070.4-1 (also PNL Noble C olleetion , JO, 4645-4646). 


AAA 


To Set All Law at Defiance 

The Pulahan Revolt on Samar and ( S. Pacification 


Brian McAi i.is i t.r I. inn 

Ter/xjs A & M Unrveryr/, U S A 


T he Pulahan Revolt of 1904 to 1907 on the Philippine islands of S.mi.n 
and Leyte is usually regarded as a minor footnote in the dramatic events sin 
rounding the U.S. conquest of the Philippines. American writers treat it as a i<> 
mantic imperial skirmish against machete-wielding fanatics; Philippine scholars 
focus on the sectarians' religious beliefs. 1 As a result, virtually nothing is known 
about either the Pulahanes military tactics or the pacificat ion campaign that even 
tually subdued them. This lack of attention is surprising, for the Pulahan ( am 
paign is one of the few case studies of U.S. pacification methods in a small war. 
Fought immediately after the Philippine War of 1899-1902, it allowed U.S. otfic 
ers to put into practice the lessons they had learned in that earlier conflict. More- 
over, the pacification of the Pulahanes was the first major campaign that the l .S. 
Army undertook under the direction of the insular government. ( )f f icers and civil 
officials cooperated to establish policies that combined coercion and benevolence. 
Finally, the suppression of the Pulahan rebellion required U.S. Army officers to 
form alliances with the inhabitants, some of them recent enemies, and incorporate- 
local units into pacification duties. This long- ignored conflict has more than a little 
relevance today, when conventional forces may suddenly be thrust amongst com- 
munities torn by social and religious differences. 

I he Pulahan uprising had its roots in historic internal tensions on Samar 
between highlanders and lowlanders, tensions which were greatly exacerbated dur- 
ing the Philippine War of 1 899-1902. The island itself is one of the most inhospi- 
table in the world; indeed, as one American soldier bluntly stated, the country is 
absolutely impossible. ' 2 A few towns hug the coastal plains and river valleys; be- 


556 


1! N N /<■ V; All l .m .it 1 Vti.nu f 


hnul tlum stretch jailed mountains. swamps, grasslands, and jungle in which a 
host ol malaria earn ing mosquitoes, leeches, venomous snakes, and stinging ants 
wait to prey on the traveler. At the time ot the campaign there were no cross-island 
roads, most travel from the interior or along the coast was In b.mc.i (canoe) or 
along ha rely discernible trails. Samars most important product was hemp. Valued 
as a source ol cordage lor agriculture and ships, hemp was grown in the mountain 
ous interior In tanners who then carried it down to the coastal towns. I hc hemp 
uade benefited port towns, but escalated already existing social tensions between 
s oast and back cotmtrv. Impoverished and uneducated hemp growers were often 
cheated ot then crops In the merchants and municipal officials. Repression bred 
rebellion. In the last decade of the R'th centurv. highland sectarians, called Dios 
D,os. attacked several villages. Be the outbreak ol the Philippine revolution in 
1 Samar was torn In deep and worsening soc i.tl die isions. 

Samar was the scene ot some ot the most c k .oils lighting during the Ameri- 
can comities, ot the Philippines. I'he revolt!, lonarv leader. Vicente l ukban. allied 
w '.h the Ihos D.OS. In order to prevent collaboration with the Americans, the 
guerrillas attacked or burned towns garrisoned In the U.S. \ nm and forced much 
()t ,he population into the mountainous interior, b.lipmos suspected of giving aid 
,o the soldiers were kidnapped, tortured, mutilated, or killed. Not until mid UH) 1 
W as the -nim able to begin a svstema.ic pacification campaign, seeking through 
cr op destruction, long range patrols, and the establishment ;>f interior' camps 'to 
break up the guerrilla strongholds and drive the population back to the occupied 
towns. After the massacre of an infantry contpanv at balangiga on 28 September 
R)01. the American campaign escalated: crops, livestock, fishing ponds, houses, 
and warehouses were all destroyed. Such harsh measures forced the last revolution- 
arv forces to surrender on 2 April RH)2. but the Dios lNos, reinforced bv recalci- 
trant guerrillas and brigands, rejected all peace feelers. After an armv patrol was 
mauled by sectarian bolo-men on 20 Julv 1002. brigadier Ceneral Frederick D. 


(iiant warned tlicic still inn. lined large groups of “Samar fanatics of sufficient 
stiength to i.iise seiiotis problems tor the civil government ot Samar to face in the 
futiiie, pioblems which I believe another generation mav not find whollv solved. 

I he btoad origins of the Pulahan movement are thus relatively simple to 
understand. \\ hat is less clear is why the rebellion took the form it did and whv 
bulahanism itself became so popular. Unfortunately, the sectarians themselves left 
no written records detailing their beliefs or goals; even their name — a reference to 
their practice of dressing in fmlti (red) uniforms — comes from their enemies. Some 
aspects of their religion were borrowed from Christianity: they designated their 
leader as “pope’ and adorned their clothing with crosses. Yet they often struck at 
organized religion, attacking priests and burning churches; perhaps in return, the 
( "atholic clergy “ably rendered” assistance to the U.S. Army. 1, In other respects, they 
seem to have owed more to traditional Visayan animism, and particularly to a de- 
pendence on priests who could intercede with a malignant spirit world. The 
Pulahan spiritual leader, Pablo Bulan or “Papa Pablo, certainly appears to have 


n 


mr mu imsi pi vi >i 


.uni 


\ cr 


i 


p 


it-. ir 


i tiff 



, n | ) ! , »S 1 >N . 


« >f 1 1 n there is 


t pii.ist- • • *i it' 1 ' 


, . i.lcm i th.it 

1 s t 

s . i r 1 1 . i r s . i mic 

». ( • r 

t n<>t Litlrofit'' 

.id* 

, j > i rd militat \ 

4 )( ) 

» jc It* I PcdtO 

the 

[j(\s Ivc'solil 

)c 1 

, ( r u/ s let tet 


been morcofashaman than a priest. I Jr w.r rrpm 
divine being and to bestow magical talisman <>r 
der the bearer invulnerable. The I'ulahanr long hai 
spells, and their belief in reincarnation, are hirilur ; 

Pulahan leaders, including several womrn. had i><> 
tions and could perform marriages and dispeir.' ; 
servers v/ho visited Pulahan communities noted th.i 
by these v/arrior-pricsts, v/ere almost tontinnoo I' 
colonial officers did, that the Pulahancs were in 
Dios/ Certainly they shared certain < h.ir.it tern n 
Pablo Bulan and several other Pulahan leaders had 
but, as Yonina Talmon has cautioned, among mil 
hardly any direct connection between whar mas f ( 
self-same movement.”' 

I he Pulahancs political views are also un< 

they believed they were continuing the war for Philippine i,: ! 

pendencc. One officer reported liis captives were m i n* m 
(brigands), but revolutionaries or imurrecto j sour P > \ ; * r 

titles and regalia from the earlier anti-American reMst.nn < |M ! 
de la Cruz claimed the title “Chief of his army the ( 
tion of these Islands and the Mountainous Province of Sarnar 
warned that if the U.S. did not give the Philippines liberty 

pean nations would intervene and there would be a great and ( i ft ,|( ’ hl ^ , () nil 

contrast, other materials suggest the Pulahan political views un ,( It( ^ ^ powers 

loyalty, anger at local injustices, or simple personal ambition: c,,u ‘j* 1 . .hut 

of Pulahan warlord Enrique Dagohob (Andres Vi I Iasi s) mamtanut 1 |,,f| ( )us 

fought the government because he wished to he a king. As widi n,K,I j^ ^ ^ ,iion 

connection to the Dios Dios, great caution must be excrc ised m 1 1 
alist or revolutionary ideology to the Pulahancs. ^ lu ir 

The limited data on the Pulahan leadership provide few clues cM 1 nne 

earlier affiliation or their goals. Lists of suspected Pulahan chiefs revea 1 
from pueblos throughout the island; judging from the repetition of sl,,n ^ | cU . r _ 
milial connections, at least among the junior officers, played a major u> L [ ), 0 s 
mining participation. 13 As noted, some of the Pulahan officers bad been 
chiefs. Others, such as Teducduc (Cipriano Amango) and ( )toy (Isidio 

Had refused to surrender in 1902. Instead they journeyed to the bcac 
the Gandara River to meet Pope Pablo and, with his blessing, established a stI ° n b 
hold in southeastern Samar and began looting and kidnapping in die siiiioiinc m^ 
municipalities. 14 Pedro de la Cruz, described as the “recognized chief of die fight 
ing force of the Pulajanes and second to the religious chief. Papa Pablo, was icput 
edly an escaped criminal from the Camarines. ,c> Dagohob, a brigand converted bv 
Pope Pablo and given a Pulahan colonelcy, commanded a community at Mas log at 
the headwaters of the Oras and Dolores rivers, where he “soon m ade himself mas- 


\\ IV 1 ‘ M ) S i lie- I urn 


1 1 war. 


I n 


558 


ter of tli.it region In reason of his cruelties, his arms, and his power of organ- 
ization. 

\ n tuallv nothing is know n ot either the rank and-tilc membership or o t the 
degree to which thev reflected [Popular aspirations, louring the height ot the 
Pula ha nes strength in 1 4) () a 1 ^OS, whole v i Hashes joined the movement, and bands 
numbering in the hundreds participated in pitched battles with the colonial an- 
th oritics. A tier the l .S. Armv intervened, these bands shrank to a much smaller 
and more dedicated core ot mobile guerrillas. \ studv of Pulahanes in one district 
m mid LM)S revealed a primary group under Cemcio Li/arra with 0 followers, 
another captain with a() followers, and several smaller bands ot between four and 
eight members. Wt armv officers soon learned that even in areas which appeared 
quiet, dozens ot rebels could appear almost overnight: the band w hich attacked the 
village of C atubig m l l )()(> was composed of former Pulahanes who had surren- 
dered and had remained at peace for a vear before but who suddenly concentrated 
to pillage a rival town. \ derails stressed that one of the most frustrating aspects ot 
the campaign was the ‘expansibility of the pulajan forces, due either to variations 
in popular sentiment or to impressment of recruits. 

In contrast to the silence of the Pulahanes themselves, the colonial authori- 
ties offered a number of explan. u ions for their conduct. Por some, the term 
Pulahan soon became a convenient catch-phrase for brigands, smugglers, political 
opponents, and even dissidents on other islands. This vagueness appears to have 
been shared by the inhabitants: one officer reported that manv who admitted to be 
Pulahanes believed the term meant “mountaineer. Fortunately, the American co- 
lonial government, and many soldiers, subscribed to a more humane explanation: 
the Pulahanes were ignorant backwoodsmen who had taken up arms against op- 
pression. I his v iew was first articulated in September 1 c )04 bv Henrv 1. Allen, vet- 
eran of the fighting in Samar in 1 c )()() and now the chief' of' the Philippine Con- 
stabulary: “Pulajanism seems to be a resentment of the Mountain people against 
Lowland people, of the cultivators of' the soil against the tow ns' people [sic] who 
purchase their products, for real or fancied oppression, expressed in the only way 
which they are acquainted. There are always agitators who profit by this discontent 
to urge these ignorant people on to barbarous deeds. The fanaticism of these people 
is .list > exploited to its ultimate limits, with the result that when a town is attacked 
th e most horrible atrocities are committed. Corbins successor to Philippine 
command, Cencral Leonard Wood, maintained that the causes of Pulahanism were 
“purely local, and lav in the “oppression of the poor people by local caciques and 
“the result of unfair treatment of the mountain people by the people of the coast, 
and are in no way incident to the American occupation. "'' I he colonial govern- 
ment also insisted the Pulahanes were essentially innocent victims: Io many the 

word “pulahan" is synonymous with that of bandit or robber... [but the] pulahanes 
of Leyte and Samar can hardly be called robbers or thieves. Indeed, as a rule the 
pulahan is hard working, industrious, and not at all disposed to violence unless 
impelled to it by long continued wrongs or by the potent influence of religious 


THH PHIIJI'I'IN! HI- VC >1 I I U >' . 


p.u ifi 
v. .mil 
.» sr r a\ 

1 1 i t \ i c 


. 01 1 i 


’tulip 


n tfu* in 
mst.int I v 

. ill.u;c' or 
..ini \st*rc* 
... i iiiUl i>c 
n 1 \\ ( Ullci 
, )f he mu 


U’CIII 


fanaticism.” 24 True or not, this shared perception pro 
cation program based on conciliating Samar popul 
order. Convinced that the sectarians were “good ;>- •< 
by brigands and religious charlatans, the colom.i. a ; 
retaliatory and vindictive policies that had o< < urn <: 
pine-American War. 

Because they could not grow sufficient food in 
hospitable and devastated interior, r he 1'ulahane v. : 
for food, plunder, and agricultural workers. Band 

town, often after warning it to have food read.; thru upon : . 

known to be hostile to the movement, such as men ham <>r 
punished. The town would then be looted and the uaUent n u <■* •• 
have participated in the looting, might he given tin i.o; <,t |oun 
punished themselves. The raid by C ’ommandante 1 u a Bu a o.n ■: 
men and 150 bolo-men in June 1906 mi the barrio of Mat>a< m.r. t *' 

After firing a few shots to scare people, Bwsas followrt robbed - ' *1 

lected 34 houses and the church for burning, but left union bed tiu 
friends and relatives. During this attack, many of the town 
Pulahanes. 25 Without strong evidence to the contrary, it 

the wide fluctuations in popular participation indicate that «omemp«»raiK 
correct when they stated that most followers were less mtetesu <i in 
millennial kingdom or national independence than in avenging person. i 
securing loot, and participating in group violence. 

Of more immediate concern to the colonial authorities than the I 1 1 1 ■ * ,,llK 
religious or political beliefs was their skill in irregular warfare. I lie sec tat i.n' s 
tics were, in the words of one veteran, “based upon the principle <>f iecl\h ss s.i ^ ^ 
ficeofabigportionofthccommandinordcrth.it the rcinaindet m.iy llUl " 
the enemy in a hand-to-hand fight.” I heir intelligence w< is exc ell en t : go\ c t n me ^ 
patrols going into the hill country were closely tracked by advance pickc ts. ^ 11 

runners and carabao horns notified other bands of the local ion and strength <>• 1 K 

enemy. If the patrol was too strong, the Pulahanes vvo uld scatter and reform at a 
designated rendezvous. 2 * If the patrol was weak or careless, the I’ulahanes won c 
set up an ambush, something at which they excelled. Taking advantage <>f s - ,mai s 
dense foliage, the cazMclores would creep up almost literally to their enemies Icct. 
Generally, they used their few rifles only for diversion, filing until the solclcts 
formed into open order and then attacked with their bolos “in a compact mass, 
completely overwhelming by force of numbers, any that may oppose them. ' * 1C 
results were deadly: one combined Scout and Constabulary patrol bad just crossed 
a river when it was halted by gunfire in the front. As it began to spread out i<> deal 
with the enemy snipers, a bugle sounded “and the brush and trees around i lie- 
troops began to crackle and break with the rush of the bolo-men, who came forth 
from the defenses. I he bolo-men cut the column in half, butchering the porters 
and forcing the patrol to retreat. 30 In another instance, a C Constabulary patrol with 


t < > I C s . 

>1 

i f i h.il >i t .m ( s l< h mct 1 i tic 
t f< t« . assume that 

\s cr c 
stT in mg .1 

i n ) 1 1 s i k 


560 


several women prisoners in name eanocs was hreel at irom one sule of the n\er. 
When the patrol n.uklleel to the other hank, the women overtur tied the canoes and 
the helpless polue were slauejiteied h\ waiting Polo men. \ C onstahulary detach- 
ment. returmiu; to u\o\er the Bodies. was tucel on from the front. and upon form- 
ing and .kIv.uk ini; to att.K k. was striu k in the flanks In cone caled holo men with 
disastrous results. 

Pulahan amhiishinu skills led \la|or I r.mklm S. I lutton to warn his superi- 
ors: 


It must he- tememhered that unless vou lia\e cwccdmgh accurate mtot 
mation the pulajans \\ ill always e house the pl.Kc w here an att.K k w ill take plaee 
uul this renders cautious movements at all times ver\ nevessarv. I he attack w ill 
usualh consist ol firing into the column horn front oi rear immcdiatclv tol 
lowed hv a rush of holo men who will jump through the column from oik* oi 
both flanks from high grass or thic k cover, sometimes vv ith the idea of dividing 
the column into two sections. I he holo men usualh do not stop hut elo dam 
hv a quick rush atul then get away. 


Believing that they would he reincarnated w ithin three daws of their deaths, 

the Bill thanes fought w ith a courage and ferocity w hich impressed the veteran 

. • frnnps C 'onstahularv chief Allen, with almost a decade of campaign c\- 

American • . . , , , . . MI ... . r ^ 

• in the archipelago, concluded that no people in the Philippines, not c\- 

^ > the \loros, have shown more deadly work with the holo than have the 

lmir."' 1 Clcnn.ird Me l aughlin witnessed a soldier split from his 

nicHint.u ncc s ■ ■ i i i i 1 * \t . . . 

i ■ u, | <s h\ .1 simile holo stroke. lieutenant Norman C.ook wrote 
shoulder to l' ls huttos k 

of' one encounter: 

, . | less ness ol the pulajanes in exposing themselves to our fire was 
I eh iraeteri/ed as ainthing hut the sublimation ol reli- 

such that is cannot 

i C )ne pulajane stood on the top of the trench about 00 yards 


mous fanaticism 


• ihlc. pointing a stick or his finger at us and evidently waiting 


•d him with a shot from my pistol. One of the 
, n()t ] s feet f rom our lines was a hoy not over 1 1 years of age. 


from me. immov 
for it to ex 

pulajane _ ^ ^ " ho stabbed I t. (.Instill, although shot ^ 

.•mire charge of buckshot in him was still 
on I t. t iu.stin when (C iustin ] reloaded his shot gun and blew 


armed with a table knife, he one ....... ... 

i c.,pln..fields and with one entire charge of buckshot in him was still 
times witn op» t (y , . , , j Jl: t j ] y 

trying to crawl up 1 

out his hrains. 


As long as they had .sufficient bolo-men, Pulahan tactics were devastating, es- 
pecially when applied against the ill-trained Filipino troops armed with antiquated 

single-shot rifles. 

for almost two years after the surrender of the revolutionary leadership the 
colonial administration had paid little attention either to discontent within the 


tut mil n-r-r 


towns or skirmishing in the motmr.nr. I 
isolated mountains and the JOO man f’hi : : 
pea red to have the situation under < ontro. 
ness of the Pulahan threat was not hill r - ’ 

too great to be handled by ( onsr.tliui.tr 

Although the official date of the • <■' 

1904, the first major clash oteurret Urno.r ‘ • 
Constabulary officer Rufus \1< < rr , , .m<l 
300 Pulahanes under Pedro dr la < ru/ m 
stables were killed; the rest escaped by jumpm ' 
their way to Borongan, garrisoned by flu '»'»*• 

36ths commander then violated Ins order 
provincial governor, and dispatched a relief p ,fr " 
the Pulahanes and recovered the munkifrd bodn 
next few months, Constabulary patrols en •nit.’ 
there was an upsurge in brigandage and raiding 
In response to the growing disorder in ,M 
in constabulary reinforcements, ext rac red m nr< ! 
a grudging Brigadier C General William I i ( ,rr ' r 
ofVisayas, and urged Samar’s munic ipal gover turn n 
unteer militia. These measures achieved litth I h r ' (,i (t ‘ 
too widely dispersed, too poorly armed, and 


\ ) .1 1 .i ' 


. r n « 


. : r n t he 

ap 

sc r i « ui\- 
»r t ions 

/ 1 luK 
% v. ben 
] to 
»ur c on 
miking 
n s I lie 
mg tlic 
j% \sith 
I n t be 
r i t arul 


, if I »t ■ tugbi 


1 1 r 


.If 1 K* s 


t f om 


tmiM.irit! 


| ) ( oat t merit 

f o for m ar m< d batul s * 

KKC1C t<><> s,,Kl11 * 

, , | |w \ blnn- 

mjo la< k i Hi' m din t r ion 

i t lM is and 

dered through the countryside, exhausting tlirmv m r !f 1,1 ^ a 

jungles, falling victim to mantraps and, occasionally '-arid >i -b< • ■ j n ^ mtf f orvc 


mixed scout and constabulary patrol was virtual ly ’an m Inlatc d and a r ^ ^ \\ x \^ 

was badly mauled. Another combined scout and c oust. ibulai \ f (,rcc ana ^ c . xU . n 

Bulans reputed headquarters in thcCandara Valley m S< pn mix n fm^ p lI( no 
sive buildings and storehouses capable of supporting S00 | U< T C r 

Pulahanes/ 7 Then, on 9 November, Sergeant Ccrbara led a patml <> - I() \ sn \ 

the 38th Company to the town of Oras on the eastern toast i<> -‘ssisi i u 
militia against an expected Pulahan attack. Instead, when the I’ulaliam ^ 

the town, the Oras militia and many of the townspeople turned <>n t K ^ . t . |n 

Eighteen scouts were killed and the town was loot ed and hmned. t )n I ^ 

ber a Scout patrol under Lt. Stephen I layt was annihilated near I )agoho ■> s 
quarters at Maslog on the Dolores River. Irustratcd scout officers notci < ^ 

obeying the rules of engagement, Hayt had doomed his command by his n lls ‘* to 
fire until certain that the attackers, who included women and children, weic not 
friendly volunteers or refugees. 

In these quick victories the Pulahanes demonstrated the weakness of gosctu 
ment power on the island, secured some 50 firearms, and now appeared bn ' n - 
cible, little short of supernatural. ” w Dozens of new bands, many with only the 
slightest connection to the original Pulahanes, began looting and pillaging; thou- 
sands of Samarenos either joined the movement openly or protected themselves by 


562 


I INN lo V; All /.«/«• Drawer 

furnishing food and information. Bv the end of RMM, manv of the colonial forces 
were demoralized, much of the north and east of Samar was under Pulahan con- 
trol. and the island was verging on anarchv. Allen was strongly criticized; even his 
usually supportive superior, \\ . C ameron Forbes, complained of his “lack of ap- 
preciation of the seriousness of the situation. 

1 he \ irtual collapse of authority in so much of the province at last convinced 
the civil go\ eminent that the Pulahancs were a significant threat and led it to de- 
mand immediate reinforcements. In what must surely have been a humiliating 
step, the c i\ il government called on the army tor support. By 2 January 1 there 
were l )()l) C ’.onstabularv, "'00 Philippine Scouts, and tour companies of the 1-tth 
Infantry in Samar. The scouts were assigned to patrol the Candara River and the 
eastern mountains; the infantry took station at coast towns designated as supply 
centers tor the troops in the interior. 

1 he arrival of American troops created a minor controversy over their use. 
( icneral ( al ter, in charge of l \S. Armv forces in the Samar area, urged the “active 
participation" of his troops in a “campaign against those in arms against [the] gov- 
ernment. ' However, the commander of I’.S. Armv forces in the Philippines, 
Major C icneral 1 lenrv C . C orbin, envisioned a much smaller role: his 3 January 
l l )()S orders declared the Americans were “a supporting force t o the native troops 
that, under the direction of the civil govr [sic] are engaged in subduing the hostile 
pulajancs. It will be the special duties of these cos. to protect loval natives in the 
neighborhood of their respective camps, encouraging the people to build houses 
and resume their accustomed vocations. Corbin outlined strict rules of engage- 
ment for the Samar contingent: “Our troops w ill not, unless otherwise ordered by 
me, take an aggressive part in the campaign. Phev will however be instructed to 
repel an attack made upon them bv the hostilcs and not onlv repel but to follow* 
and administer punishment to the limit of their ability to do so. Phis instruction 
applies not only to actual but threatened attacks. However, commanding officers 
were to inform the population that the army would stay until the island was paci- 
fied: “this is onlv the beginning of our work, that it will be followed to any extent 
that the misbehavior of these people [Pulahancs] make it necessary. Corbins 
orders were consonant with American postwar counterinsurgency practices. Ag- 
gressive military operations were to be conducted by Filipinos, with American 
troops handling logistics and providing an immediate reserve if needed.* 

Arriving again in Samar in January 1 C H)3, Constabulary chief Allen took over 
personal direction of the campaign. He played an active role in military operations, 
leading expeditions into the interior and, by his own account, using his shotgun 
with telling effect. ‘‘ His charismatic leadership revived the constabulary s flagging 
spirits and infused them with new determination. Strategically, he followed the 
garrison-and-sweep policies that the American army had developed in its eailier 
conflict against the revolutionaries. He placed garrisons of scout and constabulary 
companies in several interior towns to protect townspeople and prevent the 
Pulahanes from receiving supplies, l ie also stopped using small detachments foi 


563 


THK PHII.II'fMNh KhVOl.l l U . V.l > 1 : 


long-range patrols — a practice that had led to the < )r.i .nui i >«» 
coes — and instead concentrated his troops into mobile <>\ m.:. 
mountains in search of Pulahan strongholds. 

Convinced that many Samarenos had taken up arm in v. 
ated a number of measures to sepa. itc the rank and file from 
February 1905 , in view of the deceit and force that h c.t be ■ ; ' 1 
large number of individuals of Samar, thereby causing ri : m - i 

pulajanes,” he issued a limited amnesty. All Pulahan less- r rani. 
return to their villages and accept civil authority would b : • * <’. n:ai r.ww . 

lower-ranking officers could obtain immunity by surrenderin'/ : * 
time, Allen authorized liberal rewards for the capture or kill my « »t i « n : 

Moreover, he took practical steps to remove the mju ru 
Pulahanism, ordering the constabulary to investigate and <>ri t abu 
nected with trade in the interior. . /This is equally as important « ‘I > n 1 r 1 1 " u 1 
ers and getting their guns.”*'' With the support of the Philippi nc ( om m i n *i iu 
began construction of telegraph lines and planned a road across s.imu mat s-. otiid 
end the mountaineers’ isolation, provide jobs for the destitute , ami i loops 

access to the interior. 

In what would become an increasingly significant pan of the government' 
strategy, Allen sought to mobilize Samarenos against sectarianism. In |.inuai\. be 
wrote his wife that he visited the towns on the east coast , harangu i ng t be pe <>plc ot 
every town to instill enough courage in them to refuse the Pulajan assaults that 
spare neither age nor sex.”* 7 With the assistance of a new governor, ( woige ( mi\. 
Allen purged Samar’s civic officials, reprimanding or removing the* excessive l\ coi 
rupt and inefficient. 48 Symptomatic was their visit to I.anang where* tlu \ weie 
greeted by 300 volunteers organized by Amos Hill, who had selected as mcmbe is 
of this force only those who are property owners. 1 he I .anang volun t cci s had built 
stockades and mantraps for protection and had made frequent expeditions into the 
countryside, defeating a Pulahan band and bringing in 400 people from the lulls 
and confining them. 49 Both in their composition and activities, the I .anang \ c >1 u n 
teers reflected the internecine nature of the conflict. C Commanded by an Amei ican 
and composed of the privileged, they not only defended their town but pan oiled 
the countryside and occasionally forcibly relocated mountaineers within theii 
municipality’s boundaries. Although this policy created great hardship, there is vit- 
tually no evidence to support one author’s claim: “With women, children, and 
infirm old people forcibly removed, constables and soldiers shot or arrested cvci\ 
adult male they encountered in the back country.’ 

Under Allen’s leadership, the tempo of war increased; the first six months of 
1905 saw a series of bitter battles. 1 he colonial forces attacked I )agohob s camps 
on three separate occasions between 8 January and 1 8 February. 1 Profiting from 
earlier disasters, the troops inflicted devastating casualties on the sectarians. At 
Mount Fayo on 3 February a force estimated at between 500 and 1 ,500 Pulahanes 
launched ferocious assaults on a scout patrol but were driven off. I he scouts killed 


564 


I INN lo All Lm m Prft.WiY 


over SO bolo men and lost onlv two wounded. On 28 February another patrol, 
ambushed in hit^h cogon grass, killed over a hundred Pulahanes. Other expeditions 
were not so lortun.iie. On 21 Man. h, a combined force ot constabulary and scouts 
launched an attack on a Pulahan town near Catubig. Alter crossing a river, the 
troops found the v illage mu rounded bv bamboo obstacles and trenches and began 
taking smpei Inc. Suddenly, a bugle sounded cease tire and Dagohobs bolo-me'n 
swept into the column, killing tom ot the soldiers and driving the rest back in a 
harrow mi; hom long fighting retreat, l he survixors were impressed with 
l )agohoh s tactics and xx it 1 1 the - ferov.it v ot his en£*jd(>re>* and were not hesitant in 
saving that he is a soldiei and a fighter. 

b\ Ma\ ol 1 1 H ) A % Mien had developed a relativelv comprehensive pacifica- 
tion program, but had come under increasing pressure to turn Samar over to the 
l .S. Manx. Optimistic to a fault, he had predicted a quick victorv over the 
I ulahanes and the i.ipid ielea.se* ot all Scouts and American Regulars from the 
Samai t he ate i. 1 nstc ad. hc‘ was toiecd to request more and more assistance from the 
nn 1 1 1 a i \, w ho wlk diawn into an iiKreasingb active role. in February, Corbin re- 
moved most of the restrictions govern ini; the use of American soldiers: “Scouts and 
( onstabulai \ should be used as far as possible. but w hen hostiles are located and 
are defiant no t ime w ill be lost m their punishment and if no other troops are avail- 
able youi ieguku force's w ill l^c* used for this [impose. In a clarifying note, C orbin 
told ( artei that whenever large forces of Pulahanes were found every one at hand 
handy with a gun should join in the work. ’ 1 he armvs increased responsibilities 
fueled C alters claims that Samar should be placed under militarv authoritv. 
( alters aide. Lieutenant Albert \\ . foreman, toured Samar and found conditions 
far worse th an Allen had reported. Although Charter was on firm ground in dis- 
crediting Allens unrealistic claims, he was also repaying a personal grudge: Allen 
had used his influence to denv Charter the prestigious governorship of the Mom 
Provinces, lo make matters worse, Allen was roundlv criticized in a lorn; article by 
Manila Times journalist Stanley P 1 lvatt. ss 

In his short tenure as chief Of the constabulary, Allen had engaged in numer- 
ous squabbles with militarv superiors and had abvays prevailed by appealing to his 
civil authorities. But in the Samar campaign his arrogance, overoptimism, and fail- 
ures had alienated the powerful officials who had previously supported him. In 
particular his direct supervisor. Secretary of Commerce and Police W. Cameron 
Forbes, believed Allen had “misjudged the situation grossly and the result was the 
cost of many hundred lives. He should have put a couple of thousand men in 
Samar at that time [August 1904] and crushed the thing."*' 6 lhe deployment of 
some 2,000 scouts and constabulary to Samar had stripped the rest of the archi- 
pelago of internal security forces, and la drones soon resumed their depredations, 
raiding all the way to the outskirts of Manila. Desperate to extricate himself from 
the Pulahan quagmire, on 23 May Allen turned over responsibility for the east 
coast and much of the interior to his rival CarterA Little more than a week later, 
on 2 June, the governor-general formally requested that the military authorities 

s6s 


THh Will HUM Hi Vc )I f 


( >r 


to mot 


r i.is - 
t he 




i >: i JO 

. p*»n .1 

ssiti .In 

du-d to 
minus . 
i c same 
huts. 

, ic.it ci 1 
s v on 
i * Ic.ui 

( I »IllfIllNNl* Ml. he 
S.irn.ir t hat v. oiiUl 
.inti .dims troops 


• 1 \ 


alMis< 

1(11111! 


long-range patrols — a practice that had led to 0 
coes — and instead concentrated his troops in 
mountains in search of Pulahan stronghold- 

Convinced that many Samarchos had t.ik- n ;:> ... - 
ated a number of measures to sepa ite the rank and ? 

February 1905, “in view of the deceit and lorce that 
large number of individuals of Samar, therelv, . 
pulajanes,’ he issued a limited amnesty. All I’ulahat: 
return to their villages and accept civil authorit . <> 

lower-ranking officers could obtain immunii;. b\ nrr- i 
time, Allen authorized liberal rewards for the < aptn," <>r 
Moreover, he took practical steps to retnose th- 
Pulahanism, ordering the constabulary to inw.tij.Mt 
nected with trade in the interior. .. This isetjuall;, as import > ' 
ers and getting their guns. With the support of the I’lnlipp ■ ■ 
began construction of telegraph lines and planned a u i.i f i it r < > ss 
end the mountaineers’ isolation, provide johs for th< d< »umr< 
access to the interior. 

In what would become an increasingly sigmf ic .mt pa r t < ^ r 1 11 po * t i m i u n 
strategy, Allen sought to mobilize Samarenos against \ct tar lanisin. I fl I ,fM1 n 
wrote his wife that he visited the towns on the east c* >ast haranguing 1 I u ‘ *P 
every town to instill enough courage in them to refuse- rlu I'ulajan * |ss ' lll ^ ls 
spare neither age nor sex.” 4 With the assistance of a new governor, ( ,C(M P ( lI,n ’ 
AJlen purged Samar’s civic officials, reprimanding or removing t he cxe t ssi\ c K 
rupt and inefficient. 48 Symptomatic was their visit ro I.anang vdicic X 
greeted by 300 volunteers organized by Amos I iill, who had selected as me ml e 
of this force only those who are property owners. I lie Lan a ng volume e r s had 
stockades and mantraps for protection anel bad made f reepien r ex peel i i i (,lls 1 n 1 ( ) 1 lc 
countryside, defeating a Pulahan band and bringing in 400 people from ihe hi 
and confining them. Both in their composition and act i vi t ics, the I .ana ng \ ( )hi n 
teers reflected the internecine nature of the conflict. Commanded by an American 
and composed of the privileged, they not only defended their town but patrolled 
t e countryside and occasionally forcibly relocated mountaineers within theit 
municipality’s boundaries. Although this policy created great hardship, there is vir- 
tually no evidence to support one authors claim: “With women, children, and 
infirm old people forcibly removed, constables and soldiers shot or arrested every 
adult male they encountered in the back country.” 

U n d er Allen’s leadership, the tempo of war increased; the first six months of 
saw a series of bitter battles. The colonial forces attacked DagoholVs camps 
separate occasions between 8 January and 1 8 Febru ary. Profiting from 
sasters, the troops inflicted devastating casualties on the sectarians. At 
. Ul ] * t , a ^° ° n ^ ^ e ^ r uary a force estimated at between 500 and 1 ,500 Pulahanes 
ec erocious assaults on a scout patrol but were driven off. I lie scouts killed 


564 


ll\\ /,» V; 1..'/.;:. .irDrfij'hr 

o\cr 5o bolo nun and lost onl\ two wounded. On 2S February another patrol, 
ambushed in high u>t;on grass, killed over a hundred Pulahanes. Other expeditions 
we ic not so tor tunate. t hi 2 1 Man h. a combined force of constabulary and scouts 
Iauiuhcu an attack on a Pukihan town near C atubig. After crossing a river, the 
troops found the tillage suirouiulcd In bamboo obstacles and trenches and began 
taking snipci tin SuddcnU. a bugle sounded cease fire and Dagohobs bolo-men 
s\scpt into the column, killing lour of the soldiers and driving the rest back in a 
harrowing Hour long lighting retreat. 1 he survivors were impressed with 
I )agohobs tactics and with the terouiv ol his i a^idorc > % and were “not hesitant in 
saving that he is a soldier and a tighter. 

In Mav ol MM5, Mien had developed a relatively comprehensive pacifica- 
tion program, but had some under increasing pressure to turn Samar over t s'* the 
l .S. \rmv. Optimistic to a fault, he had predicted a quick victory over the 
Pulahanes and the rapid release ot all Scouts and American Regulars from the 
Sumut theater. Instead, he was toiccd to request more and more assistance from che 
military, who were drawn into an increasingly active role. In hebruarw Corbin re- 
moved most ol the rest ru t tons governing the use of American soldiers: “Scouts and 
( .onstabulary should be used as far as possible, but when hostiles are located and 
are defiant no time will be k>st in their punishment and if no other troops are avail- 
able your regular forces w ill be used for this purpose. In a clarifying note, Corbin 
told ( arter that w henever large forces of Pulahanes were found “every one at hand 
handy w ith a gun should join in the work.""* I he army's increased responsibilities 
fueled ( alters claims that Samar should be placed under military authority. 
( .al ter s aide, 1 icutcnant Albert \\ . foreman, toured Samar and found conditions 
far worse th an Allen had reported. Although Carter was on firm ground in dis- 
crediting Allens unrealistic claims, he was also repaving a personal grudge: Allen 
had used his influence to deny Carter the prestigious governorship of the Mom 
Provinces, lo make matters worse, Allen was roundly criticized in a long article by 
Manila /////^journalist Stanley P. I lvatt. ss 

In his short tenure as chief of the constabulary, Allen had engaged in numer- 
ous squabbles with military superiors and had always prevailed bv appealing to his 
civil authorities. But in the Samar campaign his arrogance, overoptimism, and fail- 
ures had alienated the powerful officials who had previously supported him. In 
particular his direct supervisor, Secretary of Commerce and Police W. Cameron 
Forbes, believed Allen had “misjudged the situation grossly and the result was the 
cost of many hundred lives. He should have put a couple of thousand men in 
Samar at that time [August 1904] and crushed the thing. ” s<> The deployment of 
some 2,000 scouts and constabulary to Samar had stripped the rest of the archi- 
pelago of internal security forces, and ladrones soon resumed their depredations, 
raiding all the way to the outskirts of Manila. Desperate to extricate himself from 
the Pulahan quagmire, on 23 Mav Allen turned over responsibility for the east 
coast and much of the interior to his rival CarterT Little more than a week later, 
on 2 June, the governor-general formally requested that che military authorities 

565 


mKF'HIlH'HM KF.VOM No'. • 




“putanend to the conditions of disorder in tho\ p<»n 
disaffected. 


I he 


The army immediately committed men md r 

1905 the entire 21st Infantry, three companies of tL (r l: 

niesofthe 12th Infantry were all serving on the ; .«: : \ 

boats and two steam launches ferried troops and -up; 
directed artillery and machine-gun fire against Puiah.m 
most significant, the army reequipped its nine S, o it <>r : 

magazine rifles, providing them with the firepower to i ate 

Carter was also fortunate in obtaining an immediate an<: • * ' • ' 
tured documents having revealed t lie location of 1 Jagome- 
picked force of the 21st Infantry and the ^8tli < ornpu \’i 
tacked the Pulahan chief, killing him and over a hundred of h i t* » • ‘ » v 
competent of the sect commanders, I Xigohob c ouhi in spin ‘ r * 

forces of bolo-men, and this had given the Pula bane « brief t n i i it a : ‘ I 1 ■ 

the outnumbered and poorly armed colonial forces. NXith in death • 
cazadores who had v/reaked such havoc on the colonial ton /• !,InKr u l’ " ;l< 
bands commanded by such lesser figures as I>usa and I a/aiia 

As during the earlier operations against the revolutionary P M> * <,n ll * st 
vice in the same area reaped unexpected benefits for mil if ar \ < >p< 1 •* M< ,n ( ’ 1 ! 1 ‘ ,n 
officers in isolated towns formed personal contacts and ioui<i now nt 111,1 S P KS * 

guides, and volunteers. Months of campaigning taught dun troops how to a\onl 

traps and ambushes, to preserve their heal t h, and to bee oine as f a m 1 1 ia i w i d 1 P‘ l 1 ^ 1 s 
and trails as the Pulahanes themselves. 

Concurring with the government s belief t hat most Piilali.inc suck m\<)lun 

tary conscripts or misguided peasants, the army devoted much attention I( > sc P- 1 

rating noncombatants from the hard-core resisters. I he mil it ary am I m >m t u s min 


hap 


( ap 

une a 
[s. at 

m< >st 
la i tie 
with 

f c I < K It >1 I s * 

mal let 


ated a number of civil-action projects to witi over the populat ion , bung u ( i ige c s in 
from the mountains, and deprive the Pulahanes of supplies and manpower lo 
prevent the abuses that had sparked the civilians’ initial flight, post oil k ers dist rib 
uted land to the refugees, encouraged crop cultivation, and punished son upt ion. 
1 he army also engaged in a number of public- works projects: at ( >ra s, for exam [dc , 
soldiers helped rebuild the town and in one month distributed 2.72K pounds of 
flour, 2,100 pounds of beans, and 1 5,260 pounds of rice to dest it ute bilipinos. I he 
army also benefited from the help of Governor (airry, and from a citizens com- 
mittee of such experienced former revolutionaries as Hugcnio S. 1 )a/a, brancisco 
Abuke, and Claro Guevarra. I hese men had fought the Americans for Philippine 
independence Daza was the mastermind behind the attack on Balangiga but 
the threat the Pulahanes posed to order and property was enough to make them 
ally with their former enemies. The committee raised several volunteer units com- 
posed of men intimately familiar with the island’s terrain. Armed and stippl iccl by 
the government, the volunteers hunted down Pulahanes in their previously mac- 
cessible hideouts. They not only guided the colonial forces, they participated in 


566 




I INN lb V; All Luc .ir Prfunur 

bloodv skirmishes themselves. I his combination ot militarv action, social re- 
form. and popular participation yielded impressive results: hv 1 August, nearlv 
• Samaretios had presented themselves to the authorities, and hv the end of 

the vear C arter reported that "peace and t raiK]uillitv had been thoroughlv restored 
and the uprising which had commenced eighteen months before might fairlv be 
said to be at an end. 

hv earl\ LM)6, the time looked auspicious tor the civil government to nego- 
tiate the surrender ot the remaining sectarians. 1 he hulahanes were clearlv in 
trouble. Armv garrisons stopped them from plundering towns; militarv and vol- 
unteer patrols harried them, attacked their camps, and prevented them from grow- 
ing crops. 1 orced to disperse into small groups to search tor food, thev could no 
longer summon the large forces of bolo-men which alone could break through the 
militarv screen and into the rich coastal towns. Prisoners reported that hulahanes 
were dving of starvation; at one abandoned camp troops found cvcrv tree in a one 
mile radius had been stripped ot its edible foliage." 

( Confident that the rebellion was on its last legs, C urrv arranged for negotia- 
t ions to be conducted at a barrio so small and insignificant it was not even shown 
on most maps Magtaon, or Mactoan, roughlv 5 miles inland from the east-coast 
town of San |uhan as the* site of negotiations. 1 he armv garrison was withdrawn 
and replaced by a C onstabulary unit, and Pulahan bands, including those of Otov 
and leducduc, concentrated in the Magtaon vallev. On 2a March, C urrv, a C 'on- 
stabulary honor guard and a host of visitors prepared tor the surrender ceremonies. 

I he sectarians tiled in, looked at the crowds, and then suddenlv attacked, killing 
22 constables, capturing several rifles, and disappeared into the jungle. Currv, who 
himself had narrowly escaped being boloed, notified militarv commanders that "in 
vour operations outside the towns and barrios vou mav kill anvone you have rea- 
son to [believe] a pulahan''; those who were members of the "Magtaon band were 
to be "exterminated. 

C 'lose on the heels of the Magtaon fiasco came two other tragedies. 1 he first 
of these is well documented and therefore allows for a rare case study of the dy- 
namics of the Pulahan uprising. On O April 006, the scout captain at the town 
of Catubig heard that former Pulahan chiefs had recruited a 50-man band in the 
neighboring village of Poponton. [ he town militia of Catubig, 200 strong, set out 
to investigate, but was attacked and routed by the Poponton band on 22 April. I he 
victors then returned to loot and burn Poponton and took to the hills. Lieutenant 
Hmil Speth and a scout patrol pursued them, only to discover that they had surren- 
dered to the civil authorities. A sharp confrontation ensued between Speth, who 
demanded the culprits, and Sheriff W. D. Corn, who announced that Governor 
Curry had authorized him to accept surrenders and that he would not be a trator 
[sic] to them, although they may be murders [sic]. (>t 1 he Scouts withdrew, but 
Speth's superior. Major Hugh 1). Wise, made a formal protest: Mercy and com- 
passion are wasted on cut-throats like these and it is a grave injustice to the peace- 
ably inclined natives to allow these bandits to go at large among them. Seeing no 


THfcP MI! IPPIM VOI I mm v 


justice meted out to such offenders is an inducement * * 

ample and is consequently an invitation of future rr«, 

Besides its revelation of civil-military confii r th P< : 
fill for the light it sheds on the Pulahancs themse! . r P : 

Dagohobs strongholds during the troubles of 1*0 * • ;* 

Pulahan leaders had surrendered and apparent!*, rerur* : * ; 

Consequently, the sudden reappearance of a hand at P<»; 

tentially explosive nature of supposedly pacified areas Inc :<■ • ' 

puzzling for their silence about the religious beliefs red r: 

ting usually associated with the Pulahancs, though th-**, d<> in-: •* 

tary organization complete with three generals. A cnrdmr •«» s - 

was no ideological motivation at all; the conflic t w.i < * : : : *• r 

between these people in the Catubig valley. No doubt the Pi im: « t the 

Poponton gang) in Catubig Valley will try to make it v. or 

of them are just as bad. I here are always two sides to < onsnicr m ■ * j f irui 

Factions has (sic) caused all the truble f sic J in Samar and one id< \%i\\ harm, the 
other if they can, and they will murder each other if the\ have u» •«» t«> the hill as 
Pulajanes to do so.” 66 Despite his anger at Corns interfere rue. Ma|«>r \\ i * reed 
that “no cause nor reason for it except resistance to all control m«>ti\.ited the 
Poponton gang/' The extensive data on this incident the re-sub < >t the nil mill 
tary dispute — supports the proposition that mans groups labeled as Pulahancs 
bore no relationship to the sect but were either brigands or c it i/rns engaged in \ cn 
dettas. 

Far more serious events occurred across the San Juamco St ran in I evtc. where 
an increasing number of Pulahan-like groups attacked villages. I lie- term Pulahan 
was immediately applied to the Leytcano dissidents, in part because of dun resem- 
blance to the Samareno movement — both were quasi-rcl igious and headed by 
charismatic visionaries; both wore amulets and uniforms; both drew support from 
mountaineers and were directed at coastal towns; both used similar tauus va 
contemporary and later sources agree there was no direct connection between the 
two uprisings. On 19 June the town of Buraucn was sacked, and in July two 
Constabulary units were ambushed and forced to retreat. The civil government 
then called on the army to send troops sufficient to smother the attack. I he sol- 
diers fought one battle — at Tabon-tabon on 25 July — where the rifle fire- of sol- 
diers and Constabulary smashed a fut ious assault by bolo-men. I hereafter, the 
Leyteano dissidents took to the hills and waged guerrilla war. ’ 

Io the credit of the army, the events at Magtaon, Poponton, and I .eyte did 
not prompt a revival of the harsh measures that had occurred after Balangiga. In 
part this was because the civil government made it abundantly clear that retaliation 
as unacceptable. In the same orders directing that the perpetrators of the 
agtaon attack were to be exterminated, Governor Curry insisted that “great care 
e exercise that innocents do not suffer.” 70 Nor does army correspondence indi- 
cate a widespread desire for repression. Instead, officers soon concluded that the 

568 


j 


MW lo V/ \U l .iu / VZ/./Wir 

rebellion mi was almost mn. Patrols now traveled untouched through the 

b.u Ll.uuK. diHo\ emu; onl\ desolate farms, abandoned huts, and a vountrvside 
de\oid <>t habitation. In \la\ 1 ^1)0. the situation had stabilized enough that most 
\mei u an (mops it tin ned to gai ri soiling the coast, and in lime the Depart men t of 
\ isavas dc\ lai ed nonius esu-rn \imai w as m as p,u it led or settled conditions as at 
am time siiue the insuneoion. I ’lie arms 3 optimism w as justified: between 1 3 
|uih and I K\ embei PM)o. p>\ eminent forces and Samareno volunteers con- 
ducted IS-* exped it ions and spent a total of “~S6 da vs in the field, but killed only -l 9 
Pulahanes Moie important than the casualtv figures was the destruction of the 
Pulahan leadership, kdiicdiic . the leadet of the Magtaon attack, was arrested while 
t rving to negot iate a truce with his former commander, \ ugenio l ">a/a. 1 hat same 
month a volunteet group undei another former revolutionary officer, brancisco 
\buke, attac ked Pope Pablos camp, wounding the Pulahan messiah and killing his 
war leadei. Pedro de la C ru/. Bv the end of the vear the onlv major Pulahan leader 
still m the field was ( )tov. Oto\ took over Bulans religious mantle and assumed the 
title of Papa Pompac, but never managed to revive the movement. In Mav 190~\ 
captives described him as a hunted fugitive who could assemble no more than a 
hundred followers, who never traveled with more than two, and who maintained 
his authoritv bv ruthless executions. Although the pursuit o f this wilv outlaw 
delayed th e of flcial c losing of the campaign until 30 June 100 , bv the end of 1 906 
it was all but finished. 

W ith the exception of the misnamed “Mom W ars, the Pulahan conflict was 
the longest, costliest post conquest campaign of the colonial armv. Between 1904 
and 190 , on Samar alone it required the 1st, l tth, and 3 1st Infantry, detached 
companies from the 6th, 13th, and 3*th lnfantrw and between six and 18 compa- 
nies of the Philippine Scouts. Another four regular companies were stationed on 
Leyte in 1906 and 190”’. Personnel losses were higher than some provincial cam- 
paigns during the conquest: according to one compilation, between 4 September 
1904 and 33 October 1906, soldiers and scouts suffered T 3 combat casualties in 
Samar and another four in I.evtc. Unfortunately, neither the military nor the civil 
government attempted to compile equivalent statistics on casualties among the 
constabulary, Pulahan, or Samareno population; such figures as do emerge are 
highly suspect. * Other costs are even harder to measure. 1 he Pulahanes routinely 
burned towns and destroyed fields, impressing entire populations into forced la- 
bor in the mountains. The government troops also burned houses and fields in an 
attempt to starve out the rebels and drive the hill people into the coastal towns. But 
statistics, even if available, would be an inadequate measure of the widespread de- 
struction and human misery. 

Throughout the campaign, civ il and military officials had agreed that the 
army’s task was to protect the population and to suppress the dissidents. 1 he first 
of these tasks was complicated by the populations ambivalence, if not hostility. I he 
townspeople along the coast were not only to be protected, but also intimidated 
from joining the rebels. In 1 904 and early 1903, when large Pulahan bands roamed 

369 


TUI mil Il'IMM PI VC M I n< v. 


in*' 
i u j 


V* J 


.ills 


i.ir s 


>t ru 
\ t v.l 


: h 


'i 1 1 .1 h.i n 
in tin i ii u - 

1 1 i n f r .ist r ik 
tu t irli and 
< i< » r 4 ii nalc 
i f . 1 1 s < > f \ 1 .i s I < »i* . 1 1 u ! S.Ul 


the island at will, the government encouraged u»v. t 
or rebuild the ancient forts the Spanish had cm t 
increase of colonial forces, the larger coastal town 
instead became swollen with displaced villagers ■. 

Town protection remained an important priori! 
officers often assigned half their forces to local a urr 
in the surrounding barrios, less to find iSilahaties that, 
the government’s power and resolution. Although <>r 
isolated farmers, and although patrols rounded up pc* 
towns were not used as concentration camps. 

The second aspect of army pacification tf « 
forces — was accomplished through the estahhshm to 
rior, extensive patrolling, revised tactics, and the < mat ion 

ture. Most field operations in Samar were condm u<| : pa’r«>l ■■ 

50 men and an equal number of porters. In earl . tr ‘ 

large columns of several hundreds against the se< tartan < ap 

Juan, but the Pulahanes abandoned their camps and rein ••• ' ’ 

Stanley Hyatt remarked, Allens troops march .u v * mn v ,Kl1 

lenge, but five minutes after the last man in t he col um n had « i i u i a h a t u s 

would once again control the interior. When field opera t ions w c i < wan ft r u d 1 1 } 
the army there was a reliance on smaller patrols directed less against [ u 1 jT| ^ 1>n 
gets — such as Pulahan religious centers— than ro pen ct rate i n u > r \ c t \ plate w 1 1 k h 
might afford a hiding place for the Pulajanes and also to keep them umismihK 
moving and in a state of uncertainty to the whereabouts of the troops v. Im b \mII be 
practically on every side of them. 

Contemporaries were well aware that in 1002 atrocities In AmciK.m towes 
in Samar had sullied the reputation of the entire L.S. Army. After the Magiaon 
incident, the Manila Times warned against the sort of retaliation that bad o^ciii reel 
after Balangiga: “If any exterminating is done, there is apt to be t rouble. I >c\ul men 
tell no tales, but they sometimes make an awful smell. Indeed, most evidence 
indicates that officers had concluded that brutal i ty was count eipioductivc. \ Li j oi 
Franklin S. Hutton made the point clearly: “droops in their stations and w hile on 
the march have to use great care that through their actions the natives aic not 
abused or ill-treated. This applies as well to people who are supposed to be hostile 
as it only makes them more hostile and secretive. 

As a result, army policies were relatively humane and sought to avoid punish- 
ing the innocent, as witnessed by Lieutenant Colonel ( a >rncl t us ( >a iclciicr s o i dc*t s. 


In no case, at the present time, should persons who may be m the* bills 
and have not yet come in, be killed, unless by their clothing or manner it be- 
comes apparent they are pulajanes, for it is a well known fact that the peaceable 
inhabitants of many barrios have, by force, been driven from their homes and 
their barrios burned by the pulajanes, in order that they might be made to work 


570 


Defame 


1 !\\ It V: 1/7 Liu-.it 

tor : . iiv \ . 1 1 Ik i food It is t he polu \ ot the t ornnianding (.icncral and the 

( ; . ; ’ i ; . . . : nii'.. :o ; yi these people b.u k into g.unsoncd places and from 
under the ^ » i ; t : - » i of the Pul.ii.m bluets, and when thev present themselves to 
the .mthoimes thev should he well tteated. 

I Ik* campaign I ok cd soldiers to make a number ot adjustments in small- unit 
t.utks to o\eu ome both s.inui s let tain atul the Pulahan tactic ot firing at the ttoni 
ot a column and then tushitu; it Irotn the flanks. 1 he conventional, large-unit for- 
m.uions teo>mmeiulal m the l . V \nm s hifjntn Regulations were not onl\ im- 
practical m grasslands and pingles. the\ were suicidal against opponents who fa- 
vored s lose in fit* lit mg w it h bolos and spears. In Samar, t here were no open t lelds 
tor battle, no eneim lines, often the 1 1 1 s t hint ot danger was the eraekle ot the un- 
derbrush signal mg an imminent bolo i ush. In order to withstand a sudden massed 
assault, ottueis had to develop simple formations that combined tirepowei and 
shock in such a wav that a few voice commands could shift troops from matching 
formation to the defensive oi the attack. 1 quallv important, such formations had 
to insure the protection ot the patrols pack bearing ( porters) who often 

outnumbered the soldiers. 

brom replies submitted to an armv questionnaire, it is clear that b\ 1 C K)0 
there w as a tel at iv e um form it v ot tact ics. On pat rol. soldiers marched in close single 
file the terrain made am other formation impossible —with fixed bayonets and a 
round m the chamber, bach soldier was assigned a number and instructed to 
face either left or right and fire immechatelv upon the first threat, regardless of its 
direction. A small advance guard of five or six men looked for ambushes and su- 
pervised Samareno workers hired, or impressed, to cut trail. 1 he tiir^uiorcs vveic 
placed in the center or distributed throughout the formation. \\ hen attacked, 
thev were supposed to form into a compact mass and stay out of the way. Officers 
tried to move back and forth over the column, keeping their troops closed up and 
insuring their advance and rear guards were always in sight. \\ hen attacking, sol- 
diers formed into a single close-packed skirmish line, and charged forward. lo 
prevent surprise attack, troops commonlv rose before daybreak and stood guaid 
until dawn, then marched through the morning, took a long break at noon, and 
stopped earlv in the afternoon at a suitable campsite with running watei. 1 he\ 
spent the afternoon clearing brush, often constructing a fence of bamboo and 
thorns, before lying down in two rows, rifles loaded and ready, with the porters in 
the middle. 

Perhaps the biggest difficulty to campaigning in Samar was logistics. 1 he 
mountains, rivers, swamps, and jungles imposed enormous constraints on the abil- 
ity of the army to maintain troops in the field. 1 he diaries and correspondence aic 
filled with references to efforts to obtain sufficient bacon, ammunition, medicine, 
and clothing to sustain combat operations. Samar s few commercial poits were far 
from the theater of conflict, and the absence of roads to the interior made them 
useless as staging points. Virtually all supplies had to be off-loaded onto small na- 

571 


THE PHILIPPINE KLVc >M 1 1< r . v.i 


rive dugouts, ferried several miles to a beach and tlu i mi: * 

the river by banca or steamer. 

Soldiers on patrol were sustained by the *0 -pound i* *<: 
or heads, of Samareno cargadores. A ratio of one porter ; 
expeditions under 10 days and two per soldier for ( • * : 

the army s slowness in paying, coupled with the Pul.ih.int 

them, made the recruitment of porters a constant problem i: 

tain tactical mobility, on 7 June 1906 the army authorized t? * r p s 

of cargadores to be maintained at a ratio of 25 pc >r i r f o : 

centavos per day — roughly equivalent to that of th< v< ir 

“treated with kindness, in order to build up a willing ami re; : *’ •. 

ers took extraordinary efforts to protect their porter it 

marched 25 miles to bring medical assistance to an in|ur<i ./> - / 

were the porters that in the fall of 1 906, when Manila a : d * : n p.« dn.n \ 
operations almost collapsed. (Colonel I rederick A. Smith reporn.: :i .* ::,M, P N « 

now burdened with rations and equipment, could not »t< b tin fa .t m«»\ mg 
Pulahanes; worse, some garrisons had not even received upp.u t<,r v.rc-ks. 
Major Wise complained, “it is impossible to pi natr.< ur..< * ri( 111 pud 

promptly. Our inability to do this heretofore has had a I >ad i t fee t ainiuu ( L » >t 
confidence. I therefore paid these cargadores from tm [>ersonai funds. I haw done 
this several times before; in all about one hundred dollars and the qn.u u i master 
here about the same amount from his personal funds. In order to i < >m i mu c \ pedi 
tions here we must have money for cargadores. Major franklin S. I lumms pro 
test added a further reason: “One of the greatest aids in establishing peace in this 
district and in preventing the pulajanes from making any headway or gaming ie 
cruits has been the living up to all contracts and the prompt pay mem < >t all old iga 
tions.” 88 

Although shortages were constant, the army s abi 1 1 t v to sustain armed forces 
for prolonged campaigning was a crucial advantage. I he Pulahanes lac ked theabil 
ity to feed even their own disciples; when prevented from looting towns and kid- 
napping workers their cazador bands simply dissolved. Ultimately, it was .is much 
the colonial govern men t s greater resources as its soldiers fighting ability that drove 
the rebels to surrender. In this respect, as in many other pacification campaigns, 
logistics was crucial. 

Another factor in the army’s success was good intelligence. 1 lelcl command- 
ers emphasized “the urgent need of acquiring and exchanging information with 
other army and constabulary detachments and stations. ; Yet intelligence was ex- 
tremely difficult to come by, and as Wise reported, “there is probably no service 
that requires more originality and ingenuity, nor which is less amenable to general 
rules and fixed principles.” 90 The army had relatively good information about 
Samar s terrain, logistics, and political conditions, in part due to existing maps and 
reports made during the earlier campaign and in part to the foresight of C ieneral 
Gaiter, who dispatched his aide for a three-month investigation. Once military 

572 




>;«r 


MW /«» V: U Liu /V/w 

forces were -com m it ted. intorm.uion flowed up the chain of command in the form 
of field rcpoits uiikh were supposed to include sketches of the patrol route) and 
the week I v journals of operations. On the local level, garrison officers established 
their own intelligence services, obtaining information from local officials who 
could be fined ot imprisoned if thc\ did not cooperate from interrogations, and 
from a secret service of guides and spies. Such human intelligence was often sus- 
pec t , foi as Major I lut ton icpoi ted. the truth has most always to be sifted from a 
bundle of lies. I oss of patience or the exhibition of temper loses you the confidence 
of the names and he sk becomes afraid. I hc army also received aid from the 
const, ibulat \ s intelligence service and in mid I ^00 constabulary 1 icutcnani Juan 
Sulse, a Samareno. was made the c hief intelligence officer. I he intelligence reports 
are puzzling in then lack ot information from the insurgents themselves, in strik- 
ing conuasi to then own speculation about motives and organization. It is almost 
as if the officers, having made up then minds that thev faced ignorant peasants, 
criminals, oi religious fanatic s, weie reluc taut to have those preconceptions shaken 
bv asking individual Pulahanes to explain their actions. 

t hroughout the Pulahan t ampaign, the armv operated in conjunction with 
the civil government and not indcpcndcntlv. As militarv authorities periodically 
reminded those in the field: All officers must use tact and judgment in dealing 
with civil officials. It must be understood that civil law is still operative and para- 
mount. A hcartv cooperation must exist between all civil institutions as ultimate 
success can onlv be obtained bv such cooperation. ' Samar's governor, George 
( lurry, prov ided energetic and competent civ ilian leadership. Among his most no- 
table accomplishments was the creation of a citizens committee which organized 
and paid for militia. I le also established excellent relations with influential 
Samarenos and encouraged them to form paramilitarv units. Currys impulsiveness 
led to one notable blunder the debacle at Magtaon — which appears in retrospect 
to have been a poorly handled attempt to insure that the lion's share of the credit 
for pacification fell to the civil government. Nevertheless, officers, who otherwise 
resented civilian administrators, were impressed with his intelligence, drive, and 
support. 

The continued close cooperation with the civil powers was, however, a mat- 
ter of some disquiet to the army. Some officers blamed the uprising on the selfish- 
ness, oppression, and corruption of politicians, merchants, and local elites a 
judgment that was later echoed in the civil governments own reports. Garrison 
commanders were both appalled and outraged at the mistreatment they witnessed. 
The civic officials in particular seemed completely irresponsible, robbing their con- 
stituents in the most brazen manner. Captain Frederick W. Boschen reported that 
the mayor of one town was forcing people to buy passes in order to secure food. 

In 1907, Major George Bell warned that unless the corruption and oppression 
which had prompted the rebellion were remedied, the army's victories in the field 
would be meaningless. He predicted the soldiers would have to return yet again in 
a few years. ‘ )(> Such criticism was sound, and its relevance continues to this day; but 


573 


I HI I’tlll Il’I'INI kl >M f 


it was also somewhat unfair. Officers .it idl. detail dr: 
the civil government, but they proposed no solum.; 
expand its role or serve as social workers: p.u tft ano: ! 

soldiers were eager to return to more convention. «: 
activities. Moreover, the army’s moral stance v..» . : 

garrison commanders to tolerate the misbehavior ot 
rated with them.' 

Philippine historian David Sturtevant < omn 
Pulahan revolt “the trancjuillitv that settled over San. a: 
death. "' However, an opposite conclusion app >t !..•> 
and 1905, the Pulahanes, through a combination of : . 

tactics, mounted a substantial threat to governme nt "ottol 
bloody defeats on government forces. I heir u n 

join, throwing the interior of Samar into virtual anai n 

the extremity of the threat and the brutality of t he I’ui at. at 
a harsh and repressive reaction, much akin to ■•■•hat i •• 
guerrilla attack on Balangiga. However, neither th< 
military allowed this to happen. I he civil authorities bci.* 1 ’ 1 • 1 '' 1,K 

reforms: dismissing corrupt officials, investigating ahu.es <ii ...... .nd 

initiating public-works projects. Building t>n met hods d<siio| x < i i i n . ,hl I ' 1 1 

ippine-American War, the U.S. Army was able to sum mu a pa. itn 

to overcome this military challenge. Acutely const ions both <>t un»a \ oi able public 
ity and of the need to secure a lasting peace, army of he ers sough t t o sc pa i at c .n 1 1 \ c 
rebels from more-or-less passive civilians, and to insure that the haul h.md <>1 w.u 
fell only on the guilty. They also succeeded in mobili/mg significant elements of 
Samareno society, including many of their former opponent t s. In stiuth nulit.it \ 
terms, the military forces accomplished their mission. I he\ \sctc less siu c c ssful in 
alleviating the causes of the Pulahan rebellion. Although aware of the legitimacy of 
many of the rebels’ grievances and critical of the civil government, soldiers viewed 
their task as imposing order and little more. ( )nce tliis was done, they were eager to 
return power to the civilian authorities and turn their attention to real solcher- 
ing. Io this day, rebels and sectarians still roam in Samar s mountains and jungle s. 


M I i « i ll . I *. I | 
i r r c < ! t < > ! I< » 5 
. 1 1 1 t 1 u > r ii us 


: < * r the 

D C « 

n l‘MM 
< i i * u mal 
r its < » t 
mips l o 

u d t hat 
t > \ » * h cd 
mi: the 
m > r t 1 1 e 


Notes 

h An earlier version of this paper was presented at thcIntcrn.ition.il ( onlncnu-on the 
Centennial of the 1896 Philippine Revolution, Manila, August 1 99(V I he authot 
would like to acknowledge the conference organizer, I )r. Bcrnardita Reyes-C luiivhill, 
for permission to submit this article to War and I listory and the Military Studies In- 
stitute at Texas A &M University for research funding. 

Russell Roth, Muddy (dory: Americas ** Indian Wars in the l*ht !i />pnu‘s, l S k )V- 
1935 (West Hanover Christopher Publishing 1 louse, 1981), pp. % I l"’; David R. 
Sturtevant, Popular Uprisings in the Philippines, IH40-1 940 (Ithaca: ( .ornell l mver- 


574 


I |\\ \c: 1.. / / V # .\/f/»r 

Sit \ Press, l l > '(> ; V 1/s >1. Ku hard \icns, 1 Ik* barb Pulahan Movement in 
S.im.i!, /() s. ... v . ... 11 JO S' l()0 P>r a sontemporarv account of the 

campaign. see I lu U h 1 ) \\ is,-. Notes on field Service in Samar,” Journal of the l \S. 
hit.r.:-- i * , | U R p>o ' > sS for an o\eiview of l’.S. \rmv ■ pacification 

practices. see Bn.m \k Mlister 1 inn. The l .S. Anny and the 

;'HL' !'>,<> c hapel Hill l imctsitN of North Vatolina Press. I 99~). pp. 23- 
• v 1 1 here .lie sewi.il s pc* Hint’s tor rlu' scvt.ui.uiN Pul.i|.in. 1 olajan. 1 ulahanc. 

Pul. ig. m I h.i\e used the most common. 

I l.uold I i.immoiul to Mis \ .m Nest. >0 fune PM) 1 . I larold l l.immond Papers. Spc- 
v i.il ( ollcction. I V Miht.u\ Vadcim 1 ihiarx. West Point. N.\. 

v Pi live ( rinkshank. S .won / 7>«S* /S l )S (Manila: Historical C onservation Society, 
PIN's'; Pruce ( micksh.mk. Pilgrimage and Rebellion on Samar. 188-1-1886 
Madison; ( enter tot Southeast \st.m Studies, 1° v )f 

*• 1 icdei ie k I V ( u ant . 6 \ur,ust p)().\ erulotsement on Mien \\ alkcr to \C i, 6th Sepa- 

t ate Brigade. 2() |ul\ P>().\ I ik ^ ' PS 2, Record Ciroup . RC , dM), National Archives, 
Washington. 1 ).( . henceforth all National Archive sources will he listed only by 
RC i . Pi tan Me . \ Mister l mn. I he Struggle for Samar, m Janies C . Pradford, ed.. 
( ruethle of l.tttptre: The Spanish American War and Its Aftermath (Annapolis: l .S. 
Na\.il Institute Press, l l ) l )>g pp. 1 SS 8P. 

5. Ar »i\ iDid .\,/r) ■ /our rial | \ .\ / iP(a .Match 19()5); Nor -man 1 . C ook to Military ‘ Sec- 
retary .MS. (> 1 ebruary p)()S. No. V| IP HI 1. bntr\ V] P-P>8, RC i d95; 1 IQ. 1st 
Provisional C ompanv, Philippine C onstabularv [PC ], Statement of Pantaleon 
I lobayen, PS lanuarv 1905, No. da IP C NP l P-*98, RC I d95. 

6. MS, I department of \ isavas [ DV ] to brcderick A. Smith. 29 July PM)s, No. PM b 
2699, R( . d9 5. Joseph R. 1 louring to MS, DV, PS September 1906, l d002, RCi 
d95. 

N Alfred W . Mc( oy, Bavlan: Animist Religion and Philippine Peasant Ideology, 1 hiT 
ippine (Quarterly of Culture and Society 10 (198P), It l -9a. 

S. James Smith to Secret. uv of War, 25 June P)() , Pile aS6s-a6, RH />5(). 

9. Yon ina lalmon, “Millenarism," in David 1 . Sills, ed., International Encyclopedia of 

the Social Sciences Vol. 10 (New York: MacMillan, 1968), p. d51. Statement of 
Pantaleon I lobaven, IS January 1905, No. d*H2-C.N, f 2498, RH .“>95; Hcni\ 1. 
Allen to WP Cameron borbes, PP September 1904, Box cS, Henry 1. Allen Papers, 
Manuscripts Division, Library of Congress; Cicorge 1 : . Abbott to AH, DV, 18 De- 
cember 1904, ACiO 985802, RCi 9u; Hilaries R, Howland to MS, DV, 31 August 
1 90S, No. 81, L d855, RCi 395; Frederick A. Smith to MS, DV, 26 July 1906, No. 
6100-4, b 2498, RC i 395. 

10. franklin S. I Jutton to ACi, DV, 8 February 190s, No. 2412-CO, h 2498, RH 395. 

11. C icneral Pedro de la C Cruz, C Chief of his army the C ,azadores, of the new revolution of 
these Islands and the mountainous province of Samar, 1904, No. 3412 H.M., L 
2498, RC i 395. hdmund Block to Supervisor of f iscals, 24 June 1 903, Pile 6 31, IxH 
350; translation of C .ommission of Pascual C.apito, 22 September 1906, No. 6100- 
10-1, b 2498, RC i 395; C Commission from lvnrique Dagohob, Subdelegate Superior, 






rm ph if iitim w .< >\ t 


14. 

15. 


19 


20 


21 . 


r.in. 
n at 

l 


Military Chief of Battalion of Marine < »/ * • 

34l2 f E 2498, R( , 395. I lie term at^ifinrr 
lutionarics applied it to infantry armed w n r 

12. John A. Pagjdow to Adj.. San Julian 2 > for 
Translation of Vi vayan Part of Message from 
of Balangiga, 23 September 1 90f> No (>i<) H 
Minsan — Pulajan, 1904 Diary, Box I MP r . 

13. HQ, 6th Battali on, PS, List of local fmLilfunr 

2 August 1905, E 5394, RC 5V5; RcU ion ' • 

Poponton, enclosed in H. E. Clcarrnan to f "• 

21 May 1906, E 5400, R< , 595. f >nc l« * "* 
least 22 different pueblos, see Names of I'>. - 

5394, RG 395. 

Arens, “Early Pulahan,” pp. 66-67. 

Frederick A. Smith to MS, 28 November L ; ' K> * 

16 . Annual Report for the Year Ending Ju nr 50 . >o 

Allen, Chief of Philippine Constabulary bo* 

Dagohob can be found in HQ, 1st Provisional r . 

Statement of Pan talcon Hobaycn, 18 Januar . 

395. 

17. Wise, “Notes,” pp. 12-13. Albert W. foreman m V • 1 >'• f ' 1 * ,f ,1 -' 1 
3412-CA, E 2498, RC, 395. 

18. HQ, 6th Battalion, PS, List of soldiers capture* I '-‘.itli f " m ,n * ^ 

E 5394, RG 395. Hutton to Mason, 10 November I '><><> I' 1 ' ” 1 "" 1 

St pit mix I 1 1 H ) r > . I 1 3. 

«. ( .line • r < > r i I cubes Papers, 


\ i 


i m\ I 
non of 


• t atMil.tr \ . 
♦ ‘IS |<C , 

No. 


I \n;Mlst 1 l M)N 

s > ♦ . 1 'a tie loss 


to Smith, 17 October 1906, T 241; I borne to < -bristle 
all in E 2699, RG 395; Entry in Journal, Vol. Ip 1 
Library of Congress. 

Extract from History Book of Bad C characters in I >isirn *. < 1 ,sl,< S ' m ™ r ' 

enclosure “M” in Hugh D. Wise to Irederick A. Smith, I <H ><•< < ml>< , 1 20 4. 

RG 395. 

Wise, “Notes,” p. 13. A. LaRue Christie to CC ), 5th I ^strict. S.im.ir. 2s August !'>()(>, 

No. 8, E 5211, RG 395. 

Report of 1 hird District, Philippine Constabulary, Wallace ( . I.i\l«>i i<> At ■ . I lnli[ 
pine Constabulary, 19 July 1905, Box 32, Allen Papers. ( ). I’ Rol.ins,.,, to M S. 1 2V. 
6 August 1906, No. 6100-DH, E 2498, R( > .395. I I ugh I ). Wise to MS. 1 >\ . 2 lime 
1906, E 2074, RG 395; Jesse M. Lee, Personal Memorandum Submitted n> the 
Honorable, the Secretary of War, 21 March 1907, ACC) I 250 1 SO, R( , 90; I -'red crick 
A. Smith to MS, DV, 26 July 1906, No. 6100-4, P 2498, RC . .395; W. I >. C lorn to 
Hugh D. Wise, 28 May 1906, enclosed in Hugh I). Wise to Irederick A. Smith, 19 
December 1906, E 2074, RG 395; Notes in Journal, Vol I , p. I 44, borbes Papers. 
Henry T. Allen to W. Cameron Lorbcs, Supplemental Report, 22 September 1 C M)4, 
Box 8, Allen Papers. 

23. Annual Report of the War Department \ARWD\ 1 907, Vol. .3, pp. 217-19. 


576 


I IW / Sr; / Vfe'./u « e 

I*. Report of Philippine < - Washington: Government Printing Office, 1 90M, 

\ ol 1 . p. ■ * V 

^ I Dmitx to \i i ; I Vu u t ot boiongan. S |unc 1 and C ieorge 1 1 . W right to 
Adi . 1 >istru t ot Rornng.m. 1 S |une 1 ooo. No. (>100 *. 1 2*198, R<, i 395, For similar 
r.iuls. see Joseph R Hcnrmg to Ms. I A, 28 September 1006% l 3002% RG 395; 
Norman 1 ( ook to ( hie I ot ( onstabularv. 1 2 (anuarx 1 9()5 % No. 34 1 2 A\ . I 2-p)S. 
R( i 30 s. 

^ itnt\ I Mien to W t .mu ton I oilw Supplemental Report. September 1909, 
box S. Allen Papers. See also, i k nt\ 1 Allen to Anon.. 1909, Box 8% Allen Papers; 
*1 RW I ) 1 008. \ o|. >. p 1 o 1 
2 W ise. Notes, p. l * 

2S. lesse M. lee to I eonaiil Wood. S \ugust 1 90(>. box 3A l.eonard Wood Papers. 
Manusc ripts Division. I il>i .ir\ of ( ongress. John M. lrue to Adj.% Balangigu, I No 
xernber 1900, 1 300 *. R( , >9S ; | oms M. I lamilton. “Itingle tactics, Journal of the 
Military Sen-tee Institute of the ( 'niter/ Suites 3”" Unix \ugust 1905), pp. 25-2 . 

20. George 1 \bhott to \G. [A. IS December CHH. \GO 985802. RG V M. Wise. 

'Notes." pp. IS IS. Frank Nuketson to U i. DM i March 1 No. 3*1 1 2-CS, V 
2-0)8. R( , 30 S. 

I ntt\ ol 22 Mat\h 1905, February to April 1905 Diary. box 1, Allen Papers. 

^ • I lamilton (tingle I .u t u s. pp. 2S 2 A Intel \ iew, C lennard Mel aughlin Papers, pp. 

l- S. Army Mihtarx History Institute, C arlisle, Penn. All 11]: C aptain 

C rockett s hi ;Ju. M.nnU > ( ] September 1 l )(M): C ieorge Y. Co.us. "The Philip- 
pinc ( onsi.ibul.uv: l‘>0| | ') 1 — (Rh.lX disv. Tlu- Ohio State University. 1%8), pp. 
31v|>). 

32. I ranklin S. Hutton to MS. I A '. 3 December 1 '■)()(>, Box l. k 2~12, RU 3 l >3. 

33. Supplemental Report, 1 lenry 1. Allen to \\ . C ameron l'othes. 22 September, Box S, 

Allen Papers. 

34. Norman P. Cook to MS, 6 February DOS, No. 3H2-D.H. H 2498, RG 395. Inter- 
view, Mel. aughlin Papers, pp. 1 j IS. 

3s. Annual Repot t lor the \ear Fueling June 30, 1905, by brigadier Cieneral Henry 1. 
Allen, C duel of I hihppine C .onstabularv, box 32, Allen Papers. 1 he Philippine Con- 
stabulary was the Philippine Commissions enforcement arm. I he 3,000-man Phil- 
ippine Scouts weie part ol the Regular establishment of the U.S. Army. However, civil 
authorities could borrow Scout units and at the start of the Pulahan campaign over 
half the Scout units were assigned to the insular government. 

36. Daniel J. Moynihan to AG, DV 1 7 February 1904, No. 893-B, E 2498, RG 395; 
A R\\ l ) 1904, Vol. 3, pp. 235-36; Goats, "Philippine Constabulary, pp. 312-13. 

1 he official dates for field operations on Samar were 2 August 1904 to 30 June 1907 , 
see Daniel H. Brush to AG, Philippine Department [PD], 2 April 1911, AGO 
1748020, RG 94. 

37. Manila limes (13 September 1904); Coats, "Philippine Constabulary,” p. 319. 

38. 1 lyatt, "Fair and Frank Criticism." ARWD 1905, Vol. 3, pp. 285-86; "A Scout" to 
Kck, Manila limes {IS February 1905); James R. Woolard, "The Philippine Scouts: 


577 


THh mil JPWNf Nl-V< )I f f 


K< 


' • U1S 

.inn.ir\ 

n* *sti >n . 

ns. 
; 1 m ) ^ . 

: .4 f 11 1 I 
in. 1 1 rc 
s.im.ir. 
> 1 ‘MM. 


Ms I >\ 


1 >s, R< ■ 345. 


The Development of Americas ( olonial •rrn . 
versity, 1975 ), pp. 137-39. 

39. Entry of 15 November 1904, Journal. Vol i p '><> 
ness of the situation in Samar, sec NX' A Simp -a 
1905, Box 5, Clarence R. Edwards Papers M.i • 

Mass.; Norman E. CJook to Henry I Allen 
RG 395; Albert W. Foreman to A* , D > 8 
No. 3412, E 2498, RG 395. 

40. HenryT. Allen to Dearest Jcannic, 2 Jami.irv 

Carter to AG, I’D, 2 1 January 1905, ‘ •<> • • 

port. Carter states that 16 companies of du 
but this probably reflects troop strength m • 

Vol. 3, p. 286. 

41. William H. Carter to AG, 2 January 1 90 > ‘ • 

42. MS, DV to CO, Camp ( >rnncll, 3 January ! >'» 
to CO, 1 1 January 1905, No. 34 I 2- AC I 

43. D. A. Franklin to Cornelius ( ,ardener 10 1 . • ! 

44. Entry of 3 March 1905, Diary, Box I Allen P*p< r II h I . 
raphy of an American Military Officer. ! K>‘ > 1 J •<> 

sity Press, 1 974), pp. 1 37- 141. 

45- Henry I. Allen, Proclamation, 20 February 1905 1. _ 1 > 

46. HenryT. Allen to W. Cameron Forbes. 18 Decern b«-r i 90 •» I >.a. . B«.xl. \lh n 1’a 
pers. 

47. Henry I . Allen to Dearest Jeannic, 1 1 January 1 ’ l’<>. . \ll n I q 

48. Entries of 7, 9, 16-18, 21 March 1905, Diary. Box I Mien •’•'(■‘•is. 

49. Entry of 6 January 1905, Trip of Brigadier General Hent> I. Ml, n ,,n <>u;.h Sun -"- 

Mindanao, and other Southern Islands, Box 8, Allen I ap< > 

50. Sturtevant, Popular Uprisings, p. 1.30. Some municipal anthonties and c < unmunding. 
officers did force people to move within municipal Boundaries. but concentration 
was never authorized throughout Samar. 

51- HenryT. Allen to W. Cameron Forbes, 5 and 14 March 1905. Box 8. Allen Papers. 

Lewis S. Sorley to AG, DV, 7 February 1905, No. .34 12, F. 2998. R< . 3‘>-»; 1 lem\ I. 

Allen to CO, Llorientc, 5 April 1905, No. 3412-DJ, F- 2498, R( , .39',. 

52. Entry of 22 March 1905, February to April 1905 Diary, Box I. Allen Papers. ]. S. 
Parke to AG, DV, 6 February 1905, LS 34 1 2-BL, P.2498, R< . 395; I lenrv C . ( orbin 
to MS, 5 February 1905, AGO 957168, RG 94; Frank Nickerson to AC ,, I )V. 4 
March 1905, LS 3412-CS, E 2498, RC i 395. 

53. Simpson to Carter, 7 February 1905, T 34 I 2-BP. Corbin to C iarter, 8 February 1905, 
I 34 12-BR; Frederick to CO, 1st Btln., 12th Infantry, 9 February 1905, I .34 12- 
BT, all in E 2498, RG 395. 

54. Henry C. Corbin to William H. Carter, 8 February 1 905, No. .34 1 2-13R. F. 2498, 
RG 395. 


578 


IINN Io Sr: All l *nr </: / '>rfi*unr 


SS. I ukc Wriglu to W illiam II. latt. 1 lanuarv RH)N Box S, Fdwards Papers. 1 Ivatt, 

l air atui I rank C rnicism ; \lhcrt W. l orcmans reports can he found in No. 3**12, 

I 2*P>S, rc;v>s. 

■>(>. I mrv of 10 August 10() *,\ol. 1 , p. 3” and Note 1 1 , \dl. 1 . p. I ~*N lournak horhes 
I ’apers. 

S'. MS. 1 W to ( (U amp C onnell. 23 May 1 0 ()S, 1 S.*()(), Rc i 3 ^N 1 1cm v l'. Allen to 

1 Var ( lovernoi, 2 S May PH) '..uni 1 lenrv I. Allen to lVarest leannie, 2"~ Mav RK)“\ 
2 S Ma\ PH) . all m Box S. Mien Papers; Ai\\X D PH)S. Yol. 3, p. 28". 

SS. I lenrv ( . Ide to I conard Wood, 2 |une PH)S, No. (iIOO-B, l ; 2**08, RCl 3^N 

SO. . l/\ U /) PH)S, \ol. 3. p. 2(>* l ; .1 A / *2 (20 |ul\ P)()S); 1 mil Spetli to MS, 31 August 

p) 00 . No. S2. I S sO"', Rc , 30 s. 

()( ) ( ,eorge C urry to C C P larangnan. 31 I u 1 \ 10 ()S, No. S t. I S.»S2. RC, .OS. 

61. ARWP 1 1 , <)S. \,,l 3. pp. 2 S~ (, 0 . Allred Smith to MS. DV. 1 6 August 1005, No. 

101. 1 2026. RC , COS; Norm.m 1 C 'ook to 1 . 1 . 1 tiller. 2 1 October 1 005 , No. 6 . 1 
2 "OS. RC , COS; t ornclius C i.udener to C 'O. 1 lin.tl.is.tn. 1 5 |une 190S, F 202S, RC, 
COS; C ih.trlcs R. 1 lowland to I I. Ware. 20 Novemher 1005. No. 1 l.C. 1 .CSSS. RC 
COS; Norman C ook to C hid C '.ommissai v. 1 2 l 'lee ember 1 00S. No. 61. 1 2~0S. RC 
COS; I ranklin S. Hutton to MS, HV. 20 Mav 1006. No 6100-1, E 2.C0S. RC .COS. 

62 . I lenrv C. l earned to Adj.. Camp 1 lartshorne. 2 t 1 ebruarv 1006 , No. 3-H2-CP. Id 

2 i0S. RC i .COS. 

6 .C. “Instructions of C iovernor C '.urry.'' in Norman F. Cook to CO. Taft, 12 April 1006, 
No. I | 0 , 1 .CSSS, RC , .05. W illiam 11. lohnston to MS. DV, 8 April 1006, Box .C 8 , 
Wood Papers; Black lreachery ol the Samar Pulajancs, Manila Finn's (26 March 
I 006); Siurtevant, Popular l psristngs, p. 1 ,C 0 ; C .oats, “Philippine Constabulary, pp. 
.C44-4S. 

64. W. 1). C.orn to 1 high D. Wise, 28 Mav 1006, E 2074, RC .COS. Hugh L4. Wise to 
MS. 1 )V, 28 and 20 May 1006, 1 2074 , RC ,C 0 S ; W. D. Corn to Frederick A. Smith, 
,C 0 May 1006, 1 2074, RC .COS; ARWD 1006, Vol. .C, p. 261. 

65. I high 1). Wise it) MS, DV, 2 June 1006, Pi 2074, RC .COS. Hugh 14. Wise to Adj.. 3 
August 1006, No. 22, K 2701, RC .COS. 

66 . W. I). Corn to Hugh 14. Wise, 28 Mav 1006, end. in Maj. Hugh 14. Wise to 
Frederick A. Smith, 10 December 1006, E 2074, RC .COS. 

67. Hugh 14. Wise to MS, 14V, 2 June 1006, E 2074, RC .COS. Relacion Nominal dc los 
Pulahans en el Barrio de Poponton, enclosed in FI. E. Clearman to CC4, lagabiran, 
21 May 1006, Id 5400, RC 395; Extract from History Book of Bad Characters in 
District, Camp Hartshorne, Samar, enclosure “M in Hugh Wise to Frederick A. 
Smith, 10 December 1006, Id 2074, RC 305; Descriptive Lists of Insurgents, 1006, 
E 2081, RC', 395. 

68 . Manila lima (2 1 June and 1 August 1906); Jesse M. Lee, Personal Memorandum, 
21 March 1007, ACC4 1250150, RC', 94; Arens, “Early Pulahan,” pp. 74-78. 

69. Samuel V. Ham to MS, 14 December 1906, No. 9000-4AU, E 2498, RC 395; Jesse 
M. Lee, Personal Memorandum, 21 March 1907, ACO 1250150, RC, 94. 


579 


70. 

71. 

72. 


73. 


74. 


75. 


76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 
81. 
82. 


83. 

84. 

85. 

86 . 


I Ml. mil ll'I’INI Hi V< »M 


“Instructions of Governor Cum m l < 1 

No. 149, E 3855, R( , 395. 

AftWD ]V06, Vol. 3, p. 273. I rcdcru k V n ■' 

4, E 2498, RC 395; llugli D Wise r., 1 r • : -= • 

December 1906, F. 2074, RC > 595. I R.> I > • ' c ‘ ’ • 

RG 395; Dougherty to Smith, 24 Septem*-' r 
Summary of Expeditions anti Results. S.irn.ir I'i 

No. 100, E 386)1, RCi .395. Such minuv of r. • 
downplay violence and destruction but in tli m 
policy, it is just as likely that officers won l< I ■ - ‘ 

claim more kills and captures. 

Frederick A. Smith to Ix’onard Wood, 20 I > ftid - r 
Proceedings of a Board of Officer. Boron;. m 
6100-6, Series 2498, RCi 395; Mason ro MS iO i n. j.u 
RG 395; Howland to Mason, 7 May 1 W I : < 

Principal engagements, with dates and number of « .j o 
9136-2, E 296, RC, 165. The U.S. Army fore ' on S,m..r : 
and six Philippine Scout companies; ]*)<)> 21 r Int.m 

fantry, three companies 6th Infantry, nine lomp.iinc ^ 1 I 

21st Infantry, one company 6th Infantry. on<- om J ),n ’ * * 

of Philippine Scouts; 1907 — 1st Infantry, our comp-nr. . **li 
nies of Philippine Scouts, see Daniel II. I>ru h to * ( » I ^ } 


• ' \ ; ' m 

• h ' | t ' | H | 

‘ | ') 

• < i m >2. 

i * ’ M )(». 

. « t : . • . r . ; i c 1 1 -I 

. * ; • . ■ . r;t ■. .mil 

,, v- i I’.ipers: 

1 * M M * \o 

' . ( . 1 i h » i > { y * 1 >S . 

i Vi > 

: < t ,1 it ;-t I >« »v i m u*n t 

1 * Ml i t r h Inf.mtr\ 

• niiip.um 17th In 
)||K St i mis. 1 *><><> 
.inn . 1 i mm panics 

Infant i \ . IS umip.i 
’ \ | > r 1 1 PHI. U ,C> 


1748020, RCi 94. 

Wallace C. Taylor to AG, PC, 19 July 1905. Box 52. Alien l'*D r ' 
try on Samar,” ANJA2 (12 August 1905); Some- Reioll.c 1 1 - »t i |> 
Papers, MHI; Albert W. Foreman to AC,. I >V. I 5 J.mu.uv I 90 ■ 
2498, RG 395; Luke Wright to William I I ’Lift. 2 l.mu.uv 190 


I lie .’ 1 M I 111. lit 
" S . I ru is S . S< >lc\ 

N< V» I 2 AS’. I 

I S, >\ S. | d\\ arsis 


Papers. 

Manila limes (9 March 1905). 

A. LaRue Christie to CX), 2nd I )istrict, 6 August I 900. 12 • K< , > "> 

“Curry Would Better Go Slow,” Manila limes (27 Marc It I 900). 


Franklin S. Hutton to MS, I)V, 3 December 1900, 1.2 1 2. I« . 50 ~>. 

Cornelius Gardener to CO, Ciamp Avery, 15 June- 1903, I. - >- b b ( ■ ’ , ~ > - 
Hamilton, Jungle lactics,” pp. 27-28. 

FranklinS. Hutton to MS, DV 3 December 1900, 1.2712, RC , 393; I bury b. Knight 
to MS, DV, 25 January 1907, E 5220, RC, 395; AKWD 1903, Vol. 3, p. 2S8; Inter- 
view, pp. 14-15, McLaughlin Papers. 

Israel R. Costello to Adj., 5th District, 22 January 1907, I. 5220, RCi 395; I bury K. 
Knight to MS, DV, 25 January 1907, E 5220, RC , 395. 

HQ DV, GO 28, 27 June 1906, E 2505, RCi .395. 

Augustus H. Bishop to Adj., 1 1 June 1907, No. 1 1 8, b. 52 1 2, RC , 395. 

Report of Operations, Frederick A. Smith to MS, DV, 30 September 1900. No. 
6100-6, E 2498, RC 395. 


580 


I I N \ lo Sc: Ml l mv ,// l VfLncc 

N~ Anon. Hugh D. Wise! to lrederick \. Smith. IS October 19()6, No. SI, T 2M)l. 

Re , ws. 

SS. franklin S. Hutton to MS, l A, 2S December 19()(>>, 1 3861, RG 30S. 

NO. I IQ. MS to C C ). C .imp C on nell. 10 |ulv 1 0()S. No. . 1 S*jS2, RC i 30 S. A. I a Rue 

( hristie to e e V N f l )|st ru t . Samar. 2^ August 1 00(1, No. S. I S2 1 1 . RG 30 S. 

00. \\ ise. Notes, p. S2. 

01. franklin S. Hutton to MS, 1 A . 3 December 1906. f 2M2, RG 30S. 

02. 1 IQ. 1 A. ( .enei.il Orders 2S. 2~ June 1906. 1 2S()S. RG 30S; Frederick Perkins to 

MS. I A. December 1906, No. l H)()() t-A.]., I 2o9S, RG 30S. l : or some ot the tew 

documentary sources .nailable, see Statements ot C aptured Pulahanes, (1000). f' 

2(>os. RCi 30S; Declaration ot \ ictoriano l splanda v Rota. 20 January 10()0, l 
2608. Rt . 30S; Names ot Pulajanes. C hiets and Officers,” ! 190S?] and “1 ist ot local 
pulahane leaders collected from various sources,” 2 August l0e)S, f S3O4, RG 30S. 

03. A. I aRue C hristie to e \ h Sth l district. 2S August 1 9()0, No. S. I S 2 1 1 . RG 30S. 

Oo. e ieorge C urry to C O. larangnan, 31 July 100S, No. So, 1 S-o2. RG 30S; Jesse M. 

1 ee to C ieorge e aim. 30 C Vtober 1906, No. (> 1 00- 1 . 1 2**98, RCi 30S. 

05. 1 rederick W. Boschen to ). R. 1 ewis ' January l 90M 1 2689, RG 30S. 

06. ( ieorge Bell to ACi, 1 June 100"*, Box 30, W ood Papers. 

0 1 he* woist instance ot this, and the* only reported war crime during the campaign, 

was that three suspected Pulahanes were allegedly tortured bv the mayor ot lblosa, 
1 e\ te, in the presence ot Second 1 icutenants John J. Moller and Claire R. Bennett. 
1 hese officers narrowly avoided dismissal from the army. See Theodore Roosevelt to 
Secretary ot War, 6 Inly 100S, AGO 1 200203, RCi 9o; HQ. DM General Orders 
No. 2, 1 September 1 0(P, 1 2S02, RC 30S; George B. Davis to AG, 30 June 
1008, AGO 13071 13, RC 9o. 

08. Sturtevant, Popular Uprisings, p. 131. 


S81 


The Batanes Quest for Freedom 

The Ivatan Revolts and Revolution 


Cf SAK A. Hidak.o 
/Uodermcs FoundoW , Me r. * \ *• ; ; ' • ' 


T he Ivatans, whose homeland is the northernmost hoiitin <>t l ^ K 
Philippines, closer to Taiwan (190 km) than to the nor thern tip "f 1 11/011 
(280 km) and some 860 km from Manila, had always known freedom and bowed 
to no foreign master until 26 June 1783, when the Spanish colonial state estab- 
lished itself in Batanes. It was not that the Spaniards completed the l\at. ms m 
mortal combat on this day, but the Spaniards simply proclaimed t hernseb c s as the 
new masters of the islands. Their claim to conquest was that the chieftains, the 
nobles of the islands were supposed to have welcomed their coming, to c\angcli/c 
and rule them (Basco 1782; cf. Gonzalez 1 966:3). 

Whether this was indeed the case or not, the fact was that foreigners and 
foreign vessels were regular visitors of the islands before 1 783, espec i.tlly whaling 
and other ships such as that of buccaneer William Dampicr (Dampicr 
These ships, including those of pirates’, replenished their supplies in the islands 
(bartering iron for hogs, root crops, etc.) and their crew imbibed the world-famous 
wine called bashee, brewed by the Ivatans; hence the islands were referred to as the 

Bashee Isles. Under the circumstances, the missionaries must not have posed any 
threat. 

The objectives of the Spanish colonial state (Basco 1782) should have, how- 
ever, alarmed the Ivatans, for the design was to ensure that they: 

a- embrace[d] the Christian religion and rcccive[d] the holy waters of bap- 
tism; 


582 


1 III ) \U .O t he fattene* (Jne>t tor f reedom 


b. ii\t cl in .1 c. i \ 1 1 1 / c d m.imu’i under t lie* protection ot his [the King ol 
Spam wise and benign laws, thus enioving the shelter and protection ot 
the C lovernor atu« C aptain Cicncral and other officials ot the King; 
militate d as ( atholus under the banner ot lesus C hrist. 

It. indeed, the Ivatans accepted these objectives ot the Spanish colonial state, 
it would appear to have been a sellout ot their indigenous belief system, their po- 
litical structure and authority, their culture — their freedom and independence. Do 
the events that followed bear out the claim that the lvatan 'chiefs and principals' 
were \\ illing to embrace the C 'atholic religion and live under the wisdom of Span- 
ish laws as subjects tit our C atholic King (Basco 1 82)? 

The Revolts against the Spanish Colonial State 
The Immediate lvatan Expression of Dissent 

Considering the Katans willingness “to embrace the C atholic religion and live 
under the wisdom ot the Spanish laws as subjects ot the C atholic King, the arrival 
in Batanes ot the Spaniards, among them, Ciovernor lose 1 luelva, two Dominican 
missionaries, 20 soldiers aboard the C'annen on •* June 1~83, at the start of the 
typhoon season, should have been welcomed and a great reason for celebration. 
Citing the documents, Conzalcz (1066:31) describes the arrival: 

Amidst a milling throng of natives who were armed with their bolos... 
halt drunk almost to a man, a state which had set their tongues loose and made 
them rather troublesome and annoving... it became increasingly difficult to 
maintain a semblance of order. The priests and soldiers. . . were extremely wor- 
ried.... 

Describing the next few davs after the arrival of the Spaniards, Gonzalez 
(1966:31 ) said, “'The rest of the Huelva expedition arrived four days later. Shortly 
after their arrival, a violent ealc arose, which dashed one of the smaller crafts to 

r* 

pieces against the rocks." 

I his was how the Ivatans and nature welcomed the Spanish colonial state in 
Batanes. The Spaniards had to admit that "it soon became obvious that only a great 
dose of patience, charity, abnegation and unremitting labor would succeed in win- 
ning them [the Ivatans] aw; xy from their old customs and vices — 1 he wiles of their 
soothsayers and priestesses kept them delaying and postponing their religious in- 
struction with one excuse or another, with a hundred flimsy pretexts — 1 here were 
obstacles seemingly insurmountable, chief among which was the inveterate custom 
of divorce” (Gonzalez 1966:32). 


583 


THh ('(ill ims> Kl-Vf )M IU >' 


Skirmishes : 1873-1785 


The representatives of the colonial stare were rxpr: 
They had no place to stay. I heir possessions were 
others in the kamadidi boat houses; on the hea* h *'• 
Ivatan found in the Spanish camp, the most powrrlu. t 
taliated by capturing one of the servants of < fovernor H 
and threatening to kill him (Gon/ale/ IV66; ^5 I hr 


Baltazar Fernandez Calderon M 783-1 788/ mi r< 
prisoners was effected. 

The housing situation of the Spaniards v. a . mr era? 
mised. They proceeded to correct the situation < *<>•• 
to cut wood in the fields for the purpose of fencing fin 
diers had hardly cut a tree when they found themsel f L« 
and his warriors, who were armed with spears. I In 


led ami 


. their sc . 11 
m»r I 1 1 1 c 1 *. a e i 
amp per i me 
• r < > ! i e v. i t I 


: c r 
i li 


;.ncs. 
: * tents, 
d an 
. dan . re 
t « » a p« »st 
mi di I r. 
h inge * * 1 

^ i »rn pro 
sold let s 
1 he s« d 
li t I as on 


et ‘ »n* 


1 skirmish piu i p 1 1 . it c t 1 


a 


major danger to the Spanish colonial state as I ayon and * r * ‘ : ,n l’ : ' L ' : ' ' * ' ’ 1 1 ' u 
the Spanish camp. The situation was volatile, the at tai k nn m m< m I 1 1 lc I • 1 hues 
the danger headlong, staged a show of force, and t h reate no i to oorn o.i m . 
settlements (Gonzalez 1966:37;. It was 17 HV ..ml <1>> w..s tin hist .« > hh i 

dent of gunpowder diplomacy. The Spanish camp, however, tin * ’ r) 1 pl ,Kt * n 

Batanes where the governor had any real authority lulalgo 1 ) *(>. M 

In spite of this situation, the formality of inaugurat mg die >.m i si i i < >lom.d 
state in Batanes was celebrated on 26 June *1873 by hoisting the Spanish flag and 
planting a wooden cross in what is now known as Basco, thecapit.il < >t Bantus. 

I his lack of control over the Ivatans two years into t he cst a I dish men a 1 d 1 he 
Spanish colonial state was demonstrated in 1 SS when \asa\ < hut ( Insulin 
luctucan executed a mother by hanging and her daughter In stoning. I hcii 
crime — suspicion of poisoning one of the nephews of luctucan. I lie chief refused 
to accept the authority of the Spaniards. 

Governor Juan deTalavera (Huelva had died of stomach ailment on 10 te- 
rnary 1785, ayear and eight months after his arrival) (( ion/a^ 10r>0: took this 

opportunity to assert the authority of the State and issued a seven-point proclama- 
tion on 24 April 1785 (Talavera 1785 ). What did the proclamat ion speedy." 


a. The (chief or members of the native ruling elite) may no longer 
render justice on the basis of their heathen customs; 

b. Any one among them who lets any of his cayliane 3 (followers) or who in 
flicts upon them any punishment, shall be arrested and sent in irons to 

Manila to suffer the punishment which the ( lovcrnor ( jeneral shall deem 
appropriate; 

c * Any caylianev/\\o causes any harm to the principalia shall be punished by 
the Governor or his Lieutenant in his absence; 


584 


Mil > \l i tO I hr &2t,2nr< ()ur>t tor hrredom 

d. No pr;tu :p t :. or his lieutenants have the power t o punish the cayluvics 
with death. nr with the loss ot their fields or .inv other tiling or with 
scourges; 

e. 1 he i\ixh*i9ir> should complain to the Governor it the principal?* kill hi- 

ther or mother, htother or sister or .inv other relation or do them any in- 
1 1 1 r \ who will attend to the poor and do them justice, tor the 

( lovernor is the tather ot all. more so tor the poor: 

t. 1 he c,/y//.///c» are not hound to work the fields ot their principtl/rs it the 
pr:tn do not pa\ them w hat is |ust. unless the i\ixh*oic's spontaneously 

wish to serve and airr\ tavor with their Principals: 

g. Should the he* forced to work the fields bv the prnicipiilcs , they 

must he- denounced to the C i ewer nor who will see to it that justice is done 
to them and that t hex are paid In the pwir:p t j/r> the just compensation tor 
their wor k. 

lo the indigenous ruling elite, this must have sounded like a declaration ot 
war. I he Spanish state had completely taken authority over them; it moved pros- 
ecute them, sentence them, and also execute the sentence it imposed. Would the 
prniiipiilt’s take this K ing dow n (1 lidalgo 1 996: 122-123)." 

I he third skirmish was through devious \va\*s. C lonzalez ( 1 966:4 1 ) states that 
the immediate reaction to the proclamation was “that instead ot committing their 
plunders and slayings in the light ot dav as before, they now resorted to stealth and 
concealment. A new governor, )oaqum del C as t i 1 lo (1 89-1 94), had taken o\’er 
and on his own issued an additional threefold “Instruction" (Castillo 1789): 

a. leach the C hristian and the heathen their obligations to the State; 

h. leach them obedience to the ( lovernor as the King's representative; 
c. Inform them of' the punishment to he meted to those found guilty. 

The Revolts: 17S9-1S91 

The Ialavcra and Castillo proclamations must have proved too much to some of 
the Ivatan chiefs. Quoting f rom the chronicles, Gonzalez (1966:41-42) reports the 
first Ivatan revolt — the Ghivunao revolt, 1789, led by Ivana chief Chivunao: 

A certain ev il and lawless man named Chivunao, alone, refused to bow 
his head, hailing to convince the other chiefs [in Ivana), he moved to I thud 
where he succeeded, by means of promises and presents of gold, to persuade 
the principals to make common cause with him. They rebelled against the gov- 
ernment and entrenched themselves on the rock or hill where they dwelled in 
an attempt to hold it with spears and bolos against the forces sent by Gov. 
Castillo to quell the insurrection. 


THfc PHIMPIiNI PI- Vo I 


■ r cvs . 


bob i 


• • • .tc i« >ns 

• • , * >: I hcv 

,! irnlo. 

- •, ,* <• : v *>lum- 

; . I V e ucrc 

, < , • • • * v .mnons 

- • , * , , a ■ • »i >% it ms. 
f , , ; , . • - * r uprcmc 

1 1 • . . , . , I H \ > V Solis 

•. i v. .1 • *< 4 ! from and in 
, . 1 ,. * *.*. . i ! t< » r • i •>" He 
.ii ; >r < >i >< < i t he st lengths 
. g« >% ( t n < > f si 1 1 1 1 1 1 ,v * " 

.ii h I sui i‘ »uiulcil 
\r f i ' I ,v ' 1 ^ ^ 

11(11 he* . 1 1 I NC* lie killed *1 


Hie rebels used, for the first time durmi 
the idjang — the Itbud Idjang — in their revob 

like the Masada, made more difficult to .it t.i ■ • 

stand to this day and contain the enigmatic oh 
These megaliths consist of three types: hmrstnn 
nar andesites (Hidalgo 199 6: 1 03- 1 05). 

The Spaniards could not frontally -itt.i* f 
designed to thwart this. The battle was w iped > 
and guns and by the rebels with their spears and 
TheChivunao rebels eventually surrendered w-ith ‘ 
sacrifice. He was “subsequently beheaded in pu‘»li- 

1914 : 12 ). 

The second revolt, the Dangat revolt of 1 ■ 1 

Sabtang by Malakdang chief Arrian Dangat Inin ... - u 
defied the Talavcra and Castillo proclamation •man I 
and weaknesses of the colonial state, first, during '• :n< 

1789), he and 150 armed men rowed across thech.inn- 
the mission house demanding to know from fr. b.irtoiom 
whether it was true that Governor Amo intended to arn 

man in Sabtang. Fr.Artiguez disavowed any knowledge and Am.m I " u lls 

men boasted of their courage and prowess in battle ' I irnaiK i< / 1 ’ . 

During Governor Casti I lo’s term, he and bis men min.iil. “ lM,l " nlu 1 

governor in Basco, asking him why the government was jiusn nnn ; him 

replied that neither he nor any one in government v -- ,s ! M 1 11 ll,n ''' 

Emboldened by the apparent weakness of the clmr< Ii and ,u ' I’"’" " . 

his revolutionary objectives. He had won the support of the chiefs of Vi n.m^.uu 
Ivujos and of the people. . 

He defied and challenged the church and state. I lie revolt was on. lc anc 
his men attacked and killed four soldiers, including ( .orporal I mas I’mimas. in- 
terpreter Lorenzo Alfonso, and two government men in Sabtang who wcic 
mission for the government. They also looted the government s ho.u * lst 
1792). rhe rebels were in complete control of the island of Sabtang. 

The state had to act. Governor del Castillo sent his troops, commanded by 
Lieutenant Tomas Nunez. Guns and cannons could not be mate bed by spears and 
bolos. Resistance gradually crumbled, until only Malakdang, the stronghold of 
Aman Dangat, stood alone. Nunez (1791) offers the following description: 

Aman Dangat was able to get the help of the neighboring l()WIls 
Chabagan [Chavayan], Sabiador [Savidug], and Sim; nan. Armed with ciittnu’s* 
spears and chaleres , they resisted government troops for three days from the 
moment they landed until the final surrender when the town of Malacdang 
was defeated. I hey refused to surrender Aman Dangat, the leader of the revolt. 


586 


HIP \1 1,0 / 


he t< ir bwedom 

i he Ic.idct of the ic\oh surrendered on the hist day ot the thrce-da\ grace 
period given him .nul like t Imun.io hetoie him. would pay the supienie sacrifice 
(Hidalgo . I he sentence ot Aman I Xingat gives an indication of how the 

Spaniards earned out then concept ot i list ice tor those who detied them (Suarez 
1~92): 


I or the vi ke * >1 the vitci\ .uul pe.K e of the town, the go\ et not iC iO\ . dc I 
t astilloi should immcdiaicb order that \tuan l Xmg.u be hanged on the pub- 
lic gibbet ot the „//v,rT./m the pieseiue ot all the inhabitants... that he should 
he heheadci I latei m> that his head could he exposed to the inhabitants — 1 lis 
bod v should be exhibited \\ hei e it would he most evident .. . to ser\ c as a warn- 
mg to all who might commit such conspir.K\ against the governor or an\ of 
the toll owei s ot the King. 

A man l)angat was handed and beheaded. I his was not enough. 1 he entire 
population ( > t Sabtaiu; and hups was sent t o Bat an island . whet e \ 1 1 1 ages \\ e i e c t c - 
ated for the exiles near Ivana: San \ leente and San helix. 1 he people were toiced to 
abandon home and hearth, their fields and their animals. It was a drastic move, 
disheartening the natives (1 lidalgo 1 99(i: 1 2“"). Concerned about this terrible act 
and the welfare of the exiled, the governor-general issued the following instructions 
(Paula 179): 

^ our I fonor is to watch and see to it that the people of basa\ [actualh 
Ivana] do not vex or oppress the said islanders of Sabtang and Hugos, by mak- 
ing available to them fields for their village. If, for lack of such fields, they are 
forced to sow and plant on the abandoned islands, \our Honor will pro\ ide 
them with the means for so doing, and for making the crossing, and will take 
care that those of Basav do not take advantage of then need b\ letting then 
boats for hire at high prices, being especiallv watchful to nip this abuse in the 
bud; and, if it should take increment. Your I lonor will fix a moderate price to 
be charged for each trip of tatava or boat. 

The Revolution against the Spanish Colonial State 

I he tribal revolts were ineffectual in achieving their objectives freedom and in- 
dependence. Superior arms of the Spaniards and lack of unity of the islands proved 
to be the Achilles heel of the revolutionaries. But by 1898, the revolutionary land- 
scape was different. Not only did the revolutionaries display unity but also they 
had the support of the national revolutionary movement — the Katipunan. 

1 he revolution against the Spanish colonial state in Batanes was waged on 1 8 
September 1 898, and for all intents and purposes, victory was achieved by the lva- 
tans on the same day as the soldiers of Governor Julian Fortea switched allegiance 
to the Katipunan and attacked the Casa Real on 1 8 September (Serres 1 898- 1 899). 


587 


Tlf h IWIM l'\ V< M 


:i chc 

Nor 
.a .ins 




\ .IT .1 M 


Aau dun » K» 
i.m ( .i t ill*. j< 
I lilS ( .t l > i c . 


I sUfUl. 

* « >r % in 

tt* the 
’ : pun. in 
s « » i i i i c r > 
nor w .is 

Mu- u-a 

nu ll' of 
• n . I i .in 
! ulogio 
I I .UK IM.O 


Unknown to the Spaniards was that the I - 
Katipunan (Gonzalez 1966:71). Juan ( .istilh)o 
mal, Manila, was the main link of the lv.it. u> v, 
knewoftheKatipunanagenda.soth.it when rh f >■ : 
de Filipinos, commanded by Rafael (Vre.i. kui<;- : 
there was rejoicing and full support lor the k.itip u 
Ivana was greeted with cries ol Vlaliuhay ang I ihpir. -i 
I he soldiers of the Spanish colonial state <: 

Katipunan but also attempted to capture < .overnor I <>• ' 

Commander Perea, f rustrated by their failure to < apfu* 
commenced firing at the Casa Real. It was an unc o n 
practically alone in the defense of the < .asa Keai I he l • 1 
by chief Ivatan Katipuncro Teofilo C .astillcjos ati«i ( * ,r p< »: ai 
Governor Fortca’s force. Other Ivatan Katipuncro m< td< <i i 

cisco Blanquera (Basco); Mauro F.. Balashas. h> -.«• < <ir/on 
Rabaza, Juan Espia (Mahatao); Bernardo Barsana I ■ < nt< iu> 

Asantor, Cayetano Cabirac, Mariano Oalair.ih.i. P»aito.<>t ‘ 

Delatado, Agustin Ybay (Ivana); and for Uyugan . I.usebiot . • 1 ' 

Cayetano Valcnciano (Hidalgo 1996:149). . 

Governor Fortea found himself not only abandoned i>. hi. U.uan ‘ KI 

but also fighting them as they fired at the ( asa Heal. hen ( ' ' 

ordered that the soldiers enter the Casa Real, which had » m hours mmincd no »"c. 
they found the dead governor, although his wife (I hiu Asuncion) tlun »i'e ' hi 
dren and niece were all unharmed; also found dead were tlu- goccnot pook. 
Cecilio Estovel, Juan Baesa, an official in the town hall. Sergeant I auhno A 
and a Vietnamese. I he seven Spanish missionaries and theotlut Spunm 
dered. In the entire Batanes islands, there were only I « Spaniards. 

Victory over the Spanish colonial state was complete. I he Spaniards 'ye re- 
taken to Manila aboard the Compania de Pilipinas. No Spaniard was executed By 
the Katipunan. Also aboard the same ship were the newly elected Ivatan of I .cals 
led by the governor-elect Teofilo Castillcjos. They were on their wav to take then 
oath of office before Katipunan Colonel DanicITirona, in I -alloc, < agacan. 

Freedom, at last, was gained by the Ivatans in this glorious revolution. I hey 
had been under Spanish control for 1 1 5 years. Demonstrated was their loyalty and 
participation in achieving the national dream for freedom and independence. I hey 
were part ofthe first Philippine republic. Little did they know, however, that in the 
Treaty ofParis (1898) selling the Philippines to the United States, the coordinates 
ow that Batanes was not part of the territory sold. Batanes was not part of the 
ppincs. I his was how the imperialists perceived it; to the Filipinos, Ivatans 
and non-Ivatans, it was otherwise. 

n s pite ofthe Treaty of Paris, the Americans quickly took possession of the 
fTj-j f* C ls an ds in September 1899, with the arrival of the U.S.S. Princeton. 

(Hidalgo 1996:153, 167-168). 


588 


\ Hi > \l i ,1 > l re ()ur<: tor prrcdom 

I .u I k*i. beginning on 2 1 cbruar\ 1S99. Governor C astillcjos started prepara- 
tions tor tlu- defense of Batanes against the Americans. 1 le organized a militia corps 
in each town. ordered the constitution of trenches around seaports, the prepara- 
tion of the implements of war (guns. spears, daggers, holos) (Serres IS99). Two 
days later, war broke out between the l 'n i ted State and the Philippines. 

In Bat a ties, how c\ ei. the b at ans w ere not protagonists in fighting the A met i- 
cans ( 1 1 ulalgo 199(vl(g) 1 here arc niaiiv reasons tor this, but to dwell tin them 

here would be loo nuuh of a digression. 

1 hiring the A met u an period, the b a tans did rise as one again in their ie\ tilt 
against the lapanese Imperial Arrm in Wtirld War II. 

References 

IWo. lose \ 1 82. t ommunu at ion to Batanes C hieft.utis Inquiring on then Oisposi- 

tion towards becoming ^ atliolus. 1 S 1 ebtuars MSS. Also in Gonzalez and 

m Madrigal { \ 983). 

Castillo. | o.kju i n del . 1 89. 1 nst riu t ions. Archives of the Province of the Most \ lol\ Ro- 

sa rv, MSS. 

. 1^93. Relato de los 1 f echos Oscurridos en Sabtang. lnforme al Ciobernador 
l ehx Bcrcngucr tie Marquma. 0 de Mavo. 

I )a m pier, NX liham. 1 08 IXimpicr in the Philippines, l.mma I lelen blan and Janies Al- 
exander Robertson, eds. / he Philippine' Islands. I a9S- 1 898. \ol. XXXIX. Cleveland* 
( )hio: I he A. A. C lark ( a)., 1 903. 

Fernandez, Paula. 1 1 . “Infbrme al Ciobernador C astillo." da September. Archives of the 

Province of the Most I lolv Rosary. MSS. 

Gonzalez, Julio. O.P. 1 906. “ The Batanes Islands." Acta Manilana. Manila: US 1 Research 
( Miter. 

I lidulgo, C Tsar A. 1 996. //, r Miking of the Iratans: The Cultural History of Batanes. Pasig 
( aty: ( aignita I RC 

Nunez, Io m as. 1791. lnforme al Ciobernador Castillo.” 23 September. Archives of the 
Province of the Most I lolv Rosary. MSS. 

Madrigal, Anna Maria. 1983. A Blending of Culture : The Batanes 1686-1898. Manila: 
Historical Society. 

Paula, bran cisco, O.P. 1 793. “Carta sob re al translado de los de Sabtang a la Isla dc Basay, 
20 May. Archives t)f the Province til the Most 1 lolv Rosary. MSS. 

Serres, Jose. O.P. 1898-1899. “Principal 1-vents in Batanes Islands from 1 898- 1 899." Trans. 

I\ I lorncdo. Philippine Sacra. Vol. 18, no. 63, August 1983. 

Solis, Jesus Fernandez, O.P. 1914. “Apuntes Geograficas Sobre las Misiones de Batanes, 

I )ecember. 

Suarez, Jose. 1792. “Relato de la ejecucion de algunos criminales y cl efecto que tuvo en el 
pueblo." 1 August. MSS. 

Talavcra, Juan. 1785. “Proclamations, 24 April 1783." Archives of Province of the Most 
Holy Rosary, MSS. 


589 


Pampanga Views the Revolution 
Imagination and Moinon 


of a Time of Suffering and Sacrifice 


Jot r. A. I -to r. 
Stole Unrveryty of Mew ( r /< . ' * 


Living Pampangos who roamed the peaceful and pmp 1 o»u t,M1Il ‘ r 
side of their province in the early I 900 s enjoy seeing Aluuy l 

T his paper explores the role the people of Lump. mg. « pl.iwd 1,1 

Philippine revolution. I seek not to add new information to \Jiut I ia 
already written about the revolt in that province but, rather, to c lai d> S(>m ^ CtU !cl ^ 
interpretations. 2 Benedict Anderson’s Imagined (Communities has stuicc 
consider the cultural manifestations of nationalism in the pros me c dm mg 1 
time. Likewise, the works of Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Alan lavlot on t ic 
American Revolution and the early national period have caused me n > i e t h i nk 
I said about what happened in Pampanga and have reminded me of the tiuisin t 
all politics are local. 4 

What inspired a return to this subject was a recent comment In Kafaclita 
Hilario Soriano, historian and descendcnt of Pampanga s Repuhl iean C io\cinor 
Tiburcio Hilario, that I “despised” the educated elite of Pampanga who led the 
revolution in the province. 5 Her remark surprised me, since 1 had not intended to 
pass any such judgement. I sought, instead, just to point out that this elite did not 
represent the only sentiment of the people of the province toward the revolution 
and its goals. 

At least three major visions of the ideal state operated in Pampanga before, 
uring, and after the Philippine revolution. The group with the most archipelago- 

wi e notion of an imagined community represented perhaps the smallest in num- 

er and widest in extra-provincial experience. Many other social leaders did not 


590 


I \Kkl\ r.nr:p t iii£,; l ;ru ■* 'J'( Ravlutnm 

share the same national \ision aiul unarmed, instead* .mother* more local com- 
mumtv as then nleal Still others, those w ith ties among the peasant farmers* pos- 
sessed a different, more millenarian* vision altogether. Hence* for a majority* 
loyaltv to the republic took second place to their need to protect themselves* their 
families, and then wav ol life tiom the insecuritv and violence that threatened 
then world, and thev .utepted whuhever power governed the province at a par- 
t is 11 la r time. 

I he revolution in P.imp.mg.i passed through three phases. In the first* begin- 
ning around IS 2 . a number of the elite of the province gradually began to share 
the sentiment of their lagalog counterparts that change in Spanish colonialism 
must occur or that Philippine independence would become inevitable. A tew in 
the province formed local Masonic cells in the early 1 8*)0s and paid with arrest and 
exile for that part u i pa t ion. W hen war broke out in 1 S c )6* some of the elite joined 
the revolution that began under the leadership of Andres Bonifacio and later trans- 
ferred to I imho Aguin.ildo. Meanwhile* most staved uninvolved or still remained 
loyal to Spain, lor their aid, Spanish C iovernor of Pampanga lose C anovas peti- 
tioned that the province be granted the permanent title either of “Muy Heroica y 
Siempre 1 iel, Muv Noble v Muv Peal or, possibly* Muv kspaiiola. 

Phase two commenced on 3 |une 1 S i )S after the defeat of the Spanish armv 
by I : ilipino and American forces. A substantial number of the elite ot the province, 
landholders and professionals from the towns, joined the government ot 
Aguinaldo, sending him financial and other kinds of aid* organizing provincial 
government on behalf of the republic and participating in the sessions at Malolos. 
At this time, support for the republic spread throughout Pampanga. However* 
when American forces reached the province in late April 18 c ) c ), phase three began, 
as many members of the elite gradually altered their view, either staying neutral 
toward or becoming part of the new colonial government. Some continued to aid 
the guerrilla army of the republic and never pledged their allegiance to the Ameri- 
cans, choosing exile or ostracism rather than collaborating. For almost a decade 
secret movements operated in the countrvside* serving more as reminder of resis- 
tance than as a real threat to the colonial order. 

Several important circumstances need mention in connection with the revo- 
lutionary era in Pampanga. First of all, the Capampangan had been for some time 
spreading northward and westward onto new land in western Pampanga and in 
southern Parlac province and settling frontier areas. 1 hey had often moved by 
communities* bringing with them their own society and culture that preserved the 
traditional tenant-landlord labor and agricultural systems. Only the events at the 

is 

turn of t lie century slowed down their migration. 

Secondly, in the 1 890s and 1 900s Pampanga faced an economic crisis in one 
of its important industries, sugar. Demand for Pampanga’s product fell because of 
international market factors and because of changes in the technology of sugar 
production which called for a higher quality of product than the region could 
manufacture. Hence, major parts of the regions suffered from growing poverty. 


591 


nu mu ntiM vi >\ 


C4S( 


r.isi >n 


*:i miring 

• ; : ll.diio s 

rue I he 
:hi\ .iUi> 
iu ir sup* 
b.i tries in 
s nul tiic 
ii.it c\ cr 


Thirdly, human and animal epidemic di 
higher death rate at this time. 

Finally, Pampanga suffered prolonged fi.ir<: 
the rainy season from May to August I H')‘) •• i; 

army and the American forces hogget! down in ' 

Capampangan not only had their property • on) 
faced intimidation and punishment from both 
port of the other. Perhaps even more dev.i u.itmi 
their midst resulted in the loss of the rice plantir 
arrival of hunger during the suhscc|itent year I - 
choices the Capampangan made concerning tfie r< 

As mentioned earlier, three distinguishable • i aon «•* 
in Pampanga and determined how their adherent n ; < >n< . ■ . 
dominated the region. ! he first vision belonged r<> <>m< mi"'-' 
the best educated, most cultured town professional 
Pampanga belonged to a larger entity, a nation that r< • < 
guistic borders of any one area. Included among tho.< »•. 

Generals Maximino Hizon, Jose Alcjandrino. Servillano 
Makabulos; Governor Tiburcio Hilario; landhohler I ram i <» I 
wright Aurelio Tolcntino; local authors Modesto b> "l u,M ,n ‘ 

Masons Ceferino Joven and Mariano Alcjandrino; and tea* h< t and tut no 1 ■ 

Pedro Abad Santos. These individuals largely remained tm< >" d |1 u i t 
faithful to the cause, no matter who controlled government in the l , " ,v " Kt - 

In their background they shared an extra-provinc ial 1 l niu .. 

education. Joven, for instance, came originally from Pnnondo. Ili/mi am 
attended school in Manila and involved themselves there in the debates siiitoiiiu - 


unit'. , 
in t« *r * 
i r •> .nu 


\cl« >pcd 

s v. hie h 

st >mc » 


'f .It i 1 1 . < I 


< >r u hit t li.it 
,< <i (><•% t uni the ctlinolin- 
ij.irt ti tins v ish »n \utc 

.Mill I I.IIK imo 

loiipon; pl.iy- 

I C 1 1 X C i ll lira: 


I M > 


ing the independence issue. Jose Alcjandrino and I iongson pursued an eduj-.ition 
in Europe where they listened to discussions of emigre Filipinos about libera 


this 


thought and nationalistic ideas. Through personal experience .mil training, 
group developed a larger national vision and became among 1 1 ic si m > ngc st .nu i 
diehard supporters of the republic. Hizon died in exile in (mam and Ins military 
secretary, Abad Santos, served a prison term and faced a possible* death sentence 
his wartime activities. 9 The Alcjandrino family boasted .1 long record of support 


for the national vision that persisted through three generations from the tune of 


Mariano’s involvement in Masonry to grandson (’asms career as a I Ink leader. 
Aurelio Tolentino, though born in Guagua, came from a family that migrated there 
from londo in the 19th century; moreover, he studied in the metropolitan uica 
and joined the Masons, the Liga Filipi na, and the Katipunan. I Ic devoted his life 
to nationalist causes and writing. 

Tolentino, however, is best remembered for his play Kalutpon . Ngttyou at 
l ?as - First produced in Manila in 1903 and performed in Iagaiog, the play is an 
a egory of the struggle for national independence. The main character, Inang 




592 


B.iv.m . r. c : : c.. : • *. s * uvvlom 1 1 om n.uioiis oppressor w ith the lid p o t oth- 
ers hut in.iii. . tit » n : i ; ; < >*. 1 1 om t he i i\ ei ' . pl.n <xl ongm.illv by loleniiuo him- 

self. I Ik v 1 : . i . * : c V. with p.utiotu sentiment. concludes with the eheer 
M.ibuh.n .im; I ihpm.is 1 Mm.ikil.i h.ib.tng a raw ( 1 ong live hill pinas to he exalted 
tor a long time’ 1 

Because volom.il oftu laU considered his work subversive, they suppressed it. 
and lolentmo went to j.ul I Iis support ot Artemio Ricartes attempt to reactivate 
the revolution m late I l M)> e.uned him additional prison time. Subsequently, he 
translated tin pla\ into t apampamtan atul Spanish during a prolific career that 
ended onl\ with his death m I 'M *v I \en though he authored numerous works in 
( apamp.mg.m, I olent mo .u hu \ ed his reputation t is r the so called seditious play 
that expressed his passion toi independent nationhood. In stvle. content, and out- 
look Kitlhipon. Xg t /yo?i j: /hv,/' differs markedlv from the Capampangan z<irztnLi 
Ah nig l )io>! i I lu i e is no (,od!) h\ that province's leading playwright, Juan 
( risostomo Soto (( iissot). | his p 1 a \ revealed a second vision of an imagined 
eommumtx held In a great mam ot the sik ial elite ot Pampanga. 

Soto ,ilso studied in Manila, joined the Katipunan, and fought hard against 
the Spaniards and \mcinans; however, his most popular and best remembered 
l c )0d drama reflects his commitment to his province. 1 he z*i rz ucLi was a kind ot 
operetta that originated in Spain and incorporated music with dialogue. 1 he 
drama had two forms: the cA/< vc a one act version that often contained slap- 

stick; and the z<irznc/<i gj\nirlt\ w hich consisted of three acts in a highly romantic 
mood. ( rissot s pla\ belonged to the latter stvle, and the plot of A hi fig Dios! re- 
volves around two star crossed voting lovers kept apart bv fate and social conven- 
tion. Beneath the surface, however, lies a vision of an idealized Pampanga different 
and distinct from the one existing among the lagalog national visionaries. 1 ' 

I he .unhor sets the plav in B.teolor. then the leading cultural and intellectual 
center ol the ( iapampangan-speaking world. 1 lere stood its most important theat- 
rical venue, leatro Sahina, atul the birthplace and homes of many of the leading 
intellectuals of that world. I lere, too, in OOO, the first Capampangan zitrznela , 
Mariano Broceso Babaian's lug Ma>uwj>c ( The Batcher) was staged, thus launching 
a movement of creative dialect theater that lasted for the next two decades." Ahead 
of any other language group in the archipelago, the Capampangan made the dia- 
lect zarzuela their own. 

This theater form differed from others popular in the province because of its 
appeal to the people ol town centers ( poblacioues ), the professionals, merchants, 
and landholders who conducted their business and carried out their social life in 
the vicinity of the plazas, markets, shops, and offices. Bacolor and Cuagua pro- 
vided permanent theaters for works of this genre by Babaian, Tolenrino, Felix 
Calura, and Soto. I hey spiced their plays with liberal references to the unique as- 
pects of the culture of the province, such as the Christmas lanterns, the church 
bells, and the food, all part of the imaged world of turn-of-the-centttry Pampanga. 


nil Will II'N'.f HI .< 


Crissot limns our that world vcr;. Ic-.ir!*. * nu l 

the countryside where lived the farmers, f h dr v * »r .\ 

when a supporting rural character says: 


Nothing of unusual import aru r i » • 

Here in the farm specially, there i nomr 
Out there in the pohlacum yoiid w* »r 

Later on, the world is further divided he tv. < • • t 

seen as living in a complementary relationship. '» * ■ : 

the workers sing: 


Let’s hurry up now. And finis!) tie g> 

They are good at paying. Ihcrichp.r* . 

We of the masses through sweat, mar «nd « ti 

Allow the rich the chance \o live m dnind.inr ; * 

Happy are those whom wealth h.r ?•»'. "u • 

Happier still arc the poor wfiorn 

Is this what you call good luck." 

Of course not, it s poverty. 

Lets finish this job. And heat it at once tor our 


For Crissot, the world existed in a harmony of mi h am I p< »< u 
try, even as the province suffered through some of the worst time 
hardship, disease, and economic distress. Fate could pmw 
Capampangan, as it could to the lovers, hut the world remained I 
I he attitude toward the imagined community is c-.prcssci 
show’s most popular song “Ing Dalagang ( .aparnpangan : 


t < >w i 1 atul conn- 
due to p< >st w ar 
1 1 1 1 Is iiu 1 t ( > the 

).isu.dl\ s i a h I e . 

in perhaps the* 


I he young Pampangan maiden 
Is pure and true and faithful 
Hers is an Oriental haven 
She’s a dear and precious pearl. 

She has beauty and diligence. 

She is a tender fragrant flower; 

Young swains desire her loveliness 
I hey rave to deserve her favor 
And to covet her tender care . 1 

I he maiden here is called a 'pearl” living in an ( )ricntal haven w hich is a 
play on the familiar trope “The Pearl of the Orient” referring to the whole Philip- 
pine archipelago. IH Soto thus identifies Pampanga as the real gem of the islands, 
one courted by many for her “beauty and diligence. I own audiences could tden- 


594 


I \Kkl\ I'.ifr.p \ tm < thr Rnvlutton 

1 1 1 \ these references to the natural heatit\ of the landscape and t o the C apampan- 
gan reputation for hatd work and its reward, wealth. I he maiden, Pampanga, is 
also said to be true and faithful, and the question arises true and faithful to 
whom? 

In the pla\ the heioine has two suitors, and on one level they represent the 
two sides of the plavw light: lvamon is a wealth) \oung man. jailed in a previous 
time because of a clash with the past administration (presumably Spain), while 
I m uj tie, an artist . is the true love of Maria l u/. In the end the two turn out to be 
half-brothers, and both have model characters. Ramon with a revolution,*!) back- 
ground m \ lies his I agalog friends to the celebration of the wedding he thinks will 
occur between himself and Maria 1 u/. but m the end, he is rejected, because she 
loves I nnque. wronged bv false charges and unfortunate circumstances. 1 hus, she 
chooses the art and culture of her place rather than a sentiment tor a widei com- 
munitv. 

I he imagined communitv of the tow nspeople of Pampanga may ha\c been 
more restricted than the one offered bv the nationalists, but the tormei was \ i\ id 
and sufficient in 1900 and competed with the latter. In the late IMh centurv, 
Pampanga experienced increased prosperity and frontier expansion, despite its 
contemporarv dif ficult ies. lb def ine and limit the world of the C apampangan, the 
Spaniards in 1 8~M had reduced the si/e of the province and tried to delineate it 
from surrounding provinces where other dialects were spoken. Nevertheless, the 
C. apampangan defied this mapping and spread beyond these imposed borders, es- 
peciallv into newlv established larlac province. 1 lence, the colonial order both 
enhanced the sense of separate identitv of the C apampangan by giving them theii 
own core, and failed to contain them within those defined boundaries, thus high- 
lighting their own sense of dvnamic growth. 

I he language, too, flourished on stage and in print in the early 1 900s, as 
witnessed bv the grow th of dialect theater, poetry contests, and the publication of 
the first novel, Sotos Lydia. At this time printed material became more common, 
especially with the appearance of the first C. apampangan newspaper, lug 
Etna )igdpi ran (The Nonpartisan), in 1 906. Soto and Modesto Joaquin joined 
school teacher Luther Parker in publishing An L iighsh-Spanish-Panipango Dictio- 
naiy\w 1 906. 1M With all these events occurring, many C apampangan may well have 
questioned the right of Tagalogs to monopolize the nationalist sentiment. Only 
later in the decade, as national politics burgeoned in Manila, did the C, apampangan 
in greater numbers adopt the larger imagined community. 

During the revolution, however, when the actual war reached 1 ampanga be- 
fore the start of the rainy season in 1 899, the effect might have been tempoiaiily to 
politicize some of the previously uncommitted. I he prolonged struggle foi domi- 
nation in the following months, on the other hand, when both sides in the conflict 
preyed upon them, may well have worn down the resolve of many of these same 
people, making them indifferent to the republican cause or uninterested in politics 
altogether. 0 1 he guerrilla struggle within the province over the next year, when 


JHI Hill I I'M NT l'» V< M 


intimidation came from both sides, could wn. 
of the apolitical and the weak, and enham ed tr 
Pampanga among the suffering. At such a nm 
going to dialect zarzueLis in town might 
litical choices. 

If the first two imagined communin' , < 
third one belonged to many of the poor ol d. ■ 

the tenants, smallholders and laborers of Lamp mr • : 
for even their actions and allegiances during m> f 


, I ! f I 


I 1. 


i t ' i i :« ». • »*.*. c c i me* 

.1 rul 

i > * \ nt s . i . » n u v ult. 

t i in tin 1 1 p 1 1 M k .m 
* .t t r t . < »1 i it u m.ir \ 

\ p« » 1 1 r I [ u ii \ c.i I s 
\ r 1 1 s i i 1 1 1 1 r s t ooci 


hended. Many tenants followed their hirullonl ‘ 
uninvolved, given the fact that they had no op;>or* 

However, at least one group among the poor npp' ,r 1 
direction of Felipe Salvador, also known as \pon: 

Salvadors career and wartime activities h »s b 
it is sufficient here to mention that, besides being f ,,r ,r * 1 
Santa Iglesia, from the mid- 1 890s on, he held r iu ran* 
army and guided his followers on raids in central I n/o 
captured, he was executed in 1912. 

In a brief biography he composed near the- end ot in - 
the extent and nature of bis imagined, holy < ornrnumr . 

Mount Arayat (Bundoc ng SinucuanJ, and ns reac h extended t linmgf mm me mi 
tral Luzon plain to include several Tagalog and ( a pain pang. 111 p> ii i n • pi «>s uk c s. 
Within this area he distinguished between the town mum and the >im 1 1 \ side. 
In the former lived the people hostile to him and Ins movement. il«c landholders, 
merchants, soldiers, and other nonbelievers. 

Out in the barrios and hamlets, the community ol the t.mhtul o sided, and 
they heard his message of redemption and shared their food and othei resources 
with him and with one another. Here there existed no boundaries <>f language or 
political loyalty, just the good farmers, river boaters, sugar makers, and all their 
families living in communal peace. Hanger came, not just from the foteign sol- 
diers, but from others who sought to destroy the Santa Iglesia us foundei and 
followers. In Salvador's vision, disharmony stood between town and counttx, a 
situation far different from the one imagined by C .rissot . 1 o the f ormci , on I \ pi a\ ei 
and a general sharing of food and goods could bring deli veraiu c. 

Apong Ipe saw evidence of social disunity in Ins persecution In the 
Capampangan elite, but the members of Santa Iglesia found sanctuary among the 
country poor. I hroughout central Luzon, country folk harbored Salvador, listen- 
ing to his message or at least tolerating his presence for more than a decade. I Its 
ision of sharing wealth subsequently endured, remembered hv members of Santa 
Iglesia and followers of other social movements alike. M 

e conflicting attitudes toward nationalism of the (aipampangan outlasted 

e revolutionary era and informed politics in the province into the era of mdepen- 


5 % 


I \Kkl\ \ sen » the Rei'olutton 

dcmc . Some nationalists. like C efermo |o\cn, joined the bcdcralistas early on and 
served with the new regime, while others waited and entered the political fray as 
N.k ionahsias and worked toward independence. Others simply moved to the side- 
lines and profited from the prosperitv that returned after 1909. Over time, the 
broade r \ imoii of Pampan^a as part of the larger Philippines has become ascendent 
o\er tlu- ethnohnyuisiK identitv m> much in evidence at the turn of the century. 

\ few nat umahsts. like Pedro \bad Santos and younger members of the 
Alejandrino familv. absorbed a secularized version of Apong Ipes imagined corn- 
mum t\ and became advocates for the economically disadvantaged. Prom the 1 920s 
on, the socialism of \b.ul Santos competed with the nationalism of Manuel l.. 
Quezon. I he 1 Ink movement following World War 11 represented a continuation 
of that struggle in central 1 uzon and elsewhere. 

In historx and memorv the competing visions of imagined community have 
only part ial l\ survived. 1 listorian Alan lavlor, in U illuwi ( oopers lotcn, ' astutely 
demonstrates how the novelist lames 1 enimore C ooper distorted history in I he 
Pioneers in order to create a proper, mvthic version of the founding of 
( .ooperstow n, New V>rk, bv his father. Americas first successful professional au- 
thor of fiction thus sought in his work to revise what he recognized as unfortunate 
democratic tendencies and to return his home tow n and other new frontier com- 
munities to the guidance of a civilized, educated, and conservative elite. And just 
as those Jeffersonian tendencies defeated C oopers scheme in the place of his child- 
hood, the struggles of the peasants of central 1 uzon have clashed with the images 
of the revolution of Pam pangas historical memorialists. 

In 1933, lose Alejandrino, at the behest of Ieodoro Kalaw, wrote his mem- 
oirs of the revolutionarv period. The general fondly recalled the students that he 
knew in burope, such as lose Rizal, Ldilbcrto Hvangelista, Juan buna, and Gra- 
ciano Lopez Jacna, as well as the group of revolutionaries he associated with in 
Manila and environs, including Bonifacio, Aguinaldo, and Antonio Luna. Action 
took place on the international and insular-wide stage and consisted of diplomacy, 
national politics, and battles. For Alejandrino the revolution was high drama in- 
volving individuals of great heroism or great duplicity. 

The only attention the general devotes to Pampangas patriots was to his 
brothers, particularly Joaquin, who rose to the rank of general by the wars end. 
And one of the few details he reveals about Joaquin has to do with an election in 
the late 1920s or early 1930s: 

In politics, Joaquin militated always in the ranks of the opposition. In 
one of the elections, at the instance of Pedro Abaci Santos, who promised him 
the votes of his men then called Socialists and are now the Huks, he ran as a 
candidate. I le suffered a great disillusionment for, even in the bailiwick of the 
Socialists, he failed to get the votes which he expected because many of these 
socialistas voted for the Administration candidate for one reason or another. 


397 


THF F’HII H'I'INI I 


• s.int 
IK C t»> 

; , i ? 1 no. 
••.>n m 
Manila 
ai I II- 
f. •! t IlC 
panga. 

. • ['.INS. 


The vignette portrays the humiliation «>f rb 
socialists and their duplicitous leader. Abati 
the Huks was added by ( icneral loses ncpln 
who translated the memoir from Spanish r<> i r 
1949. By then many of the Capampangan < If 
to escape the guerrilla warfare. In both the oriyn • •»! 
glish translation, the radical peasantry hear f r o '> • 
lack of respect due to those who spearheaded tie 
The community that Ccncral Alejamlrino had - 
and he and his nephew knew whom to blame 

I he first Capampangan to attempt a 
was Don Mariano Henson, sugar farmer and ton 
Surprisingly, Henson mentions very little about tin i< ■<> ■ 
cept to note — from a very Capampangan per [>' - ti < 

Spain began only on 3 June 1898. I lc then lists just 7 *'•" ' 1 ! p , : ,m> 1 11 

and writer Felix Galura of Bacolor, as among dn hr t M ' 21 r< " ’ 1 

Henson vindicates his province by devoting a p* 1 ”' 1 1 l >; '' 1 1 

Scouts fought for the Spaniards and Americans b< < a u 
diers, and that their actions did not represent the f i 

Capampangan. 

Aside from these events, Henson observes onh tb.n <ton<,mK h.ud s hi| 
plagued the province because of the downturn in sugar. IHipt S . 1 1 . . n i < > t -*iu 

Santa Iglesia he identifies only briefly as victims of l H ' rsa ' ,M,,n ln llu 1 >lnl, lM 1,,u * 

Constabulary in 1906 “for refusing to give informal ion about elicit .kumiics. 
Henson charges fellow Capampangan Pedro A bad Santos with a la, k of patriotism 
for embracing a “Soviet-inspired ideology and never acknowledges that 
Santos had fought in the revolution. 

The recent work by Rafael ita Hilario Soriano, published in \')')\. focuses 
mainly on the revolution at the national level and Pam panga s pa 1 1 i c 1 P J 1 ,( )M on that 
level. She stresses the careers of her grandfather, ( iovernor 1 iburc ic> Milano, and 
her husbands grandfather, General Mariano Uanara of Nticva Iwija. I listoneal fig- 
ures she judges according to their commitment to the national vision and treats the 
revolution as a political and ideological affair among the elite, with no social 
change involved. To my observation that the revolution in Pampanga did not o\ c i 
turn the political and social orders, she countered: 


But why does Larkin expect the masses to administer the towns at that 
time. It must be acknowledged that during t he more than 300 years of Spanish 
occupation of the Philippines, no universal education was provided for the 
common man, not even at the elementary level. Only the families with means 
could provide for their childrens education/ 


598 


I \KkI\ l :ni ' the Rnxilutwn 

I bus. according to lui. onl\ the elite had the ability and, therefore the right, to 
lead the province and the country. 

\\ hat is common to the works of Aleiandrino. 1 lenson, and Soriano is their 
unwillingness to acknowledge the complexity of the revolution in Pampanga. 

1 hev exhihit little- svmpathv for the C apampangan noneomhatants trying to sur- 
vive- a wat in then midst, hollowing the revolution, the ideology of Osmeria and 
Quezon so a pt u red the imagination of the intellectual community and became so 
ingrained in the educational system, that aspirations contrary to the attainment of 
immediate independence and nationhood proved unacceptable. In C apampan- 
gan historiography nationalism has stolen the march as well. 

I urthermore, the three authors either ignore or disparage the role and the 
aims of the' poor in the* st niggle. I hcv belong to the landholding class, and the ten- 
ant-landlord confrontations in the province from the 020s to the 1 960s dissuade 
them from acknowledging am positive or active part played by the likes of l elipe 
Salvador oi Pedro Abaci Santos. 1 hose with power have thus tried to shape the 
collective memory of the revolution in Pampanga. 

In this century when the* bihpmos have won their independence three times 
from foreign overlords, there* exists a natural inclination to exalt individuals who 
achieved those* victories and who remained true to the cause. Others are found 
wanting or judged praiseworthy only to the extent that they emulated the advo- 
cates for inelcpciulcncc. I hose w ho did not share that v ision or pursued another 
are either ignored or deemed treacherous. In such ways have later generations con- 
structed the history of the revolution. 

C arcumstanccs in Pampanga, however, reveal that much more complicated 
forces operated. At a time when notions of nationhood were just coming into 
prominence, other aspirations captured the imagination of large segments of the 
public. I low those ideas clashed and how they were ultimately resolved constitute 
a real basis for understanding Philippine nationalism, lo dismiss those ideas and 
the confrontations surrounding them merely prolongs the time required to reach a 
clearer comprehension of the revolution as a whole. 

It is not for a foreigner to talk about the deeper meaning of the Philippine 
revolution or its role in the construction of nationalism. However, if the experi- 
ence of revolutionary war in mv native New York has any comparative value, it 
seems true that times of revolutionary upheaval foster a conflict rather than a unitv 
of thinking and purpose. ~ v) Out of the cauldron of confusion eventually emerges 
fused ideas that a nation employs to chart its future. 1 can only suggest that what 
happened in Pampanga needs to be examined in all its complexity in older to be 
useful to the national debate. 


599 


i m phii M'i'1%1 f'f • < »t ‘ 


Votes 


1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 


Juan S. Aguas, Juan ( .nwstorno Soto and I'aoisn . > 

of the Philippines, 1963). p. 58 

See The Pampangam: Colonial Society m a / '■ ■ 

gples. University of (California Press 19 

Imagined Communities Reflection i on the ( trrnn 

Verso, 1991). 

I» 0 • * 0 r f 7 •• r • * * * m Z f * { 

Alan Taylor, Liberty Men and (trait 1 9 rnprtrt*n ' ^ 

Maine Frontier, 1760- ! H20M Tia pel Ifill* 1 

William Cooper's I own: Power ansi Per : it ti t"n • ' 

Republic (New York: Knopf, 19 # >5;. ^ ^ 

RafacTita Hilario Soriano, A Shaft of / /^/>/ ( 7 ,ir/ ' ,r * 1 


272-3. 


ui 1 o' 


John Larkin, Sugar and the (friyim of Modern Pht.-.p ; 

Angeles: University of (California Press. p 

Larkin, Sugar , pp. 51-37. 

for a full discussion of this problem see Ken I l» • " 
demic Disease in the Colonial Philippine I'mmc < ’ ' 1 
1995), passim. 

U.S. National Archives, Bureau of Insular Affair 1 
For the text of the play, see Amelia Uipcna Bonifacio /' 
weights: Early American Occupation (Manila:/^* rz ■ncl.i louncl.mon f f f 

1972), pp. 177-206. On Tolentino’s life and wrinnp. 1 A,s,m '’ A ’^ Ut ^ ^ "" 

of Philippine Biography (Quezon ( aty: lilipiniana I 1 1 1 > 1 1 ‘ 

371-432. 


..<• \‘/cnt of !/•"< nr. pc ip: 

|' r mi < -I. . 1 ) I MU' I'"' I’lCNN. 


I I H I 1 ’ 

S edition Iw.’ulog I t.iv~ 


11. Aguas, passim; Manuel, I, 420-436. 

12. John A. Larkin, “The Capampangan Zarzuela: lluiut h>i 1 * 1 ‘ ■ 1 1 ‘ ' 

Southeast Asian Transitions: Approaches through Sot tnl / h -ten ). c<l Kuili 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978), pp. 1 38- 1 90. 

13. For the complete text in Capampangan and English of Alung l)im!i t r.msl.iu-d In |uan 

Aguas) see Rosalina Icban-Castro, Literature of the Parnpangos l.mil.i- l ni\cisit\ 

the East Press, 1981 ), pp. 1 82-3 1 2. 

14. Ely V. Javillonar, “The Significance of Mariano IVoceso Pahalan in C Capampangan 
Dramatic Literature” (Master’s thesis. University of the Philippines. 1 l H> I ). 

15. Act I, scene 3. Icban-Castro, p. 255. 

16. Act II, scene 1. Icban-Castro, p. 277. 

17. Act II, scene 13. Icban-Castro, p. 288. 

18. Jose Rizal, for example, uses the expression in Noli Me lunge re trails. Ma. Soledad 
Lacson-Locsin (Makati: Bookmark, 1996), p. 2. Also, in “Mi Ultimo Adios lie re- 
fers to the Philippines as “Pearl of the Orient Sea.” 

19. Edna Zapanta-Manlapaz, Kapampangan Literature: A Historic, it Surrey and Anthol- 

(Quezon (.ity: Atcneo dc Manila University Press, 198 1 ), p. 6; Lvangelma 


600 




I \Kkl\ I :ru > the Rewlutum 

I hl.irio 1 .u son. A apampangan U ;•///*/£ J Selected ( otnpendium and ( Critique (Ma- 
nila. National I listoi u al Institute. 1 9Sa . pp. 2 4) *3: Manuel. I. 923-929. 

J() I he trials <9 1 1 i v t apampangan were similar to those taced by the residents ot 
\\ estv hester i ount\. New Vuk. during the \ineriean Revolution, who become 
depolitki.vd as the\ hustled to \ur\i\c. See Sunt; boh Kim. 1 he l imits ot Politi- 
cization m the \meruan Revolution: 1 he hxpcricncc ot Westchester C ountv. New 
York, journal of \n.rruan fftaon. I X\\. SOS SS9. 

21. See Re\ naldo ( lemena lleto. I'a>u>n and Ret olution: Popular Movements in the P/n/ip- 
pmc'. 1SH) /9/0 Oue/on ( it\: \teneo de Manila l niversity Press, 19 ch. 0: 

I ai kin. Sugar, pp. 1 >1 1 M>. 

22. lose P Santos. I ■ Xapahant N n*i lutisan sa Pilipinas (Gerona, larlac: By 

the author. 1 4) >0 ) . pp 11 J 1 . 

23. Revnaldo C I let < > . '( h atoi s ami t he ( row d: Philippine Independence Politics, 1910- 
19 1a." in Reappraising an I tnpnr: Xeu Perspectives on Philippine-American Ht story, 
ed. Petei W Stanle\ H ambndge: ( ommittee on \meric.md ast Asian Relations, 

1 larvaid l mversitv. 1 9Sa ). pp. NS 1 13. 

29. William ( ooper\ loa n. pp. * l 2 

25. |ose Ale|.indrino. / Ac Price of hreedom: l pisodc> and Anecdotes of Our Struggles for 
hreedom, nans, lose M. Alejandrino (Manila: M. C olcol. 19*9), p. 43. 

26. M.uiano A. I lenson, /Ac Province of l\wipanga and its linens, 9th ed. (Angeles, Pam- 
panga: Bv the Author. 1 9(>S, pp. 30-32. * l - *3). 

27. Soriano, p. 20 . 

28. I am indebted to Resil Mojares for this observation about the emerging dominance ot 
the ide as ( > f C Ysmena and the transformation ot thinking about the revolution. He 
considers these matters in “Reinventing the Revolution: Sergio C Ysmena and Post- 
Revolut ionarv Intellectuals in the Philippines,'' paper presented at the Association ot 
Asian Studies Meeting, I lonolulu. April 1096. 

29. In addition to the w'orks cited earlier by Iaylor and Kim, see C.arl Lotus Becker, /Ac 

History of Political Parties in the Province of New )ork\ l 60-1 6 (Madison: Univer- 

sity of Wisconsin Press, I960). 


601 


Ilocanos and the 1S 1 K> Revolution 

I . Shi i . W 


C live Christie’s recent work, A \lnrlcrn II: 

(1996), expands the themes presented m Bern d c t S<>«! t •< * 1 ■■■■■• ■'>< <" ,J 

munities { Woods 1996a). Christie explores the explosion - >l ethnn tensions in 
20th-century Southeast Asia. The diverse etlum ciul.iw- m di.mm.n. I li.nl.uul. 
and Indonesia lead Christie to question the < on veil t u >n.d idea <»t Sout he.ist \si.tn 
“countries.” Similarly, the 1896 Philippine Revolution must l>e laictulb detined. 
Did the Philippines have a revolution ini 896 or did I agalog pn»\ uu cs sut ton tid- 
ing Manila have an uprising? Breaking it down lurt her, one m.t\ ask: was it a popu- 
lar lagalog movement or did it represent the disgrunt led few r I I use quest tons have 
been raised and, to a certain extent, answered by Philippine histoitans. 

Scholarship on the 1896 Revolution concentrates on the lagalog areas. 
Ilocanos in the Ilocos area arc rarely mentioned in connection with this event. I his 
oversight is defended based on the limited role Ilocanos played in the IS *6 Reso- 
lution. Indeed, as shown below, from 1896 to 1898 Ilocanos protected Spanish 
friars from invading lagalog forces and were commended as loyal subjects by 
Spain. Does this have a face of a national rcvol u t ion 

Ilocanos, however, took a much more active role m the Philippine American 
War (Scott 1986; Ochosa 1989). This paper explains why Ilocanos ref rained from 
joining the 1896 Revolution while two years later they tenaciously fought Ameri- 
can encroachment. Certainly there were exceptions to the general Ilocano re- 
sponses. In this essay, however, generalities are made regarding Ilocanos during the 
last decade of the 19th century. To be sure, not all Ilocanos supported the' friars nor 


602 


\\ i H M is Iu\.:r:o> litui the Resolution 

did .til light against the \niaK.ith. Several llocanos. including General Antonio 
I un.i. lsalulo «.le Ion Reves. and Gregorio Aglipay. played important roles in the 
Propaganda Movement and the l 890 Revolution. Caveats are given their due be- 
low. I lowever. a future detailed study will increase our understanding ot Uocano 
factions during this period. Moreover, tor sake of clarity, llocanos referred to in 
this study, are. tor the most part, the farmers and every day tao ot llocos Norte. 
Iloios Stir. and 1 a l nion provinces. 

I his st nil \ begins with an introduction to the llocos area. 1 his context in- 
cludes lloi.tno origins, the .Spanish invasion, and atholicism in llocos. Ihis in- 
formation setves as background to understanding the Uocano Myth which is 
ile. tit with in a latter section. Uocano responses to the 1890 Revolution and the 
Philippine Amerii.m War make up the main body of this studies. 1 contend that 
llocanos did not join m the 1 89o Revolution because of their ethnic identity and 
their economic and educational experiences. 1 lowever, religion and Gregorio Agli- 
pay spurred llocanos to reverse their passive position two years later. 


Uocano Origins and Earl} Outside Contact 

There are two contrasting views on Uocano origins. 1 he conventional theory is that 
llocanos are descendants of' ethnic Malay groups that spread throughout insular 
Southeast Asia (Rogers ITS 1 )). Otley Royer, a proponent ot this hypothesis, con- 
cluded that it was the more "advanced Malays" who populated northwest Luzon 
(Beyer 1953). 'lb be sure, the pre-1 lispanic Malays on Luzon's northwestern coast 
had sophisticated irrigation and navigation skills. I his knowledge, in part, allowed 
them to dominate the various ethnic mountain tribes thev encountered. 

A more recent theorv on Uocano origins is that northern Luzon inhabitants 
are “the end results of both the long process of evolution and the later movements 
of people. Thev stand coequal as their groups without anyone being the dominant 
group socially and culturally" (Jocano 1975, 23). Madamba and Jocano believe 
ancient indigenous and unique cultures were part of early Philippine history 
(Madamba 1983). These scholars posit that the original Uocano, like the indig- 
enous groups in Java, Borneo, and Australia, represent processes in evolution. 1 his 
theory explains vvhv llocanos, particularly those from llocos Norte, are darker 
skinned compared with other Filipinos. 1 he syncretic peoples that evolution and 
migration produced would include strains of Malay and Negroid features. 

Uocano is a very developed Indonesian division of the Austronesian language 
family. Pronunciation and accents change from province to province but there te- 
mains in Uocano a particular “hardness and bluntness... possibly reflecting the 
harsh life of the Uokano — thus, giving them the impression that it lacks the wistful 
tone of Visavan on or the declamatory tone of lagalog (Foronda 19 1, 2). 
llocanos are the third largest linguistic group in the Philippines. 1 hey are numeri- 
cally second only to lagalog in printed Filipino literature. 


603 


nu mu iitim ri v< 


I hcllocosarca (present-day I locos Norte. li<> 
quented by foreigners long before the Spanish t r r •. 
the 10th century A. I). China was aware of non! 
Dynasty (1348-1644), the Chinese junk trading 
western Luzon. During the 1 ^th and 1 ith u niuru 
and China flourished (Keesing 1062 It is not : i 
Spanish early on were const rained to bin hi r« >rr s < u 
“protection against Indian, Japanese, and < him 
1903-1909, 7:165; 9:74). 


r < >b 


.m * Oat ill 
Ming 

• :u: n. nth 

i l:i>v .inos 

• : Mat the 
n v • *ast tor 
K< »1h r t son 


were met 
i a ik 


The Spanish in Ilocos 

Spanish incursions into Ilocos bc^an in I S"\], |u.m <i< Vti :■>. .if • 

exploration of the Ilocos area (Jorontl. i I V>“* I ; I >c I < >s l<< lS‘»o V' : f :uti.it 

ing the Vigan area, Salcedo and his mell moved on to I ao.ig V. Ill !( tin 
by hostile locals. A company of Spanish soldiers headed r » s 
Saavedra remained in the Lioag area to guarantee peace. S.iLedo n tinned to \la 
nilawith stories and 1,000 ounces of gold. Subsequent Spam di •. ph »i at i< >ns ahmg 
the Ilocos coast would find a bit more gold but not the souk e ot tins piev. ions 
metal. Keesing posits the early Spaniards in Ilocos were primanb ntnuinai \s nh 
locating the precious metal s source. 

Disappointment gave way to resign at ion . I be Spanish w e i c in I i <u os to stay, 
even without gold mines. But what to call tins place' I hcie ,m speculations re- 
garding the provincial name “Iloct is. I )e Los Keyes wrote that the- Spanish desig- 
nated the area /loc from the Tagalog word Hog meaning nvei (which were plentiful 
in Ilocos). Another theory posits that the islands st ret c lung f n >m I ai w an to north 
ern Luzon were called Liu Kiu (Japans Riu Km island chain). Adding a y to this, 
Spanish chroniclers called the islands Ylul <us, a title that became associated with 
northwestern Luzon. Samtoy” was also a designate of this area. I ra\ Andres C arro 
claims that the term came from the Ilocano phrase s<io ini toy or our language here 

(Foronda 1971, 33-36). 

Ilocos originally encompassed a much I arger geographical arc* a than it does 
a ^* ^ Census of 1918 states that at that time of the arrival of the Spaniards 
t ere was already a region known as Ilocos...’ The region then comprised the 
present civil provinces of Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Stir, A lira. La Union, together with 
Lepanto and Bontok. It was a large and extensive province, famous for its gold 
mines, which traders from China and Japan usually came to exploit" (Foronda 
1971, 36). Ilocos eventually encompassed modern-day La Union ( made a separate 
p ovince in 1850), Ilocos Sur, and Ilocos Norte. These two latter provinces were 
, ^ T , tC * n ^ due to continual revolts in the Ilocos area (Keesing 1062). 16- 
^ . ^ C ° S ^° rte ls t ^ le Philippines northernmost province. 1 he C Cordilleras sepa- 
rom Abra, Cagayan, and Kalinga-Apayao provinces. 


604 


\\ t H 'i ^ ;/v ISW* Revolution 


Spanish Priests in Ilocos 

I o>n \la t i ik i k'ln J.uniN that 'the Spanish hisiorv ot the Philippines begins and 
ends witli the tii.u \i\ 1 ikcwisc. the Blair and Robertson volumes are prefaced 

w nh these v. oinments: 


} !, • ::k .V;-. mu Sp.mish establishments in the Philippines were a 

n.hMo': .uni in : ' the punvi sense a u'lonv. 1 hexwere founded and minis- 

u u vl in tin- • mteies: ot lehejon lathet than a commerce or industry. In examin- 
ii. - i In poiiiiv ni .ulm::'.isiiatu>n of the Philippines then we must be prepared to 
ihnl .1 s»*i; i't own .eiiment wiulei whuh the living hodv is ecclesiastical vi- 
es 0> 

I he August mian pnests who accompanied Salcedos 13“^ expedition mark 
the initial C atholu prosckti/mg campaign in Ilocos. ]uan boronda believes the 
eail\ c oik cut t at ion ot priests m northern 1 u /on (eight out ot Is according to 
Phelan and l V I os Rex c.O demonstrates that the August inians hoped to evangelize 
|| lK os within -t bt tet period. I low e\ en the August inians first two \ ears in the area 
garnered meaget lonxetMons. 1 he continued hostility ‘between the Spanish soldiers 
and the indigenous peoples made evangelizing ettorts difficult. A Spaniard w ho 
observed these early obstacles wrote: “...the religious (priests) ot our lather San 
Artist m xxent to that province and they lived in the new citx* with the Spaniards: 
but thev did not work tor the ministry ot the lndios, tor it seemed to them that it 
was not vet op pot t tine, because ot the xvars in other parts ot the country (He Los 
Rexes IS 90, I : •!()). 

At times the priests were advocates tor the local population. In 13~4, a priest 
in Ilocos informed the Spanish Viceroy: 

Although the people never attacked the Spanish still thev defended 
themselves and their villages and would not surrender unless conquered by 
force ot arms, t onsequently, all those villages were entered in the same way 
.liter summoning to submit peaceably and to pax* tribute unless they wanted 
war. Thev replied that they would first [Move those to whom they were to pay 
tribute, (donsequently the Spanish attacking them, an entrance was made 
among them bv force of arms and the village was overthrown and whatever 
was found pillaged. I hen the Spanish sent to have the natives summoned to 
submit peacefully. V hen the natives came thev asked them immediately to give 
them tribute in gold in an excessive amount for which they promised to give 
them the rights of peace (Blair and Robertson 1903-1909, 34: 286-287). 

In 1 373 Vigan became the missionary center for Ilocos. Subsequently, on 3 
January 138b, the Augustinians founded the pueblos of Laoag, Santa Lucia, 
Iagudin, and Sevilla. 


60S 


i hi mu im 


Some argue rhat Ilocanos cmbr.u : < 
religion entrenched in their tommunmc s o I > 
had a sophisticated metaphysical belief 
Ilocanos mirrored other Southeast \sian • >. u ■ . 
trappings of “world religions toc*.prc • r . ^ ■ i r e. * 
metaphysical beliefs astounded the tir r < 
worked in the I locos area, lather |uan < #<»r / » 

1 586: In certain adjacent islands - ailed t Ii< > » > 
fering him many sacrifices in payment and prat:: 
gave them” (Mendoza 1586. 146 More than t:.:< 
Protestant missionaries in llocos wroi- 


*,> ssorld 
I i« u anos 
I Inis, 
and 
.»s iit»ar\ 

. s who 
it this in 
de\ d. of 


. »t the t it \t 


As one studies the Iloc.ano people .ni<i 
their customs and habits, their doubts and u e it t 
they arc more and more convinced that Rom m ( 
little to them in the way ol conversion It rather n , 

their part to add to t he* superstitions and unwr in cm :• : 1 4 • 

the forms and dogmas of the church. I lies c-e.c up im. <*r 

church gave them the opportunity for public displ-e. d p i .mtu at nm 

of many of their spirits, and furnished them w ith dc hum f. »i m , 

monies for their marriages, births and cleat hs Ik u ‘i'u s i: | 

crction appear so vividly as in t hei r prac t ic es a t t h< time • >t d< u 1 1 » i > » 1 1 11 

147-148). 

Indeed, despite the large Catholic churches in ll<K.m<> town pl.t/. is. sju>l.ns 
question the influence of Catholicism in 1 Si h and I'Jih-u-imm 1 1 < k ,m< > soc icty. 
Professor Porter claims that the large church buildings represent ( atholn isms tail 
ure rather than success among Ilocanos: 

Although the most massive churches ate in the II<>I\<>s legion. du\ in 
large measure point out the failure of t he August i n i.m s in t h i s a i ea . Ka 1 1 ie i i ha n 
devote themselves to better teaching of the ( .hutch s doc time*, the eighteen 
century [sic] Augustin ians devised a church -building program that would line 
the Ilokano native into the dogma by the symbolic nature of t he building. 1 Ik* 
natives did become “Catholics” but at the expense of understanding (65 6 l). 

rhe llocos topography made evangelism difficult. Remote barrios and nsittty 
dotted the llocos area. Many friars hoped that large buildings would impress the 
rural Ilocanos and cause them to worship or move to the ( atthol ic centers. 1 his did 
not always happen. Vintar, llocos Norte, is an example of how areas were some- 
what neglected by friars for a great number of years. 

Vintar remained a of Bacarra until 1774. 1 he towns increased popula- 
tion facilitated its political status change. In 1774 Vintar received its own priest 


606 


\\ I >v M W 


I!oi .ino> and the IS'H'* Revolution 

and became a p.uish under the archdiocese ot Nueva Segovia. In 1800 the town 
rccei\ cd its t u s t an elected magistrate ot a township), Agustin 

Yinova. I Iis siiuosoi. \gustm l cano 1 1801). began constructing the San Nicolas 
( lunx h the pi event da\ center of worship for Yintarinian Catholics. The church 
parallels the \ intai River. vet it is high enough to escape damage due to annual 
tloodinu- Subsequent priests, including Mariano Ortiz and Ricardo Alonzo, added 
to the const! iic non. 

\ s a /•;»//./ toi more than two centuries, Yintar remained at the periphery ot 
the ( at hoi ic church. San Nicolas archival records indicate that the majority ot 
\ 1 mail mans were* not converted until alter it received its own parish and priest. 
\ 'intai s reputation as a difficult assignment was due to the many unconverted on 
the per apher\ ot the I a rue tow n (some ot the barrios were more than 30 kilometers 
from the futbLivion) . Flu construction ot the large San Nicolas parish in the 
fwbLmon w as meant to draw out its geographically remote citizens, loday the town 
remains a svmbol ot folk Christi.mitv (Fdroza 089; Woods 1996b; Jocano 1981). 

Iloeanos and the Resolution 

hconomic inequities have caused main* revolutions. I hey certainly played a role in 
sparking the 1 S^O Philippine Revolution since Spanish economic policies a fleeted 
all 1 i 1 i pi nos. At the outset ot their rule, the Spanish government used the 
nnomienda svstem. Spanish citizens were given the right to collect taxes. In addi- 
tion, la ri;e tracts ot land were sold or chartered to Spaniards. As time passed, many 
ot the se lands were turned over to the church and were administered by the friars 
(De la (Aosta 1961 ). Thus, triars were blamed for abusing their power as land man- 
agers. While some of these criticisms were valid, it was also through managing large 
land holdings that the indigenous dustrado class emerged during the 19th century, 
hventuallv, an mdio upper c lass was able to send their sons to the finest Kuropean 
universities. 

Landholding rights and increased land values precipitated strained relations 
between dustrados and friars (Schumacher 1991, 130-133; McAndrew 1994). But 
those who owned vast amounts of land were few. 1 he majority of Filipinos eked 
out an existence as landless or tenant farmers. 1 heir brutish lives were made palat- 
able through loan extensions and perpetual debt. 

The Philippine Propaganda Movement blamed the Philippines' poor eco- 
nomic situation on Spanish policies. Rizal and Morga demonstrated that priot to 
Spanish arrival rice production, precious metal extraction, and interregional trade 
flourished. After the Spaniards arrived, the Philippines began to decline in all these 
areas (Sucesos de las Idas 1 890). The Manila galleon trade did facilitate international 
trade (Reed 1 978; Schurz 1 985). However, this was a limited and strictly regulated 
trade. Manila's Chinese communitv profited from this trade while benefits rarely 
trickled down to Filipino farmers (See Ang 1990). 1 bus, the Filipinos had legiti- 
mate complaints about Spanish economic policies. 


60 


[Hi 1*1 III 


>uc/ 

mo. 

urn* 

l\ IH* 


Mciji Japans meteoric ri a * m: ; 

Canal, and the Pacific Railroad aii ; * 

Yet the Philippines remained sngi u ' ' 
servative Spanish governments a. nm«»:. 
of political and soc ial progre in r «r ; 

I hese economic machination 
Ilocanos were at times disgruntled \ > ; 

18th-century tobacco rnono|>oK can ! I » 
tions, Ilocanos clandestinely traded v. * • ** 

Silang’s 18th-century revolt was in pan i « • - - * r 

nities a pro-British llocos would garn : i 

however, Ilocanos accepted their • <*i ■ 

below. 

I he llocos area is a narrow strip of i.uid 
in length. I he total area of llocos ' «<»r IM " 
hectares but the arable land consist » of * ■ %n ‘ ; 
area). I he llocos area is bound bv tin Soutii ( 
dillera mountain range to the east. I he t"p n " r ! : 
rocky, and barren soil which m coiiip.iri <»n to r 
Mountain Province, or central I.u/on yield *• 1 • :f ‘ 

in farming, llocos experienced a drauiatu population n t 
century (McLcnnon 1955, 174). ( .ms US f a OI ( Is I Ml 1 1 * a t 
were 60,328 inhabitants on the llocos co., m. IV. I M tin m,ml., , l,.,d lumped to 
more than 150,000. In 1003 llocos Sm was tin mo ., <h-nsc i . |'<-|ml.ind piovmcc 
with 389 person per square mile, and llocos None tanked mm nil, aimm;.; the SI 
provinces. 


Ik 


asv dm in; 
that m 1 


Oc Mire, 
v ul.ir the 
♦ > i z t f 1 1 n i 
i he go dc 
« 'Uponu 
i«»Nt pan. 
s noted 

m ) km 

tiie land 
the < or* 
iw lulls, 
m \ allcv, 

dlttlc ult\ 

the 1 Sth 
hs there 


Hemmed in by the sea on the west and the ( < > r d 1 1 1 e i a s < > n 1 1 u cast tlu mm tig 
Ilocano population should have been ripe for rev < >1 1 dm mg the I ‘>t h mmirv. but 
as Scott notes: 1 he historic Ilocano reaction to these conditions, however, had 

been out-migration rather than agrarian revolt (Scott 1 9.SO, M. I he lloc ani/ation 
of surrounding provinces was the Ilocano response to them difficult economic 
situation. Ilocanos moved out to the Cagayan Valley and sm rounding prov inces. 

hey did not stop there. I hey moved to the most re m o t c a rca s o f t h e a i c h i pc 1 ago. 
In 1900 f rederick H. Sawyer characterized Ilocanos as ever reads to migiate. 1 le 
went on to write: “Ilocanos — this hard-working and industrious race occupies 
the northern and western shores of Luzon... the lloc aims are ever ready to emigrate, 
and besides the places I have mentioned, there are thousands of them in Manila 
other parts of the islands. I have no doubt that there is a great future for this 
h ; ’ ^ ntc, P r * s * n 8» an d industrious people (S awycr 1900, o ). It is not surprising 
percent of the Filipinos who traveled to Hawaii from 1920 to 1 950 were 
r . C ^ ocos provinces. At present Ilocanos make up the largest percentage 
o ilipinos in the United States. Brenda R< jot notes that immigration is rarely 
cone a one. 1 hat is to say there is usually a family member in the sending and 


608 


\\ V H M >s 


Iii\.sno> ,:r 4 d :> c !$'>(> Rr:\>lut:on 

host u)imir\ i » I the migrant i Root 198M. Certainly this is true of llocanos. Ihe 
case ot the Ilmano migration in atul out of Mindoro clearly demonstrates this 
( Sc hull R> 1 >1 >. 

Ilocanos responded to economic pressures bv migration rather than uprising 
because there we re ver\ few large lloeos land grants they could attach themselves 
to. I he growing IKnano population reduced the land passed on through inherit- 
ance itoi those fortunate enough to own land), l hev did not face the problems 
found in the* enormous land holdings in the laiialoti regions. Mabini castigated the 

V V v' V 

)>h 'tu'o and I agalog :l:t>n\:t{o> toi not understanding the cause ot conflict due to 
these large lain 1 holdings: 

W v haw been witnesses ot unjust spoliation ot lands in the south ot 
1 u/on. and out duui term in the Clovcrnmcnt ot Malolos and the travels we 
were toued to make through the north not onh corroborated our sad experi- 
ence. but likewise made us understand that the evil is very grave* and quite 
i^enetal. \\ hen wc weie m the C eminent ot Malolos, some Hustni(io> told us 
with great feat that the d\ ot liberty had made socialist or communist ideas 
spring up m tlu minds ot the masses, who were dissatisfied with certain prop- 
el ties ot doubtful origin. 1 hese tailed to understand that the discon- 

tented belong prec isel\ to the category ot the poor w ho have been despoiled ot 
their land b\ the hacenderos and great landowners (2: lao-laT 

John P. Me Andrew s latest w ork on the friar and hticcndem lands ot Cavite 
illustrates the power of land. 1 le notes that the increased value ot land motivated 
friars and indigenous land ow ners to become vigilant in protecting their lands 
(McAndrew 1 99-t, 26-33). As Schumacher correctly points out, land became the 
focus of attention leading to the revolution due to its increase in value: 

In w hat sense then were the friar lands a major factor in the Revolution? 

The answer will be found only within general context of land problems at the 
time of the Revolution. 1 he decades preceding the Revolution had seen a great 
growth in the value of land around Manila, especially land to be used for the 
export crop of sugar (131). 

If indeed this was one of the motives for the revolution, it is little wonder 
that it appeared irrelevant to llocanos. In 1903 the average land holding of culti- 
vated land in I locos Norte was 0.62 hectares. Ihe Augustinians in lloeos restricted 
their land holding to church land and small parcels of land to farm in order to sup- 
port themselves (Porter 1 980, 26). 1 bus, enormous land holdings were not part of 
the Ilocano social or political order. There was not the motive to revolt in order to 
gain large amounts of land. 

A more subjective element mav have contributed to the lack of Ilocano par- 
ticipation in the 1 896 Revolution. For lack of a better term, it is called the "Ilocano 


609 


mi mn ii’i’iNi pi •. 


Myth” (Alvarez 1970: Porter 1980: F>; rr '' 
in literature, drama, and Philippine high 
“hard working. ’ Certainly a complin • • ! 
claim that one is nagnget (industrious- I 
worked in the Ilocos area perpetuated dir imar 
the “indolence of most Pilipinos P> or and K 
Ilocano scholar Morencia Kigucra explains the 
terms of competition: 

First, an Ilokano tries to emulate i r. *• 
or in resources: and the pro css to o.' -;,r 

side red without being compared to other ••t<>up 
aware of their solidarity as a people l •% re. on <>• 
tongue, and at the same time of their distun ;:,, n ■ 
people, the ilocanos also try to einul.ne or < • r. 
groups of people. This leads to the (act th.it th l!o : >t . e 
other people (8-9). 

Whether one accepts this Ilocano myth, '< ‘ ^ lhlt li<u m “ s u s l >0,ukd 10 

their difficult surroundings with hard work. I Inis, llot.mos B.i\c t:u ‘aigcst num 
her of irrigated lands in the Philippines. In fact I 1 m,Us l ^ ,n 1 ! • 1 ouglumt 
Southeast Asia only Bali rivals the Ilocos area in tetrns <>t nte/aud lands (lewis 
1991). I he construction and maintenance of the 1 meat cd la in I s <. ici n a ndc d 1 h k a no 
energies throughout the Spanish period. Could it In that lluuims "etc too Busy 
concentrating on improving their economic situation togi\c lull dc\otion to a rc- 
nnote rebellion in the southern section of their island:' 


a f .K tcri/cd 
’timis and 
other in to 
: v a 11 n v. ho 

• mpared to 
>. 1 2 ~). 
h.ir.u ter in 


Ilocano Education and the Revolution 

Southeast Asian scholars recognize the importance of ediuution in formulating 
nationalism and revolution in the area. One can only imagine what Indonesian 
geography students thought when they first compared the si/e of the Nietherlands 
with the Dutch Hast Indies! Education played a significant role in clevclopi ng a na- 
tional consciousness among Filipinos. Exlucat i ng Filipinos was not Spain’s priority 
in the Philippines. Yet, during the 1 9th century ilustnuln families were able to send 
their sons to European universities. The Propaganda Movement was one result of 
this higher educational attainment. Political writings were direc ted to all Filipinos, 
ut were certainly best understood by those who were involved in some type of 
education on the archipelago. 

It was also in the Philippines that education spurred the idea of revolution. 
As Schumacher notes, Only in the Philippines was the colonial power so ‘unprac- 
tical as to allow higher education” (39). Catholic institutions Became centers 


610 


WOOl Vs l/oeunos und the 1 S VO Revolution 


tor rc\ olm ion.ii \ thought and intellectual exchange. Schumacher comments 
that what made the 1 S9o a national revolution as opposed to a "local mutiny was 
the spread of the propaganda literature. Filipinos in local C atholic universities 
were exposed to this literature. 1 'his stimulated debate about revolution and 
freedom. 

IUk anos did not ha\ e large universities where this type ot activity could flour- 
ish. \t the end of the l 9th centurv Uocanos were not well educated nor was educa- 
tion a pi lorn \ foi them, This was one legacy ot the Augustinians in the 1 locos area. 
Phelan notes that "the Augustinian parishes in llokos and the \ isayas were prob- 
ablv the worst instructed in the Islands" (Phelan 1939, 00). One reason tor this 
was the large population and the remote villages that the Augustinians did not 
reach. There was also a relativclv low ratio ot priests to Uocanos. The C uia Officiiil 
dc Li> isLi> I ilipiiiii /<S\S‘3 records that there were onlv 1 2 priests in 1 locos Norte and 
1 3 foi I locos Sur. At that time the two provinces had a population ot 08.224 and 
1 1 1,(03, respect i\ el\. With all the remote barrios and risinis the priests were over- 
extended. The Nueva Segovia Diocese had 131 Filipino secular priests. This was 
the lowest percentage of Filipino curates ot all five dioceses. One school ot higher 
education was set up in the llocos area (Yigan). This school was constantly in fi- 
nancial trouble. It was closed and opened several times during the 19th century. 
When it was open it supplied students only three ot the five vears needed tor a 
university degree. Students would go to Manila and finish their education at Santo 
Tomas or San Juan dc l.ctran. 

Isabclo de los Reyes was atypical in terms ot llocano education. Verv few 
Uocanos traveled to Manila, much less hurope, tor education. Thus, during 1890- 
1891 onlv two llocano students were enrolled at San Juan de Letran. In a larger 
context, ot the 3,000 students studying in Manila during the 1890-1891 school 
year less than 4 percent were Uocanos (Porter 1980, 29). At the time Uocanos con- 
stituted 27 percent of the archipelago's population. 

In the 1 locos region secondary education was available through schools set 
up by individual "professors." However, dire economic straits made even this edu- 
cation inaccessible to most Uocanos. In Laoag, for example. Professor Adiate ran 
the only secondary school. Despite having a monopoly, Adiate only had 40 first- 
year and 40 second-year students during the 1897-1898 school year. Professor 
Porter concludes: 

There were other schools throughout the llokos region with varying 
numbers of students; these, however, underline the fact that the vast majority 
of elite Ilokanos who sent their children on to school could not afford the ex- 
pense of education in Manila. Both secondary and college education in the 
more prestigious institutions of Manila throughout the later part of the nine- 
teenth century remained in the hands of the Tagalog elites (30). 


nu mu i i*i*i n i 


Schumacher correctly posits: 


I his national consciousness and the 
its catalyst, came into being < hicfK » * ?r . 

higher education. No doubt that en »t ■ 
tuated by the experiences of the f ilipino • ;<: 
desire for liberal and progressive reform-. !<•- 

If this is true, it is not surprising that b*> »n<> *•* • i}'-ier\ 

of a national consciousness. 

Ilocano Identity and the Revolution 

After thcTreaty of Biak-na-Bato the Philippine re-.cilut ion . vi to move 

to Hong Kong. But with the outbreak of t lu Sp.m: ^ 1 in A ‘ v 1 V? UMlu 

nitics for final victory and an establishment of an uni pen* : :\i i ! ' i *pp 
more realistic. As Commodore ( ,corgc i >ewcy sank tin- Spanish lie 1 .i.pmo sol 
diers were on the verge of ousting the Spanish ti<>m the w.iihv. . u\ <<: \lamla. 
Manuel Ttnio of Nueva Ecija was a general who was ret «. in missioned in lone 1 S‘)8 
as a colonel in the Philippine Army. In the midsummer <>t \S')K In- h t mu t<> liber- 
ate the I locos area. I he goal was to remove Spa n i si i a 1 1 1 1 1 or 1 1 . 

I n response to I inios fast -moving a r m \ . Iloios ( inu-iimi 1 n i u 1 1 u 1 olo dc 
Lara made preparations to evacuate Vigan. When he ami Ins loinuip m * ' 1 Spanish 
friars, soldiers, and bureaucrats reached I.aoagan ama/mg thing happened. 1 .mag's 
Ilocano mayor, Aguedo Agbayani, pleaded for the Spanish govemoi i«> make a 
stand in L.aoag. Agbayani guaranteed that he woitltl rail <>m stippoi it i s to fight 
for the Spaniards. Scott and Porter note that Agbayani wanted t<> make a stand 
with the Spanish because he feared that Tinio represented an invading lagalog 
Katipunan army marching into Ilocano territorv (Stott 1‘fSt). I ; I ottet 1 '>80, 

84-85). 

rhis incident occurred two years after the Philippine resolution li.ul begun. 
It points to another reason why Ilocanos were ret teem to )<)in the it solution. 
Ilocanos rarely act independently of relatives. It is these deep Ilocano kinship rela- 
tions that add to the Ilocano myth. This inie use ethnic I ova 1 1 y does not nega t e et h- 
mc loyalties among other Philippine groups. But as one scholar rightly puts 
it: Relatives are important, but the importance is relative (Lynch 1 l ) 3a, 3). 
Jeremias Calixto, an internationally known Ilocano poet, noted in an interview: 

We (Ilocanos) don’t have much, so we have to work hard; anti also be- 
cause of this reason you know the Ilocanos are what we tall clannish. VCe 
Ilocanos have been accused of being clannish. There is a strong kinship among 
Ilocanos. I hats why even now in spite of what they say against Marcos you 
cannot just say things against Marcos among Ilocanos, because in blood \vc arc 


612 


\\ H M >S I/oeunos . vui the l S'-) 6 Revolution 


Ilot.mos .uni we bear the pain ot another lloeano (Galixto, 12 December 
1 1 )0 2 ). 

C )nc reason for the importance ot kinship among Ilocanos is their geographi- 
cal seitinu. Iloeos has limited arable land. With this factor we should keep in mind 
the following stnd\ on kinship in the Philippines: 

1 ver\ wotthwhile bit ot evidence we have points to the fact that one ot 
the bluest reasons behind clannishness, as defined bv proposition 1, is simply 
the relative availabilitv ot kinsmen. 1 he higher their percentage among the 
local population, the higher their representation in the informants universe 
( I vne h 1 ^3h. ”). 

If one main factor for kinship intensity is availabilitv of kin, the 1 locos area, 
which as early as 1 928 Never mentioned as desperately needing to move part ot its 
population due to the limited space, fits the pattern for intense kinship. 

The solidarity among Ilocanos must also be seen in the light of their history. 

I he spread of lloeano influence, the displacement of lbanags, Gaddangs, 
I inggians, and other mountain peoples by lloeano migration could have been 
done only through group cooperation. 1 his intense kinship system in part explains 
the close-knit unity among lloeano families. In a critical analysis of a popular 
lloeano folk song, “Pamulinawcn, lloeano specialist hmilio L. Alvarez concludes 
that the song exemplifies the closeness of the lloeano family: “ The Ilocanos are 
the most clannish people of this country and are, as a general rule, irresistibly 
influenced by the inherent propensity to group and stick together among them- 
selves in social interrelations and hence are likened to the Pamulinawcn in cohe- 
siveness” (24). 

“Behavior within the barrio is, in general, kinship behavior," so begins Daniel 
Schcans' chapter on behavior and kinship in an lloeano setting (56). Anthropolo- 
gists have studied the remarkable kinship patterns among Ilocanos (Nydeggers, 
1966; Pcrticrra 1988). One of the many conclusions they have arrived at is that 
lloeano terms indicate how important relatives are. Blood relations or the term 
used for kinship is agkabagian (of the same body). 1 his is derived from the root 
word bagi (body). Raul Pcrticrra notes that the intense relationship patterns among 
Ilocanos transcend the common “class' distinctions one might find in societies. 

Taealoes were in the eve of the 1896 Revolution. I his was in some sense 
natural since Manila was Spains political center within the archipelago. In 1896 
Ilocanos were not going to jump into what they perceived was a mainly Iagalog 
uprising. The intense kinship patterns among Ilocanos necessitated group action 
or inaction. Two years after the 1896 Revolution Ilocanos remained wary of their 
southern neighbors. When General Tinio and his men marched into Batac they 
were not given a warm lloeano welcome. A Batac historian records this event: 1 he 

arrival of General Manuel Tinio with his band of Katipuneros were not given the 


613 


(Hi I'M!! lltlNI FM 


cooperation and courtesy as expected f t:.* ; 
cruelties and crimes they committed m i. <■ » 

I locanos accused lagalngs of disruptu * v 
In particular. General I inio incurred Il< » .m< » w r •' 
between Tinio and Aglipay. I his .u rimomou 
deep ethnic distrust. 

Ilocano Responses to the Philippine- Xnierican War 


The reasons for their dramatic shift from passr.r r 
fighting against American aggression are too mm 
However, the primary reason for the striking • >• 
tudes was the varied nature of t lie two c on flic t s I < »r ! • * 

resented a pol i t ical response t o social, econo mi and }><»*: i ; ■ : i tie war 

against the United States had more to do with w hat t tu < u u l : d t . :n» im 
portant aspect of their existence their metaphysu .d belief I n u< u I •• u * mos re 
sponded to a war whose final outcome could potential I \ h.me.c- : n Ueed«>m to 

worship. 


William Henry Scott s book lloaino !<( /uni t to A»i< > u Ig ^ I K) ()()- 

1901 details the battles that Ilocanos and Americans engaged m during, that pe- 
riod. Yet he notes that Ilocano motives for fighting m this w.n remain nebulous: 

But individual decisions to risk death m battle t « » r t p.imotu e .iuw. 
whether as volunteers or conscripts, were stirclv made t‘»i a \.uut\ <>t pet son. d 
reasons. Men of property, privilege and prestige may lia\r hoped to pieseixc 
their positions or even i m prove them, while peasant yo' 1 1 h s at 1 1 u < » t lua caul of 
the social scale, with no hope of pa trinionv, ma \ lias c - f < > 1 1 n » 1 the noble* ad \ e n 
tureofwar a welcome relief from penury and hunger. And, like- the ma|<>t 1 1 \ m 
between men willing to follow accustomed leadership evetvhodc \sas tc 
sponsive to social dynamics like peer pressure, familv honot <>i local lov.dtv. 
and the dictates of utang na loob ( 48 - 49 ). 

I believe Ilocano motives were less vague and primarily centered on religion, 
three issues support this thesis: the importance of religion in Ilocano society, the 
role of Bishop Gregorio Aglipay, and early American attitudes against the domi- 
nant Ilocano religion. 

As noted earlier, Ilocanos accepted the Catholic faith without losing their 
metaphysical animist-based beliefs. Folk Christi anity continues to pervade every 
aspect of Ilocano life, including rituals and rites surrounding agriculture, death, 
burials, conception, and birth. One Ilocano scholar claims: “Superstition is so 
ecp y rooted in oui culture that in spite of almost a century of modern science 
an medicine, these ancient beliefs have surprisingly survived up to the present day 

particularly among the rural folk” (Madamba 1984, 19). 


614 


WOOps 


Iiiwinos the IS K >0 Revolution 


\s \ I.ulamba notes, it these practices continue to occur as we approach the 
millennium, the importance ot rites and faith 100 years ago must have been even 
greater. \s such, the \ugustinians allowed Uocanos to mix animism with Catholic 
church trappings. Ilocano-Catholic amiable relations were based on this compro- 
mise. lo be sure there were llocano criticisms against the church. I he primary 
complaint centered on under-representation ot Uocanos in the clergy. However, tor 
the most part, a comfortable coexistence between Spanish and Uocanos prevailed. 

I bus, when some prominent Uocanos rebelled against the Spanish clergy in 1898 
and set up the so-called ‘Vandon Republic." they were not supported by the 
llocano populace. One is not surprised that during 189~ the queen ot Spain be- 
stowed the title Mu\ A 'obit* v leal (Yerv Noble and 1 oval) upon Yigan. Animism 
was the Uocanos world view and its coexistence with Catholicism made Spanish 
rule palatable lor Uocanos. 

\glipav understood the deep spirituality ot Uocanos. He also knew he could 
use metaphysical aspects ot the Uocanos world view to rally supporters. He was 
correct. The majority ot those who sided with Aglipay were not upper-class 
Uocanos, rather thev were the common uto. Aglipay was a man Uocanos could rally 
around. 1 le did not come from an elite llocano family but was ot humble origins 
from Batac, I locos Norte. 1 1 is conflicts with linio represented the Uocano/Taga- 
log tensions mentioned above. Thus, while Spanish triars and llocano ilustrados 
eagerly anticipated the American occupation, Aglipay gathered together a dispar- 
ate group ot Uocanos, w illing to die tor their faith. 

To inspire his troops, Aglipay placed small crosses around his camp. He did 
not dispel the belief that he had an anting-anting (petrified-wood charm) that made 
him invulnerable to death on the battlefield. During World War 11, this antinv- 
(niti)ig was reportedly placed on Ferdinand Marcos back bv Aglipav himself 
(McC 'o\* 1 982). The mystical beliefs ot the Uocanos and the leadership of Aglipay 
is evidenced in the 16-17 April Batac and Laoag battles. American soldiers noted 
that the Uocanos appeared crazy and oblivious to their impending death as they 
mounted suicide attacks. Colonel Robert L. Howze had to conclude: “Agglipay 
[sic] has bv his fiendish religion struck terror into the hearts ot the ignorant na- 
tives (Scott: 65). Three hundred thirtv-three llocano soldiers gave their lives in 
these battles. 

Captain Isabelo Abava also used the motive of religion to inspire Uocanos. 
During February 1900 Captain Abava wrote to Uocanos after he had taken com- 
mand of the 1 locos Sur Guerilla Union One. He concluded with this injunction: 

And finally, it is an offense to von in your Catholic sentiments not to 
respect those objects your fathers taught you to hold sacred, to profane your 
temples, and to mutilate and rob your venerated images. Eloquent witness and 
examples of such profanations and usurpations are the churches of Pangasinan, 

La Union, I locos and Abra (Scott 1986, 160). 


nu mil IITIM 


Ilocanos had reason to tear the sons <>r I ;:i ( tin 

Ilocano Catholic clergy and Arncru am <> urrrd * 

tant missionaries. During the Philippine \m :: .»* a ’’ - -'s .in 

cribed the Ilocano resistance to the I In* a no ( a: ho. 

Catholic clergy in Ilocos were unsanciioncd II«k am » ( acholic 

priests had replaced the recently departed Spanish s pan 

ish priests allied with the Americans in hop' s that r. : • '^ions 

would be protected. 

Conflict between American soldier, ami th< i «. r •• :>.tsed 

on the anti-Catholic bias prevalent among \meri in Pmi * c * laris 

20th-century American Protestants pejor.it r. < i . r< f i r < 1 * « * ( ‘ : ’ * ( 11 hoi i 

cism as “papists’ and popery. I he majoriiv of tie \n r: e . * !.ikos 

were Protestants and the hatred of Ilocano ( atholi. .< r ■ . o » • »»r racist 

and religious prejudice. One example of \meruan o.di r ns tow aril 


Ilocano priests is demonstrated in a letter penned In Pm . an Mi ne, < , Nixon 

I he priests have iU) love for us hec.mse t I k % an nno r . » »n, 1 s 

government. We cordially hate them m return .md m » 

would not hesitate to waste a Kr.ig I >i 1 1 1 c* t on th< in t«»i » iiku 

and rapacious class never lived. I hev refused for .t whilr t<» »lun tiu l s flag 

(as all over here have to do) hut the hull of a gm* applied to them i k t i 1 1 u in 

that the United States and not t lie pope of Koine i su pr < r i k in 1 1 1 1 >v i I u u i s 

I would rather send a bullet through one of these hl.u I. r < >1 u 1 1 v u t t h i o.i i r ol > 

hers than through Aguinaldo (Nixon 1000). 

I he Americans represented a religious threat to the Ilocanos. Aghpa\ used 
this threat to awaken the tuo to impending danger and poicnnal loss <>i freedom. 
He used the metaphysical beliefs of the afitin^-tiutni” and special signs to holster 
his followers faith and resolve. Unfort unatelv, this at times led to irrational battle 
plans resulting in hundreds of deaths. I inallv, the Americans prosed to he all that 
Aglipay had promised. Amcric ans abused the corpses of then enemies, something 
that had metaphysical implications to Ih icanos (Woods 100 ). I he\ despised the 
Ilocano clergy and the Catholic faith. 


Conclusion 

The 18J6 Philippine Revolution did not garner much support from the 1 locos 
area. Minimal Ilocano response during the revolution is not surprising. 1 he causes 
oi revolt in the lagalog world included economic disputes between i/nstnu/os and 
c er gy, increased land values, and the rise in education and revolutionary thought 
in t e universities. Ilocanos responded to their economic plight with migration, 

ins ip support, and hard work. Moreover, education was not a priority for 19th- 
century Ilocanos. 


616 


\\ H M w To t.snoy and the 7806 Revolution 


Should we then conclude that the 1800 Philippine Revolution was a lagalog 
rather than national re\ olution: 1 listory does not allow us to make that assessment. 
Isahelo de los Reves, Circgorio Aglipuv, Antonio l ima, and other Ilocanos made 
significant com ribut ions to the Philippines fight tor independence. More impor- 
tant. though the mujoritv of llocanos were on the periphery ot the revolution, 
w ide scale civil war did not occur during 1 800. I t h n ic cleansing was not part ot 
the Philippine revolution. Recent Southeast Asian revolutions (Burma and 
Kampuchea) ha\e included ethnic cleansings. In contrast, the Philippine revolu- 
tion called on Filipinos, not just lagalogs, to stand against colonial tyranny. 


References 


Alvarez. 1 milio 1 . 10T. A critical analysis ot * Pamulinawen. Phe regional song ot 
lloiandia. /loi<» Rerun, no. 2: 1 -2 . 

Am. mo. leresa B. ct al. 1083. “Wedding, pregnancy, child hearing, and burial beliefs and 
practices. In Tradition. change and development: « i nthropotogical study of Batae. 

Hoi <» A One. Philippine* . eds. Blanco et al. OS- 100. Batac: Mariano Marcos State Uni- 
vcrsit v. 

Anderson, Benedic t R. O'C. 1083. Imagined communities: Reflections on the origins and 
spread of not ionah>m. I ondon: \ erso. 

Ang, Teresita. 1 000. I he ( hincsc in the Philippines: Problems and perspeetires. Manila: Kaisa 
Para Sa Kaunlaran. 

Bever, ( ^ t le \ 1 1. and jaime C . de Vcvra. 1033. Philippine sago: .1 pictorial history of the an hi- 
pcLigo sinee time begin. 3rd ed. Manila: C apitol Publishing 1 louse. 

B1 air, lmma 1 lelen and lames Alexander Robertson. 1003-1000. The Philippine Is Linds, 
/•AM- / SO l . 3 3 vo Is. Cleveland: A. 1 1. C lark. 

Cadiz, Frncsto Ma. 1082. “Beliefs and practices on maternal and child care in an llocano 
fishing village, lloeandia . no. 1: W-62. 

Calixto, |e remias. 1002. Interview lw author. 1'ape recording. Vintar, I locos Norte, 12 
1 December. 

Christie, Clive J. 1006. A modern history of Southeast Asia: Decolonization, nationalism and 
separatism. 1 ondon: 1. B. lauris & Co Ltd. 

Oe la C 'osta, I loracio. 1 06 1 . The /t 'suits in the Philippines . / .5 81-1 68. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. 

De Los Reyes y Horen lino, Isabelo. 1800. Historia de lloeos. Tome L parte prebistorica; Tome 
II, parte lustoriea. Manila. 

Ldro/.a, Anora R. 1 080. “Pallas: A case study on adaptation in a rural communin'." Masters 
thesis, Mariano Marcos State University. 

Foronda, Juan A. 1 O' 7 1 . “The establishment of the first missionary centers in lloeos 1372- 
161 IT lloeos Review, no. 3: 1-73. 

Ciuerrero, Leon Ma. 1060. The hirst Filipino. Manila: National Historical Commission. 

Jocano, Felipe Lancia. 1073. Questions and challenges in Philippine pre-history. Quezon City: 
University of the Philippines Press. 


617 


mi mu ims 


. 1981. Poll: (.hrtstutnity \ prelttn of 

Christian experience tn the Philippine * ) . 1 

Kcesing, Felix M. 1962. / he cthno history nt k >rihrr r crsits 

Press. 

Lewis, Henry F. 1991. I Inca no irrigation l he nr/'*>r.i:e : !i\sau. 

no. 37. Hawaii: University of Has*, an Prr 

Lynch, Frank 1973a. Introduction Philippine S "* ue :n> 


21: 1-5. 

. 1 973b. Perspectives on Filipino ( l.mm ' ' r: :eu 

Special Kinship Issue . no. 21 ’ '> 

Mabini, Apolinario. 1931. Im Heroine ton / :l:pm*i 
Manila: Bureau of Printing. 

Madamba, Isagani C ). 1982. Hoc. mo suprr .tit ion /. r 
MeAndrew, John P. Urban usurpation / torn fruit e ta: 

hinterland. Manila: Atenco de Manila I nr. < ■ at P f 
McCoy, Alfred W. 1982. Baylan: Aninnst religion and Ph:.:p; 

ippine Quarterly of ( Culture and Soi iet\. no 16 I U } * 

McLennon, Marshall. 1973. Peasant and hatendm* in . i . i » . vonomu 

origins of a Philippine ricc-growing region Pb D d: . n; : ,r ( -dittum.i 
Mendoza, Juan Gonzdlcs. 1586. “History of the great kingdom « »f ( h ma I *r i n t cd b\ IVvlro 
Madrigal in the year 1586. In / he Philippine l land 1 / w ■> I^ti. i J , I mma I Iclcn 
Blair and James Alexander Robertson, vol 6 1 < le*. eland \ M < LuL 

Nixon, Milton G. 22 April 1900. Fani i 1 v c < >rresp< xkIc ik i I mu d Sum \ 1 1 1 1 1 a r \ I 1 istorv 
Institute Spanish-Amcrican War Survey). 

Nydegger, Corinneand William Nydegger. 1 966. htrong \n Ihn <>s hat no m the /Philippines. 

Cultures Series, vol. 6. New York: John VCilev and Sons. Iik 
P ertierra, Raul. 1988. Religion, politics, and rationality in a Philippine < otmnnnit^. Oue/on 
City: Atcnco de Manila University Press. 

Phelan, John L. 1959. I he hispanization of the Philip/ ones. Madison: \\ imoiisiii l mversitv 
Press. 

Pickett, C.L. 1907. Primitive superstitions plus some ( .brisiiamty. Ahw/on Intelligencer , 
no. 20: 147-148. 

I orter, David Franklin. 1 980. “Ilokos: A non-Tagalog response to s< >c lab polit k aL and eco- 
nomic change, 1870-1910.” Ph. IX diss., C ornell l nivei sit y. 

Reed, Robert R. 1978. Colonial Manila: The context of hispanic ur/ntnism and process of 
morphogenesis. Berkeley: University of Cali(< >rnia Press. 

Riguera, Florencio. 1970. “Ilocano thriftiness.” I locos Renew , no. 2: ’ 16. 

Rogers, I homas. 1989. “Philippine racial origins: A morphological viewpoint. AIA1SU 

Insights, 1(4): 57-63. 

Root, Brenda Davis. 1987. A family migration model: Development and empirical appli- 
cation in the Philippines.” Ph.D. diss., Pennsylvania State University. 

SarDesai, D.R. 1289. Southeast Asia past and present. 2nd ed. ( .oloraclo: Wcstview Press. 
Sawyer, F.H. 1900. 1 he inhabitants of the Philippines. New York: Scribner. 


618 


\\ ^ K >ps Iloc.:no> And the 18% Revolution 

sJk.uis. 1 bmd loscph. TVT Ihe SuFin l/oenno kinship configuration: An Application of 
:.::: . : \ , ; the Aud\ of 'kinship. Masters thesis. University ot l Oregon. 

Sjuilt. \ olher 1 t)l) 1 Mindoro ! soct.il histon of a Philippine IsLind in the 20th century. 
Manila l h \ me W otd Publications. 

s, luim.K lu i . |olm \ 1 ^ 1 / Vv m.tbtng of ,/ nAtion: Fssays on nineteenth century Filipino 

Manila: \tenco Ac Manila l niversity Press. 

Sjun/. \\ ill lam 1 1 > v s S p) W. /re Mahi/a gAlleon. Manila: Historical Conservation Soci- 
ety 

s^ott. W illiam llentv 1 4 >S(>. llo, a*:o responses to AmericAn Aggression PHHF190L Quezon 
( it \ : \ ew p a\ Publishers. 

Sea . ( 'hinben. 1 ^>0. ( hmese in the Philippine s: .1 bibliography . Manila: Chinese Studies 
Program IV l a Salle l mversitv. 

Sui e>o> dc Li' hit> Pilipinas . por et Doctor Antonio de Morga. I S90. Obra publicada en Mejico 
el ano Ac 1 oOT nuexamente saeada a lu/ v anotada por Jose Ri/al y precedida do un 
prolot^o del Plot. 1 erdinand lMumentritt. Paris: Marnier. 

Woods. Shelton 1 . “ Review of cl modern history of Southeast Asia: Decolonization* 

nittwniilism and separatism. bv (.'live |. Christie.” /he Historian. Forthcoming. 

1 i ) l )(>h. “1 oik C 'hristianitv in an Uocano town.' Midwest JottniAl of As inn Stud- 
ies. ( \ toher, 1 

1 V)OW “The first Americans in Uocos. Philippine Studies* Forthcoming. 


619 


For Want of a City 

Manila in the Balance of Resistance and Capitulation 


Rem R. I'mm im 


W Ticn the Manila ilustrados convened the Ke\oliition.ii\ ( ongicss at 
Malolos 2 on 15 September 1 898, the elat ion the\ felt must have been unreel 
with regret. As delegates representing districts throughout the au lupelago. they 
were responsible for charting the course of the ne w re public I tailed b\ thiongsof 
excited people who shouted ‘Viva! the ilusiradns were gr at i lied and seemed pro- 
foundly moved. I hey spoke eloquent ly about the new I v pun l.inncd independence, 
and their goals of justice and liberty.* But their perception of political reality was 
inescapable. I he Philippine flag was hoisted over the revolutionary ( apital of 
Malolos, a town of less that 13,000, while the American stars and stripe's flew o\ei 
the colonial capital of Manila, a sprawl i ng, bust 1 1 ng c 1 1 y of close to 300,000 people. 

Io get to the festivities that morning, the ilustriirins had traveled the' 20-odd 
miles separating the two capitals, and t he con t rasi s must have been sharp. Step pi ng 
off the train, they walked along the long, narrow main street to the towns largest 
structure, the church at Barasoain. Malolos was the center of a thriving ////>,/ indus- 
try, and thatch and other palm products abounded. Woven palm and floial 
wreaths encircling homemade flags of reel calico decorated arches, houses, and 
posts. Uniformed revolutionary troops “with the confidence of conquerors stood 
at attention and a band played music in the churchyard. It was an exhilarating 
sight, with signs of revolutionary victory everywhere.' ( Convening with Revolu- 
tionary I resident Emilio Aguinaldo and his milit arv group from C'avitc, the Ma- 
nila ilustrados n ow formed the nation’s highest leadership. But Malolos was a mi- 
lieu unfamiliar to the Manila ilustraclos: and images from their home city Manila 
loomed large. 


620 


V \KI Pi S for Wont of \i ( Vn 


Foi o\ei a month mikc 13 August, s the ilttsti'ados had seen the l .S. colors 
raised daih o\ ei Intiamuros. the ancient walled city that was the archipelagos sym- 
bolic and actual seat of power. 1 he\ watched American military officials, now the 
new masters ot the colonial capital, striding in and out ot the magnificent 
governor s palace. bus\ with governing the cuv. American bars and saloons had 
sprung up overnight on the 1 woha, Binondos premier business street. Big, brawny 
American soldiers m rough uniforms jostled subdued Spanish officers in ornate 
braids and epaulets w ho sullenh moved out ot their way. American women, mostly 
ladies of naval officers visiting from l long Kong, were making frequent appear- 
ances. in shops and restaurants, beginning to look into rental property. 1 he 
Manilenos home ground was now patrolled dav and night by American sentries, 
w ho marched as conficlentlv up and clown the noisy, crowded districts of Binondo 
and londo as through the clean, cobbled streets of silent lntramuros. from the 
grand Pla/a Mavor, ringed b\ the archbishops domed cathedral, massive buildings 
of state, dark convents, and quiet cloisters, to the throbbing wharves and teeming 
suburbs, the Americans w ere quicklv making themselves at home in the \ lamlenos 
home city. 

Although burdened bv images ot an American-controlled Manila, the il us- 
trados conducted government business m Malolos that day. 1 hey were charged 
with training the organic law and structures of an independent nation, and they 
turned with gusto to the push and pull ot political process. C learly in their ele- 
ment, thev elected officers from among themselves to guide legislative delibera- 
tions, forming committees and defining tasks, traveling back and forth between 
the two capitals- their home citv, and the home of the revolutionary govern- 
ment — thev worked resolutelv over the next few months, ratifying Aguinaldos 
proclamation of independence, organizing the Literary and Scientific University 
with themselves comprising the faculty, and debating the merits of a preponderant 
legislature over a strong presidency. ’ 

But even as the ilustrados worked in Malolos, some of the most highly edu- 
cated among them had begun t o participate in American administrative affairs in 
Manila. Lor this thev would come under withering rebuke by their Filipino con- 
temporaries and the coming generations of Filipinos would echo that criticism. 

On 29 September 1898, the ilustrado physician T.H. Pardo de lavera was 
appointed by U.S. Military Governor F'lwell Otis 10 as an honorary member of the 
newly formed Board of 1 lealth. Lie had represented Cebu at the opening of the 
Revolutionary Congress and was one of a small group of Filipino intellectuals first 
approached by Otis for advice about how best to approach Philippine governance. 
Otis found that one of Manilas most pressing problems was the threat of epidem- 
ics because its facilities had been severely strained by surging increases in popula- 
tion and disruptive fighting during the war with Spain. Most probably informed 
by the LJ.S. Chief Surgeon Major Or. Frank S. Bourns 11 about Pardo delaveras 
long-standing interest in matters of public health, 1 Otis invited the ilustrado to 
help develop a procedure for the systematic vaccination of all Manilenos. In fairly 


621 


im mn iitp. 


f « » t more 

< U »f \s .is 

i K to her 

;» »t i. ii mu 


cm 


: ■ : i ' v v. .is run .is 
'< h.ui !>i\ . Mile the 
t in t r rat \ < >t I \iris 
• t hr pr« »ple of the 
n i i i a 1 1 1 . «»in ions 
< *r * i sh« »\s \ t li.it he 

\\ 1 1 h h >sr Ki/.il 

.u i-. » k ated h\ ul.ir 
let \ < >! I’ln sk i.ms 
n the v on 1 1 o\ ersv. 


short order, the American general began *u 
than advice on public health issues. \X her I 
Pardo de laveras obvious stature arnon r 
1898 appointed him director of diploma 
with the Americans. 

In October, ( ) t is closed the ( olrgn > d< 
a school of medicine and pharmacy, \rguii * Ltta r. ' 

“property of the Government of the 1 mn : s t 
from Spain," Otis declared the college was h Id t<u * 

Philippine Islands for educational purposes 
that Pardo deTavera was belli nd this action btit the hi tor: i 

was indeed instrumental in pressing ( )t is to s<\ ular i/t t ' 
and many of his fellow intellectuals, Pardo de la*, era *r«n 
education. By June 1899, Pardo de I avera had otp.mi/ol the s« 
and Pharmacists, and there would be little doubt about h.: :«>. 

When the rector of the University of Santo I ornas re<j ties ted t iie t< »:i< >\s mi; lub that 
the college be reopened, ( )t is response was to issue .m ord. a at th* insi.uu c al the 
president and directors of the Philippine Medical Ass«k iatmn. forbidding the 
rector from opening the school. I he assoc iat ion president uas I atdo de I as eta. 

By December 1898 , i lustra do judged ayctano Arellano had become m) highly 
regarded by the Americans that Cieneral Otis infoirned Washington of Ins mien 
tion to appoint Arellano as chief justice. ( his describe el the- ilu^ti ii<ln as a distm- 
guished and universally respected man, who had I >ccn of grea t a u I . . i n c on 1 1 e >1 1 mg 
the insurgents. ” K> Earlier, on 1 October, Arellano had been swum in at Malolos as 
Aguinaldos minister for foreign affairs. 

In March 1899, the first civilian commission to the Philippines an ived. 1 cd 
by Cornell University president Jacob ( iolcl Schurman, the- commissioners, 
namely, Charles Denby, Dean Worcester, and Bernard M oscs, sought collaborative 
interactions with the Manila ilnstrndos. By then, a shooting war between 
Aguinaldos forces and the Americans had begun. Ism the frec|t.cney of the interac- 
tions increased. Novices at colonial administration, and largely uninformed, the 
Americans found that although the authority of the l nited States was “limited to 
the city of Manila,” their access to knowledgeable and art iculate Manila ilustrados' 
provided them with the basis for sound policy-making. In July 1 SUU, Benito 
Legarda, a Manila ilustraclo businessm an who had family connections with the 
wealthy Iuason family, was working with the American commissioners to organize 
local governments in the areas that had been wrested from bilipino control. ls 


The Manila Ilustrados Condemned 

Writing over the span of almost a century, Philippine nationalists have directed 
airly unrelenting criticism at the Manila ilustrados and castigated them for their 
sins against the revolution. Foremost among these writers, leodoro Agoncillo has 


622 


P \ KI PI S / ( > r Wig nr of . 2 ( in 

uiriuiiiiiai the politics of the curb \mcrican period as a struggle between the cra- 
\ en ilh'tr.i :• v i dlaboi atot s atul the heroic nationalists. In this, he echoes their bitter 
dcnuiK tat ion b\ a ^ontcniporarv. the revolutionary general Jose Alejandrino, who 
inveighed auainst the meat majority... ot the educated and wealthy class... at- 
tr.Kted to the t evolut ionar\ cause b\ its success. . . (but) totally unprepared to sup- 
port n in ad\ ersitN .... 

In the cvcsot the nationalists, the revolution s defeat and the subsequent suc- 
cess ot \merican colonialism is the work ot a handful of the wealthy Manila 
ilustrjdo traitors, not a more complex interaction ot historical forces. In an era 
dominated b\ such popular heroes as lose Ri/al. Andres Bonifacio, Marcelo H. del 
Pilar, and \polinario Mabini. the tlustrados 'are stereotypically characterized as 
wealths and 1 1 ispanic l/cd . and dismissed as scoundrels, mendicants, oppor- 
tunists, and “office seekers.** As the alleged inducers ot the Filipinos tall from a 
stale of revol in mnarv grace into the colonial purgatory, the Manila / / / ts ti\ uios a m - 
plv till the villains role in nationalist historiography. And Pardo de lavera, 
Arellano, and 1 egarda have been singled out as “examples... to demonstrate the 
agilitv with which men of propertx and education switched their allegiance from 
one colonial power to another, with a short revolutionary career in between. 

But the nationalist writers have not condemned all who collaborated w ith 
the colonizers. In particular, thev have not tarred the irreconcilables with the 
traitors brush despite the fact that those men ultimately surrendered, swore alle- 
giance to the U.S., and collaborated with the American colonial government. Un- 
like the / lust?\u/(» of Pardo de lavera s ilk, such propertied or educated men as 
Miguel Makar and Apolinario Mabini are seen as patriots who waged protracted 
war and capitulated onlv when defeat became irrefutable. 

Therefore, despite the fact that the formation of the Partido Federal with its 
advocacy of the I ’.S. statehood for the Philippines is one of the collective acts of 
betrayal most frequently condemned bv the nationalists, the “irreconcilables who 
joined this so called pro-American partv have not been pilloried. A few examples 
should suffice. Bv Mav 1 C K) 1 , the Partido Federal s membership had increased to 
some 1 SO, ()()() members in 200 committees throughout the archipelago.* 1 Among 
them were such former revolutionary leaders as Father Gregorio Aglipay and Gen- 
eral Juan C 'aillcs. 

Blit unlike the party founders, these later federalistas have not been stigma- 
tized. Instead, C amstantinos discussion of Aglipay s founding of the lglesia Filipina 
Independientc, which is seen as one of the enduring revolutionary institutions, 
highlights the church s “nationalistic features but omits the fact of Aglipay s mem- 
bership in the Partido Federal, as well as federalista support of the Independent 
Church, especially in the Manila suburb of Fondo." Adopting the nationalist per- 
spective, other historians such as the American William Henry Scott, who absolves 
Aglipay of his Federalista membership, have tended to exculpate these k lapses by 
ascribing acquiescence to American rule to “strategic purposes.’”' Likewise, 
Agoncillo rationalizes the open collaboration of Nacionalistas Sergio Osmena and 


623 


mi PH 


.1 \ i 


Manud F. Quezon during the first <: 
roic resistance. ‘ 

Thus, the nationalist view hold » 
ration of the Manila ilrntrarlm and di 
Faulting the Manila Hunra/ln for mo: 

Americans, nationalist writers inch u r .» \ 
form the dross of collaboration into o 
observation that T.H. Pardo dr I a*, era ( 

Benito Ixrgarda went over to the Amer; an 
revealing. What damned them in the eve. 
pattern so that “others occupying 1< < r po t 

lowed their example. I he .Manila ;/;/ aj 

But, when is “too soon onstantmo n :*r> ne 
between the Philippine revolution. ir. government ar. : 
Merritt on the 4 februarv I 8VW I he revolutionar*. 
the men of his class, lacking) sell abnegation an<l patrp* : n 
tunity... almost without a single honorable exception 
annexationist Federal Party. . . on 2.^ of I Vc ember MMI 
members of the Hong Kong Junta. Agmnaldos loici;*:. 
matic initiatives, charged that they were forced to a»iun 
tion of Partido Federal. 


m t ! 


\ie 


- r. »rm of be* 

r oii\ v i lll.tho- 
i v « »fu liable*. 

;>s with the 

v « mid t r.ins- 
* mvtantmo s 
\r aneta and 
>>ii!hicn is 
dies set the 
ent st m »n fol- 

» *t hostilities 
fou es under 
unit mo said 
fust < >ppor- 


at 

[ riu'»l tin mnleus of t he 

Similar Is. the :ln^tru(io 

lascil Sll ppol t tot liiplo* 
failure with the forma- 


A simple chronology of the revolut ion cannot pi os id r the basis toi nlent its - 
ing what date was “ too soon. Loaded with negative jmli’.iiK nts <>t ilu^n.ido hehav- 
ior, such an analysis would impose a monolith k c h.u.u ter <>n t Ik I ilipino t espouses 
to American colonialism. As recent stitches of the revolut nut. ir\ pet tod h.t\ e shown, 
those responses in fact varied by type and timing f'om one region to another. 

I he trend toward microhistorv, wit It us foe ns upon the lot. . 1 1 and spec 1 f k . pi otit- 
ises a more productive approach to understanding federalista pohtn.il behavior. 
Nationalist historians have presented the irrccoitc tlahles capitulation as both the 
acceptance of a final defeat and, more import. milw the beginning of .1 new un- 
armed struggle. Without attem pt i ng to j list 1 f v the e.i rl y .ic(|iiiesceiice of the Manila 
ilustrados , would not a local, Manila-based perspective make their behavior expli- 
cable in the same terms? 

loaManileno, resident in the capital that was coveted but never gained by 
the revolutionary forces, these questions should be asked: W hen did final defeat 
become indisputable? When did unarmed struggle become the necessary alterna- 
tive tactic.' In analyzing not only elite behavior but also that of ordinary residents, 
other corollary questions arise: How long did Manilchos remain in the revolution? 
Was there an exodus from city to countryside as the fortunes of the revolutionary 
orces waned, or did Manilenos return home to resume their lives? 1 low seriously 
t c murders of the Manileno Andres Bonifacio and ilustnulo Ant onio l.una 
a tenate Manilenos from the Aguinaldo-led struggle? ’ ’ 


624 


PARK OHS For Want of a City 


The analytical approach to Manila as a "region” allows not only a clarified 
view of ilustrado behavior during the revolutionary period but allows a perspective 
not previously possible. The ilustriuios response was in fact consistent with the be- 
havior of Manilas average residents. The particularity of their response was the re- 
sult of a shared experience and perception as fellow Manilenos. 

Eyewitnesses to the scene at Malolos on IS September invariably describe a 
separateness between the ilusti\uios as a group and the other Hlipinos present that 
daw The Manila elite were described as "prominent,"' 0 "aristocratic, M "digni- 
fied," "exceptionally alert, keen and intelligent in appearance. Dressed formally, 

44 . . .in full evening dress. . . with silk hats, the i l us (ratios were so clearly distinguish- 
able from all the others that not even General Aguinaldo himself could be mistaken 
for one of their group. But these descriptions of difference focus too narrowly on 
external contrasts. Indeed, the i/usmtdos were distinguishable from the other revo- 
lutionary leaders and the crowds on the street by their speech, dress, and manner. 
But included among the milling crowds were ordinary people from Manila who, 
like the ilustmdos , had come to attend the opening of the Congress." With these 
people who were fellow Manilenos, the ilnstrados were most closely akin than with 
the Caviterios who were, like them, claimants to national leadership. Obvious dis- 
tinctions of speech, dress, and manner notwithstanding, the ilustrados and the or- 
dinary residents of Manila were bonded as fellow Manilenos. 

There were three aspects of Manila that rendered life in the colonial capital 
unlike that in other parts of the archipelago. These were the cirv space: size, struc- 
ture, and style; the capital-centered perspective; and the experience of colonial 
controls. By the beginning of the 20th century, Manila was over 300 years old, and 
Manilenos had behind them one of the oldest and most firmly "European-in- 
duced" urban traditions in Southeast Asia.' 1 

In size, structure, and style, Manila held a special preeminence among the 
urban centers'" 1 that had emerged in the archipelago by the second half of the 19th 
century. First, the colonial capital enjoyed a head start. By the late 16th century, 
Manila had already achieved its permanent and imposing character. 1 he enormous 
profits from the galleon trade between the Philippines and Mexico built the im- 
pressive structures of Hispanic colonial power. Its core was lntramuros, a fort-city 
carefully planned to meet Spains real and symbolic needs. Its massive gun emplace- 
ments faced outward into Manila Bay and guarded the entrance to the Pasig River. 
Its walls ran for 3,300 m around a rectilinear grid of 29 streets. Comprising only 
64 blocks and measuring 4 km around, lntramuros was not large. But it was a 
decorous and formal place, where the streets were narrow, and only one street, 
Palacio, rated the description paseo or drive. Its purpose, as the center of colonial 
power, was to impress, to inspire awe and obedience. Its imposing look came not 
from broad, sweeping avenues but from stately buildings of solid constitution — 
the Ayuntamiento, the Governor's Palace, the Cathedral, the churches, and the 
convents. There was no air of stylishness or frivolity about its structures. It was an 


625 


i m Hiii iftim him >h ii*)'. 


.irul miht.irv 


u »r t h . si me h. .uul inland, 
? ' iu\ uri s 1 he seven 
t m »r i h . c ast . anil soillh- 
' and c anals. e.u h with a 
% contrasting with chns- 
n its wharves. \tucllcdc 


arena for religious pageantry, social mtcrav n<»n p«»9ti 
parades.” v ’ 

The rest of Manila, the new city, spilled outward i 
beyond the gates of Intramtiros, encompassing %<»m a » 
suburbs or arrabales ranged in a loose radial pattern t*» \\. 
east of In tram uros, divided by natural boundaries « »t ru* 
distinctive ethnic and socioeconomic character 
tered Intramuros, the commercial center Binondo la*. «>(., 
la Rein a and Muelle de Silva, crowded with warehouse 

these halves — the old city and the heart of the new the I wente de 1 sp.ma spanned 
the Pasig, which one had to cross over, to i ate h a glimpse < >t life anil progress. 

By the late 19 th century, the galleon trade s three month season of tren/ied trading 
had long since grown in magnitude, duration, and pact Innomios wharves had 
become the hub of unceasing activity, with goods valued at s ‘>me S-H) million a 
year crossing her docks for British, American, ( hmesc. or Spanish merchant 
houses. Describing the scene in 189 \ American observers noted: 


Along the water front, or anchored m mid stream arc- small steamers of 
two to eight-hundred tons burthen, as well as a great wmrtv i*t sailing craft. 

Often a dozen or more steamers may be found i n i he i r. ( i at oik t. t*u the trade 

with the provinces is large, and in several mstanc es lines < >1 stramci s aie main 
tained, in part by (Government subsidy to carry the mails and t<> transport 
troops. Hemp and sugar form the major part of the- cargo « » f v e ssels inward 
bound, although the smaller steamers often discharge m addition a varied 
cargo of cattle, rice, rattan, dried fish, coffee, fruit and other artu les. |ust over 
the bar in the harbor, from two to a dozen foreign oc can sic. unci s and sailing 
vessels may usually be seen. Most of them fly the l nion lack, though the 
krench, German and American flags occasionally appeal Japan has of late 
taken a motherly interest in the Philippines. She has a fine line of passenger 
steamers which call at Manila and now and then one of het mm war vessels 
puts in an appearance . v> 


All the major institutions of the colony's commcrc ial life- eventually located 
in Binondo. The central tobacco warehouse and the Prov incial Treasury were on 
Calle Anloague, two blocks west of the major span, Puente cle I spana. I ven in the 
days of the galleon trade, the raw silk exchange was .it ( alle San Pemanclo. Banks, 
wholesale houses, and retail stores were located on neighboring streets, sometimes 
alongside the residence of a prosperous merchant or multifamilv structures known 
as accesorias. 

One block from the river front, the two mam business streets, C.alle cle la 
Escolta and Calle del Rosario, converged roughly at a right angle near the loot of 
the Espana bridge. European business dominated the Kscolta and lined it with 
shops stocked to make a comfortable, even luxurious, Pumpean life-style possible 


626 


PARFOES For Want of a Car)’ 


in the tropics. Gallo del Rosario was the street of Chinese commerce, its stores 
crammed with goods of curious shapes and smells, commonplace and exotic. Ac- 
knowledging the districts vital commercial role, the colonial government moved 
its Customs 1 louse from Intramuros to Binondo in 1887. 

The new wealth from the growing export trade therefore enhanced 
for Manila a position which was already well established. Although the emerging 
regional centers contributed a new element to the colony's political and economic 
equation, the Manilenos overweening perception of the capital city as the center of 
power persisted. Indeed, the elaboration of Manila's role as the colonial capital in 
the middle of the 19th century reinforced this attitude. 

Transport and communication difficulties had enforced a decentralized sys- 
tem upon the earlv Spanish colonists and of necessity the archipelago was frag- 
mented into small units of government, secular and ecclesiastical. By the 1860s, 
despite the increase in the numbers of dioceses and provinces, a more centralized 
structure became possible. The proliferation of new central agencies spawned a 
“huge bureaucracy" in Manila, staffed in large part by peninsular Spaniards/' 0 
These central government bureaucrats were determined to assert Manila's primacy 
over the provinces. 

Whether or not the Manila bureaucrats were effective in marginalizing pro- 
vincial growth is beside the point. What is important to this analysis is that for a 
considerable period, from the 16th through the earlv 19th centuries, a Manila-cen- 
tered Spanish bureaucracy sought to control all aspects of development in Philip- 
pine colonial society. The Filipino perception of the colonial universe therefore was 
one in which power — political, economic, ecclesiastical, and social — emanated 
from Manila. 

Compounding the Manilenos view of the home city as the navel of the uni- 
verse was the reality of the colonial state's mechanisms of control in the city. After 
Spains American colonies broke awav in the earlv 19th century, the Spanish au- 
thorities in the Philippines strengthened the military to serve both as its most vis- 
ible instrument of control, and its most effective means of coercion. 1 hus, the 
strengthening of colonial control throughout the 19th century led to the militari- 
zation of all institutions charged with public order. 1 hese were, primarily, the 
(iiiardia Civil or the provincial constabulary, and the Guardia Civil Veterana, the 
military police of Manila/* 1 These garrisons remained Spains ultimate weapon in 
controlling and defending the colony's capital. 

The Guardia Civil's rapid growth was a measure of its importance. Starting 
with a single division when first organized in 1868, 20 years later it had three divi- 
sions of 3,342 men and 156 officers. 42 If troop deployment is an indicator of the 
government's strategic priorities, then Luzon, with two of the three Guardia Civil 
divisions, was clearly the main area of concern. Within Luzon, Manila had the 
highest police concentration. 

As indicated above, the special police corps known as the Guardia Civil 
Veterana took charge of the city, with an initial staffing of 400 men and 1 3 officers. 


627 


mi miUPPINI HI AC Ml l U )N AN! » HI t< mi * 

In 1 888, half its force was concentrated in Intramim > > 

which comprised the city’s core*. By contrast, the sa uml ktx\ *»t the arc lupclago had 
a tenth of Manilas force for hall its population h'Mn»oad *- ( mardia t isii I lie 
archipelagos third c i t v% Cebu, had only V) < «uardia < nil Manilas t tiiardia 
Civil troops outnumbered the* ^18-strong force then dcplmcd in the sprawling 
provinces of Iloilo and Negros Occidental. where endernu unrest threatened the 
colony’s major export industry in sugar. 

Keeping pace with the city s rapid gre >sv ih in the i.ist ilu.uics ol tiu* \ *t h cen- 
tury, the two companies of 280 ( mardia < nil assigned to the- toss ns comprising 
the Province of Manila in 187 1 ’ were regularlv expanded as limp areas and 
were absorbed into the metropolitan area. In 1 * s »n I ernaiui<» dc I >i.ao 1 acoi 

was incorporated into the municipal g< >vcrn ment si r tu i u r c and 1 n die iu \ t \ ear its 
28-member Guardia Cavil was increased to aO 

Judging from the assiduousness with which the ( uiaul i a < in d \ cu r ana s de- 
ployment was relocated to fir the cirys shifting morphology. 11 see ins tan to infer 
that the colonial government regarded the police as the kc\ to rigid social control. 
I herefore, as Binondo’s river front achieved greater commercial import.uuc dm- 
ingthe 1 870s, the location of headquarters of the Sih SuIhIimmou tor Bmondo- 
Tondo at the foot of the Join and llaya Street bridge, well within the boundary of 
Tondo, was deemed inadequate. Arguing that the police could more cfficientb 
serve the “most heavily populated and rich suburb it the\ ns etc* guaranteed access 
to the wharves and the* subdist rie t of San Nicolas, the* ( i ua i d ra ( nil pci 1 1 1 once I the* 
governor-general to allow them to shift their headquarters to < alle San bernando 
in Binondo. 45 

The Royal Order of 3 July 1 895 created the ( ucrpo de Vigilanc ia y Seguridad 
with a chief inspector, four inspectors, and 20 agents. I hen task was to sp\ on 
their associates and neighbors, and report their f mcl mgs to the authorities. In addi- 
tion, there was close coordination among the* ( ilia rd ia ( nil and other gov cm n me* nt 
agencies. On 18 January 1897, for example, the Public Treasury prov ided detailed 
information on taxes and rem i ttanccs of a gr< > i i p of men held on suspic ion after the 
discovery of the revolutionary Katipunan. Among them we* re* prominent i / u>[ vu- 
dos — Francisco Roxas, Antonio Luna, Numcriano Adriano, and Pio Yalen/uelaP 
As interlocking mechanisms of repression, the ( iiiardia ( .n il and the* C iiiarciia 
Civil Veterana won court convictions based on a low standard of evidence which 
allowed, for example, admission of indirect and hearsay evidence. ‘ s Much of what 
Filipinos today know about life under the repressive Spanish colonial system is re- 
flected from recorded experiences of the ilustrados A' What is not grasped is the 
weight brought down by the system upon all residents of the city regardless of class. 

I here was little one could do to redress grievances against the military. On the 
contrary, all acts to insult, violate or resist members of these police corps were 
punishable by court martial and were construed as “offenses against sentinels on 
uty. The penalties in such cases were extraordinarily severe. 


628 


PARI Pi s For U 'lint of ./ ( Vn 


\ll mtr.K lions were taken into account. A report dated 10 December 1881 ' 
listed hcaw penalties tor pettv infractions— live pesos tor sleeping in a carriage for 
lure, two pesos lor driving a cart w ith an unlit lantern, two pesos tor allowing an 
untet he red carabao to wander a public street, tour reales tor walking shiftless on 
the street, one peso tor driving a cart with an unfit horse, and two pesos tor dis- 
^ barging I new oiks. 

I he entire population was closely watched, not simply tor the purpose ot 
apprehending those who broke the law, but also to keep w atch on those under sus- 
picion. I he numerous lists and reports on sospev/ u?sos seem to indicate that Duaidia 
( i vil units watched all those likely t o commit a crime or any act ot disloyalty 
attain st the state, i he inclusion ot ones name on these lists was virtually an indict- 
ment with extremely grave consequences. 1 he civilian population was paintully 
aware ot their vulnerable position because the Cmardia C ivil could arrest on suspi- 
cion, and, while the Spanish government did not directly authorize or sanction the 
use of force to extort confessions, it was not unscrupulous in... accepting confes- 
sions so obtained as evidence ot crime, nor was it quick to punish members ot the 
Ciuardia C ivil charged with mistreatment ot prisoners/ 

1 hus, the Spanish colonial administration created a police state in Manila 
w ith controls tar greater and methods more unrelenting and brutal than anywhere 
else in the Philippines. It was difficult to evade the extensive network ot controls. 
Hie ( iuardia C avik.s extraordinary power derived from its responsibility tor "deter- 
mining the lovalt\ and disloyalty ot individuals." 1 he authorities drew a fine 
distinction between those who were “disaffected with the authorities and those 
“disaffected with Spain, since it was the latter whose designs posed the real dan- 
ger to the state. P.ach person in the citv had a place and number indicated in the 
residential lists, bv district and bv ethnicitv. Occupation, economic class, age, civ il 
status, names ot spouse and children were listed. The authorities knew what had to 
be known about a person, and this inhu mation kept that person within their grasp. 
1 heir scrutiny resulted in the amassing of reports, lists, transcriptions, commu- 
niques, instructions, proceedings, files, and dossiers on the suspected Filipinos. 

1 hev maintained a pool of information from all possible sources and included tihs 
on servants employed bv wealthy Filipinos, with the names and addresses of their 
employers. One such list show ed the servants of two ilmtmdos who would become 
founding members of the Partido Federal, Don Ramon Cienato of Santa Cruz dis- 
trict and Don Mariano Pimjap of San Miguel district/* 

Unlike the people ot the rural Philippines, the city folk had no recourse to 
mountains or hinterland to escape the authorities. 1 he ilnstrados who had wealth 
or education or both did escape to the European capitals. But these sojourns weie 
temporary, and the ilnstrados eventually ended their self-imposed exiles and re- 
turned to their homes in Manila. 


629 


i m mn nmi hi \ 


The Revolution through Manilehos’ l.\cs 

Several major developments carls in rh< mid p? * p ;mhI 

had a specific impact on Manila. I hr hi r v. .« tl *»lu 

rionary command to take the colonial »; tn»* ' pc 

riod of mid-June through late Jul. 1 SOS \ * d at 

Intramuros and the American naval oinrnat.d v. » i i Pmt ot 

Manila and the isthmus of Oavitc. with no fore r f * “ ' f - F ' u- the 

Filipino forces were masters of the rest ot I u/on In tr c t •:<> :: P Mar :1a. the 
revolutionary forces were pressing the Spam h f<»- •: ! :<► . :»i tr *<»mhcd 

section that by the end of the first week in him smut so. non p.mu k«-.i Spaniards 
were crammed into space that normally housed mii. lo.ooo t >n > hine. the 
Filipino command cut the water supplv to Manila Xit: a il stroke , the 

revolutionary forces could have conquered the < it 

But it is one of the imponderables of die i evolution that Vum.ii do did not 
press further and take Manila. With his control o. r nppN til ^ nnr.il plain 
provinces and those south of the Pasig. his tight "tip < »n the Vmt.i \k a water 
works, and his stranglehold on inland transpor tat ion and hipping. \::mn.iMi) 
could have brought the Spanish to submission. I he ftanin t"iu ot c .eneral 
Agustins dispatches from earl v June attest to this Instead there was a uhu t.uuc 
on Aguinaldo’s part to “subject the citv to the hardships ot an i t tec tic siege. t hi 
26 July, he signed an order d i rec ting that goods s 1 1 < h i I < I he sent into M a n 1 1 a f tom 
the north to prevent starvation in the citv. Im hided m this oidei was an m|inu non 
against the heads of the towns in the vicinity f r< >m intnfiimt: with this 1 1 af f u . 

i he wi ndow of op port u n 1 1 v for a rev* >1 1 1 1 1 o n a r \ vie t < > i \ in V I a m I a began to 
close with thearrival of American expeditionary forces in mid |uh. W\ >1 |ul\, that 
window had slammed shut. The total numher of American forces had iik leased 
from the original 1,964 under I )cwey s command to 10,92-1. I he* Spanish sent 
secret feelers through the British and Belgian consuls, and Began negot lat mg for a 
peaceful surrender to the Americans of the colonial capital. ( hi I 3 August , a Satur- 
day, Manila passed into American hands. Now, a vista of rapid normal i/at ion 
opened for the Manilehos. On Sunday, the terms of c a pi t ulat ion were signed and a 
military government was proclaimed by the American c om mat icier \\ cslcv Merritt. 
On Monday, ] 5 August, ( ieneral Arthur MacArthur was appointed and took com- 
mand as provost-marshal-general of Manila and its suburbs. I Ic immediately took 

control of police, Fire, health and street-cleaning matters, and the issuance of li- 
censes for vending, restaurants, commercial establishments, and other activities. 

1 iscal affairs and Finance were given to ( ieneral Francis ( irecnc. 

. A^hough the Spanish officials tried to obstruct the American takeover by 
wit o ing cooperation, the American volunteers had a whole range of adminis- 
trative, usiness, and bureaucratic backgrounds. Quickly and effectively, generals, 
leutenants, majors, colonels, and ordinary soldiers took over functions of citv gov- 
ernment. On Juesday, 16 August and the third day into the American occupation. 


630 


1WKI PI N For Want of a C 'sty 

die post office opened for business. On Wednesday, Lieutenant Colonel W h i trier 
opened die eustoms house as collector and in H) daws reported that he had col- 
lected over S 100.000 in dues. On Friday, O August, Navy Captain Glass was ap- 
pointed captain ot the Port of Manila and international and inland shipping re- 
sumed its brisk pace. Following the first weekend break ot the occupation. Major 
bement took over the internal revenue office as collector, bv luesdav, 23 August, 
the provost court under Judge Advocate Lieutenant Colonel Jewett was meeting in 
its first session. It has jurisdiction over all military as well as civil cases, and its 
docket was immediately full. 

Some ot these administrative appointments and functions may well have 
passed unnoticed by the average Manileno. but the restoration of services essential 
to dailv life would not, and there was more than enough evidence to reassure the 
residents ot the quick return to normalcy. For the first dav after the American take- 
oxer, Manilas streets were quiet and retail shops and other establishments were 
closed, but it was a Sunday, and that might have been normal. On Monday, IS 
August, some shops opened. On luesdav, more shops, restaurants, offices, and fac- 
tories resumed their regular schedules, bv Wednesday, the banks reopened, news- 
papers were back in circulation, merchants were pressing to declare their goods at 
the customs house, and tram cars were running. There w as no sign of unrest, dis- 
order, or distress among the civilian population. Some Spanish officers and em- 
ployees were sullen, but that was normal, too. 

Americans in the first flush of victory tended it') describe conditions in the 
city with considerable optimism. 1 bus, bradlev Fiske, officer and navigator of the 
U.S.S. Petrel of Deweys original fleet, fairly gushed over the scene on the Hscolta, 
which he visited a week after the occupation. He said: 

Tiled ay happened to he bright, and we could see the greatest number of 
people and horses and carriages and street cars, and shops and window's; and 
they all seemed to he moving. But order was everywhere. Great numbers of 
Spanish soldiers, officers and privates, were gathered in groups, most of them 
smoking cigarettes. They were depressed, and some of them looked sullen, but 
they were gesticulating and talking nevertheless. Many of the officers were dis- 
t i net 1\' handsome... of course they were not armed. 1,1 

Walking about Manila and Intramuros, and talking to one of the volunteers 
who stood guard over the walls, Fiske exulted: 

1 1 ] n one week, the whole machinery of the Government, and the whole 
machinery of business, had been set going, just as it had been before the war. 

The Army had certainly done this work admirably. 

The elation of Americans like Fiske must have been patently clear to the 
Manilenos: 


631 


mi mn u 


After a short stroll v. < tour. : <? 
story of a house on the i * 
the Pasig River. Prom thi w ■ U 
nations and the Amcri< an flat: o% r M 
querors in .1 conquered c 1 1 % 


In Fiskes exultant description of som 
Manila is a reflection of what the Mam 
governors palace, Fiskc said: 


We went inside the palace imi mount U « n. 
the top of if found a splendid statu if 
tion rooms, and corridors and lot? oiirx . 1, : ! 

columns that we saw and the hand <>rn< norni- 
gilded lions, each with his pass on • "io 
magnificent draperies, and the ‘|ui< * *nd 1 ' 
least with awe. 


I here arc a few existing rcc on Is of Main inn • 1 ‘ ,n ' ’ 1 ' ' ’ •* s 1 Lat 

were occurring in their home citv with brculu.e n l * v . w the 

i lustra do Rafael Palma shows that Ins mam inn 1 r <‘!nial 

documents as the terms of capitulation and .i iim i ,f< * n 1 * 11 1)11 * U:gmt 

1 898 to the Filipino people. For wider 1 cf I ec tio 1 < > t M . m 1 u i m < : huimicss. 

the Filipino newspaper La hulcpcndem m pros id< < u etui <»um 


Launched on 3 September 1898 In revolut ionai ( .eiu-ial \ntomo 1 mu. dic- 
ed 1 tonal hoard 1 n cl uded agroupofthemost 1 n c 1 a 1 \ • m < I n t r. > U . m 1 1 . 1 1 n n 1 Lx 1 1 1 
als. Some were men who later formed the Part it hi I < d< ial, like I clip. ■ < aide mn and 
Mariano Vivencio del Rosario; some joi 1 icd the I’anulu . . u 1 < > n . 1 1 1 s 1 .1 . like t ec 1 1 10 
Apostol and Rafael Palma; one, Fernando Ma. ( .unicm. I lelped found ilu I 'am do 
Federal but later became one of the bright lights in the Ratiulo Nac lonahsta; and 
one was a woman, Rosa Sevilla. Unlike the revolut lonarv govern men 1 s official or 
gan, El Heraldo de la Revolution , which was published at \lalolos and contained 
mostly decrees and official records. La hulc/icudcm /a \\ as a Manila newspaper pub- 
lished at the A silo de M alabon and pn n t ed items c < n a 1 1 n g the \ 1 a n 1 I c 1 u >s wide 
range of interests. 

In its issue of 6 September I 898, the lef t lead column of not ices and events 
quoted from the Spanish press statements marking /a hu/i'/untL'iiiia ' debut. I l 
Comercios reference was chilly and curt, blit polite; /:/ / hiivio dc \LniiLi\ lengthier 
statement was carping, and ended with a disclaimer that “civility does not detract 
from bravery to dispel any suspicions of motive. It was a reminder that Spanish 
resentment of Filipino assertiveness was alive and strong in the capital, even if 
Spanish sovereignty was not. 


632 


P \Rl PI S hor U \int of ./ ( Vn 

\n itc in about the election ot local officers of San betnando de Oil aw, as Paco 
w as then also known, indicates that the residents were again going about their local 
political affairs. 1 he news editor included a congratulatory note to the item, prais- 
ing the elected officers tor then willingness to serve the community and the ex- 
ample the\ were giving ot uptight and honest leadership. 

I he doings ot the revolut ionarv government took up a large section ot the 
tiont pane. indicating that tt loomed large in Manileno consciousness. I he surren- 
dei ot 1 aoag in llocos Norte and \parri in Kagayan, were reported separately as 
individual items ot news. Other updates on the governments activities were pro- 
vided. including a transcript ot a decree hv President Kmilio Aguinaldo, in Spanish 
and lagalog. Also, clearlv intended as a public relations item, an excerpt from a 
letter bv a high official ot the former Spanish government was quoted in which the 
unnamed officer praised the revolutionary officers in Aparri. 1 le and other prison- 
ers like himself were awaiting transport to Manila on board the German ship LLmu 
and he wrote that the l ilipino command had shown them humane and respectful 
treatment. 1 mallv. the paper noted with satisfaction that rail service between Ma- 
nila and Bavambang and boat travel to Santa Gruz in 1 aguna had been restored, 
and should ease the problems that plagued residents who had business to conduct 
along these routes. 

Bv earlv .September, the tactics ot ordinary residents in an occupied city be- 
gan to untold. In the ~~ September issue ot I j ludtpcndcnchi , strikes bv factory 
workers, carpenters on board the ship LsciUio , and female cigar and cigarette work- 
ers at the C ompania Meneral de los labacos are reported. In addition, an item re- 
ports that domestic workers, servants, cooks, and even coachmen in hit ram uros 
no longer want to work tor their C astillian emplovers and have likewise gone on 
strike. ( f her strikers include the crew ot the ship P. dc Sotolongo* and male and fe- 
male workers ot the cigar factory II Oriente. Regard inti these strikes as a rising 
assertiveness and not simple a demand for more wages, /.</ hidcpoidenciii s editor 
"applauds Manilas workers for demonstrating strength, unity, and above all, pa- 
triotism, and "con tern [dates with immense pleasure the grand spectacle of a people 
clamoring tor their rights. 

I here appeared no doubt that the Manilenos held the aspirations of the revo- 
lution close to their hearts. In its 1 1 September issue. Lit Independencut s statement 
on President Agumalclos choice of Malolos as the revolutionary capital shows an 
unmistakable pride and lovaltv: 

A short while after establishing the presidency and revolutionary gov- 
ernment offices in Bacoor, it was noted that the town did not have any of the 
appreciable conditions necessary to serve as the residence of the president of 

our nation and his government Looking for an appropriate place which, by 

its location, wealth, comfort and other factors, would raise the prestige of our 
government and the honor of our people, our president found none more ap- 


633 


Ifii 1*1 ill MTINI H\ \< >1 I 


propriatc than Malolos. Aside from ' " 

tiful and above all patriotic M.ilolo ho : d. 

place among the most brilliant a nu * i d * ' 

seditions and deaths... and it h.is * « o ; 

soaked with the blood of rnarrvr .« 
mingled in the holy friendship of d-Mth ■ «ti 
its beautiful fields and valleys. 


But the political realities m .Manila wen tin r « :• • 

contend. In what must have seemed to mark i fm ' tt t«>t Manilenos. 

Aguinaldo compounded bis failure to c burn Giambi rignttwi.-. th apu.d ot riis 
government with an inexplicable eagerness to torn tiiat ( >n *s v ;>t :nln-i s ‘ ) ^. 
General Otis wrote to Aguinaldo aggrcssr.cK demandin'.* tb.it the I ibpino armed 
forces evacuate the entire city of .Manila, including its suburbs anti dc tenses. I ur 
thermore, ( )tis “served notice that unless the se t mops we re withdrawn i u \ « uul the 
line of the city’s defenses by the 1 5 of September, Ik* would be obliged to resort to 
forcible action.”" C )ver the objections of his assistant . ( »eneral Not iel. who temon 
strated with tears in his eves, Aguinaldo acceded. 

I he day before the Revolutionary ( ongress cons cried in Malolos. therefore, 
Manilenos watched what American correspondent |< >hn .Me ( uu bee >n desc r ibed as 
a “pathetic” withdrawal of hi I i pi no troops from Manila. I be Rev < >lut ion at \ t om- 
mand had requested of the American general commanding Malate and I mma that 
the troops be permitted to march up to the I .unci a with then amis and pass along 
the ground where the Spaniards used to shoot the I ilipmos. Since it would not 
create any security problems but rather was a pretty sentiment, American C »en- 
eral Overshine “gave his consent. 


[ So ) . . . came the t roops, hundreds and h u nci reds < > I t hem , a 1 1 in hi ue d r 1 1 1 
and every man with his rifle. There were over six hundred of them and the pu 
ture their bright uniforms made as the columns of four wheeled out of the 
Calle Real, down the Calle San I.uis, with the hands playing and the horses 
tearing back and forth, was one never to he forgotten. I hrongs of people 
watched the long lines march bv. There was something pathetic about the 
whole incident, for they were being driven out of the* city which thev had 
fought so long to get into. . . [that ] one could not help feeling sorry f ot them.... 

In the twenty-four hours of September Id over four thousand armed men 
marched out of the city.../’ 

What thoughts crossed the minds of the Manilenos who stood silent, watch- 
ing the cream of their revolutionary army marching not into but out of the 
capital that by all rights should h ave been theirs? Did it signal the end of armed 
resistance in the city for them and of necessity the beginning of resistance by other 
means? At Malolos, the very next day, did the Manilenos, ilustrurlos and average 


634 


V \Rf PI s for U7 int of ( :n 

residents alike, hear the **\ ivas! with hollow feelings ot regret that the street 
lined with cheering people, hunting, and flags was not at the l.uneta the day pre- 

\ ions: 

In Manila, life was quicklv returning to normal. 1 he American military his- 
torian lohn lavlor noted his candid observations about how the Manila ilttsn\ido$ 
were conducting their relations with the American command: 

In Manila mam of the natives of' means and prominence... gave their 
support to the \merieans from the time thev occupied the city. It was not al- 
\\.i\s .in open and frank support, especially at first, when the destiny ot the 
archipelago was still m doubt: it was an interested support and a matter ot the 
head rathei than of the heart, for the insurgents were ot their own people; but 
thev remain in Manila under the protection ot the Americans, and as the latter 
strengthened their hold upon the city and over the people, and as it finally 
became known that the Philippines would most probably be ceded to the 
l nited States then influence was more openlv thrown to the side ot the l tilted 
States. . . Mam of them never broke ofVtheir relations w ith the insurgents even 
though thev took offices from the Americans. In some cases their friendship 
for t he l nited States was simplv a disguise to enable them to work in the inter- 
ests of "Aguinaldo. pmbablv in more cases intercourse with the men beyond the 
American lines was continued tor financial advantage or on account ot the ties 
of friendship. 

Pragmatic, if ' cvnical, this observation was too narrowly cast. Had laylor 
w ritten w ith the benefit of hindsight, he would have found that his assessment was 
applicable not onlv to ilusn\ulo<, but to the whole ot Manilas population, as well. 
The Americans would learn, as had the Spanish before them, that control over the 
citv did not mean control of the archipelago, and the dichotomv between colonial 
capital and provincial regions would remain as it had been. What control over the 
citv did bring the Americans was access to the most urbanized sector ot the Phil- 
ippine population, with its highlv politicized community and its irrepressible, 
assertive leadership. Indeed, the new masters ot the citv would find that they wore 
masters onlv in a limited sense. Manila was, and continues to be the Manilenos 
domain. 

Notes 

1. Pilipino term for the intelligentsia. 

2. The Congress met in the church of Barasoain, a separate parish just across the river 
from the town of Malolos. It was a live-minute walk trom the Malolos church to the 
Barasoain chur eh. See John boreman, 7 he Philippine Isliwds (New York: Charles 
Scribner s Sons, 18W), p. 623 tn. Because the revolutionary capital was at Malolos, 
it is customary to refer to the Malolos, not Barasoain, Congress. 


63 S 


mi mu ittiM 


3. 


4. 


5. 

6 . 

7. 


8 . 

9. 

10. 
11 . 


12. 


13. 


For a description by cyrwirn 
Crisis of the Re pul flu <( < r 

277-282. 


See Agoncillo, M it lob, p 2 '> ? 

Revolutionary President 1 nuho V 

“I he work of the revolution being h U 

tory completed, the moment r. t • 

brilliantly accomplished bv our f . 

ernment (will) assist in the unfoldm • * •' ; : 

on the standards of tlie r .olunon.u ; •* 

Teodoro A. Agoncillo Malnlo l L< ( ,,f ' 

the Philippines Press, 1900 p 2 
For a description by cvewitncv s of tie 
A passage from one of the rrwitiir 
number of the delegates bad axs<mbhd 
side... sitting on benches... loot nr/ immih : 
church, from the nave to the column *<• v ' ,,fl 

American correspondent Prank I > Milbf I bt i i. 
of the War in the Philippines Mart on d ( ' ! 

I he Spanish colonial government surrendered dm. \ • 

mand on 1 3 August 1898, marking t ti< end of t h» i h i i i ppu 
American War. 

For a fuller account of the work of the Kevolmn >n ar ( 
Malolos . . . op. c it ., pp. 281 309. See also I eodoi o a i F • 1 1 ‘ • 
tion (Quezon City: R.P. Garcia Publishing* ( » l x.w i 


lusilu a. a 
e warm m 
it. b . »f t be 



s M 11 *’ 

tint 

' II II 1 

P </> 


\iin i i 

v an nasal ^ 

oni 

pha ,e 

< »t t he Spanish 

H* r < 

sr i \i;o|u 

illo 

H; /V. 

ihppun Rex 

olu 

<»l !'). 

1 t c’d i lion) 

. PP 


122-159. 


General Otis had been appointed military govetnoi a month eiilici. «>n 28 \ugust 
1898. 


Hour ns traveled to the Ph 1 1 1 ppi nes i n 1 88 asamembeioftlu 8 t <■ < n i e n 1 1 1 k I x pc 
dition. The group included Dean ( . Worcester a pmfessoi at 1 1 , c l m\eisii\ of 
Michigan, who would later return to the Philippines a- a c « mi in issionet. 1 hiring his 
visit to Manila, Bourns met I )r. Pardo de I a vet a. who was in the Philippines to re 
search medicinal plants, as well as oversee the colonvs partn ipation in the Madrid 
Exposition. In 1898, Bourns and Worcester were among a .mall handful of \meri 
cans who knew considerably more about the Philippines than that the\ weie "not 
canned goods.” See Dean C. Worcester, The Philippine fLnuh ,nul l hen /Va/'/clNcw 
York and London: The MacMillan ( mmpanv, 1899 ), pp. \m \i 
In 1895, Pardo de davera published a health manual.. . b te fie ( itnLir I n/ernnu (Ma 
nila: I ipolithografia de Chofre y Comp. 1895). Translated into Tagalog that same 
year, the manual was intended by its author to provide Filipinos with basic knowl- 
edge about primary health care. 

As summarized in the U.S. Philippine Commission, Reports of the Lift Philippine 


636 


PARK PI S For Want of a City 


1 *. 


IS. 


16. 


17 . 


IS. 

19 . 

20 . 
21 . 


i 1 


23. 

24. 


( otntnission. Report of Noremher AO. / 9CW (Washington: Government Printing Of- 
fice, 1901 ) [ hereinafter 1 a 1 1 Report. 1900]. p. 16. 

Pardo de Iaveras correspondence with Dean C . Worcester and Frank S. Bourns 
proves his influential role in the San Jose C ollege case, as well as other education and 
secularization issues. See Pardo de lavera to Worcester, Letter ot 3 August 1899; 
Pardo de lavera t o Bourns, l etter ot 3 September 1 899; in Dean C. W orcester, Docu- 
ment* and Papers. W orcester Philippine C ollection, Michigan 1 historical Collections, 
Bcntle\ 1 Iistorical l ibrary, I’niversity ot Michigan (Hereinafter, W PG), Yol. 1“\ 

/ antis Held for Feelesiastieal or Religious i J scs in the Philippine Islands. etc. Message from 
the President of the l ntted States. 36 Congress, 2 Session, Senate Document No. 190 
( W ashington: Government Printing Office, 19011, p. 27. 

Otis reported to Washington on ~~ December 1898 that provincial governments 
could be established in 1 u /on under the general supervision of the U.S. Army and 
Navy, and that moreover, the judicial system could be restored under Cayetano 
Arellano as chiet justice. See |ohn R.M. Taylor, The Philippine Insurrection Against the 
United States: .1 ( 'ampliation of Documents with Notes and Introduction (Pasay City, 
Philippines: l'.ugenio l ope/ Foundation, 19 1), Vol. 11,19 May 1898 to 4 July 1902, 


p. 1*1. 

Worcester mentions, tor example, that he took Charles Denby to call on Arellano, 
the great Filipino lawyer here. Worcester, entry ot Saturday, 6th May 1899, Docu- 
ments and Papers, Yol. 16, W PC. 

Worcester, Documents and papers, Yol. 16, entry ot 9th July 1899, W 1 C. 

Jose Alcjandrino. I he Price of Freedom: Episodes and anecdotes of our struggles for free- 
dam (Manila: M. Colcol C o., 1949). 

Renato C onstantino, I he Philippines: A Past Revisited lanila, n.p., 1 ) b, p. -38. 
T. 1 1. Pardo dc lavera. .-I History of the Federal Party Appendix A in the U.S. Philip- 
pine Commission, Report of the U.S. Philippine Commission to the Secretary of War 
(Hereinafter. Taft Commission Report] Part 1. S7 Congress. 1 Sess., 1901-002 
Washington: Government Printing C 9 It ice. 1901 p. 168. 

See Constantino, A History of the Philippines: From the Spanish Colonization to the 
Second World UV/;*(New York: Monthly Review Press, 19 8), pp. 246--4 ). Aglipay s 
membership in the Partido Federal by 1902 is discussed in Sister Man Dorita 
C.lillord, Iglesia Filipina lndependiente: 1 he Revolutionary Church, in Gerald H. 
Anderson, ed.. Studies in Philippine CJ.mreh History (Ithaca: Cornell F m\ersit\ 1 rcss, 

1 969, pp. 223-88). 

William 1 lenrv Scott, lloeano Responses to American Aggression 1900-1901 (Quezon 
City: New Dav Publishers, 1986), p. 88. 

The assessment of the first decades ot Filipino participation in the American colonial 
sy stem is summed up neatlv: “Filipino nationalism took a fresh approach to its chal- 
lenges and opportunities, and applied itself to the task of demonstrating the capacity 
of the Filipinos for self-government. For here, it seemed, lay the best chance ot the 
Filipinos to bring themselves closer to the central objectives of attaining national re- 


637 


THI I’HII UTINI Kf Vc >1 l I l< >'• 


: 


pptnrt 

• ! tile 


25 . 

26 . 
27 . 


28 . 


30 . 


31 . 

32 . 


l.iUi.. < 

' ' // ft t ) 


lr mo s 
.! \ 1-1 

f r .// 

/ U'jr 
1 1 c t o . 


demption." See Agoncillo. with ( )vcar M Alton <» I S/ T ' 

(Manila: University of the Philippine Press ! ><> ( ) 
nacionalista period, see ibid , pp ^ 1 9 Vj j 
Constantino, The Philippine: A Past Ret rated. p 7 *8 
Ibid. 

AJejandrino, ibid. Among the men w ho signed th< par • . r . . * 
own brother-in-law, Arsen io Urn/ Herrera who wouM lar<- 
nila and federalista president 

See, for example, C ilenn Anthony May. liitttle for Ha tar. .a 
War (New Haven: Yale University Press. I9'H dn « r<> < 

Contradictions in Philippine Society. !H € JH 1 '>(>.' n p • } 

Pasyon and Revolution PopuLtr Movement m the l hihpp: r • *(’ <• yMuvnn 

City: Atcnco de Manila l niversity Pres-o 1 9 ' } 

29. An account of the Aglipay- I imo conflict suggests that th< mi r n in tinting among 

revolutionary leaders forced some to seek safetv bv surrrndi ring n» the \meru.inv 
Sec Pedro de Achutcgui and Miguel A. Bemad. Religion Revmut :>>n it: :m * t'dspptne 
I he Life and Church of Cregorio Aglipay. Mil. 1 Manila \n iu«* d< M.iml.i. 19(>()). 
pp. 136-8. I*o r a study of internal politics and Inc nonalism mmur I ilipmos in the 
revolution, see Santiago V. Alvarez, Recalling the hevolutum \ lemon of a / ipmo 
general, trans. by Paula Carolina Malay; intro In bubs k I airdes. Madison \\ I: 
Wisconsin Monograph 8; Manila: Atcnco l niversity I tc*ssi. 1907 
Sec Joseph L. Stickney, War in the Philippines and the / tfe iinrl ( dortou^ I Vrv/» of \dnu 
ral Uewey (Chicago: n.p., 1899), (juoting an account l>\ American c or respondent. 
John T. McCutcheon, pp. 297-298. 

Foreman, op. ci t . , p. 625. 

Agoncillo in Malolos ..., pp. 278,281, quotes American correspondent I i.mk D. 
Millets descriptions of the event in “The Filipino Republic, Harper's History of the 
War in the Philippines, Marion Wilcox, ed., (New \ork, 1900), p. 09; and m I he 
Expedition to the Philippines (New York London, 1 899), p. 1 7.L 

33 . American journalist McCutcheon said, “The train from Manila was jammed with 
natives, and a great many prominent Philippine merchants and lawyers were on 
board. See Stickney, op. cir., p. 297. 

34. Robert R. Reed, Colonial Manila: I he context of Hispanic urbanism and process of 
morphogenesis (Berkeley: The University of California Press, 19MS), p. 6*5. 

35 . I hese included Manila, Lega/.pi in Albay, Sual in Pangasinan, Iloilo in Negros, Cebu 
and Zamboanga. See Nicholas Cushner, Spain in the Philippines , I PC . Monographs, 
No. 1 (Quezon City: Atcnco de Manila University, 1971 ), pp. 205-6. 

36. Reed, op. cit., pp. 68-70. 

37. In the early 19th century, the galleon trade came to an end. Put the opening of Ma- 
nila and the rest of the Philippines to foreign trade led to the growth of an export 
economy, ensuring the continuing flow of wealth. In Manila, the new wealth spilled 
over into the development of new areas just outside the walls of Spanish Intramuros. 
See Reed, ibid. 


638 


I’ARHMvS For Want of a Cin 

38. ( i. Waldo Browne. The Pearl of the Orient: The Philippine IsLwds (Boston: Dana Estes 

and (. of. 1 ‘■>00). p. 

3'). 1 V an ( . W orcester and Prank S. Bourns. Spanish Rule in the Philippines. The Cosmo- 

politan. Will: 0 (October 189~). p. 392. 

• »(). See 1 liodoro G. Robles, /he Philippines in the Nineteenth Century (Quezon Cin : 
Malaya Books, Inc.. 1969 ). pp. 13". 133. 157. 169. 289 . Robles states that "actual 
centralism” bad taken sufficient institutional root about the 1860s with reforms in 
the 1830s reestablishing "the supremacy of the Captaincy-General. Thus. Robles 
describes the era from 1861 to 1 898 as “one of actual experience with the highly cen- 
tralized system of government, both in theory and in practice" and concludes that the 
centralized form of government in the Philippines was "a late nineteenth century 
phenomenon. 

41. In the Luc 18th centurv, the lntramuros garrison had only 4,000 poorly trained 
troops. By 1800 the force had increased to 14,000 heavily armed men tor a city of 
only 86,000. Moreover, the force was supported by a "well stocked arsenal and a 
foundry lor cannon. See Sainte-Croix, op. cit., pp. 188 - 189 . 

42. foreman. The Philippine Islands, p. 229. 

43. PNA, Guardia Cdviles, Bundle 42. "Estado del Guardia Civil.” 2 November 18 1. 

44. Ibid. 

48. Ibid. 

4b. Cluia Oficial . 1807, p. 824. 

47. PNA. Guardia Cdviles. Bundle 42. "Relacion de 13 Enero. 1897. de Administracion 
de 1 lacienda Publica.” 

48. Dean C. Worcester, The Philippines , Past and Present (New York: 1 he MacMillan 
Company, 1014), p. 379. 

49. The incident recounted in Jose Rizals novel. Noli Me Linger? of the encounter with 
the < iuardia Civil is an example. 

80. Berriz, Diccionario, p. 1 30. See also, Worcester, I he Philippines. .., p. S. 

8 1. PNA, Guardia Civiles, Bundle 42. Relacion de las Personas c|ue had cometido 

inf race tones a los Bandos Vigentes \’ han sido notados por individuos de esta Subdi- 
vision, Seccion de Ciuardia C ivil Veterana. 

82. Ibid. I he police commentarv was often terse and unsubstantiated. A suspect was 
“unimprovable,” or was continuing his “bad conduct. 1 here were careful distinc- 
tions made between degrees of unacceptable conduct: worst (alieirna condueta J, bet- 
ter (etnpeora condueta), or average (niediana condueta). It any change tor the better 
was noticed, that too was indicated: es niejoiahle su condueta. Some suspects were 
characterized in a single word or phrase: ratero (thievish), prostituta (prostitute), or 
sin tnodo de vivir conocida (without known means of livelihood). In a tew instances, 
the lists ii dicatcd that the surveillance had been lifted by order of the Civil Gover- 
nor— these were the fortunate tew who had somehow won reprieve. 

83. PNA, Ciuardia Cdviles, Bundle 42, “Expcdiente sobre la forma en que la Guardia 
Cavil debe llevar el registro de sospechosos,” 1889. 

84. Ibid. 


639 




I HI. I'HII II'I’IM H I V< >1 l I |( \NI > HI |. >'.l . 

55. James LeRoy, The Amcrtcam in the I 9 htltpptne Boston Ilmii4itnn \ ! nmpany, 

1914), Vol. 1, p. 201. 

56. Taylor, op. tit., pp. 25-28. 

57. Augustin stated: May (> As entire town will b<- Our- 1 tnMips out of 

walled city to avoid losses leaving on Is enough to nun • * n ! t » n • : . s lime 

3 — Situation very grave. Agumaldo sin c ceded in raisin Railroad 

and telegraph lines cut, have no means of omnium* ati«»n with ar •? prnuiucs. 
Cavite Province has risen in mass Shall mak- i * *t ■•■md n. *. < »i ■ rc:gn sub 

jects embarked on foreign vessels in hay; onK snur * hmc S s nu 

ation very serious; enernv corning from BuI.m an I -umna < r n ha-, surrounded 
city and force line of /Capote, I agiina and Pasig Ha\< heen tor defense of block* 
houses, which have been conncc ted by t rem he s I « »f >l *.at i« *; is « »f ihur i »s has c taken 
refuge in walled citv from fear of outrages of insurgents preferring. r«> run risk of 
bombardment, which has not yet begun lime 7 * - ms f to*»ps do not inspire 

me with confidence; but I need them I he walled sits is r« »ssded ss it h w« mien, s hil 
dren, sick and wounded, who have taken refuge hen tearing the msutgents would 
enter the suburbs or barrios and commit outrages. \m not aide to dine them out; 
but even without bombardment or fires they ssill greatls nu tease diffuults of dc* 
fense. — July 25 — According to rumors disaster to siju.ulton « » f ( erset.i; Santiago, 
Cuba, capitulated, and peace negotiations. As government has not inhumed me* of 
this, I deny it; but if true, I think that my authority is bid i tiled In not mfm tiling of it. 
even if necessary to do so confidentially — Ilnscitv has been blockaded tor three 
months and besieged for two by the insurgents. All wonder at our ahilnv to resist so 
long without aid, with merely improvised defenses; but h>< >d supply is giving out, al- 
though am doing what 1 can toobtam pro visions.... I lies ha vc c u t < >1 1 w- a t et supply 
of city. Cisterns will he used. See laylor, ibid., pp. 28 20. 

58. Ibid., pp. 26-27. 

59. LeRoy, op. cit., p. 1 7. The forces under I )cwev arc desi ribed m (,.|. Youngluisband, 
7 he Philippines and Round About (New York: I he MacMillan ( o., 1800), p. S5. 

60. For the sequence of events, see Joseph I.. Stic knew U nr m the Philippines, and I ifeufid 
(ilorious Deeds of Admiral Dewey (C .hicago, 1 800), pp. 283 28*». 

61. Bradley A. Fiskc, War Time in Manila (Boston: I he ( .orli, mi Pre ss, 1013), pp. 138- 
139. 

62. Ibid., p. 141. 

63. Ibid., pp. 141-145. 

64. Rafael Palma, Historia de L'ilipinas (I)iliman: University' of the Philippines Press, 
1972), Tomo II, pp. 613-618. 

65. Original in Spanish, La Independence, 1 2 September 1 808. 

66. Taylor, op. cit., p. 135. 

67. Stickney, op. cit., pp. 296-297. 

68. 1 aylor, op. cit., pp. 1 38- ] 39. 


640 




The h’lesia Sasrada 112 Lalii 

O O e > 

upholding the Unfinished Revolution 


Moi O! Tl RAMl-W.\n.\ 

imvohotlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India 


S il.ini;. in C uvitc province, sonic (i0 km southwest ot Metro Manila, is a muni- 
cipality where most of the residents are still small-scale farmers growing coftee 
or pineapple, lust outside the town center stands a small concrete church with a 
roof of galvanized iron. Inside are around 10 rows ot wooden benches, one column 
on either side of a center aisle, and a little space at the hack where people may stand 
when there are more churchgoers than what the benches can handle. 

W hen one is facing the altar, a statue of the blessed \ irgin Mary looms on 
the left. She has a red skirt, a white blouse with a yellow sun on the front, and a 

blue robe clcarlv she svmboli/cs the Inang bayan, or Mother Country. Next to 

her is her consort Joseph, draped in yellow and green. At the center ot the altar is 
the Iatlong Persona Solo Pios (the 1 hrec Persons in One Cod or the Holy lrin- 
itv), dressed in white. To the right we see another statue ot Mary, this time in white, 
and her heart stabbed by two knives. 

l he bust ol lose Ri/al, below the lutiong Persona, looks out on the congre- 
gation. And on the wall behind the altar, one can view the individually trained pic- 
tures of several heroes of the 1 SPb Revolution, among them Jose Rizal, Apolinario 
Mabini, Marcclo I 1. del Pilar, and Andres bonitacio. 

On the wall behind the Iatlong Persona hangs a picture ot three mountains. 
A sun whose seven raws reach out to the mountains reposes above them. Within the 
sun is an “all-seeing eye. On the two side walls ot the church are more portraits ot 
Rizal and other revolutionary heroes, along with banners on which are written 


i m mu imsi hi v< »m i h i » s 

prayers in I^itin. The credo < >f chc church is displ.iv cd a iiu > rc about 

the prayers and credo later. 

I he edifice which I have just desc rihe< I is t he . Im r • » ’ • • . ; »w n as the 

Iglesia Sagrada ng Dihi or ( hutch o t the Sacred K.u i W hat is 

striking about it is that we do not find am image «»t i ( not a single 

picture or statue. Instead, Ki/al and other 1 > resohnioi esered and 

venerated. 


History of the Iglesia- 


The roots of the Iglesia can be t raced bac k to the turn < >t this u-utun \v onling to 
the church members, Jesus ( Jirist is said to bas e* been renu ai nated at a pku e in the 
Far Hast called the Philippines. I he followers belies e that tor the period 1S(>1 
1 896, Jesus Christ took on the form of lose Ki/al . It is then contention that w hen 
Rizal was executed in 1896, Cod spoke to a Kapnan < ul<>n who \sas entrusted 
with the task of putting up I I is Church on top of a mh k Im them this is the gen- 
esis of Kapitan Culon, who ventured into his mission work guided In a \oue. 

During the turmoil of the anti Spanish revolution in iso kapitan ( ulon 
brought into existence a ‘tunay na Iglesia ng Dios 'true ( him h of ( ,od • on top of 
the table rock on the mountain considered holy In people limn different walks of 
life, Mount Banahaw, which stradd les the border bet ween the provinces < > t l a gun a 
and Quezon provinces, immediately southeast of Metro Manila. 

Some 40 years later, in 1935, a branch of the chimb was established in 
Calamba, I^aguna. Between then and the outbreak of the- \\ brkl W ar 1 1 . this ^ (lurch 
had many pastors, among whom were Agapito lllustrisimo and Benigno Kamos. 

In 1 947, two years after the devastating Japanese < >c c upat i< >n , t he c hurc h was 
reestablished in 'Hondo, Manila, under a different name, the Iglesia Sagrada ng 
Lahi. A former Aglipayan priest, Monsignor Roberto Pcrc/, initiated this move, 
along with 300 members. A few years later, in 1950, a branch was established in 
Atimonan, Quezon Province, with approximately 500 members.' ( )ther branches 
in the provinces followed: at Catabangan and Bagong Sik.it, both in the province 
of Camarines Sur; at Mauban, Sampaloc, Agdangan, and Padre Burgos in ( )ue/on 
province; at Bagac in Bataan province; and even as far south as Palompon in the 
island of Leyte as well as in the province of Agusan del Norte, on the island of 
Mindanao. I he Iglesia was duly registered as a religious organization on 21 Octo- 
ber 1 959 at the Securities and Exchange Commission, Department of C ommerce 
and Industry. 


In the early 1960s, the headquarters was moved to l.echeria, Calamba, La- 
guna province. I here was another transfer, in 1983, this time to its present site ir 
2^ C ; aVite - t ^ IC ^70s, the membership is said to have grown to arotnu 

50,000 throughout the Philippines. 

I he members of the Iglesia Sagrada ng Lahi believe that their group is one ol 
t e re tgious organizations that Jose Rizal had entrusted with the task of freeing the 


642 


IT RAM I WAP A I he Iglrsh? Stignu/di ng La hi 


Motherland. Other such religious organizations include the Iatlong Persona Solo 
Dios, Bathalismo. Bokal na katalinuhan, Bukal na Pananampalataya, and NX atawat 
ng 1 ahi. 1 he members ot these organization venerate Rizal, share the same credo 
and aspirations, and amoni; themselves thev consider one another as brothers and 
sisters. 


Religious Rites and their Ethical Domains 

I h ere are prayer- rituals that are peculiar to the Iglesia. The devotees place the right 
hand on the forehead, next on the stomach, left shoulder, right shoulder, and, ft- 
nally, on the heart. At the same time, thev recite, “Bathalang Ama Ko (God, Mv 
bather), "Bathalang Ina ko" (God, My Mother), “Bathalang Jove Rix-al (the God 
lose Ri/al), Bathalang C ristum Rev" (the God, C hrist the king), “Nag-lkalawang 
Persona (the Second Person), “Bathalang Yerbo Omnipotente lesus (the God 
Jesus, Omnipotent Word)." 

1 hey believe in their ancestors ( haninio-nuno — mv distant ancestors; nuno 
ng nuno — ancestors of my ancestors; nuno ng nuno n<^ Anni ho — ancestors ot my 
bather; nuno )ig nuno )ig Ina ho — ancestors ot mv Mother), Amang Lihim (Secret 
bather), Inang l ihim (Secret Mother), Bathalang Lumikha (God the Creator), 
Bathala ng Bansang Kavumanggi (God ot the Country ot Brown Race) and 
Bathalang Palling kavumanggi (God ot the Brown Race). 

After the prayer, the song of lose Ri/al is sung to the tune ot “Aloha Oe": 


l uwalhati Sa Rix-Al 


O, R1X-A1 liari at Bathalang 
makapangyarihan dito sa lupa, 
akong sa lyo av nanawagan 
dinggin Mo po itong abang sinapit 
ko at sa nagbahalang bagsik ng 
panahon givera, peste, gutom, 
lindol, bagvo at inondacion. 

Ako y kahahagan at iligtas Mo 
sa pamamagitan ng lubos- 
lubosang paniniwala at pananalig 
ng masamhit ko lamang ang 
busilak at makapangvarihng pangalan 
mong BP-JA1 1 andukhain Mo ako 
sa biyaya y pasaganain habang 
ako y nabubuhay dito sa ibabaw 
ng lyong lupa — siya nawa — ° 


643 


I HI mil 1 1*1*1 N I H I v< 




(( )h Rix-al, king and ( ,c >d 

all powerful here on earth 

I beseech you 

heed my pinlul Lite 

and the fierce destruc non 

of war, pestilence, famine. 

earthquake, typhoon and flood 


Have mercy on me and deliver me 
through the power of absolute* faith 
that even merely through the mention 
of Your pure and powerful name 
HE- YAH will bless me 
with grace and prosperity 
for as long as I live 
here on Your earth amen 


I he members of the Iglcsia arc* expected t<> h>ll<>\s the 1‘itong l tos. or 
Seven Commandments: 

1) Matang Maamo (( icntle Lyes) 

2) faingang Lampasan (forgiving bars) 

3) Bibig na Sinusian (Sealed I i ps > 

4) Pusong Kordero (I lean of a I amb) 

5) Manood (Be Observant) 

6) Mag-antay (Have Patience) 

7) Ang Pilipinas, sa mga katutubo o s.i mga Ina.mak Lamang ng Pilipinas 
( I he Philippines is only for the Natives or True ( hildren of the* Philippines). 

In order to achieve and reinforce the Pitnng l tos mentioned earlier, the 
following “Limang 'Iadhana” or l ive ( Conditions must be fulfilled, with the ex- 
pected end result of the members establishing a sound relationship with one an- 
other. 


1) Magsusuyuan (Be pleasant to one another) 

2) Magmamahalan (Love one another) 

3) Magtitinginan ('lake care of one another) 

4) Magtutulungan (Help one another) 

5) Magyayakapan (Embrace one another) 

Phus the emblem of the Iglesia Sagrada ng Lain is the embodiment of these 
teachings. I he Seven Commandments are symbolized bv sevc 
rom the all-seeing eye within a triangle inside the sun. 
ines each, symbolizing these Limang Iadhana. 

h ^ CCOrc ^ n 8 to the church history, this emblem was used as the n.u ion.il (lag ot 
t t ansang Mayi (said to he the name of the Philippines prior to Spanish colo- 
nization), which is believed to already have had 1 00, ()()() years of history before she 


n raws emanating 
e raws consist of five 




644 


IT RAMI \\ \l V\ The Igfrsi.i Sjgru/fa ng L*ihi 

became a Spanish colonv. lodav ii continues to he the design ot the church flag ot 
i he orgam/at ion. 

There are special ceremonies performed on the birth and death anniversaries 
ot important martvrsot the 1 S^>(s Revolution, such as those ot Rizal and Bonifacio, 
and during the Iglesias l oundation Oay. On such occasions, the flag raising cer- 
emonv is held at the back ot the church building. Two flags, that ot the Republic ot 
the Philippines and ot the church, are hoisted before the mass is celebrated, at 
around :(M) a.m. 

As the flatis are raised, thev sing ‘Bavang Magiting. This song is likewise 
rendered whenever leremias Adia, the president ot the organization as of 1991, 
makes his entrv to the church. The melody is cxactlv the same as that ot the Phil- 
ippine national anthem, but is sung like a mass hvmn and has slightly different 
lvrK s. 


Bavang Magit mg 
Na avaw paal i pi n 
Bnuing maningning 
Ng aming pag-giliw 

Kaming ivong mga anak 
Ay handang makilahan 
Sa ganid na pakav 
Ng mga davnhan 

Sa ilog mo kaparangan 
Sa bayan mo t kahundukan 
Ama namin nangamatav 
Dahil sa ivong kalavaan 

Kava kaming ivong mga anak 
Sa iyo \ lumilivag 
Sa ngalan mo v 
Naglilingkod ng matapat 

Bansang Mavi namin pinakamamahal 
Di ka namin pababavaan 
Sisikapin namin ng lubos na matanghal 
Watawat niong tatlong kulay. 

( Brave count rv 

Who does not want to be enslaved 
Bright Star 
C )l our love 


645 


i m mu ntiM 



Wc, your children 
Arc ready to tight 
Against the greed v ob|c * tr. > 

C )f the foreigners 

In tlic rivers and fields 
In your towns and mountains 
( )ur fathers died 
For your freedom 

That is why we, your ( hildren 

I j)vc you 

In your name 

Wc will serve w ith loyal t v 


Mayi, our most beloved count rv 
Wc will not forsake you 
Wc wall persevere in raising 
Your flag of three colors.) 


I he priest’s sermon usually exhorts the members not to commit am \\ to un- 
doing (huwag magkamali) by strictlv observing t he c burc h s i tiles and c ommand- 
ments. He also entreats them to follow the laws and constitution ol the- Republic of 
the Philippines, because these are the bases for peace, strength, and units. Further- 
more, as the republic aims to bring the Filipinos to the summit of greatness, the 
members are encouraged to guard its peace and stability. In this manner, thev 
dream of a time when there will be no slave nor an oppressive head, when t he great 
fjod of the Brown Race will reign, will come. But while oppression c out miles, it is 
the duty of all followers to redeem the country. 

loward this end, the members are urged to unite with one another, just as 
true brothers and sisters who have one Father and one Mother to protect and bless 
them. I hey are strongly encouraged to follow the footsteps of a kiiluluuuuig n'ltgiis 
(pure soul) that characterized the martyrs and heroes of the 1 <S C )6 Revolution. 

Sometimes the priest singles out Artcmio Ricarte and Benigno Ramos as ex- 
amples of patriots to be emulated, and as uncompromising nationalists who 
struggled against the U.S. colonial power. 


Continuity 

One is struck by the strong nationalism that the prayer, hymns, and church credo 
manifest. I hese works stress that the Philippines is only for the natives or children 
o t e Philippines and that Rizal is Ciod and belongs to the kuyutfuin^i or brown 
race. The members believe that the equality and prosperity' which the 1 S c )6> Revo- 

646 




11 R \Ml W \l ^ \ / hr IgL'si*! S<2gr*idi2 ng I * 2 hi 


lution aimed tor ha\e not vet been obtained. And because thev belong to the brown 
race. thev are the right tul inheritors ot the struggle which was initiated bv the revo- 
lutionary mart\rs and carried on bv the people like Ricarte and Ramos. 

I his sac red mission can be sustained through the harmonv amonti members 
that arises trom vigorously abiding by the Bitong Ltos and l.imang ladhana. 

In part ic iilar, the teachings ot the Pitong Laos have been handed down trom 
the end ot the Spanish period, when the original church was established. Ricarte 
reminisces in his memoii that the phrase, “Matang maamo, laingang lampasa[n] 
and Pusong C ordero was recited bv the priests or priestesses before addressing in 
congregations, he called the “l olorum. 

According to one historical source, the L'olorum started in the late 1890s and 
spread all over C avite during the height ot the revolution. Initially it was a mutual 
aid and praver society established in a remote mountain in Batangas province 
southeast ot Metro Manila, aiming to be far trom the clutches ot Spanish oppres- 
sion. It was a kind ot ( '.ofiadia wherein they prayed to Mod tor protection and sal- 
vation, w hile helping and cherishing one another as brothers and sisters. 

As the organization grew, the leadership is said to have come into the hands 
ot a hermit who lived in a cave on Mount Banahaw. At the outbreak ot the anti- 
Spanish struggle, the membership had already reportedly grown to over 20,000. In 
order to defend the freedom of the country as well as their own personal liberty, 
some 5,000 men and women from this organization fought against the Spaniards, 
claiming to be guided by the 1 lolv \ oice. Despite the tact that their initial attempt 
was a failure and that the fighting spirit ot the elite-led revolution was dwindling, 
they continued their struggle bv supporting the Katipuneros/guerrillas as well as 
other Cofradia-like organizations. 0 Toward the end ot 1910s, the Colorums force 
amounted to some 30,000 in the areas ot Batangas, Laguna, and lavabas. 10 

f rom the same source and the IMesia s history, it mav be that the IHesia was 
one branch ot the “('olorum Society created at the end ot 1890s. After Jose Rizal 
was executed, thev betian to venerate him as the reincarnation ot Jesus Christ. We 

- w 

can therefore say that the Colorum tradition has been preserved by the members ot 
the Iglesia Sagrada ng Labi in their beliefs and actions. 1 hus, trom the close of the 
1 9th century to the present, the members have been working toward establishing a 
truly independent country where justice and equality prevail. 

Jeremias Adia and other Members 

lo illustrate this point of continuity further, let us look at the members themselves. 
For instance, jeremias Adia, the president of the Iglesia from the 19 0s until his 
death in 1992, came from a family of revolutionary fighters who had upheld the 
tradition of Bonifacio’s katipunan. 

jeremias father, Constantino Adia, owned a leather shop in Santa Mesa, 
Manila. He was a member of the Ricartista group and around 1916 he was jailed 
for six months in connection with an armed robbery perpetrated by the group. 


647 


i f if mu im\i hi v< 


They had wanted to steal ammunition from a l 
Sampaloc for use in their independent st nipple e 

After his release, ( .onstantino joined tin an* } s u; 1 mggulan 

and shortly after, the newlv established Vikd.ii <»r 

was deeply disappointed with the failure of the .t *. ' ■» N ipiiMiii*. 

which aimed to overthrow t .S. authorits \n<i <» hr n: d 

Solo Dios group in Mount Banahaw. founded • M,s lh never 

left the mountain, and died there in \ tf ><> 


C )ther members of Jerem las tarnilv had .iK<» lu r :; •> ' o : ugg.e tor 

independence, f Pis maternal uncle, like his father. w as a ku at t ist a I I is mot her who 
was distantly related to I either Zamora of th< < »<»mbur/a pt;<st\ v *- ls ‘ teiatiseof 
Melchora Aquino, a woman revolutionar\ of i *S *(> u • < >ii..n • o > M’.i.i Mis mother 
used to work at the Mi Minerva ( agar I at tor,, ami \s -i <>n « » ? t'u aboi leaders 

under leodoro Asedillo who led the big, strike in the mi*: > ^ l,s 

Jeremias Adia was born in PH in Manila, and graduated from the Philip- 
pine School of Arts and trade in PMd. In his vouth. i»e lomed du Vikda: \lo\c 
ment on account of his father s influence, out rrm.niuv. ratlua lukewarm to it. It 
was when he had a chance to personally meet Bemgm* Kamo, founder of the 
Sakdal Parry and later on the ( ianap Part y, that \dia Nunn. !l,mst 'h moic .utivck 
involved in the movement .lie was mstantK a 1 1 rat t ed to K ni: , i mi K a m os . m w onl\ 
for the latter’s espousal of the cause of mdc*pende - ik « Knt also t < > i ins prowess as a 
poet and orator. kventually, Adia was appointed as t lu sec rc tar \ « > f tiu < «anap Parts 
(which succeeded the Sakdal party) m the earls P> Pk, and became its secietary- 
general during the Japanese occupation period. 

At the end of the occupation, the M aka bay an kali pi man ng mga Pi li pi no or 
Makapili was established. It was an armed volunteer aims whose* mam objective 
was to fight along with the Japanese. Most of the Sakdal/( ..map pans members 
joined up. However, Benigno Ramos discouraged some b\ sasmg \ I.istooii na 
kayong sariling ladaw; hayaan ninvo ang iba ang sumama ( V>u alreadx have vour 
own identification card; let the others join instead ). 

Heeding Ramos’ advice, Adia did not become part of the Makapili. But at 
the end of the World W; ir II, he did flee to the mountains wit It the group and the 
retreating Japanese forces. I le was later arrested and tried In the postwar Peoples 
Court and spent some years in the national pen item i a i \ in Mini 1 1 ngl upa, now part 
of Metro Manila. 1 * 


As president of the Igl esia, Adia was a vital entity in the* lglesias c elebrat ions 
and would deliver speeches after the mass. I lis usual themes we re kiiLiyihui (free- 
dom or independence), pakikipagkapwa tao (establish i ng proper i c* lot ions with oth- 
ers ^ asc< ^ on ern pathy), and being maka-Dios (( iod fearing) and nhikiibttyiin (na- 
tionalist). When tackling nationalism, h e would talk about such problems as colo- 
nial mentality and corruption. 

Adia stated that most of the initial members of the Iglesia were former Sakdal 
and ( ianap members and their families. 1 le claimed that the Iglesia was in a sense 


648 


11 KAMI W \n \ Ihi Iglesia StignitLi ng 


a disguised form of the Sukdul Ounap movement of the prewar years, rhey wanted 
to avoid the revenue or harassment accorded by other Filipinos tor their pro-Japa- 
nese activities during the said occupation. 

In t.K t. some of the names of those who founded the church and its branches 
in Manila. Atimonun, and other [daces after the war are the same names one would 
find on the pages of the Sakdal Manap newspapers published throughout 19jH)s 
and 10 i()s. I he hvmn sum: during the Iglesia s flag-raising ceremonv is exactlv 

v W W W VC 

the same as the one that the Sakdalistas used to si in; before their meetings in the 
1930s. 


Further Look at Continuity 

It is all the more clear now that a running thread throughout the struggle tor inde- 
pendence was provided bv a group of people known as the Colorums, ever since 
the end of the 19th centurv. Thev carried on the fight all throughout the American 
period, while most of the i/nstnu/os or elite had accepted the new regime, t hus, 
Colorums are among those who have preserved the sacred ideals and the struggle 
of Bonifacio's (not the iht<n\uio<) katipunan. Outing the American period, the 
struggle w as can led on bv such organizations as the Ricartistas, Kapisanan 
Makabola Makasinag, langgulan, Sakdal, and many more. Although their form 
and the names have been changed to accommodate particular circumstances, their 
objective remained the same —the true independence of the mother countrv. 

lodav, there are approximatelv a little over 100 such groups as the Iglesia 
Sagrada ng 1 ahi in the Philippines known as kapatiran (brotherhood). Their 
basic tenet, apart from the veneration of Jose Rizal as (Aod, is the brotherhood and 
equalitv of people. 1 hev also appeal to one's sense of patriotism or love of countrv, 
and ask that the Philippine traditions and culture be upheld. Thus, thev declare 
that the 1 806 Revolution is not vet finished, and sc') are still working toward that 
end. 

Notes 

1 . The description of the Iglesia Sagrada ng Lahi in this paper is limited to its historical 
background. 1 he anthropological and sociological analysis of the movement is dis- 
cussed in a separate paper. 

2. 1 he background of the Iglesia is based on the following materials made available to 

me bv its members: Author unknow n, “Ang kasaysavan ng Pagkatatag ng Sagrada ng 
l.ahi sa Quezon" (typescript, n.d.); Bonifacio P Yillaruel, ASalaysav ni Ch Olimpia 
Parafma (OS angedad)," (tvpescript, 1 98 1 ); and several interviews with Jeremias Adia 
in his residence in C abuyao, l aguna Province, spanning the period 198S-1989 (in- 
cluding 20, 2 a, 2S, and 20 April, 18 May, O August, S October, and 2^ November, 
all in 1 08S; 20 November 1080; 10 Januarv and 2-1 April in 198 ; and 28 March 
1080). 


040 


\ m mu iitim im . « >i 


K 


3. Illustrisimo was the founder or tin *r 
Banahaw. Ramos founded th< vd.d.i M 
Valentin de los Santos Ik< am< th< p. r « » r >f " 
after. He formed Ins own organization t r s 

4. The altar of the chun h in Atimonan h < i- » 

Holy Family. Instead, there* is .» bust <»l i<> Kiz 
on a hollowed-out piece of wood that t.md t< 
are eight framed pictures tho < of Mar 
Mclchora Aquino, ( ,rcg orio del Pnar \ndr 
ers whom I could not rec ogmzr Beluiu! on mu 
mountains as seen in the c Imre h m Sihmg 

5. I he following account is based on ms parti if uit - 
ties in Silang, C lavite, as well as in Atimonan ( Uu /* >n 'nr m: 

6. Another hymn popular!) sung bv them in the hut 

Gat. Rizal/di binuo, di ginawa/Di rin hunga n: p »: *; 

(Donya Doray, Don Kiko)/Nagsitubu sa Kalarnba Nsa\I >n. 

Rizal ang JOVE RIX-AIVNoong siya y nasa langit l<>VF. siva rm any. 1 1 M'S KIX 
AL/Haring kahaliling/Sa lupa ay maghahahk I h<* truth is t at Ki.a! was not 

formed nor made/Ncithcr was he the fruit <>f low < M the nuiin.i it,u pic 1 )ony.i 
Do ray, Don Kike, /Who were from < alamha/l le is < md tnun In as, n Ki/al is 

the JOVK RIX-AL/When we was m heaven/ J< >\ I he is also the II M S KIX AIV 
Also King/ And will return to earth...). 

7. The important dates are the following: 34 April ( lglc*sias I oundation [ >a\ >. 1 9 |une 
(Rizal’s birthday), 23 July (Mahim birthday), U) November Romf.u io‘s biithdav). 


1 1 u 
like 


Mount 
'he war. 
. n sbortlv 

•r of the 
' • d f't.U cd 
•* t he t hrcc 
Malum, 
tnd two Oth- 
:n of three 

r 'nitv h .utivi* 
> nod 1 9.s> J9XC 
\ n i * t ot no si 
un m ag asa w ang 
l> dial langit . N 


and 20 December (Rizal death anniversary). 

8. Artemio Ricartc, Memoirs of General Artetnw Rtearte ( Manila: National I femes C om- 
mission, 1963), p. 83. I hey were called “(adornin’ because then pi.iuis end with 
per omnia saecula saeconlorum. For details, see Milagros ( ( merrero, 1 he ( olorum 

Uprisings: 1924- 1 93 1 ," Asian Studies 5 (April 1967). p. OS. 

It may be safe to assert that these included such organizations as the Santa Iglcsia, 
Guardia de Honor, and F.jercito I.ibertado Nacional. 

10. For details on the Colorum, see Santiago Alvarez, the Katipunan ittul the Revolution: 
Memoirs oj a General (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila l hiiversitv Press, 1902), pp. 
207-210. See also Reynaldo C. Ileto, Pasyon and Revolution: Popular Movements in 
the Philippines, 1840- 1910 (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila I mversitv Press, 1 9^9), 
PP- 205-206; and Setsuh o Ikehata, hiripni hakttmet to hittonshi eun/u ( I he Philip- 
pine Revolution and Catholicism) (Tokyo: Keiso-shobo, 198" 7 ), pp. 2 S( ) 2 SS. 

D. Adia might have been referring to what the government officials called the Christ- 
mas bvc I iasco, which took place in 1914. If his meinorv of the date* was correct, 
then the Ricartistas had kept alive their struggle even after the failed attempt. 

Church history claims that Ilustrisismo was one of the pastors of the* Iglcsia. If this is 
so, then the Iglcsia could be an offshoot of the latlong Persona Solo 1 )ios. 


650 


! 1 K \M1 \\ \P \ / >v A N/tfr./*Yw //p> / .;/»/ 

1 v Intcr\uw with \dia \|so see People s C ourt Papers, No. 3-C>. Archival Section, Main 
I ihiat\. I tmeiMiN ot the Philippines. Quezon C i t \\ 

1 * hor ileiaiU. sev Moioe letami W'.ula. “ Filipinos W ho Pinned Pheir Hopes on Japan." 
paper lead at the I itth International Philippine Studies C onterence. Honolulu, Ha- 
waii. l a 1 o \ p 1 1 1 1 

IS. lot instance, the names Doroteo C ampomanes. Bonifacio \ illacruel . and Miguel 
\dan appeared in the Sakdal newspapers ot RHOs. Por details, see lerami-W ada, 
\nu Kilusang Sakdah Ph.D. dissertation, University ot the Philippines, Diliman. 
1 l ) i )2. 

1(>. "Bavang Magiting. S.iHLiL ~~ |uly l 1 ) .Vi. 

1 ~\ Some ot them are called Ri/alistas because they venerate Rizal as Ciod. One ot the 
pioneering works on the subject is that ot Marcelino horonda, Jr. See Cults Honor- 
ing Ri/al m Historical Bulletin S (December R)6l): pp. "4 -la-4. 


6S1 


The Revolution in Mindanao 


Ri f i s P>. K< »i >v\i 

Son Seba-.tior ,y :» 


T here arc few accounts, if any, of the heroes of Mindanao in the ie\ohi non 
against Spain and the subsequent war against the Amcinans. 

I eodoro Agoncillo s Philippine I hstory, the onl\ account of Mmdanaos par- 
ticipation in the revolution, contains one paragraph stating that although the 
people of Mindanao opposed American sovereignty, the leade rs, particularly in 
Zamboanga, quarreled among themselves such that when the' Ame ricans attacked 
Zamboanga, the town fell without much resistance. 

His later book, History of the Filipino People, does not mention any revolu- 
tionary activity in Mindanao from 1896 to 1901. ( ited instead is the Bates lrcaty 
between the Americans and the Sultanate of Sulii of 20 August 1 899. 

Gregorio Zaide’s 7 he Pageant of' Philippine Hilton devotes only three 
pages to Mindanao s participation in the* Philippine revolution to the effect that 
during the closing days of 1898, the people of Palawan rose in arms, liberated 
Puerto Princcsa and other towns; that in January 1899 the- ( hristian inhabitants 
in Misamis, Cotabato, and Surigao in Mindanao also rose in arms and drove 
away the Spanish garrisons, which fled to Z.amboanga; and that on 1 /> May 1 899, 
the C .hristian revolutionists under the command of ( icneral \ icente Alvarez 
attacked the Spanish army in Zamboanga and later the Spaniards had to leave 

Zamboangad 

Zaide also mentions that when the first U.S. troops under ( aptain Pratt 
landed in Jolo on 19 May 1899, the I ausugs did not resist, and on 20 August 1 899, 
t e so called Bates Ireaty was concluded. He also states that on 10 November 
1 897, American troops arrived in Zamboanga and made it a base to launch an in- 


652 


Rv M >RKit ‘ V / The Revolution in Mindanao 


tensive military offensive in Mindanao. He then briefly recounts the Battle ot Agu- 
san l lill and the assault ot Macahambus Cave, both in Caeavan de Oro, bv the 
Americans. 

Sonia M. /.aide s The Philippines: A l biique Nation (with Gregorio F. /aide's 
History of the Repuhlie of the Philippines ),** has only two paragraphs devoted to 
Mindanao, The first paragraph states that in April 18 c )9, the Filipino patriots ot 
Zamboanga captured a large number ot machine guns and titles from the Spanish 
gunboats in Basilan. With these arms, they attacked the Spaniards in Basilan and 
Zamboanga. In Misamis, Surigao, and Cotabato, the Christian Filipinos also ad- 
hered to the cause of Philippine independence, l he second paragraph is an account 
ot the signing ot the Bates Treat v. 

In Futronio M. Alips Philippine History: Political, Social and heonomieP 
there is no mention at all on the revolution in Mindanao. In his later book titled 
Political and Cultural His ton’ of the Philippine /' there is only a passing reference to 
the Islamic elements in Mindanao which supported the cause ot the revolution. 

In Antonio M. Molinas l he Philippines through the Centuries' there is a short 
account ot the revolution in Mindanao. A sergeant and a corporal attached to the 
68th Retiimcnt tiarrisoned in lolo succeeded in recruiting members tor the 
Katipunan to which thev were secretly attiliated. On 4 September, thev rose in 
arms and engaged the government troops in various skirmishes. However, the 
movement was quickly suppressed and trials were summarilv conducted, with two 
sergeants, five corporals, and two soldiers sentenced to death. 

Molina also mentions the rebellion ot the 69th Regiment in Iligan on 21 
October 1898, and of the Marine Forces joined bv Filipino land troops rising in 
arms in Lanao in November 1898. He also says that early in April 1899, as the re- 
maining Spanish troops in Mindanao converged in Zamboanga port, readv for 
repatriation, the Filipinos, led by the patriots ot Zamboanga, took over. 0 

1 hese books, written by our more prominent historians, show a disregard ot, 
even a bias against, the heroic participation ot the people ot Mindanao in the revo- 
lution against Spain and the fight against American rule from 1896 to 1901. 

Mindanao's Participation in the Revolution 

This paper will show that in different places in Mindanao, the people rebelled 
against Spain and later fought the Americans who replaced the Spaniards. 

Northern Mindanao ( Kukidnon , Camignin , Lanao del Norte , 

Misamis Occidental , and Misamis Oriental ) 

Iligan City (Lanao del Norte), Misamis Oriental, and Bukidnon 

The revolution against Spain started in northern Mindanao in Iligan City 
when a group of discip/inarios (Filipino soldiers under the command ot Spanish 
military officers) mutinied in the carlv months of 18 C ) . 1 hey killed all their Span- 


6 S3 


i m mu utini ui v< >i i 



ish officers and left Iligan. Numbering tOO. tin . b i«*;. :? i mb I mirth 

Companies of the regular Spanish \rm\ st.nmnoi f * 

I hey went to ( iagavan but t < >i 1 r i < i it he.r. : . : * : ^p.mish Regi- 

ment No. 72 and the Tercio dc V< iluntanos dt < * < < ' •* 4 \ an vol- 
unteers who were primarily responsible lor the deter!-. >! * \ vkip|K\l 

Cagayan. In an encounter at Santa Ana, lagalo.m. tlu 1 re defeated 

and some of them went on to Bukidnon and iiw d t i » . drums and 

some went on to Surigao. 

Before the Spaniards departed from \1 1 samis < >r : * .u t i .< ; « »p < »r gam/cd a 

new government based upon the laws and regulations <>f *; N oiui\ Cov- 

ernment at Malolos. I he first resolution passed In trie im ai ( miiikiI uni- 

tained provisions to fight any invader, to organi/e ar med t« »r w ‘ini t« * sev ure arms 
and ammunition. 


Later, Anselmo Abejuela arrived from Manila 1 le bail lu en app* >mud b\ the 
Revolutionary C Government of Malolos as the militate cluet <»r the province. lie 
organized the local forces and continued the war preparat ion but later r esigned due 
to poor health. M 

Battle of Cagayan 

I he Americans occupied Cagavan without resistance. Mo\se\et. t ,eneral 
Nicolas Capistrano ordered all rebel forces to meet at ( »ango I 'I at i an . 1 7 km south- 
east of Cagayan, on the same day that ( aga van vs as oc c upied b\ the \ metis a ns. 1-1 
I he Bukidnons joined the rebels. 

On 7 April I 900, the C Gagayan revolutionaries attacked the- \imiic.in bar- 
racks; thus started the Battle of Cagayan. I or almost an hour, the* battle* raged. 
Captain Apolinario Pabayo of the muchetcros succeeded m entering the* barracks 
and wounding some Americans but was lu nisei I k 1 1 led . I wo Amcric .in soldiers were 
killed and 1 1 wounded. On the side of the revolut lonarics, 5.S were killed, with 1 8 
wounded. I he Americans had superior might and so ( icneral ( apistranos troops 
had to retreat. 15 

In the fight against the Am ericans, the Bukidnon hnniirl promptly responded 
to the appeal of their coastal brothers. In the Battl col t agavan, IS Bukidnon pa- 
triots died. I hey also helped not only in warfare but also by giving quarters and 
provisions during the war. 

Battle of Agusan Hill 

On 14 May 1900, Captain Vicente koa led the Cagayan revolutionaries in 
^ Ca f 1 ' n an enc °unter with the 40th Regiment U.S. Volunteer Infantry. When 
c t at all his men had been killed, Captain koa kept on lighting with his re- 

et until he ran out of ammunition. When he fell, an American soldier snatched 
P ,S m cdals of honor. On Agusan Mill lay dead 34 brave soldiers of the First 

| any o the Mindanao Battalion with their gallant captain. 1 " 


634 


. 


1-U >| 'RH ,11/ I'he Revolution in Muul.nuio 


Battle ol Macahantlms 

t heC agavan revolut ionaries in the west had fortitied Macahambus cave. On 
•* lune 1900 C aptain 1 liot of the 90th Regiment decided to capture the cave. As 
the Americans climbed the narrow trail to the fortress, the revolutionaries am- 
bushed them from their trenches. Nine American soldiers were killed and more 
than 10 were wounded. Onlv one, Apolinario Nacalaban, died and three were 
wounded on the side of the Cagavan revolutionaries. 1 

Surrender of General Capistrano 

1 he surrender of C ieneral C apistrano on 6 April 1901 ended the Misamis 
phase of the Philippine- American War, which lasted for about one year. 

• Misamis Occidental 

1 here were people from Misamis Occidental who fought with Aguinaldos 
forces in 1 u/on. One of them was Mariano Garcenes, a Spanish mestizo who re- 
turned to Misamis after the signing of the Pact of Biak-na-Bato. Upon his return, 
he joined the resistance group organized bv Simeon Ledesma. Ks 

Chi la May 1900, Captain Lambdin of the American forces with 40 men 
who were stationed at Loculan, a miles east of Misamis, were attacked bv Misamis 
revolutionaries armed with daggers. Fifty-seven revolutionaries were killed and 20 
wounded, repulsed by the superior weapons of the Americans. 10 

1 he revolutionaries in Misamis Occidental were headed bv Rufino Deloso. 
H is force of 400 insurgents continued the struggle against the Americans bv rais- 
ing funds from the people, securing arms, and initiating encounters with the 
Americans. 1 here w'erc no less than 20 encounters between the revolutionaries and 
the Americans in Misamis Occidental from 14 May 1000 up to 6 January 1901. 20 

lb the natives of the Oroquieta-Launguan area, Capitan Daligdigled numer- 
ous assaults against the Oroquieta garrison of the Americans. He was known for 
this courage and as a fencing expert possessed of supernatural powers. 21 

° Camiguin 

On 27 January 1899, Severino Reyes organized the Cuerpo de Liberta- 
dorcs, arming them to maintain public order and defend Camiguin against invad- 
ers. 22 

On 12 February 1899, General Simeon Gonzalez, appointed by General 
Aguinaldo as the military chief of Mindanao, arrived in Camiguin and com- 
mended the local revolutionaries on their war preparations. 23 

On 6 December 1899, American gunships appeared along the coast of 
Camiguin. Gunship No. S dispatched a small boat to attack a banca which was 
aligning for port space. The Cuerpo de Libertadores defended the banca and vol- 
leys of shots were exchanged. The small boat retreated and went back to the gun- 
ship which then shelled the island for three to four hours. 24 


I HI Hill Il’I'ISi HI \< >M 


On 10 December 1800. ( mnship dc i * - M:nrn\i. 

owned by the provincial government . when it resisted * t tin gtinship 41 

the waters around Gagavan. 

On 3 1 March 1 900, the Americans were aide (<>:.».*. <>. apital town of 

Mam bajao. 


Caraga Region (Agusati Norte . Agusati S nr, 
Surigao Norte and Surigao Sur) 


I he Gonzalez familv of Surigao v. as headed b\ I >«>n hiar lantm In I SO J the 
Spanish governor of Surigao exiled to join tin brothers ami WeiucsLio 

Gonzalez for their anti-Spanish activities. I In would has »amshcd to ihc 

Marianas Islands bur hr. Pastells, Superior of r 1 1 < hunts. inter sent d 1 he\ returned 
to Surigao after almost four vears of exile. 

In April I 806 , the Spanish gove rnor exiled Simon ami Wemeslao. this tunc 
to Manila. Harlier, their brother I lorcncio had been exei uied in the Spanish au- 
thorities in Gcbu for his Katipunan activities there Both men never armed to 
Manila because war broke out between Spam ami the l V ami tluv w e r e detained 


in Iloilo. 

In September 1896, they obtained permission t « > go to I long, Kong, l hev 
stayed there for a short time and later went to Manila vshete the\ got m contact 
with Aguinaldos revolutionaries. After IS September 1898. the\ attended sessions 
of the Malolos Congress. ( )n 2 January 1899, Agumaldo appointed Simeon 
Gonzalez as military commander c > f Mindanao and Wericeslao as governor of 
Surigao. On 11 hebruary 1899, they returned tnumphamlv to Surigao. 

I hey declared Surigao a free territory and par t of the- Republic of the Philip- 
pines and with the assistance of their supporters imprisoned tlu- priests and mis- 
sionaries, Jesuits and Benedictines alike. 

Simon was the first person to hoist the Philippine flag at ( asa Real m Surigao 
while Wenceslao became the first person to hoist the- Philippine flag in Binuun on 
14 January ] 899. 

When the Spanish-American War erupted, ( icncral Simon ( ion/ale/ and 
overnor Wenceslao Cionzalez made military preparations and geared the people 
uri ^ ao ar, d Agusan for resistance against the Americans. I lowever, their nation- 
a istic efforts were thwarted when Prudeneio Garcia, the general from Banganga, 
executed a coup d etat and toppled and arrested the ( ion/ale/es after they had been 
In P° wcr for only 83 days. 


I he year before, on 23 September 1 898, ( larcia had 


taken mat ters into his 


• , r an ( ’ S an<J lc<J a swift antl successful uprising against the undermanned Span- 
a ; aC * | " t " tsa phe Banganga-Cateel line on the Pacific coast ol Surigao. After 

as head U Pan 'f h °^ lccrs and other government officials, he installed hi 
° t c new local government unit. 


nmsc 


If 


656 


Kv l . / A A V: in Mindanao 

On \ \pnl IS 1 ) 1 ). ii.iki.iN men took Simon and Wenceslao, together with 
then lather. l\m luan. to the heaeh ot Cortes where they were shot to death. Later, 
Oenet al ( i.uxia pe.uetulU welcomed the \merieans upon their arrival in Surigao. " 

C entral Mindanao (lanao del Sun Maguindanao . 

\ortb ( otabato % Saltan Kndarat) 

I tom the h'sun Moaonan l e::e y > from Mindanao'' we learn that the people in cen- 
tral Mindanao also rose against the Spaniards, hr. Mariano Snare/ wrote to the 
Mission Supetioi wrote the plan ot the deportees in ( otahato to rise against Spain 
as earl\ as Noxemhei 1 X^o. 1 low ever, this plan w as aborted bv alert Spanish au- 
thorities. 

In ( \ tober 1 X^X, hr. Snare/ w rote to the Superior about the plot ot the Span- 
ish Infant i \ to minim. 1 low ever, the Spanish governor learned ot the plot and the 
infantry men were disarmed, shackled, and detained at the barracks. 

In November 1X0X, the Spanish authorities executed bv tiring squad in 
C otabato 0) ot those who plotted against the Spaniards.' 

In Pollok, Maguindanao, hr. Balta/ar herrer also wrote to the Mission Supe- 
rior on ~ 1 December 1 X C )S that there was a conspiracy, probablv planned jointly 
with those in ( 'otabato, to take over the two Spanish gunboats, the Gardoqui and 
Hrartr bv killing the officers ot the ships. Hut the plot was discovered and 22 per- 
sons were apprehended and brought on board the l\wa\ to Isabela. 

In the same letter, hr. herrer also mentioned the arrival a month earlier ot 
more than SM) political exiles and convicts. Shortiv after arrival, 101 were ex- 
ecuted, some in Malavbav and Haras and others in Parang."' 

After the Spanish w ithdrawal from Cotabato, Oatu Piang declared himselt 
sultan of Mindanao. On 0 January 1800, with a thousand warriors, he occupied 
('otabato and later on lamontaka. 1 he churches and convents were badly dam- 
aged and the pent up wrath of the Maguindanaos against the Christian colonizers 
rose to a peak. 1 he memory ot indio participation against the Maguindanaos was 
still very strong. ,n 

However, Dam Piamis reitin in Cotabato was short-lived. I n December 
1 800, American occupation forces arrived in Pulangi, putting an end to the armed 
conflicts. *' 

Although Datu Piang collaborated with the American establishment, resis- 
tance to American rule was led bv Datu Ali, a descendant of the Buayan ruling fam- 
ily and a former follower of Datu Uto. Datu Ah attempted to incite the whole 
( .otabato Valley rise in revolt. His fortress in Cotabato was the largest-ever con- 
structed m Mindanao. It could easily hold 5,000 men. Although this fortress/gar- 
rison was eventually overrun and taken bv the Americans, he was not captured. 
1 )atu Ali of Buayan was the last Muslim of renown to resist American rule through 
armed means.' 


65 " 


i m pun im 


ni pi \ < >1 I IP*'. v m .. ; 

Western Mindanao ( Rasilan, S /////. laullani. 

Zamboanga Sort c\ and Zamboanga del Stir) 

At the beginning of flu* Philippine revolution .t - « attached 

to the 68th Regiment garrisoned m (olo su • : . rs tor the 

Katipunan. On 4 September 1 8V6. the n.ir <>ldu * \II engaged 

the government troops in v.irious skirmishes II- * ■•■ a\ ijuickly 

suppressed. Two sergeants, five corporals. .md two m.mh tried 

and sentenced to death. I he rest of th<> c arrest r< : '•* ite impris- 

onment. 

By 1 898, the repercussions of the resolution 
Zamboanga where C ,cncral Vicente Alvarr/ ied ohm the re- 

maining Spanish contingents." 

In April 1 86 V, the rebels had capture a I a large number of : : a v rune guns and 
rifles from Spanish gunboats off Basilan and on I * Mas I <v>‘> the-. began a siege 
of Zamboanga. The Spaniards finally evacuated the toss n but at embarkation, 
Montcro, a Spanish general, was fatalb wounded. ( mi aide ios K i< »s sur rendered 
the city to General Alvarez on 18 Mav IHWarul es.Ktiated Ins t loops it) Manila 
the next day. 

After the Spanish evacuation, a pens civil wai be tween the pr nil tpalia of 
Zamboanga and a faction of the revolt! t lonarv militia broke- <uit t >n lo March 
1899, the Americans attacked Zamboanga with little resistance from the battle- 
weary citizens. 

In Jolo, the first U.S. troops under Gaptain Pratt landed on IS Mav 1899; 
the Jausugs did not resist. In July 1 8VV, Mil itarv < lovunor ( )t is sent ( » etui a I John 
Bates to Jolo to negotiate an agreement with Sultan lamalul Kiram II of Sulti. On 
20 August 1899, the Bates Treaty was concluded, establishing fiierulb relations 
between the sultanate and the U.S. 


Southern Mindanao (I)avao Norte, Davao Oriental , 
Davao Snr \ South Cotabato ) 


I he I hilippine Revolution of 1896 caused no significant reaction in Davao. In 
November 1896, hr. Saturnino Urios, Superior of the- Jesuits in I )avao, wrote about 
ow much they thanked God, for the people in Davao continued to be friendly, 
unaffected by the revolution/" 

In September 1 898, the Spanish officials in I ), lvao received orders to vacate 
e p ace and turn over the government to the local authorities. When the Span- 
. c , C ^ C ^ avao * n mid-January 1899, a new council of government was installed, 
ecause many refused to abide by it anarchy reigned in I )avao. 

lexpectedly, on 6 February, the tercios revolutionaries armed with rifles went 
a rampage, killing their senior officer, his wife, and y 


on 


a hi mi 


relative. Others 


658 


1U M il l / the Revolution in Mindanao 


joined diem and they proclaimed themselves masters ot the town. Somehow the 
Jesuits managed to convince the tereios to return. However, one ot the princi pales, a 
triend ot the lieutenant killed bv the tercios , tired a bullet killing the latter's mur- 
derer; lighting ensued. 1 low ever, they were later pacified and peace finallv pre- 
vailed. 

Ihe Role ot the Muslims in Mindanao 

Although there was not much direct participation ot the Muslims in Mindanao in 
the Philippine revolution trom 1896 to 1901, toe us should be made on the Mus- 
lims indispensable role in helping the Philippine revolution bv continuouslv re- 
sisting Spanish rule, especially during the years immediatelv preceding the 1896 
Revolution. 

The Hostilities between the Magn i ndanaos and the Spaniards 

In 1880, Haiti l to became the most powerful datu in the Pulangi area. I he Span- 
iards decided to conquer the data to demonstrate that the Matiuindanaos had no 
chance against the might ot the Spaniards. 

In 1 88*i, a tierce battle between the Spaniards and the forces of Datu Uto in 
1 timbao took place, but the dams men there were defeated. Datu Uto, however, 
remained unconquered such that in 1886 Governor-General Emilio Centeno 
lerrero had to personally lead the punitive campaign against the dam. After more 
than a year ot fighting, Datu l to was forced to sue tor peace through a letter. The 
Spaniards abandoned their expedition which was criticized in Manila tor its huge 
expenses. * s 

General Valeriano Wevler succeeded Governor lerrero as governor-general 
in 1 888. He strengthened the Spanish forces in Cotabaro hut decided to first con- 
quer the unconquered Maranaos.*' 1 


Two Attacks against the Maranaos 

On 21 August 1891, the Spaniards under Governor-General Valeriano Wevler at- 
tacked the Maranaos at Fort Marawi under Datu Amai Pakpak. Unaware of con- 
cealed pits or ditches planted with sharpened bamboo sticks covered with plants 
and vines, many Spaniards fell into the traps and were killed. However, they suc- 
ceeded in scaling the fort’s wall and defeated the defenders. Amai Pakpak escaped 
death. s " 

But Wevler three days later abandoned the fort in fear ot Maranaos who were 
already massing for an assault on the Spaniards who returned to Iliganf 

On 1 0 March 1 895, Governor-General Ramon Blanco, with a force of about 
3,000 Spanish troops aided by countless volunteers, marched to Marawif 2 After 


659 


i m m 


>pm 

s .1 1 1 < 


ui.in.it > .uul 
t religion, 
f.iu- .igamst 

ppmc rcvo- 
ie < >pporiu- 


sk u.it ii »n t.oor- 
u t.ixcui .1 1 14.I re- 
t Muslims, the 
hum Muslim t.iv.igcs. 
ers <>t (list iiiiiciit. \s hu h combined 


severe fighting, including hand r<> h.uui er. « *'•' 
sides, Blancos superior force succeeded 
the second time at the cost of I S Sp.mi.m! 

Effect of the Wars Waged by Spain against 
the Maguindanaos and Maranaos 

The coiufuistarlores of Spain nu t their m e 
Sulu: after 300 years of fighting the M°n»s pr i 
and culture. * I he .Muslims had stayo! j h:* : 

Spain for a period of S *> sears. 

I he Moro Wars became a fac lor m the »: 
lution. They sapped the energies of Span : h « »f * : : 1 
nity to strengthen the Spanish hold on I u/<»n ’ : K : 
able to a revolutionary movement . \\ bile f he < \ 1 1 1 t ta r » : 1 - i 
cruited into forced labor in suppoit <>t the ^ * 1 ’ 

Spanish authorities failed to protect ( bristian settUnum 
I bus, the Moro Wars «ilso helped create- aniric s <»f 

with other dynamics responsible foi the Philippine i ,< ’^ 11!<>n 

The politico-military government <>» Mindanao began uum.ing deficit 
spending of P439.920.03 in 1884; at the insular level .1 > omp.mson slums that the 

staggering deficit accounted for P 1 ,8-l6." 1 8.0 I ami the budget lm t Ik succeeding 

years before the 1896 Revolution reflected the same trend. I lu budget immedi- 
ately preceding the resolution, from 1893 to I 800. sass the ssa. dc |>a. t ment's get- 
ting the lion’s share of 'P4.045.00 I .34. A good percentage went to salaties of the 
clergy and support of the church, amounting 10 L 1 .0 t "x.S M). \t 1 lie outbreak ol 
the 1986 Revolution, the insular government had at ns disposal a limited force 
consisting of two sejuad ron s of cavalry, one battalion < • f c n gt 1 k e 1 s , niu .it 1 1 1 1 c is 
regiment, and seven regiments of infantry. Six ol these mlantts regiments were 
then in Mindanao for the Lake I.anao campaign, hut some \scrc immediately re- 
called. 57 

Because substantial Spanish forces were concent t ated in \lind.inao, tnclud 
ingthe forces in the trocha of the isthmus, Spanish forces in Manila were too weak 
to suppress the revolution. Therefore, the activities ol the Moms in the isthmus, 
the relationship of the Moros and the Subancn, and the concentration of the Span- 
ish forces i n M indanao con t n buted to the success ol the I hilippinc Resolution of 

1 896. 58 

Burdened with financial constraints, the Spaniards could not light two fronts 
at the same time, so they focused their attention on Mindanao. Because of this, 
their control in Luzon loosened as the bulk of their forces was sent to the south. It 
was during this period that the Katipunan spread all over Luzon. I Ik* re to re, there 
is enough reason to believe that the Moro resistance contributed to the strengthen- 


660 


ROORU ,1 \ / f'/tg- Revolution in MiruLitmo 


mg of the katipunan because without the military campaigns in Mindanao, there 
would have heen enough Spanish forces in Manila to check their activities/ 0 

1 he Moros mav not have taken part in the actual combat during the revolu- 
tion, but their tin wavering resistance t o Spanish domination was enough contribu- 
tion to the cause ot freedom. 1 heir resistance and offensive operations undermined 
the Spanish plan to subjugate the archipelago. I normous sums ot monev tor the 
improvement ot the army and the navv were spent, leaving neglected other services 
tor the colonv. w hich resulted in dissatisfaction among Spanish subjects. I bis dis- 
satisfaction. was one ot the reasons tor the revolution. Revolution is change and 
change is a process; in short, a revolution does not happen at the tlick ot a finger, 
but develops until it matures. The Philippine revolution was the climax ot the pro- 
cess, the maturity of the determination ot the Filipinos to be tree/' 0 

I he Moro resistance, raids, and piracies, therefore, were the Moro contribu- 
tions to the tight against the colonizers, which climaxed in the Philippine Revolu- 
t ion of 1 S l )(v 

Conclusion 

It is clear that the people of Mindanao, the Christians, Muslims, and lumad had 
participated in the Philippine revolution that culminated in Philippine indepen- 
dence. 

It is unfortunate that our historians have given onlv cavalier attention to the 
heroic deeds of the people of Mindanao. But it is not too late to correct our history 
books. A hundred \ ears can not suppress the recognition that is due to our heroes 
in Mindanao; Nicolas Capistrano, Apolinar Velez, \ icente Roa, and Apolinario 
Pabavo from Misamis Oriental; Rufmo Deloso, Simeon Ledesma, and Capitan 
Dalitiditi from Misamis Occidental; Simeon and Wenceslao Oonzalez ot Surigao; 
Oatu Uto and Oatu Ali of Cotabato; Amai Pakpak ot Marawi and Vicente Alvarez 
of Zamboanga. 

Onlv bv recognizing the heroic struggle of the people ot Mindanao against 
colonial rule and bv declaring as heroes the Mindanaoans who fought so that this 
nation may be tree and independent can we achieve a truthful and truly national 
celebration of the Philippine centennial and the unity of the entire Filipino people. 

Notes 


1 . leodoro A. Agoncillo, Philippines History (Manila: InangWika Publishing, 1920), p. 
243. 

2. History of the hi/ipmo People ((Quezon C.itv: Ciarotcch Publishing, 1990). 

3. The Pageant of Philippine History (Manila: Philippine Education Co.), vol. 11. 

4. The Philippines: A l ’nitjtie Nation (Quezon C.itv: All Nations Publishing C.o., Inc., 
1994). 


661 


\ m f iii ipimni \n \< hi 


5. Philippine History: Political. Soctal ami Itononj: 

1940). 

6. Political and (Cultural l h tor, of ti'c I’* :. :/•/ *' ^ 

7. Ibid. 

8 . / he Philippines l h rouy l 1 the ( cnturtr< \ i -« f 1 1 ! 

9. Ibid., pp. 73-74. 

10. Mardonio Lao, “History of < ^ipiy.m d< { *n > 

Northern Mindanao f I )crnct r m . c d f » ’ ; - 

11. Filomcna M. Bautista, 'Philippine Krv<»luti«»n m »r 

ibid., p. 253. 

12. Ibid., p. 256. 

13. Ibid., p. 257. 

14. Ibid., p. 268. 

15. Lao, op. cit., see Note 1 L (>. *01 

16. Bautista, op . cit., see Note 1 * p 38.’ 

17. Ibid., pp. 286-287. 

18. Felina M. Madrid, Insurrection in Mindanao p 

19. Ibid., p. 4. 

20. Ibid., pp. 8- 1 0. 

2 1 . Ibid., p. 7. 

22. Demetrio, “Brief I )ata on the I listors of the I ’1..I i f > ( >i n« K t . .1 1 n r« » i . . I S‘K* I ‘MM p. 
552. 

23. Ibid., p. 552. 

24. Ibid., p. 553. 

25. Ibid., p. 553. 

26. Fernando Almcda, Jr., “The Revolution in Surigao: I len.es and \nu I femes. " p. 2. 

27. lx-o A. Cullum, “Notes on the Revolution in Surigao. /'A////, /./,/,• SW/e«. p. »89. 

28. Peter Schreurs, “Angry Days in Mindanao, pp. 18 l*^ 

29. Priscilla Cionzale/.-Ancium, “ I be ( lonzale/ Freedom I igbtiis, p. I . 

30. Ibid., p. 2. 

31. Ibid., p. 2. 

32. Arcilla, “Philippine Revolution and the Jesuit Mission in Mindanao, 1806 1901,” 

p. 6. 

33. Ibid. 

34. Jose Arcilla, Jesuit Missionary Letters jrotn Mi nfLi i uio, p. 440. 

35. Ibid., pp. 449-450. 

36. Ibid., pp. 463-464. 

37. Ibid., p. 467. 

38. Ibid. 

39. Ibid., p. 482. 

40. Reynaldo Ileto, “Maguindanao 1860-1888,” pp. 96-97. 

41. Ibid., p. 97. 

42. Ibid., p. 98. 


662 


_ 


ROPRk.l 1/ / 

he Revolution in 3 fitnLiimo 


\ntoino Molina. 1 he Philippine* through the ( enturies , pp. 3-~H. 

Non c ..manual, Moro Raids. Piracies or Offensive Operations: The Case of the 
\ loros and the Philippine Revolution/' p. 12. 

|S. \rulla. I he Revolution in l\n\to % p. 2. 

■K>. Ibid., p. v 
Ibid., p. •*. 

iS. \ltaro \lilava. 1 he Role ot the Maguindanaos and Maranaos in the Philippine 
Revolution. p. 0. 

•p). Ibid., pp. O ~\ 

SO. Manuel R. lawagon. I nun Puhpuh. 18*13-1805, p. 13. 

5 1 . Ibid. 

52. \lilava Altaro, 1 he Role ot the Maguindanaos and the Maranaos in the Philippine 
Revolut ion . p. S. 

53. Manutua Saber. “Rattle ot Marawi," 1 80S, p. 

5 t. Antonio Isidro, Muslim Philippines . p. *t 1 . 

SS. Ibid., p. 1 2. 

So. 1. de los Angeles, MnuLmuo: Story of tin IsLmd \ p. 61. 

S"\ Michael O. Mastura, I he R)S6 Revolution in Search ot Historical Argument/ p. 

8 . 

SS. Pduardo C asas, 1 he lrocha Along the Mindanao Isthmus/ p. 1 4. 

50. ( financial op. cit.. Supra Note *t~\ p. "A 

60. Ibid. p. 1 0. 

6 1 . Ibid., p. 1 2. 


663 


Ang Dugo o Pagkakamag-anakan ng l.iderato 
at Pagiging Kasapi ng niga Magdiwang at Magtlalo 
sa Rebolusvon sa Kabite. lN ( )(v I ( )()_! 


I \ < i \ . i R. Mi ;.■■■■ 


D ahilan sa kakulangan ng panahon, ipopokus k<> n.i i.nn.m;; .mg aking 
papcl sa kahalagahan ng pagiging iis.ing dugo <> mukha ng. mgi kalmcnvo sa 
halalan sa lejcros noong Marso 22, 1 .it .mg ul.isv<m nm > sa dalaw ang Via do 
Iejeros at ng Naik, pagkatapos ng clcksvon. 

Malinaw na makikita kung papaano gumanap ng paju l ang pagkakamag- 
anak sa halip na rchiyonalismo o ravitisyno gava ng ipmakakalat ng mga mav 
samang loob kay Aguinaldo na sina Mabinit Rkanc sa halalan sa Ic|cros nang 
Marso 22 ( 1 2, ayon sa kanila — I KM ) 1 89 ’ upang pag isah in ang da i mg da law ang 
pamahalaang Magdiwangiu Magda lo upang mapalakas ang puwcrsa lahan sa unti- 
unting pagbagsak at pag-okupa ng mga bavan sa Kabite ng mga kasiila inula sa 
kaitaasan papunta sa kapatagan nang sabav-sabav na parang sipn na pagsalakav. 
Pinasok ang Imus at I )asmarinas nang Marso, at nang ika-2S ng buw ang nabanggit 
an £ Casa Hacienda de Iejeros ay a bo na. 

Sa mga krisis na ganito ay nagiging kongkrcto ang kasabihang “sakit ng 
kalingkingan, dam dam ng buong kata wan . At upang mai I igi as ang sa ri I i ng Inibav 
at ari-arian ay magkasamang kumilos ang dalawang dating nag-uumpugang 
sanggunian. 

Bagamat sinabi ni Agoncillo ( Revolt , p. 296) na bahagi I amang ng pagkatalo 
ni Bonifacio sa lejcros ang seksyonalismo ay mabigit pa sa sal i k na ito sa aking 
palagay, batay sa aking masusing pag-aaral ng mga partida dr In/ut/sn/o , rasamirnto , 
entierro , mga kasaysayan ng mga angkan (genealogy) at pakikipanavam sa Kaabita 
nag-uugat ang pagkapanalo ni Aguinaldo. 


I M\ \ | >;r l () l > I* , ^- 4 ; ;v r - 4 ; / <•. ; ;; ;/£ / idcrdtO 

\ni; dtigo o kadugo sa Kabitc, o sa alinmang lalawigan o rehivon sa Pilipinas, 
pa\a i in up u 1m onalismo, ang lugit na malalim na dahilan ng pagkakawing- 
kaw mg ng mga Innlog, pami-pamilxa, bukod sa nagdudulot pa ito ng kacapacan 
ng mga magKakapatid, magpipinsam magkukumpari t magkukumari sa pagiging 
ninong o ninang sa binyag. sa pug-iisang-dibdib o kava v sa pagiging katuwang sa 
mga naiatanging okasvong ito sa ikot ng buhav ng mga Caviteno. Pagdag pa rito 

i t ^ ■ . v ^ r 

a\ ang pagkakapat u an ng mga taga-kabite sa Katipunan, Masoncriva at pagiging 
dating magkakasama sa nsang paaralan, kolehivo o unibersidad. 

1 lindi nlang istorvador at manunulat ang naniniwala sa mga naroroon sa 
kapulimgan sa lejcros ang nagsasabing ang enrilisnio nga ang nagpapanalo kay 
Aguinaldo. Avon ka\ l pi t an io dc Ion Santos ( The Philippine Review, 3/1-d Encro- 
Pebrcro RMS), p. SX: 


Masasahi ring scksyonal o damdaming pampook ang sa paligsahan at 
nagpasama sa halalan. Kung nnatanggap ito, bakit ipinangako ni Bonitacio na 
igagalang ang naroroon ay mga kabitenvo. Ang ibig bang pakaluilugan ni 
bonil.kiov nnatanggap lamang niva ang nakararami sa boto ng mga 
.MtigdiWiing: I ivak na hindi kahit na lahat ng A Ligdinuing ang bumoto sa 
kanva, hmdi pa t in siya nakakuha ng mavoriva o baka ipilit ito; sila ang higit 
na superyor sa lakas sa ilalim ng mga pangvavari kung saan, inuulit namin na 
ang puwersa ang pangunang sal i k. Ang L\itotol\nnin aw gavon pa man, hindi 
damdaming scksyonal ang naging timbangan knndi ang prestihivong naitatag 
na ni Aguinaldo sa buong kabitc, sa Pilipinas, sa ibavong-dagat at kahit na sa 
kanyang kaaway, na tumangging ipadala ng kanvang mga sugo, na sina Pio at 
Pi * u P‘hacl ( omenga kahit kanino kundi kay Aguinaldo, upang makipag- 
kasundo so kanya ukol, hindi sa Rcbolusvon ng Altigt/iuuing [lamang], kundi 
ng Rcbolusvon sa buong Sangkapuluan. Dapat ding maalaala na ang mga 
Batangueno av mav kinatawan doon, sina Santiago Rilled at anti kanvang mga 
tauhan nang ang panunumpa av isinagawa at isa sa mga umubliga kay Ricartc 
na manumpa. Sina C 'lemente lose /ulucta ng Pako, Mavnila; ang inhinycrong 
si Don kdilberto Evangelista ng Mavnilat bavani ng Xapote; ang sawing-palad 
na si Jokson ng Mavnila rin at lalung-lalo na si Mamerto Natividad ng Nucha 
bsiha, ang hcncral na mav malaking prestihivo sa Luson; at iba pa na hindi 
taga-kabite, ay nagpahavag mismo na pabor ka\' Aguinaldo... 

Sa katunavan ang rehivonalismo a\' nakabaon na sa utak at kalooban ng 
bawat Pilipino at mangvavari rin sa kailukuhan, sa Kabisayaan o kamindanawan. 
Pansinin natin ang pagkakamag-anak ng magpinsang sina Artemio Ricartc at Pa- 
dre Gregorio Aglipav ng llokos; sina Teresa at Pascual Magbanua ng Iloilo; ng mga 
Abella sa Kabikulan; ng mga mag-aamang sina juan Gonzalez at tatlong anak na 
Florencio, Simon, at Wenceslao ng Surigao at gayon din ng mga magkakapatiu na 
Bonifacio ng Mavnila o ng mga He Jesus at Plata ng Kalookan. 


665 


E mga 

Vl\ M 

i.ik na 
amag- 


I 


P 


Ii 


1 .1 1 . 


'.i mga 
an. kava 
\nt: mga 
ang 
1 nulio 
:uis \ng 
• \ s t lomas 
\ng ina ni 
I vi kood. si 
nis \ng a ma 
vi.u mg guro 
I .* b« >n na ang 
a k . II i lagang 
n trios 
ng nasabing 


Ang rirvval na pagkakarnar anal*. pa 
ninong, ninang o katu.var / 
nagpapalavvak ng mga kawmg nr ? am 
ginagawang mga hinlog sa p.im.unar n 
anak (by affinity). 

Ang kapilian (pmuifutlta nr K d 
kapiliang pampook ng parchong b* m 
napatibay ang taling pagkakamag an u § ; 
pag-iisang-dibdib na panlabas , nyanmu 
halimbawa ng mga Aguinaldo \ arc/ 

Aguinaldo ng Kawir ay nakipag i ang p-had • 
kanyang ina ay mula sa pamil;. air; I am . r ■ 

Mascardo, taga-Kawit dm a% ikina • ( 

Liccrio lopacio ng Imns a\ nagbnbai Hainan 
Mariano Alvarcv. ng Nobclcta av rial apang.i iv. a m 
ni Ladislao I )iwa ay nagmula pa sa Purr n » K i * i a i »a * * i r 
nang ika.sal sa isang litaw ring mga ng Sm i r 

populasyon ay kalabating mga No< on I an* f Imi-.r <■ 

Ilokos, si Artemio Kicartc, na ii nang c in mating < s , • »« 

noong 1890. Siya y unang ikmasal kay Mann in \1 ai* n 
bayan. 

Nais kong bigyang-diin ang kaugnavan nr t tnnpnti • a ■ " < <> -nutna^s^o isa 

binyag, kasal o karuwang) sa tagumpav ng I dusang tulad ny Iwbolusyon. 
Kapansin-pansin itosa ka.so nglidcraiot pagigmg kasapi nr \ Iny/Lm/t \ LiyJnrnngl 
Mapagtiis na nakadagdag sa bigat ng pagigmg rnarapat. at mai ikin' p m.magutan 
sa kani-kanilang tungkuli t gawain. 

Ang mga magulang ni I \milio Aginnaldo a\ kumpari ang, dating pari ng 
Kawit at inarcsto sa Mandaluyong nang pnmntok ang 
1896 sa kadahilana ng maaaring may kmalaman siya, a\on sa p 
Kastila, sa kinaroroonan o pinagtatagnan ng kauv.mg inaanak. \ lagknmpai l siki 
nina Candido Tirona at Eugenio ( Jrcullo, kaparid ng tanging opisval na kintawan 
ng Magdalo na dumalo sa Iihim na pulong ng mga pangulo sa Ikmlat, Kalookan. 
Kumparerin niyasi Gregorio Jokson ng Naik aidoon tumigil sa t aha nan ni to nang 
siya’y minamalarya at natuklasan ang Iihim na miting sa bahav asvnula nang 
isinagawa ang Acta ng Naik noong Abril 1897. Si Diego Mojka ng Mapagtiis M 
capitan municipal Eugenio Viniegra, ang bayaw sa pinsan ni Aguinaldo ay 
magkumpare rin ngunit dahilan sa ayaw makipagtulungan sa kanyang kumpare na 
noo y pangulo ng Katipunan sa ( ien. I rias ay ipinapatay rin nang mag-agaw-armas 
sa Gen. Irias noong Agosto 1 896. 

Kumpare rin ni Mariano Alvarcv. si Cornclio Magsarili, Ministro rid Interior 
n g Magdiwangnzng binyagan ang kanyang nag-iisang anak na si Santiago Alvarez. 
Kinakapatid ng ina ni Lazaro Makapagal si Mariano Alvarez, dahil sa ang kanyang 
tatay ang tumayong saksi sa binyag ni Agapito Makapagak 


Kc lx >1 u s\ < > n noong .Agosto 
[i.imwala ng mga 


666 


Ml PIN \ l>; • / ng lidrrato 

l lup.it ulalahanm n.i .mu ikul.iwang asawa ni Bonifacio ay apo sa pamangkin 
m Mai iano Mv.uc/. I )oon din nagtago't lumigil sa b.ih.iy ng magulang ni Gregoria 
dc Icmis s.i Kalookan naim magluilihan saniamalang nagmimiting ang rnga 
panmilo ng Kaupunan sa B.ih.iv nina l.ind.ing Sora sa Gulod sa Banlat noong 
Auosto 2 i, 1 S l )(>. 

Ipopokus ko na l.imnne ang pagiging m.igkadugot iisang pamilv.i sa liderato 
ai paeiemu kasapi iu; Ma<^dnca>u> sa Nobelcta. ng Mapagtiissa General I'rias. at sa 
Maodalo sa K.iwit sa halalang ginanap sa Icjcros noong Marso 22. IS 1 ) - . 

l’in.ighandaanu luBos ne mga Magdi using ang halalang ito sa Icjcros. ayon 
k.tv Emilio \guin.iklo. 1 ineid s.i kaalaman ng mga Magdalo na noo v suBsuB sa 
pakikipaulaBan s.i l )asmarinas ai mga kanugnog at walang kamalay-malay sa Balak 
na pau isalim ang ,\ Liodncauo at Magdalo. Ito ay sa ikatatagumpay ng paglalaban 
sa my k.i.iw.n na nasa ilalim ni 1 Icncral Jose l achamBrc npatig mabawi ng mga 
Kastila ang dating mga lup.iing napasakamay ng mga Pilipino. Napatay na noon sa 
/.apotc ang ikakandidato s.ma ng »higddlo sa pagkapangulo na si Hvangelista sa 
minimithing l’amahalaang RcBolusyonaryo na papalit sa dating Katipunan at sa 
Supremo. Di magtatagal at si C'rispulo Aguinaldo n.im.in ang mapap.uay. 

Iniwasang Banggitin ni MaBini sa kanyang “Pagguho ng Republika" na ang 
Balaian s.i Icjcros av m.iv isang Buwang pinaghahandaan at naglilibot para sa 
kampanva ni Andres Bonifacio. Artemio Ricartc at i B a pa sa labing-isang bavang 
sakop ng Mopdiiv,nip. I’inasalulningan pa sila sa Bawat Bayan ng Banda ng musika. 
tugtog ng kampana at iBa t-ibang ritwal gava ng pag-aantay ng kura sa pintuan ng 
simBahan at saBav pagkanta ng /<' Deum sa damhana. 

I umalaBas na Hindi nila ipinaalam sa Mopdolo ang mahalagang balak na ito. 
Isang a raw lamang ang paghahandang ibinigay sa panig ng Magdalo Bago 
maulialalan. Ang kalatas ni Mariano Alvarez ng Mitgdiwatig ng Marso 21. 1897 na 
nag-aanvava kina Baldomero Aguinaldo at mga pinuno ng Magdalo av dumating 
mine hatineeabi lamane ng a raw na vaon. Dahil sa paekabiela nila at sa kakulangan 
ng panahon up.mg ipakal.it ang Balita sa iba pang Bavang sakop nila wawalo 
lamang sa mga opisvales ng Magdalo ang nakapunta sa Tejeros kinabukasan. 

Sa halalang ito naipakita nang malinaw ang k.nvikaang “matimbang ang 
dugo sa tubig." Bagama’t ang Magdiwang AW* nakararami at sa lupain pang sakop 
nila isinagawa ang Balaian, namayani pa rin ang wawalong mga pinuno ng 
Magdalo. Nataon pang ang karamihan sa kanila ay nakikipaglaban upang mapigil 
ang pagdagsa ng mga kaawav. Ngunit tuso man daw ang matsing ay 
napaglalalangan din. 

Ang paghahalo ng mga elementong dugo at kapatiran sa Masoneriva at 
Katipunan ang naging malaking tulong sa halalang ito. Ang magpipinsang-buong 
pangulo ng Magdalo Baldomero Aguinaldo at Heneral Crispulo Aguinaldo, 
katulong ang mga naniwalang mga "alsa-balutan tulad ng mga Batangueno, mga 
taga-Maymla at iba pang Bayan si Emilio Aguinaldo pa rin na ayaw umalis sa 
Dasmarihas at binabantavan ng sa riling buhav ang mga tanggulan doon ang nanalo 
sa pagkapangulo laban kay Andres Bonifacio, bagama’t wala siya sa silid ng Balaian 


667 


I Hi 1*1 ill IfTI ' * i t i . « »: 

(in absentia). Kasarna rm mla .mt: tar ong m.i : m ' * Iopacio 

(Director de Hacienda v, I ucrio lop. « i*» ! ik.i i h- 

rector de Oracia y Justuta Bukod .1 ? .ni: .i •: ; *;£si 

Tomas Mascardo, manupmu n 1 ( a\rram» b>; nvag ng 

Director de (itierran^ sina I i.im . I ' 1 I iron.). 

Kadugo rin ni Sixto Sapinoso si ( aver mo lopa » ; a*. na anak 

niyang si Modesto a v napangasav. a ng i * ::: s *; \ntonio 

Montenegro lamang ang raga \lavml.i at ■ ar:: ’ r>« »mt.u 10 va 

dahilang sila av pinaralsik kasania m I <-# i# tr « » < * ^ a;um ng 

Kataastaasang Sanggunian ng A N B »r n.irr.r ' o 

Separatista tulad din ng Htnht ng l\r.apa 

Bukod sa mga magkakadugo ang pmmp in.rav. t ;'a*u* pa rm 

sila sa Masoneriya at Katipunan. rnagkakaknala i : • : a pa a *:a ifahil ^a 
magkalapir lamang ang Kawit ar Irntr na pm.rnmp: an Vmygumang 

Magdalo. 

I )agdag pa rito v ang pagpan ig ng da lass ang inn in pi uw < n : a : • i:u any 

na sina Mariano Irias ar Erniliano Kiego dr I >ios mr.i ‘ na panpalaw ang- 

pangulo at Director de (itterra. 

I )ati nang ka.sapi ng Magdalo si I rias. Si Ki< g< > d< 1 > n am an at ang, kam ang 

dalawang kapatid av siimumpa sa liarap m 1 milio vnimaido sa tan. man mio sa 
Kawit nang kapistahan ng bay. in noong I lulvo I 

Mahahalata na rin sa ikimlos nina Padre IS*) IS ai / /a./. (lateral Rafael 
Comenga noong kalagitnaan ng Marso I 89 ' ang malakmg paggalang mla kay 

Emilio Aguinaldo at di-pagkilala sa pagka Supremo ni Bonifacio na ikmagalit ng 
huli upang ihinga sa Akta sa Naik at kay Emilio (ac into noong \bi il I S 4 ) ang di- 
umanong pakikipagsabwatan m Agumaldo sa mga Kastila upang makipagkasundo 
sa isang maagang tigil-putukan. 

lalagang malakas ang lukso ng dtigo sa panig ng m;:a matataas na kasapi ng 
Magdiwang lalu na pagkatapos ng eleksyon at gawin mla ang Akta o Kebolusvon sa 
Tejcros noong Marso 23, 1 897 na di-ktimilala sa restilta ng balalan dahilan sa di- 
umanong mga paratang na mga pandaraya. Ito ay siisundan dm ng Akta sa Naik, 
Abril 1 897 dahilan anila sa pakikipagsabawatan ng mga taga linns sa mga kastila 
kayasila naglayong magtayo ng sarili o hiwalay na bukbo kina Aguinaldo. Malinaw 
na hindi kinilala ang results sa Tejcros ng mga kaanak ni Mariano Alvarez, ng 
kanyang anak, apo sa pamangking sina C iregoria de Jesus at .Andres Bonifacio at 
dalawa pa niyang kapatid at ang ingat-yaman na si I )ionisio Alvarez. Nakiramav 
rin ang isang kasangguni (Elcutcrio Malia) na kaanak niya sa panig ng ina ni 
Mariano Alvarez. Sa katunayan, maliban kay Pascual Alvarez na hindi pumirma 
kahit sa Akta sa lejeros o Naik ang tatlo pang Alvarez (Damaso, 1 Torenrino at 
Mariano, isang katokayo lamang) ang pumirma nainan sa Acta dc Ic/cros. 

Ang mag-amang sina Ariston Vill anueva, Mnnstro rlc (itterra ng A lagdt tea tig 
at ng kanyang anak nasi Andres ay kapwa rin lumagda sa Acta dc Ie/erossA A \ttk. Si 


668 


, 


Ml IM \ \ 1 / hi s . » . > / idem to 

\i iston .i\ pi nsa n si \gumaldo sa pa nig ng kanx ang ina. Kadugo rin niya si 1 lencral 
1 iK iano San Miguel na lumagda sa Actj dc Wiih. 

Si I )icgo Mojica, dating pangulo ng M,ip t tgtiis at luniaoy naming Mmistro de 
l Licicndi at ang kanx ang manugang na si Nicolas Port ilia, dating kalihim ng 
Miifhigtn.s av kapxva luniagda sa Akta sa lcjeros bagamat si Port ilia ay hindi sa kaso 
ng Aihi de \>nk. 

I umalabas ngaxon sa inaingat na pagsusuri na si Baldomcro Aguinaldo, ang 
nagmamobra upang nianalo ang kanvang pinsang si hmilio. hov isinagawa sa 
pagbabago ng proscso ng halalan inula sa paggamit ng lihim na balota sa pagtayo 
na la ina ng sa isang tabi ang li null kumakatig sa tungkulin at sa kabilang tabi naman 
ang niga kumakatig upang mapadali ang bilangan, daliilan sa duniidilim o 
gumagabi na noon. Wala m isang niang tuniutol sa paraang ito ni Baldomcro 
Aguinaldo. ho \ isinagawa sa paghalal ng Director de Ciucrra at ng Director del Inte- 
rior na si \ i id res Bonifacio ang sivang nanalo, laban sa kanvang Nolo na si 
Mariano Alvarez. Kinwestvon ni IXmicl l irona na nararapat na isang abogado ang 
magliaxvak ng posisxong ivon. Si abogado lose Maria del Rosario ng lanza ang 
inihalal niva. Angbaxaw ni Mariano l rias, ang batikang manananggol na asawa ni 
1 eli/a Trias, kapat iM ni Mariano lrias, ang nalialal na pangalawang-pangulo laban 
sa ‘‘maglolong sina Mariano Abate/ at Andres Bonifacio, lpinahavag ni Andres 
Bonifacio na walang kabuluhan ang naging resulta sa halalan sa lcjcros, bagamat 
sivaV kinwestixon ng isang taga-Batangas na si Santiago Rillo, lider ng mav 2,000- 
~\ ()()() niivcmbro ng gobierno Regional Btittingueno, na Hindi kailanman binabanggit 
nina Ricarte at Alvarez sa kanilang mga talaaraxvan. Umalis si Bonifacio na may 
sania ng loob kasania ang may O katao at nagpulong muli sa isang lugar sa Tcjeros 
din kinabukasan. ho ang nagsiniula sa sigalot sa pagitan nina Andres Bonifacio at 
Hmilio Aguinaldo, halal na presidente ng bagong pamahalaang Rebolusvonaryo na 
nagxvakas sa kamatavan ng magkapatid na Bonifacio sa bundok ng Hulog sa 
Pinagsanghan, Maragondon. Ang pagpatav av isinakatuparan ni Lazaro 
Makapagal, anak ng ki nakapat id ni Mariano Alvarez sa bimag at kalihim ng 
1 lukumang-Digmaang na sumunod lamang sa mga ipinag-uutos ng mga naka- 
tatataas sa kanya. 


660 


The Political Socioeconomic Milieu 
in Pangasinan on the Kve of the Resolution 


R< )sakk > \1 1 .1 >« >/ < 


T he province of Pangasinan is located noith of the centi.il plain of 
I u/.o n , hounded on the north hv 1 .1 n ga ve n t * 1 1 1 f . It is hounded on the west hv 
the Zambalcs range (Sual was the westernmost town in the late l'»th c cnmrv); on 
the east by the Benguct and Cordillera mountains; <>n the nottheast In the prov- 
ince of La Union; on the southeast hy the province <>f Notes’. i f ct|.i; and on the 
south by the province ofTarlac. I )espite its having been the site ol bloods revolts in 
the 17th and 18th centuries, it was not among the eight provinces that took up the 
standard of revolt in that final convulsion against Spain in 1 I lus paper seeks 

an explanation in the province’s political socioeconomic milieu on the eve of the 

revolution. 

I he incorporation of the native elite into the lowest level of the Spanish co- 
lonial administration acculturated them to I lispanic political institutions. It intro- 
duced them not only to the forms, structures, and functions of the Spanish politi- 
cal system, but also to the intricacies of the system of Roman law. I he political 
experience gained hy native society was not insignificant. I he prnuip.i/id of the 
towns learned to frame and couch petitions in elegant Spanish phrases of respect 
and humble submission and to present these properly to the scfwr gobcnuidor of 
the province. 1 hey hired apoderados to see their petitions to a successful conclusion 
through the labyrinthine passages of the Spanish bureaucracy in Manila. 1 If there 
was a snag, they renewed their appeals and furnished th e necessary proof or docu- 
ments. I hey learned to make affidavits with the requisite number of witnesses and 
make use of Spanish law and legal procedures. They learned the value of written 
documents, of keeping records in their archives for future litigation as in boundary 


670 


( * M\ 11 s / v Sth'iort'onomic Mi Urn in Patigdsirun 

disputes. In sikIi instances, the principals brought their disputes and conflicting 
Jaims to the attention ot higher authorities, rhey asked for fresh determinants of 
jurisdictional limits whenever the original markers had been displaced or had dis- 
appeared. I he settlement ot these conflicts took time, but however slowlv the cum- 
bersome wheels ot justice turned, it was t o the credit ot the native elite that they 
followed the Spanish lethal procedures. 

The elite al so acquired skills in governmental administration as reflected in 
their management ot the corvee labor svstem and fiscal affairs of their localities.' 

l*h e acculturation of the native elite was duplicated bv the common people, 
the Ctiylhnns. lust as the elites acculturation to 1 lispanic Christianity was followed 
bv the spread ot C hristiamtv among the masses, so did the political awareness of 
the elite seep down gradually to the common people. This was reflected in the com- 
plaint filed by Manuel Josef, a trader, against the native officials of his town, San 
C arlos, for abuse ot authority in 1 82-4; in another complaint filed against the same 
officials t( n abuse in the administration ot the corvee labor svstem in 1828; and in 
a similar complaint tiled bv the common people of Malasiqui against their town 
officials in 1836.' barber in 1818, the townspeople of San Carlos had succeeded 
in forging an agreement on the administration ot the compulsory labor svstem. 
Under its terms, the performance ot the polos y Servians would be restricted to the 
months outside ot the planting and harvesting season, and the payment for exemp- 
tions from these services were regularized. 1 he agreement also provided that three 
representatives would come from the common people in the auditing of the re- 
ceipts and expenditures of the <<//</ dc comunidtuL These incidents signified the 
growing political awareness of the common people. It might be recalled that there 
had occurred a revolt in 1 62, six decades earlier in San Carlos, then named 
Binalatongan, against the native officials and the Spanish provincial governor. It 
was led by a caylian named Juan de la Cruz Talaris, who had worked as a coachman 
of Don hnriquez de \ illacorta, a justice of the Supreme Courtf Significantly, six 
decades after the Talaris Revolt ot 1762-1764, the common people resisting injus- 
tice, resorted not to arms but to legal procedures. 

All of these are evidence of how far along the road of political development 
the society had traveled from pre-Hispanic customary law. According to Cyril 
Black, the replacement of arbitrary administration of individuals by a legal system 
is the hallmark of modernization in the political realm/' Thus in various ways, the 
native society politically developed toward modernity. 

The last decades of the 1 8th century and the earliest decades of the 19th cen- 
tury caused significant changes in the native economy. Tangasinan thrived. As a 
result of the country's opening up to foreign trade, there was a demand for certain 
agricultural products, especially sugar. In consequence, there was a shift from sub- 
sistence farming to commercial agriculture in many areas. Tangasinan was one of 
the chief producers of sugar in Luzon in the 19th century. It also became the prin- 
cipal rice producer of the country, exporting rice not only to rice-deficient areas of 
Luzon but even to China. The growth of commercial agriculture and a cash 


671 




i m 


economy accompanied the rise <>r «>*• 

trade carried on locally v. itinn and 

The introduction of die peop:; r « » -< 

As trade became an important sour <»f ' 

traders, merchants, and monev lender en 

tern triggered the introduction of : ••• 

stratum of bourgeois groups formed In- tv.* 
cayliatt lower class. I his set tor of tin popm.e <*: 

It nurtured higher aspirations acquired differ* 
yond those of the traditional soil bound uit i 
injustice and abuse. As it im reased in wealth ami n 
subservient roles with a critical c.e In tont 
caylianes over the issue of comptilsor . he »or 
class rose from this emerging middle cla 
caylianes. But unlike in t he 1 8th c entur v when r 
the polos y servicios bad erupted into \ lolen* 
tain redress of their grievances. 

The 19th century therefore sav. a c pile l eu i ne <*t 


although 
r 1 1 rn 


: • e domestic 

;h iviivsions. 
ant groups of 
, v * »n« *mu 
. v \ middle 
i ate and the 

• arise mk teiv. 
it ‘ ed gt *.lb 1>C- 

* i \ e t o .u t\ of 
,, d its t radmonal 
• . e v lire and the 
ii : p of the lower 
u i ■. it it in i fled as 

t ii. t r ibutes and 
a i means t c > ob- 


I » t St >v I 


al c hange 


which proceeded from economic factors within the • n K ,!n l n 

appeared to have come from the outside < .v. i he- mmm.m.m of Sp.mish meman- 
til ist policy. 

Economic growth was at tended by social de\ eh >pnu i n h v.as pan of Span- 
ish colonial policy to promote education in terms of instnu non of the t atbolic 
faith and the spread of the C ast ilia n language. In the founding, of new tow ns, the 
building of a school house was just as much a ret | u i s 1 1 c* as was 1 1 u building of t be 
church, parish house, and town hall. After the bducational l>eciee of I S(o, the 
erection of primary schools for both bovs and girls bee ame obligator a. In the last 
decade of the I 9th cent u ry, all the t < >wi i s of I , «mg.i sm a n bad s<. h oo I h o uses, and at 
least three-fourths of those towns bad school buildings of pci inanent oi scnitpu- 
manent materials. While these schools mainly provided instruction in the C bris- 
tian doctrine, the curriculum also included Spanish grammai, Spanish histot\, 
rules of urbanity, and music. Ibis educational facility was available onl\ to the 
townspeople, and the majority of the school children stayed in school just long 
enough to acquire a modicum of literacy skills. Nevertheless, the’ acquisition of 
these basic tools of learning by a significant sec tor of* the population bad far-reach- 
mg consequences for society. I be schoolhouses which today form a part of the 
town-center-complex in all towns, founded during the Spanish regime, are the 
forerunners of the barn-like structures of a preceding age that nevertheless housed 
inquiring and curious minds. 

I he material development of the province was also a gauge of soc ial and cul- 
tural progress. By the end of the 1 8th century every town in Pangasinan bad public 
edifices necessary to provide a socio-institution. il setting for the peoples political, 
social, and religious activities. Bv the 19th century, these structures would be re- 


mise 


672 


^ ^ I l s I he Political Socioeconomic Miliru in Pangashum 


placed hv edifices of stone masonry, attesting to the material progress of the prov- 
ince. All the towns were linked to each other and to the capital of the province, and 
ultimately to the cantina real, the state highway, which connected all provinces to 
the metropolitan capital. Manila. Although these roads easily deteriorated, the sys- 
tem of highways built in the Spanish regime has remained essentially the same 
throughout the province. 

1 he province was also linked to Manila and to the northern provinces bv 
mail routes, both overland and maritime. This communication system was aug- 
mented in 1 8~3 by the extension of telegraph services to Pangasinan and the build- 
ing of the Manila Railroad in 1891 . 

Social change can also be discerned in the growth of the population and in 
the filling up of all the lowlands between the Benguet and Cordillera mountains in 
the east and the Zambales range in the west. This was due not onlv to natural in- 
creases in the original Pangasinan population but also to population shift from the 
llocano north. The population increased by 140,000 in the first half of the 14th 
century and by about .200,000 in the second half. Only the oldest towns in the 
central part of the province, built in the first two centuries of Spanish rule, have 
remained essentially composed of a Pangasinan-speaking populace. Of the towns 
founded in the 19th century, all but one, Urbiztondo, founded in the center of the 
province, are dominated by bilingual inhabitants, speaking both the Pangasinan 
and llocano tongues. These towns are located in the eastern part of the province 
and registered heavy increments of population in the latter half of the 19th cen- 
tury. So great was t he influx of llocano migrants from the north that today Ilocano- 
speaking residents constitute almost half of the population of the province. In fact, 
they dominate the eastern and western towns. 

In the last decade of Spanish rule, the 29 towns of Pangasinan each had a 
separate cap i tan municipal and a juez de paz. All of these towns, had one male 
teacher for the boys, a female teacher for the girls, and a directorcillo to conduct all 
the necessary paper work tor the town.' 1 he i|ualifications for justice of the peace 
included the possession of an academic title and the ability to speak, read, and write 
Spanish. All these indicate that 1 angasinan had sufficient educated individuals to 
fill such positions. No doubt these individuals belonged to the families that had 
benefited from the economic changes in the 19th century. 

It was the claim of Oomintcan historians that Pangasinan "remained loyal to 
Spain up to the last moment of sovereignty of that nation in this country.” 9 In 
January 1 8 27, the elections for the headship of the municipalities was carried on as 
usual and the results reported to Manila, even while the eight provinces in the Ma- 
nila Bay region were already under martial rule. 

On 3 November 1 897 , the district engineer of the inspector general of lands, 
based in Pampanga, complained that the prerogatives of his office had been in- 
fringed upon. He had discovered a report dated 15 September 1897 stating that an 
ayudante of Pangasinan had carried out the marking of the town center in 
Bayambang. Phis was the town-plaza-complex, which under the law should not 


k. 


673 


I f U f* I III IITINI Hi Vi )\ \ 


exceed 30 hectares. The district engineer churned that under the Koval decree of 30 
September 1882, this function belonged onlv n» rhe mpneers «»? his office. 1 he 
Pangasinan governor explained that the request f«>r m ciu;inc 

boundaries of the public area in Bayambang hail been made to the t >tfue of the 
Inspector General of L^inds as far back as the 1 Mebru % 4 M. but no action had 
been taken by that office. In the meantime mair. disputes «»\c r properts had oc- 
curred. Thus he was prompted to send his ayiuLnitr to mark <>ui the limits on the 
ground that under Article 1 19, chiefs of provinces were obi igcd to exec ute orders 
and lend help in all cases. Therefore the aytuLtntr were also auxiliaries of the engi- 
neers. The municipality of Bayambang was probably billed twice tor the ^os( of 
properly delineating its town-plaza-complcx. But what tins incident illustrates is 
that while fighting had been going on since 39 August 1 89o. bet we c n Katipunan 
revolutionaries and Spanish forces in the .Manila Bav region, it was still busincssas 
usual in Pangasinan as late as November 189 ( entral and local officials still 

feuded over their respective turfs. 

Why the revolution in the lagalog region did not immediate l\ spread to the 
province of Pangasi nan may find ex plan a t ion in the p< >1 1 1 ic a I . economic, and soc i.il 
conditions that prevailed there. It lias been noted that tbe people had learned to 
avail themselves of legal means in redressing their grievances. In the economic 
sphere, the benefits of the changes in the economic system mav have* been more 
evenly spread among the d i fferen t levels < >f the* Pa ngasi nan communn\ than in the 
lagalog region. Besides, there were no huge religious estates m Pangasinan that 
might have occasioned unrest as they did in I aguna. 

f he waves of unrest from the lagalog region finally reached I angasman late 
m 1897. In October 1897, disorders were reported m the western towns in the 
region which at the time still belonged to Zambales. By then fighting between the 
revolutionaries and the Spanish forces had already reached a stalemate and nego- 
tiations for a truce had started. 


f he people of Pangasinan learned about the Pact of Biak-na-Bato in Decem- 
ber 1897, when Don Emilio E Aguinaldo passed through I Eigupan on his way to 
take the steamer at Sual that would take him to exile in I long Kong. 

In the renewal of the revolution in April 1898, even before tbe return of 
Aguinaldo from Hong Kong, the Pangasi nenses evinced their sense* of identity with 
the developing Filipino nation by joining the common endeavor to throw off the 
yoke of Spanish sovereignty and establish the Philippine Republic. Daniel 
Maramba, Vicente del Prado, and Juan Qucsada, all graduates of Atenco and the 
niversity of Santo Tomas, led revolutionary groups under the leadership of Don 
rancisco Makabulos y Soliman of Tarlac to free Pangasinan from Spanish rule. 

^ ^ .^ n 22 July 1898, their combined forces vanquished the Spanish forces gath- 
i C m ^ a 8 u P an and overthrew Spanish sovereignty over the province. Pangasinan 
us came under the umbrella of the First Republic. Then when another im perial- 
power threatened the newly born nation, the Pangasinenses did not hesitate to 
t Qlr blood in defense of their nationhood. Phis was the measure of their so- 


674 


c 'OR IT S The Political Socioeconomic Milieu in Pangas i?uin 


cial and political development. A common cultural and historical experience un- 
der Spain forged powerful bonds of brotherhood among inchoate linguistic groups 
and gave birth to a nation. 

Notes 


1 . An example ot these documents housed at the Bureau of Records and Management, 
(hereafter BRM) Manila are the documents on the founding ot the town ot 
Binalonan: “Pangasinan, 1822 a 1839. Varios documentos sobre la ereccion y 
deslindes del pueblo de Binalonan en provincia de Pangasinan,” Legajo 96, no. 19. 

2. On the boundary dispute between San Fabian and Mangaldan in 1819: “Provincia 
de Pangasinan, Ano de 1819 . Expedience intruido sobre limites divisorios de los 
pueblos de San Fabian v Mangaldan. ' Mss., BRM, leg. 96, no. 1. 

3. See sheaf ot local budgets in “Provincia de Pangasinan, Ano de 1 855. De oficio Supe- 
rior Gobierno y Capitania General de Pilipinas. Seccion de Gobierno, Sobre 
Presup uestos de gastos anuales de los pueblos de la provincia de Pangasinan,' Ibid., 
leg. 79, no. 26. 

4. “Provincia de Pangasinan, Arios de 1824 a 1829. Queja de los Tributantes naturales 
del pueblo de San Garlos, provincia de Pangasinan, contra los principals del mismo 
pueblo sobre los polos y servicios." Mss., BRM, leg. 93, no. 9 and “Provincia de 
Pangasinan, Ano de 1836. Expedience sobre de solicitud de varias cavlianes del 
pueblo de Malasiqui para se determina la cantidad que deben de lar las personas que 
se reserva del servicio del tribunal v de las obras publicas.” Mss. Ibid., leg. 93, no. 16. 
For further discussion of these incidents, see this writer's Pangasinan, ISO l-l 900 
(Quezon Gity: New Day Publishers, 1990). 

5. Information ot this particular detail comes from the Report, “Anda to Carlos III, July, 
1764, in Blair and Robertson, The Philippine Islands, 1492-1898 (Ohio, 1905) Vol. 
XLIX, 303. For a more detailed discussion ot the Palaris Revolt see this writers 
Pangasinan , 15^2-1800. (Quezon City: U.P. Press, 1974. Reprinted by New Day, 
1974 and 1990.) 

6. The Dynamics of Modernization . A Study in Comparative History (New York: 1 he Free 
Press, 1968), chap. 3. 

7. Further discussion may be found in Pangasinan , 1801-1900 , chap. 5. 

8. Guia Of cial, 1898, 818-819. 

9. Valentin Marin, O.P., Ensayo de una sintesis de los Trabajos Realizados por las 
Corporaciones Religiosas de Pilipinas (Manila; Impr. de Universidad de Santo Tomas, 
1901), 2 vols., II, 646. 


675 


The War in Northern Mindanao 

Capistrano, Roa, and Velez as Heroes of the Revolution 

I hanc is Cl. Mahk.an, S.J. 

Irww Unrvefyty, (ogoyun de Oro. P9uppr 


W hen the American (Commodore Dewey entered Nl.mil.i hay and sank the 
Spanish fleet during the Spanish-American W ar, in. my I ilipinos hoped that 
the Americans would join them against the Spaniards and help them in their war 
for independence. However, the Treaty of Paris in 1 898 simply t hanged the occu- 
Pymg colonial power in the Philippines from Spain to the l anted States. 1 he l ili- 
pino forces in Manila who had first fought shoulder -to-shouldcr with the Ameri- 
cans soon found themselves fighting eyeball-to-cyeball against them. American 
usiness interests, on the shoulders of President Theodore Roosevelt s popularity, 
won out against Americans who had wanted to give the Philippines its indc- 
iml enCC ^§ u * na Ho, Del Pilar, Tinio, and other generals carried on the war for 
PhipP en< ^ enCe * n nort ^ ern Luzon, while various leaders in the southern parts of the 
1 ipptnes fought against the new colonizers. Among these were C icncral Nicolas 
a pistrano, Colonel Apolinar Velez, and Captain Vicente Roa y Racines of Ca- 
gayan de Misamis in northern Mindanao. 

p Q ,^ n dle n >ght of 16 January 1900, hundreds of Cagayan os met in the Club 
II f anC ^ J° ln tly signed a pact of resistance. It was now necessary to designate an 
lead^ 1 mi tar ^ Lader. I he leader chosen over several others who were too old to 
Velez ° f alread Z occupied in other important military posts was Apolinar 

a j ° ad m ilitary experience in an engagement with a large band ol escaped 

Howe COnViCtS Fr ° m thC Iligan 3rea S ° me yCarS earlier 

at bein ^ <dez ’ a self-made man still on the rise, was apparently embarrassed 

said he^ ^ erred to others more highly ranked in the Cagayan social structure. He 
most willing to serve but that he preferred a lower post than that ol 


676 


MAOUiAN The War in Northern Mindanao 


overall commander. Consideration then turned to Nicolas Capistrano, an appar- 
ently wealthy lawyer, who had organized a troop of soldiers whom he wanted to 
combine with the provincial torces it the Americans should attempt to invade the 
Cagayan area ot north Mindanao. Capistrano proved willing to accept it chosen 
and thus was selected as the overall commander ot the Cagayan torces. Velez ac- 
cepted the position ot major in these torces. 

On 6 March 1900, the Arayau an American warship, anchored at the 
Cagayan whart. Its commander threatened to shoot down the Filipino flag flying 
there but did not make good his threat. However, on 14 March another warship 
anchored in the Cagavan harbor. The ship's commander said that American war- 
ships and armed torces would soon come to take possession ot the province and 
that it would be better tor the people to surrender peacefully. "We come to pro- 
mote the weltare ot the people, not to enslave them," he stated, "but it the people 
resist us, we shall be induced to use force." On the tollowing day, this ship shot 
down the Filipino flag. 

On Saturday, 30 March 1900, at sunrise, the lookout unit on Buntola Hill 
on the southeast part ot the Cagayan port area began firing its cannon. The detense 
forces rushed to their posts. But the American troops outflanked the Cagayan 
torces by coming up the Cagayan River in boats and landing on the river side, 
rather than the whart side, ot the port area. 

The American troops were from Volunteer Regiment Number 40 under a 
General Bates. They were not regular army soldiers. The occupation was peaceful 
and without bloodshed, and the American troops treated the people in a friendly 
and courteous manner. 

Since his positions had been outflanked. General Capistrano withdrew his 
forces in good order to a plateau in the foothills about 8 km southward of Cagayan, 
called Gango. 

Many of Capistrano's officers urged an attack at the earliest possible time 
upon the approximately 1 ,000 American troops. Others, probably including Velez 
and perhaps Capistrano himself, doubted the wisdom of an early attack with 
largely untrained troops. But most officers apparently felt that the earlier the at- 
tack, the greater the chances of success. So Capistrano decided to make the attack. 

The plan called for a very early morning surprise attack in complete silence 
upon the American barracks. Men with bolos and scaling ladders would lead the 
attack. They would be supported by rifle and pistol fire from the Cagayan infantry 
and cavalry. \ he attack would take place on 7 April just eight days after the inva- 
sion. Altogether, about 2,000 Filipino warriors would participate in the attack. 

Unfortunately, one aspect of the battle plan that could go wrong did go 
wrong. Among the Filipino forces was a group of tribal Higa-unon warriors. These 
warriors killed several sentries near the quarters of General Bates and, according to 
tribal custom, shouted their war cry. This woke up everybody in the area. 

Nevertheless, the scaling ladders were set up and men swarmed up the lad- 
ders. But the awakened soldiers in the barracks began almost at once to fire from 


677 


nil mu imsr vi vc >i t n< r, \ 


their windows and to trv to cast off the ladders But although the I ilipino infancy 
and cavalry kept up a steady fire from the ground. < >nlv a few « >r the ! dipino militia 
were able to fight their wav in through the window s. iru hid mi: ( a pi am \polinario 
Pabayo. Another officer, ( Captain ( 'Icmcntc < h.u < »n . tw ic c made it t hr« nigh the hail 
of fire to reach a window, but his ladder was twice hurled bat k. he v. as bavoncted. 
and his skull was laid bare. I he second time, he fell heas -t*. ::ie w.iv to the 
ground. 

I he battle raged for an hour, f inally. ( apistraim rean/ed that the tide of 
battle had turned against his men and so sounded the retreat I he \mcrk.ms pur- 
sued the retreating Pihpinos as far as the outskirts of the citv s i\ biltpinos 

died in this battle in Cagayan dc Misamis, but it is believed about lOO. including 
1 5 unidentified Higa-unon tribesmen, died in battle afterward as a result of their 
wounds. About 50 Americans were killed. 

Gango was not an easy place to defend, so ( apistrano moved his base to 
Sumilao in the Bukidnon foothills, and later to Iankulan where be also organized 
his army. 

He split his men into eastern and a western divisions. I Ic assumed c ommand 
of the eastern division, f fc raised Velez to the rank of colonel. 

Velez seems to have been a military genius, fie chose I angaon. Bukidnon, as 
his headquarters, and trained his men in tactics more fitting for those with less 
military experience and less firepower. He emphasized scorched earth and hit-and- 
run tactics in his training, showed how to choose battle* sites w hic h would give his 
men advantages of terrain and how to wear down the enemy by exacting a heuv} 
price for any territory yielded. His tactics close! v resembled those of present-das 

guerrilla warfare. 

Velez chose four sites blocking the approaches to his headquarters in I angaon 
f° rt ified them. These were Makahambus I fill on the west side of the C agavan 
ver > and Supaksupak, Mindulahog, and Mansulaluig, .ill on the east side of the 


^ General Capistrano put Captain Roa y Racines in charge of training the men 
eastern division. Roa had served in the Spanish arms', was recognized for his 
u,tar y experience, and was known to be a brave man. 
m l r P art: °f training but also for patrol purposes, Roa decided upon a long 
S ' ^ an ^ u ^ an > > n present-day Bukidnon, down to the sea along the old 

S a | S trai (which places can still be seen from the modern road), and then up to 
y m the northeast of present-day Misamis Oriental. C hipistrano approved the 
ern ° n ^ ^ a y 1900, Roa set out with the green troops of C Capistrano’s east- 

ision, which included the largest segment of Capistrano’s men. 

On theTcM^ ^* 1S tra,nees arrivec l in Salay on 1 1 May, where they stayed overnight, 
that th 1 ’ ^° a an< ^ ^' S men marc ^ e< ^ hack toTaoloan. On arriving he declared 
On^h C ^ WOU *^ * De a rest holiday for the troops, 
tnet the 0 C rn ° rn ' n § ^ 4 May, Roa marched his men to Agusan barrio where he 
eastern division quartermaster, Major Cayetano Pacana, as well as Captain 


678 


M A D K i AN I he W a r t n Northern A lindaruio 


Pablo Mercado, Captain Pedro Casino y Yare, who had command of hundreds of 
men armed only with bolos or with swords, and Sergeant Uldarico Akut and his 
25 cavalrymen. 

It was a fine day and most of these officers were in the prime of life, eager to 
a win a battle against the Americans. In the course of the many, often ludicrous, 
incidents recounted in conversation, Roa suggested the possibility of sending a 
messenger to Cagayan to challenge the Americans to come out and fight. The oth- 
ers liked the idea, and a messenger was dispatched to Cagayan with the challenge. 

Meanwhile a battle plan was worked out. Roa and the first company of in- 
fantry would occupy the first hill and encounter the enemy coming along the 
rough road from Cagayan to Misamis. Sergeant Akut would occupy the second 
hill with his cavalry. The men with swords or bolos would hide under the houses 
along the sea side ol the road. 

When the Americans had come within range, Roas infantry would fire at the 
Americans, and then retreat up the hill. The Americans, it was believed, would 
follow this retreating force up the hill. When the Americans had gotten about half- 
way up the hill, the men with swords and bolos would attack them from the rear, 
and the infantry would turn around and fire down at the Americans as the bolo 
men hit them from behind. The Americans would be caught in the middle between 

c* 

the two attacking forces and would be decimated. 

Soon after they had finished their meal, the lookouts sent word that the 
Americans were coming. Seven skirmishers came first, followed by two companies 
of infantry. Roas men fired three volleys and then climbed the hill. The battle plan 
seemed to be working because the Americans followed them up the hill. But the 
bolo men, except for a handful, did not appear. 

Roa then called for his force to turn and fire down the hill. But the Filipinos 
were badly outnumbered, and the result of the failure of the bolo men to appear 
meant the decimation of the infantry. Roa kept firing until his pistol was empty 
and then whirled his saber about him. Paying no attention to calls from the Ameri- 
cans to surrender, he was finally shot or bayoneted. The cavalry under Akut could 
not come to the rescue of the infantry as their number was small and their horses 
would have had to climb the hill sideways. They would have had to leave their 
battle post on top of the second hill. The Americans withdrew, carrying their 
wounded and their dead, without attacking the cavalry. 

What had gone wrong? Roa had wished to leave his infantry under the com- 
mand of his most senior officer, in order to lead the bolo men hiding under the 
houses along the shore of the bay. If he had done so, the results of this battle might 
have been very different. But his men, green soldiers that they were, had begged 
him not to leave them. As a result, very few of the men under the houses cooper- 
ated with the infantry during the battle, for lack of a determined leader. 

Besides Roa, 33 others from the infantry died in the battle, as well as 12 bolo 
men. In addition 12 other men of the infantry were wounded. 


k 


679 


i hi wui imsf in vi »i i 


I he Americans apparently rum rc.ih/cd that then h.ni **» first with Velez 
before they could attack ( apistr.ino in Linkuhm t >th rv. isc \ c.cs might be able 
to outflank them deep in Bukidnon. I bus on ’ ' M.r. i *:«» ; »• soldiers set out 
from Cagayan, crossed the riser, and came up t<»v. ar*l \ \l.ik.u .m bus I he detend- 
ers of Makahambus prepared for an attack, hut the ans turned back after 

thoroughly reconnoitering the area. Six d.iv . later, on the .'^tM a scumuI parrs* left 
Cagayan, this time approac hmg \lakahambus more f« »se . -nit a:;ain turned back 
without engaging in battle. 

On 1 June 1900, a large American expedit ionar » f<»tve ieft C agas an, 
equipped with battle wagons, cannon, other v.ar materials, food and supplies, and 
horses. It deployed in Carmen. ( )n the night of ^ hint* a tomp.ins of ca\ airy and 
a company of infantry left Cagayan, presumable to atta k s lakahambiis. but be- 
fore these troops left Carmen, ( ipriano \ amenta sent a horseman. I lilano 
Mandar, to gallop up the trail to warn \ el e/ of an imminent attack upon 

Makahambus. 

Captain FJiott, commander of the* American force, planned a \cr\ early 
morning attack upon Makahambus. I he* lookout at Kahula. \polmario Naca- 
laban, saw them coming and ran from Kahula up to \ fakaham bus hill to warn 
Lieutenant Cruz Taal, ranking officer of the fortress, of a probable imminent 
attack. 


laal calmly ordered his forces not to shoot until their cannon, trained upon 
the entrance to the fortress at the top of rlu* lull, had fired. (In those days the 
present wide road leading past the cave at Makahambus was not. of course, there. 
1 he only trail led up over the hill, and was very narrow in many places as it wound 
up, leaving room for only one man at a time to pass.) 

Velez men were entrenched in the fort bchirul breastworks. I he* Americans 
narrow trail winding upward, and came so close to the f or 1 1 f i cat ion that 
e lead man said ‘Good morning. With that, the cannon roared, and the en- 
renched defenders poured such withering fire into the invading ranks that the 
whole line of attackers was swept off the trail. 

f *11 , W ^ CC rnorc the Americans charged, only to be confronted by a blistering 
a ] C ro m the fortress. Finally, demoralized, they had to retreat, leaving behind 
cause ^ Uni ^ c *r of their dead and some wounded men they could not rescue be- 
was A V *" ^ rc f r °m the fort. On the defenders side, the only one killed 

three ~~ nar *° ^ ac alaban, the lookout who had warned of imminent attack. Only 


were buried with 


men were wounded. 

militar hr t ^ 1C k at de, the dead, both Filipino and American, 

Laneaon ° n ° r f' wounded Americans were treated in the military hospital at 
except a Co ^ Cr w ' t ^ 1 t ^ le Filipinos. However, all the American wounded died 
eventually ^° OC ^’ w ^ ose leg had been shattered. He was treated kindly and 

prisoner of the'/t'" ,^ CZ W3S a ^ e to exchange Moody for a comparable 


ilipino 


l 


680 


M AD K ; A N I he \\a r i n Northern A lineLituio 


At the start ot the battle ot Makahambus, Taal's men had an average ot less 
than 14 bullets each, bach shot had to count. The supply of gunpowder and wad- 
dint; was so limited that only one ot the two cannon could be fired. 

Velez captured 24 Krag rifles from this battle, as well as a large supply ot 
ammunition, medicine, and food. Shortness ot ammunition and the inefficiency 
ot his weapons continued to plague Velez. The Krag was found to be superior to 
the weapons ot his men. 

Toward the end of October 1900, Regiment 40 and General Bates were re- 
placed by Regiment 28 ot the regular U.S. Army and irs commander. General 
Kobbe. 

Kobbe planned a second attack upon Makahumbus. He first moved against 
Supaksupak. On 1 November, his men were entrenched in the heights overlooking 
the north bank ot the Bubonawan River. On the following day at about 2 p.m., the 
American cannon on the north side opened devastating fire upon the Supaksupak 
fortress. Under cover of this fire, American soldiers began descending the hill into 
the Bubonawan and crossing over to the Supaksupak side. The Filipino cannon 
and rifles opened tire from the heights of the Supaksupak fort on the other side of 
the river. But the American cannonading was so intense and accurate that Lieuten- 
ants Clementino Chavez and Aguedo Pimentel abandoned it to protect their men. 
No men were lost; the only casualty was Dodoy Martinez, who had been struck by 
a piece of flying rock. Chavez and Pimentel retreated to the next fort set up to pro- 
tect Langaon, Mindulahog, which lay westward of Supaksupak, about half the dis- 
tance to the Cagayan River. 

When the Americans reached the Supaksupak fort, they found it burned and 
empty. However, they had broken through the chain of forts guarding Langaon. 
After some time, they broke into two troops, one moving south toward a position 
from which they could attack Langaon, the other remaining in Supaksupak. 

Thus Chavez took a detachment of men and marched southward to Maasin, 
from where he could attack the American southern troops. He found a cave in 
Dilimaantus Hill from which he could attack the Americans when they passed by. 
However, the Americans took a different route. Chavez then marched westward to 
the Cagayan River, crossed it, and rested in caves in the uplands of Opol. He con- 
tracted malaria as did some of his men. 

Pimentel in Mindulahog awaited his chance to attack the Americans in the 
Supaksupak area. Finally, seeing no opportunity to attack with advantage, he 
burned down Mindulahog and crossed the river with his men to join the 
Makahumbus garrison. 

Meanwhile the Americans approached Langaon, only to find it burned down 
by Velez, who had retreated to Talakag. On 6 November 1900, the Americans de- 
stroyed what was left of Langaon. At about the same time, the Americans in 
Supaksupak found that Pimentel had abandoned Mindulahog so they proceeded 
to the Maasin plateau, which is higher than Makahambus hill. From there they 


k. 


681 


THK mil.IPPINI KfV< Ml '!!<>% K 


bombarded Makahambus across the (Cagayan River, But when thc\ crossed the 
river and attacked Makahambus, they found that it had been burned and aban- 
doned by its defenders before the bombardment I bus the \mrruan forces 
returned to Cagayan without notable accomplishment despite the men thev lost or 
casualties they incurred. And Velez now had the option rebuilding Ins toni- 
fications. 

In the eastern segment of the ( agayan dc Misarnis area. < tcncra. ( apistrano 
left a detachment of soldiers on the north bank <>f the I aoloan lv ss er and proceeded 
to Saray, which he strongly fortified. However. ( apistrano v.as not the military 
genius that Velez was. The detachment on the north bank <>f :mc I.n»i<»an was dis- 
lodged by a furious cavalrv charge across the riser, and so it |omed < apistrano in 
Saray. 

But the American forces marched toward Ighgod .Mountain from which they 
could bombard Capistrano’s Saray fortifications. I bus late m the afternoon of IS 
December 1900, Capistrano ordered his forces to Siloo. I he re be reorganized his 
troops, giving definite guard responsibilities to diffe rent units. I lc also sent guer- 
rilla units to guard and attempt to hold other [daces. A force was left in Siloo to 
defend it. 

I he Americans then attacked Siloo and after a hard battle captured and 
burned it. Capistrano meanwhile had moved bis headquarters t<> I atak Mountain 
which he strongly fortified. The Americans lost contact with him. Not knowing 
his whereabouts, they attacked Panampaunn on 20 I )ecember. former Sergeant 
Uldarico Akut, now a lieutenant, had left a rear guard in the pass \\ here the Ameri- 
cans would have to enter. Corporal Carlos Adan and Ins men fought bravely and 
well but were outnumbered by their enemy. Adan was seriously wounded but he 
held up the Americans long enough to enable Akut and the remainder of his cav- 
alry to escape and join Capistrano in Patak. Three days later. Adan was found in a 
Panampuan field by a Bukidnon farmer. The farmer brought Adan home but the 
wounded man died shortly thereafter. 

Capistrano was confident the Americans could not climb the steep precipice 
below his fortress high on a Patak ridge. But on the night of 2 I I )ecember, Ameri- 
can soldiers were discovered to be slowly scaling the steep'), rocky precipice. 
Capistrano’s men began firing down the precipice in the darkness, drawing return 
fire from somewhere below. That night Capistrano decided that he would cross 
over to a neighboring higher ridge in the morning. When daylight came, his men 
found hats, a pair jf field glasses, and blood on the precipice below them. 

A few days after Christmas 1900, Capistrano moved his main camp to what 
is now Malaybalay, Bukidnon, but which then was deserted. I le set up his head- 
quarters in Elihan, a cliff-like area near present-day Linabo. 

After numerous indecisive skirmishes and small battles, Ceneral Kobbe pro- 
posed an armistice to General Capistrano in late January 1 90 1 so that the two sides 
might consider a possible peace treaty. The rwo sides met in Cusa, at that time a 


682 


MAI Mt i AN The \\ hr in Northern Mindanao 


small barangay near Cagayan do Misamis. T he two sides met there again in early 
February but were unable to reach an agreement. 

General Capistrano and his staff rushed back to Malaybalav to be there be- 
fore the armistice ended. They arrived there after dark. 

Capistrano warned the officers in Malaybalav to be ready tor an attack, be- 
cause some of his party had noticed distant lights in the darkness, which might be 
an American torce following them. He then proceeded to his headquarters in 
Eli ban. 

However, these officers felt that an attack so soon after the end ot the armi- 
stice at midnitiht was unlikclv. So thev celebrated the last hours of the armistice 
with feasting and jollity. 

At midnight the armistice was over. I he officers were by then sound asleep. 
The rapid f'ire from the attackers and the return t'ire from the defenders awakened 
the officers. Most of the privates and low-ranking officers escaped, but the higher- 
ranking officers who had been asleep found themselves almost surrounded. All but 
one were captured. Further, the men who had escaped were demoralized because 
they had failed to assure the escape ot their officers. 

Capistrano proceeded to divide his remaining forces between Lieutenant 
Akut and another soldier, Douglas, and appointed new officers in place of Major 
Gaerlan, Captains del Prado, Del Castillo, Espedidio, and Lieutenant Bacarrisas. 
all ot whom were captured. 

On 23 March 1901, Aguinaldo was captured in Isabela. Toward the end ot 
March, Capistrano sent Lieutenant Bernardo Neri to General Kobbe to request a 
second armistice on the chance that this time peace might be worked out on terms 
more favorable to the Filipino side. Kobbe agreed and the two sides met in Gusa 
on 30 March 1 901 . 

Capistrano presented peace terms from the Filipino side and a Major James 
F. Case presented terms from the American side. After much discussion, mutually 
acceptable terms were agreed on by both sides. 


683 


The Ethnic Chinese 
in the Philippine Revolution 

Ti.ki sita Ant, S i i ant> |i \ \ (i<> H«»n* 

Kflr/J pQfrj yj |T/]!jnlofGr). Inr # V/jr i . •>'. 


I t is popularly believed that in significant political events in Philippine 
history (not to mention the revolution itself ) , the ( Jnnese were mostlv neutral 
bystanders, uninvolved and uncommitted. Are these perceptions justified or are 
they just a myth." In the greatest upheaval in Philippine history, the 18% Revo- 
lution, the Chinese, who were already a part of Philippine life then, must also have 
been gravely affected. Did they play a role at all in the Filipinos struggle for 
freedom against Spanish tyranny and were they able to exert any kind of influence 

or have any impact on the tide of revolution.' I his is what this paper wishes to 
examine. 

I he invitation to participate in this conference is not only a distinct honor 
or t e authors as Isinoys ( fsinong Pinoy” or Chinese Filipinos). It is also a recog- 
nition of the role the ethnic Chinese played in the Philippine revolut ion. For us 
sinoys, speaking specifically on the topic of the Chinese in the Philippine revolu- 
^* Stor * ca ^ nec essity. As the late historian Antonio Ian said in his work on 
1 C inese mestizos-. “The recorded history of the Philippines would be incom- 
k aS ^ S ^ or understanding contemporary society unless it takes into account 
t e inese mestizos contributions to our development as a nation. 

A few articles have tackled the ethnic Chinese’ contributions to the Philip- 
p ne revolution. However, most of the research data regarding the topic are buried 
wit in ot er works on the general topic of Philippine history, or else scattered in 


'"Edward Yulo helped prepare this paper. 


684 


ANc, M l- A: <AO BON The Ethnic Chinese in the Philippine Revolution 


various works on local history. No attempts have vet been made to do a more thor- 
ougli research, systematically gather data, and publish a comprehensive work on 
the eth nic Chinese in the Philippine revolution. 

We can look at the ethnic Chinese role in the Philippine revolution at several 
levels: the earliest isolated incidents ot sporadic uprisings; the role ot the Chinese 
mestizos the participation in the revolution ot the Chinese themselves whether as 
revolutionaries, financiers, or supporters; and finally, the involvement ot the Chi- 
nese outside the Philippines in the revolution whether as sympathizers or as active 
supporters. 

Early Uprisings against Spain 

History tells us that tace to face with threats, oppression, and persecution, the Chi- 
nese as a people have shown their stubborn retusal to blindly or docilely accept 
their tate; their motto has been "wherever there be tyranny and oppression, there 
will be revolt. 1 his was true in ancient times and continues to be so in the present, 
in all corners ot the globe, inside or outside China. 

From the time ot the Qin dynasty (221-207 B.C.) when Qen Shengand Wu 
Kuang led the tirst peasant uprising, there were several hundred other uprisings in 
Chinas 2,000-year history ot revolt or rebellion against oppressors and conquer- 
ors, thus establishing the Chinese peoples long revolutionary tradition. In tact, 
among the overseas Chinese scattered all over Southeast Asia were the many revo- 
lutionary warriors displaced or expelled from China in one of the big waves of 
migration during the period ot unrest and instability spawned by the long-drawn- 
out Taiping Rebellion (1851-1864).' 

It the tirst tolk hero ot the Philippines was Lapu Lapu, who in 1521 led the 
first anti-Spanish revolt and killed the conqueror Ferdinand Magellan, then Pan 
Ho Wu, who 72 years later, in 1593, led the more than 250 conscripted Chinese 
galley rowers to mutiny against the ship captain, Governor-General Luis Perez de 
Dasmarihas, was both a Chinese and a Filipino tolk hero. 4 The rowers were flogged 
brutally, kept at their oars without rest and with little food so that several died. Pan 
Ho Wu, upon learning that the ship was actually on a military expedition to con- 
quer the Moluccas, thought that they would die either from the atrocious condi- 
tions in the ship or be ted as “cannon-fodder in a battle not their own.” Hence, he 
passed the word on to his comrades: “Should we submit to scourging unto death 
and suffer an ignominious death of this kind? Ought we not rather die fighting 
and try to save our lives? This uprising against the governor-general, therefore, 
can also be considered as one of the many Philippine revolts against Spanish rule. 

There were at least six massacres of immigrant Chinese in the more than 300 
years of Spanish rule in the Philippines. Some of these massacres, like those in 
1603, 1639, 1662, 1686, 1762, were also called “Chinese uprisings in historical 
chronicles. In truth, the massacres were triggered as retaliation against the Chinese 
who rebelled against Spanish oppression. The 1639 massacre, for example, was car- 


685 


THh HI1I.IPPINI HIV c >1 1 I I< >N \Nl > fU *n >'.i > 


ricd out to quash a peoples revolt against the harsh treatment and [xrvecution of 
the conscripted Chinese laborers who were forced to open up trie frontiers of Ca- 
lamba, Laguna. In the first few months alone, more than *00 settlers died, ravaged 
by malarial fever. Driven to desperation, the settlers armed themselves with crude 
bolos, bamboo poles, and farm implements and killed I )on I ms \rias dc Mora 
(the heartless, cruel, and extortionate aUaUU-mayort . I he revolts .ailed premedi- 
tated treason or rebellion in Spanish accounts) led to the slaughter of the ( hinesc; 
more than 25,000 died (Chinese sources recorded ^0.000 throughout the islands 
in this atrocity. 

I he history of the Chinese in the Philippines during Spanish times, gist like 
the history of the Filipinos then, was one written in blood and tears. I he si\ mas- 
sacres claimed more than 100,000 lives. The series of mass expulsions, the restric- 
tions in movement through the travel pass, the excessive taxation, the legal dis- 
crimination and persecution, abuses like forced labor, and other anti C hinesc rac- 
ist policies of the colonial government all brought untold suffer ing, oppression, 
and humiliation upon Chinese immigrants during the 300 years of Spanish rule. 
Even during the 1896 Revolution, the Chinese did not escape Spanish rampage 
and destruction. One example of Spanish atrocity is described in Htstortcul Record 
of Big Events Outside China fin Chinese] edited by Qi ban Seng, which cites the 
May 1896 issue of the Star Paper in lain Xuo Huei reported the* arrival in ( ebu of 
a Spanish military expedition sent to quell the Cebu revolts: 

I he Cebu ethnic Chinese suffered a great tragedy. I he Spanish ( »o\ er- 
nor General ordered the soldiers to torch all the native houses. 1 he ( hinesc 
stores were completely gutted. However, all the other merchants of other na- 
tionalities were protected by their consuls with the exception of the ( .hincse 
who had no protection at all. I hey ran hither and thither, each one li ving his 
own escape. Some died in the fire, some died from the enemies fire power and 
some were killed outright by the soldiers. The whole town’s ( diine.se residents 
numbering almost 900 people perished, with only two able to escape. I could 
hardly bear to read the accounts of such a tragic massacre. 

Under such persecution, was it possible that the Chinese would just stay 
quiet and not fight back or rise against Spain? Remember that peasants in rural 
China staged scores of such uprisings under several dynasties when local tyrants 
oppressed them beyond what men could bear. 

Another example of Chinese participation in the Filipinos’ struggle against 
colonial rule was in faraway Sulu in 1773. There were 4,000 Chinese immigrants 
who helped and supported the natives of Jolo in their struggle against Spain. They 
organized a contingent and fought the Spaniards. They had actually been expelled 
by or escaped from the atrocities of Spanish authorities in Manila in 17587 Luis 
Dery in his paper, “Gen. Jose Ig nacio Paua and his role during the Philippine Revo- 
lution described why the Chinese joined the revolution: 10 


686 


ANCi SIT. N GO BON The F.thnic Chinese in the Philippine Revolution 


It is certain that he [Paua] learned the plight ot his fellow-Chinese 
through his connections with some Katipuneros. Hence his sympathy lor the 
Filipino cause. By this time, he had come to realize that lor the Chinese inhab- 
itants in the Philippines to be treed trom the oppression ot Spanish rule, a radi- 
cal solution was necessary. To Paua this solution was revolution against Spain, 
which meant joining hands with the Filipino separatists. His close ties with the 
Katipuneros showed this conviction — and his rejection ot the peaceful, often 
opportunistic solution taken by other tellow-Chinese, headed by Carlos 
Palanca Tan Quiensien, who sought the establishment ot a Chinese consulate 
in Manila to protect Chinese interests in the Philippines. To Paua, the tormer 
solution was the best under the existing conditions tor it meant the end ot 
Chinese, and Filipino, sufferings under Spanish rule. 

Whether it was Pan Ho Wus mutiny against Governor Dasmarinas or the 
Chinese uprising in Calamba, they were just like the hundreds ot spontaneous and 
sporadic Filipino uprisings before the 1896 Revolution. They may have been iso- 
lated, localized, or parochial and therefore limited in effect compared to the na- 
tional revolution led by the entire population to achieve independence; but they 
were all carried out as part of the resistance against colonial domination and abuses. 
Added together, these small pockets of regional revolts sparked the flame that lit 
the national conflagration leading to the final revolution that ended Spanish rule. 
In the same vein, all the other "Chinese uprisings" were part of this long history of 
revolts that finally led to Philippine independence. This fact was acknowledged by 
an early historian, Rafael Cabalfin Londres, in his 1923 monograph. Lives and 
Memoirs: Sons of the Revolution , when he included the Chinese revolts of 1603 and 
1662 in the insurrections against Spain. 11 

The Chinese Mestizos 

The Chinese mestizos or offspring of Filipino-Chinese intermarriages were a natu- 
ral product of Chinese migration to the Philippines. But they played a crucial role 
in the history of the reform movement and Philippine revolution. 1 his significant 
role could never have been imagined by their parents, by the mestizos themselves, 
by the Spanish colonial masters, or by the priests who were responsible for the 
evangelization of the Chinese and who encouraged them to marry Filipinos. As 
Tan said: “ 1 hey played a significant role in the formation of the Filipino middle 
class, in the agitation for reforms, in the 1896 revolution, and in the formation of 
what is now known as the Filipino nationality. In contemporary times, their role in 
nation-building continues.” 12 

In the last half of the 1 9th century, a Filipino intellectual middle class (known 
as the ilustrados) made up predominantly of Chinese mestizos , was formed. This 
mestizo intellectual middle class not only organized the propaganda movement, 
whose key leaders were Jose Rizal, Marcelo H. del Pilar, Graciano Lopez Jaena, and 


687 


THK PMII UTINI Hi V< M l I I< >' • 


others, but were also the leaders of the revolution .tr.unst s pam I nc kev leader ot 
the revolution, Hmilio Aguinaldo, who declared Phi.rppmc independence at 
Kawit, Cavite, in 1898 and became the first president of the Philippine republic, 
and many of his other leading officials, all came from the < hinese mestizo middle 
class. 

I he Chinese mestizo s were able to form the intellectual middle class mainh 
they were educated in exclusive prominent < atliolu institutions mu h as the l ni- 
versity of Santo Tomas, Ateneo de .Manila. San luan de 1 etran. and others. Intact, 
many of them, like Juan Luna, I )el Pilar, and Ki/a! lumselr were educated abroad. 

By the late 1 860s, a.s a result of the educational decree of INos which gave 
the indios and mestizos access to higher education, a few people, mosth wealthy 
natives and Chinese mestizos had the oppormnit\ of getting college education. In 
the 1870s, more families were able to send their children not <>nl\ to Manila but 
also to Spain and later to progressive huropean countries like I t. true. I ngland, 
Austria, and Germany where they imbibed the liberalism of the west. 

With formal education and influenced by the liberal ideas m I u rope, these 
mestizos began to think in terms of national instead of provincial or even sectoral 
concerns and evolved a philosophy of Lilipinism. 

I he ilustrados not only played a crucial role m the* formation of (he* Lilipino 
nationality hut were also the first to awaken lilipino national const ions ness. IVdro 
Paterno and Gregorio Sanciangco, according to Jesuit historian l ather John 
Schumacher, were the “trail blazers in formulating the nascent idea of a Lilipino 
identity. Paterno s collection of poems, Sampa^uttit (1880), and his novel, Nt titty 
(1885) , were the first attempts at defining the Lilipino national feeling. Sanciangco, 
on the other hand, in his hook hi Progreso de Pilipinas ( 1 88 I ), defended the dignity 
of the Filipino and took issue with the so-called indolence of the Filipinos. His 
book anticipated and enunciated all the themes that RizaL Lopez plena, Del Pilar, 
and others would later elaborate on. h Paterno and Sanciangco, both C 'hinese mes- 
tizos, are the best proof that the history of the revolution and the formation of the 
Filipino nationality are inseparable from the (.hinese in the Philippines at that 
time. This part is thoroughly discussed in Antonio I an s work, ( Chinese Mestizos and 
the Formation of the Filipino Nationality. 

In 1841, Sinibaldo de Mas, in a secret report to the Madrid government, al- 
ready suspected the Chinese mestizos as a potential nucleus around which the indto 
insurrection might be organized, and predicted that the Chinese mestizos would in 
time dominate public opinion. He then recommended that should Spain decide to 
keep the Philippines as a colony, “race hatred between the Chinese mestizos and 
natives must be developed and the two classes must be “separated and at sword’s 
point in order that the native class which was “strong through its number” and 
the mestizo class through its intelligence, activity, and wealth, “may never form a 
common mass or public spirit.” 16 But the Chinese mestizos were inclined to iden- 
tify themselves with the indios culturally and socially and they were starting to 
gravitate toward each other politically due to common grievances. 


688 


> S 1 I ,\ v »0 tU >\ / /v I’thu: t ( hinese :n the Philippine Revolution 


K>hn Roger M. laylor in Philippine Insurrection ilgai ns t the l iiited State: 
also said: 


C hinese mestizos, the descendants ol C hinese. in mam* eases educated 
in Spain and in other parts ot l urope, are the leaders in the islands in wealth 
and in intelligence. 1 hey are the men w ho were chietlv instrumental in over* 
lurmng the power ot Spain and the\ are the men w ho, w ith the loudest voices, 
arrogate to themselves the right ot speaking tor the people ot the Archipelago, 
h is not always easv to identitv them, thev are not, as a rule, proud ot their 
( hinese descent, hut preter to call themselves Filipinos or to speak ot their 
Spanish ancestry: hut ot the lo t men who were sufficiently important to re- 
quire separate index cards in classitviiu; the papers ot the insurrection in the 
Philippines against the I nited States, 2” seem undoubtedly ol C hinese de- 
scent. and prohahlv, a more caretul investigation would increase the number. 
Aguinaldo is one of these 2”, and so are two ot the members ot his cabinet, 9 
ot his generals (one ot them was a pure-blooded C hinaman), one ot the two 
heads ot his cabinet or council ot government and his principal financial 
agents. 

Aside Irom those who were active in the revolutionary movement, C hinese 
mestizos often mentioned as financial supporters of the revolution include Roman 
Ongpin, Luis \angco, Mariano him jap, and lelesforo Chuidian. Francis St. C lairs 
The Katipunan mentions that other Chinese mestizos who supported the separat- 
ist movement were Pedro and Francisco Roxas, Antonio and Juan Luna, and 
Eduardo Litonjua. ls Burguctes La Guerra en Pilipinas mentions the brothers 
Mariano and Jacinto him jap, who, a day before they were arrested, donated a stag- 
gering PI million for the battalion of Manila volunteers. 10 Roman Ongpin was re- 
ported to have secretly collaborated with the insurgents. He strongly sympathized 
with the ideals of' Andres Bonifacio. He furnished the revolutionists with funds, 
foodstuff, and other supplies, and his store became an outlet for propaganda mate- 
rials Of the indemnity paid by an insurance firm after his store was burned on 6 
February 1898, he contributed 90 percent to Aguinaldo. He was so embittered 
against the Americans who imprisoned him due to his revolutionary activities that 
he was reported “never to have sold any item to the Americans and he urged his 
children not to receive any single centavo from them."-' 0 
Allow us to mention some more historical items. 

o Jose Rizal formed La Liga Filipina in 1892 in the house of the Chinese 
Doroteo Ongjunco at 176 llava Street, Binondo, Manila. Among the financiers of 
l \ 1 Ha Filipina were the Chinese mestizos , Pedro and Francisco Roxas, Mariano 
1 imjap, Telesforo Chuidian, Luis Yangco, Eduardo Litonjua, Antonio and Juan 
l una, Felipe Zamora, Marcelino de los Santos, Maximino Paterno, Isaac F. Rios, 
and Nazario Constantino. 21 


689 


i hi mu n* 


• I he revolutionary novs ort:.!is i- • 4 * • •' 

rile house of ( Chinese ?m tiro I'm* * 

Street, San Nicolas. Manila. 

• The three martyred priests <>i ( asite 
Mariano ( \ ome/ were all of mixed I ihpmo and < 

• I fie trcce m<iriires < 1 ^ mart . i ( 

• Julian Felipe, the composer <>f rfu //; 
tional anthem plavcd during the flag raisin*/ 

Cavite, was a ( Chinese me tr/o. 

• The Banda de San Franc 1 st ode Malabon. 

them in the 1898 declaration of Independent . <■ I , a%. lS " un 
tizt). ' 


c ss .h printed in 
o * $ i >s I a\ e/arcs 

: n : « » /am* »ra. and 


n h Ih\ ame the na- 
nu 1 S‘>S at Kaw it. 

* i tiu nat i on. il an- 
in at hmese me$- 


• Francis St . C Jai r i n ! he h titifnohui I 0( ) . a 1 1 r M 1 ! H 1 / 1 it ot t he* richer 

revolutionists were Chinese mestizo . 

• In the national conference on the* I thm* ( fmu as I ilipmos held at tin* 
University of the Philippines on 10 I 1 ^ovembet 1 ( , v tw <> i ni\etsit\ ol the 
Philippines historians, I saga m .Medina and (aim* \ < ik r a* i< m . ::au- papers, respec- 
tively, on tfie C Chinese of ( aivite and the ( hmese * > f Bul.u an I *« >t h dew i died fully 
how the ethnic ( Chinese and the ( hmese mestizo r< >< >k p ar t m t lie si r uggk lor inde- 
pendence in the two most prominent cradles o! the Philippine’ resolution: C avitc 
and Malolos. Med i na cited voluminous diuit h rec ore I s to show that the* leader of 
the revolutionary movement in Cavite were most l\ ol ( Imiese* des*. ent . \eneracion 
described how the ethnic Chinese plaved a cmeial i < > I c in the in ham/at ion of 
Malolos and how, in time, Malolos rivaled die- cities of Bul.u.m and C alumpit in 
prominence due to the dynamism of the ( fiinese me^tim*. ( a\in was the place 
where Philippine independence was declared while .Malolos was where the first 
Philippine C -ongress was held and t he Phil ippi nc ( onstimtioii hoin. I ndoubtedlv, 
the depth and extent of the ties of the ethnic ( hmese as well as ( hinc’se mestizos 
with these two shrines in the history of Philippine* rcv< >1 1 1 1 i< >n could not just he ac- 
cidents of history. 

I hese items on the Chinese mestizos are not meant t< > exaggerate the Chinese 
ancestry of our national heroes or to claim their heroism as a product of their 
mixed blood. The truth is that these mestizos rec ogni /cd i hem selves as Filipinos and 
they fought the revolution not as mestizos hut as Filipinos. Being of C hinese de- 
scent or mestizos , to them, was secondary. In fact, some would even clean* or refuse 
to recognize their Chinese blood. In 1896, when |osc Ki/al s death sentence was 
announced, he proclaimed: “I do not agree. I his is an injustice. 1 lere it is said that 
I am a mestizo , and that is not true. I am a pure iiulio ' But, in the pursuit of his- 
torical truth, pointing out the background of our reform and revolutionary heroes 
as Chinese mestizos , is a necessary historical task. 


690 


\Nn. M l «N iiO BON The Tthntc ( hinese in the Philipp: fie Rerolution 

The Full-blooded Chinese in the Revolution 

The “Chinesencss of these mestizos \n the revolution would only be tangential 
compared to the participation ot the full-blooded C hinese themselves. The most 
notable among them was none other than the onlv pure-blooded C hinese general 
in the Philippine revolution, Cieneral Jose Ignacio Paua (1 in 1 leng Po or 1 lau Pao 
in 1 lokkien), whom leodoro Agoncillo described as “more Filipino than mam 
Filipinos. 

F.xcept perhaps tor Filipino historians, tew people know about this C hinese 
general. In tact, Philippine history textbooks seldom mention his name. In selected 
books on Philippine history, however, his name is occasionally mentioned and 
some authors like l uis Oery, Cregorio /aide, and Chinese historians Zhou 
Nanjing and Zheng Bingshan have written about him.' 0 1 i is life was even made 
into a movie by l any Santiago Productions in the OSOs. As a notable representa- 
tion ot the Chinese contribution to the Philippine revolution, Paua was respon- 
sible tor building a munitions factory in lmus, C avite, raising from among his fel- 
low C 'hinese 400,000 Mexican dollars,' much needed bv the depleted revolution- 
ary cotters, and personally risking his life in leading bis men in the battlefield 

About his prowess as a general and his baptism of fire, allow us to quote 
Cieneral Pmilio Aguinaldos own description as recounted to a Chinese, 1 iu Yuan 
Van, and cited in the THS Philippine Chinese Yearbook^ 

1S C ) . 1 he revolutionary army fought the Spaniards in Cavite. Many 
( hinese s\ mpathi/ed with the cause ot the Philippine revolution, not a few also 
joined the revolutionary army and carried arms. Many of them had then- 
homes in Ca\ite. Jose Paua and Benito Uapit [1 lapit — sic] were the right hand 
and ^ tlR d [commanders]. 1 heir wives were related to one another. They 
weie \oung, and they proved themselves equally in their ranks. Pauas braverv 
touched and amazed the soldiers. 1 le was at the forefront in every battle. When 
the two armies are locked in battle, manv soldiers would hide and wait but not 
Paua, he would even run where nobodv else dared to tread.. . In the Battle for 
Baeoor, our army encountered the Spanish troops led bv Aguirre and in 
Zapote, Paua was hit by bullets in the left chest. His wounds were grave and 
the army was rattled thinking that Paua could not rise again; but he did, as it 
nothing happened, and continued to lead until the enemy was defeated. W hen 
they saw Paua, the enemies were terrified. Hence, people thought he had mys- 
tic powers and the belief that he couldn't he harmed by halos or bullets started 
there. 

Harpers History of the War in the Philippines recorded that the first encounter 
Paua had with the Spaniards was in lmus, Cavite. Paua and Pio del Pilar had only 
27 men but they forced a regiment commanded by Colonel Salcedo to retreat from 
their stronghold. In the Battle of Binakayan on 1 0 November 1 896, Paua headed a 


691 


j in mu ii'i'iN 


group of bolo-wielding men v. Iu> sever. il emu s .n - vi i t. s ; mi : h riLemcn in 
hand-to-hand com hat and succeeded in f< >n in;: r I . ’ ■ * •' : > ; >s tout real . 

As a pure-blooded ( hmese wlm rose from the rank « • * ii men. mi to a briga- 
dier-general because of his military exploit am! .'.h<> ;;n :ntr dedicated his 
life for the cause of Philippine resolution. Paua ontributi* * f <> * :e\ olution is 

indeed unique. Paua was also one of the 3 2 signal or le n of the Bi.ih na Ha to C onsci- 
tution in I 897. Asa side note, we do a* km >v. ledge r (u histor u mu: t iiat because 
of Aguinaldos full trust in Paua, lie v.as unlo/r unau i » on « * r th .< ».du i s assigned 
to capture and bring Andres Bomf.u 10 to the trial that fin. ilk. led to lk>nitauos 
execution. But this obedience to his commanders order does mu ilemgratc Ins 
battle record, military skills, and Ins distnu t ion as being, t he onb < hi new to have 
signed a Philippine constitution, and leaves no room for doubt that be was fully 
accepted as a Pilipino, .is a revolurionarv hero ami as «n integral par t of the Phil- 
ippine struggle for independence. 

Prom archival materials on the* Ph il ippme rev oh it ion < h mese v on t r ibut ions 
to the cause can be divided into direc t part ic i par ion . f i na iu i.il assist a m e. and ma- 
terial-resources procurement or assistance. I >tie to the- volume* of materials in the 
National Library, which are not even indexed, we* we re* able* u> g< > through onlv a 
portion of the Philippine Revolutiontiry Rccoreis. I lu ic is a need t < > continue* this 
work and include other archival materials like those at the* l mvcrsitv of' Santo 
Lomas archives and the Jesuit archives at the* I ovola I louse of Studies m Atcnco, 
among others. 


Direct Participation 


I he list of Chinese who directly participated in the revolution includes not just 
General Ignacio Paua. Por example, another ( Chinese served as Lanas assistant 
when he built the arsenal and foundry in Imus, Cavite. I ikewisc, an article. 
General Jose Pauas Biography," based on Singapore Nan-An l iUa^c Associations 
^ 777 Journal mentions 3,000 Chinese revolutionists led bv ( icneral Paua.'*’ 

Other forms of direct Chinese participation in the revolution are cited in the 
following sources. 

Aguinaldo said: I he Chinese who supported the Philippine revolution 

are many and those who directly joined the ranks of soldiers are also numerous. ” r 

I he Philippine Revolutionary Records (PRR) microfilm reel no. 79 noted 
that the Chinese were considered by the Pilipino revolutionists as their allies in the 
common fight for freed omP 8 

Burguete mentioned that “in looking for the roots of the Philippine revo- 
lution, the authorities traced it to my Chinos, who were a part of the revolutionary 
movement.” 39 


Among the 13 martyrs of Cavite were Prancisco Osorio, son of the promi- 
nent Chinese meichant. Historian Rafael Guerrero noted: “Calmly, Chino Osorio 
did not weep even up to his execution.” In a box owned by Bonifacio was found a 


692 




•\N(i SI l C.O 1U IN The hthnii ■ ( hinese in the Philippine Revolution 

picture of L. Osorio (brother of Francisco Osorio). Although other sources con- 
sider Osorio as a Chinese mestizo, most state that his father was pure C hinese. Since 
both of his sons were active participants in the revolution, it is not farfetched to 
surmise that the old Chinese Osorio himself would have been directlv a supporter 
or sympathizer of the revolution, especially considering the fact that Osorio was 
accused of buying 230 guns and concealing them in his house.' 10 

° PRR Box Rl 21 (Revolutionary header- 1 899) cites Isidro Iorres’ report 
on a Chinese spy — Wenceslao 1 im — working for the revolutionists. 11 

° PRR reel no. 81 mentions the list of those who were implicated (includ- 
ing those who were captured) among the Filipino revolutionaries. This includes 
160 names of Binondo residents, including the father of President Quirinos wife, 
Cregorio Sy Quia. Aside from these are numerous names of residents from Tondo. 
San Nicolas, and Quiapo. A number of these names are sinicized. Of course, we 
cannot conclude that since the names are sinicized, thev were all Chinese. But 
among these numerous Binondo residents at least, especiallv those with Chinese 
surnames, must be a number of ethnic Chinese.''-' 

• PlxR reel T 2-l, 23 January 1899, mentioned the organization of a regi- 
ment in Binondo." 

PRR reel 209-36, 13 September 1898. reports that ammunition was 
discovered in the Binondo cemeterv." 

hdwm Wildmans book on Agumaldo mentions that "from time to time, 
our police unearthed small native and Chinese shops, where in inconspicuous and 
inaccessible back rooms, bolos were being made and insurgent uniforms manufac- 
tured.”" 

1 RR i cel 33, l into i ui (..ivil dc Pilipinas 'I onto 1 1 C.tirttis cie P.P. I iom i n nsi nos 
sobre la Insurrection dc 1898, states: "A Chinese in Pampanga supplied ammuni- 
tions. Each Mauser had 200 bullets and the others had 100.”'“ 

o There is a house made of stone in Cagayan de Oro called Balay nga Bato. 

1 his house was built by the Chinese, Insik Ygua, from two boatloads of bricks 
shipped from Amoy. During the revolution, a number of Filipino revolutionists 
were killed by the Americans in that house and buried in its backyard. Up to now, 
during All Saints Day, people light candles around the house to commemorate 
their deaths. 4 


Financial Assistance 

Chinese financial contributions to the Philippine revolution were largely solicited 
by General Paua. Money that went through Paua’s hands was recorded meticu- 
lously, and from the names and amounts we can discern the big contributions of 
the Chinese. Other Financial contributions are as follows. 

° John Taylor’s Philippine Insurrection points out: "Voluntary contributions 
from a number of provinces show that the Chinese contributions always come up 
to twice the amount contributed by anybody in the town.” 48 


693 


[ \ \\ mil 1PP 


• In November 1898, Aguinaldo < irdcrcd the 
of public bonds. On 2 bine 1899 . under i’.iu.-. ” ‘ . in \uc\«i 

Caccrcs were urged to buy P 1 00.000 w or r h of n i Line. I aua 

also invited the (Chinese in AJb.iy and ( amarine omnium ! ? *. 8) to the 

revolutionary coffers. ( )n 28 ( )i tober be report \ . O' ' as me special 

emissary in Southern I u/on. be bad personalis so.: ir d *•>' u ° ’itionar\ sot- 
fers P220,000. ’ 


• From 18 May 1800 to 2* < >ctobcr 1800. P.ma » die national 

treasury a staggering 400.000 \le\itan dollar / nd •. rr IColandia 

alone, historical records reveal that tin amount I'aua o. ■ * *’• * |N ^Sn.noo. the 
largest cash sum ever collected bv an author i/ed a* c nr «>: :m< i PP ,,U * Repub- 

lic.”™ 


• b.d wm W 1 Id rn a n w rites I lie ru h ^ bmeciti . 1 a n 1 1 a a i n i c \ c r \ \s here el sc 
in t he island, were urged to gi vc 1 1 uge 1 1 na ru la I contributions to : \ u r e\ ol u t umary 
cause. . . its ft be revolutionary government mam sour i r of i onmbut ion c amc from 
the rich mestizos and the ( hi nese men bants. 

• 1 listorian ( iregorio /.aide ret minted in A ( hmesc ( «eneral m the Philip- 
pine Re vc> I ci t i c > n that in October 1800 . Paua solic ited I OO.t M )0 sil\ c*r dollars and 
was traveling through the Ragay C >ulf toward the I ay abas < oast when be enccnin- 
tered American gunboats which pursued them. I le almost lost Ins life but was for- 
tunately able to maneuver to t be shallow waters near the* banks where he dumped 
all the silver coins. I he A meric an s ceased ilicir pursuit and I ’aua r et 1 1 e\ cd i lie coins 
the next day. 

• In the list of those who gave* monthly contributions t < > the revolutionary 
coffers were unmistakably Cdiinese names: Ian ( ao, lao ( hien, I oa I ico, Ian 
Dianco, Loa-Siengco, Yu-dongco, Lau-( Inchon. ( )tlu r ( hinese sounding names 
in the list were Anguico, ( iuison, ( mason, and (^uioiisjjii who may be* pure C hi- 
nese or at least, mestizos. 


Material Resources 

Supplying material resources needed by the revolutionaries appeared to be the 
more prevalent form of assistance given by the* C .hmese then, lor instance*, C icneral 
Santiago Alvarez s work on the Katipunan recounts that on 26 August 1896, 
aftei Andres Bonifacio led the Katipun eros to signal the start of the revolution 
in Balintawak, they moved to Mandaluyong where two ( hinese stores gave them 
two packets of La Insular Cigarettes, two boxes of matches, five cans of sardines 
and five pesos in cash. ” S4 These contributions may have been small blit they* never- 
theless demonstrate that at the very start of the revolution, there were already Cdii- 
nese who sympathized and supported the cause and supplied material resources to 
the I ilipino revolutionaries. Let us look at other forms of ( dii nese support. 

• I he Philippine Revolutionary Records show that the ( Chinese supplied ma- 
terial resources in Angeles, Malolos, Tayug in Pangasinan, ( 'atmon in C 'ebu, I locos. 


694 


\N\. Ml c\ lie') BON The Ethnic Chinese in the Philippi tie Revolution 


Vigan, San Fernando in Pampanga, Samar, Iloilo, Masbate, Iba in Zambales, lar- 
lac, Aplit in Pampanga, La Union, Calumpit in Bulacan, among others. Aside from 
cash, the C hinese contributed rice, oil, salt, dried pork, carabao meat and other 
food; otherwise, they helped solicit gunpowder, matches, pen and paper, clothing, 
hats, and medicine. Some helped transport the goods of the revolutionaries. In fact, 
some Chinese were even sent bv Antonio Luna to cut dried leather and bake galle- 
ttis tor the revolutionarv armvT 

° The photograph of larlacs revolutionarv hero, Francisco Makabulos, 
shows a man ol unmistakable of Chinese descent. There are numerous references 
to Chinese helping to provide the larlac revolutionists with their needs. Paua him- 
self also assisted Makabulos in fighting General Monet s army in Mount Kamansi 
during the tumultuous days of September and October 1897. There was also a 
Captain Mariano Tim, Makabulos military commander in Dagupan, whose be- 
ing of Chinese descent must have enabled him to solicit supplies from the Chi- 

So 

nese. 

• Rafael Guerrero writes: " The Chinos have supplied the separatists with 
falsified stamps and seals of the government. The separatists have much to thank 
the Chinos.”' The underground manufacture of' government paraphernalia was 
apparently uncovered when a Chinese warehouse was raided. 

1 he C .hi nese support and contribution to the cause of the Philippine revolu- 
tion can also be seen in the pronouncements and documents of' the Philippine 
revolutionary government itself. 

° Maiiano bias, secietai\ of the treasury, m a letter sent to the governor of 
I locos Stir on 3 January 1 899, writes: "Considering that the Chinese in the Coun- 
try pay various contributions, especially the capitation tax, bv which act thev are 
assimilated with the natives of the country, a circumstance which excludes them 
from the obligation of requesting authority to exercise anv industry, provided thev 
pav the propel license. 1 he letter ordered that the Chinese be exempted from 
paying a wai tax required of other foreigners in order to conduct business. 

• A lettei tiom Juan Quesada on 1 1 March 1899 to the provincial governor 
of Pangasinan and some local government officials says: "Bv order of the Honor- 
able President, you will see that the Chinese residing in the towns under your com- 
mand who have sympathized [j>/V] with our cause and continue making contribu- 
tions for the needs of the war, shall not be annoyed by our brothers and that they 
be defended from the aggressions of an unjust character of which they are the ob- 
ject. 

Support from Chinese Revolutionaries Overseas 

Under government policy during the Philippine revolution, the Chinese in the 
Philippines were actually all Chinese citizens, subjects of the Manchu (Qing dy- 
nasty) government of China. Hence, at this point, a look at the Chinese peoples 
(in China) connection to the Philippine revolution is appropriate and necessary. 

69' S 


i m mu irn 


This will highlight the close ties between iwn : 
persecution, abuses, and tlie irnperiaiisf 
ported and crnpathi/cd with one another tar 
through historical times. 

In the early part of this paper, we tie sc nbr. : the tie Ip 
cause of Philippine revolution In the c rhn: ( hm< 

called hua cjiaos or overseas ( hinese. I he to ».*. :r 
other “overseas (Chinese — ( hinese outside the Ph:.ipp r 
revolution. 

Here, we draw heavily from the work of Beijing I ni 
Nanjing who wrote on I he Philippines struggle tor imipeiu. 
nese people. ' (All the quotations be loss were tr.mslated trom t 
nese.) 


»rn suffered from 
s mutualh sup- 
. • •mnuMi destiny 

• p< » r t gis en to the 
i ppi lies. v. ho arc 
- r eiat u »ns of the 
h the Philippine 

h i st < »r lan. /.hou 
u e and the C hi- 
he or iginal C hi- 


• Liang Chi-chao, one of the famous leaders and kt \ rnoseisof nu scll-rt- 
newal movement (sometimes also known as the reform or renaissaiue iiuncmcnt) 
in China, in his article on “America, the Philippines. I ngkmds battles and their 
relation to China points out: 


I he Philippines, in evicting the Spaniards .md fighting t iu \ met k an %. 
is the vanguard in the struggle for independence m Am * I he <>t the* 

Philippines will also help us, the vellow race, in <>ur fight anti put fe.u in the 
hearts of the* white race. I he incumbent President has relations with ( hina 
(Agu maldo s maternal grand mot her i s a f h i nese ) . Among his m 1 1 1 1 a t \ of tic ers 
are many Chinese also. Philippine* independence is watched closeh by 
the C hinese* because its influence on ( Inna will he great. Philippine Indc* 
pendence can help China in its hid for independence. ( hit relat tons ate- inter 
connected/' 1 


* In June 1898, Philippine representative to Japan, Mariano Ponce', met 
Chinas leader, Sun Yat-sen, in Yokohama, and requested him to help the Philip- 
pine revolutionists acquire military arms. Sun agreed and helped procure’ two ship- 
ments of arms. I he first shipment was in Julv 1899 hut the vessel Xonulnkt hit 
some reefs off the Zhejiang province and sank. I he second procurement was in 
January 1900, but due to the intervention of the governments of Japan and the 
United States, the shipment was not able to leave Japan. Sun also agreed with Ponce 
to send some members of his revolutionary party to the Philippines to help in the 
stru ggl e against the American invading army. After the Philippines gained its inde- 
pendence, they agreed, that the Philippines would help China in its own struggle. 
When the Philippine revolution failed, Sun changed his strategy and concentrated 
on succeeding in Chinas own struggle for independence so that they could help 
the Philippines to achieve hers later. He said: “ I here’s no first or last in this big 
stru ggl e - Our party decided to establish its revolutionary army and pursue its own 


696 


\Ni . M I «x i «0 BON / he h'thnic ( 'hints? in the Philippine Revolution 


task. \\ hen we succeed in our objective, then we can also look into the cause of 
Philippine independence. 

° 1 he C hinese revolutionary paper, Min Ptio> published in Japan, printed a 

picture of Philippine President 1 milio Aguinaldo in its ninth issue in October 
l c )06. Another paper published in Yokohama, the Xin Min Cong Pao , in its eighth 
issue in U)()d called Aguinaldo "A great man in contemporary times.' Liang Chi 
C hao in his treatise on "\ low to annihilate a country'' said: “The Philippines, our 
brothers from the same continent and race, struggled with the white men twice 
already without losing hope in their defeats. 1 look towards the south [the Philip- 
pines 1 and go down on my hands and knees [prostrate mvselt] to kowtow to 
them. 1 his is high tribute indeed from a Chinese reformist who envied the Fili- 
pinos for their courage in bat tl ins; two bis; powers. 

° Au Ji-jia, in his article, “ The Independence of the Philippine Islands," 

savs: 


Alas, looking at the Philippines, we have a lot to learn and gain. We 
should closely observe and watch it. First, the Philippines is such a small coun- 
try but can become independent and oust the United States. China is big so it 
should also achieve its independence, continue the spirit of struggle without 
fear of death, without bowing down to the strong, not afraid of outsiders nor 
the enemies. Secondly, the Philippines has a small population, but they could 
fight for 1 reedom, even fight the C titled States. China has a bii; population and 
can also fight for freedom, let people have freedom of thought, freedom of 
speech, spark the spirit of nation-building, help the country, reform politics. If 
ever\' citizen has thoughts about his country's political future, then there will 
be survival even in the face of death; victory in the face of defeat. . . China is big 
but is afraid of the small while the Philippines is small but fighting the big. The 
[fighting] spiiits of these two people are as disparate as heaven and earth, lhe 
people of out country must therefore not despair, quickly follow the Philip- 
pines to achieve victory.*”' 

1 he authoi earnestly exhorted the Chinese people to use the Filipinos as a model 
in struggling foi independence and freedom. 

° Anothei Chinese revolutionary, Zhang Bing-lin, in his “A treatise on five 
nothings, wines: lhe archvillain McKinley [referring to U.S. President 

McKinley), using his own tactic, on the pretext of extending help to the Philip- 
pines is actually bent on extending territory, such actions must be condemned and 
cannot be forgiven. 1 he author castigated the United States for its shameful and 
imperialistic designs on the Philippines in the guise of aiding the country/ 0 

o After the ship Nonubiki , which was carrying the shipment of arms pro- 
cured by Dr. Sun in support of the Philippine revolutionaries, sank in July 1899 
after hitting some reefs, the Philippine representative in Hong Kong, Galiciano 


697 


im mn ii'i'iNj 


Apacible, was so disheartened r hat he wanted r<> ^ 1 hmesc revolu- 

tionary leader ( Jicn Shao-hai earn r*th ad*, i-'ed m::. 

If is not so much advcrsit ic* fh.if r T i < u . * ». - •' 

ever seeing the day of vie tor v I lov. an v<mi .n 
In wanting to die. von seek onlv . <mi own f* ‘ 
hveryone has to suffer death hut dc.«th * <n » • 

or liglitcr than a goose leather Ym v. h«» • 1 « * ri,,r n • 
how about the hundred r Iiousands of -.our '»nir.i«! 
of battle, braving the cannons and y unfire • * »nr * •• n 
the survival of the Philippines itself do n«>t !«>«»*• at ir 
ciously for the sake of vour counrrs. 

After Apacible heard this touching admuniimn. he was cru < >t i r aged and ^ t >n tinned 
to call on the hi I i pi no pat riot s in I long Kong f < > help plot 1 i < »v. t he\ o»uLI holp ill 
the cause of the Philippine revolution. 

• After tlie st niggle for independent e from the l m t ed Vans t a i led . a num- 
ber of Filipino patriots fled to I long Kong. Xiamen. <u Shanghai. I he anti \mcri- 
can Filipino playwright juan Abaci reportedly esc aped u > Xiamen m 1 1 >2N and died 
in a village there on 24 I December 1942. 

• It is also worth mentioning that Agumaldo, as head <>t the rc\ olutionarv 
government, gave Sun Y 100,000 f r > r Ins expenses. Aguinaldo also expressed the 
desire to help initiate (chinas armed struggle* bv sending o\ci some soldiers after 
the Philippines achieved its independence*. Suns uprisings m ( .uang/hou and 
Huizhou received considerable financial assistance* from the Philippines. 

A Shared Destiny 

Historical sources reveal that in 1521, Spain colonized the Philippines because it 
desired to use the Philippines as takeoff point to evangeh/e or ( hrisiiam/c C hina. 
In the same vein, in 1899, when the United States annexed the Philippines, the 
majoi intent was also to use the Philippines as its jumping hoard to penetrate the 
rich China market, invade its territory, and eventuallv concjucr C hina. I his fact is 
most convincingly discussed in Republic or kmpire: American Rcsisttincc to the Phil- 
ippine Wary which revealed that McKinleys final decision to colonize the Philip- 
pines was actually motivated by Ame ricas ambition to conejuer ( hina. 1 ’’ I his 
shows even more clearly how the destinies of the Philippines and C hina have in- 
deed been closely intertwined throughout history. From earlv times, when thcC.hi- 
nese immigrants were forced to leave China because of famine, poverty, and politi- 
cal unrest, and in the Philippines they raised their Philippine-born and I ilipinized 
offspring, I hilippines-China relations indeed were “as close as the lips and the 
teeth, to use a Chinese expression, or “tied together in one umbilical cord, to use 
a Filipino expression. 


i • umt.un 
death 
u midst 
It’d uh 
d it nrc 


698 




\\a i si 1 ,S; i ,0 BON I he hthtiie ( htnese in the Philippine Revolution 

It should also be noted that at the end of the 19th century, when the Philip- 
pines was struggling tor independence from the United States, and China was fully 
occupied with putting down the Boxer Rebellion, both events necessarily involved 
U.S. militarv troops in the bar hast. The United States was faced with the dilemma 
of whether to concentrate its troops in China to put down the Boxer Rebellion, or 
in the Philippines to quell the revolution. 

In mid-lulv of 1900, the United States planned to send 10,000 soldiers to 
China to stifle the Boxer Rebellion, but since the Philippine-Amcrican W ar inten- 
sified, the U.S. was forced to retain its soldiers in the Philippines to combat the 
hilipino revolutionaries. C ommander-in-Chiet of the U.S. Armed forces Ccneral 
Arthur McArthur reported: "It we pull out even just one battalion from the Philip- 
pines, there is grave danger of losing the entire islands. However, the United States 
also recognized the grave importance of putting down the Boxer Rebellion. Hence, 
we decided to pull out part of our Philippine troops to China. But, in earlv Au- 
gust, since the Boxer Rebellion has weakened, the United States need not pull out 
mors* troops from the Philippines." " 

Moreover, on \ July 1901, after Ccneral Arthur McArthur went back to the 
U.S., Major Ccneral Adna R. C hafee, who had taken over, had just returned from 
his tour of dutv in China after routing the Boxer Rebellion. Other American 
soldiers in China also returned to the Philippines. As U.S. Colonel Sexton de- 
scribed it: 


1 he 9th infantry had hut recently returned from the China expedition. 

It had performed signal service there, had taken part in the capture of Tientsin 
and had been among the first to rush the walls of the Imperial l emi t of Peking. 

With the cessation of the Boxer activities in China, it had returned to the Phil- 
ippines and had been scattered in small garrisons throughout the islands. 

Captain lavlor, who compiled the five-volume Philippine Insurrection against 
the United Strife** was also part of the military contingent sent bv the U.S. to quell 
the Boxer Rebellion. 1 le was sent to the Philippines to gather military intelligence 
documents. 1 he above coincidences point to one of many historical conun- 
drums — d the United States had pulled out a bigger contingent of soldiers from 
the Philippines to be sent to China, would the Philippine revolutionaries have suc- 
ceeded in the Philippine-Amcrican War? 

Conclusion 

During the entire period of the Philippine revolution, the Chinese all over the 
country were also adversely affected and, like the Filipinos, also suffered great dam- 
age and personal losses. Some were killed; businesses were attacked, looted, or com- 
pletely ruined. Some were forced by the government to transport its military sup- 
plies. At the same time, anti-Chinese racist policies, orders, and rules made life 


699 


!H! I'HII I fTI N ! 


hi \i m ii< v.i » m ?• 1 

miserable for the Chinese. There were ( .hinese who nist have re- 

mained conservative, apolitical, neutral, anti wnrkn! on.. :< protc. • themselves. 
There were also some who escaped from ihcuphcav.il r<» H<*i k<*: «*: ( hitu. All 

of these are normal occurrences in revolution. ir. strir/ > secondary. 

We do not need to hide or highlight them, hut t he t r nth v. - t h. at me t lu I ilipinos. 
the ethnic Chinese paid a heavv pric e during stn Ii periods «»: un:. r 
The C Chinese, who came to the Philippines l< m >ku::’ < m. n >r 
ter their lives, suffered, as the I ilipinos suffered unde r colom.i mm < oturarv to 
certain perceptions that as a people, the ( hmese v. on Li rather d< u i leh .u i ept t heir 
fates, no matter how untenable, the ethnic < hmese had then moments of daunt- 
less defiance. One hundred years ago. in the countrv s struggles against three cen- 
turies of Spanish colonialism, the- Chinese, together with their I ilipmo brothers* 
also gave a bit of their strengt h, also suffered, and also shed r hen Blood feu the revo- 
lutionary cause. The red color for braver v in the Philippine flag lias some drops of 
ethnic Chinese blood in it. 


Notes 

1 . Antonio Ian, The Chinese Mestizos and the hormation of the filtpnn \atnmalsty (Ma- 
nila: Kaisa Para Sa Kaunlaran, Inc., .Monograph p 2 I Bm work was also 

published earlier by the University of die Philippines Asian < enter as ( ) t e t istanal Pa- 
per No. I (). 

2. Articles that touched on the C Chinese in the Philippine revolution iik lude that of An- 
tonio Ians work on the Chinese mestizos (see note 1 ). and the works of ( iregorio 
Xaide, Luis Oery, Xhou Nanjing, and Xheng Bingshan on ( icner.il lose Ignacio Paua 
among others. A Chinese General in the Philippine Pero/ution: lose hnon to l\tua [this 
monograph contains the three articles on ( iener.il |ose Ignacio Paua two in 1 nglish 
hy Cregorio /aide and Luis I )ery, and one in ( hmese written jointlv In /.lion 
Nanjing and Zheng Bingshan (Manila: Kaisa Para Sa Kaunlaran, Inc., 19S9), Ss pp. 

I lenceforth cited as Paua Monograph. 

3 . See Vi n cc n t Y. G. Sh i h , 7 he Ini ping I deo log y ( S e at tie: Universitv of Washington Press, 

1967), 352 pp. 

J. Milagros C. Guerrero, “Ihe Chinese in the Philippines, 1 570 1 ^70“ and Rafael 
Bernal, I he Chinese Colony in Manila, 1 570- 1 770 in I el ix A I foil so, ec I. I he Chi- 
nese in the Philippines, 1 570- 1 770 (Vol. L Manila: Solid., ridad Publishing House, 
1966), pp. ] 5-66. 

5. Ming Annals, vol. 323, translated hy Lr. Matthew Chen, ( ).P. in helix Alfonso, ecL, 
ibid. Also see Charles J. McCarthy, S.J., “The I ligh Price of Prejudice, " in McCarthy 

ed., Philippine- Chinese I ntegration (Manila: Pagkakaisa sa Pag-unlad, Inc., 1971), pp. 
83-102. 

6. McCarthy, S.J., I he Slaughter of the Sanglcys in 1639,“ in McCar lived., ibid., pp. 
103-112. 

7. Felix Alfonso, op. cit. 


700 


\Ni . si l v\ l » O BON / he Pthnte ( hitiese in the Philippine Revolution 


8. Oi | i.m Scn^. ed., Historical Ream! of Big Brents Outside Chinn ( in Chinese) citing 
the Mav 1 S c )q issue ot the St*tr Piper. 

9. Blair and Robert son. I he Philippine Is Linds. 7*/9 S- /<S9<S (Cleveland: Arthur Clark 
( o. . 1 903 ) , \ ol. SO. p. i t. 

10. I uis l Vrv ■, op. c it .. l\ittu .Monograph . p. 21. 

1 1 . Rafael C ahaltin l ondres, / ire> and Memoirs — Sons of the Philippine Revolution (.Ma- 
nila: National lederation ot 1 ilipino Teachers. 1023). pp. 6 and 8. 

12. 1 an, op. eit.. p. 2. 

1 3. Tan. op. sit., p. 1 0. 


It. I sha Mahajani, Philippine Rationalism: External Challenge and Filipino Response, In 66- 
Pht 6 (l niversit\ of (.Queensland Tress, 19""*1), p. 36. Also cited in Tan, op. cit., p. 13. 
IS. John Schumacher, S.J., l he Propaganda Movement. ISSO- /iS’95 (Manila: Solidaridad 
Tuhlishing 1 louse, 10 '3), pp. 1S-2S. also cited in Tan, sip. eit., pp. 13-14. 

10 . Blair and Robertson, op. cit.. Yol. S2, pp. 64-65; quoted in Tan, op. cit., p.12. 

1 John Roger M. lavlor. Philippine Insurrection against the Cnited States. S Yols., 

Eugenio 1 ope/ Philippine 1 listory Series (Pasay City: Eugenio l ope/ houndation. 


18 . 

10 . 

20 . 

21 . 


In- 


24 


27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 


33 


10 1 3 ), \ ol. 1 . pp. 3 1 -33. 

1 raneis St. C lair, Phe Ratipunan. ( Tip, Amigos del Pais Palacio 2S8, Manila, 1902) 
i e publish*, d (Manila: Soler Publishing Corp., 1991), p. 33. 

Kisaido Burguete, /.</ Cuerra en Pilipinas: Menwrias de l r n Herido (Barcelona: Casa 
Atonal Maueei Mallorca, 1902), p. 4 19. 

Roman Ongpin: Philanthropist in Pilipinas in History, Yol. 11, pp. 63-64. 

\\ illiam 1 haddeus Sexton, Soldier in the Philippines — A History of' the Insurrection 
(Washington: 1 he Infantry Journal, 1944), p. 34 S. 

Memoirs of Hi. 1 j 0 \alen/.uela in Minutes of the Katipunan » (Manila: National 
Historical Institute, IONS), p. 1(H). 

^ mas x Cl ter, Pilipinas por Pspaha (Barcelona: Centro Editorial del 
Alberto Martin, 180^), p. 48 ; also Ian, op. cit., pp. 12-13. 

_(i. Isagani Medina, C hinese Mestizos and Ethnic Chinese in Cavite during the Philip- 
pine hit ion, paper presentee! at the National Conference on The Ethnic Chi- 
nese as I ili| inos he lei at the l niversity ot the Philippines, 10-1 1 November 1995. 
St. C 'lair, op. cit., p. qq 

Medina, op. cit., anel Jaime Veneracion, “ The Ethnic Chinese in the urbanization of 
Bulacan, [see footnote nos. 24-26]. 

Reverter, op. cit., p. 4# 

I ana Monogiaph (Manila: Raisa Para Sa Kaunlaran, Inc., 1989), 53 pp. 

Philippine Revolutionary Records (PRR) Microfilm Reel 32, document 526/8 cited 
bv Tuis Oery, Paua Monograph, ibid., p. 34. 

Tin Vuan Mm, l he Contributions of the Overseas Chinese in Developing the Philip- 
pines in \ong C dieng Tong, eel. 1 935 Philippine-Chinese Yearbook (Shanghai: Shang- 
hai Society, 1935), p. 17. 

Marion Wilcox, ed., Harper's History of the War in the Philippines (New York: Harper 
and Bros., 1900), p. 365. Cited in Dery, op. cit., p. 23. 


701 


34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 
36. 
40. 


41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 


46. 

47. 


48. 

49. 

50. 

5). 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 


57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 


Philippine Starueeh I 

Reverter, op. c it p *8 

( lolden Anniversary Soiti rnn /' * " ■ 

(Singapore: 1 9 * 

Reverter, op. tit p M2 

RRR, reel no. Manila 

Burguetc, op. t it p. M5 

Rafael Ciuerrero ( ronnti dr hi Hurmi <t< < 

1 H ( Jh ( Bare elona I 't i f » 1 1 ' J i < r and «!.«•• : ' : 1 

ahlv 1 897), pp 2~0 and 2 a 2 h » ' • i a i 

C Cavite, Kahirup Magnet nr 199 Rhilippue Ro*’ 
and 24. 

RRR, Box RI 2 revolutionary l< «d< r 

RRR Microfilm reels nos. HI 2 1 and 29 ,f }( • 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

I'xlwin Wildman, Agumaldo: \ Narrate-' *»f 1 \:i>. ■ * n 

War Laicyclopedia l )iret tory of the Philippine B< » ton • ,r? :,, R 1 


' \ ;*!£*/ A <W. 


IS 95- 

• ’ date .in prob* 
f Spanish Rule in 

pp IS l o. 20 


in t or ne)o s /Vr- 

( O . 1 9 () 1 ). pp. 


50-69. 

RRR, reel 55. 

I he Brick I lot lse of I nsi k Vgua in I )e I \ 1 a t \ i *. torn Streets, in I t a r u i s^ » > l \ nit t no. 
S.J.ed., Ihe Local Historical Sources of \ortlu rti dtndimio ( aga\an tie ( ho. \.i\ki 
U niversity, 1995), Ran 1 1 : ( iagavan and I let I muons, p I 9 
Taylor, op. cit., Vok II, pp. 2 1 2-2 1 V 
Ibid., p. 478. 

RRR reel 32, document 526/8 cited m I )erv, Puna 3 lonogr,ij>h. op. tit., p 5 a. /aide, 
Pau a Monograph, op. cit., p. 11. 
hd win Wildman, op. cit. 

Paua Monograph, op. cit., pp. 1 1-12, also Iavlor, Vol. III. p. “sS 1 RIR I 50. letter 
book, original in Spanish. 

RRR, reel no. 93. 

Santiago V. Alvarez, I he Katipunan and the Revolution Memoir \ of a ( tenera! (Qu- 
ezon City: Ateneo I )e Manila University Rress, 1992), p. 22. 

I hilippinc Revolutionary Records from various provinces. 

Tino L. Dizon, Francisco Makabulos y Soli man A Piographinil Study of a Revolution - 
ary Hero ( Jar lac: larlac State University', (.enter for larLujueno Studies, 1999), pp. 
70-7 1 . Also see Appendix II for Chinese donations in larlac and I )agupan. 
Ciuerrero, op. cit., p. 286. 

Taylor, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 581 citing RRR T-30, letter book, original in Spanish. 
Taylor, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 771 citing RRR 1 157 no. 3, original in Spanish. 

Zhou Nanjing, I he Rhilippines’ Struggle for Independence and the Chinese 
I eople, in ( io Bon Juan, ed., I he Philippines and the Pthnie ( ihinese — U orhs of Zhou 
Nanjing (Manila: Kaisa Rara Sa Kaunlaran, Inc., 1993), in Chinese, pp. 33-46. 


702 


\Nc .Ml M .O IU >N I'he Irhme ( hmese in the Philippine Revolution 


1 iang C lu Jiao, \merica, the Philippines, 1 upland s Battles and the Relations with 
C hina, in Qtng- L: /P> ( 'ompilation, Yol. 1Y. cited in /hou, ibid., p. 3N 
Peng / \ you. Hiaon of the Revolution (C commercial Press, 1936), Yol. -t. pp. 80-91, 
cited in /hou. ibid., p. 3(o. \lso cited in C arlos Quirinos “Or. Sun Vat Sen and the 
Philippine Revolution, hookien limes ) earhook, PH\\ pp. 26™’-268. 

Mm I\u >, Yokohama. C October l9()(o, no. 9; Xin Min (long l\w, Sth issue, 1902; Liang 
C hi C ho. New 1 realise on 1 low to Annihilate a C ountry,'' No. u, Qing- ) 7 Pao Com - 
fuLttton. \ol. \ 11. all cited in /hou, ibid., p. 3~. 

An h jia, 1 he Ind ependeiwe ot the Philippine Islands, Qing-Yi Pao Compilation, 
\ol. 1\, cited in /hou. ibid., p. 3~*. 

/hang Bing lin, I treatise on hire Xothings . /hangs 1 ibrarv C collection No. 3, pp. 
*3 I I. cited in /hou, ibid., p. 3“*. 

Sun Nat Sen, \in-hai Revolution, Wo. 1, pp. I 08-109, cited in /.hou, ibid., p. 38. 
Arscnio Manuel, Philippine Historical limits , No. 1, p. t. cited in Zhou, ibid., p. 38. 

1 eng Zi > on, cop. c it .. \ col. Ill, pp. 31 32, \ col. 1\ . p. 82, cited in Zhou, cop. c i t . . p. 36. 
Panic 1 B. Schiimer, Republic or hmpire: American Resistance to the Philippine War 
(C ambridge: Schenkman Publishing C 'o., 19“*2), 298 pp. 

Zhou, cop. eit., p. 3s. 

ani ^ haddeus Sexton, Soldier in the Philippines — A History of tin' Insurrec- 
(t °n { ^ '^hmgion; l he Infantry Icournal, RMu), pp. 229-2 M). 
l.iylor. op. cit., Yol. ] Inuoductum. 







THE MUSLIMS 
AND THE REVOLUTION 


✓ 


Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


Samuel K. Tan 

National Historical Institute, Manila, Philippines 


to 


T he focus of this essay is the state of resistance in Sulu from 18 

1910, using the concept '‘revolutionary inertia as a framevvor o am > ' 

By adopting this idea I have also taken the position expressed more speci 
the following premises or historical observations. 

1. While the Sulu armed struggle had its origin in the ration e o a g 
Sama aspirations, it was really a part of the greater struggle of t le a ^ it * i 0 . . ^ 

enous inhabitants) of the archipelago against foreign intrusion an 
and, therefore, related in this sense to the underlying causes o t le P 

2. While, however, it shared in essence the motive force of the Philippine 
revolution, nonetheless, it had never been governed by any of the political processes 
of the Katipunan or its successor after the death of Andres om acio. 

3. Consequently, what ultimately became the pattern of armed struggle 
marked by an increasing necessity for compromise with co oma ism, may e at 
tributed to the structural changes of the 19th century and the changing fortunes of 

Sulu society. . . , rr„ „„ 

This essay attempts, first, to explain the foregoing position as a takeoff to an 

analysis of largely untapped primary sources of indigenous origin known co ec- 
tively as the Jawi documents or locally as the surat sug. But the analysis will be put 
in the context of changing realities during the transition from Spanish to Ameri- 
can rule. 


707 


r hi r-f f rt jr-f'P.' p's 


Premises of Struggle 


It is clear from both colonial and indigenous '"im rs th.it thre . ermines or '*> of 
revolutionary struggle in the archipelago were m.ukr*: ’ • < « tnam independent 

revolts of ethnic groups against colonial rw> I venru.u:.. as the imp.ui of colonial 
oppression increased and widened, as a rr .u. - <>{ impr«>vemem m communication 
and technology, the fundamental rationale of iniliprmms aimed mugglcs began ti> 
emerge, especially in the Katipunan revolt of 1 H‘H, m whu h a national ideology of 

revolutionary struggle was beginning to be c ryxtaili/ed in tfie literature of the I ro* 

paganda Movement 11880-1892; and the resolution . Ixprcxscd by 

no less than the Aguinaldo revolutionary government m I.V'-c and IS' 1 **, the Mus- 
lim armed struggle has its roots in the same causes that brought about the' non- 
Muslim uprisings in the archipelago. I he motive Imcc seas lose tor the ancient 
liberties” jealously cherished by all indigenous peoples, \\ nlmut exception, the 
various ethnic groups always responded violent!, to am external threats to their 
liberties and rights or to ret rca t to the inaccessible lulls or cliffs of the- h i n ter hinds. 
TheTausug-Sama word for rhis ancient freedom is similar in mean- 


ing to the hagai og kalayaan. 

But while the Muslim struggle shared the same lose for freedom as those in 
the Revolution of 1896 in Luzon and the Visas. is. it was never a part of the 
Katipunan structure and system. I his was clear from the failure of the Aguinaldo 
government to even get a reply from the sultan of Sulu to an appeal for alliance in 
1899. Two flaws in Aguinaldo’s perception, typical, to a certain extent, of those 
exposed to Spanish colonial influences, were implied by the sultan’s silence. 

1. The Aguinaldo government assumed incorrectly that the Sulu sultanate 
represented the Muslim south. It failed to recognize that even in the Muslim com- 
munity, the independence of the dattiships and ethnic groups was respected, 
notwithstanding their commonalities in Islam. Aguinaldo’s letter of 19 January 
1899, although flattering to the sultan of Sulu, was not accurate as it ignored other 
Muslim potentates in Mindanao. 

2. The tenor of Baldomero Aguinaldo’s letter of 3 I May I 899, in behalf of 
the revolutionary government, to the sultan of Ma ran gas was reflective of the erro- 
neous premise of Spanish-influenced political thinking that the Muslims were sub- 
jects and inferior to the Hispano-Christian sector. ’ The letter assumed that the 
sultan was subordinate to the leadership of the revolution and needed help from 
the revolutionary government to resist American threat. Asking the sultan to re- 
port his plans to the revolutionary government was presumptuous. It was sugges- 
tive of either a lack of real knowledge of Muslim history and culture or a residual 
display of colonial prejudice against Islam acquired from catechetical education. 

3. The logical step taken by Sultan Jamalul Kiram II was a practical approach 
to the problem of politico-military conflict which, from earlier experience, could 
not be met by the usual 7'ausug traditional method of warfare without staggering 
losses and costs. 3 It could only be dealt with by the resort to compromise without 


708 


I AN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


humiliating surrender of sovereignty and personal dignity. Whether or not the sul- 
tan succeeded in this strategy of political survival is what the surat sug analysis 
hopes to unveil. Since the surat represents the only significant source of native per- 
ception of colonial rule, the fundamental value of the materials cannot be easily 
ignored. From the surat sug. Stilus continuing struggle against colonialism can be 
categorized according to the social level of responses; the kasultanan , the kadatuan , 
the kahadjian , the kabanuwahan , and the karaayatan. 1 his categorization will be 
treated in more detail in the latter part of this essay. 

Briefly, the surat sug refers to the corpus of documents, mostly correspon- 
dences, of the leaders and people of Sulu from the sultan down to the ambarayat. 
1 hev were written or scribed in the ancient Arabic-based script called Jawi . In 
other words, the surat can be read bv anyone who knows how to read Arabic, but 
only a Iausug or Sama, as the case may be, can understand what is read. It is, there- 
fore, Arabic in form, but indigenous in substance. Available are about -00 of the 
surat , including 22 in tnagiandanaon kirnn . 1 hese are briefly described and classi- 
fied in my An Annotated Bibliography of Jawi Materials of the Muslim South ( 1 ) )6). 
But only representative samples will be used in this essay, which, in a sense, is just 
an introductory part of a larger study being done on the “Unmaking of the Sulu 
Sultanate, 1899-1936.” 

Contextual Realities 

1 hus, the issue to be dealt with is: What does the Jawi reveal about the state of the 
Sulu armed struggle between two colonial regimes? Was it just the tail-end of t ic 
once great and long revolutionary activity? Io answer this query, it is necessary to 
briefly look at the realities in Sulu at the close of Spanish rule beginning h° m a 
1 890. At this time, politico-military events took a radical turn against t le Spams i 
grip after long and relatively successful divide-and-rule relations with Suu 
1890) through which Spain effectively built the process toward not on \ t e. u 
lishment of Spanish forts in Sulu (Jolo — 1880, Siasi 1882, Tataan 1 a 
Bongao — 1882), but also toward the diplomatic recognition of Spams i so\ei 
eignty and interests over the territory of the Sulu sultanate. Onh Nort oi 
was not included in the resulting Spanish-Anglo-German I rotoco o 

1 883 which defined the extent of Spanish sovereignty. 

By 1890, the diplomatic leverage of Sulu in the conflicting t ii usts o uro 
pean interests in the area was lost. Sulu could no longer manipulate t e n\a ne: o 
western powers. She had, in fact, become vulnerable to a more uni lec pressure 
from the west. The weakening of Stilus diplomatic position was accompame > 
successful Spanish intrigues beginning with the proclamation ^atu F () 

rasid of Palawan as sultan of Sulu after the death of Sultan Barraru in in • 

Continued support of Spanish forces and annuities kept Sultan Harun on t ie 
throne for a while, but gradually faded away by 1890 as Amiiul Kiiam e pt is 
position and armed resistance to Spanish intervention became increasing!) potent. 


709 


THf. PHII im'.'! Pi von I K e, .V.: > Hi J‘ ‘ % - 


On 16 December 1893, Sultan Martin 'sometimes called N.irr.isid in documents 
and seals) resigned as sultan after the departure or ( ,<>vrm<>r |uan \rolas ot Sulu. 
Arolas had been his consistent military bac ker in Ins eft* »r r i<» ent< >rc e bis authority 
among the kadatuan. Aided bv his astute mother. P.mgiv.m Irulii lamila. Amirul 
Kiram finally brought a majority of the rLitu behind his armed resistance and as- 
sumed the throne v/ith the title JamaJul Kiram II. Me was subsequent l\ recognized 
by the Spanish government as Sultan Martin faded into hisrorv in his Palawan 
home. 

It was clear to Sultan Kiram, after a decade of armed st ruggle. that w hat came 
out of the Spanish successful inroad into t he internal af fairs < >t Stilu w as a seriously 
fragmented or divided sultanate no longer capable of bringing all the recalcitrants 
under the central authority of the sultan without outside politico military help. 
The Spanish success in bringing the rLitu and leaders of Parang. I uuk, I ati, and 
Patikul into Sultan Haruns battle against Kiram s forces eventually led to the po- 
litical bifurcation of the sultanate between what historian ( esar \lajul called the 
Northern Alliance under the Aliuddin- Kalbi- Julkarnain triumvirate in Patikul, 
and the Southern Alliance led by the Kirarns of Mainlining. It was this political 
dichotomy that would shape the political cult ure, conflict, and real it ies during the 
reign of Sultan Jamalul Kiram II from 1893 to 193b. The surat documents 
provide the insight into this dynamic period of conflict and compromise. I low did 
Sulu respond to the new realities? What attitude and steps were taken bv the sul- 
tanate and the people? The answer is: the struggle com inued, but the method had 
changed. 

The twist in the method of Sulus struggle was influenced bv the profound 
changes during the transition from Spanish to American rule. The structural 
changes in the emerging colonial system were based on the American liberal demo- 
cratic approach to the “Moro Problem backed up by a superior military force and 
technology/ This approach would become obvious in the politics of the Bates 
Treaty, first to be concluded between the United States and Sulu after Spain ceded 
the Philippines to the United States in the Treaty of Paris on 10 December 1898. 

Politics of the Bates Treaty (1899-1904) 

The conclusion of the treaty in August 1899 was predicated upon the American 
acquisition of sovereignty over the Philippines. 10 However, the Muslims' refusal to 
recognize this right in relation to the Sulu Islands was not without justification, 
and the subsequent effort to enforce the American claim was naturally expected. 
Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the validity of the Spanish cession of the Sulu 
archipelago or even the entire Philippine Islands for that matter in order to under- 
stand the Muslim reaction to American military rule in Sulu from 1899 to 1913. 

In the Treaty of Paris, Spain ceded the entire Philippines to the United States 
for $20 million. But the Filipinos and, more so, the Muslims could not accept the 
validity of this transaction. T he cream of the Filipino leaders at that time — Emilio 


710 


1 AN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


Aguinaldo, Felipe Agoncillo, Antonio Luna, and Apolinario Mabini — took signifi- 
cant steps to prevent the application of the treaty. Felipe Agoncillo exerted diplo- 
matic efforts in Paris and Washington, to no avail. 11 Aguinaldo issued a proclama- 
tion on 5 January 1899 which established the Philippine republic and, in effect, 
sought to nullify American efforts to establish sovereignty through a "policy of be- 
nevolent assimilation. He also tried to solicit the assistance of the Sulu Muslims 
in a letter to the sultan on 19 January 1899 which readsT 

The Philippine Republic has resolved to respect absolutely the belief and 
traditions of each island in order to establish on solid basis the bonds of frater- 
nal unity demanded by our mutual interests. 

1 therefore in the name of all the Filipinos very gladly offer to the pow- 
erful Sultan of Jolo and to all brothers who acknowledge his great authority, 
the highest assurance of friendship, consideration and esteem. 

But the American modus vivendi with Spain to deny the Filipinos their light to free- 
dom naturally resulted in the outbreak of armed hostilities on 4 February 1899, 
which lasted until the end of Muslim resistance in 1913. Whether displayed b\ the 
Christian Filipinos in Luzon and the Visayas or by the Muslims in Mindanao and 
Sulu, the reaction against American rule was natural and spontaneous. 1 he validity 
of Spains turning over the Philippines to the United States may be impugned on 
the following grounds. 

1. By 14 August 1898, the insurgent forces under General Aguinaldo a 
already recovered Luzon, and crippled and confined the Spanish resistance within 
the walled city of Manila or Intramuros. 1 he Filipinos, however, could not e ff e( j t 
the ultimate conquest of the city because of the objection of their all) who ha a 
ready ignored and betrayed its “friends-in-arms in a secret agreement with tie 
Spaniards. Thus, on the basis of physical possession, the Philippines had passe 
back to Filipino hands and Spain lost whatever sovereignty she might have exer 
cised over it. How then could Spain have rightfully ceded the islands to America in 
Paris? 

2. The Americans could not claim sovereignty by conquest since the \ ictor) 
of Admiral George Dewey was merely confined to the defeat and destruction o 
the Spanish Navy in Manila Bay and not to the entire Philippine archipelago, or 
could they claim right on the basis of purchase since Spain no longer had t le so\ 
ereignty to effect legal transaction by the time of the negotiations in Palis. 

3. In relation to the Sulu archipelago, the claim appears even more piepos 
terous. If Spain had no more right by 14 August 1898 over the Philippines, ow 
could she have the right to cede the same to America and to include t e u u s 
lands over which she never exercised sovereignty except what Victor Hui e> ca e 
a “sovereignty by proclamation”? 13 Expectedly, the Muslims of Sulu, out o t 
love for freedom and defense of their legitimate prerogatives, could not remain un 
touched and undisturbed by the attempts to get their teiritory without at east 


711 


n u mu imsi p 


fighting and dying for it. Since the Ameru.ms un<- if urminai ' 4 • enforce their 
claim over Sulu, the sultanate and the po >ple demon st rate ear l\ and open I v their 

hostility to American rule. I he only factor winch presented the immediate imple- 
mentation of an iron polk y in relation n> the M« »:« > e t lie s ar i« »us armed dis- 
turbances in I Ai/.on and the \ isayas which were c an set I bs the same sentiments and 
grievances against American interests in the r .and \ 

I he Americans, therefore* saw the need f<>r neutralizing the sluslims of Sulu 
th rough a t reaty wit h r I k* sultan, w 1 1 h provisions ■»« * a m h : : ;i i< > 1 s and v « »n f 1 u t mg t hat 
the Muslims would find it difficult to understand the complex question c»f sover- 
eignty. Wittingly, some sort of recognition <>f the sultans pr lives was stipu- 

lated, but at the same time the wording gave Arner ic a sornei lung t< » hang on to later 
for the enforcement of her claim. I bus, the Mates I teats v..is m realm an attempt 
to fill the gaps in the Paris document in relation to the Sulu Islands 

Before the Bates negotiation, the Spa tush mfluetu es ami jurisdu non did not 
extend beyond the limits of the garrison and no material reform or progress actu- 
ally reached the Muslim community r h rough that channel As .1 matter of fact. the 
Spanish garrisons, which were located at Join, Siasi, Bong. 10. and lata an had to be 
always on the alert because of continued Muslim hostilitv. I n fort unatel v, Spain 
made no effort to educate the inhabitants and her governors proposed no adequate 
measure relevant to the needs of the people and acceptable to their wav of* think- 
ing. I he Muslims suspected that the Spanish g< >vern men t or some of its recognized 
agents were strongly inclined to destroy their unity, and, consequently, thev never 
had complete confidence in them. They repulsed every attempt to establish close 
relations between them and the Christians of the- Spanish garrison. No tax or trib- 
ute was collected from the Muslims and their territory was exempted from the op- 
eration of the laws of the Philippines. Little also had been accomplished in public 
works. I here was no road system and all transportation was absolutely dependent 
on trails which were frequent areas of ambuscades. I here was practically no public 
school system. J hus, the Americans found out for themselves in the summer of 
1899 that the military occupation of Mindanao and Sulu was not a matter to be 
taken lightly because “the Spaniards had left the country in much the same condi- 
tion as they had found it.” 15 

Moreover, in 1899, about 50,000 American soldiers were engaged in sup- 
pressing the Filipinos in Luzon and the Visayas. While these operations were in 
progress, the isolated Spanish garrisons in Mindanao and Sulu suffered horribly 
not only from lack of essential supplies, but also from the increasing activities of 
Muslims who vowed to kill the last Spaniard they found in the archipelago. The 
posts of Bongao and Siasi were quickly abandoned and the remaining Spanish 
forces in the south were concentrated at the ports of Zamboanga and Jolo to wait 
for the long-expected relief from the American armv. I he critical condition 
prompted General Rios to request immediate relief. Accordingly, Major General 
E. Otis wrote Admiral George Dewey on 14 May 1899 from Manila, relaying to 
him the request of General Rios. Subsequently, ( )tis, by C icneral Order No. 28 of 

712 


. 


I AN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


IS May, directed the dispatch of the 23rd Infontrv to Jolo, which consisted of 19 
officers, two surgeons, a chaplain, and 733 enlisted men. On 19 May, Captain 
Pratt and the force arrived at Jolo. The port of Zamboanga was also blockaded and 
later occupied bv the United States Navy on 16 November 1899 before it was taken 
over by three companies of the 23rd Infantry from Jolo. 11 ' 

Shortly after the occupation of Jolo, the Americans garrisoned Siasi and 
Bongao. Siasi was placed under the command of Captain 1 homas R. Havson and 
Bongao under Captain Sidney A. Cloman. During this period, expeditions were 
sent to the outlying islands on account of the frequent disturbances to peace and 
order bv “rovinc brieands. 

During the period of disorder. General John C. Bates of the United States 
Volunteers was sent to negotiate an agreement with the sultan of Sulu for the pro- 
tection of American interests in the southern islands. On 3 July 1899, he recei\ed 
a directive from Otis which reads in part: 1 

In compliance with orders this day issued directing you to proceed to the 
Jolo Archipelago, there to execute specific instructions to he communicated b\ 
thede partment commander. 

bv reference to these memoranda you will perceive that in vour discus- 
sions with the Sultan and his datus the question of sovereignty will be forced to 
the front. 

The United States will accept the obligations of Spain the agreement of 
1 878 in the matter of money annuities, and in proof ot sincerity you will ofhr 
as a present to the Sultan and datus $10,000 Mexican, with which you w ill be 
supplied 

However, Otis modified his instructions on 1 1 July due to the disco\er\ of 
the sultan’s agreements with Spain in the Manila archives, which pointed to tie 
variable policies Spain employed in dealing with the Muslims. Otis felt that some 
kind of flexibility should be used in the negotiation, with emphasis on getting con 
trol over the revenue of the archipelago which the sultan had been collecting, but 
the sultan should be made to understand that America intended to use the revenue 
for educational and material improvements of Sulu. |s On 12 July, Bates sai e 
from Manila on the Churruca , accompanied by Captain S.E. Smiley of the 1 5r 
Infantry and a doctor. 1 '’ He stopped at Iloilo to unload some cargo and airi\e at 
Jolo on 16 July. Immed iately, he sent word to the sultan in Maimbung, but the 
latter could not meet him as requested. By a special courier on 18 July, he sent a 
letter to the sultan requesting for a conference. I he next day, the sultan set t ^ a 
jah Muda (heir apparent) with full powers to negotiate together with Ha ji utu 
and Habib Mura. Conferences were held on 24 and 25 July with the three ran in^ 
Muslim leaders, but the progress of the negotiation was hindered by the tumore 
illness of the sultan and the difficulty in communication. During the conference, 
the sultan’s requests were presented: 20 (a) that he be allowed to fly his own flag sit e 


713 


i m mu ipf'i 


by side with the American Hap, b that the \mcr: <> should 1 h* lim- 
ited to the island of and that he be alb »v. cd t<» *»:i:miic c * »Hcc ting (he du- 

ties in the Siiln ports cspcciallv in the port <»t ^la i as pro. uini for in the Spanish 
Treaty of 1878. Bates argued on the basis of \r t u le I of i he t re.it \ of I S N v. herein 
the sultan recognized Spanish sovereign! v < r. er Sulu arwi a. o \rtule Hiss huh pro- 
vided for t he Spanish occupation of the |o|o an h i pe apo I le c\ en t a. led attention 
to some facts in Montero y \ idal s Hi 'nr 1*2 dr Li psr.ttr * */;./:./*, > *noh. 2 ff;rt* 2 tu 2 en 
Mindanao , Jolo, y Borneo (Madrid. I 888* and the Pmtoc nl of 1 88 S between Spain* 
Great Britain, and ( icrmanv concern i ng t he st at us « »f t hr s uh i I s. and s t >n the other 
hand, Hadji Butu presented Arri< le III of the 18 8 agreement which referred onl\ 
to the Jolo island and not the ent ire arc hi pel ago thus limiting, m ef fee t . the Span- 
ish occupation to the island of Job). Moreover, tin* occupation of Sj.isi and lawi- 
I awi by the Spanish forces in 1887 was done w a t h the proper perm ism on and con- 
sent of the sultan. 21 

On the disagreement over the collection of duties, the Sulu representatives 
quoted Article IV of the 1878 treaty whic h gave to the- sultan the right to collect 
duties in the different ports of Sulu. In fact, he ac mails collected dunes at 
Maimbung in 1879 and 1880 as did Ins father. I lowevcr. he did not collect in the 
Siasi port since it was made a free port by mutual agreement with Spam. Later, 
the sultan resumed collection after the evacuation of the island by the Spaniards. 

I hcrcforc, the Americans could not use* the* treaty to extend t licit occupation be- 
yond the island of Job). I lowcver. Bates contended that: 

Although Spain had agreed in the treaty of 18 8 t<> . 1 1 1 < > the* Sultan to 
collect duties at poi n t not occupied by Spa i n , she had c b > sc cl tlu* ports and had 
thus prevented the collection of duties except at points whic h she occ upied. 

On 26 July, General Bates presented his proposal of I I articles which were 
translated into Tausug. He also conferred with Datti Kalbi and his powerful 
younger brother, Datu Julkanain, on 30 July when the latter told Bates, “If the time 
ever comes when we cannot agree and settle things by reason, man to man, then let 
us fight it out,” to which Bates, through an interpreter, replied, “Tell him that 
when we fight, we fight to win.” 24 On 31 July, Bates held a conference with the 
sultans representatives from Siasi, Hadji Musin and I ladji Usman. The two gave 
information on the importance of Siasi to the sultanate which provoked Bates to 
plan a trip to the island. On I August, he sailed on the gunboat Manila and passed 
by Maimbung to pick up Hadji Musin and Hadji Usman. At the island of Lugus, 
Lieutenant James R. Reeves went ashore unarmed to fetch the headman, Datu 
Amir Husin. 25 In Siasi, Bates surveyed the town and saw the sultans emblem Hy- 
ing over the island and 20 of his Sikh guards. But he failed to meet Datu Ptiyo, the 
ea man °f the island and a member of the sultans council. In the brief visit, he 
found out that the Chinese residents wanted the Americans to occupy the island to 
protect their economic interests. 


714 


I AN Revolutionary Inertia in Su/u 


On the same day that Bates was in Siasi, the Charleston under Captain 
Pigman arrived in Jolo to give necessary assistance to Bates in the negotiation. 26 
After the trip to Siasi, Bates paid a brief visit to the island of Basilan on 3, 4, and 5 
August to see Datu Kalun (Pedro Cuevas) and Commander Very of the Castine, 
hut the latter was unfortunately not on the island. On 3 August, Bates received a 
letter from the sultan through a special courier. Shell Saleh, which contained his 
proposals tor agreement but which could not be accepted by the American govern- 
ment.' For some time, the prospect of agreement seemed dim, but optimism came 
with the employment of effective methods to coerce the sultan to come to terms. 
Bates used the English method of playing on the jealousies of the different chief- 
tains and the display of the phonograph. According to Captain Smiley who was 
present during the conferences, the success of the negotiation was due to the ma- 
chine which showed the greatness and power of the American nation. He said in a 
later interview in Chicago: “Then we let him (Sultan) marvel at the phonograph 
and that seemed to settle the business. :s Thus, on 9 August 1899, the Muslims 
presented to the American government the following document, signed by the sul- 
tan and 1 9 of his headmen, which was not acceptable to the Americans. 1 he reason 
was the obvious lack of a provision on the recognition of American sovereignty in 
Sulu. 2<) On 12 August, the Rajah Muda, Hadji Butu, and Habib Mura arrived in 
Jolo with a letter from the sultan. The conference which followed discussed both 
the Bates Proposal and the sultan's, resulting in an agreement of 13 articles. On 
14 August, Bates went to Maimbung on the steamer Charleston , together with 
Datu Kalbi and his followers. He called first on Pangiyan Inchi Jamila and then 
proceeded to the Sultan’s residence where a conference was held with the sultan, 
Datu Kalbi, Habib Mura, and Hadji Butu. 1 he next day, the sultan, together with 
Hadji Butu and some followers, boarded the steamer for another conference. Here 
the sultan was shown the 8-inch gun of the Charleston : 31 The Bates Proposal was 
finally agreed upon with modifications to suit the sultan. Agreement was also 
reached to make immediate arrangement to bring the sultan and the leading datus 
to Jolo for the formal signing of the treaty. Before leaving the steamer, the 8-inch 
gun of the Charleston thundered a salute for the Sulu potentate. 

Realizing that his mission was virtually accomplished. Bates took a trip on 
1 6 August to Bongao where he anchored about a mile from a ruined Spanish fort. 32 
A launch was sent to fetch Datu Tantung, the headman ofTawi-Tawi, and together 
with Datu Aliuddin of Tungpatung and Datu Sakilan of Sicubung, a conference 
was held to press for American sovereignty over the southern islands. Bates pre- 
sented each of the datu a flag and a present as his token of friendship and goodwill. 
On his arrival in Jolo, 19 August, he held a last conference with Datu Kalbi and 
Datu Julkanain at the residence of the former to finalize everything for the cer- 
emony the next day. On 20 August, the Sultan, the Rajah Muda, Hadji Butu, and 
about 100 followers arrived in Jolo and received honors by troops. Then followed 
the signing of the documents by General John C. Bates in behalf of the United 
States. Hadji Butu signed for the Rajah Muda, and Datu Attik, Datu Kalbi, and 


713 


[fit PHII I WIN I Hi '• * »I 


Datu Julkanain all signed in the native ript : \ .< • r ,v,,r ::ir sl, B- ,n rc ‘ 

quested Bates to include Datu Soog and I >atw I Hkul.i <>n me ns Iim. but Bates 

could not make the commitment. I lr pfomi'.ni : ’■ ue matter to 

the authorities concerned. Before parting Bates r.-r a i. .< ai ■: a present tor Datu 
Puyo of Sia.si who could not at ten < I ami svhom the : a. vs an t c > . . o sec But failed. 

However, the treaty could not take cite t until did . approved i>v the governor-gen* 
era I of the Philippines and finally by the Senate and pre .idem of the l mted States. 
Secretary of War Llihu Root duly notified < .eneral < >tis on ‘ Btobcr 1 N l >*> that 
the agreement was confirmed and approved hv the president sutne. t to the action 
of Congress, adding: 4 ’ 

With the understanding and reservation v.hnh should he distnu ilv 
communicated to the Sultan of Sulu that tins agreement is not to in deemed 

inany way to authorize r,r give consent <>l die l mted State-. t<> the existence of 

slavery in the Sulu Archipelago, wine I. is mad. impossible hv the thirteenth 
amendment to r lie* constitution of the • mted States 

An understanding also was reached regarding changes in the agreement. It was 
agreed that any change desired may he done only hv mutual consent of the two 
parties in the agreement. 

In assessing the success of the negotiations. Bates did not overlook to give- 
credit partly to the help of I xl ward Schuck as the interprete r and the support of 
Captain Pigman of the Charleston. l ieutenant ( iomm.mder N.i/co of the Manila, 
Commander Very of the Castine, and, later, ( iommaiuler Sperry of the Yorhtoum 
Concluded on 20 August 1899, the Bates Treaty contained the kind of com- 
promise the sultan and the Ruma Bichara entered into with Barely any knowledge 
of American diplomatic principles and thrusts, without any anticipation of the 
effects that would arise from the ambiguities of negotiation, translation, and inter- 
pretation of agreements. The sultanate was practically dependent on the rudimen- 
tary role of negotiators-interpreters like Charles and Julius Schuck, I labib Mura, 
and Wazir Hadji Butu Abdul Baqui. Language proficiency was wanting in the pro- 
cess. I he same was true of the Spanish negotiations where the sultanate was com- 
pletely dependent on Alejo Alvarez as interpreter for Sulu relations and Pedro 
Ortueste for Maguindanao. As it turned out, the Lnglish version of the treaty un- 
doubtedly established the validity of American sovereignty over the sultanate and 
lts territory. 36 But the Jawi (Tausug) version merely recognized American su- 
premacy and power as well as American commercial rights and personal freedom 
vis-a-vis the rights and privileges of the sultan. Both American legal principles and 
procedures and Sulu customary laws were recognized. In effect, the sultan and 
Se w h° signed the treaty could not have contemplated the surrender of their 
sovereignty. As the acknowledged “shadow of Allah on earth, the sultan derived 
authority from Heaven. 47 He was chosen from among peers and heirs on the 
asis of lineage to the Prophet Muhammad through the first sultan, Shariful Hasim 


716 


TAN Revo lu tio rum' Inertia in Sulu 


Abubakar, whose title of "Sharif '' established the "Prophetic" line. Therefore, the 
sultan theoretically could not have yielded sovereignty to the United States or its 
representatives. That this was what was in the mind of the sultan and the people 
may be seen in the various surat written in response to the imposition of American 
rule. 

The enforcement of the Bates Treaty provisions, pursuant to American inter- 
est, inevitably clashed with the sultans perception, understanding, and expecta- 
tion. 1 he conflicting views became obvious as American campaigns against a series 
of armed disturbances between 1900 and 1904, especially the Hassan Uprising, 
portrayed the sultan and his government as incompetent and impotent to suppress 
the disturbances. The sultans explanation of his role and efforts, which assumed 
the nature of a protest to American indictment, was ignored. On the instruction of 
War Secretary William Howard Taft, the treaty was unilaterally abrogated on -1 
March 1 904. 1 he abrogation caught the sultan by surprise. He was not prepared 
to immediately deal with such an action which completely ignored what he 
thought was his basic right to royal respect and treatment. He was unaware that 
from the American perspective there was really no sultan or sultanate to speak of 
except a symbolic mechanism that might prove useful for American colonial pur- 
poses. Several surat of the sultan and his lahasya (kin) reveal the dilemma and inner 
pain of how to react to a real threat to the political survival of the sultanate and the 
dignity of the sultan. Fhe threat was so real and the struggle to hold on to some- 
thing so desperate that the crisis could only be equated with the sultans loss of 
military capacity to react decisively. The analysis of the surat brings out this fact. 

The Surat Kasultanan 

In an undated surat, V) but undoubtedly in the early years of American rule, 
Pangiyan Inchi Jamila, Mother of the Sultan, referred to the governor of Sulu as in 
taymunghud (the friend), acknowledging his letter to the sultan who was visiting 
the kapuhpuan (islands) as part of his royal duties. Nothing in the letter suggests 
the loss of sovereignty. In another surat , 40 the Pangiyan wrote her taymanghud \ the 
governor, acknowledging the receipt of the panji (flag, presumably the American 
Stars and Stripes), affirming the mutual friendship between them, and appealing 
for American tabang (assistance) in the resolution of bunuh (local conflicts) involv- 
ing Panglima Indanan and Hadji Tahil. Similarly, Pangiyan Putri Sahira, another 
of the sultans lahasiya , sent a suraf u to her two brothers, as well as to the governor 
wishing him well in his return to the United States. Again, reference to American 
sovereignty was absent. Only the expression of pagtaymanghud (brotherly relation) 
was obvious, not as an indication of subservience but of respect, and dominated 
the tone of all the surat. In 1899, another surat of Pangiyan Inchi Jamila to her 
taymanghud , the American governor, inquired about the case of an am baray at (sub- 
let) named Akil and his children whom she wanted to get into custody pending 
the resolution of his case. In a follow-up surat to the American captain (Leo 


717 


mi mu jpM 


Fcbigcr) in charge, the pangtyan suggested the need n> r.cci wnn t He suh.in. who 
was expected to arrive from his trip to the islands I lie tone of :M c letter ss.us clearly 
to hold on to the sultans right to hr involved in the resolution of the Akil v.isc. 
Then, in the same vein, another prominent !■•«!>. 1 .uiuk.i I Hsang (hung 

Piandao, daughter of Sultan B.ir.iruddtn II. addrr .scd a ur.:t :.> t .overnor Hugh 
Scott of Sulu bearing the d.itc I i hari hulan lumadii a. . ! 1 ’<•.'> asking 

for the return of her five girls 1 servants and expressing fan h m t nc g«*\ ernor u horn 
she called Apoh Ko ( grandfathers Nothing m the ur.tr as in the others, suggested 
the recognition of American sovereignty < bily pr«>i«uuni aitimutum of brother- 
hood and mutual friendship was obvious. In other words. in ail the > u of the 
sultan’s immediate kin, there was no acceptance of die loss oi the sultans renal sta- 
tus, rights, and privileges even if the capacity to enfore c the same hail been grcatlv 
eroded. I he fact that the members of the royal family aksas s c at i icd their long des- 
ignations showed the deliberate effort to bold <>n to their ancient prerogatives. 

But a more significant illustration of the sultanate resistance to the emascula- 
tion of its character and function is found m the numerous sur.it of the sultan him- 
self. One of these is chosen fora detailed analysis of the Sulu art of compromise in 
the face of continuing effort by colonialism to destroy the foundation of resistance 
to colonial rule. It is one of the longest, consisting of 92 /ain lines. I he surat was 
written in “bulan Shawwal 1323 (1905)” after the abrogation of the Bates Treaty. 

I he entire sural and its translation and transliteration arc appended hereto for ref- 
erence. Referring in the first line to himself as Pacluka Mahasati Xlaulana Sultan 
Ha Sug Hadji Muhammad Jamalul Kiram,” the sultan necessarily brought back 
memories of the ancient origin of his person and authonts. I aduka M.ihasan 
echoed the pre-Islamic basis of the sultanate just as "Maulana” suggested the 
sultans lofty enlightenment a.s ruler of his iittibarayat (subjects). Sultan clearly 
brought in the Islamic character of his authority as emanating from Clod and “ha 
Sug defined the territoriality of his authority and rights. I I.ulji indicated that he 

had gone to Mecca and, together with “Muhammad," established his identity in 
the line of the Prophet of Islam from whence the temporal line of his lineage be- 
gan. The adoption of “Jamalul Kiram II” as his official title put him directly in the 
historical line of succession to the sultanate started by Jamalul Kiram I in 1823. 

With emotions and nostalgia anchored on centuries of the ancient tradition 
converging on his mind, the sultan began to talk about the subject of his surat to 
th z“ma’as” the governor, a term which means “elder” as in a kinship relation. First, 
he acknowledged the receipt of the $500 sent to him as payment of annuities since 
the abrogation of the Bates Treaty in 1904. According to the surat , he received the 
amount on 17 January 1905 from Governor Hugh Scott of Sulu whom he also 
called maas . He felt reassured of the American pledge to support his status as 
sultan on the same royal level as other native rulers of similar rank under 
whitemens government” ( parinta ). But toward the middle of the long surat , he 
explained that his acceptance of the money, as if to erase any idea of recognizing 
American sovereignty, was a gesture of respect and honor to the governor as clearly 


718 


TAN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


shown in "karnah paglagguh ko kaymu." He proceeded in rhe rest of* the letter to 
present the nature and state of his freedom, rights, and privileges vis-a-vis the sup- 
port given to him by the American government as earlier stipulated in the Bates 
Treaty; the inalienable and ancient character of his position as he courteously re- 
ferred to the governor in "ma’as in GubnuP (the governor, my elder) and in "raayat 
in nanjari Panghuh sin katan Pilipinas” which means "the duly established head of 
all the Philippines.” The latter phrase may be misconstrued to mean a recognition 
of* American sovereignty in Sulu unless understood in the context of* the rest of* the 


surat. What was recognized by the sultan was the supremacy of* the American gov- 
ernment throughout the archipelago without necessarily giving up his Sultan ha 
Sug (Sultanate in Sulu) on the basis of* the ancient tradition. Following are specific 
points in the surat which clarify the sultans sovereignty, power, and freedom. 

1. On the question of the American government, the lausug text reads: 
“. . .karnah in parinta ku laud-gimba, kalibut sin lupah Sug, mabut pa kapuh-puan 
niya, kamu na sa mga ma’as ku, bangsa Amerikan, amu in kimaput ibarat... . The 
almost literal translation is: "...inasmuch as my government on sea and land, 
throughout the land of Sulu up to its outlying islands, you, my elders of the Ameri- 
can nation, have now controlled. ' In other words, the sultan used the loss of con- 
trol over his own territory to the Americans as the reason for his dependence on 
American subsidy to keep the dignity of his person and position according to an 
cient tradition. The loss of the economic basis of his government is captured in a 
graphic description of his liberty and privileges. 

2. On the issue of freedom, the Tausug text reads: 


Manu-manuk in aku ini, liyu’un na sin mga ma as ku pa laum sin 
kungan, malaingkan lullun na aku miyagad, karnah mahukaw aku sumaggah 
kaniyu mga ma’as ko, aula aula tumagad aku sin butang niyu kakuh ha 
mapatut, na in manuk-manuk ha laum kungan, unu-unu nasadja in kipakaun 
kaniya, lunlun kumaun, karnah way na kausahan niya, kabuhianan, 
malaingkan bang dih kansuban, makatingug iban magpaspad, n ^ a hg > 
mikidugang supaya siya kansuban, biyah na hayan in hal ku ha biy , 
unu-unu na sadja in pag-agi niyu kakuh lunlun aku magad, malaing & 

aku butangan niyu mga sin ma’as sin dih mapatut kakuh, lumugus 
wa, makatu, sampay ma’aun in kasi-lasa niyu kakuh. 

The passage may be rendered in English as follows. 

I am now like a bird in a cage, imprisoned by you, my elders. In fact, I 
always have to obey inasmuch as I do not wish to go against you, my elders, 
certainly waiting for your judgment on me according to justice. The bird in a 
cage eats whatever it is given since it has no other means of survival. If it is not 
satisfied, it chirps and flutters seeking for more in order to be satisfied. 1 hat is 
the state in which I am. Now, anything you want me to do, I have always to 


719 


I f if f'MI! IWT. 


follow. Bur if you. m> cldrrv irn|><*^ 
steadfastly to von. rm elder* srr.isnru: r * 
upon me. 


v. ill lament, appeal 
: r ^ . »mjuvMon rots 


» i i i i ; , J r »ff in irt rd !h Iovs ol political and 

111 the passage, the sultan viewed Ins sad star* m.iiK 

I,,, ,1- ff-l ifnl t< > the loss «»f lihcm in oerv sense, 
economic means to survive, as chrre tl% rci.it c«i i 

, ■ ■ n i i .1 ,, I , ( >r r i s cinlx ulicil in the I.uisug-Sama 

It IS, in effect, a longing for the me tent nocr ‘ 

r / / / i i ..... I,,- lii mni to liic nr mu' mu frcclv without 

concept of kahmayahan which in.is D< liKcnro 

.. . . i . t i v- . I, ... , litlishcii I st-»i in popul.it discourse, 

limitation except wh;it Mother N.iturc fi is cst. •mi'-oro , 

r i / / / . .. d IS the- oim wold tll.lt fits the full 

limaya, from whence kaltniayahan is dtti'« 

r u r « 'fi I irlw'Kirriff) I l .IL’C 1^ IM IIlUl gCUOllS lit* 

meaning of free. I he analogy of t lie Dim m i -«g l * 

erature and usually carries the strong emoiion.il ipi'' 'I ' ’! Idut.ui* 

chains," for "freedom in lrav.nl, wlm I, has never rcvi.l.ilionary 

it i i if, , rfl , . - 1 , r | v ilurinr periods <>l foreign domination 

struggles throughout the world, p.irm ui.iriv 1 • 

• • •i i ,t _ w force ili.n fuelled the uprisings and distur- 

or intrusion. I his was the same motive torn t 

bances in Sulu, as well as in Coral, an. ami U.i ••'■■•ng .he American regime 

despite the introduction of liberal democratic ( ,Mut ( * 1( MSS(, I persona 

dom, especially if accompanied by the loss of digmtv arul nglus. as c car \ expert 
enced and expressed in the sural, always leaves . i residue •>( resistance di.it eepstie 
revolutionary spirit and fervor alive, waiting for the right moment to reemerge as a 
motive force of revolution. After a graphic discourse on freedom, the sultan moved 
on finally to the root of his continuing struggle to hold on to his freedom and dig- 
nity — the ancient heritage he was determined to preseise. 

3. On the issue of the ancient tradition, the smut, after reiterating the sultans 
faith in the justice, concern, and law of his American elders (nut as), has the follow- 
ing passage on the ancient heritage: 


Harnah ubus in pamung niyu kakuh rnga nia as ku, aku da mavan Sul- 
tan ha Sug kapala kumaput sin Agama Islam, na hiyah.iuglnigan ku m ud. 
karnah kaput hindah Apuh ku nagpangkat, na ampa tiaptap in ng.ui Sultan pa 
asibi, malaingkan auti mayan kaparadja an niya, angk.m hipapikil ku mud 
kaniyu iban sa buli-buli pikil, aula subay tu’ud isuel niyu mga mans ku 
pakaisunan in hal ini. 


I hese concluding lines may be translated as follows: 

Since you have finalized your discourse on me, my ciders, I am still the 
Sultan in Sulu holding the authority of Islam which I will really uphold, being 
the authority my ancestors have held through generations as Sultan up to the 
smallest unit where he has always a role to perform. That is why I ask you to 
ponder over in the end, as my elders, to really incorporate in any agreement 
what I have requested. 


720 


1 \N Revolutiotuiry Inertia in Sulu 


By harking, Back to the Islamic foundation ot his authority and prerogatives, 
the sultan reminded the American authorities of the inalienability ot his sover- 
eignty -r/.v that ot the l nited States since in Islam there is no separation ot 
powers as in American liberal democracy. Kverything in Islam is interrelated and 
integrated as a whole. Thus, the efforts ot the American government to weaken his 
political power and reduce his economic means of survival did not destroy the 
foundation ot the sultanate as an institution still entitled to respect and dignity. It 
had only been reduced to a forced dependency by circumstances brought about by 
mcapaciiv to resist American power. As a distinct creation ot Islam, the sultanate 
st i 1 1 remained the government of the Sulu Muslims, entitled to all the rights and 
privileges under Islam. In either words, the sultan still reigned but die! not govern. 
1 his was the essence ot what the sultan tried to underline as he concluded his .attar. 
lo complete the portrait ot Stilus revolutionary inertia, a brief survey ot the other 
social levels of response to colonialism is necessary. 


I be Surat Kadatuan 

1 he kadatuan is a category of leaders consisting mainly ot the data. How die! the 
data react to the enforcement of American sovereignty in Sulu? V hat does the .a/tat 
reveal? for analysis, one typical surat " will be used, out of the 30 scribed bv differ- 
ent data in Sulu. It was written by Datu Muhammad Amilusin of Siasi. It has no 
date, but was probably scribed in the early years of American rule. It consists of 13 
Juwi lines with the seal of the data. Like that of the surat kasaltanan, the data s surat 
refers to a complete designation “Paduka Datu Muhammad Amilusin which su*, 
gc'stcd a conscious effort to bring out the ancient character of the datuship as well 
as its Islamic veneer. “PadukaDatu” suggested the pre-lslamic origin of the 
datuship, just as “Muhammad” underlined identification with the Prophet of Is- 
lam. “Amilusin” is Arabic-derived and is common among Muslim names, n t u 
surat. the ^//addressed the governor in Sulu (ha Sag) as Taymanghud ;;/>sinn ar 
to the way the sultan did in his surat except that Datu Amilusins use o t k t me 
person avoided the direct intimate style of the sultan that could be miscons 
subservience. Phis was true to the personal character of the data w to, i 
r at, was described as the most influential in Mueldas, the o e name e 
though he actually lived in Tapul-Lugus. re- 

in the surat, the data acknowledged the need to inform t ie ^ewe' 
isttu namuh (our understanding) with the American ofheei a l 
Hayson) in Siasi concerning the conflict between the sultan and Julkanam in wh e 
he agreed to be neutral together with his followers, but that ic wou t * 

inform the governor that the other leaders were not following t te government, 
order. In fact, the letter revealed that only the influence of in enmity cou <- stop 
the fighting caused by the effect of the Sultan-Jtilkanain feud. In tic stoat, atu 
Amilusin said in relation to the local armed conflict: 


721 


I Hi 


Pagka si Li nasulut na ' • • ' ' 

kiy.1lauj4.1n in mg.i .igad kakuh f o 
kayman, hang dih durmhil bun il 
imam na, karnali h.i k.imr.1- in • 
lulling niyu kakuh. aula in mi * •* 
kapangbunuh mahapun m alr»a a 


n ’nii! arm* ill 
piiak anak anil 
. a bi\ uniih na. 
ru; aim lahailg- 
nalunava na in 


I he translation of tins tint leaf passage u at. 

Inn smut h a.% f he < onfht t h.ni be en u •• »i • f * • fl I 

di/.cd were my followers I lie I'anghni.i was • rrair.*r ms«»l\iru. 1 ** |K*sos 

1 1 1 ' / k 1 . . .. i > - < i r < 1 l- 1 1 i 1 n «n« j rt f aliat it »n Hcv.illsC 

wirh interest of about SO I allure m go < 

r . , r 1 1, ... .,]•<-.) I hu • tir. fu In mui uiii extend 

of poverty of the victims I had ro g< f in • • tl f 

1 1 . . .. .11 , M . ,,.ir trt (in n» init 1 w in as sufferings 

to me, due to our lac k of re-sou re <• v. 1 1 1 < tu »ui •»* 

l 1 . / . . : , 1 . 1 . r ir rt 1 1 in f lit ifi( iiuhih of WaliHMlas .it 

had ensued from the fighting ssfnt h -tarn o 
six o’clock. 

What is dear from the sura/ is the ..hseme of .ms mfeeme to tlu- recognition 
of American sovereignty except some kind of mum.. I u.ulc. st.t.tdmg to prevent 
local conflicts and contingent on what the Amcru.m ..Hue. m M. . das could offer 
and did not indicate any willingness to give up sue It .me tent he. tt.tge of power. In 
fact, in a surat of the sultan, Dam Am.li.sm was me... .....e el as a pain ... die sultans 

neck. 


The Surat Kahadjian 

Like the kaclatuan , the kahadjian is a level of authority below the sultan consisting 
mainly of all the religious functionaries or leaders in society independent from that 
of the kadatuan. Titles like "Hadji/’ Imam,” and "Sharif" are usually used by the 
persons recognized for their socio-religious roles, lor analysis of the inertia of 
struggle, the suraP of Imam Milan is chosen. It was written in Taustig, but using 
the modern alphabet, not the Jawi. It is chosen because of its clear statement on the 
authority of the sultan and the colonial government. The text reads as follows: 

Ini surat hi Imam Milan mari haCiuhnuf tiantu sin ( iuhnul in bukiin 
bunnal, in tau ku wah makapagsabil, na marayau da tifud, in namaitah kail in 
aku way awam hang mabinasa sin way ngi, ampa in kapiiulasiun dih aku 
makagaus, bat in sultan, Datu nannih m ud, ampa in gairs dih kaingatan 11a a, 
sah kau makatabang iban da kau kapangharapan, Isa t ikau na in sumunug dain 
ha lapal mu, bang kau mabaya, kaimu na in stmuga. 

( I his is the letter of Imam Milan to the ( iovernor. The ( iovernor has 
ascertained what is not true. My people did not run berserk. It has been spread 
around that you said I am ignorant and might suffer for not being had. But I 

722 




TAN Revolutionary Inertia in Su/u 

cannot uphold the treaty because the Sultan is really our sovereign Dam and 
our strength remains unknown tor a while until the need tor help arises, and 
you cannot face us. You will burn trom vour own words, but it you wish, you 
burn your very own.) 

hvidentlv, the surat was a reaction ot the imam (priest) to the government 
report that he was responsible tor the amucks who had given the government cause 
tor concern. 1 he l ausug institution ot armed wartare called magsabil \s sanctified 
by religious ritual in which the local imam plays a vital role. But in the surat the 
imam denied that his people were guilty and, therefore, expressed his inability to 
honor the Bates Treaty. He reiterated his recognition of the sultan as the onb sov- 
ereign among them, telling the governor to burn in his own words. 1 he metaphor 
of anger against a colonial imposition is obviously an indication of the extent of 
religious influence in Stilus struggle. 1 he same sentiment was also found among 
the other local leaders and may be deduced from the surat kabanuwahan. 


The Surat Kabatitucahan 

The kabanuwahan are local leaders below the kadatiuui who perform more or less 
secular or nonreligious functions in Sulu society. 1 hey are identified w ith tarious 
titles such as “Panglima, “Maharadja, Nakib, Ulang Kaya etc. For determin 
ing their response to colonialism, one of the surat in this categoi\ is used. It is t le 
surat of Panglima Indanan, a prominent local leader in Jolo whom the American 
authorities tagged as behind the cattle-rustling in the island. 1 he surat was sen xt 
in 13 Jawi lines bearing the date “adlaw Sabtu 26, l.a20 (Saturday 2 OO. 
carries the name of Imam Shariul. 1 he latter was probably the one w to \\ rote t te 
lines for the Panglima since not every local leader knew how to write in au i. 
the panglima w'as the appointed headman, a designation used b) t ic Amenca 
ernment for local leaders who accepted positions of authority from the colomal 
government as heads of districts into which Sulu was divided during the Moro 
Province (1903-1913). Actually, the designation was in essence similar to tie 
panglima whose appointment in earlier times was done by the su tan. is unction 
was to serve as the sultans representative in one of the five districts to which he was 
kiyawakilan (appointed). Thus, when the panglima assumed the role of headman, 
it created a conflict of loyalty between the sultanate and the colonial government. 
But this was exactly the political problem confronting Sulu society, including the 
sultanate, when American rule was imposed. What does the surat reveal about the 
reaction of the kabanuwahan, which represented the basic unit of Stilus political 
system, to the political dichotomy? 

At the start, Panglima Indanan stated his being “headman sin kapala sin mga 
banua katan kimaput parinta bangsa Amerikan” (tradition) which limited his ju- 
risdiction to only those who accepted American rule. He did not include those who 
resisted. He addressed his surat toTnan Sali, Hadji Butu, and the governor, inform- 


723 


wrier i* 


I he I.iusug 
: in the lutes 
«»f dcu'ion- 
he reference 
ist he incer- 
.,.ered agree - 
lllk.lll polity 
meaning CO 
v tual popular 


•fllnl. CflU 
sf.ifc ami 


, Inch 


f i u 


lie resivieiK e tax w I 
had i >a i) t he hone of 
imaltil Kiram II upon 


mg them of rhe agreerru nr n< 
word used for rhe agreement i 
Ireary. ft suggests tons' mu 
making. Ir would he 
to judicial judgment in two 
preted in relation it# nnitin h 
tnent in contemporary dm m 
declared in relation to |u ri< 
we/ upakkattni. ( ,onsc(|iirfif i - 
response. 

I lie test of rhe agreement v.as in me 

symbolized the s ovcreigruy <>f flic t‘»l*<ni.i 
contention between the- Sp.mish t'«c. < tnm< in md Si: • <n 
the latter’s assumption to the throne in l*‘> '• -W. .h< .nbocm.,1 ..ml con- 

troversial fmnglhnet of P.u.mg li.id |»«h bis so|.|-.,t bebnui fbc entouement ot l« 
cedula “ha | ;I ,' ini kaput l.o b.. C.lingl-.l un l','.,n '•■'*»>... ms imisJutioff 

throughout Parang, starting in fbc ........ I. U I b . la-. ... «!u teas, ahe Kam.ulan. I i* 

panglima planned to impose fines <.n rln.se ssl,.. u fwwd ><• oiu \ as a lesson ioi t u 
recalcitrant Tatisug, to show Ins cornpli.iiK e with \inrn, an p"lu '• ^ betbet or not 
the panglima carried out bis pledge would bet.. me <>b\ioiis as \nu ruan ofiicM 
and confidential commumcation <|uesti<me<l the miegntx <>l i be p.mghma when 
eases of cattle rustling were attributed to bun ... Ins followers m moI.uiou of Ameri- 
can declared law. Hut in the sur<it of the sultan where rctciciues to I'anglim- 1 
Indanan were made, the portrait of the /xinglnu.i w .is that of a man obeibent to the 
sultan and bis will. It seems that the P<ib<nii<ie.il>,ni, wlm h was (be broadest politi- 
cal level of decision-making, was expericiii mg a dilemma in its response to colo- 
nialism and, consequently, resulted in the formation of a political dichotomy 
where both the old and new political processes were held for expediency. What 


the 


cn was the effect of such a dichotomy in Sul 


l 1 S 


P< 


>1 i i k j I c ult tire .uul future? 


Emasculation of the Sultanate 

Wne of the results of American entry into Sulu society w. 
tlHn °f the sultanate and the establishment of liberal dcmo< 
to Wea ken the framework of Sulu society. I he reason for this policy thi 


is the gradual emascula- 
moeratie processes designed 


rust was to 


ensure not only the effective enforcement of American sovereignty, but also to k iy 
,°^ n r he foundation of American colonial interests. The role of the Hates Treaty 
• A 1^0 4) and the Moro Province (1903-1913), which balanced military and 
th •'^ an aS ^ ects °h colonial administration, was decisive in ultimately dealing with 
u 11 problem during the first decade of American ride. Based on the America* 1 
• Pt of separation of powers, the sultanate was gradually deprived of its politb 
authority while at the same time encouraging the independence of the datuship* 
,c had been the main political foundation of the sultanate. But the sociocub 


724 


I AN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


uiral tradition of Sulu society, especially its Islamic features, was allowed to con- 
tinue but subject to the subtle pressure of American liberal education, one of the 
most enduring influences on Sulu society. By the time the Kiram-Carpenter Agree- 
ment was concluded on 22 March 191 S, the sultan had been deprived formally of 
his political authority and a political dichotomy of colonial and traditional leaders 
had been established throughout the Sulu archipelago, controlled by the American 
governor of Sulu in particular and bv the central government in Manila in general. 
In effect, Sulu had finally been integrated politically into the mainstream of the 
national colonial system. 1 he appointment of Wazir Hadji Butu as senator in 1 H 0 
and, subsequently, Sultan Jamalul Kiram 11 in 1934 completed the process of po- 
litical emasculation of the sultanate. But the elaboration of this post- 19 I.*) process 
of political reorientation of Sulu society is a theme for a later essa\. 

Aiding the American political emasculation of the sultanate was the equalh 
important erosion of the economic foundation of the sultanate based on three 
directions. First, the sultans power to collect levies or dues from his domain was 
limited. This was initially enforced by first invoking the Spanish-Sulu understand- 
ing which deprived the sultan of the levies collected in Siasi e\en after the wit i 
drawal of Spanish presence from the area in 1S9S. Second, the sultans agreement 
with the Spanish government was oriented to allow the sultan to continue 
control and share in the pearl business monopoly and the opium tiaele. In t ie ea. 
of the pearling business, which was governed by the sultans paitneis n[. \ t 
the Chinese sector led by Binga Tan, the American authorities liberalized this 
business by allowing the white man to engage in the pearl trade, thus destroying 
the sultans leverage and encouraging a new American-Chincse \ am c [ : 

new situation was lamented by the sultan in one of the 1 h 1 K ca L . 

opium trade, the sultan was also denied his singular partnership NXlt 1 1 
business sector which practically monopolized the trade. By liberahzmg the two 
business concerns, the sultan eventually lost substantia income horn these two 
sources, thus leaving him with only the resources derived from his lands a sou.ee 
that would also be affected by subsequent enforcement of r mu Kan am | o kks 
which inevitably limited the amount of landholdings the suhan cou d possess. 

The effect of this economic erosion of traditional sources, as cxpicssec > 

tan in his sum,, was Co create a client-patron relationship where rite sultans depen- 

i , • I • i- „ j (T( , n <-msirv was the onlv immediate means or 

dence on American subsidies and gene rosin 

survival. This was provided in the Bates Treaty and columned even after the treaty s 
abrogation in I 904. as revealed in the amt. The pathetic appeal ol die sultan lor 
more subsidies to maintain his posture and dignity as sultan ,s an uules ol how 
the culture of dependency had developed in the oncc-proud Sulu sultanate. Hut 
while this situation was true of the sultanate, the opposite was the reality in the 
datuships. American strategy allowed the data to maintain the status quo and, in 
several cases, even helped in the datit s alienation from the sultanate, l'he process to 
weaken the datuship would come later with the establishment of popular educa- 
tion after 1 9 1 6. 


725 


I Ml mil U*F 


It is not difficult to see hov. rhr 
basis of the sultanate would had t<» rh< 
sultan s power and rcsouri cs were redu 
raayat would begin to weaken 


i » j 1 
\ ! 


Skives <>f •>< 

left the suit. ins household or th.it of hi- 

icari laws which prohibited the pr.u ti- ' • 

ment in public works, services. a*nl : "i :n< 

attractive alternatives to the masses Si;;»s< «jii< n 

further cm our .igc-mc til to people from .ill 

f,,r irnpros < tin m m th< solotu.tl bureaucracy. 

I.ist two do .tries of pt ess at American 


>|itual and economic 
mv.fr MipjHirt. /Vs the 
his e . u u ./A/// and 
,unl freedom simply 
r refuge under AniCf- 
»j i unities tor employ* 
Mi.iii v < >nt ml offered 
personal progress 


through modern education gave 
walks of life to find better prospet i 
I his reality would become oIjvioiis in f b< 

rU t What would the future of Sul,, so. ,et> look l.k, the of liberal demo- 
cratic processes inf roduc ed In Antern an t ule \it<tth< < . .il >i . h uu \nun 

presence in Siilu the iransforination of Suiu s... i< . i ... .<',h ,<ntut\ 11 

increasingly be marked by the intensification <>t i... i. ‘ ’ 1 - ' ' ' ■ 1 11 1 * T , 

r I ' / I I I / r f 1 1 urn I is \srll is affiled d I sC U f baiK es b\ C llOSC 

favor m the eyes of the colonial gos c rn m< m a . 

unable to cope with changes in soc iery. I bat t Ik siiiuih»ii .u iii.iIK i uu i.,u 

gleaned from the numerous historic al studies on ^ nurK ‘ m m Sll ^ u 

But what had remained the only refuge of the sultanate and soc icy bom lib- 
eralization and American democratization was Mam. In the soc toe ultural life of 
Sulu society, American policy was not to intet fere mi he pi.u t ic c <>f Islam as stipu 
lated in the Bates Treaty and reaffirmed By the Knam ( -u penter Memorandum of 
22 March 1915. But there was no prohibition nor hindrance to the entr> of <• *" 1S ' 
tian missions, especially Protestants, into Sulu to undertake educational, social, 
economic, or cultural tasks for colonial interests, including the establishment of 
churches. This indirect means of social change helped American colonial rule m 
gradually changing the attitude and direction of Sulu socie ty. 

One of the fundamental changes brought about by American policy and ef- 
forts in Sulu was in the demographic character of Sulu: the influx of Christians, 
Chinese, and other nationalities was noticeably encouraged, thus forming a new 
social class distinct from the Tausug and Sama who constituted the majority of 
the population. This new social class served as the intermediary between the native 
and the colonial levels of Sulu society as American bureaucratic structures and sys- 
tems were set in place by a series of American administrators, especially after the 
establishment of civil government in 1 1 S following the abolition of the Moro 

Province. 

But it does not necessarily mean that the political, economic, and sociocul- 
tuial transformation of Sulu society according to colonial design altogether oblit- 
erated Sulu resistance to colonialism. It simply demonstrated the successful effort 
of American rule to democratize an Islamic society by enforcing without reserva- 
tion the separation of powers as the underlying principle of governance. Since tin- 
dei the same principle Islam was allowed to continue as rhe traditional basis of 


726 


I AN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


Muslim life, except in the exercise of political prerogatives, profound transforma- 
tion also meant that the sultanate, although literally just a political symbol to the 
outside world, was also equally successful in maintaining its traditional role as a 
residue of spiritual-religious dvnamism from which emanated the inertia of 
struggle against colonial rule. For as long as Islam remained the more important 
element in the native tradition, and secularism the basis of colonial rule. Stilus 
revolutionary struggle would continue to resist anv external threat to lausug-Sama 
kain)ia\ahiVi y the “ancient liberty that was as precious to Sulu society as it was to 
all the indigenous inhabitants of the Philippine archipelago. 

Finally, it is important to stress that the shift from the traditional lausug 
dependence on violent armed struggle to a more peaceful, nonviolent resistance 
against a determined and superior militaristic colonial rule, aided b\ a parallel, lib- 
eral democratic program, was the very factor that allowed Sulu society to prese r\ c 
the essence of its tradition. 1 he continuation of the old pattern of snuggle b\ the 
recalcitrants of Sulu society onlv leel to their literal obliteration and the reduction 
of their struggle to protracted and fragmented individual reactions w hieh weic eas- 
ily neutralized. Unfortunately, the spirit and fervor of revolutionary struggle, 
which were expressed vividly and profoundly in at least over 200 surat -of the sul- 
tanate and other sectors, did not lea el to the establishment of a w litten intellectual 
tradition as it did in the revolutionary ferment in Luzon and the \ isa\as. 1 he 
Muslim armed struggle in Sulu, as well as in other areas of the Muslim south, ttoni 
callv did not produce a powerful body of intellectual litciatuie as in the Mice 
hast where Islamic movements were galvanized and mo\cd b\ ideological foicc. 
produced bv a variety of literary works. In brief, Muslim society did not pioc ucc 
the equivalent of Rizal, Jacinto, Mabini, or the reformers whose pen and ideas were 
as powerful, if not more potent, than the bolos of the rc\ olutionists. 1 ic w litten 
instrument used by Jamalul Kiram II known as the Sunit Jan i was not ce\c c \ ee 
into a more powerful linguistic weapon. 1 he Muslim intcllectua s, w mse nati c 
intelligence was equal to their counterparts the rest of the world, lamentably fat ee 
to use their creative potential in the pursuit of their long struggle to preserve an 
protect their “ancient liberty/' their kalimayahan. Why they failed is the focus of 

another study. 


Notes 

1 . John R.M. Taylor, ihe Philippine Insurrection Against the United States (Pasay City: 
Eugenio Lopez Foundation 1971), Volume V, Exhibit 1426 , 1 / 19 / 1899 . 

2. Cited in Cesar A. Majul, The Muslims in the Philippine (Quezon City: University of 
the Philippines, Press, 1973). 

3 The l ausug method of war was based on the belief that it was dishonorable to retreat 
from the enemy, and therefore one’s quality was shown by confronting the enemy 
frontally. Consequently, in the battles with Spanish forces numerous deaths by artil- 
lery and guns were common. 


727 


4 . 

5 . 

6 . 

7 . 

8 . 

9 . 


10. 
1 I. 


12 . 

1 . 3 . 

14 . 

15. 

16. 


17. 

18. 

19. 

20 . 
21 . 
22 .- 


23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30 . 


Hi [-Mil II 


i Mim 


Ucs iikIuJ- 


Jiht.jr', 


*r .i t ' 

//f. 


i |r f . 1 1 1 


r •// i ( >ur/« »n ( if v: t ni* 
.m \liln.ir\ .mil Peaceful 


,* • n- i i fitrr ft»r Integra* 

I hr annorau d f » iMm > r f v? - 1 . 

tivc.ind Development Wl Mhlncand 

1 he do< ur Merit is in f h< . . uh Li ' 

Archives M<M‘ >A I M 1 - ’-5 

Majul. <>p t 1 1 

Ibid. 

Sever.i I of the unit i*m * . 

i r i jj; MitzumiLnumn hntm s " m ‘ * 

See file author s S ///// f n/lrr \rnrm .i 
versify of the Philippines I r ' 

Campaigns. Hereafter S u!u untirr , . ... 

The Mess;, of ‘A .M, M ► ■ " 

January 1 900. . . 

Mtmori.il of t el.,.. A„ ' 

IKW:jIv..iIu-I tl.l.f" Hi.! .1 Ij'HI' 

, . I i I lfl J \\ ( *f run li «>t I( run SMI U 1 the l V fri- 

ary 1899 t|iioied m tl ir spec. 1. of \ ‘J-* ‘ r<1 

ate, Tuesdav, 1 5 June 190.! 

Dean C. Worcester. /hr Rh.l, pp.nr Ra t am! R" r„t New Wk In M.u Mill.tn 
1914), Volume I ., p. 228 

Victor Hurley. Swish of the AV/» 1 New York I I' iVln.-n <\ ( -- l-n ,v 

Najeeb M. Salcel.y, I hr Moo, Rroh/rm 6M.mil. i I'M 6 |> II 
Hurley, op. cit., pp. 162-10 5. 

Ibid., p. 152; also, the lr.tr, of < -eneral I Iwell I < >n- «> .d ( -orge DeueV. 

May 14. 1899 m Marion Wile ox's H.n,.r r\ ! ham y of, hr \\,n thr RhthppnuM New 
York: I larper and Profilers Publishers, 1 ^00 ), |> . ^8 

Ibid., p. 239. 

Ibid. 

Report o( (, eneral John C. Bates and the I npl.sh version of the agreement m “Ap- 
pendix A, in ibid., pp. 403-405. 

Ibid. 

Ibid.* 

Article IV provides: “The’Stiltan shall have the right to collect duties from all foreign 
merchants and ships of whatever nationalism hey m.iv he. m case tluv come to our 
parts; I tut.wci have no rtgh p to collect duties limn 
cupied by the Spanish (iovcrnmcni. 

Wilcox, op. cit., p. 403. 

Ibid. 

Bates Report, ibid., p. 4 04. . „ > ’ ^ • 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 

Ihe Manila limes, 3 March I 90 1 . 

Hurley, op. cit., pp. 153-156. 

Bates Report , Wilcox, op. cit., p. 405. 


them when thev come to parts oc- 


728 


1 AN Revolutionary Inertia in Sulu 


3 1 . Ibid. 

32. Ibid. 

33. Ibid. 

3*». Ibid., p. 2 \ 2 . 

33. Ibid., p. t()3. 

36. Sec Najeeb M. Salecby s Mow Document tor literal translation of the fiausug text of 
the Bates Treatv: also, the authors Sulu l r nden op. cit.. Appendix B. 

3 . Sunit kasultanan 200. 

3S. Report of the Philippine Commission to the president 31 January 1000 (Washington 
n.C'.: Government Printing Office, 1000), Volume 1, p. 64. 

30. Surat Kiisultiinitn No. I. 

40. Sunit Kiisultunitn No. S. 

4 1 . Sunit Kisultiiniin No. 

42. Sunit Kisu/tiiniin No. 2. 

43. Sunit Kisultnniin No. 2-4. 

44. Sunit Kuiiittiiin No. . 

43. Sunit Kiihtuijiiin No. 20. 

46. Sunit Kabiinuwtihan No. 5. 



Reflections on the Philippine 
National Awakening 

The Mom Problematics as a Factor 


Mm i i \ i ; < > . M 


A vision of lustotv is about rnowment « > f j > c < > f > I c and ideas, not 

-Z Xabout li ist one ;i] ji tdgemen t s wh u h .1 1 e n 1 .0 l< t h i < > 1 1 id 1 niiii|uiiM>ti. NX e can- 
M ( n si). ue the thoughts of a people distant in nine and spa*, e without becoming 
aware of certain marked historical c hanges. I he centennial theme the I Mi 1 1 1 ppine 
revolution and beyond projects a historical perspective buefei in memorv hut 
broader in horizon. 

lo the general (piestion. Is it possible to wine a unified hisiorv of the* 1 * 1 1 i - 
pi no people as nat ional cailt tire by writ ing of f t he Mom problemat ic s? I answer ten- 
tatively in the affirmative. 

Abstractions from detail and constructs of historv cannot discard entire 
problems and times that are seen in the pre historv perspective and are consid- 
ered outside national standard of historical selection of what is important or 
unimportant. What I am about to advocate, it is my hope, w ill not merely draw me 
into the war zone of the historians on matters of methodology. I lere, I am more 
interested in a historiography that will include the significance of the Moro 
struggle for self-determination in the concept of halaydati and trios of trajectory 
rather than deflation of positivism or of the substantive philosophy of history. 

On Filipinism and Moroism 

I he significance of the Philippine revolution has ret mac ted to an earlier epochal 
background for the historic establishment of the republic. Of' the period 1 892- 
1898, O.I). Corpuz (1989) says that it was so far the most dynamic six years of 


MAS l't T RA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


Filipino history. Whv this swift pace of events? “Into these few years were com- 
pressed crisis and growth, each a historic step awav from the past and towards a 
new phase of the nations future. 1 

I hat convulsed period known as the Philippine revolution was essentially a 
brief episodic national awakening before the turn of the 19th century. In retrospect, 
the period marked also the climax of Spanish colonization. Philippine historiogra- 
phy has made this the end of an era and the start of a new idea — Filipinism — the 
leit-motif for rewriting Filipino national history as culture. 

Yet no explanation is made of a historiographical problem in the treatment 
of “moroism as a phenomenon submerged in slower currents of national-con- 
sciousness formation. As a historical factor, the Moro problematic relative to na- 
tional awakening of Filipinos covers more than the extension of the total i r \ of our 
colonial history s time span and space. As an organization element in culture en- 
counter, its “geographic time consideration expands beyond the divisions of colo- 
nial geograph v or even modern borders of the 20th-century nation-states. 

" 1 propose to rethink Philippine history in relational terms to the “Moro 
problematics. Fo do this, 1 shall try to present intellectual constiucts in which the 
Moro recognition struggle assumes a significant historical ethos. Social histon, with 
a few exceptions, neglects to examine the expressions of Moio self esteem 
( maratabai) of a communitarian kind. It is a common trait shared by the Maranao- 
lranum-Maguindanao- Tausug ethnic groups of Mindanao which icfcis to an as 
sumed “psychological substance possessed by them. 1 his phenomenon is ex u 
ited in cultural patterns and cultural contradictions that aie miriored in tu con 
temporarv scene. Such a historiography needs a rethinking of histon anc 

disciplines. , ... 

Kenneth Bauzon (1991) draws attention to the inadequacy of a positivist 

viewpoint as a “paradigmatic analysis of nationality-foimation pio^ems 
Philippines. The new analytical tool of research is in itself a majoi contri 
historiography and in assessing the relevance of Islam to nation- mi c in^ unc er 
eral ideas. This intellectual climate, in his own view, has influenced the Christian 
Filipino intelligentsia with respect to the way they defined and founc so uuc 
their “Moro Problem. This discussion of a new approach biings to mine 
Fukuyama (1992), whose work revitalizes the Hegelian historical concept o 
“struggle for recognition" and clears the way to apply a vei v diffeient met it e 

One begins to understand in a comparative light the substance 
Muhammad Iqbals philosophy of “self-actualization. If we look at the conunuin 
of the revolutionary period to the American colonial era, we can account foi t ie 
struggle for national independence and the Moro problematics as the manifesta- 
tions of desire for recognition, arising out of thymos, or spiiitedness. It is pie- 
cisely if we look at the whole scope of historic relocation of legitimacy and the 
transfer of popular sovereignty as historical cycles that we can examine our shared 
experience. When one considers the Philippine revolution an end of the long world 


31 


im mu ivvi'.i hi ■• « »i * 1 1« v'- 

process ( >i re vo 1 1 ir ion ( >f ideas am i • i mod \ « ! r .1 ‘ 

enment, can we then argue that it also <: 

t ion — one that extends to * i i< cur* : 

The hori/on for such .1 one t .1 r : * ' i>r,,r * 

alone in terms of the initiative of t: r c if men or 

range of historical meanings I ilipino so i< t . .m 
constant process of creation 

The Philippine Revolution Restated 

In restating the historical argument of the Philippine :■ o. nion .is an event that 
fulfills the I ilipino struggle for self esteem . tip < |uc a jon 1 » » w h i« : 1 st 'ek new an- 
swers is, I low relevant is the achievement or spirmdru of that resolution to 
specific contemporary needs of Philippine so ( u i\ 

I . There is a need to continue to hcltcrc /// the ri\ runnu ot in Itgt nous < ultural 
heritage to single out points of human aitirtty that nun < t Philippine 

society. 

Ihe revival of interest in the ancients i L thi) \sas first launc lied during the 
Propaganda Movement. This supplied impetus m establishing the- icspec table cul- 
ture of the archipelago and our own people s c apac 1 1 \ f < » t c is il i/at ion be fore colo- 
nial rule. An achievement -oriented cult lire, assumed as sir h. ss as pan of the ‘imag- 
ined times of prosperity which was t he c me ia I clement 111 t he 1 1 1 si < >1 ic a I experience 
of the people to restore human dignity. lose- P. Ki/al ssas himself the exponent of 
what is in our current political thinking passed on as t he* t livmm ic spirit or ‘self- 
esteem.” 

Consciousness of the Past 

I his desire for recognition in the form of asvakening in 11s the consc iousness of 
the past was the reason for Ki/al annotating Morgas Succsos dc Lis Is Lis Pilipinas. It 
was aimed to redeem our own worth as a people. I lu re ss as a bit of decisive histori- 
cism in Ri/al s dedication lo the Filipinos. I he use- of historv for him was not 
much of a departure from the Hegelian historic ist f < > 1 n 1 s of succession of con- 
sciousness. 

Why did Ri/al say that he considered it necessarv to invoke the testimony of 
an illustrious Spaniard (Morga) who directed the destinies of the l ilipinos in the 
beginnings of the new era and witnessed the last moments of out ancient national- 
ity”? John Sch u mac her f I 973 ) notes that Morga was the < > n I \ one among the early 
chroniclers who showed sufficient impartiality to warrant serving as a basis for the 
history of the Filipino past he projected. I he national sentiment went further 
than that consciousness of the past, however. I he theme continued in the series of 

732 


\gc « »l F n light* 

t: . ,1 . ic • »* cmancipa- 

,. i:: .mm u be interpreted 

: .,p:m ai . .niviih »n Rut (he 
t, , us .u turns is limitless, in 


\t \s 1 1 R.\ A ’efleenons on the • Philippine .Wuionnl Awakening 

articles written tor l ,1 Solid, iruhui. In a more futuristic, if not of pragmatic, value 
to critique the “present" was Ri/al's lengthy essay, "Pilipinas dentro de cien aiios. 
In it, he outlines a program of reform that anticipated, at that time, remarkable 
developments of the 20th century. 

\\ hat was "the perspectiveness for Ri/.al that cries out for reasoning? 1 he 
prouressive nature of Ri/alian historicism is implicit in its world-view: that "there 
is an imperceptible and incomprehensible logic at times in historical events. I his 
form of historicism manifests itself in this logic: “It is to be desired that peoples as 
well as governments adjust themselves to it. Perhaps influenced b\ scientific in- 
quire Rizal preceded C Oswald Spenglers organicist method of drawing an analogy 
between society and a biological organism. Relevant to this point is the philosophy 
of history which Rizal, however, tailed to fully develop, for Kazak the 1 hilippines 
was to be transformed as demanded by the course of her historical evolution if 
she was to remain pohticallv united under Spanish rule. 1 he threat of falling into 
the hands of other powers was very real, as Rizal analyzed the unfolding e\ents. In 
predicting that the American republic, with interests in the Pacific, would think 
of acquiring overseas possessions, Rizal was ahead of his time to foretell that the 
Philippines" would remain politically under Spain but with more rights and free- 
dom. or that she would declare herself independent and adopt probably a federal 

republic. 

This historicist vision manifests itself when he wrote: “History does not 
record in its annals any enduring rule of one people over another. 1 here was no 
doubt that Rizal desired for the Filipinos to gain “recognition as the equal" of those 
in Spain, which spirit is represented by a woid of Greek origin , jsothyttwi. 
point will be elaborated further. Whereas he achieved “absolute self-consciousness 
Ri/.al remained a product of his times, an ilustrado. Nonetheless, he did not lose 
sight of the inner Malay character of sensitiveness or what Rousseau A amour- 
propre which was unmasked by subsequent events. Rizal called it st usi di it), 
quality par excellence the indio. Rizal s concern about the absence of national sen- 
timent was premised on the need for a revolutionary spirit, since progress, he said, 
necessarily requires change, implies the overthrow of the past for the present, tie 
triumph of new ideas over the old and accepted ones. 1 he lack of nationa senti 
ment did not encourage any opposition to measures that were prejudicia to tic 
people, and the absence of any initiative that redound to their welfare. F 01 t lis rea 
son Rizal conceptualized the first filipino: “A man in the Philippines is onh an in 
dividual; he is not a member of a nation. Once the national spiiit was awa enec , 
the large enlightened class that persevered and struggled became an important 
component of the national Filipino society. 

1 hat Rizal understood perfectly the “bourgeois revolution of the eaih cen 
tury is evident, however. If transformation, for Rizal, were to originate from the 
masses it could be violent and fatal but peaceful and rich in results should it conic 
from the upper classes. With the “new men” and “the remembrance of the past, 
the Philippines would perhaps enter openly the wide road to progress. And Rizal 


imi mu uti'.'i w \ « »i 1 1 


iii . o . 


f .i I 


had to explain the centrality of national poit 
our level of national consciousness 
cries,” he once wrote. Heforeth.it onr. fund. *• 
of the country, so that no measure provoked m- m,r ; 
ion except in cases where relatives were more <»r l< 
mative stage of nationalism. 


granted today in 
^ t « » utter its first 
isteii. hardlv chat 
r « un public opin- 
I his \s as the f or- 


Moral and Material Condition 

The characterization of rhe moral and material u unlit mu < >t the f^riod under con- 
sideration is known today through his Salt Mr lanyrrr W ith K./al. where two- 
speed history preceded rhe approach of historian I erdmand braudcl. the hoi i/on 
for reconstruction of the past was widened. I he appro.u h adopted b\ Ki/al of 
sketching the past and the present was aimed at consciousness raising. 

In his “lacs l ilipinas dentro tie c len anos, he asks br< >adl\ \\ ell now. is the 
Philippines in the same condition as three centuries ago" lo uncover an under- 
standing of the past, he granted that the mdios ol that 1 1 me \s ere not like those of 
today: Three centuries of brutalization and ohsciiraiitisin must have exerted sonic 
influence on us. Ir was inevitable that rhe Philippines would ad\ aiu e and progress 
but the government set up stumbling blocks in us path, \rnong t hese were: brutal- 
ization of the masses; impoverishment of the country; gradual destruction of its 
inhabitants; and the fostering of the enrnitv between the races, including the 
Moros. In his sequel “Sobre la indolencia de los f ilipinos lie asks more specifically: 
“How did the Filipino people so devoted to their customs as to border on habit, 
abandon their former industry, their trade, their seafaring, etc . to the point of for- 
getting completely their past?” To discover the forces behind fostering the indo- 
lence, he reasoned that Spanish trade monopoly policies impeded the growth of 
native industries. Indolence was a chronic malady, but not a hereditary one. I he 
“dispiritedness” of the inhabitants arose from error in policy, pernicious influence 
of the rulers, social ills, environment, and natural calamities. 

A combination of circumstances induced the decline of work — such as the 
wars and internal disturbances brought about by the new order; the disincentives 
to labor and impediments to coastwise trade; the insecurity of individual liberty 
and property; and government apathy toward everything pertaining to commerce 
or agriculture. Rizal, in a sense, expressed his own world-view within the frame- 
work of “the Moro wars” in reference to the pacification as "these fatal expeditions 
that wasted all the moral and material energies of the country. ”* Over and above 
these material considerations was the denigration of indio pride which was accom- 
panied by Spanish isolationist policy. Absence of moral support was traced to the 
defects in education and lack of national sentiment. 

Consideration of history in economic terms was in the stream of Rizals con- 
sciousness as when he tackled the question. Can poverty arrest their develop- 
ment?” This indication of egalitarian consciousness was better served in the ques- 


734 




MAS II R \ Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


tion ot condition of the masses under the encomenderos and under friar tutelage. 
No one understood the well-to-do classes better than Rizal, who considered them 
as ‘partisans ol peace and order. Wealth brings with it refinement and the spirit of 
preservation, he argued, while poverty inspires adventurous ideas, the desire to 
change things, little attachment to life. To support his plain argument, Rizal relied 
on the Machiavellian logic that 'the loss of well-being raises more tenacious en- 
emies than the loss of life. There being no motive for discontent, with what will 
the masses be stirred up? he then asked. In his view, injustice excites the weakest to 
rebellion. 


2. There is a need to continue to discern intellectual imports of liberal universal - 
ism to retain certain traditional features that define the mosaic patterns of Philippine 
society. 


1 hroughout wider southeast Asia, the history of revolution in the 1 hilippines 
is the onlv event that might be fitted into a periodization span borrowed from 
western European or North American history. Colonial autonomy was linked to 
European liberal ideas and tradition; for liberalism in Spain, suppressed at home, 
had taken refuge in the Spanish territories overseas. It follows that the political 
thinkers of the revolution voiced demands and ideas that were current in the minds 
of contemporary Spanish liberals. I he Filipino intellectuals in Spain pursued 
the Propaganda Movement in Spain, which was meliorist and evolutional) in ap 
p roach. 


Liberal Ideas of the Revolution 

As in all historical reconstruction, it is possible to shift the hoiizon above the tu 
multuous unfolding of the events to the realm of thought. By 18)6, Philippine 
history took a series of vital turns under Spanish colonialism. Rizal was execute . 
Death claimed both M.H. del Pilar and Graciano Lopez Jaena, two stalwarts of the 
Propaganda Movement. The Katipunan, the underground popular movement o 
Andres Bonifacio, was discovered; so there was no alternative but to iise up in aims. 
There was a quest for value besides glory in those dramatic movements of batt es, 
and to search for it, we turn to the movement of ideas. 

It was Apolinario Mabini who, after the signing of the Pact of Biak-na-Bato, 
thought that the political climate was more favorable for the revival of the reform 
movement. When Mabini wrote La Revolution Filipina he had been an active pai 
ticipant and ideologue of the short-lived Philippine republic under Emilio Agu 
inaldo. He had lived through the period following the transition fiom Spanish 
dominion to American sovereignty. There was a conscious effoit on his part to 
break away from the tradition of medieval Christian political philosophy that is 
more reflective of pragmatic import in his two other works: hue Decalogue and 
( Constitutional Program for the Philippine Republic. C.A. Majuls (19S ) inteipieta- 


1 

tion of the political idea nt the r . for the rec- 
ognition and securing of pout: e * i s I hi* pre- 
ponderance of ideas was <rn ir tf. • w*.era: lonsti- 

mrion.il projects. Knus rir jib :r.r the political 

ideas of the propagandists and of ?t *:.«* * *■' * M * • * onsticucion. 

Iherc wa.s no intellectual pr< on tov. mmon to the 

Katipunan and Propagandist pl.:io ? • * . e *. >iog\ u ,is not 

grounded in historical rmpir: run 

If this interpretation is to lx .« p r . < r » w the ideas of 

the Katipunan theoreticians. Mr f.« r i that I » arid tin works of fellow 

ilustrado reformists provided r Ik • mo< i . for ri. I *• ;> ;: amtestos and codes 

of conduct. I hat the puhlu ists of r h< Katipunan i»:.i ed pr opagaiuiist perspec- 
tives as their own can he gleaned from fir /./>;s leading armle h\ Pmilio 

Jacinto. But for all the personal rivalries of r Ir hade r Jupof the rc\ oh it ion. the core 
of the struggle was less about clash of < law than r be dr me t< » he free* from domi- 
nation, around which a historic a I i ra n si i ion t o r I r 1 1 m \ < r sa I n iea of sel f determ illa- 
tion can he understood. 


Social hmbodiment of Transformation 

Despite the efforts of recent historians to view the- i < >< >t s of the rev olui ion in terms 
of class interests, the categorization plebeian ve rsus i/t^nadd duhotomv re- 
mains unsatisfactory. Perspectives on sot ul embodiment <>f the* Philippine* revolu- 
tion, and the social class which was a reinvention in colonial thought the priori- 
pail a- leave much room to critique the* inovemeni c > f ideas on die revolution. We 
have to rethink Philippine history itself. 

Assuming that a theory of history based simply on economics suffers from 
lacunae without taking into account the thymotic part of tlu* spirit, we need to 
lemrn to the struggle for recognition approach as a major locomotive of history. 

I he social embodiment of the revolution, and die* social c lass against w hom the 
Katipunan was pitted, remains incomplete or inchoate* in ideological under- 
pinnings and historical ‘contradiction. I lie* movement of ideas we associated 
with Rizal and Mabini as to the new liberal impetus lias established the elose link 
between history and politics. Yet to Mabini who advocated soc ial emancipation, 
it meant also defining the social impact of the* revolution .is its final aim. In this 
frame of mind, he believed that the revolution could serve* as a mode* I for the 
struggle of freedom among other Malay race. By twist of historical fate the Philip- 
pines became the only daughter republic and new birth of liberty' on this side 
of the Pacific. 

New problems, particularly agrarian unrest and church relations, emerged. 
Mabi ni, of course, was to write ex ten si vely of the agra ria n situation as a el 1 reel cause 
of the revolution. If a new radical socialist awareness was spun out by Mabini, 
the peasant movement — unleashed during the ( Commonwealth period — extended 

736 


j 


MASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


the struggle lor independence against American imperialism until the post- 
war years. 

One might perhaps describe chronic elitism, or the disdain for it, as condi- 
tioned by the social milieu existing at the closing decades of the 19th century in 
which we seek new explanations for the ilustrado betrayal of the anti-imperialist 
struggle. In his article for La Solidaridad written eight years before the revolution, 
Rizal gives a characterization of the ilustrado : 


the intelligent, independent, that lives by itself, without the need for the sup- 
port of protectors or guardians, the one that has a thirst for justice and peace, 
the party full of reproaches for the excesses and tyrannies of certain classes; the 
party, in short, denounced by its enemies as fllibustero for being composed of 
worthy men, and from which will surely come the real filibiisteros, if the la- 
mentable system followed until now continues. 1 ' 


In reading this much-quoted passage one finds the prideful self-assertion of 
“men of worth." Of course, there are equivalent words such as dignity and self- 
esteem " used by Rizal, Del Pilar, Lopez-Jaena, etc. Such concepts correspond to 
isothymia , the factor of “recognition which social science uses nowadays for un- 
derstanding the human motivation in political life. 

The revolutionary upheaval did not alter much relationships of the social 
forces. Consider the picture depicting the cacique class as the bulwark of the colo- 
nial status quo published in a local paper: 


One of the phenomena which prevents the present social situation from 
normalizing is “caciquism.” This is a form of combination between quixotism 
and feudalism. The “cacique” in a town is both a deceiver and whip-master of 
the masses. . . In all the details of public life, you will see him interfering, either 
directly or indirectly, by means of his agents, in order to further his own per 
sonal interests and swell his pockets. During election time, he does a great deal 
of manipulating, making justice conform to his personal whims. 


Institutionalized class exploitation through the cacique system was encour 
aged by colonial economic policies. The articles historical judgment, this c ass is 
diminishing, with the result that the people are becoming more sovereign. 

Renato Constantino’s (1975) revisionist work lends itself to radical histori 
ography on the theme of class struggle. Two consequences flow from this idea, t e 
revolution is seen as a peoples revolt and a peoples war under elite leadership. A 
long series of revolts through the centuries culminates in the 1896 Revolution. 
Schumacher (1991) comments that in the end, for Constantino, the revolution has 
only an inchoate ideology ; the “inchoate desires’’ of the people being responsible for 
the inchoate declarations of Andres Bonifacio, who qualifies as a proletarian. De- 
sire, in radical terminology, is the “motor of revolution but it took the ilustrados to 


737 


nu mu 


give these desires a more explit it form Wh.it Bom m ” uT: to Ja ire. they took 
care that the resulting c rear ion would trr*. 'best • •'* ba.inic A 

peoples war under elite leadership 

The point is pressed further tli.it the nu ipicnt i ihpim. fMolct.mat w as too 
small and scattered to perform a vanguard ro;r I ‘ : • K v# :s S il[k u Ivichardson 

and hast (1979). In their work, flics point out that on* n!e the res oiutionars main- 
stream — scattered groups of the disaffected NVpms sugar workers saw the 
struggle for national liberation and so* ia! |u>ti a ‘ ! ar n<> nine did these 

groups coalesce to present a serious or svsicfnati haiic n:s t<> r< [nihlk .in author- 
ity. y Separated by islands and poor commtiiiK.itions, the peasantry was divided in 
the pro vi nces. Fearful that middle class urban Katipuncros and the p r < >\ i ru i.il elite 
would unite, the ilustradm suci urnhed to \rner u an uienlnyy of tutelage .\\\d betrayed 
the anti-imperialist cause. Ir was also ironic that u> .1 point elitist pci spec mes domi- 
nated nationalist thinking. 


The Moro Problem Restated 

It seems inevitable that we need to refoc us the hist* >1 i.m s pc i spe c 1 1 \ cncss on the 
More; problematics as an extension of the- unfinished resolution. I he time frame 
of history changes as the subject matter of historv c hanges. We need to answer the 
question raised at the very outset on t he possibiln v of writing a unified history of 
the Philippines. I his means justifying our selection <>f categories (the* question 
asked and answer arrived at) and our point of view. .And several different view- 
points guide historical studies generally and Moro studies particularly. 

/ . I he need to return to basic understaudni g of human history based on the un- 
folding of natural laws of development to discern its continuity over time. 

Several different viewpoints guide historical studies generally, and Islamic 
studies particularly, in which we have come to categorize Moro studies in the field 
of area studies. Jo be sure, historical studies are about “what is timelessly impor- 
tant about the dated and placed events of human ctil t ure. " In But if, as historian 
Marshall Hodgson saw it, historical studies cannot be anything less than a body of 
questions about human cultural development. 1 lere we cannot rule out the need 
for relatively dateless generalizations, and even prediction using “lessons" in his- 
tory as a means of verification. 

Muslim Theory of History 

The Muslim understanding of historical knowledge is shaped by the concept of 
din or religio. The logic behind derivation of a primary signification of this concept 
of “state of being" is natural tendency or nature s state. I bis organic linkage be- 


738 




M 


ASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


tween history and religion leads to a basic hypothesis in the Muslim theory of his- 


tory. 


Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas posits that the perpetuation ok the "ratio- 
nalistic spirit,'' whose philosophical foundation had been laid by Islam long be- 
fore, can be considered as a continuation of the ‘'process of islamization. 11 Islam 
transcends the influences of human evolution and historicity. For the man of Islam 
is he for whom history is decisive but not final, whose world is seen and known 
and experienced and made conscious of time in the time of the Prophet 
Muhammad. Within Islamic thought, history is a moral science whose purpose is 
to give ethical meaning to life that will lead man to God. lbn Khaldun is credited 
with being the first historicist to have disentangled the laws of history and their 
relations with the activities of societies. 1 his philosophy of" history, with its estab- 
lished meanings and symbols and systems, is not a closed, static, or predetermined 
system. That is why in Islamic thought, we reject secular theodicy as a justification 

of all that exists in terms of history's final end. 

From here on, we can discern that in the Islamic universe, the governing prin- 
ciple of all thought is that God, not man, is the source and object of history. Put 
another way, the ultimate reality is represented by God who is the beginning an 
end of history. As the Islamic account of history makes clear, histon is formed > 
God's revelation to the Prophet Muhammad of the perfect existence. We visualize 
the first Islamic community as created for the perfect social model. As a fust crac 
at understanding the universal precept we take guidance horn this perfecte com 
munity” (ummab) which was the receptacle of traditions of the idea past, le \ en 
idea of “universality of the ummah n is itself unique and revolutionary as it he a 
“new” shape of ideas for the future. Notions of the exact nature of that polity, how- 
ever, vary according to the empirical and experiential exigencies of contemporary 


living societies. 


sol lciico. . c * 

By way of contrast, theorists of liberalism presented the discussion of human 

nature as a portrayal of the “first man,” that is, man in the state of nature prior to 
the creation of society. The radicalness of Hegel’s histoncism is evident in his very 
concept of man. With one important exception, virtua y every p 1 osop er 
(Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau) writing before Hegel believed that mere was sue a 
thing as “human nature” (i.e. with more or less permanent set o traits^ passio s, 
desires, abilities, virtues, and so forth) that characterize man as man. 1 e in 
dividual man could obviously vary, the essential nature of man ic notcuiyc 
time. Later, the 19th-century social theorists understood the variety o human so- 
cieties, technologies, and cultures as governed by common causa principles. 
Bauzon, in his recent work on the Moros, used the paradigm of liberalism and the 
primacy of culture and concluded that clearly the Muslims in the Philippines have 
been the victims and not the perpetrators of historical circumstances. I he recog- 
nition” of their actual consequences counts more than recognition of the conflict- 
ing conception of nationality. 


739 


i nr mu imNi hiv< »n n<»'. > hi «« >'*i » 

Human history, as I fcgcl saw it. must hr seen n*>t «»nl\ as a succession of dif- 
ferent civilizations and levels of materia) at <. <>mp!: -.hment !nn mor <* important!) 
as a succession of different forms of conuioumr !<>r past thought, whcchcr of 
ordinary people or great philosophers and scientists. w.w not true absolutely Of 
“objectively/ according to I legel. I hat past thought is onh relative to the histo- 
rical or cultural horizon within which that person lived It is this essential histo- 
rical relativity of “truth that gives perspec tiveness to the thought process. I his 
marks a culmination of human movement of ideas W e v an assume as implicit in 
historical consciousness a notion of the times and sve share in common the 
importance attached to being up-to-date or c on tern pot at v I he c on sequence of 
this pragmatic way of thinking ro he up to date is. in fac t . seen m historic ism as 
“waves” of foreign influences. ( 'ontcmporaneits <»f the distant past is itself a 
hallmark of indigenous Southeast Asian historiographs I he Southeast Asian 
specialist O.W. Wolrers noted: The Southeast Asian elites propensity to he du 

courantis to the historian’s advantage because it requires him or her to reflect on 
the conjuncture of events responsible for introducing new possibilities and to 
inquire about the nature and process of the changes which could then take 
place/’ 1 * 

Universal History 

The effort to write a “scientific” Universal History can be attributed to Ibn 
Khaldun. But it was Immanuel K ant who broached the* Idea of w riting of Univer- 
sal History which would provide collective human consciousness, for Kant saw in 
natures plan a humanity working it out in history. Was i here a way to explain the 
universal laws of human historical e volt.it ion? Yes. Aware that “this idiotic course of 
things human did not seem to show a particular pattern on the surface, he won- 
dered whether there was not a regular movement to human history. That which 
seemed so chaotic from the standpoint of a single individual might yet reveal a 
slow and progressive evolution over a long period of time. This reflection sug- 
gested to him that history would have an end point', the actualization of human 
freedom. 

All the particulars of Kant’s project were fulfilled in the Hegelian system of 
thought. Kant held that the mechanism which propels mankind to higher levels of 
rationality is not found in reason but rather in reason’s opposite: the selfish antago- 
nism created by man’s “asocial sociability.” Hence, we now recognize in Hegel’s 
philosophy of history the Kantian “contradictions” turned into the Hegelian “dia- 
lectics” to explain that history proceeds through a continual process of conflict. 
Dialectics was a “method” which Engels, who was Marx’s collaborator, appropri- 
ated separately from the content of Hegelian philosophical system. But in setting 
forth his own view on history, Marx followed Kant, not Hegel, for his point of 
departure for a theory that history discloses a pattern of “class struggle movement” 
toward social revolution . 14 


740 


MASTURA Reflect: o ns on the Philippine National Awakening 


As a historicist, we certainly agree that Hegel was one of the first European 
philosophers to take seriously the "national histories of other peoples" outside of 
Europe. The Universal Histories represented bv the Hegel ian-Marxist tradition can 
be understood in the history of thought about first principles, in political gover- 
nance and social organization, l he convergence of foreign ideologies in the Philip- 
pines from varying periods and differing cultures (in our case without natural or 
dialectical synthesis) engendered a republic with its head in 1896 and feet in 1946. 

1 his consideration obliges the historian to date "Moro problematics as a dialecti- 
cal necessity since 1 521 and 1310 C.E. or 710 A.H. The drama of modern civili- 
zation made yet another turning point when in the face of the practical material- 
ism of the European bourgeoisie, the proletariat would set up its dialectical mate- 
rialism" in 1871 . The dispute between two opposing forces was now carried from 
the philosophical into the political arena. 1 his social schism was contemporaneous 
with the height of the colonial era and the first manifestation of Muslim renais- 
sance. It was by this double material thrust bourgeois and proletarian that the 
Muslim world became conscious of European influences in its political and intel- 
lectual evolution. By plain coincidence, the first signs of Filipino nationalist send 
ment found focus in 1872 as a result of Spanish repression. 

In constructing a summary of modern views on Universal History, a contem- 
porary analyst, Fukuyama, makes an important point that the notion of histon as 
being "directional, meaningful, progressive, or even comprehensible is ver) foreign 
to the main currents of thought of our time. 1 The end of bistort t esis o 
Fukuyama pivots on the directionality of history. Without appeal to the aut lorin 
of earlier theories of history, he takes on the mood of pessimism of the ~0t i cen 
tury contra the optimism of the 19th century. Relative to direction ity, t lere aris ^ 
a question as to (a) whether societies evolve in a certain uniform irection, or 
whether their histories follow a cyclical or simply random path. 


Directional History 

A directional history, in the view of Fukuyama, implies that no foim of socia ^ 
nization, once superseded, is ever repeated by the same society. But, as a mat 
course, different societies at different stages of development can repeat simi ar evo- 
lutionary patterns. Uniform Mechanism (or set of historical first causes t 1C 
tates evolution in a single direction and that preserves historicism or istolica 
memory) of earlier periods into the present has to move in a certain way, l istory 
were never to repeat itself. Fukuyama concedes that the only one t at is \ com 
mon consensus unequivocally cumulative and directional is modem natural sci- 
ence.” His Mechanism is extended to investigate its relativity to capitalism and 
political liberalism. This is particularly relevant to our historical reconstruction 
since he believes that Islamic fundamentalism is not as a competitor in the Muslim 
world, but that Islam has no appeal outside of communities that were not Muslim 
to begin with. 


741 


i m mu iwiNi i'i •< 


In the end. we arc made ..ware «».-.« the <i> " r, ..t .hr sucm.lu method 

created a Fundamental, non-cvclic.il division <>! ' t before 

and after. Once discovered, the progress, ve ami . unfolding of modern 

natural science provided a directional Mechanism t<>. explaining mam aspects of 
subsequent historical development. S» icntism rj’-rs histor-. its ciircc tionalitv. I*o 
understand Fukuyama, sve have to look at In hist c- 1 1 . . r t t«»la\ the basis for a direc- 
tional history of the logic of modern s> icm e His is. m rtfr, t an economic inter- 
pretation of historical change: one which, unlike its Marxist \anant. leads to capi- 
talism rather than socialism as its final result. Hut the rationalistic spirit" initiated 
by Islam, warns Al-attns, if allowed to proi eed along, its present w estet m/ccl c nurse, 
will undoubtedly deviate in its vision toward secular ends and uru oust ions mate- 
rialism. 


As a point of departure from I ukuv.im.i. we leas e aside er p< • l tutor m Mecha- 
nism that gives history its directionality and turn to the explanation of cyclical his- 
tory. As a prelude to our discussion, let us consider ssh.it his disc muse leads to. fo 
his mind, cyclical or random views of history do not exc hide the possibility of so- 
cial change and 1 1 m i ted regular 1 1 icx in devch >ptnc*n t . Hut these s less s do not req uire 
® single source of historical causation. I lieoret ic alls . tliev encompass a process of 
degeneration: the possibility of a total historical forgetting. or otherwise each suc- 
cessive cycle would build on the experiences < > f earlier ones. ( ousc lousness of the 
past would then he erased. 


2. The need to relearn the phenomenon of < hurt h -in -pohtn > <ju,i social authority 
to discover once again the potentially homogenous state tn which freedom is lived in tt 
just society. 

The p°st-g]°bal-war period demonstrates the inadequacy of the category 
19th century” with regard to the “colonial antithesis on the fate of "lands over- 
seas. 1 he enormous rapidity with which the Muslim world was moving toward 
the “West” was hut one aspect of the culmination of a historical movement. Its 
other aspect was accidental, an incidence of the colonial fact of life, hahits, and 
ideas. This universal radiation of western culture has to he understood properly 
and can he analy/.ed in its liaison with the Filipino national culture and, in effect, 
in its liaison with the Moro problem. This duality of colonial experience is full of 
“contradictions” and a “double development” of 20th-century Philippines makes 
highly problematic to Moro society the relativity of the “westernization” and “mod- 
ernization” phenomena. 

Theory of Cyclical Phenomenon 

During the last half of the 20th century the Muslim world was historically passing 
through a period of difficulties and dilemma. To understand cyclical history, we 
may shift the historicist’s focus through the work of a contemporary Muslim 


742 


MASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


scholar, Malik Bennabi (1991), who put forward his theory of "cyclical phenom- 
enon. This theory traces its intellectual roots to Ibn Khaldun but must be dis- 
tinguished from other theories to avoid the fatality, if not impression of recogniz- 
ing in isolation a phenomenon "civilization" and a phenomenon "decay or 
en trophy. 

Malik Bennabi builds on the theory of cyclical phenomenon by considering 
historical phenomenon from various points of views (i.e. history is psychology; 
history is sociology; history is metaphysical). One can get a general picture of his 
originality and ability to synthesize from the following analysis of his Islam in His- 
tory and Society* originally published under the title Vocation de VI slam in 1954. In 
this book, the author does not bother himself with the record of events oi details, 
but from the outset concentrates on methodical analysis of the various stages of 
history and the march evolution of civilization. 

Developing further cyclical history inherent in lbn Kalduns approach, 
Bennabi presents his own theory of the cyclical phenomenon. \\ here Bennabi took 
off from Ibn Khaldun the latter disentangled the notion of cycle from his theory of 
the "three generations." By reducing the dimension of a given civilization to the 
scale of the dynasty, asabiyyah > Ibn Khaldun unmasked the profundity of the idea 
which was somewhat entangled with the terminology. 11 As now focused, its con 
ception only highlights the transitory nature of civilization yet allows us to see in 
the latter merely a succession of organic phenomena each of which necessarily pos 
sesses in a determined space a beginning and an end. 1 he importance of this con 
ception lies in that it allows one to discuss not just the conditions of progressbe 
development but also the factors of regression and decadence: the fone ofine? tin of 


a civilizatioti. 

Malik Bennabi presents his own theory of the cyclical phenomenon as 
follows. 

1 . One can only ascertain its continuity through the ages. Whenever one as 
attempted to establish its historical coordinates, one perceives that they designate a 
space that changes its place. So that the continuity that one ascertains in the gen- 
eral perspective of history could find itself masked by a discontinuity t at appears 
when one looks upon the succession of spaces or areas of civilization. 

2. Civilization perpetuates itself in an indefinite exodus, throug success 

metamorphoses: each metamorphosis being a particular synthesis of man, soil, and 
time. Thus appears an essential notion of history: the cycle o civi ization. ac s 
defined by certain psycho-temporal conditions proper to a social group: it is a civi- 
lization” in these conditions. Then the civilization migrates, shifts its abode, trans- 
fers its values to another area. 1 " , , 

Thus, Bennabi divides the history of Muslim society into three stages. The 

first represented, at its most sublime, the impulsion and living force of the Qui an, 
and ended with the battle of Siffin. The second witnessed the flowering of Muslim 
culture and civilization and lasted till the fall of the al-Muwahhids who ruled 
North Africa and Spain. The third is the period of stagnation and decadence. The 


743 


I HI I'HII ll'f'INI y I V* Mi’ll* >’• V • l > HI ‘ 

post-aJ-Muwahhid man who succeeded the rn.m of Mus::in r • ni/.itmn tarries the 
baggage burdening the Muslim world. All this means that flu- Muslim problem is 
“one” and not in its variants of political, or even, erhm on! : m the essential 

order. C )n this point, the Malayo- Muslim »r Id has |iist mtumciual in its effort at 

renaissance. 

At this point, Bennabi turns to flu- I uropran ssorld am! h*«>ks at the origins 
and evolution of its civilization, and its formative elenu nts I he historical antith- 
esis is presented as the dramatic confrontation between the se two worlds at a 
turning point in historv with its Christianism ami ( artesiamsm. I he history of 
our period illustrates this departure of the civilization wliuh le ft a world that lias 
become “colon izablc” before being fully t oh >m/ed. .Mean w bile. I* tire >pcan civiliza- 
tion has completed its course, culminating in e olonialisrn and sv lent ism Similarly. 
Bennabi transposes us in a new stage of historv as reflected in the- ie awakeningof 
the Muslim world. In this respect, we have extended Bennabi s critical evaluation 
of the traditionalist, reformist, and modernist movements u> those of the Philip- 
pines and the Southeast Asian region. 

At the center of Bennabis historical studies is that world umt\ has always 
been the essential phenomenon of historv. I hat world historv, with its twists and 
turns, digressed the Cartesian mind whose formative culture ascribes the com- 
mencement of history and thought to the foundation of Rome and the Athenian 
academics. Fukuyama writes that two 20th ccnmrv historian, Spcnglcr and 
loynbee, intersect at these crossroads. First, tliev divided the histories of distinct 
peoples “cultures” and “societies, each of which was said to he subject to certain 
uniform laws of growth and decay. Second, they broke with the tradition that be- 
gan with the Christian historians and culminated in I lege I and Marx of the uni- 
tary and progressive history of mankind. But, in an important sense, both histori- 
cists have returned to the cyclical histories of individual peoples that characterized 
Greek and Roman historiography. 

At the same time Islam is on its way to renewing itself, thanks to the Car- 
tesian value. The new synthesis, according to Bennabi, which is slowly taking 
place, would no doubt gain momentum once problems begin to he tackled with 
the scientific spirit that has become the factor of the acceleration of history. vSci- 
entific method singularly shortens the stages and eliminates those unnecessary. The 
most startling forecast in Bennabi s work is the shift of the center of Islamic gravity 
from the Mediterranean to Asia. I he medieval, traditional Japan that opened its 
doors to Commodore Perry in 1868, cleared in one stage the distance that sepa- 
rated it from the 20th century. While Meiji upsurged and oriented Japan toward 
the sciences, the Muslim renaissance would remain confined to cultural insti- 
tutions. 

Certain stages, like nationalism, which once appeared almost a necessity, are 
no more than archaisms bypassed by history. In any case, the Muslim world is al- 
ready, by its very atavism, halfway toward the new world. Io he sure, while the 


744 


MASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


post-al-Muwahhid man must attain the material level of the present civilization so 
marked by the technical spirit, his role remains, above all, spiritual — as moderator 
of the excesses of materialist thought and national egoisms. While tracing the path 
of its spiritual renaissance, Bennabi draws us to Iqbal who called to the Muslim 
world for a turn of mind capable of considering things and institutions. From 
Iqbal, we know that "to live is to shape and change ends and purposes and to be 
governed bv them "; that is, purposes do not simply color our present state of con- 
sciousness, they also reveal its future direction; in fact, they constitute the "forward 
push of our life,” 18 The "enormous rapidity” with which the Muslim world was 
moving toward the west was merely a particular aspect of a larger phenomenon that 
Ibn Khaldun had seized: the conquered people adopt the forms, the ideas, and the 
manners of the conquering people. 1 his leads to "colonizibilitv. 

Struggle for Recognition 

At this point we find it useful to return to ideas already generated from 
what Fukuyama calls his Hegel-as-interpreted-by-Kojeve history, d his new, syn- 
thetic interpretation of "the end of history, simply called endism by its critics, is 
not exactly an original theorv. As interpreted by Alexander Kojeve, Hegel merely 
provides us with an alternative "mechanism by which to better understand the his- 
torical process, one based on the concept of struggle for recognition. Under- 
standing the importance of the desire for recognition, as the motor of history, 
makes for the progressive method of interpretation of the phenomena of culture, 
religion, and nationalism. Such an understanding of history we find a useful and 
appropriate way to interpret the contemporaneity and simultaneity and the endpoint 
of mankinds ideological evolution. 1 he horizon for our reconstruction of history 
is the Malayo-Muslim world linked to the national histories of the region. 

Now for the last part of the generalizations. 1 he logical endpoint formula- 
tion is a retreat from fuller consideration of whether directionality implies true 
progress” in the course of human events, or in terms of morality or perhaps the 
“pursuit of human happiness.” The alternative is a transistorical approach from 
which we become conscious, at midpoint, of the notion of a truncated turn of event. 
To illustrate the point, let us take the eventful separation of the Philippines from 
Spain. The separation of the Spanish colonies in the Americas was surely a back 
ground of our national movement but not part of the foreground, just as the Phil 
ippine Revolution of 1896, contemporaneous as it was with the revolt in Cuba, 
has little operational or spiritual links with events in the Caribbean. A simultaneity 
of similar cause such as raciality or Spanish repression operating on similai circum 
stances — delayed but explosive nationalism — produced similar results, the wars for 

independence of the Philippines and Cuba. 10 

It so often happens that one truncates the historical conception, as did 
Thucydides, when he virtually annulled the entire past of humanity by declaiing 


745 


I HI mil ! 1*1*1 N I HI v< )I I ! \i 


that before his epoch: ‘No important esenc v,.is pmdiii oi m the l imcrsc. Marx- 
ist thought, in a similar vein, ncglcc t s the essential notion < »t c v < lc b\ its avsertion 
that “the social and historical process moves from the era < »r pt imitise animality to 
the era of abundance, consciousness and hbert*. even though trie hnalism implied 
in this perspective is contradicted by the very prituiple of th urn Mere the 

temporal sweep of history is truncated 

Toward the end of the 19th ccnturv, the Philippines w as seen as a truncated 
case” of the Hispanicizatton process. Irue. in the preceding discussion of the ori- 
gins of hilipino national awakening, what stands out the most is the succession of 
events that were filled in by external stimuli from I mope Mm. again, there was a 
historical argument to the effect that had Spam not at fiscal in the Inch century 
Islamic penetration of the whole arc hipelago would have been completed m a few 
years. It was then t he common consciousness that the phenomena of I lispaniciza- 
tion and evangelization were practically one and the same process, especially in 
their procedure and effects. 

I his distillation of consciousness of out past has become a psychological 
resume of the history, to borrow Bcnnabis phrase. of out \ olom/ibiht v. I he 
prejudices that the Mispanicr/ed profess against the* Islami/cd have been accumu- 
lated over so many centuries that thev have imbibed them as part of their organ- 
ism. Writing in the mid- 1 9th century, Agustin Santas ana was at last w illing to con- 
cede this point: 

It has always been a fatal error to consider the Moms < >t the ate hipelago 
as an independent nation because its special constitution established an insu- 
perable antagonism between them and t lie ( .h rist tan c i vi I i/cd n,i t ion . I he t rea- 
ties and conventions that have been made with the Spaniards in different lan- 
guages or written only to have been violated were hardly enforced or ob- 
served. 21 

I hat sort of fatality seems to have crystallized awareness of the colonial 
peril. Contained in a memorandum to the Papal I)elegate written by the Jesuit 
Superior Pio Pi in 1900 was the long-held view by the Spanish missionaries that 
“Moroism constituted a nucleus of population, which is nationality or state within 

another sovereignty, systematically and obstinately opposed to the rulers civilizing 

”22 

aims. 

The proper understanding of what constitutes “Moroism” was, in the opin- 
ion of Pio Pi, essential in overcoming the obstacle to their “reduction” and “civili- 
zation” of Mindanao and Sulu. Spanish rule in the Philippines, from conquest to 
collapse, was dominated by the church and the administration throughout its geo- 
graphic time span was religious in character. The “problem” implicit here is that 
the Moros never accepted being part of the Spanish possession, which had a unique 
national polity with universal aspirations and which confronted a rival Islamic uni- 
versalized religion in its local manifestation. 


746 


N1ASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


Renewed Meaning of the Revolution 

One needs to ascertain how colonization introduced itself into our national life as 
a contradictory factor that helps to surmount the condition of “ colonizibility." The 
antithesis has yet to be established to reconstruct Philippine National History 
within the concept of Universal History. Viewed from the perspective of our 
present time when we can “look back to the effects of historical process, one in- 
vokes the “Spirit of 1896," a momentary upturn measured against Rizals idea of 
“making known the past to judge the present and the past traversed. Mabinis 
project was in a sense a cyclical turn headed toward the beginning of the cycle of an 
enlarged history of Asianism. Io my mind, the substance of the revolution was not 
simply the germ of an idea that was to become the revolutionary virus but th t piob- 
lem of the idea itself. 


The Impact of Islam 

The cultural and historical impact of Islam, which we know as a process that 
brought about the phenomenon of Islamization . , also revolutionized the Moro vi- 
sion of reality and existence. Viewed from the perspective of the present when we 
can “look back" to the effects of the historical process, the coming of Islam was a 
momentous event in the archipelago phenomenalized in a number of linked or 
ganisms, including the original synthesis of man and soil and sea and time. Medi 
terranean Islam was dynastic, and the end of that era marks for Islam its liberation 
from internal shackles. In his book. Studies in Moro History, Law and Religion^ pub- 
lished in 1 905, long before Samuel Huntington thought out his essay on the clash 
of civilization," Najeeb Saleeby wrote: 


For four centuries two different agencies of civilization have been at 
work in the Philippine Islands. One started in the north and worked its way 
south, continually progressing and constantly growing in power and improv- 
ing in character. The other began in the south and extended north, but it soon 
reached a definite limit, and like a tree stunted in its growth it reverted to the 
wild nature and grew thorny and fruitless. 

Saleeby picturesquely depicts Islam as the first graft of the tree of Maguindan 

that was not aided by later irrigation. The epic of Christianity is to in t e 

wave of immigration,” which was not reinforced, and with an ebb ti e it ost i 

of its size and force. 


Cyclical History Outline 

Let us find out how the cyclic history of the Moros would run paiallel to Filipino 
national history: 


747 


I HI 1*1 III ll'I’IN'l Hi V< >1 I I It V.HiU 


Historicism 

Inrjio- 

Filipmo 


Mon > 
Muslim 

Time 

Line 

Islam and the Sultanate 



1410 1475 
Cycle 


Foothold of Spanish Era 

1521-1565 

Cycle 



Truncated 

Corcuera-Kudarat Treaty 

Liaison 

(1645; 

Liaison 


Muslim Consolidation Era. 



1664 1 77 1 
Cycle 

50 years 

British-Manila Interlude: 

1772-1774 

Cycle 


M 775) 


Politico-Military Rule: 


(1860) 



Revolution and Republic: 

1896-1946 

Cycle 

Linkage 

1896-1946 

Cycle 

50 years 
Truncated 

Carpenter Agreement: 


(1914; 



Commonwealth Era (U.S.): 

Liaison 

(1916) 

Liaison 


Japanese Interregnum: 


(1941-1945) 



Independence Mandate: 

1946-1996 

Cycle 


1946-1996 

Cycle 

50 years 

EDSA Revolution: 

Liaison 

(1986) 

Liaison 


Beyond the Horizon; 

Future 


Future 

Direction 


Moros had intervals of trans-history, which occurred on the average every 50 years; 
non-Moros had long, random, truncated turns of events. Between 1663, after the 
Spanish abandoned Zamboanga, and 1771, the confederation of harbor principali- 
ties became full-fledged sultanates. The Maguindanao sultanate rose to power; the 
revived Sulu sultanate became the dominant power in the trade zone of the east 
archipelago in 1766. 

To summarize, then, in the course of the history of Spain in the Philippines, 
the essential element of Moro history continued to develop as a separate category 
with contemporaneity in the direction of the Malayo-Muslim world. The “magic 


748 


MASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


poison of modern capitalism did not touch, say truncate, the evolution of Moro 
progress until the introduction of the steam gunboat in 1848. In a contemporane- 
ous movement, the Moros were slave-trading like their counterparts in the Spanish 
American colonies. The colonized indios , whose fate was supposed to be drawn in 
the direction of the 1 8th-century bourgeois movement and, with simultaneity, who 
were to lead the revolution, did not awaken until their intellectual contact with 
Europe. 

If what we call independence is in effect an interpretation of historical change, 
it was certainly one in which the Moros had been reduced to bit players. Disrup- 
tive events of the last quarter of Spanish rule obscured the nature of the long 
struggle of Muslims as a component of the Islamic culture encounter with the civi- 
lization of the west. Ideas embodied in the assertion of peoples rights surprised 
1 homas Forrest in 1 77 5. In Alagui ndanao, he found six office holders with the 
title hambarajah who were said to be the “asserters of the rights of the people." 
Forrest's description did not exhibit condescension unlike Alexander Flamiltons 
description of the mainland Malay states in 1727, which condemned the indig- 
enous government. The Maguindanao and Sulu sultanates also developed crafts- 
manshfp in treaty-making, with a total of 18 treaties for the former from 1605 to 
1888 and 14 treaties for the latter from 1646 to 1917. 

The history of Muslims allowing for disparate experience is the historical 
construct that links the Philippines to Asiatic societies, one which Rizal seized al- 
most as a philosophy of history. Attempts to provide Islamic contextual back- 
ground have shown the slower currents typical of the historical progress of human 
groups to establish principles and institutions for ordered life. 1 his understanding 
of history of the Muslims in the Philippines is associated with Majul (1973), who 
viewed the Maguindanao and Sulu sultanates as part of a wider “constellation of 
sultanates” and principalities, a veritable Malayan part of dar-ul-Islam. In this ap- 
proach he considers Muslims in the Philippines as a historical people whose con- 
frontation with Spaniards is divided into seven stages of Moro wars. ore 
over, Majul (1985) ascertained its “continuity” in Muslim contemporary move- 
ments such as the Moro National Liberation Front and the Moro Islamic Libera- 
tion Front that justify their struggle as the “eighth stage” of this historical con- 
tinuum. 2 '’ 


Survey of Historical Construct 

As a background to the major changes in the world-view of the Moro people 
brought about by the coming of Islam, we present an outline survey o tie istori 
cal construct focused on the following. 

Phase I 

The Moros are conscious of the jahili thinking contending with the Qui anic 
spirit for knowledge in social internal contradiction and institutional dynamics. 


749 


[Hi PHI! IPl'P.f PI Y< >1 1 ! U V'.: • Mi -?< » 

In reality the Muslim communit. survr.nl in its Mist*»r\ hrvotui die Mipra- 
kinship system with consensus-taking leadership t >nc rn.»\ point :«> consensus" as 
a collectivity process assoc iated with ideologic al different rs I he institution of "en- 
tourage and alliance animated by a set of retinue, apable of r. diving was one ol 
the dynamic happenings in the region I j uc. Re*. na!d« > lien » 1 ' 1 demonstrates 

in Data Utos career that, svith about 600 men v. bom be tallied m the RioC»randc 
de Mindanao, in the last quarter of the 19th entur*. he turned Mindanao upside 
down. Majul dated the coming of Islam to Suiu m I H<) based on the Bud Oato 
tombstone. Sulu, Maguindanao. Icrnate. and Brunei t rvstalli/cd as sultanates in 
the 15th and 16th centuries, as were also interrelated along, ilvnastu lines. Islamic 
political institutions enabled them to dec hire a ver liable- ///></// against c olonial rule. 
J.C. van I .cur (1955), who < hallcngcd the static t atcg< »r i/at ions of colonial history 
as applied to the 1 7th and 1 8rh centuries, was among the first to inter pret the his- 
tory of the maritime world from an indigenous perspective. 


Phase II 

Hie Moros arc aware of the interrelated human activits of ntiingiiyao raids by 
men of prowess coupled with geographic distance in a time of seaborne trade. 

In an earlier period, Maguindanao raiders were viewed as an extension of 
jihad with political, not simply economic, motive’s. I he concept of "men of 
prowess was the major human agenev in the 1 t h and 18th centuries. Sultan 
Kudarat, for example exhorted his followers not to exchange* the* loss of "harvests 
for liberty and signed a treaty to define his suzerain domain . James \\ arren (1981) 
has reconstructed from archival sources the Sulu /one of trade around the interre- 
lated theme of external trade, slave raiding, and state* formation as the* kev to the 
general history of the region. I he rise of Sulu as the* dominant state in articulating 
the trade of the zone at the end of the 1 8th century conforms to the more general 
process of state formation and economic integration accelerated bv external trade. 
This is parallel to the evolution of independent states and stateless societies in Asia 
and Africa. On the impact of mangayao raids, Bruce Cruikshank ( 1985) has un- 
covered the effects on regional economy, mortality, and the settlement structures. 
After 1788, the pattern of Moro raids changed from large-scale frontal attacks 
against poblaciones to smaller, scattered raids, against fishermen, traders, and small 
settlements. 








Phase III 

I he Moros are conscious of the organic concept of bangsa with its relatively 
autonomous character, and awareness of self and what was foreign. 

The village as basic pattern of organized life is common throughout South- 
east Asia. T he wet-rice-cultivating populations shared much of the common pat- 
tern of Malayo-Muslim polity spread throughout Mindanao, Sulu, and the 
Moluccas. The unique bangsa identity of the Moros made up for the elements of 
weakness in their political institutions and their ethnic diversity. The Sulu and 


k. 


750 


MASTURA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


Maguindanao written tarsi Lis contain office titles, legitimacy rules lor succession, 
and suzerainty. Cultural transference was made decisive by “outward-lookingness" 
which promoted the sense of belonging to a wide world. Ruurdje Laarhoven 
(1989) has amply corrected the "decay" notion in post-Kudarat era; instead, the 
successful “centralized redistribution" system in the 17th century at the 
Maguindanao harbor principality served as the catchment lor all the trade goods 
coming into the sultanate’s capital lrom overseas. 1 he period oi political consoli- 
dation was 1663-1718. De la Costa (1961) identifies this as an interval during 
which Spain’s withdrawal from the south and when the Maguindanaos and Stilus 
had made considerable advances in the direction of centralized government. 


Phase IV 

The Moros are aware of the traumatic pacification as a product of colonial- 
ism and carry on their pride role in the struggle lor survival. 

The long pacification campaign, first of the Spaniards and later oi the Ameri- 
cans, had traumatized the Moro population. Jose Rizals critique oi the pacificacion 
was premised on the destructive means employed and its effect of depopulating 
Moro settlements and the rest of the archipelago. Piracy, slave-raiding, and slavery 
are historical terms with value judgement; they imply contemporaneity and simul- 
taneity with acts of privateering and all that corresponds to slave-trading in Span- 
ish America. Trading, raiding, and slave-traffic activities in the 18th and 19th cen- 
turies were not only predicated on specialized craft but also entailed men on the 
oars management and navigation. I he center of boat-building activity was 
Cotabato until it shifted to Sulu in 1790. Warren, who attempted to reconstruct 
the odyssey of the slaves, found that acquired persons and capti\es weie ,_,i\en r a 
tive social mobility. The Sulu luntar and Magindanao luwaran code governed the 
principles of manumission. 


Phase V , 

The Moros are now faced with the phenomenon of armed struggle waged as 

liberation movement which needs to be placed in the contemporary perspecti 

oppressive fitmah (chaos) and tajdid (renewal). , 

It is true that Muslims in the Philippines have imbibed the inertia rom 
Islamic heritage of jihad against long foreign domination, but its historic ^ causa 
tion runs within ill-defined periods. Samuel Tan (1977) placed the armed 
struggle” in contextual framework of jihad and fi-sabillah effort, but attri utes it to 
Muslim realization of the futility of collective resistance; he then makes its istinc 
tion with juramentado in the motivation. Various authors found no di erence e 
tween motivation in the early American period of Moros amuck-running wit 
those in Java or other Malay communities. Thomas Kiefer (1972) piovi es socia 

dimensions to the complexity of violence and law. 

The “Moro problematics,” 1 think, is both psychological and technical. 
Placed against the backdrop of the traumatic effects of the pacification, we con 


751 


I HI mil JI'I'IM HI •.< »I 


sidcr the new condition of "colom/il>ilit\ ts .1 t<>rm •• 
dichotomized into .Muslim desire for i.ijtl ui rene .s . 1 . 


oppressive fitnah (chaos) 


.Summary Statements 

In search of a historical argument for the Resolution sse presented perspet* 

tives from historicists. I here arc reasons t<> hcliese that sse uin reconstruct a l ni- 
fled National History if we reconstruct our dated events at the uu cptton and end 
of Spanish colonialism and American adventurism m the I hihppmcv I Ik long- 
term perspectives change our categories lor historical studies because the swift pace 
of events cannot provide substance lor prompt moserncni <»f ideas 

We must not overlook certain historical processes i! we concern ourselves 
with essence of things rather than their appearances In the words of Malik 
Bennabi, this process docs not commence with colonialism hut with the 
“colon izibiliry” that provokes it . According to this formulation, the relation of sub- 
ject with object is between the coloni/cd and the- colom/ihle and not between the 
colonized and the colonizer. Ri/al exposed this corulit ion <>l hiliptiht' as being colo- 
nized and colonizible when he decided to return to the- Philippines. I he Propa- 
ganda Movement wanted to continue addressing the condition of the colonized 
and the colonizer. 

We can see that the colonized was in need of legitimate means for acting on 
the condition of the colonizible. Phis was the historic moment when the 
Katipunan came to the forefront of the action. I he I B9() Spiriteduess could not 
possibly demand its means of action from the colonizer, Spain. I Ins paradox can 
help explain the betrayal by the i lustra do of the cause of the revolution. 1 he same 
revolutionary for involutionary) process had been in progress over time and space. 

We need a renaissance to extricate ourselves from the unfinished agenda of 
the Philippine revolution. I lie centennial celebration will be considered successful 
if it enables the Filipinos to free themselves from being “colonizible. 

Notes 


1. Onofre L). Corpuz, I he Roots of the hi h pi no Nation ((Quezon C aty: Aklahi founda- 
tion, 1989), p. 268. Phis is a major attempt to write a national history in contempo- 
rary perspective. 

2. Kenneth E. Bauzon, Liberalism and the Q nest for Is Lirnic Identity in the Philippines 
(Durham: Duke University Islamic and Arabian Development Studies, 1991), pp* 

1 I and 1 52, 1 65. See my “Muslim Scholars and Social Science Research: Some Notes 
on Muslim Studies in the Philippines” in Omar Farouk Bajunaid (ed.), Muslim Social 
Science in ASLAN (Kuala Lumpur: Yayasan Penataran limit, 1994) on intellectual 
constructs and inter-paradigmatic dialogue of ideas. 

3. John Schumacher, I he Propaganda Movement: IRRO-IR 95 (Manila: Solidaridad Pub- 
lishing House, 1973) p. 198. 


752 




\l.*\s l l ’RA Reflections on the Philippine National Awakening 


-i. lose P. Ri/al. Political and Historical Writings (Manila: National Historical Commis- 
sion. l i )"’2), centennial edition, Yol. VII, trans. of Rizal's work published in the La 
Solidaridad ’ 

3. Cesar A. Majul, l he Political and Constitutional Ideas of the Philippine Revolution 
(Quezon C itv: l niversitv of the Philippines Press, 196 ): interpretation of Mabinis 
ideas. 

6. lose P. Ri/al. op. cit. ' l lie Truth tor All, 31 May, p. 268. 

(Quoted in Majul, Ideas , p. 61; in C .alumnus \ olates, 1, No. 21, 2/> August IS 1 )'*). 

8. Renato C Constantino, I he Philippines: A Past Revisited ((Quezon City: lala Publishing 
Services, 1973 ) p. 1 62. See John Schumacher, The Making of a Nation (Ateneo de 
Manila University Press, 1991), p. 181. 

9. Jonathan last and Jim Richardson, Roots of Dependency: Political and bcononm Revo- 
lution in Oth Century Philippines (houndation for Nationalist Studies, 19, 9), pp* h 
and 111. 

1 0. Marshall t LS. 1 lodgson, The l enture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World Ctvt- 
liz-tition (( Chicago: l lie University ot Chicago Press, 19 4). pp. 2--3S. 

1 1 . Syed Muhammad Al-Naquib Al-Attas. Islam and Secularism (Kuala Lumpur: Mus- 
lim Youth Movement of Malaysia [ABIM], 1978). appendix. “On Islamization: The 
Case of the Malav-Indonesian Archipelago." See also 1 homas Naff, towards a 
Muslim Theory of History" in Alexander Cudsi and Ali Hilal Dessouki (eds.). Islam 
and Power (London: Croom Helm, 1981), p. 24. 

1 2. t ieorg W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, trans. ). Sihree (New York: Dover Pub- 

lications, 1 936), p. 1 9. 

1 3. Oliver W. Wolters, “Southeast as a Southeast Asian Field of Study presented at the 
International Conference on the Promotion of Southeast Asian Studies in Southeast 
Asia (1.1 PI and loyota foundation, Jakarta, 3-5 November 1 ^53), passim. 

14. Culled from Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: 1 he 
Free Press), passim. 

15. Ibid. 

1 6. Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History, trans. F. Rosenthal (Lon- 
don; Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1967). 

17. Malik Bennabi, Islam: In History and Society, trans. Asma Rashid (Kuala Lumpur: 
Berita Publishing, 1987), pp. 7-8. 

18. Muhammad Allama Iqbal, Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islnrn (Lahore: 
Ash rat, 1971). 

19. The perspective is drawn from Royama Masamichi and Iakeuchi latsuji. The Phi ip 
pine Polity: A Japanese View , Monograph Series No. 12 (1967) Southeast Asia Stud 
ies, Yale University. The collective authorship of In Search of Southeast Asia. A Modern 
History (1987) edited by David Joel Steinberg records a welter of human events not 

otherwise seen in the work of a single author. 

20. See John Phelan, The Hispanization in the Philippines (Madison: University of Wis- 
consin Press, 1959). 


753 


' 


I HI PHI! wvr 


[ 


uml-i Ministry of 
:juiu I a liLt (It 
\Im» in 

u s tn . X'skuaI R t- 
im« »n. Philippines* 




( ) 

i r 

* lit 


! i .1 bureau of Print- 
er sit\ of the Philip- 

t'f / V ’; Apptnes t Her- 


21. (2 l,ofc ’ < l in Michael < > M * *ur .* 

Muslim Affairs, 1 4 ^H * p b< 

Mindanao Su llr.tnria > - 

Mistura, ibid lor hill u .r rr l*:» 
porn A Major ( icnerai < »rorr* • * ‘ * 

1 ( )ctobcr 1 902 to 2H Ju I*. J( ) .i.u 

22. II, id. 

23. Najcch Salccby. S tudtc in \torn / /; • #/ " 
ing, 1 905). p. 3 1 

24. C.esar A. Majul. Mu Inn ni /> '' } 'n: ppnir 
pines Press, 19~M) and l hr < ontrfnpntar v 
keley: Mi/an Press; 

25. Ibid. 

26. C )ne benefits from a number of dated •• « »r i. P 
of I Jatti l )tu ( Jto of Huayan. I )ata paper. ’ 
of Asian Studies. C .ornell I mvrrsit v. If 1 1 a < a. « » 

Indonesia trade and Society M he I I ague VX \ an I lot- sc 

Sulu Zone, 1 768- IH ( JH The l)yn,nnn of Cxtrm.u h.trh s l./ten an/l Tthnn tty in the 
Iransjortncition of ,i Southeast I tan Maritime S t.it, Smyapou ' imetsm Us". 
1981 j; Kuurdjc I.aarhovon. / rtum/’h of .\h>ro / ttp/nm.u ) / h< > ’..to Su.... >..tte 

in the 17th Century (Quezon ( itv: New I >av I’uMisliei l‘»K‘>.. 1 ho.nas Kiefer. The 
Tausug: Violence and ! tiw tn a Ththp/nne Mn-lt >n So, iet\ 'New V'lk I loll Rinehart & 
Winston, 1972;; Samuel Ian The htltptno .MuJnn \>me,l Struggle 1 700- 1 9 2 
(Pilipinas Inundation, 1977); I I. de la ( ,«»sta. I he A ■•«//. /« //'<• Thtltppines: IWI- 
1768. I homas Porrest , /! Voyage to l\ew ( ittiiu'ii an/l th, .\ loin, , ae I * I ('(Kuala 
Lumpur: C )xford University Press, 19 (V)). 


•. n al.i. . Il< t. , ISto) 1 SSS The ( .tretr 
s, , i j 1 1 1 , .,.1 \ \ i a Po'i’.tam IVpartmcnt 
•. 'i i it k ( h i c •! >i i 1 ' * Uf 


\ an I cur. 


754 


Toward an Understanding 
of the Indigenous Concept of Bangsa/Bansa 


Nagasura T. Madale 

Mindanao Stole University, Marawi, Philippines 


T he Moro or Muslim community has an ambivalent response to the 
celebration of the centennial. It is a historical fact that the Moro struggle tor 
freedom began before 1896. In essence, if we agree that Filipino heroes include 
the forebears of the Moros who continuously fought colonial rule, then we can 
accept that the Moro struggle is part ot the long struggle tor tieedom. 

Philippine history has been created bv different ethnolinguistic groups. I 
view Philippine history as a rainbow, the colors coming from a common source. 

The indigenous concept of bangsa or bansa (literally, race or nation) should 
be further explored and discussed in order to reconstruct or rewrite 1 hilippine his 
tory, particularly as the concept relates to the centennial celebration. Such a discus- 
sion is particularly relevant and significant in light ot the establishment of the 
Southern Philippines Council tor Peace and Development (SPCPD) in Mindanao. 

There are two parallel and contrasting concepts ot nationhood- bangsul 
bansa and bajo de campana — which can serve as unifying factors in forging a new 
bansa and thus make this celebration more relevant to Moro/Muslim commu- 
nities. 

This paper is exploratory and will deal with the evolution and development 
of the indigenized concept of bansa. 1 he data is primarily diawn from the Ma 
ranaos (lake dwellers), being the last ethnic group to have embiaced Islam, in the 
late 14th century. Moreover, as a group they provide clues to the evolution of the 
data system into the sultanate political system, an evolution which will hopefully 
lead us to the bansa. 


755 


I believe rh.it the corn ept < ►? /y - /7; •*' ' 
its counterpart in t lie ( hr i t i.m • • 

cepts developed v.c sh.ti! <•[ ’" r < : 

I hese two notions oj //,///'./. 
mi zed communities on th< b.i 
why the Moro/Muslirn comrnumt: 
hilipinos. 

In this exploratory stuck* Ii«- f.‘ • < ' u 

may explain the cohcsiscness or um<|ii< 
trade/economics (the cut t . point in n< • ••* * 

Muslim missionaries); religion Is. nn inter in. it r i. 
the foreign Muslim tr.ickr iml tb< 
notion of territory is ant hored on 
blood ( purely natives 1 1 one otninon but :: t 

f'i ) one common belief sv stern rooted in •* tu * * *r .si 
I he dynamics and mterpla;. ot thr.i ta< t<»r 1 

ment, will be t lie subject ol this disc < mu ^ I 1 u s 1 at a n •* ‘ * 
per because they provide the* link in the e\ ohitioii ol tMc 
evolved in com pari son vvi 1 1 1 our popular notion < » I a t>* i h ^ 
dons related to the making of a I ihpino ,/ 


u v * »mmumcy) has 

. _ i lov. thc>c two con- 

- ; >* k .it 1 /ed and dk'hoKO- 

... ’ iu p iiN understand 

* p : that t hc\ arc also 

i ii u nt \ or f.u tors which 
1 hami/ed *. omnumitics: 

• c -en t he Mat i\ cs and the 
•:\seen the Uk.iI elites and 
, ,r :unt»»t\ Initially. the 
, r r \ . k oiu common 
it* »r \ \.snipon^\ and 

\ p i r it belie t . 

t \ i dm ion and develop- 
\ .in t be ft k us of this pa- 
\ I* no sultanate. I low it 
will tin t het answer ques- 


Etymology of the Concept Hangcnsa/llangsa/lUinsa 

B. Macaraya and McKaughan ( I'Tw: if.) define haupen-a ban^t as rank, social 
prestige, race, ethnic identification. The concept baupetoa. ban-a is also anchored 
on two historical syncretic developments: ( 1 ) the concept of tnerepeda s.i post'd^ lie* 
crally, part of a long umbilical cord), an indigenous <. oiiccpt <>l bansa , and (2) dar- 
ts l- 1 slam fall Muslims tire brothers), a cone ept whk Ii same w i < h the int rod action of 
Islam, which strengthened and fortified the indigenous concept of tuerept'dil S(l 
posed. Eventually, this concept further developed into /'</ ha apa nia . isa ha data , ansi 
isa ka masptl (one cornmunity/rehgion, one dat u/le.uler, and one mosque). 
Hanpensa/ bansa is contrasted to the concept of bajo de Ctiinpaaii Kwws lei the eluirch 
bell), the “other notion of community. 


Merepeda sa Posed 

The phrase merepeda sa posed is derived from two words: roped (literally, part of) 
and /><w<{/(literally, navel). The phrase means “a part of a long umbilical cord. 
nificantly, it means “oneness.” “Oneness” or unitv is further anchored on the idea 
of one blood, one ancestor, one apania (community/belief or religion), and one 
mosque. This “oneness” is symbolized by one titular leader called the data , who 
later on became the sultan. 


756 


MAI VU l Toward an l riderstanding of the Indigenous Coneept of Ba ngsa/Ba ns a 


I li is indigenous concept of kaisa-isa (oneness) is based on two Maranao oral 
narratives/cpics: Radia Indarapatra and the Darangan . Both are considered not 
only as salsiLi (lineage, chain of descent lines), but also as accounts of the po-onan , 
the beginning ot the peopling ot Ranao (Lanao). Y hey are considered the basic ref- 
erences in recounting the mythical beginning of the people. 

The descendants of the hero, Radia Indarapatra, who later on intermarried 
with the characters in the Darangen , established what is popularly known as the pat 
a pengampong ho Ranao (four traditional estates ot Lanao). 

hour data miraculously escaped trom the tabled Bembaran (the setting of the 
epic), which was piyamaloy (enchanted, petrified) as a result ot the peoples resis- 
tance to Islam. 

Anthropologist K Landa Jocano notes that the “enchantment or burning 
is symbolic ot the attempt of the Muslim missionaries to subjugate or conquer 
the natives and turn them to Islam. 


1 he tour founding ancestors who escaped enchantment were the same data 
who founded and established the pat pengampong ko Ranao Bavabao, Masiu, 
Unavan, and Balo-i. They were responsible tor the social stratification of Maranao 
society into 15 pagawidan (supported villages), 28 pegawid (supporting \illages), 
and the lipongan (slave class). 

They also formulated the taritib (social order), adat (customary practices), 
and igtria (common consensus), which became the fundamental laws that go\ei ned 
social relations in the pengampong 

Lhe ceremony of the enactment of these laws was so sacred that piarengan 
sa solo, riopetan sa orak a manok, piotolan sa balagan go tinimbakan (a toich light 
was put out, an egg was broken, a rattan string was cut, and a gun \\ as hied). Those 
who did not abide with these laws would suffer the following. Di den samberen a 
ndo, di mailay a alongan, go di den makailay sa moriyatao niyan tanatiyasT (He 
will not be blown by the wind, will not be seen by the sun, and will not bear chi 
dren from generation to generation). 

This social covenant is recorded in the salsilab/tarsila and is handed own 
from generation to generation. A commoner may be permitted to look at it if e 
slaughters one carabao. It is reinforced and strengthened by values, viitues an 
moral conduct, and ethics which are encoded in the Radia Indarapatra an tie 
Darangen. Both are considered andangsa muna and anonen a rawaten (the ways o 
the ancestors and the height of ethnocentricism/emulation). 1 hey collectively ex 
press the Maranao world view. 

The Tagalog concept of kapatid from the word patid (part of), the Cebuano 
igsu-on, Palawanon tiposod Yakan-Sama buffo tina-i, and many other similar con- 
cepts nationwide should be the basis of discussing and rediscoveiing the roots of 
Filipino nationhood (Casino 1975: 30). 


757 


Dar-ul-Islfim 


\ f U mu IP!*!'.* 


I he concept chir-nl hhim •* •* 11 

the indigenous concept of °nen< 

The concept of one Moot! r> m 
marriages between the local elue * r 1 ‘ * 
ccpt of territory called iiyumn r enl.r •*. 
entity and as a religious emits 

The concept of one leade r rLttu i 
tween the local traditional elites and tie U 
accord i ng to the Stilsiluh. t ra< e< I 1 1 h i r i e r r 
became the basis of the development of the 
lineages were traced to the Prophet r<> k 
Muslimness. 

1 he existing religious ideologic a! brh 
Islamic principle of the universality <>f man 
tions, and political boundaries. 

I he establishment of a mos<|u< was i>< 
of a highly centralized political system and 1 1 
sultanate system — distinguished from the 
and state were separate. 


i f , • : arui strengthened 

« p C v. of the IMCT- 

j, | in .. e ar -' I he limited con- 
rfin . ,<,*• a. a • * raphival political 

( (l r b inter marriages bc- 

rrjpn Mii.irn misN:ofiar ies I he latter 
r<> t \|:i!:aminaJ I heir unions 

\ 1 oro Miltanati and m rue then all noble 
iutni/i il'.cm and to emphasi/e their 

(I ssstcin \s a '■> further enriched by the 
1 1 ) ( J i r i <.■ si us 1 1 s i of nue. ethnic .1 f h I ia~ 

IV 1 1 .1 manifestation of the development 
)( (mu >n of the* stats and religion -the 
c , 1 1 , r H ,ininunit\. in uhkh church 


The Growth of Communities 

I he growth and development of I ihpmo communities sail be gleaned from K. 
Arsen io Manuels (1973: 175) studs' of the Manus u social org.mi/aiiom which 
gives us insights into the format ion of villages that f < > 1 1 < >\c two principal processes: 
budding and segmentation. 

Budding involves the pioneering actisns of one* Iannis, starting with otic' 
household. The group gradually grows due to the- influx of other families from 
other villages. The main motivation for settlement is kinship, although it did not 
necessarily produce a village of kinsmen. 

Segmentation is a larger version of budding. Mans families start the village at 
once, from one parent village. I he ness' village is likels to base village authorities 
right from the start. 

A case in point which needs further research is the Ira nun of Rampayan, Kota 
Belud, Sabah, Malaysia, who trace their lineage to Radia Moda of I)atu, Wato, 
Balindong in Lanao Sur, six generations ago. 

They speak a language similar to Maranao, Maguindanaon, and Iranun in 
the upper Pulangi River. The community would be a good example of the prin- 
ciple of segmentation based on the narration of how they reached Rampayan (lit- 
erally, to have arrived). 


758 


\1 \ir\I 1 toward an l ’ndcrstanding of the Indigenous Concept of Bangsa/Bansa 


bhc agama community and the bajo de campana communities show two con- 
t tasting htit parallel developments: the agama community, which eventually 
evolved with the sultanate system, and bajo de campana, which eventually devel- 
oped into a larger and more consolidated community, the nation state. 

Another tvpe of community, which is neither Muslim nor Christian, is the 
tribal community or lunnuL which is pulled in both Muslim and Christian direc- 
tions. 

l lie “Filipinos' were eventually drawn into two geopolitical and religious 
groupings: the Atiama-lslamized communities whose constituents make no 
distinction between the state (sultanate) and religion (Islam), and the other com- 
munities under the nation-state, which separate church and state. In practice, 
however, there seems to be no distinction (J. Cardinal Sin, B. 1. Sept. 24/91: ). 

An ocular visit of communities in the countryside reveals a clear distinction 
between these two types of communities. 1 he establishment ot both communities 
is based on the same principle — sound. In the bajo de campana , the geograph- 
ical limits of the community are determined by the distance at which the sound ot 
the church bell is heard, in the agama by the beating ot the tabo , drum in the 
mosque. 

A closer look 
commonalities: the 
Islam, the qiblat (W 
12-14). 

Two Cases Studies: Madaya and Marinaut 


both at the mosque and the church architecture reveals some 
pulpit, minaret, and many others. At one time in the history ot 
Zest) was Jerusalem (N. Madale, 5//Aw/January-March 1976: 


Madaya 


Originally the apo, the ancestor who now resides in Madaya, a suburb in Marawi, 
came from a nearby village, Bangon, in the same suburb. Our informant claims 
there were six elders (other claim there were 10) who settled in what is now called 


Madaya. . . . 

According to this account, it was the tradition of these elders to n e in t lea 

banca and, following the flow of the river Agus, sail down the livei and ancioi 
Rapitan (“where one passes by”) to gather wood. They decided to clear tie p ace 
and, realizing how flat and clean it was, divided it among themselves ant ca e 
Madaya (“clean and flat area”). 

On one occasion, the elders argued over when to observe katnac an ast 
ing). The community eventually split into Raya Madaya (upper Madaya), ru e y 
Ama-i Manabilang, and Lilod Madaya (downstream Madaya), mled b) Diatoi. 
The latter, being the new community, built its own mosque and duplicated all the 
titles from the other village. 


759 


Marinaut 


I Iff mil Il'IT. 


Marinaut was original!;, one siil.igr 

named for a medicinal irrus Fruit :n.t: <: 

Ilie village was large* and flu* ( <in 
Dansalan, each with irs own leade r and m«» . 

I he two cases illustrate hov. . ; e'e 
ding or segmentation. I he cider - *sh«» r - f •*■»!: - 

blood. I lie process of village formation, as m the 
pengampong, can likewise be* i fiarac leri/ed as buddir 
in the sense that the elders who later mosed mu n> <■ 
lated by blood. 


: n% »r n.ants v laim it was 

into Marinaut and 

t ;«.;nd through either blld- 
t v. sillages were related by 
,,r riu lies elopment of the 
. Atu i lineage segmentation 
t.d>hsh ness s illage were re* 


The Concept of One Agatna, One Data, and One 


The sultan is both a temporal and a religious leader \s the odc-si.istu.il and politi- 
cal leader, lie is responsible for the* appom t men t « » f the e bid ( 2 lt 1 1 loan Kali h the 
choice of Imam, and the appoint merit of religious leader s. I h also lias t he right to 
have his name included in the* K h u 1 1 >a ( I r i< la \ Pr .1 ver> * s 1 a 1 1 1 ! s 1 1 c e i in \ . \ ladalc 
1976: 1 3). 

1 n unitary, h iglily cen t rah/ed st a t cs mic h as Su h i and t < > s < >n u extent \ I agin n- 
danao, there existed also a centrah/ed plaeeof worship the mosque \\hieh"as 
not °nly a political and rel igious center I > 1 1 1 a I sc > a s\ m bo I < >f the - sultans e*n t rali/cd 
power and authority. In multicentric communities stie h as the* Maranao 
pengampong, however, there are multi religious e e nte rs. 

A Maranao rlaiul sultan would ncvci allow the- construction of a mosque 
without his permission because this edifice represent cel both his political and rcli* 
£ ,ous authority. J he proliferation of most) ties suggest s t he gi ow a h of com m unities 
as well the duplication of tides, wh i ch is a u n u ] tic- c ha ra c tc-rist ic of mult i centric so- 
cieties. 


I his phenomenon may explain the development of the- Rtnoio pcngti))ipoilg. 
I here were four mosques so far identified from carlv sources: one in Picon, near 
Malabang ( ] 597); a stone one in Uato ( Wato, Balindong); another in I araka called 
Bahu Rahman (door of Mercy), built by Apo Balindong; and one in Ditsaan- 
Ramain built by Buadi Alao, descendant of Alao (cf. Pieres 19 1: 296; Mastura 

1 979: 146; Abbahil 1980: 89; and N. Madale 1976: 12). 

Indeed, the construction of a mosque provides clues about t be establishment 
of new agama (villages) as well as the development of com muni t ies. Abbahil ( 1 h80: 
8^) tells how the sister of Olao and Olok had an accident on her way home to 
Ramain to attend the Friday Prayer, f ter boat capsized in the river (Ramain) and 
she nearly drowned. She begged her brothers, rulers of Bayabao, to let her build a 
rnasgit (mosque) in Ramain. They gave her pc rmission although traditionally 
women were not allowed to build mosques. 


760 


MAO \1 1 lou'.irti ,ui l 'niferstantfing of the Indigenous Concept of Bangsd/B,ins,i 


I hrcc implications can be drawn from the above accounts: (1) the authority 
to construct a mosque was possible upon the approval ot d^f/r/sultan; (2) the ob- 
servance of the Friday Prayer in a mosque was permitted it two conditions were 
met: that there be at least 40 to 44 men who constitute the jama (people who pray 
accord inc to the Shafi-i School) and at least four males including the Imam, ac- 
cording to the Malik school; and (3) the construction ot a mosque therefore im- * 
plies one village {aganni) and one leader (the datu or sultan). 

The establishment of a mosque thus suggests a growth ot population and the 
emergence of a leader (N. Madale 1980: 72 pp. typescript). 


Hu jo de Campana 

Baja de avnpivui (under the church bell) is the Christianized version ot the concept 
ot community. Before the coming ot Christianity, however, the concept ot a com- 
munitv was similar to the Muslim concept. 

Although economic activity draws people together, a belief system, a com- 
mon territorv, and a leader bind them together. 

Communities were once characterized as lineal, following the natural con- 
tour of a river, a coast, and the like. 1 he introduction ot Christianity, howe\er, 
dramatically changed this concept of a community as the church became the focal 
point both for psychological and, more important, religious conditioning. 1 he 
An gel us bell which was" heard daily drew peoples minds to a common focal 
point — the church. 

The establishment of forts and the so-called Moro towers greatly contributed 
to the dichotomy and polarization ot the Islamized and the Christianized commit 
nities. 

The fort served as a nucleus for the propagation of Christianity but at the 
same time it became a permanent edihee which eventually separated these two 
communities, later altering the indigenous concept ot a community. 

The Moro towers became a refuge tor Christianized natives and warned them 
of the coming ot Moro raiders. Thus, the campana (church bell) served as a wain 

ing device and at the same time symbolized the new faith. 

The church was a focal point in the community, which was now more orga- 
nized, making tax collection more efficient. 

In both Islamized and Christianized communities, therefore, the sound ot 
the bell or drum was both a psychological and religious tactoi which conditione 
people’s minds. The spatial component provided a distinct demaication between 
these two communities. 


761 


SPCPD: An Mtcrnathc Nomiolent \pproacli 

to a New Definition of an emerging I ilipino Hansn 


1 PI > . jn spice 
* Poth Muslim 
^ lc.it dern.wca- 
i noble gesture 
nt\ .uul |KMCC* 
1 1 -i i 1 iteration 


: k » * in 


».| 1 f 


n v. .is formed 

« »u bev .uisc in J 
»m« ms Region in 

miniated hv the 
t he m »\ eminent 
» ( In istian Pro- 


file Southern Philippines < our ii 
of the criticisms and aciver • • i.o ti 
and (Christian com mum tie Ooui. 

tion and l>oundary between r. 
of the f diristian (larger < omnium * . 
as well as a constitutional pt‘>< < , 
front (MNI.f) into the large r otn 

Its opponents aretif tliat ?' 
and that it was formed m . lolatio 
plebiscite only four provitu e opt < 

Muslim Mindanao. 

I would argue that while tin PI > ad t mp • 

MNLh tlie SPC V\ ) was formed through • « d» ■' ,M , - lM ' P : '* 
appointed its official member'-.: a- total tc pn a trail-. n ^ Ci 

fessor from Mindanao, who is kin >w le< lgc a I >lc a I »oii t M 1 1 w i a t no [h * »pies and their 
culture. Phe MNU* alsti has its own metnlu t :il s nu hiding repre- 
sentatives of tlie ( Jirist ian set tots who wen e on suite d l> M imi.ui f tom the 

very beginning. 

I be hi )SA Revolution of | D8D was a mining 1*01111 m I hiiippuie* histor\ 
because it demonstrated people posse t, a nous loirnt appio.uh to change. I be 
Peace Commission was institution. ili/ed and l.itet on peace education was incor- 
porated into school currit ulums nationwide. Peace talks and Muslim ( luistian 
dialogues were conduc ted much earl iet and 1 1 lese c < >n in hi re I to be non 11 shed, mu - 
tured, and supported. The seeds of peae e and a c 1 1 1 1 me < >1 peae c* ba\ e been [danced, 
bet it grow not for our genera t ion but (be next general ion of I all pi nos, who might 
harvest what we started today. 

According to Amando I )oromla ( Philippine / hi//] hn/n/ri )\ |ul\ 1 d l ) 6 : l )). 
President Ramos is the villain and traitor of his cultural kinsmen in Mindanao. 
But if wc exam ine h i story, change is of ten wt< night In men who ha \ e 1 m tied 1 1 aitot 
to their class. Ramos seeks to change the social and power distribution of Mind- 
anao by giving the Muslims a larger share of ns resources. I he* ( .hrislian elites see 
the writing on the wall and the signs are driving them to desperate and unreason- 
able responses.” 

I he real issue is the sharing of power and resources in Mindanao, which the 
Muslims believe have been the monopoly of a larger community which happens to 
be Christian. 

I hc* failure of SPCPI ) will further contribute to the* elemarc.it ion and delin- 
eation of the Muslim and Christian communities, hut its success will demolish the 
“invisible wall” between them. It will lie* a clear mandate, a nonviolent alternative 
toward a definition of a new emerging Pilipino biuisii. 


M AI ' \1 I Voti iird tin I ndersuinditig of the Indigenous Concept of BangsaJBttnsa 


The Math Ray in the Philippine Ilag Revisited 

C ioroll.irv to the issue on the SPCPD is the issue of adding a ninth ray to the sun in 
the Philippine llag. The movement to modify the flag started in 1946 as a "vision 
and was picked up hv Immanuel l . Osorio in August 1969. 

1 or the first time, in September 1969. a flag with a ninth ray was unfurled at 
the Arts and Science Theater at the University of the Philippines at Diliman and 
presented to the late senator, Mamintal Tamano, by Carol Pagaduan, Pilar 
Sandejas. and Orace Holazo (Osorio 1969: 16-19). 

In 1988. the Regional Consultative Commission in Muslim Mindanao dur- 
ing its sixth session held in Puerto Princesa. Palawan, on 9 July 1988, considered 
1 )raft Resolution No. 1 55, which proposed to add a ninth ray in the flag and. after 
a long debate, approved it. 

In October 1995, a proposal to reconsider adding a ninth ray to the Philip- 
pine flag was presented at the 16th National Conference on Local and National 
1 listor\\ Western Mindanao State University, Zamboanga City. 

Like the SPCPD, this issue has become controversial. 1 he rationale for the 
movement is that the ninth ray will symbolize the converging point in the develop- 
ment of the national and Muslim flags as well as "unity in diversity. 

Adding the ninth ray would he a reconciliatorv act, a symbolic and historic 
act of “people empowerment,” a nonviolent historic event equal to people power 
in magnitude (Madale, October 1995). 

CP 


Concluding Remarks 

The preceding exploratory’ discourse has shown some areas of conflict as well as 
areas of accommodation which should be encouraged in a spirit of peace and na- 

tional reconciliation. c 

The merits of this scholarly debate should be brought to the attention of 

policy-makers as well as writers, publishers, and particularly journalists, some of 

whom add f urther confusion to issues such as the SPCPD. 

What is needed is an ideology that will unify all Filipinos irrespective of re h- 
gious affiliation, ethnic origin, and political color. This ideology cannot be reh- 

aion as wc practice it today. ,, 

The “garrison mentality” is a clear manifestation of the “imaginary walls 

which divide both communities. Journalist Neal H. Cruz wtotc. Obvious v, 
Misuari wants more territory and so he wants another plebiscite. 

The plebiscite, if possible after three years, will either delimit that territory 
or expand it. This “territory” should be expanded through constitutional processes. 
The fear, however, is that it will further delineate the dichotomy between an Is- 
lam ized community” represented by Nur Misuari and a Christianized commu 
nity” headed by the local leaders, mostly Christians. What President Fidel V. Ra- 
mos wants is a larger community, a special zone of peace and development in Min- 


i m ran htim *•; . • »i 

danao, the constirucnrs of wluJi tre i»«>r. \5 : : < ■ * s. nuiiuimcthc 

lunutds. After all, Muslim- an*! * «: ; • * i '* / ; 4 , A 

Kaya natin tto. f We can do if 


764 


Muslim “Separatism” 
One Hundred Years Ago 


Ghisi ainf. Jhanne Lovre 

National Centet for Scientific Reseatch, Institute fot Southeast Asia, Fiance 


T liai the Muslims live in the southern part of the country in Minda- 
nao and Sulu is a well-known geographic fact. This factor enabled the inhab- 
itants to develop independently of the administrative center established in Manila. 
As a consequence, the Muslims have been physically separate from the places of 
decision-making and psychologically distant from the movement of ideas, particu- 
larly t h c wave of liberalism which led to the revolution. 

The position of the Muslims of the Philippines in 1 896 was based on various 
phenomena First, 1 will view the socio-political setting of the Muslims and the 
ideological framework in the south. Second, I will briefly recall the aims and poli- 
cies of the ilustmdos and the Katipunan. Then, I will establish the meeting points 
between the revolutionaries and the Moms. Finally, 1 will pinpoint the differences 
not in situations but in the various aspects of both movements, such as ethnicity 
and nationalism, and what the revolutionaries and the Moros understand of each 
other. I will deal little with the impact of the revolutionaries on the Muslims be- 
cause it seems to have been inconsequential. But it is valuable to study the aims of 
the two movements as they both aspired for freedom and independence. What 
could they have had in common? 


The Spaniards and the Moros 

The Spaniards were much more interested in the wealth expected from the 
Moluccas and considered the south, and Mindanao in particulai, as a meie base to 
reach the precious spices. These and other geopolitical causes led the would-be 


Jiff f'HJI If'F'f ' . f f'i .< >i ' V.: 


danao, the constituents of which arc hot h \I : urn ar •: < .'inscans. iru hiding the 
lumads. After aJI, Muslims and ( Jirisrian an !'«»[' -* * i»<>« »* / ;*/-A/a/£). 

Kaya natiti ito. (We can do it;. 


764 


Muslim “Separatism" 
One Hundred Years Ago 


CiUISl AINl Jl ANNl LOYRE 
National Center for Scientific Research, Institute for Southeast Asia, France 


T hat the Muslims live in the southern part of the countiy in Mincla 
nao and Sulu is a well-known geographic fact. I his factor enabled the in ia 
itants to develop independently of the administrative center established in Mam a. 
As a consequence, the Muslims have been physically separate horn the p aces o 
decision-making and psychologically distant from the movement of ideas, partici 

larly the wave of liberalism which led to the revolution. 

Hie position of the Muslims of the Philippines in 1896 was baser on \ai 
phenomena. First, 1 will view the socio-political setting of the Mus ims at 
ideological framework in the south. Second, 1 will briefly recall the aims an [ 
cies of the ilustrados and the Katipunan. 1 hen, I will establish the meeting j- 
between the revolutionaries ; and the Moros. Finally, 1 will pinpoint the differences 
not in situations but in the various aspects of both movements, suci as ct 
and nationalism, and what the revolutionaries and the Moros unt ustaiu o 
other. I will deal little with the impact of the revolutionaries on t e us in 
cause it seems to have been inconsequential. But it is valuable to stu y t te aims 
the two movements as they both aspired for freedom and in epen 
could they have had in common? 

The Spaniards and the Moros 

The Spaniards were much more interested in the wealth expected from 
Moluccas and considered the south, and Mindanao in particular as a mere base to 
reach the precious spices. These and other geopolitical causes led the would-be 


THE mil Wl'lSl Rf VOM I u >-. \si »!■; 


sultanates to establish themselves using Islam. I he- Muslims were nru-mal toward 
what is present-day Indonesia even though the I )ucch had dcstmved the* network 
created by marriages, alliances, cultural diffusion, and spreading < >t religions. In short, 
until the second half of the 1 9th century, the Muslims dealt onh <k .im« mail v \Mth the 
Spaniards and the indio soldiers. 

The Muslims thus perceived the nidim a s unable to must the colonial power. 
According to Combes, in the first half of the I 'th centur\. Oudi.it. the most fa- 
mous Maguindanao sultan, exhorted the Maranaos. who had I >een imadal bv the 
Spaniards, to flee, even if it meant sacrificing a harvest, so as n<>r to suiter the same- 
fate as the indios.' Qudrat had other reasons for not wanting the Spaniards to set 
foot in that area: it was next to his own territory and if Spaniards settled there he 
would be vulnerable and lose the support and help of the Maranaos. 

M. H. del Pilar recalled the pacto d( uingrr between the I ihpmos and the 
Spaniards: “They expose their breast to knglish bullets for the sake of the Spanish 
flag. They give their resources ro avert the danger confronting the ( arohne Islands. 
And in the present moments of Philippine history they do not spare then I i ves for 
the same flag on the battlefields of Jolo (Agonc illo 1 ‘O a , p. 1 NO ) . K i/al also made- 
reference to the soldiers serving the Spaniards with loyalty who were- giving their 
lives in the wars in the south (Ri/al 1972, p. 142): I he little wars with the inhab- 

itants of the South consume only the soldiers, people whose loyalty to the Spanish 
flag, far from making them a danger, makes them prec iscly one of its st longest sup- 
ports” (M. Mastura, p. 422). I he soldiers, however, mav have fought less because 
of their loyalty to Spain than the fact that they had no choice but to be drafted by 
the Spaniards, even if it meant fighting their own people. 

In the early 1 7th century, the inhabitants of the northern coast of Mi ndanao 
chose to retain the Recollect Spaniards in order to protect themselves from the 
Muslims, who would raid their communities if they failed to pav tribute. During 
the same period, the inhabitants ofMisamis also sided with the Spaniards and in- 
spired fear in their enemies with their bravery. But as a rule the Moms had no re- 
spect for those who had let themselves dominated by the Spaniards and resented 
them because they helped the Spaniards in construction work or as soldiers. 

The Muslims, however, raided neighboring territories for the purpose of kid- 
napping and enslaving the inhabitants. In fact, bisaya in Maranao means slave. The 
Muslims could not have held in much esteem the revolutionaries who had been 
under Spanish masters for so long. 

To the Muslims the ilustrados were imitators of the Spaniards: they had 
learned their ways, their language and sometimes had been educated in Spain. 
However, there is little information on how much the Muslims knew about them. 

The Muslims at the coming of the Spaniards were hardly more centralized 
than the rest of the archipelago but they slowly transformed themselves into sover- 
eign states with a sultan as overall ruler in the Pulangui valley and in Sulu. 
Uncolonized for so long, the Muslims developed customs and traditions free from 
Spanish cultural and religious influences. 


766 


I i >1 Kl Muslim "Separatism" On? Hundred Years Ago 

But at the end of the 19th century things started to change. The Spaniards 
decided to end the independence of the sultanates, militarily and politically. Sulu 
and Mindanao were now under a politico-military government established in 
I860. 

Slave-raiding along the unpat rolled coastlines was eradicated with the devel- 
opment of the steamship. 1 he Spaniards permanently occupied Jolo. In Mindanao, 
thev built up defenses and reinforced the forts of Pollok and Zamboanga in 1885 
( Mast lira, p. a 15). I hey built 10 forts along the Rio Grande. 1 hey interfered with 
the old wavs of government and manipulated successions to ensure that the candi- 
date most favorable to them would come to power. 1 he Jesuits had established 
themselves in lamontaka and bought back slaves, training and converting them. 
Although custom and tradition were not broken completely, they were greatly 
weakened. 

Thus, by the end of the 10th century, the Muslims who had had more con- 
tacts with the Muslim Malavs and the Arabs than with the Spaniards, now had 
more occasion to meet the Spaniards. 1 hey retained their culture but adopted some 
European practices. As earlv as the late 1 8th century, the Raja Muda, the second to 
the sultan, loved music and played the violin (Forrest, p. 310). Drinking choco ate 
became a privilege of the court in the lower river sultanate of the 1 ulangui \a e\. 
Some Spanish expressions were adopted: such as abogado (lawyer), boavui (mout i 
of the river), caso (debate), corona (crown), evidencia (proof), oras (hour), pc ato 
(to explain), testigo (witness), vista (hearing of a case), and many more. 1 hesc 
other changes, however, did not a fleet the Muslims overall identity nor theii mce 

pendent mind. 

The Revolutionaries and the Moros 

It is of importance to recall how the revolutionaries conceived of theii country. Del 
Pilar wrote in La Solidaridad that the country was one single unit out of ter i itoi 
separated from Spain by the oceans" (quoted by Mastura, p. 416). Kizal wrote m 
La Liga Filipina “that he hoped for the unification of the whole archipelago into 
one compact, vigorous, homogenous body (quoted by Mastura, p. 417). An les 
Bonifacio in creating the Katipunan already had an independentist objectixe oi a 
territory which, by the time of the declaration of Philippine independence on 1~ 
June 1898, would include Mindanao. When Aguinaldo declared the republic, it 
included Luzon and the Visayas. “Only a part of Mindanao embracing the ptov 
inces of Misamis and Surigao (Caraga) was considered part of the tenitoiy of tic 
Philippine Republic as the rest of Mindanao, except Zamboanga, and the Sulu ar- 
chipelago remained in the hands of their Mohammedan and pagan possessor who 
enjoyed, as formerly, a semi-independent status (Mastura, p. 437, quoting 
Fernandez 1986, pp. 139-140). In the establishment of the constitution, the south- 
ern parts of the country were ill-defined. The new leaders weie nonetheless con- 
scious of the peculiar situation of Mindanao because its inhabitants included not 


767 


THfcmil.imM- HIAOH I ION \N| > hi t ( )*. I > 

only Moros but also forest dwellers, most of whom we re* e\ rn m< >rc diffic ult to con- 
tact than the “pagan. 

The Visayans had already chosen a federal form of government (O.I). Cor- 
puz, vol. 2, p. 331 ). “Aguinaldo warned the president of the \ is.iv.is u > remain with 
him for unity in order to obtain recognition (Mastura. p. *38 >. I lie Muslims were 
not independentist; they were independent even if their ruling svstem had been 
disrupted. The question of territory was not, therefore, an empt\ one. 

Although two worlds apart, the revolutionaries and the Moros shared a love 
for liberty. Rizal wrote in 1 889: “'Today there is a fac tor wlm h did n< >t exist before. 
I he national spirit has awakened, and a common misfortune and a common 
abasement have united all the inhabitants of the islands (.Mastura I 1 )”* 1 ), p. *08). 
The question is whether the revolutionaries and the Moros understood each other. 

Did the revolutionaries adopt the attitude of the Spaniards, believing th at 
w the Moro race is completely antithetic to the Spanish, whether t he latter he penin- 
sular or indigenous, and will ever be our eternal enemy ’ ( I uis de la lone in Salccby 

1963, pp. 252-233)? 

Some literature of the time described the Moros negativelv as pi rates or cruel 
people. It is interesting to note that Rizal annotating Morga reverted to this point 
of view, writing that the first Spanish raid was committed against I\mav in 1399, 
“by the expedition of Magellan when they seized ships from friendlv islands, and 
even from ones which were unknown, demanding heavv ransoms from them 
(quoted by Mastura, pp. 420-421 ). Mastura commented that “it seems ironic that 
Rizal in part expressed his own nationalist view within the Mom-war framework 
(ibid.). 

One could easily argue that the Moros were not making war on Spain but the 
reverse. By raiding their neighbors, the Moros were practicing an economic activ- 
ity which was the gathering of goods to trade. I he slave trade was good business 
and the Muslims’ best customers were the western nations. The slave trade also 
made up for the disruption of trade by the colonial powers. There were few occa- 
sions when the Muslims acted as warriors against their cnemv. 

I he Moros were hated and feared by Christians, so many of whose villages 
had been ruined and their population taken away. In the Visavas during the 18th 
century, not a single village had escaped those raids and many were raided more 
than once. I he fact that the Moros had escaped Spanish colonization did not make 
them symbols of resistance and independence; they did not inspire the Revolution 
of 1896. They were seen as fearsome people responsible for so much human and 
material loss. 

Now, after so many scattered rebellions, a strong national movement for in- 
dependence emerged. What were the positions of the leaders of the south? 

I here are few documents proving that the revolutionaries established con- 
tact with the Muslims: “We find no sources to indicate that the assimilationist as- 
pirations of the propagandists appealing to the support of the Mindanao and 
Sulu overlords as in effect very little can be said on the subject" (Mastura, p. 417). 


768 


I OYRI Muslim "Separatism" One Hundred Years sign 


Nonetheless, five documents have been identified dated 1899 (as mentioned 
by Mastura, pp. 445-448 and Cesar A. Majul, pp. 314-315), as well as four letters 
and a manifesto in the Insurgent Records Collection of the National Library of the 
Philippines: 

• a letter of Baldomero Aguinaldo to the sultan of Marangas dated 31 May 

1899; 

° a letter to Pedro Cuevas, the leader of Basilan, from Aguinaldo or from the 
revolutionary government; 

° two letters to Haron-ar-Rashid, the sultan of Sulu, dated 19 January and 
31 May 1899; 

° Aguinaldo s message to Congress on 1 January 1899 (Mastura also makes 
reference to these letters on pp. 446-449)3 

Andres Bonifacio had earlier sent letters to Mindanao to obtain the support 
of the Christians (Mastura, p. 427). They remained unanswered. The revolution 
aries and the new republic probably did not know that some of those the) had con 
tacted were no longer in power. 

Sultan Mangingin of Malangas had difficulty establishing his powei. 1 he et 
ter to Haron was addressed to him as sultan of Sulu but he had in fact abdicate in 
favor of his nephew Jamalul Kiram 11 in 1894. Kiram in 1896 was performing Mjj 
and stayed in Mecca for a year, returning only before the U.S. occupation of Jo o. 
Passing by Singapore, he would have obtained arms and ammunition. 

The letter to Datu Cuevas in Basilan, a lagalog of Cavite turned Mus im, 
invited him to intercede on his behalf with the sultan of Sulu (Mastura p. 44 . 

Let us consult their own words. Aguinaldo hoped to obtain the ie p » ° ti 
Muslims as stated in his manifesto (Mastura, p. 427 based on Agoncillo 1 ? • 7 ^ 

147): “We have wasted our wealth and blood and even given our i\es in t 
(Spanish) defense; we have even fought our compatriots who would not wi in^, > 
submit to their yoke." Corpuz (vol. 2, p. 329) notes that Aguinaldo a as ec 
authority to negotiate “for the purpose of establishing national solidarity upon t„e 
bases of a real federation and of absolute respect for their beliefs an tra iri ^ s * 

It is said in Aguinaldos letter to Sultan Haron ar-Rashid. Tiat tie i ipi 
nos, after having thrown off the yoke of foreign domination cannot forget t le 
brothers of Jolo to whom they are bound by the ties of race, interest, secunt) an 

defense in this region of the Far East." . 

The Philippine republic under Aguinaldo had resolved to respect a^so ute y 
the beliefs and traditions of each island in order to establish a solid fraterna UI ^ ir ) 
demanded by our “mutual interest" (Mastura, p. 445 from Faylor Exh. PIR o. 
1426). 


769 


THE PHILIPPINE. KLV< )I l ' I K )N AN I > HI Y< >NI ) 


Notes 

1. Francisco Combes, Historic! cle Lis isLis cic SJmdanace join > u adya*. ente*. progresses c/e 

la religion y armas Catolicas , Madrid, Los heredems de I * d < • \al I(>(* 1 80 \ 

2. Gov/ing (1977) p. 26 mentions that Dean ( . Worcester translated letters of 
Aguinaldo, documents available in Philippine Insurgent Records. I he Philippines: 
Past and Present, 2 volumes. New York, MacMillan. 10 1 •$, veil. I. pp. 22 \ 220 230). 

3. Some other contacts have been referred to in some articles Inn we base been unable 
to Find them. When the First Philippine republic was established in 1800. Pmilio 
Aguinaldo proposed that the government be empowered to negotiate \sitb the Moms 
oFMindanao and Sulu for the purpose of establishing national solidarity upon the 
basis of a real federation with absolute respect for their beliefs and traditions “but his 
proposed alliance was rejected by the Muslim leaders (K.J. May. p. 12 a, in l ii ful- 
filled Promise citing R.R. Canoy, The Quest for Mindanao Independence, C agayan de 
Oro: Mindanao Post Publishing, 1897, pp. 69-^0). 


770 


JOSE RIZAL 




Jose Rizal’s Impact on Bohemian Society 


Zhknka Vasii jevova 

Charles University, Prague, Qech Republic 


T he centennial of the martyrdom of Philippine national hero Jose kizal 
is a challenge to evaluate the importance of Rizals legacy to his nation as well 
as to mankind. In this connection we can go back to the doom-laden days at the 
end of 1896 and explore the immediate impact of Rizals execution on European 
public opinion or the degree to which it influenced attitudes toward Spanish colo- 
nial policy. I endeavor to show the impact of Rizals martyrdom on public opinion 
in at least one European country. 

With this in mind I decided to look through the pages of the periodical press 
in Bohemia before the end of the 19th century. Bohemia was not an independent 
country, so she could not formulate a foreign policy of her own. Hence, coloni 
problems were not of immediate concern to a country located in the very centei o 
Europe, far from any seacoast. 

However, Bohem ian newspapers did refer to developments in tie 
non-European world, although in most cases foreign news agencies or the foreign 
press were the source of their information. Dependence on indirect sources i > o 
course, lead to some omissions or misinterpretations. On the other an , 
Bohemias almost 300 years’ subjection to Austrias Habsburgian rule an t e 
steady rise of its autochthonous Czech peoples movement for national emancipa 
tion had made them receptive to news about the rest of the woild. B\ the en o 
the 1 9th century, an ardent political struggle raged in Bohemian society, divi e as 
it was into a Czech majority and a German-speaking minority whose uneas) coex 
istence within the Austro-Hungarian empire caused a lot of animosity, with tie 
pages of newspapers as the battlefield. 


773 


THK PHII.IPPfNI HW ’( >1 I I H . I > t • : < : » 


As far as scientific research was concerned, mmp.u.ime Imuuisiks and eth- 
nology, both having a fairly long tradition in multi ethnic Bohemian soc let y. dealt 
with non-European problems as well. I he Philippine studies ot I erdinand 
Blumentritt are an example of the high level of erudition ac hies cd h\ the most out- 
standing scholars in Bohemia of that time. 

Moreover, Rizal was not unknown in Bohemia. Blumentritt. his closest 
friend, lived in and studied the Philippines in l eitmerit/. a town of north 
Bohemia, rather small in population, but a cultural center where mans students 
came to attend the local schools or the Catholic seminary. I he journey of Rizal 
and Maximo Viola to Leitmerit/., Prague, and to Brunn in May INN ’ was covered 
by the local Leitmeritz^r Aeitung as well as by the Prague ( icrman language dailies 
Bohe mic? and Prager laghUitt. ’ Rizal was introduced to the- readers as not only an 
excellent poet, but an artist as well, who had just finished IS months of studies in 
Germany, where he had been admitted, in Berlin, as a member of the \nthropo- 
logical Society. 5 7 he correspondence between Ri/al and Blumentritt proves that 
these “distinguished guests” were well remembered in Leitmerit/ for mans years. 
In 1894, Napoleon M. Khcil, a well-known personality in Prague intellectual 
circles, contacted Rizal in his exile in I)apitan on the recommendation of 
Blumentritt. They had exchanged a couple of letters until their correspondence was 
interrupted in 1895. Rizal’s execution as well .is the Philippine resolution could 
not have passed unnoticed in Bohemian society. 

The attention of the Bohemian press in 1 896 was drawn by developments in 
Cuba. However, in the last weeks of the year scattered news of fighting against 
Spanish troops in the Philippines appeared and newspapers began to mention an 
anti-Spanish insurgency. On the last day of the year a dispatch from Madrid was 
published by Bohemia saying: “The court in Manila has condemned Ri/al, one of 
the instigators of the insurgence, to death. It is supposed that he will be shot this 
morning.” 8 Naroclni Politika (National Politics J, a (//.cell-language daily published 
in Prague, was able to get a more up-to-date news dispatch from an agency in 
Manila on 30 December. It said: “The instigator of the insurgence in the Philip- 
pine Islands, Dr. Rizal, was shot to death this morning.”*' While the Prague news- 
papers published the dispatches without any comment, the local Leitmeritzer 
Zeitungm its first number of 1 897, published on 2 January, expressed the editorial 
boards grief: “This news from the far insular state of the Philippines has evoked 
mourning in Leitmeritz as well because Dr. Rizal, who stayed in Leitmerit/ as a 
guest of Professor Blumentritt some years ago, obtained the sympathy of anybody 
he met, due to his high education and his knowledge.” 10 

Rizals execution indicated that the situation in the Philippines was serious, 
and in the first days of 1897 the news became more frequent and more compre- 
hensive. Besides news of clashes between the Spanish troops and the “rebels,” the 
readers of both Czech- and German-language newspapers were given information 
about continuing executions or rumors of the support offered to the insurgents by 
Japan. While the German-language newspapers confined their reports to agency 


774 


V \MI ]\ \\ )V\ Jose' Riztil’s Impact o?i Bohemian Society 


news without giving anv comment, Ndrodni Listy (The National Paper), the 
leading C '/ech daily considered the voice of Czech policy in Austria-Hungary, 
described the Philippine situation in more detail, not concealing where its sym- 
pathy lay. On a January, it wrote under the title "The Insurgency in the Philip- 
pines against Spanish Rule : “ I he execution ot Rizor [sic!], the leader of* insurgents 
on the island, who, though a Malay, was a man ot high intelligence who knew sev- 
eral Puropean languages — he had studied medicine in Europe and once he even 
visited Prague — has attracted again the attention ot Europe to that tar Asian island, 
where the natives have been struggling up to now, and not without success, to get 
rid ot oppression and exploitation by the Spanish rulers. 11 In a text that followed, 
The National Paper described events in the Philippines: the insurgency on Min- 
danao, the uprising in Cavite, the increasing number ot deserters who joined the 
insurgents, the tension in Manila, and the Spaniards bloody repression ot their 
opponents. 

The next daw 5 January, The National Paper reported trom Manila that nine 
insurgents, including three native priests, were condemned to death by the Spanish 
Court Martial, with the following comment: 

The frailocracv tries to maintain its rule by blood and iron, but its terror 
will, without doubt, bring about in the Philippines the same results as the 
Spanish reign of terror did in Cuba: it will inflame the insurgency e\en more. 
However, the adherents of the principle of self-determination of nations and 
the friends of progress and freedom have little reason today' to complain about 
the shortsightedness of the reactionary Madrid government. 1 he seed sow n by 
reaction ripened in the end — to be reaped by its opponents. 

Then, the following day, 6 January, under the heading “On Dn Rizal, the 
Architect of the Uprising in the Philippines, 7 he National Pape) carried a etter 
sent to the editorial board by Napoleon M. Kheil. Although Kheil had ne\er aac 
the opportunity to personally meet Rizal, he wrote of his deep respect foi Tim. 

His great intellect, his profound education, his knowledge of the world 
and people he had acquired during his long journeys to remote countries 
singled him out as an extraordinary personality. He came from a rich family of 
native Filipinos and, like other young people from affluent families in the 
Spanish colonies, he studied in Spain, where he chose medicine as his subject 
and was conferred the title of Doctor of Medicine. In ordei to pursue further 
studies in medicine he traveled to Paris where he spent a fairly' long time, then 
visited England, and Central Europe. He paid a visit even to Bohemia where 
his interest was attracted by the ethnic situation, as his highest interest lay in 
linguistics and he was well versed in several European and Asian languages. He 
had published some political essays in Spanish and a political novel with a title 
in Latin: Noli Me Finger e . 1 ' 


775 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND PI Y< >NI > 




Kheil took the opportunity to explain the current situation in the Philip- 
pines: 


We have to know that Augustinian, Dominican and I t. incise. in orders 
are owners of almost all the cultivated land controllable bv the Inland Revenue 
authorities in the Philippines; that these monastic orders <as I was told In 
Spaniards) have an annual revenue of more than 20 million pesetas; that triars 
of these orders are European Spaniards who are in constant opposition to the 
local secular priests, i.e. Malay Catholics, and that these wealths orders are ex 
ercising, in a way, sovereignty over the Philippine Archipelago. 

About Rizal’s expulsion to Dapitan, Kheil wrote: 

The reason he was sent to exile was his repeated literarv assaults on the 
frailocracy fi.e., domination of the Philippines by rich monastic orders whose 
members are Europeans). Due to his continuous assaults on that frailocracy, 
assaults that must have been interpreted as pure filibusterismo < i.e. endeavors to 
separate from Spain), Rizal was expelled to Dapitan and it is there where I first 
sent him my letter in 1894. 

While Kheils letters to Rizal have been published, Ri/al's replies, mentioned 
by Kheil, are not available. We can, however, know their contents from Kheils 
article: 

...they were written by a man of wit, although I always found a certain reserve 
in his words, or even, I would say, a kind of chill. I believe t hat his bei ng a poli- 
tical suspect, his correspondence must have been checked by the authorities. In 
one letter he wrote: He was very much busy in Dapitan, all the time, giving his 
medical advice to local people free of charge. I can imagine that he must have 
made many a devoted friend through his medical activities and, maybe, even 
secret adherents of filibusterismo. In another letter he mentioned doing linguis- 
tic research on Tagalog and Visayan languages (these being native languages in 
the Philippines) and intending to publish a book on his studies. 'That was his 
last letter. I did not receive any answer to my [next] letter. Maybe my letter was 
seized, or his reply directed to me, who knows. Since then our connec tion was 
interrupted and I did not hear anything about Rizal anymore."’ 

It was only through the Spanish press that Kheil learned about RizaPs further 
fortunes: 


It was not before August 1896 that I read in a Spanish newspaper that 
Rizal was expected to be expelled, because of his filibusterismo, to the island 
Fernando Po, off the coast of West Africa. But, apparently, further investiga- 


776 


VAN 1 1 |l \'0\’A Jose Rial's Impact on Bohemian Society 


tion must have been undertaken against him through which his participation 
in a conspiracy against Spanish rule seems to have been revealed. As von have 
already reported, in a court session in Manila held on December 26, in the 
presence of about 200 people, Rizal was sentenced to death. I here was no 
written evidence at all about him being guilty. The prosecutor highlighted this 
as proof of Ri/al’s cleverness in never having anything written that might be 
used to indie t him. 

lo conclude bis recollection of his late friend, kheil had the following to say: 

Ri/al represented a powerful Asian intellect and a quiet diligence, a deep 
and meditative love toward his native people, a violent, though cautious en- 
deavor to escape from subjection to Europeans, and therefore, a warning signal 
to future ages, that there would be a catastrophe one day, a clash of European 
and Asian elements and, perhaps, an ultimate expulsion of Europeandom, a 
process against Europeandom similar to what we have been witnessing these 
days as nearing completion in America. 18 

Nor did the German-language press in Bohemia keep silent ovei kizal. On 
17 January 1897, Bohemia* the principal voice of German political circles in 
Bohemia, published an article by F. Fernandez giving a long and detailed biogra- 
phy of Ri/al. 1M The editors chose to place it on the whole front page and much of 
page two. Again, Rizals education and talent were highly praised: 

Ri/al was a man spirituallv gifted in an extraordinary way, he was fluent, 
in addition to Tuialoti and Spanish, also in French, English, and Italian, and 
he understood Dutch. He was quite familiar with the literature written in t lese 
languages and he knew by heart the gems of their poetry. He was gifted with a 
lot of wit and humor that surfaced in his cutting remarks in conversation and 
his writings. He was a sharp observer who, as we say, knew the weak and strong 
points of the Fairopean nations to the core. 0 

In their praise of Rizal, the Czech- and German-language press in Bohemia 
was unanimous. Both highly valued Rizals high education, fluency in seveta an 
guages, and his vast knowledge as well as literary activities. Both those who knew 
him personally and those who first heard about him after his execution were no 
doubt touched by his tragic death. In 19th-century Bohemia, Rizal was the fust 
living evidence of the capacities of and high culture attainable by an Asian. At a 
time when the phrase “colored race” was synonymous with inferiority and back- 
wardness, a young man came to Europe from an almost-unknown insular country 
in East Asia, embodying the harmony between a classical European education and 
the culture of his own people for whom he sought rights and justice who could 
ever forget meeting him? 


777 


THE PHILIPPINE RI-.VC >! f ! I< >N \M > hi V< > 


Rizal and his work won the esteem of outstanding I uropc.m sc hol.irs of the 
time, both in arts and science. But fie also won the syrup. uhv .nul frierulship of 
ordinary people he met on his journeys. He was undoubtedly helped In his ability 
to speak and understand many languages, but his letters prose, both in content and 
style, that on top of all this, he thoroughly understood the et u jiiet te and rules gov- 
erning social life, which must have helped him communicate easil v with people of 
various nations and social classes. 

During Rizals brief visit to Leitmerit/, he and his companion. Maximo 
Viola, were received at the Leitmerit/ (own I kill by Mayor ( »ebhardi and asked to 
sign their names in the Memorial Book of the city, an honor reserved lor on ly the 
most distinguished visitors. They were also invited to attend a board meeting of 
the Leitmeritz Gebirgsvcrein (Mountain I rackers Association). Ri/al replied to the 
welcoming words of the chairman of the board, Mr. Krombhol/, with a speech 
that was equally remarkable due to its spirit and message and was received w ith 
applause by the audience. ” 22 Local Trackers Associations- which sought historical 
inspiration in the natural and historical monuments surrounding their towns — 
were centers of cultural and social life in Bohemian towns, especially where the 
German and Czech populations lived close together. Membership in these associa- 
tions was a matter of prestige. I he same was true for invitations to attend their 
meetings. These events show that Ri/al was not perceived as a mere private v isitor 
of the Blumentritt family. He was, both formally and informally, receiv ed by the 
community of Leitmeritz. 

However, we can also observe certain differences between the C vech- and 
German-language press in the way they treated the significance of Ri/aFs life and 
activities. The Czech -language press received Ri/al without hesitation as the initia- 
tor of the struggle of the Filipino people. Ri/al was a filibustero who courageously 
challenged and exposed the Spaniards’ misdeeds in his country. In contrast, the 
above-quoted article of Bohemia describes Ri/al more as a lonely thinker: 

In any case, Rizals death does not mean that his memory among his 
compatriots will be extinguished. He was their pride, as he was the most con- 
spicuous evidence that the Malay people in the Philippines were not an infe- 
rior race as the Old Spaniards had maintained. I his and only this is the sole 
explanation why he received such recognition from and was so popular with 
the Filipino public. This, as well as the political situation and the requirements 
of the country, could have been easily understood even bv Spaniards. 1 lovv- 
ever, they were obsessed with their preconceived idea that he must have been 
the leading star and the idol of his compatriots in his political ideas as well. 

This was not true: his pessimism alienated him from the right wing of the re- 
formists, while radicals were against him altogether because he hated blood- 
shed and was not in favor of any revolutionary policy. 2 ’ 

Bohemia commented on Rizals sentence: 


778 


\ ASII |1 -VOVA Jose Rizal's Impact on Rohan inti Society 


\\c do not want to crit icize this sentence; however, it is certain that its 
execution was politically unwise. A martyr was created for the Filipino people, 
whose shadow w ill prevent a reconciliation between the colony and its moth- 
erland, perhaps forever. ‘ 

1 Free years later, in an extensive and detailed essay on the history of- Spanish 
rule in the Philippines and the struggle of the Filipino people for independence, 
in Nase doba (Our limes)' a political and cultural revue edited by lomas Masaryk, 
the future First president of the Czechoslovak Republic, J.M. Podhorsky, 
noted: “ 1 hat Or. Rizal and manv others have become victims of a judicial murder 
in its full abhorrence, is a fact about which nobody in Spain, at present, has any 
doubt. " Js 

Similarly, the Czech- and German-language presses covered the Philippine 
revolution from different approaches. We do not find in the German-language 
press the sharp criticism of the Spanish colonial administration and the frailocracy 
that was typical of comments in its Czech counterpart. 1 he explanation for this 
has to besought in the political situation in Bohemia. During the 1890s, the Czech 
national movement became radical, demanding the same rights as the German- 
speaking community. Unlike the German-speaking minority loyal to the 
Habsburg dynasty, Czech public opinion was increasingly critical of the govern- 
ment in Vienna, l he historical ties of the Habsburgs with Spain contributed to 
Czech criticism of Spanish colonial policy. The infamous General Weyler was com- 
pared by the Czech press to those Spanish officers who, after the Habsburg victory 
over the uprising of the Czech nobility in the 17th century, took part in the devas- 
tation of Czech lands. 26 

Last but not least, the fact that the struggle of the Filipinos was aimed against 
the power of the monastic orders had a special importance in shaping Czech atti- 
tudes toward the Philippine revolution. Even after almost three centuries, the 
forced reconversion to Catholicism of the Czechs under the Habsburgs by monas- 
tic orders — especially the Jesuits — entering the country, was not forgotten. 

rhe admiration with which the Czech public followed the progress of the 
Philippine revolution culminated in June 1 898. While the German-language press 
cautiously hinted that the situation in the Philippines was serious and time and 
again spelled out apprehension for what might happen to the residents of Manila, 
the Czech-language newspapers, in firm conviction that the Filipinos wouc 
achieve their independence, expressed their excitement. The daily Lidove noviny 
(Peoples News)' established in 1897 in Brtinn as a voice of the Bohemian and 
Moravian intelligentsia, wrote on 16 June: 

...the Philippine insurgents are reportedly as close as two kilometers from the 
ramparts of Manila... Even at night there is fighting in front of its walls. At all 
cost, the insurgents intend to capture Manila on their own, before the Ameri- 
can troops even set off for the sea, so that they can install their own govern- 


779 


THE PHILIPPINE RKV( )I l ! K >N A N I > HI Y< >M » 


ment in Manila and proclaim in a definitive manner t he Kcpublu <»t the Phil 
ippines. They readily accept American assistance, they mas- accept even their 
protection, but not their domination, nor the dom mat ion of a ns other foreign 
posver. They svant their country to he theirs alone and independent' 

In the comments by the Czech-Ianguagc press about the Spanish defeats a 
feeling of satisfaction can be noted: 

I he things that could have been, by all means, expected, art being ful- 
filled at present: the svar that was started by t he Spaniards with sue h ar r< >g.mc e. 
is turning to their disadvantage and brings them disaster after disaster. I he last 
two days have brought news about one of the most serious disasters t hat could 
have happened to them: the loss of the Philippines! ..Am >t her p< >w er at tac ked 
them from the rear: a huge uprising in the Philippines, led hy Aguinaldo. I here 
was news right from the beginning of the war saying that the insurgents were 
approaching Manila closer and closer; however, deceptive Spanish correspon- 
dents boasted of victories over the insurgents so that 1 u rope does not have a 
clear picture, even now, of what was happening in the Philippines. 1 lie insur- 
gents are taking revenge for the humiliation the Philippine population had to 
suffer over hundreds of years from the cruel and extortionate Spanish domina- 
tion in which Catholic friars played the main part. I he loss of the Philippines 
will be for Spain a new penalty for the shameful pages of her past marked with 
despotism, blood and religious fanaticism. 

Nor often do quality dailies resort to such excited comments as those in 
which 77?^ National Paper anticipated the fall of Manila: 

The catastrophe that was so feared in Madrid for many days and in an- 
ticipation of which the Spaniards literally trembled for weeks, has come. The 
Spaniards in Manila trembled, we say, because they were aware that the hili- 
pino insurgents, protected today by the Star Spangled Banner of the American 
Republic, would not enter the capital of the richest and most cruelly exploited 
Spanish colony as mere victors, but also as avengers for the torments and hu- 
miliations of the past. The shadow cast by Ri/.al, the intelligent and noble 
leader of the natives... who was executed last year [sic!] by the Spaniards based 
on a mere suspicion of having been implicated in a plot, together with the 
shadows cast by the other victims of the Spanish rule of terror, are entering with 
the victorious insurgents a Manila knocked down to its knees; and facing those 
shadows of the past, the Spaniards should consider it a rare generosity if 
Aguinaldo and his comrades, after having conquered the harbor city, will con- 
tent themselves with the role of victors, while renouncing that of avengers.... 

There would be no wonder if the insurgents decided to devastate and reduce to 
ashes this residence of injustice and inhumanity, a residence from which so 


780 


VASIl II VOVA Aw Rizttls Impact on Bohemian Society 


many exploiters had been sent into their lands and from which so many execu- 
tioners departed in order to seek victims in the poor villages of the miserable 
and discontented natives.... In anv case, now the Spaniards have to Face days of 
destruction and humiliation. 


I he Prd ro lidu ( 1 he Peoples Right), a daily of the Social Democratic Party, 
wrote on 22 June: 


I he most important event of these last days is without doubt the fall of 
Manila. The news dispatched from Madrid still tries to prove, in their familiar 
cheating wav, that there is no official confirmation of the fact. However, there 
seems to be no space for doubt any more that the capital of the Philippines has 
been seized bv the insurgents and the Americans. As early as on the 13th [sic!] 
ol this month, Aguinaldo and other leaders of the insurgency formally declared 
in front of Manila the independence of the Philippine Archipelago and they 
called the representatives of the insurgent population for a convention to de- 
liberate on the Constitution of the Republic of the Phillipines. 


I : or the leaders of the Czech political movement, claiming more freedom and 
equal rights for the reemerging Czech nation but still hesitating to point to inde- 
pendence as their ultimate goal, the fact that a republic was declared in the Philip- 
pines must have been a fascinating experience. It took another long 1 / years until 
the Czech representatives rejected the idea of coexistence within the framework of 
the Austro-Hungarian Empire and declared, together with the Slovak political 
leaders, in November 1915: u We strive for an independent Czechoslovak Nation. 

The Filipino people have every right to be proud that their country was the 
first in Asia to rise in a struggle for liberation and to declare a republic. We wou 
only like to add that the repercussions of that historical event crossed the bor ers 
of Asia and became a challenge for one European nation seeking its way to in e 
pendence. 


Notes 

1. Malayischer Besuch in Leitmeritz. Leitmeritzer Zeitung, 18 May 1887, 537. 

2. Seltene Caste. Bohemia , 20 May 1887, 6. 

3. Seltene Caste. Prager Tagblatt , 18 May 1887, 5. 

4. Leitmeritzer Zeitung, 18 May 1887, 537. 

5. The Rizal-Blumentritt Correspondence. Parts one and two. Manila, Jose Rizal Centen 
nial Commission, 1961. 

6. Miscellaneous Correspondence. Manila, National Heroes Commission 1 963, pp. 
306-308; pp. 317-318; pp. 328-329. Napoleon Kheil was also mentioned in Rizal s 
letter to Dr. Meyer of 9 May 1 894. Ibid, p. 299. See also Zdenka Vasiljevova, Dr. Jose 
Rizal and European Intellectuals: A Less Known Contact of Rizal to Bohemia. In M. 


781 


THE PHILIPPINE REVO I l I K >N AND ft! N < >M ) 


Rajaretnam (ed.), Jose Rizal and the Asian Rena/ssnni e ' Kuala I umpur M.mil.i 1996), 

pp. 244-247. 

7. Bohemia, 31 December 1896, 2. 

8. Narodni Politika, 31 December 1896, 2. 

9. Leitmeritzer Zeitung, 2 January 1897, 4. 

10. Narodni Lis ty, 4 January 1897,2. 

1 1. Narodni Listy, 5 January 1897, 3. 

12. Narodni Listy, 6 January 1897, 2. 

13. Ibid. 

14. Ibid. 

15. Ibid. 

16. Ibid. 

17. Ibid. 

18. “Dr. Jose Rizal,” Bohemia, 17 January 189 , 1-2. 

19. Ibid, 2. 

20. Leitmeritzer Zeitung, 18 May 1887, 537. 1 be Memorial Book has been preserved in 
the Leitmeritz District Archives. See: Jindrich Tomas, Litomcricky profesor lerdnunid 
Blumentritt ajeho styky s Pilipinami, zvldste s Jose Rizuiletn. I e nova no HO. I yri^i hrditine 
smrti Jose Rizala, ktery hyl popraven 30. prosince 1 H00. f] erdinand Blumentritt of 
Litomericeand his connections with the Philippine Islands, especially with lose Rizal. 
Dedicated to the 80th anniversary of the heroical death of Jose Rizal). In Litomericko. 
Vlastivedny sbornik. Vol. XIV. Litomerice, ( )kresm mu/.eum 1977, pp. 95-1 14. 

21. Leitmeritzer Zeitung, 18 May 1887, 537. See: Rizal s Response to the Welcome of 

the President of theTourists’ Club of Leitmeritz, Austria, M r. Joseph Krombhols [sic!] 
as Reported by Professor Blumentritt. In: Rizal's Prose. Writings ojjosc Riziil. Vol. Ill, 
Book Two. (Manila, Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission 1962), p. 74. 

22. Bohemia , 17 January 1897, 2. 

23. Ibid. 

24. Josef Mojmir Podhorsky, Spanelsko a Pilipiny “ Spain and the Philippines. " In: Nose 
doba, Vol. VI, 1899, 87-95; 178-184; 274-281. Podhorsky acknowledged to profes- 
sor Blumentritt, “the outstanding and the best European expert in the Philippines," 
for information provided in his writings as well as in letters and during their personal 
meetings. The last event mentioned by Podhorsky was the departure of two Philip- 
pine delegates to Paris, where the peace negotiations between Spain and America were 
taking place. Podhorsky was rather skeptical, pointing out that “the victors as well as 
the former rulers of the country would like to possess the beautiful Islands" (28 1 ). 

25. Narodni Listy, 17 April 1898, 1. 

26. Sevyenf Manily, “The Encirclement of Manila," Lidove Noviny, 1 6 June 1 898, 4. 

27. Valka spanelsko-americka “The Spanish-American War." Prdvo lidu, 1 1 June 1898, 3. 

28. Pad Manily, “The Fall of Manila,” Narodni Listy, 20 June 1 898, 6. 

29. Valka spanelsko-americka “The Spanish-American War.” Prdvo lidu , 22 June 1898, 
3. 


782 




Rizal’s View of the Spanish Language 1 


Cristina Barron 

Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico 


Jn his novel El Filibusterismo , Jose P. Rizal said: 

As long as a nation preserves its languages, it preserves the symbol of its 
liberty, just as a man maintains his independence only as long as he maintains 
his own way of thinking. Language is a peoples way of thinking. ~ 

Undoubtedly, Jose Rizal was fully aware of the importance of a language in 
the construction of a nation-state. Language is the vital element in the creation of 
a national society, a factor in forging identity, and finally, the manifestation of 
power of the ruling class. 

Simoun tells Basilio: 

. . .You ask parity of rights, the Spanish way of life, and you do not realize 
that what you are asking is death, the destruction of your national identity, the 
disappearance of your homeland. . . what will you be in the future, people with- 
out qualities, a nation without freedom 

Basilio replies: 

On the contrary, if the knowledge of Spanish may bring us closer to the 
Government, it can also unite all the islands. 


783 


THE mn.IPPINh HI V( )! I I I( )\ 


.1 ) P.l > V .I > 


Simoun chides Basil io: 

A gross mistake! You let yourselves he fooled In big words .mil never get 
to the bottom of things to study the ultimate eonsecjuetR e\ Spanish v\ ill never 
be the national language because the people will never speak it I hat tongue 
cannot express their ideas and their emotions, hath people has its own wav of 
speaking just as it has is own way of feeling. What will yon do with Spanish? 
The few of you who will get to speak it? You will onlv kill your mdiv uiual per 
sonality and subject your thoughts to other minds. Instead of making your 
selves free, you will only make yourselves truly slaves. 


Simoun concludes: 

If they refuse to teach you their language, then c ult iv ate v< >ur < >w n. make 
it more widely known, keep alive our native culture for our people, and instead 
of aspiring to be a mere province, aspire to he a nation. . . 

From this interesting dialogue, it can be deduced that although Spanish was 
not taught in the Philippines, at least a good number of Filipino i/asmis/os' mas- 
tered the language and they formed an important sector in the search and struggle 
for independence. However, the question of why Spanish was not tang hr in the 
Philippines as it was in the other Spanish colonies in America and the ( .aribbean 
always arises. The Laws of the Indies and other royal decrees were supposed to he 
implemented in all Spanish colonies. 

To answer that nagging question, this paper seeks to explain the historical 
circumstances that hampered the teaching and dissemination of the Spanish lan- 
guage in the Philippines. Comparisons will he made with Nueva Hspana, now 
Mexico, the Spanish colony with which the Philippines had very close relations for 
250 years and where Spanish eventually became the national language. 

Language in the Construction of a Nation-state 

An early example of how language was used as an instrument of the state can be 
found in El arte de la lengua caste liana y /{ written by the Spanish linguist Antonio de 
Nebrija in 1492. Nebrija advised the Reyes Catolicos to use language as an instru- 
ment of consolidation. In other words, language was the perfect imperial device 
for the unification of the Spanish kingdom. 

Since the 15th century, language was used as an instrument of unification of 
emerging European nation-states. However, it was not until the 1 9th century, dur- 
ing the era of nationalism, that the language policy was applied systematically 
through the establishment of a public obligatory and secular educational system. 
Spain was not an exception; then and today in Spain, Spanish is not the national 
language but only an official one. 


784 


BARRON /\u\:!> \ ieir of the Spanish language 


Christianization and Hispanicization 

I hiring the colonization of Mexico and the Philippines, Christianization and His- 
panici/ation had practically the same meaning. Both terms referred to the process 
by which beliefs, values, customs, and even the way of life pertaining to the Span- 
ish culture were transferred to the cultures of the colonized. However, the Spanish 
language was not necessarily the medium through which this transculturization 
was carried out. The natives of Mexico and the Philippines were Christianized and 
1 lispanici/ed but not necessarily “castillianized. ' 

1 here are four fundamental reasons why the native Filipinos do not speak 
Spanish. 

Why Filipinos Do Not Speak Spanish 

I he first reason is geographic. The distance from Spain was such that these islands 
were always considered a frontier land where neither Spanish culture nor language 
could grow firm roots. 

The second reason was the Spanish crowns fundamental objectives with re- 
gard to the archipelago. Until the late 18th century, the Capitania General de 
Pilipinas (now the Philippines) was centered around the Manila port area as it was 
maintained only as a commercial stopover between Spain and Asia. For more than 
two centuries, there was hardly any direct contact between colony and mother 
country. The Capitania General de Pilipinas was administered through the 
Virreinato de la Nueva Espana (now Mexico). As a result, there were more cultural 
exchanges between these two colonies than with Spain herself lo appreciate the 
linguistic repercussions of these very direct relations between the Philippines and 
Mexico, one can refer to Carmen Paloma Albalas excellent work about nahuatl 
words in the Pacific islands. 0 

The third reason is related to the main instruments ot support of Spanish 
colonization: the sword and the cross. The military presence in the Philippine is- 
lands was relatively insignificant; moreover, the colonial army's main task was ex- 
ternal defense against Muslims from the south and against English, Dutch, and 
Chinese pirates, and not the subjugation of the native population that survived the 
Spanish conquest, as in Mexico. 

With respect to the cross, the evangelical work of the missionaries depended 
on the success of the reduction or congregation de pueblos (now called hamletting), 
that is, the resettlement of the native population into new pueblos de indios. In 
Mexico, this process was the basis of Christianization and Hispanicization, and 
was completed successfully as early as the 1 6th century. 

However, in the Philippines, the reduction met with very limited success. By 
the 17th century, there were not more than 20 new pueblos , most of which weie 
established near sea ports like Manila, with about 20,000 inhabitants, a significant 
number being sangleys and Spaniards. In the interior areas, the newly established 


785 


THK PHII.IPPINK RLVOI l I K >N \NI > hi Y< >NI ) 


hamlets had even less people and could be called fiestii piubh> where natives were 
attracted by the festive atmosphere of religious ceremonies and town le asts. I hir- 
ing the rest of the year, they lived in their traditional areas. 

The fourth reason was the lack of civilian migration from Spain to the Phil- 
ippines during the first 200 years of colonization as the Spaniards believed that the 
exploitation of the colony’s resources was not a very profitable enterprise. It was 
only in the 19th century that Spaniards became interested in the cultivation and 
trading of sugar and tobacco among other products. But these commercial oppor- 
tunities did not attract great waves of migration from Spain because of the enor- 
mous distance of the colony and its climate. 

In Mexico, the factors that hampered the spread of the Spanish language were 
quite different. The Spanish crown used all methods within its power to conquer, 
control, and consolidate Mexico as it was to become the center of its empire: the 
conquest all but obliterated the native population, t nlike in the Philippines, only 
a small percentage of the natives in Mexico survived the aggression. 

Besides, greater military support served to round up the indigenous people 
into new pueblos where the Christianization and I lispanicization of the native 
population took place. By the 16th century, even Mexicos architectural panorama 
had changed drastically. Gone were the pyramids. Nueva Pspana was a cluster of 
fort-like churches, convents, and massive stone crosses. 

The shorter distance from Spain, Mexicos benign climate, and legends of El 
Dorado encouraged a considerable civilian migration to Nueva Ivspaha. Interracial 
contact produced the mestizaje , a phenomenon which became a fundamental fac- 
tor of the emerging, Hispanicized Mexican nation. It must be noted, however, that 
during the colonial era, the mestizo was socially rejected and had to take refuge in 
the indigenous world. However, when the anticolonial movement for Mexican 
independence began the mestizo participated actively in the political, social, and 
economic life of the nation, but only after learning the Spanish language. 

Teaching and Dissemination of the Spanish Language 

As the 15th-century Spanish linguist Antonio dc Nebrija said, language was the 
perfect imperial tool. Nevertheless, from the 16th to the late I 8th centuries, the 
Spanish crown had contradictory attitudes toward the teaching and dissemination 
of the Spanish language in its colonies. 8 

For example, during the reign of Felipe IV, the Real Cedula dc 1627 prohib- 
ited the use of vernacular languages and promoted the teaching and dissemination 
of the Spanish language among the natives. But at the same time, the Real Cedilla 
allowed evangelization in native tongues. 

Not until the Reformas Borbonicas of Carlos III, at the end of the 1 8th cen- 
tury, did the Spanish crown decree a more coherent and systematic language policy 
which favored Spanish and suppressed the use of vernacular languages. I his was 


786 


BARRi A* u+il'y \ iew of the Spanish luingudge 


done mainly to facilitate the colonial administration and foster spiritual union. As 
the Real C edilla said, “ 1 ’hey may come to love the conquering nation — " I0 

Although the Spanish crown believed that the missionaries should teach and 
disseminate the Spanish language, the latter were not given any effective support to 
implement this language policv. l or their part, the missionaries were more inter- 
ested in the continued use of the vernacular languages than in teaching Spanish, 
for two important reasons. 1 'his gave them a position of power for, in effect, they 
were the interpreters of the local population and the ecclesiastical and civil authori- 
ties. 

1 he second reason is purelv religious, t hrough the use of the vernacular lan- 
guages, the missionaries attempted to reconstruct, among the indigenous converts, 
the primitive C hristian doctrines, untainted by the heresies of the Middle Ages in 
Europe. W hen the missionaries came to the Philippines, their religious orders had 
already experienced 40 vears of evangelization in Nucva Espana so they knew that 
the vernacular languages were the best instruments of Christianization. 

1 his had favorable res tilts tor the indigenous languages. In the Philippines as 
well as in Mexico, the religious orders svstematized these languages when thc\ pie- 
pared dictionaries, glossaries, and grammar books. Obviously, the teaching and 
dissemination of Spanish in indigenous communities could not have been success- 
ful. By the middle of the 18th centurv the Spanish language was tai from being 
widespread even in Mexico, the heart ot t he empire. 1 he following document writ 
ten in Madrid m l -7 ’() confirms this: 


After more than two hundred fifty years of colonization, in more devel- 
oped and civilized places like Mexico and Puebla, there are still many different 
local languages like atomic ttiazdhinu huasteco . tepehud and to to titled. In 1 ucbla, 
aside from the previously mentioned ones eh o coho and ?tiisteco f tldpdtieio , 
olniecti and two variations of tototmeu also exist. 11 


This situation was also confirmed by the virrey Antonio Maria de b Llc ‘ irt - 1 ) 
Ursua and by Archbishop Antonio Lorenzana v Bultron who both expiesse tieir 
deep concern when they said: “Two and a halt centuries alter the conquest o 1 
kingdom, we are still, in greater numbers than before, using and feeling tie nee 
for interpreters of the languages of the natives...” 12 , . 

For this reason, at the end of the 18th century. Archbishop Lorenzana m 
self initiated in a very organized manner an important movement to casti 


the natives of Nueva Espana. . , ■ 

All this leads to the conclusion that the Spanish language becan^ ^ 
propagated in Mexico as a result of its independence from Spain in ' 
precisely the castillianized mestizos, rejected all throughout the colonia c P oc ^ ^ 


began to use the language as they felt the need to participate . 13 , 

economic life of the country, then dominated by the criollos. The mestizo 


in 


the political and 


787 




THI PH 1 1 IPPINT H\V( )(l IK >N \ N I ) Mi u >NI * 


hamlets had even less people and could be called fir tii purblo where natives were 
attracted by the festive atmosphere of religious ccrenmnics uni town feasts. I dur- 
ing the rest of the year, they lived in their traditional areas. 

The fourth reason was the lack of civilian migration from Spam to the Phil- 
ippines during the first 200 years of colon i /.at ion as the Spaniards believed that the 
exploitation of the colony’s resources was not a very profitable enterprise. It was 
only in the 19th century that Spaniards became interested in the cultivation and 
trading of sugar and tobacco among other products. Put t hese commercial oppor- 
tunities did not attract great waves of migration from Spain because of the enor- 
mous distance of the colony and its climate. 

In Mexico, the factors that hampered the spread of the Spanish language were 
quite different. The Spanish crown used .ill methods within its power to conquer, 
control, and consolidate Mexico as it was to become the center of its empire: the 
conquest all but obliterated the native population. I nlike in the Philippines, only 
a small percentage of the natives in Mexico survived the aggression. 

Besides, greater military support served to round up the indigenous people 
into new pueblos where the Christianization and I I ispan ic i/at ion of the native 
population took place. By the 16th century, even .Mexico s architectural panorama 
had changed drastically. Gone were the pyramids. Nueva h.spana was a cluster of 
fort-like churches, convents, and massive stone crosses. 

The shorter distance from Spain, Mexicos benign climate, and legends of El 
Dorado encouraged a considerable civilian migration to Nueva h.spana. Interracial 
contact produced the mestizaje , a phenomenon which became a fundamental fac- 
tor of the emerging, Hispanicized Mexican nation. It must be noted, however, that 
during the colonial era, the mestizo was socially rejected and had to take refuge in 
the indigenous world. However, when the anticolonial movement for Mexican 
independence began the mestizo participated actively in the political, social, and 
economic life of the nation, but only after learning the Spanish language. 

Teaching and Dissemination of the Spanish Language 

As the 15th-century Spanish linguist Antonio de Nebrija said, language was the 
perfect imperial tool. Nevertheless, from the 16th to the late 18th centuries, the 
Spanish crown had contradictory attitudes toward the teaching and dissemination 
of the Spanish language in its colonies. 8 

For example, during the reign of Felipe IV, the Real Cedula de 162/ prohib- 
ited the use of vernacular languages and promoted the teaching and dissemination 
of the Spanish language among the natives. But at the same time, the Real Cedilla 
allowed evangelization in native tongues . l> 

Not until the Reformas Borbonicas of Carlos III, at the end of the 1 8th cen- 
tury, did the Spanish crown decree a more coherent and systematic language policy 
which favored Spanish and suppressed the use of vernacular languages. This was 


786 


BARRON Riztil's l iete of the Spanish l. an gunge 


done mainly to facilitate the colonial administration and foster spiritual union. As 
the Real Cedula said, "They may come to love the conquering nation — " 10 

Although the Spanish crown believed that the missionaries should teach and 
disseminate the Spanish language, the latter were not given any effective support to 
implement this language policy. For their part, the missionaries were more inter- 
ested in the continued use of the vernacular languages than in teaching Spanish, 
for two important reasons. This gave them a position of power for, in effect, they 
were the interpreters of the local population and the ecclesiastical and civil authori- 
ties. 

1 he second reason is purelv religious. 1 hrough the use of the vernacular lan- 
guages, the missionaries attempted to reconstruct, among the indigenous converts, 
the primitive Christian doctrines, untainted by the heresies of the Middle Ages in 
Europe. When the missionaries came to the Philippines, their religious orders had 
already experienced 40 years of evangelization in Nueva Espana so they knew that 
the vernacular languages were the best instruments of Christianization. 

I bis had favorable results feu* the indigenous languages. In the Philippines as 
well as in Mexico, the religious orders systematized these languages when they pie- 
pared dictionaries, glossaries, and grammar books. Obviously, the teaching and 
dissemination of Spanish in indigenous communities could not have been success- 
ful. By the middle of the 18th century the Spanish language was far from being 
widespread even in Mexico, the heart of the empire. 1 he following document writ- 
ten in Madrid in 1770 confirms this: 


After more than two hundred fifty years of colonization, in more devel 
oped and civilized places like Mexico and Puebla, there are still many different 
local languages like oto?ni, nirtzahua, huasteco , tepehua and totonaca. In 1 uebla, 
aside from the previously mentioned ones chocoho and ttiisteco , tlapatitco , 
olrneca and two variations of totouaca also exist." 


This situation was also confirmed by the virrey Antonio Maria de Bucate i y 
Ursua and by Archbishop Antonio Lorenzana y Bultron who both expresse 
deep concern when they said: "Two and a half centuries aftei the conquest o tats 
kingdom, we are still, in greater numbers than before, using and feeling tie nee 

for interpreters of the languages of the natives... u . 

For this reason, at the end of the 18th century, Archbishop Lorenzana hi 
self initiated in a very organized manner an important movement to casti lamze 

the natives of Nueva Espana. . , , 

All this leads to the conclusion that the Spanish language became wi e y 
propagated in Mexico as a result of its independence from Spain in 1821. It wa. 
precisely the castillianized mestizos , rejected all throughout the colonial e P oc ’ w ° 
began to use the language as they felt the need to participate in the po itica an 
economic life of the country, then dominated by the aiollos. 1 he mestizo 


787 


THK PHILIPPINE KI-.VC >1(1 K >\ \M > hi ,< r.i > 


became the best vehicle for the propagation of Spanish, which everim.iIK became 
the national and maternal language of the majority of Mexicans. 

Although Mexico has a national language, Spanish, its national unitv is not 
guaranteed. Precisely because they do not know Spanish, the indigenous people 
have been marginali'/ed from the mainstream of political and economic life- and it 
has become almost impossible for them to he integrated. In the- l c H>(K. the- Mexi- 
can government formulated a policy for indigenous groups that aimed to perpetu- 
ate the use of the 56 native dialects spoken by almost I 0 percent of t lie pop u Lit ion, 
or 9 million Mexican Indians. But it was impleme nted to sc ree certain political 
interests, not to integrate the nation. 

The Spanish Language in 19th-century Philippines 

The state of the Spanish language at the time of the Philippine ant ic olonial resolu- 
tion in 1896-1898 was similar to that of Mexico in 1821, when it became inde- 
pendent. Let us see why. 

Due to the liberal policies proclaimed by the Spanish crown in I <S(h3 plus the 
Decreto de Instruccion Publica the Spanish language was imposed as the sole me- 
dium of instruction. The Decreto ordered compulsory, lav education for children 
between the ages of seven and 13. It also established a Normal School for teacher 
training and schools in every town. 

The Decreto was thoroughly rejected by the religious orders, provoking great 
debate, polemics, and declarations similar to the arguments of I ray Francisco cle 
Gainza, then the vice-rector of the University of Santo Tomas in Manila. I Ic said 
that if Spanish were to become the lingua jranca of the islands (Philippines) it 
would break the providential barrier between it and the vernacular languages, mak- 
ing it easier for the spread of heresies and anti-Catholic ideas. Fray cle (iain/a also 
said that it was not necessary to teach Spanish because C Christian doctrine had al- 
ready been translated into the different native dialects and that evangelization had 
always been carried out in the vernacular. Finally, he declared that the dissemina- 
tion of Spanish would only foment rebellion among the natives as in 
Hispanoamerica. He said: 

Up till now, there has been a healthy rivalry between different lamzua^es 

1 J of* 

and races; by pitting the cagayanon against the tagalog and the pampango 
against the ilocano, the government has isolated rebellions; the unification of 
languages could create a unity of sentiments and make it possible for one man 
to lead the masses to an incendiary proclamation . 1 ‘ 

Documents like these have been overemphasized by those who study Philip- 
pine history, especially by those who sought to justify the propagation of the En- 
glish language when the North Americans began to colonize the Philippines. Taken 
out of context these declarations are given a literal meaning. What is not analyzed 


788 


B \ K Kc )\ Ri^i/'s \ :cu of the Spanish l.*in^tujgt 


is the opposition ot the religious orders to the anticlerical and antireligious policies 
of the liberal state and their loss o! power as intermediaries between government 
and the governed tor almost three centuries. 1 h is negative reaction was carried as 
far as opposing the secularization of the University of Santo Tomas, the oldest uni- 
versity in Asia. 

Despite the opposition, the Decreto de Instruccion Publica was proclaimed. 

I here were declarations in its favor such as that of Sinibaldo de Mas who was sent 
to Manila to report on the state of the Spanish language and how best to propagate 
it. He concluded that the crowns interest should not be focused solely on the teach- 
ing of the language but on a complete education that would redound to the welfare 
of the Filipino people. 

However, in the 1 c ) t h century, Spain no longer had either the financial or 
human resources to implement its educational policy in its colonies, although it 
could have used Spanish soldiers stationed in the Philippines just as American 
troops were used to teach Fnglish after the U.S. invasion. 


Conclusion 

It was already too late when the Spanish government realized the importance of 
teaching the Spanish language or kiistiLt for their colonial interests in both Mexico 
and the Philippines. Only a small percentage of the population spoke it. In the case 
of Mexico, aside from the eri olios who were Hispanicized because their mother lan- 
guage was Spanish, the mestizos learned to speak it only after independence. In the 
Philippines, the criollo circle was so small that its contribution to castillianization 
was minimal. 1 lowever, the ilustrados among the native population did speak and 
write Spanish for the same reasons that the Mexican mestizos , promoters of then 
independence movement, learned the language: to gain access to the politica ant 
economic processes of an emerging nation. 

Id attract the attention of the liberal government in Spain during theii 
anticolonial struggle, the Filipino ilustrados expressed their revolutionary ideas 
in Spanish. Had the First Philippine republic survived the North American 
invasion, the Filipino ilustnulo would have certainly propagated the Spanish lan- 
gu age as the FI i s pa n i c i zed mestizos did in Mexico. In effect, Spanish became a kind 
of shield against North American culture for several decades, as can be gleaner 
from the writings of the Filipino nationalist. Senator Claro M. Recto: “Spanish 
culture and literature form an integral part of our Filipino soul and we cannot 
destroy nor prescind it without at the same time destroying and tearing our 
own 

Unlike their Mexican counterparts, the Filipino ilustrados preserved their 
own native tongues and maintained their links with the majority of the popula- 
tion. As a result, the Philippine native dialects survived the clash between two co- 
lonial languages, Spanish and English. Eventually, what Simoun told Basilio in El 
Filibusterisrno came true: 


789 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOI t I K )N AND IU Y< >NI > 


If they refuse to teach you their language, then... cultivate vour own. 
make it more widely known, keep alive our native culture lor our people, and 
instead of aspiring to be a mere province, aspire to be a nation. 

Now that the Philippines is an independent nation that has preserved its own 
native language and dialects, it is a pity that Pilipinos find no sense in using the 
Spanish language. Just as the iluslrados used the language in their anticolonial 
struggle, today Spanish should be a tool to study the documents about more than 
300 years of history. Philippine history cannot be written without using the Span- 
ish language as a tool. 

Moreover, more than 20 countries in I .at in America speak Spanish. I he Phil- 
ippines can reestablish the close cultural and commercial relations it had with this 
region for 230 years. In this manner, the Philippine presence can be strongly felt in 
what was known as the New World. 


Notes 

1. English translation by Gemma Cruz C juerrero. 

2. Jose Rizal, El Filibusterismo, Leon Ma. Guerrero (trans.) (London: I ongm.ins (ireen 
&Co., 1963), pp. 51-53. 

3. The ilustraclos were mainly natives, mestizo chinos or sangleys, and mestizo cspafioles. 
During the anticolonial revolution (1896-1998) they already had developed a na- 
tional sense of being Filipino; however, the term Filipino during the Spanish colonial 
period referred to the children of the Spaniards who were born in the Philippines. In 
Mexico, these children were named criollos. 'The natives in both colonies were called 
indios. 

4. Dominguez Ortiz, El antiguo regimen: los reyes catolicos y los austrias ( Madrid, Alianza 
Universidad, 1973), p. 31. 

5. Castillianizedox the Filipino word kastila means the teaching and diffusion or disper- 
sion of the Spanish language. Castellano is the language of Castilla kingdom. I his 
language extends to the rest of Spain, therefore it is also known as Spanish. I he 
people of Castilla were the first ones to reach America and their language Castellano 
began to be used in both colonies: Mexico and the Philippines. 

6. Carmen-Paloma Albala, Nahuatlismo en las islas del Pacifica , in Cristina Barron and 
Rafael Rodriguez- Ponga, La Presencia Novohispana en el Pacifica Insular I Jornadas 
Internacionales, Mexico, Universidad Iberoamericana, 1990. 

7. Charles Gibson as well as Peter Gerhard consider that at least 80 percent of the native 
people died during the first century of the Spanish colonization of Mexico. Peter 
Gerhard, Geografia historica de la Nueva Espana 1519-1821, translated by Stella 
Mastrangelo, Mexico, IIH-UNAM, 1986. Charles Gibson, I he Aztecs under Spanish 
Rule , A History of Indians of the Valley of Mexico 1519-1819 (Stanford: University 
Press), 1964. 


790 


KARRt Rtziil > l iew of the Spanish Language 

8. Silvio Zavala, ,77 easte/Lino, lengitti ohligatoriaf ( Mexico: Secretaria dc Education 
Public.!. 1965). 

9. ReeopiLieion tie / or* tie Ins Reynos tie Lis holms, 4 vols., Madrid, A. Baibas Ed., 1957, 
1 ib. 1. tit. XIII. 1 cv V. 

10. PNA. “Real C cdula disponiendo quo sc extingan los diferentes idiomas que se usan 
cn los dominios dc ultramar v solo sc liable cl Castellano, 1685-1897," vol. I, exp. 2, 
lojas 6-7. 

1 1 . Quoted by Francisco l arrou), Historic comparada de Li educat ion cn Mexico (Mexico, 
hd. Porrua, 1 p. 1 -*2. 

12. Ibid. 

1 3. 1 be mestizo was t lie child ot Spaniard and native. In Mexico 90 percent of the people' 

are mestizo . 

14. “Voto patictilar sobre el cstudio oblii;atorio para los indios de la lengua castellana, 
eniitido por brancisco Cainza en la Junta elc Educacion Primaria, Manila, marzo de 
1 861 . In ( annnnicaciones oficia/es de las autoridades ec/esiasticas y civiles 1866-1688* 
vol. 1, 167. 

1 5. Sinibaldo dc Mas, Informe sobre el esrot/o de Lis isLis Filipiruis en 1842 (Manila His- 
torical C.onservation Society, 1963), 3a. parte. 

16. Claro M. Recto, ‘hi castcllano como factor de nuestra nacionalidad. In For Philip 
pine Survival , Nationalist Essays by Claro M. Recto and Renato Constantino, 
(Quezon City: 1 he Foundation lor Nationalist Studies, 1979). 


791 


Rizal’s Utopian Society 


Roi.ando M. Gripai.do 

Do In Snlle University, Mnniln, Philippines 


Wliat is a Utopia? 

A utopia is originally conceived as a desirable society. 1 homas More 
(Finley 1967: 3-4; Kateb 1967; 212) coined the term from two Greek words, 
on for “no” or “not” and topos for “place.” It literally means nowhere. But the 
Greek prefix eu can also mean “good” or “well, so we can have a good oi an 
“ideal” place or society. In a significant sense an ideal society is possible albeit im- 
probable. It can only be copied or implemented imperfectly. It is in this sense that 
it derives a negative connotation of impracticality and therefore without utility. 

Plato (Sabine a nd Thorson 1973: 50-31) did not consider The Republic as 
impractical. That he failed to educate and train a ruler to become a philosopher- 
king" merely meant that he had not yet met the right person. In the same vein, Karl 
Marx and Friedrich Engels (1965:40-42) did not think the classless society was 
utopian or impractical. They believed it would inevitably arise as the histoiical 
consequence of economic determinism. They belittled the earlier socialism of Rob- 
ert Owen and others as critical-utopian while theirs was scientific. 3 It was only very 
much later that a number of critics were convinced that the desirable societies of 
Plato and the communists were themselves utopian (Kateb 1967:213). 

Jose Rizal likewise thought that his desirable society was achievable in prac- 
tice. He argued (Fores-Ganzon 1967:1:669-70) that for new men, a new social 
order.” ' It is the contention of this paper that almost a century after Rizal s death 
on 30 December 1 896, his desirable society still remains to be achieved and it ap- 
pears essentially utopian. 


793 


THE PHILIPPINE Rf.VOU I K >N \NI> hi i < >N[> 


The Time of Hizal 
Social Context 

What were the conditions during Rizals time- that gave rise* ro Ins c-nvisional new 
society? 

It is widely believed that prior to the Spanish coh >ni/at i< >n < >t the Philippines 
the natives had their own civilization: they were literate and had a system of writ- 
ing; they had surplus goods which they traded with their Asian neighbors includ- 
ing the Borneans, the Orang Dampuans of ( Champa ( now \ iet nam ), and t he ( h i - 
nese, among others; they had a system of government; they understood the use of 
metals; and some of them — such as the sultan of Siilu, the suit. in of Mindanao, 
and even the raha of Manila — controlled a relatively large territory. NX hen the 
Spaniards colonized them, the natives had already left the Neolithic stage and were 
in the process of developing a full-blown civilization. 

The government that Miguel Lopez de Legazpi established in Maynila (later 
Manila) after the defeat of Raha Sulayman was one where the state and the church 
were unified. This was important because the church was an instrument of the state 
in the process of conquest and colonization. 

The Augustinian friars who were the first to arrive in the Philippines, to- 
gether with the batches of friars from the early religious orders ( branciscans, Do- 
minicans, Jesuits, Recollects) that came to the country, were once the champions 
of the natives since they defended the latter in their parishes from the abuses and 
excesses of encomenderos who collected taxes on lands awarded to them by virtue of 
their encomienda rights. Although some of what the friars inculcated in the minds 
of the natives was negative, (like not cooperating with the encomenderos by not 
working on the land), these were supposedly in the interest of the natives. 1 his 
protective generosity and religious zeal among the friars declined when the en- 
comienda system was abolished and replaced by alcaldias or provinces. Here the 
friars gradually assumed a number of extra-religious functions which had nothing 
to do with the saving of souls. One of these was to give his consent as to who would 
become the head of the political territory where he had an influence, for example, 
at the barangay or municipal level, no cabeza de barangay ( kapitan ) or gobernador- 
cillo would be appointed by the governor-general without the recommendation or 
consent of the parish priest who held jurisdiction over the territory. As a conse- 
quence the friar became the real political power of the place. In addition, the friar 
knew the people within his parish since he was the census-taker and he supervised 
and controlled their education. In this regard his influence was widespread, i.e., 
not only among the political leaders but also among the people. 

If this kind of influence was used exclusively for the welfare of the people, it 
must not only be tolerated but encouraged. Unfortunately, it became the source of 
abuses and malpractices. In many instances, the gobernadorcillo or kapitan could 
not make his own independent political decisions. He had to consult the friar. 


794 


CiRIPAl.nO Riziil's Utopian Society 


whose decision was final. He could not go against the decision of the friar and 
therefore became a puppet. On the other hand, the friar did not want the natives to 
learn the Spanish language despite the government's policy to make Spanish the 
common language of communication, probably out of prejudice and possibly out 
of fear that “an uneducated Filipino who knew Spanish would become a “future 
'filibustero' ’(Agoncillo 1990: 97). Moreover, it was widely accepted that many fri- 
ars fathered sons and daughters. 

From the religious perspective, the friars failed to uproot the pagan supersti- 
tions of the natives which they “utilized as a means of holding the natives to the 
practices of the new religion. ' According to leodoro Agoncillo, by the 1840s and 
later. 


...real Catholic doctrine was not understood by the [natives], who saw little 
distinction between magic and the Catholic belief in miracles, idolatry and the 
veneration of saints and images, superstitions and certain Catholic rituals 
(Agoncillo and Guerrero 1983: 97). 

On the part of the colonial government certain abuses were perpetuated. 1) 
there was the polo or forced labor where thousands of natives were taken from their 
farms to work on the construction of roads, bridges, churches, etc.; some were 
brought to faraway places to cut and haul logs for the construction of ships, but 
only few returned; 2) there was the bandala which allowed the government to buy 
the surplus products of the natives at a dictated low price; 3) public offices were 
sold to the highest bidders and became sources of personal gain (Corpuz 1981: 79- 
80); 4) commercial monopolies were established at various times which wreaked 
havoc on the development of economic competition and individual initiative in 
industries; and 5) gambling was introduced." 

Effects of Conditions on the Natives 

What effects did this kind of socio-religious and politico-administrative milieu 

have on the indios , as the natives were then called? 

First, the indios became docile. They did not complain or oppose abuses and 
malpractices. When insulted, maltreated, or mistreated, even when they were rig t, 

they bowed their heads and indulged in self-pity. 

Second, they had the tendency to become religiously fanatical. There was 
nothing wrong in spending some time for religious activities, but to forget otier 
equally important matters except for religion and pangningue(z kind of card game) 
was tantamount to fanaticism. Here is what Rizal (1972a: 58) himself said of i i 
pino mothers: 

What could the offspring be of a woman whose only virtue is to mur- 
mur prayers, whose only knowledge is derived from aunt, novena, prayer- 


795 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< >M ) 


books, and miraculous tales intended to fool men, with no other rec rc.it ion but 
panguingue or frequent confession of the same sins?... 1 he mother who can 
teach nothing else but how to kneel and kiss the hand [ot a friar; should not 
expect any other kind of children but stupid ones or oppressed slaves. 

I hird, they became indolent. When they were uprooted from their farms to 
work in far places, when their surplus products were bought by the government at 
a trifling price, when their office work was not duly compensated, when taxes were 
unreasonably high, etc., the inciios preferred gambling or banditrv to an honest 
days work. 

Fourth, they became highly individualistic or familialistic, entirely devoid of 
the feeling of nationalism. 7 hey could not identify their interests with t hose of the 
colonial government nor could they rely on the colonial administration for secu- 
rity and survival. 7 hey had to rely on themselves or on their families for mutual 
support and security. 

Lastly, they became pronouncedly fatalistic. 1 hev became resigned to their 
lot, hoping for the best and expecting the worst. And should the latter occur, they 
assumed the attitude of indifference, leaving to God whatever might become of 
them. 

Hie Alternative Society: A Historical Perspective 

Rizal envisioned an alternative society that would be composed of enlightened 
human beings with dignity and responsibility, people who would recognize their 
inalienable rights to life, liberty, and property, and who would refuse to submit to 
oppression and despotism. To quote Rizal (1972a: 58.59): 

Men are born equal, naked, and without chains. 7 hey were not created 
by God to be enslaved, neither were they endowed with intelligence in order to 
be misled, nor adorned with reason to be fooled by others. It is not pride to 
refuse to worship a fellow man [i.e. the friar], to enlighten the mind, and to 
reason out everything. 

Razal knew there were few such men during his time. When he went to Spain 
or t e irst time in 1882, he was disappointed to find that the members of the 
Fi ipino colon) there were unpatriotic and irresponsible, except for one or two. Ac- 
cording to Rafael Palma (1949: 51) the young Filipino expatriates in Madrid “slept 
to midday, spent the afternoon playing cards, and amused themselves wi th women 
in the evening.” They considered “going to class as out of fashion and the expres- 
sion of any patriotic sentiment as quixotic.” Rizal had to exert extra effort to suc- 
ceed in focusing their attention on the political affairs of the country and to fight 
for liberal reforms in order to make the Philippines a province of Spain. Toward 
that goal, the reformists sought the following (Agoncillo 1980: 148): a) equality 


796 


c.RIPAI l >0 A l t apian Society 


between the Spaniards aiul the Filipinos; b) representation in the Spanish Cortes; 
c) granting of freedom of speech and of the press, and the right of redress griev- 
ances; and d) secularization or handing over the parishes to the secular priests. 1 he 
last reform apparently would effect the sending home of the friars from the Philip- 
pines, which the reformists desired since thev regarded them as the real cause of the 
country s backwardness. 

Ri/al wrote a number of political essays, plavs, poems, two novels, and one 
annotation which were largely designed to awaken in the Filipino mind the spirit 
of nationalism. Filipinos must recognize that they were a nation and this native 
nation (putrid chicd) should be assimilated into a larger nation (pdfrid grande)* viz.. 
Mother Spain (Ma. Ciiierrero 19~H: ",~7; Cripaldo 1986: 1 and ). Should this 
nation desire to separate from Spain it would be in the main the fault of the latter 
tor not listening to the former’s clamor tor reforms. 

1 low ever, the struggle for reforms that the Propaganda Movement in Spain 
launched failed. Agoncillo (1980: 146; 1990: 148) noted, first, that the Spanish 
government had its own problems to settle and it did not really have the time to 
attend to the problems in the colonies. Second, the Propaganda Movement did not 
have sufficient funds to sustain an effective campaign for reforms. 1 bird, the friars 
themselves had their own tentacles in Spain who defended them and criticized their 
enemies, and who opposed the reforms, especially Filipino representation in the 
Spanish Cortes. And lastly, the reformers were not united but disagreed with each 
other and fought over the leadership of the Madrid colony. 

When Ri/al left Madrid for Hong Kong and handed over the leadership to 
Marcelo H. del Pilar, he had already decided that the battlefield was no longer in 
Spain but in the Philippines. The Filipinos must be enlightened, their conscious 
ness must be raised to a level sufficient for them to recognize their inalienable 
and fight for them, and one of the ways to do this was through an association, o 
this end La Riga Filipina, the constitution of which was written in Horn, o 
was founded in Manila on 3 January 1892. , 

The Liga had the following objectives (Agoncillo 1990: 1 46): 1) to uni t 
entire archipelago into a homogeneous, vigorous, and compact body; 2) to pro 
vide mutual protection for every Filipino in every way and whenever necessary, 
to defend themselves against all injustices and violence; 4) to encourage et ucatron, 
agriculture, and commerce; and 5) to study the reforms and their applications. ie 
fourth objective was highly important as this was the fastest way to taise t ie c 
Filipino consciousness. 


Education as a Precondition to Assimilation or Separation from Spam 

Rizal regarded education as a precondition to assimilation or perhaps separation 
from Spain. 6 Through education — through the study of civic virtues, among oth- 
ers — the natives, who currently wallowed in ignorance, fanaticism, and moral de- 
pravity, could be enlightened and redeemed. To quote Rizal (1972b, 348). 


797 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLU TION AND BLY( )ND 


...I place as a prior condition [to liberty] the education of the people, 
that by means of instruction and industry our country may have an individu- 
ality of its own and make itself worthy of these liberties. I have recommended 
in my writings the study of civic virtues, without which there is no redemp- 
tion. 

Education could be formal or informal. A home or an association like La Liga 
Filipina could perform the informal function of enlightening the people. But the 
school was necessary for the formal function. In Noli Me Tangere Ri/.al ( 1 973: 205) 
argued through the character of the provincial governor: 

I he school is the foundation of society, the school is the book in which 
is read the future of the people. Show us the school of a people and we will tell 
you what kind of people they are. 

Rizal made a distinction between liberty in the sense of freedom and liberty 
in the sense of independence. A nation can be free without being independent or it 
can be independent without being free. Between the two, it was necessary to ob- 
tain the various freedoms first and to defend them with the efforts of an enlight- 
ened populace before obtaining assimilation or independence. As Rizal said 
through Fr. Florentino in El Filibusterismo: “What is the use of independence if the 
slaves of today will be the tyrants of tomorrow?” (Rizal 1 975: 297). 

A revolution for Rizal was not therefore necessary. When Filipinos are en- 
lightened, that is, when they would have “personal discipline, intellectual integrity, 
and moral uplift, coupled “with a love of country and a refusal to submit to tyr- 
anny (Majul 1967: 25), then they become the new men . Of course, Filipino en- 
lightenment may lead to a bloody revolution but this need not be the case. In fact, 
Rizal was more inclined to believe the latter. He said: 


Our ills we owe to ourselves alone, so let us blame no one. II Spain 
should see we were less complaisant with tyranny and more disposed to 
struggle and suffer for our rights, Spain would be the first to grant us [indepen- 
dence] (1912:360). 

When such independence had been granted, Rizal (1972c: 340) was con- 
vinced that with unity and intellectual enlightenment, the Filipinos would “not fall 
into the hands of Japan, or of England, or of Germany.” 

American Intervention and Colonization 

The Philippines fell not to Japan or England or Germany, but to the United States. 
The Philippine revolution took place when the people put emphasis not on theo- 
retical enlightenment through formal education but on practical enlightenment 


798 


ciRIPAl HO Rizutl's l topi an Society 


through personal experience. In refusing to submit to tyranny, the Filipinos fo- 
mented a bloodv revolution. Since their consciousness was not sufficiently raised 
so as to value the various freedoms, Rizal feared a situation similar to that of Latin 
America where native tvrants simple replaced foreign tyrants. There was indepen- 
dence indeed but the Latin American populace still lived under despotism, but of 
the former slaves. Rizal ( 19^2b: 348-49) condemned the uprising and advised the 
Filipinos in his manifesto ( 1 3 December 1896) to go home. 1 he Spanish authori- 
ties, however, were bent on executing Rizal and did not publish or circulate the 
manifesto. 

The United States desired the Philippines as a colony for at least three rea- 
sons (Agoncillo 1980: 211): 1) to make the Philippines the commercial headquar- 
ters of American business and industrial interests in the Far East; 2) to proselytize 
and spread the Protestant religion, especially in a Catholic country; and 3) to ha%e 
naval and military' bases as a first line of defense of the United States in the Far 
East. 

After defeating the Filipinos in the Philippine-American War, the Americans 
started implementing a program which seemed to be the fulfillment of Rizal s c e 
sirable new society' and the reforms that the Propaganda Movement failed to o') 
tain from Spain. 

First, the Americans democratized education by rapidly establishing \anou 
schools throughout the country. Teachers from the United States were importe t 
the Philippines to replace the soldier-teachers. English became the medium o 
struction and the common language of the people. Later, pensionados or sc o a 
on stipends were sent to the United^ States to obtain further education an spec 

izc in their respective disciplines. . 

Second, there were representations to the American Congress, wo up 
resident commissioners could debate, discuss, and exert influence in Con^ 
measures pertaining to the interests of the Philippines although the\ co 

Third, various freedoms were granted: the freedom of speech, 
press, religion, suffrage, redress of grievances, etc. 

Fourth, the Filipinos were trained in self-government by Filipmizin D t 
ministrative machinery and by establishing the Assembly and later on tie ei c , 
all composed of Filipinos. Only the governor-general, the vice governor ^e 
and the secretary of the department of education remained in American la 
until the establishment of the Philippine Commonwealth in 123 w ere 
United States was represented in the Philippines by the American c 
sioner. 

Lastly, there was a measure of equality now between the Filipinos an 
cans far greater than that between the Filipinos and the Spaniards. 

The brief experience of independence when the fust republic was ou 
and of revolutionary success against the Spanish regime instilled in tie l ipmo 
consciousness the aspiration for political independence rathei than assinn atio 


799 


THK PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND PI Y< >M ) 


with the United States. The Filipinos repudiated Trinidad 'Pardo 1 I. Iaveras Fed- 
eral Party, which wanted the Philippines to become a state of the l ’nited States, In- 
supporting the Nacionalista Party, which sought “immediate, complete and abso- 
lute” independence. 

During the Philippine Commonwealth, the president of the Philippines and 
the secretary of education were both Filipinos. There was a brief Japanese interlude 
where the second republic was established with Filipino government officials, in- 
cluding the president of the republic, and with emphasis on cultural development. 
Tagalog was made the medium of instruction. 

After the Japanese occupation, the third Philippine republic was set up with 
Filipino government officials from top to bottom. It continued the policies of the 
Americans with a slight difference: the Philippine republic was independent in 
principle with regard to foreign relations, currency, tariff, immigration, and public 
debt, which had been in American hands during the Commonwealth era. From 
1946 to 1987, there were constitutional changes but the government remained 
republican. 

The question now is: Has RizaFs new society been achieved? 

Characteristics of Rizal’s New Society 

Let us first clarify what this new society is all about. Rizal onlv made some sketchv 
references to it. He did not write a book like Plato’s 7 he Republic or More s Utopia , 
where the details are discussed and elaborated on. RizaFs references were in the tra- 
dition of the Marxian remarks about the “classless society” or Herbert Marcuse's 
description of his desirable “ideal democracy” (Martineau 1986: 61-1 13). s 

The following characteristics seem to constitute RizaFs envisioned new so- 
ciety. 

First, the Philippine archipelago must be united as a Filipino nation: com- 
pact, vigorous, and homogeneous. 

Second, the people must be educated in civic virtues and enlightened in all 
possible senses of it so that they will struggle for their rights; repudiate slavery and 
despotism; be equal with the rest of the people of the world; love and help their 
fellow Filipinos in every trouble and need, and against violence and injustice; be 
industrious in agriculture and commerce, among others; be tolerant of other reli- 
gious creeds; discard fanaticism and reject both crab and colonial mentality; 1 ’ and 
be able to actualize ones potentials for the good not only of oneself but of the Fili- 
pino nation as a whole. 

Third, schools of all kinds and of sufficient quality and quantity must be es- 
tablished throughout the archipelago, primarily as an instrument of enlightenment 
and secondarily as a means to develop one’s skills for livelihood purposes. 

Fourth, there must be a common language of the people and it must be a 
native language: Tagalog. Simoun in El Filibusterismo ridiculed Basilio and the rest 
who would want to propagate Spanish as the common language. Simoun said it 


800 


c i R I PA I no Rizals Utopian Society 


would never he the language of the people; they would not use it in speaking be- 
cause it could not express their native thoughts and feelings. Tagalog later became 
the language of the revolution and was declared the official language in the Biak- 
na-Bato and the Malolos constitutions. 10 

fifth, the people must have their liberties. Freedom of speech, assembly, 
press, redress of grievances, etc. must be guaranteed by the state. 

Lastly, the Filipinos must not onlv have the sentiment of nationalism, they 
must be able to manifest it. In this wav, they would have the dignity and patriotism 
worthy of a people. Thev would value their own products, improve the latters 
quality, and be proud of them. Their internationalism must be rooted in their na- 
tionalism; that is to saw they must first be nationalists before becoming interna- 
tionalists. They would he selective and discriminatory in absorbing Foreign cultural 
influences. II the Filipino people were to have this broad (not narrow) nationalism 
in their hearts, Rizal believed they would cease to be corrupt and would have racial 
pride. 1 hey would value the national interests above individual and familial inter- 


ests. 

For Rizal, the Filipino — who has nationalism, racial pride, and enlighten- 
ment, or one who values his liberties, who does not submit to tyranny, who loves 
his fellow Filipinos, who values national interests, who refuses to be corrupt, and 
who does not have a “crab" and colonial mentality — is a truly free man , one de- 
serving of independence. Rizal himself was a new man , and for new men, a new so- 
cial order. 


Has Ri/al's New Society been Achieved? 

I he answer is negative, although some ol its features have already been iulh 
and others are in the process of being fulfilled. Rizals society' remains ephemera . 
For one, the language issue remains, in that the Filipinos do not have in practice a 
common native language that is universally used as the medium of instruction. Sec- 
ondly, Philippine society appears difficult to unify and homogenize although t icie 
is an attempt by the Ramos administration toward this end, especially with t le 
Moro National Liberation Front and the New Peoples Army. Lastly, the menta ity 
of the educated and semi-educated Filipinos is largely shaped by the English lan- 
guage and therefore seems colonial in outlook. 

I here are two important articles that depict the Filipino situation durin^, t it' 
period of independence. One was written by a Filipino, Renato Constantino, titled 
“Our Task: To Make Rizal Obsolete,” and the other by an American, James Fal- 
lows, “A Damaged Culture.” 

According to Constantino (1971: 150), Rizals dream of transforming the 
Filipino colonial consciousness into a dynamic nationalist consciousness remains a 
dream. Rizal wrote for his time and not for ours but the colonial problems of the 
past that Rizal criticized are still with us. For example, we still have the tulisanes in 
the towns and cities,” that is to say, the corrupt employees and officials in govern- 


801 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI VON I) 


ment who rob the people by milking the government, neglecting their duties, or 
mulcting the people, etc. We still have corrupt businessmen like Timoteo IVlaez, 
who shrewdly conduct devious business transactions with government authorities. 
We have the influence peddlers and fixers in government and other offices. We use 
a foreign language to communicate, which Rizal, according to ( Constantino, con- 
sidered ridiculous and pathetic, since it opened us to incursions of a foreign cul- 
ture which swept aside our “native traditions, manners, and values,' resulting in 
the loss of much of our national pride. And we have weak men like Basilic) who 
preferred to be left alone in peace and not help his fellow Filipinos or work for the 
national welfare; such weak men become “dummies for foreign interests, corrupt 
government officials, servile mouthpieces of alien groups, “10-percenters, influ- 
ence peddlers, and cynical racketeers.” Constantino enjoins every Filipino to be- 
come a nationalist. The Filipino must realize Kazaks dream by making Rizal obso- 
lete in our time. Rizal’s colonial problems must become a thing of the past. 

James Fallows (1987: passim) argues that the Filipino culture was damaged 
by Spanish and American colonizations in that the former “hammered home the 
idea of Filipino inferiority” and the latter “prevented the Filipinos from consum- 
mating their rebellion against Spain,” among others. According to him, the Philip- 
pines is a “nation not only without nationalism but also without much national 
pride.” Fie contends that while in some Asian countries the communist political 
system serves as the barrier to development, in the Philippines the present Filipino 
culture is the “main barrier to development.” The Filipino culture makes a “natu- 
rally rich country poor”; the press is extremely free — even “licentious"; it does not 
matter who governs the country — Ferdinand Marcos or Benigno Aquino — since 
the cultural and economic problems have been there for decades although they 
have been intensified by Marcos; while culture “brings out the productive best in 
the Koreans,... [it] pulls many Filipinos toward their most self-destructive, self- 
defeating worst.” lo quote Fallows (1987: 56-57) more extensively: 

If the problem in the Philippines does not lie in the people themselves 
or, it would seem, in their choice of socialism and capitalism, what is the prob- 
lem.' 1 think, it is cultural, and that it should be thought of as a failure of na- 
tionalism [italics mine]. 

...Nationalism can, of course, be divisive, when it sets people of one 
country against another. But its absence can be even worse, if that leaves people 
in the grip of loyalties that are even narrower and most fragmented 

Nationalism is valuable when it gives people a reason not to live in the 
world of Hobbes — when it allows them to look beyond themselves rather than 
putting their own interests to the ruination of everyone else. I assume that most 
people in the world have the same mixture of selfish and generous motives; 
their cultures tell them when to indulge each impulse. Japan is strong in large 
part because its nationalist-racial ethic teaches each Japanese that all other 
Japanese deserve decent treatment Individual Filipinos are at least as brave, 


802 


UR I PA l Pc') R lull's l topidti Society 


kind, and noble-spirited as individual Japanese, bur their culture draws the 
boundaries ol decent treatment much more narrowly. Filipinos pride them- 
selves on their lifelong lovaltv to tamilv, schoolmates, com pad res, members of 
the same tribe, residents of the same barangtiy [rather than on loyalty to the 
nation]. 

... I he tradition of political corruption and cronyism, the extremes or 
wealth and povertv, the tribal fragmentation, the local elites willingness to 
make a separate profitable peace with colonial powers — all reflect a feeble sense 
of nationalism and a contempt for the public good. Practically everything that 
is public in the Philippines seems neglected or abused. 


Conclusion 

In conclusion, 1 would sav that Rizals desirable new society remains utopian. Like 
Marcuses utopia, it is achievable in principle, that is to say, when the obstacles in 
the present situation are surmounted. For Rizal, as well as for Constantino an 1 a 
lows, there is only one solution: nationalism. It is the task oteveiv 1 ilipino to ma 'e 
Rizal obsolete in our time and to instill in the Filipino consciousness a 

sense of broad nationalism. : , 

It is important for a Filipino nationalist to act from nationalism or fron 
sense of nationalism as a matter of duty. One who acts from duty in this cas 
directly front nationalism and not merely ni accordance with nationa li 
subtlety here is derived from Immanuel Kants (l c }39: 13-1/) distinction " 
acting from duty and acting in accordance with duty. In the former, a P e 
rectly — without inclination or motive — acts from duty while in the atte 
with a direct inclination or with a selfish motive in accordance w it i c uty , ' 

say, a motive intervenes between duty and action. It a Filipino nationa ' 
accordance with nationalism (or in accordance with duty), then he ma\ a 
ish motive or a personal interest in mind rather than the inheient natior 
at heart (which is the essential meaning of nationalism). On the ot icr lai , 
pino may perhaps personally profit from acting out of nationa ism ut r 
effect or consequence rather than the intention of his action. In some ca. 
ing from nationalism may thwart all personal inclinations or motives, n a 
a social or political action in the context of this article is good if it is 
nationalism as a matter of duty without regard for motives an consequ 

Logically speaking, nationalism seems to be the panacea of a P° , r 

social evils. I am here talking about a broad (not a narrow and fanaucaU 
nationalism which is the foundation of a peoples internationalism an t eir 
ticism in culture absorption, as in the case of the Japanese. But since it [S 
pected — although it may be logically possible — that every Filipino wou c me 
Rizal, then to argue — as Constantino did — that we can have a nation o iza s, 
i.e., a nation of Filipino nationalists, is simply to mean we can have a nation w leie 
a substantially large portion of the population are nationalists. This is in contiast 


803 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI Y( >NP 


to Fallows’ description of the current Philippine situation where the majority of 
the Filipinos are devoid of nationalism and “without much national pride. 

Notes 

1. Utopias can be positive (desirable) like Plato’s Republic ( 1056, 106a: 1 18-t22) and 
Mores Utopia { 1965, 1968: 1-127) or negative (undesirable) like Ayn Rand s An- 
them (1946: 11-123) and George Orwell’s 14R4 (1081: 5-267). 1 he latter mav be 
called a dystopia, or “a difficult place.’’ Utopias can likewise be full or sketchy in de- 
scription. Again, Plato’s and Mores are full in description while \larxs (Padover 
1978, 1979: 64; Lenin 1932, 1943: 70) and Marcuses (Martineau 1086: 37) arc- 
sketchy. Rizal’s utopia is desirable but it is sketchy. 

2. Plato traveled to Syracuse to help his friend Dion in the “education and guidance of 
the young King Dionysius, but his efforts failed. 

3. The critical-utopian socialism of Claude Flenri de Rouvroy Saint-Simon, l rancois 
Marie Charles Fourier, Robert Owen, and others critically analyzed or attacked every 
principle of existing society at a time when the prol etariat was still in a “verv undevel- 
oped state. I heir proposed measures would solely lead to the “disappearance of class 
antagonisms which, at that time, were only just cropping up” and were therefore uto- 
pian: 1) the abolition of the distinction between town and country; 2) the abolition 
of the family, private gain, and wage system; 3) the proclamation of social harmony; 
and 4) the conversion of the functions of the state into a mere superintendence of 
production. The critical Utopians merely wanted to improve the condition of every 
member of society, including the most favored. They rejected all political and revolu- 
tionary action. I hey wished to attain their ends by peaceful means through small 
experiments that would pave the way for their new societies. 

Scientific socialism or the proletarian movement, on the other hand, will 
achieve its aim to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat and the classless society 
through a bloody revolution. 1 his presupposes the imparting in full of the knowl- 
edge of existing social conditions and the meaning of the act of universal emancipa- 
tion, which is the historical mission of the proletariat. (See Marx and Engels 1965: 
40-42; Engels 1965: 45-82; and Lenin 1932, 1943: 70-71.) 

4. In Spanish the passage reads, “A nuevos hombres nuevo cstado social.” Encarnacion 
AIzona (1 972. 143) translated this as “For new men, a new social status.” Ricardo R. 
Pascual (1962: 253) had the same translation as that of Fores-Ganzon. 

5. Gregorio F. Zaide and Sonia M. Zaide (1984: xvi) enumerated 1 1 evils of Spanish 
misrule, viz., (1) Instability of colonial administration, (2) corrupt officialdom, (3) 
no Philippine representation in the Spanish Cortes, (4) human rights denied to Fili- 
pinos, (5) no equality before the law, (6) maladministration of justice, (7) racial dis- 
crimination, (8) frailocracy, (9) forced labor, (10) haciendas owned by the friars, and 
(11) the Guardia Civil.” See also Onofre D. Corpuz (1965: 78-92) and John N. 
Schumacher (1973: 40). 


804 


CiRIPAl.nO Riztil s Utopian Society 


6. It is surprising that Rizal never mentioned Antoine Nicolas de Condorcet in his writ- 
ings, but Ri/al s ideas were much closer to Condorcct's than to any ot the Enlighten- 
ment thinkers. Condorcet (1959: S" 7 ) emphasized political reforms and education 
that would lead to progress: “the abolition ot inequality between nations, the progress 
of equality within each nation, and the true perfection ot mankind. 

7. John N. Schumacher (1987: 99-100, 105-106) believes that Rizal was a revolution- 
ist in the sense of activelv agitating for the peaceful separation ot the Philippines trom 
Spain, similar to the EDSA struggle: “Revolution is not primarily an armed struggle 
to shed other people's blood, but a willingness to risk shedding ones own blood tor 
the sake of the whole people. Mv article agrees with Schumachers main thesis that 
Rizal was alreadv a separatist upon finishing the writing ot Noli Me Tangere> but be 
lieves that Rizals option was not limited to only nonviolence. In practice Rizal had 
chosen the Horentino option, but theoretically, Rizal would have accepted a blood) 
revolution if it were feasible, if it were clear to him it could succeed. Blood shed 
therein would not be wasted but a welcome sacrifice tor national emancipation. 

8. For Marcuse, the ideal society must discard the domination ot man by institutions or 
by man himself; it must have no surplus repression; and it must maximize the use ot 
science and technology to minimize the need tor human labor. It is a socien ruled b 
justice, traternity, and happiness. See Robert W. Marks (1970: 1-170) and\.I. Leni 
(1932, 1943: 70) on the ' future evolution of future Communism. 

9. In general, a colonial mentality is that type ot mind which by and large disparag 
what is essentially the product or outcome ot the local situation and considers 
able the prod net or outcome ot the toreign situation. For example, importe 

are preferred to domestic goods even it the quality ot the latter is much bet : < 
demic degrees obtained abroad are preferred to those obtained localh e\en 
cal school is top caliber; foreign ideas and designs are considered superior 
ones; etc. On the other hand, a “crab mentality is that type ot mind w here o * \ } 

one-up-manship possibly out of envy, vanity, a holier-than-thou attitude, 

situation, the crab-minded person pulls down those who are above (or bette 
ated than) him and pushes down those who are below him (or those asp o 

up). i 

10. After American colonization, it will be difficult, but possible, to make Tag t> 
national language because of cultural fragmentation and the rise of regiona nat 
alism, such as the Bisayan and Ilokano, which was nonexistent during the ie\ o 
The rise of Cavite nationalism as against Manila nationalism (Aguinaldo versus 
facio) was due to politics — or perhaps, family or kinship ties and not to lan D uag 
I am a Bisayan but I do not object to making Tagalog the national language on 
torical grounds. Tagalog was essentially the language of the revolution althoug p 
ish was used in a limited way (see Gripaldo 1985; 69-72). 


805 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI Y< )Nl ) 


References 


Agoncillo, Teodoro A. 1980, Ang Pilipinas at ang mga Pilipino Noon lit Ngayon. Quezon 
City: R.P. Garcia Publiching Co., Inc. 

. 1980. History of the Pilipino People, 8 ed. Revised by the Agoncillo family 

with the assistance of Bernardita Reyes Churchill, Samuel K. Ian, and Isagani 
Medina. Quezon Ci ty r : R.P. Garcia Publishing Co. 

and Milagros Guerrero. 1983. History of the Pilipino People , 6 ed. Quezon 

City: R.P. Garcia Publishing Co. 

AJzona, Encarnacion, trans. 1972. [Rizal's] Political and Historical Writings. Manila: Na- 
tional Historical Commission. 

Bronner, Stephen Eric. 1988. “Between art and utopia: reconsidering the aesthetic theory 
of Herbert Marcuse.” Marcuse: Critical Theory and the Promise of l hop in, eels. Robert 
Pippin, Andrew Feenberg, and Charles P. Webel. South 1 lad ley. Mass.: Bergin and 
Garvey Publishers, Inc. 

Condorcet, Antoine-Nicolas de. 1939. “ I he progress of the human mind. In Theories of 
History; ed. Patrick Gardiner. New York: The Free Press. 

Constantino, Renato: 1971. Our task: to make Rizal obsolete.” The Pilipinas in the Philip- 
pines and Other Essays. Quezon City: Malaya Books, Inc. 

Corpuz, Onofre D. 1981 . “Graft and corruption.” Readings in Human Behavior in Organi- 
zations, eds. Nestor N. Pilar and Rafael A. Rodriguez. New Jersey: Prentice-1 lall, Inc. 

Engels, Friedrich, 1963. “Socialism: utopian and scientific.” Essential Works of Marxism, ed. 
Arthur P. Mendel. New York: Bantam Books. 

Finley, M.I. 1967. Utopianism ancient and modern.” The Critical Spirit: Essays in Honor of 
Herbert Marcuse, eds. Kurt H. Wolfe and Barrington Moore, J r. Boston: Beacon 
Press. 

Fallows, James. 1987. “A damaged culture.” Atlantic Monthly 260. 

Fores-Ganzon, Guadalupe, trans. 1967. La Solidaridad. Quezon City: University of the 
Philippines Press. 

Gripaldo, Rolando M. 1985. “The north and south of a national language.” Diliman Re- 
view 34 (July-October). 


. _• 1986. Rizal s politics of nonviolence.” Page 12 Journal 1 . A revised edition is 

forthcoming. 

Guerrero, Leon Ma. 1974. The First Filipino. Manila: National Historical Commission. 
Kant, Immanuel. 1959. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. Lewis White Beck. 
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc. 

Kateb, George. 1967. Utopias and utopianism.” The Encylopedia of Philosophy, 8 vols., ed. 

Paul Edwards, 8. New York: MacMillan and Free Press. 

Lenin, V.I. 1932, 1943. State and Revolution. New York: International Publishers Co., Inc. 
Majul, Cesar Adib. 1 967. The Political and Constitutional Ideas of the Philippine Revolution. 

Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press. 

Marks, Robert W. 1970. The Meaning of Marcuse. New York: Ballantine Books. 


806 


ciRIPAl Pc') Rizal's Utopian Sorter y 


Martineau, Alain. 1986. Herbert Marcuse's Utopia , trans. Jane Brierlev. Montreal: Harvest 
House. 

Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. 1965. " l he communist manifesto. Essential Works of 
Alarxisrn , ed. Arthur P Mendel. New York: Bantam Books. 

More, Thomas. 1 965, 1968. Utopia , trans. Peter K. Marshall. New York: Washington 
Square Press, Inc. 

Orwell, George. 1981. /‘AS’ /. New York: Penguin. 

Padover, Saul K., ed. and trans. 1978, 19“'9. The Essential Marx. New York: New American 
1 ibrarv. 

Palma, Rafael. 1949. Pride of the A la lay Rare . trans. Roman Ozaeta. New \ork: 1 rentice- 
I Till, Inc. 

Pascual, Ricardo. 1962. The Philosophy of Rizal. Manila: Pedro B. Avuda and Company. 
Plato. 1 956, 1964. The Republic of Great Dialogues of Plato, trans. W.H.D. Rouse. New 
York: New American Library. 

Rand, Avn. 1946. Anthem. New York: New American Library. 

RizaL Jose. 1967. “ The Philippines a century hence. La Solidaridad \ 2 \ols., trans. 
Guadalupe Fores-Ganzon. Quezon City': University of the Philippines Press. 

. 1972a. “Message to the young women of Malolos.” Political and Historical 

Writings, trans. Encarnacion Al/.ona. Manila; National Historical Commission. 

. 1 972b. “Manifesto to some Filipinos.” Political and Historical Writings, trans. 

Encarnacion Al/.ona. Manila: National Historical Commission. 

. 1972c. “Data for my defense." Po/itieal and Historical Writings , trans. 

Encarnacion Alzona. Manila: National Historical Commission. 

. 1912. The Reign of Greed, trans. Charles Derbyshire. Manila: Philippine 

Education Co. 

. 1973. Noli Me Tangere, trans. Leon Ma. Guerrero. Hong Kong: Longman 

Group (Far East Ltd.). 

. 1975. El Eilibusterismo, trans. Leon Ma. Guerrero. Hong Kong: Longman 

Group (Far East Ltd.). 

Sabine, George H. and Thomas L. Thorson. 1973. A History of Political Theory. New De 
Oxford and I BH Publishing Co. 

Schumacher, John N. 1973. The Propaganda Movement: 1880-1895. Manila. Solidarida 
Publishing House. 

. “The Noli Me Tangere ns catalyst of revolution.” In The Noli Me Tangere a 

Century After: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Budhi Papers No. 7 . Edited by Soledad 
S. Reyes. Quezon City: Phoenix Publishing House, Inc. and the Ateneo de Manila 
University. 

The New Oxford Illustrated Dictionary. 1978. S.V. Republic. 

Zaide, Gregorio F. and Sonia M. Zaide. 1984. Jose Rizal. Mandaluvong: National Book 
Store, Inc. 


807 


Rizal and the “Woman Question” 


Albina Peczon-Fernandez 

University of the Philippines, Quezon City, Philippines 


T he 19th century saw the negative effects of capitalism on societies of 
varying stages of development. Regardless of the stage of development, there 
was the growing perception of the need to transform society. 'The place of women 
in this transformation has been referred to as the “Woman Question." 

It is in the context of the debate on the “Woman Question" then and now 
that I will read the women characters in Jose Rizals Noli Me Tangere and FA Filibus- 
terismo as texts. My reading takes into consideration the pronouncement of Roland 
Barthes (1979) on the death of the author, or at best, his presence as a mere guest 
in his written work, as well as Patrocinio Schweicharts position on reading: 

The gaps that structure the reader’s response are not built into the text, 
but appear (or not) as a result of the particular interpretative strategy employed 
by the reader... there is no distinction between what the text gives and what 
the reader supplies (s)he supplies everything (Schweichart 1986:37). 

Enabling me to supply everything is socialist feminism. This, to date, has the 
most capability to explain why women are oppressed. It fills the gaps left open by 
other feminist theories, namely: (1) liberal feminism, which sees women’s oppres- 
sion as a result of the discriminatory application of formal and informal laws on 
females; (2) Marxist feminism, which sees the mode of production in class society 
as the matrix of womens oppression; and (3) radical feminism, which challenges 
the Marxist assertion and identifies the mode of reproduction as the matrix of 
womens oppression (Jaggar 1983). 


808 


PI c /ON IIRNANOIZ Riztil und the " Woman Question " 


Other than the manifest objective of Rizal in writing his novels, to wit, to 
show the cancer eating Philippine society and what must be done to cure the dis- 
ease, is a latent one: the promotion of feminism. It is my reading of Rizals life and 
writings that our national hero did not come out openly to support the feminist 
cause for justifiable reasons, Firstlv, he desperately wanted to witness in his lifetime 
the birth ol a national community. 1 he Filipinos, he says in the Noli, are like 
stones scattered in the fields and unattached to an edifice. For as long as they can- 
not come together and build the edifice thev will never have the comforts and se- 
curitv of home. 1 he objectives of the La Liga Filipina enunciated this sentiment. 
He probably thought that if the “Woman Question were to be included in the 
agenda of the nationalist struggle, the gathering of the stones may become more 
difficult: feminism can divide because of the emotionalism attached to gender re- 
lations. Secondly, Rizal was a product of a sexist colonial culture. Much as he knew 
about the “Woman Question from personal experience (Fernandez 1996), he 
might not have wanted to risk his stature in the Propaganda Movement by comin D 
out openly as a feminist. In and out of the movement, the macho men and patriar 
chal women would ridicule and persecute him, and considering the incapacity of 
Filipinos to separate persons from issues, the movement would suffer tremen ous 

setbacks. . . 

The struggle of women against colonization at the gender, class, rack , an 
national level is what Rizal really discussed in his novels. But since it was his mam 
fest intention to show evil as a function of Spanish colonization carried out^ ->\ a 
frailocracy, he frequently subverted his feminist discourses (Fernandez 199 a* 
Even his Letter to the Young Women of Malolos which he wrote on ~~ 1 ebruary 1 j 
upon the request of Marcelo H. del Pilar, then the editor of La Solidmi a , 1Z 
ignored altogether gender oppression. 1 he tone of the letter is that of a man cau y ir 
in the conflict between patriarchy and feminism: he condemns women as victims 
and victimizes while at the same time congratulates them for w hat the) ia\e one 
and could do. The treatment is contrapuntal and very intriguing. Rizal leaves it to 
his readers to provide reading strategies to derive meaning from his contra ^tions 
and unearth the multiple layers of meaning of his letter. This is also true or is 
novels. Consciously or unconsciously, what Rizal intended in his written wor r s is 
to invite anyone willing and able to extract the secrets, the other of his writings. 


Extracting the Secret s from RizaTs Novels 

A general statement can be said about the women sired by Rizals pen. the women 
who could not prove themselves equal to their oppressors are made to die w * e 
those who could are allowed to live. Dead or alive, all engage in subversion. T is 
subversion, committed in silence and through silence, is what symptomatic rea 
ing has to retrieve from the margins of the printed page. 


809 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BLY< )NI ) 


I 


Dead Women Tell Tales 

Let us take a look at the women who arc made to die and try to find out if death 
does silence them or, on the contrary, makes them speak in silence. 

Sisa becomes crazy and dies as a cumulative effect of being the wife of an 
abusive, good-for-nothing husband, the mother of two sons victimized by an un- 
just system, the woman made by the Guardia Civil to parade herself publicly as the 
mother of sons accused of thievery by the parish priest. Idias sister is found dead 
floating in a river after her engagement to the son of a well-off family was broken 
due to the discovery of her being the descendant of accursed ancestors. Balat s 
mother dies gazing at the head of her son hanging from a tree after a hard life im- 
posed on her by an unjust system which takes away her husband, drives her into 
prostitution, and sends her sons to the mountains as tulisanes. Jtili, hapless daugh- 
ter of Cabesang lales, whose land is taken away from him by the friars, leaps to her 
death to avoid being raped by Padre Camorra to whom she turns as a last resort to 
rescue her sweetheart, Basilio, from prison. Before that she works as a debt peon to 
a well-off woman to raise money to ransom her father who is kidnapped bv 
tulisanes. The daughter of Capitan Pablo dies after being raped by a well-connected 
Spaniard. Maria Clara dies an insane woman in the convent as a consequence of 
the meddling of men in her life and her rape by Padre Salvi. All these women have 
few, if any, speaking lines. All have suffered in the hands of men as male suprema- 
cists/white supremacists/social betters/conquistadors. Though all these women 
tried to prove themselves equal to their oppressors, they could not quite make it. 
Rizals works suppress the truth about the “weakness” of women. 


Women's Weakness is Man-made 

If we read the above-mentioned women’s tales with the third eye of socialist femi- 
nism, we soon discover that womens weakness” is literally man-made. Let us take 
Sisa as a case in point. 

Sisa becomes weak only because the standards of valor in her time and 
clime are that of men: to be strong is to master the environment and others even 
when this means the degradation of life. Sisa, seen from men’s standard of valor, is 
weak because she allows her husband to use, manipulate, and subdue her. This 
weakness, in the first place, is a cultural imperative of colonial Philippines. Does 
not the church, the most dominant social institution and purveyor of patriarchal 
values, exhort the woman to love, honor and obey” her husband “in sickness and 
in health, for richer or poorer, till death”? Does not the Codigo Civil y transported 
from the west to the Philippines via Spanish colonization, demand that husband 
and wife be treated as one and that one is to be the husband? That as head of the 
family, the husband must be consulted and obeyed by the wife? That women, be- 


810 


I * K ' ZO N 1 I- R N . \ N P 1 Z Riztil and tf n' “ Woman Question ” 


cause of their man-defined weakness, are lumped together with ‘minors, the in- 
sane and the disabled in need of mens protection? 

The head of Sisas household is her husband because church and state sav so. 
Yet it is Sisa who primarily produces and reproduces life for her family. Her work 
is marginalized bv mens standards used lor reckoning household income which 
categorizes it only as “pin money or supplementary income when it is, in fact, the 
main source of income. Worse, because it is within a subsistence economy and 
outside the mainstream semi-feudal, semi-capitalist economy, Sisas work as seam- 
stress, producer of vegetables in her backyard, and a raiser of chickens tor table use 
is made invisible. The propensity of men to generalize rules and apply them objec- 
tively makes Sisa “weak and denies her the proper name of head ot the family! 

Consider that she begets two sons who carry their fathers surnames in spite 
of the fact that he has nothing to contribute to them except the seed in his semen, 
she socializes her sons to become conforming members of a colonial society in spite 
of the fact that this is the very society that engenders her oppression as well as that 
of her sons. Sisas weakness is men s strength and at the same time an indictment ot 
what it is to be strong in men s terms: to oppress the very people who arc the sources 
of ones st remit h. 

C 1 


The Truth about Rape 

Other truths could be gleaned from the margins ot the pages. For one, there is t 
truth about rape. Rape is about power. Men rape because they want to assure t ie 
selves that women are their subjects; that men are masculine and not enunine 
cause to be masculine is to penetrate women with what men have and women 
not — the penis.' For example. Padre Camorra tries to rape Juli because ie 
that Juli is under his power. She comes to him to ask tor his help in ic easm o 
sweetheart from prison. In the friars appreciation of her circumstances, tns 
ister of a religion who should consider sin against chastity a mortal sin, cou t ' 
from her what she and patriarchal society value most in unmarrie wo ^ 1 ^ n 
chastity — because she is desperate for his help. It is also for power that a 
rapes Maria Clara. He knows that he has power over her: he knows ler sec 
that she is the illegitimate daughter of Padre Damaso. Anyway, nobo } woi 
lieve her if she charged him with rape. What is a nun befoie a friar. Another t 
about rape is that it is not a crime against individual women but against a wo 
as Susan Brownmiller (1975) convincingly explained. Fear of getting rape 
made women accept male superiority, the basis of which is the penis. Because 
have it and women don’t, men are all potential rapists and women all potentia rape 
victims. And since patriarchal societies like Hispanicized Philippines deman t lat 
a woman should preserve her chastity, “the best gift she can offer to the man s e 
marries,” so she is told, she goes home before dark, avoids the company of men, 
and even suppresses her sexuality just so she can be safe from rape. The conse 
quence of being cautious has dire effects. Because women make it a rule to be home 


811 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEY< )NI ) 


before dark, they are prevented from venturing into the night to seek opportunities 
for development, such as going to night school or taking a higher-paying job bv 
working the night shift. Consequently, the night is lost to women and it becomes 
the monopoly of men/* Simoun knows this and therefore does not recruit women 
for the revolution. What kind of revolutionaries will they make il they have to be 
home before dark? 

To assure themselves that they are not misconstrued by men to be inviting 
rape, women suppress their sexuality. I hey deny themselves tho pleasures o{ the 
body and consequently open themselves to the many possibilities of a derailed li- 
bido: insanity, prudery, and frigidity. None of these arc in the service of women, 
especially in marriage. 

The Truth about Prostitution and Motherhood 

Another truth the text tells us concerns prostitution. Baku’s mother is not even 
given a name although it can be presumed that she had one because the printed 
page says that “she became nameless” only after h er series of misfortunes. What we 
are told by the text is that she becomes a prostitute in order to support her children 
after her husband is unjustly accused of a crime and consequently incarcerated. As 
a practitioner of the oldest profession, she gets infected with venereal disease for 
which she is blamed . 5 She is also blamed for many other “crimes” because those 
who condemned her refused to see anything good in prostitution. I hey do not see 
that prostitution is a function of the patriarchal notion that women arc the private 
property of men. Because of the availability of prostitutes, wives and daughters, 
who are private possessions of men, are safeguarded as private property. Prostitutes 
ought to be commended by men who benefit most from their existence. The un- 
spoken is told by Balats mother: if prostitution is a crime, it is men who should be 
condemned and punished because they are the criminals. Women are their victims 
and society should accept this silenced truth. 

The story of Balats mother is not fully told on the printed page. Silenced is 
this truth about this mother and all mothers, here and there, now and then: moth- 
erhood is forced labor, as well as alienated labor. Women who appear to willingly 
enter it are actually forced into it because they have no choice. The ideology of ro- 
mantic love and the ideology of motherhood work hand-in-hand to coerce women 
into becoming mothers. They interpellate women to become mothers and to ac- 
cept motherhood as natural because motherhood is the crowning glory of a 
womans life and women who do not give birth are not women . 6 In fact, women are 
valued by men only because of their procreation work. Adrienne Rich says it so 
much better: 

Patriarchy has told the women in labor that her suffering was purpo- 
sive — was the purpose of her existence; that the new life she was bringing forth 
(especially if male) was of value and that her own value depended on bringing 


812 


IM ( /( IN 11 KN AN l >1 / Rizal and the "Woman Question " 


it forth. As the means of reproduction without which cities and colonies could 
not expand, without which a tamilv would die out and its prosperity pass into 
the hands of strangers, she has found herself at the center of purposes, not hers, 
which she has often incorporated and made into her own. 1 he woman in labor 
might perceive herself as bringing forth a new soldier to fight for the tribe or 
nation-state, a new head of the rising veoman or bourgeois tamilv, a new priest 
or rabbi for her fathers faith, or a new mother to take up the renewal ot life. 

(liven this patriarchal purpose she could obliterate herself in fertility as her 
bodv swelled vear after vear, and pain and suffering might well become associ- 
ated, for her, with her ultimate value in the world. She might equally know 
that her pregnanev and labor would result in life without a future, a child who 
could not be fed, or who would be strangled at birth; a wasted life (Rich 1986. 

1 59 ). 

Balat s mother of 1 9th-centurv colonial Philippines makes Adrienne Rich of 
20th-century America an honest woman. 1 he former does not abort Balat but car 
ries him in her bodv for nine months in spite of all the odds, in spite of the know 1 
edge that the fruit of her womb faces no future. How could she? Abortion is con 
sidcred a crime by the state and a mortal sin by the church. Yet men of church an 
state would later brand her a bad woman for giving birth to him and punish this 
son of hers with a violent death. His head hanging from a tree like some grotesque 
fruit, the fruit of her womb separated from his body, is an image that speaks c o 
quently of motherhood as alienated labor. First she is told by church and state mat 
it is good for her to become a mother and so she becomes one against great ° s * 
She tries to socialize and educate Balat on how to be an acceptable colonial and a 
carrier of patriarchal values. To enable her to produce and reproduce life sic se s 
her body, the ultimate sacr ifice, which society sees as an act of depravity an e\ i • 
When her son grows up to fend for himself he leaves her at the very time w ien s le 

needed him. How can Adriennes words lie? 

Rizal’s work describes Balat and his mother for the last time in a poignant 
scene so reminiscent of the pasyon popularized in the Philippines by Spanis i co o^ 
nization (see Javellana 1988). The words ring in our ears: Son behold th\ mot lei. 
Mother, behold thy son!" Frozen in the silence of death and far from being si ^ nce ’ 
madonna and child speak in various tongues for the oppressed, especia > t e 
women. 

Men Appropriate Women's Voices 

Read Elias 1 account of his grandmothers story now with the third eye of socialist 
feminism: 


“My grandfather (was accused of arson). He protested in vain and since 
he was poor and could not pay famous lawyers, he was condemned... My 


813 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLU TION AND HI Y< )NI > 


grandfather, abandoned by all except bis young wife, saw himself tied to .1 
horse followed by a cruel crowd, beaten at every crossroad, before men, his 
brothers, and in the neighborhood of the many temples of a C >od of peace. 
When the unfortunate, already disgraced forever, had satisfied with his blood, 
his tortures and his cries the vengeance of men, they had to take him from the 
horse since he had fainted and would to God he had died! Hut one of the re- 
finements of cruelty, he was freed: his wife, then pregnant, begged in vain from 
door to door for work or alms to take care of her sick husband and son, but 
who would trust the wife of an arsonist and a disgraced man? 1 he wife then 
had to become a prostitute.” 

Ibarra stood from his scat. 

“Oh, don’t be disturbed! Prostitution was no longer shameful for her nor 
dishonorable for her husband: honor nor shame no longer existed. I he hus- 
band was cured of his wounds and went to hide with his wife and son to this 
province. Here the wife gave birth to a damaged foetus and full of infirmities 
that fortunately died. Here they lived a few more months, miserable, isolated, 
hated and avoided by all. My grandfather, unable to endure such misery and 
less courageous than his wife, hanged himself, desperate at seeing his wife sick, 
deprived of all help and care. His corpse rotted within view of his son who 
could hardly take care of his sick mother and the stench revealed it to Justice. 
My grandmother was accused and condemned for not having reported it; her 
husbands death was attributed to her and it was believed, for what is a 
wretched wife turned prostitute not capable of doing? If she swears, she com- 
mits perjury, if she cries, they say she is lying and blasphemes when she invokes 
God. Nevertheless, they took pity on her and waited for the birth of her child 
before beating her: you know that the friars spread the belief that the only way 
to treat the Indians is by the stick. ... 

A woman thus condemned will curse the day that her son is born, 
which, aside from prolonging torture, violates maternal sentiments. I he 
woman delivered well unfortunately, and fortunately too the child was born 
healthy. Two months afterwards the sentence was executed to the great satis- 
faction of men who believed thus to have done their duty. Not being anymore 
at peace in these mountains, she fled with her two sons to the neighboring 
province and there they lived like wild beasts, hating and hated. The elder of 
the two brothers, who remembered in the midst of so much misery his happy 
childhood, became a tulisan as soon as he found himself strong enough. Soon 
the bloody name of Balat spread from province to province, the terror of the 
towns, because in his vengeance everything was put to blood and fire. The 
younger who had received from Nature’s good heart, was resigned to his fate 
and disgrace beside his mother; they lived on what the woods gave, clothing 
themselves with the rags that were thrown away by the travelers; she had lost 
her name, she was only known as his mother’s son for it was not believed he 
was the arsonists son because of the gentleness of his character and because 


814 


I'K'ZON I I RNANUI / Rizal and the “Woman Question" 


evcrvbodv can doubt the Indians morality. At last, the famous Baku fell one 
day in the hands ol Justice that exacted of him a strict accounting of his crimes, 
she who did nothing to teach him the Good; and one morning, as the young 
man was looking for his mother who had gone to the woods to gather mush- 
rooms and had not returned he found her lying on the ground beside the road, 
beneath a cotton tree, her face turned toward the sky, her eyes staring wildly, 
fixed lv, her lingers clenched, buried in the earth over which can be seen blood 
stains. It occurred to the voting man to raise his eyes and follow the cadavers 
stare, and he saw on the branch a basket hanging, and in the basket the bloody 
head ol his brother! (Noli Me lungerr. 302-304). 


The story* of Baku's mother is told by* Elias in response to Ibarras request to 
be informed about the oppressed people of the Philippines. He tells Elias why. 

“I was not educated among the people whose needs I do not perhaps 
know; I spent mv childhood in the college of the Jesuits, 1 grew up in Europe, 

I was formed bv books and I only read what men hove been obit to In ing to light. 
what remained in the shadows, what writers do not tell, these 1 do not 
know 

xxx 

“Maybe knowing them (the truth about the oppressed in the Philip- 
pines) will correct my judgment; you know that l do not tuist theoi it* mini . 
am more guided by facts' [underscoring mine] (Noli Me langere. u02). 

What Ibarra says to Elias when intertexted with what Elias says to Ibarra calls 
attention to a suppressed truth that symptomatic reading can divulge. 1 us trutt 
pertains to the problem laced by seekers ot social change like Elias ant a 
To be able to alfect/eflect meaningf ul change in society', there is need to e g 

by facts’ for theories cannot be trusted. I his desideratum articulated } 
put in another way by Elias thus: "It is a bad doctor... who seeks on y to cor e 
the symptoms and stifle them, without trying to determine the cause o tie i 
ness” (ibid.: 296). In spite of the awareness of both gentlemen to back up tieor ; 
with facts if one were to succeed as a social engineer, they nevertheless su \eit t ° 
own axiom. Both are blind to the fact that women, not men, are in a e ^ ter P 0S 
tion to tell womens stories. And, indeed, womens stories must be to mor ? 

than the men, they are more visited by the sins of the fathers, as the story o a at : 
mother told by Elias proves. If history is to move the Filipino people towar t eir 
historic goal of freedom and the good life, men must not displace womens \oices 
in the discourse of development. But, alas, what Elias says about the tonquhtn on 
is also true for the indio male: "although they say trivialities and nonsense, tieir 
tone, their titles and their origin make them sacred, give them such authority 

(ibid.: 301 ) 


815 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI YON I ) 


II 

The Women Who are not Made to Die have Stories to Tell 

Those who try and partly succeed in proving themselves equal to their oppressors 
are not killed. These are Doha Victorina and Doha Consolacion. I he first is a 
major character that appeared in both Noli and Fili while the latter, also a major 
character, is not allowed entry into the pages of the Fili. Why? Are the Fili and the 
Noli hiding something? Could it be that what the novels hide has something to do 
with Rizal’s concept of feminism and the kind of women s movement he thought 
would really liberate women? 

Remember that the novels were produced by Rizal who witnessed the 
womens movement against the backdrop of the class struggle in the western world 
and the national liberation struggles of colonized nations (hernandez 1996b). 
Knowing this, it really is surprising to note that none of the women sired by his 
pen ever say anything about the oppression of women because they are women and 
the need for them to organize so that they can liberate themselves from men. None 
of the women bears witness to her own oppression because she is a woman, hven 
Sisa is begrudged that power to talk about her oppression. I he most that she is 
allowed to say is this cryptic statement: “The night is dark and children are getting 
lost {Noli: 152). An account of womens oppression, significantly enough, does 
not come from womens own lips but from mens. It is Elias who gives an account 
of the oppression of his grandmother, mother, and sister. Is this because women 
cannot be trusted to speak on their own behalf? Or is it the practice of men to ap- 
propriate for themselves the voice of women? 

Indeed Rizal s works when re-read reveal that women are oppressed because 
they are women and there is need for a movement to liberate them. However, re- 
reading them also reveals that perhaps Rizals knowledge of other nations womens 
movement made him a vacillating feminist. VTile convinced about the need for a 
womens movement he silences himself in his works. But it is just as well: What he 
silences speaks loud and clear. 

We now examine the two women Rizal did not allow to die. Let us start with 
Doha Victorina. 


Who is Afraid of Doha Victorina ? 

Her full name is Victorina de los Reyes. Translated into English it is “Victory of the 
Kings. This is a fitting name for this woman is obsessed with winning in mens 
games for power. Because she wants to be like men, she defies the colonial concept 
of the ideal woman: instead of staying at home and engaging in housekeeping, she 
is fiequently out of hearth and home attending parties or parading her husband as 
a prize catch; instead of seating herself with woman as customs and colonial tradi- 
tions demand, she sits with the men (during the tinola dinner for Ibarra she is the 


816 


I’l C '/.ON 11 R N AN D EZ Rizal and the " Woman Question 


lone woman who sits in Capitan Fiago's dining table; she is also the only woman 
who sits with male upper-deck passengers of Bapor Tabo)\ instead of being the quiet 
woman, she talks and talks (she has the most speaking lines) in fractured Tagalog 
and Spanish which men ignore or trivialize; instead of being an obedient wife, she 
orders her husband around. Her favorite topic is her discourse on “class : she is 
from the “right class because she knows the powers that be in colonial society; 
important people visit her in her home; she does not entertain “so-so people only ; 
she is not a native but an Andalusian, an “ orofea, and so hides her brown skin in 
layer after layer of rice powder, contributing to the rice shortage in Manila, so says 
the printed page. She dresses in European clothes and tries to speak in the Castilian 
language as her wav of showing her “class. She is obsessed with titles and therefore 
confers the title of “Doctor” on her husband, not for the sake of her husband but 
for her own self inasmuch as the wife of a doctor is addressed as a Doctora. She 
has great admiration for the oppressor class and her main target in life is to become 
a member of this class. For this reason, she uses her wealth to buy her a husband 
who is Spanish. She develops in him economic dependency which allows her to 
manipulate him. 


Dona Victorina and Marxist Feminism 

Doha Victorina focuses attention on the Marxist feminist assertion that the matrix 
of women's oppression is the mode of production. Where men are the owners o 
the means of production, their relation to women becomes like the re ation 
tween capitalist and proletariat, where the former exploits the latter foi r e pro 
duction and reproduction of life (Engels 1884). 1 he dona escapes ; the ot o 
proletariat in the hands of men mainly because she is an owner of lar D e tracts 
land. In her household, it is her husband, the propertyless Senor Don 1 urc 
who is the proletarian to her capitalist role. Among male friars, she is a pain in tie 
neck who cannot be dictated upon. Her wealth allows her indepen ence ro1 
them. She does not need their blessing because wealth has already blesse ier. 
civil officials (there is not a single female official, hence colonialism ias a n ^ a 
line face) do not commit acts of injustice against her person because s ic ant t ) 
know the Golden Rule: he who owns the gold makes the rules. The white supie 
cists tolerate her because what they lack is what she has wealth. B\ ant arge, t 
text is saying that Doha Victorina is subverting the prevailing binary opposition o 
woman/ non-white/underclass/colonial vs. male/white/upperclass/co omzer y 
leaving the position where she is supposed to be and positioning herse w leie s le 
is not supposed to be. Does this deconstructive feat make her a feminist an w,oo 
material for the women’s movement? 

This question gets answered as we gather the truths barred from entering t le 
printed page. One of these has to do with liberal feminism. Also known as our 
geois feminism, this posits the view that the oppression of women is iootec in 
the unequal application of rules in society, be they formal as laws and statutes of 


817 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 


the state or informal as customs, mores, and tradition. Rules are biased for men 
and biased against women. Take law, for example. The main sources of national 
law are Roman law, British common law, and Muslim law, which are all patriarchal in 
orientation: men are held to be more equal than women. Reinforcing formal law are 
customs, mores, and traditions which also promote male supremacy over women. 
Since it is inequality before the law which creates the conditions that makes women 
vulnerable to mens oppression, to liberate women, it is necessary to close the 
gap between men and women. Women have to be made the equal of men bv grant- 
ing to them the rights of men, such as the right to education and the right to the 
franchise. 

Dona Victorina and Liberal Feminism 

Dona Victorina invalidates the liberal feminist claim expounded above. She suc- 
ceeds in making herself equal, if not more equal to men, but this does not make her 
a feminist — a liberated and liberating woman. She thinks like her present-day, 
well-heeled sisters who do not and refuse to recognize women’s oppression because 
they actually believe in the liberal claim that all would have the opportunity to be 
equal to the “more equal” if women were willing to struggle. Also, she does noth- 
ing to alter the structures that produce and reproduce inequality. In fact, she has no 
desire to change the system. All she is interested in is to join the class of oppressors. 
It is for this reason that she is allowed to enter the pages of the Fili which discusses 
the anatomy of a failed revolution. Her presence critiques feminist liberalism. 
Equality with men is impossible in the liberal state notwithstanding legal reform to 
empower women like the granting of the franchise to them and treating them as 
the equal of men before the law, because gender is not the only source of inequality. 
There is also the private ownership of the means of production which creates class 
and which in turn creates structures that generate inequality. There is also inequal- 
ity created by race and the position of a nation in the international economic or- 
der. Liberal feminism completely ignores these other sources of inequality. Dona 
Victorina then is a reminder to those who want to devote themselves to a move- 
ment for liberation: be sure that the slaves of today will not become the tyrants of 
tomorrow by seeing to it that the structures that produce and reproduce slaves are 
eliminated, for as long as there are slaves there will always be tyrants. 

Dona Victorina and the Jeivels of Simon 

Until the last page of the Fili, we find Dona Victorina alive and kicking. Does this 
mean that the text does not rule out the possibility that one day she will try to 
obtain Simouns jewels and use them for her purpose? 

The answer is “Yes,” if she is to be taken as the symbol of the landowning 
class whose economic interest has been threatened by takers of land through land- 
grabbing and pacto de retro vendo. Convinced that property can no longer be safe- 


818 


IM C /ON-M- RNANni'Z Rizal and the "Woman Question ” 


guarded by the system. Dona Victorina, fighter that she is, will certainly go to war 
to protect what is hers. 

In the 19th century, land became a very valuable means of production. The 
opening ot the Philippines to international trade created a demand tor agricultural 
products such as sugar, abaca, and copra. To be competitive in supplying the de- 
mand lor these goods in the world market, large tracts ofland were necessary since 
in the export trade bulk is the name of the game. Tons and tons of sugar, for ex- 
ample, required ownership/control of large tracts ot land tor planting the cane. To 
avail themselves ot the opportunities tor making money in the export of sugar, 
landowners sometimes sold their land in order to raise the necessary capital with 
the agreement that once the vendor raises money, he can buy back his land. Many 
landowners lost their lands because what they sold was not sold back to them ei- 
ther because they could not raise the money or the vendee wanted to hold on to the 
land (Constantino 1 976: 1 23-1 26; Larkin 1973: 53 - 56 ). Another way by which a 
landowner could lose his land was through land-grabbing as experienced by the 
Rizal family and told in the story ot Cabesang Tales. 

Dona Victorina would not care one bit about Padre Florentinos words on 
the ideal revolution led by the ideal revolutionary and followed by the ideal follow 
ers and launched at an ideal time. As far as she is concerned, her war against takers 
ot land is just. 

I he answer is also “Yes, if Dona Victorina sees the likes of Cabesang 
Tales take hold of the revolution for national liberation. She would certain!} tr\ 
to beat them to the cache which she would use to fund a movement that \\ ou c 
crush the nascent class war that was riding on the revolution for national i era 
tion. 8 Contemptuous of the lower class, she would see to it that they fight for le 
hidden agenda — the preservation of property — while talking to them a out o 
of country and national redemption; she would use them as cannon fo tr ut 
when the time came she would abandon them and join forces with whoever wou 
support her real agenda, even if they be foreigners in search of colonies, n t le 
history of the Philippines it is this collaborating Dona Victorina w io ias so 
prevailed. 9 . . 

I he answer is also “Yesf if we take her as the representative of mi 
women who increasingly have come to realize that they have energies t at cannot 
be fully absorbed by reproduction work. In fact, it is bourgeois women w o z 
predominated in the womens movement in the Philippines. Like Dona Victorina, 
not a few were/are confused movers of history for women. For example, t lose w o 
struggled for the right to vote in the 1930s did not realize that what they accom 
plished was to give legitimacy to American colonization of the Philippines. For t at 
matter, because women were granted the right to vote as early as 1937, the churci, 
cited by Rizal as the very institution that prevented liberation by promoting o - 
scurantism, quickly regained lost ground even after the 1935 Constitution de 
dared separation of church and state as a principle. Catholic women voted Catho- 
lics into office and the rest is history repeating itself because, as Alexis Tocqueville 


819 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 


is reported to have said, “the lesson in history is that people do not learn from h is- 

■n 

tory. 

Bourgeois women practically have monopolized the womens movement in 
the Philippines (Subido 1954, De Dios 1990, Tirona 1990). Women of the 
lower class were much too busy eking out a living or engaged in the class struggle 
and the national struggle to bother about womens emancipation. It is only lately 
that women of the lower class have included in their agenda the “Woman Ques- 
tion” (Fernandez 1994d, De Dios, op. cit.). It is also only lately, with the declara- 
tion of the International Year of Women in 1975 and the Decade of Women in 
1975-1985 by the United Nations, and the popularization of the United Nations 
Forward Looking Strategies that promoted the concepts of women-in-develop- 
ment (W1D), women-and-development (WAD), and gender-and-devclopment 
(GAD) that bourgeois women themselves have started to look at the “( 'lass Ques- 
tion,” the “Woman Question,” and the “National Question'' from the feminist 
point of view. 

If Dona Victorina is not the woman to emulate because she merely wants to 
join and be counted as a member of the oppressor class, is I )ona ( Consolacion then 
being offered by Rizals novels as the probable candidate? 

Who is Afraid of Dona Consolation? 

Before we answer the question, let us take a look at Dona Consolacion. She is not 
allowed entry into the pages of the Fili. She is last mentioned in the “F.pilogue” as 
a silent woman who has taken to chain-smoking and drinking and has grown in- 
different to her looks as evidenced by her wearing her usual “blue flannel blouse 
now of indescribable color 10 such that “not only young girls fear her but also old 
women and boys {Fili: 381). Before this last presentation of her, we see her whis- 
pering something into the ears of the alferez after she hears T; irsilo call her the ug- 
liest woman he has ever laid eyes on and categorizes sleeping with her the greatest 
punishment a man could suffer. Tarsilo is then lowered into a well, an act reminis- 
cent of the returning a son to his mothers womb as a curse. When he is drawn out 
of the well, she, in a fit of Freudian outburst, puts the lighted end of her cigar on 
this mans body to find out if he is alive or dead. 11 Finding no reaction to the fire of 
her cigar, a phallic symbol, she kicks him and leaves for the barracks. Consciously 
or subconsciously or unconsciously (who can ever tell the difference?) she engages 
in the ritual of turning the penis against itself, that organ, for which whole civil- 
izations are erected, according to MacKinnon (1989) “just to keep it erect.” After 
this scene, she does not say a word and remains quite speechless up to the “Epi- 
logue.” 

Why is Dona Consolacion prevented from entering the pages of the Fili? Is it 
because she is the wrong material to use in discussing the anatomy of a failed revo- 
lution? Or, to put it another way, is it because she prefigures the kind of revolu- 


820 


l*l-i /ON 1 1 UN \NDt ■'/ Riz*il and the "Woman Question" 


tionary who will turn a whole system inside out, who will destroy completely what 
is there because old and rotten materials have no place in the new edifice? 


Dona Consolat ion and Dona Victorina Compared 

It we compare Doha Consolacion with Doha Victorina, we discover significant 
differences, for one, there is the difference in class origin. Doha Consolacion 
comes from the lower class. She acquires social mobility by using the only resource 
she has: her bodv. She works as a laundress and later as a camp follower. Her ser- 
vices as washerwoman and mistress must have pleased the alfcrezs o much, and 
being a reasonable man, he marries her. By marrying her, the alferez no longer has 
to pay for her services. All he has to do to keep her sexual as well as domestic ser- 
vices required to reproduce life for him is to give her free board and lodging in his 
barracks. Little does he foresee that this woman he has assumed to be simple be- 
cause of her lowlv stature in life will prove to be a formidable combatant in and out 
of bed. 

Doha Consolacion can read. This indicates her intelligence and diligence to 
improve herself, because formal schooling was not available then to the lowei class, 
much less to females of the lower class. She must have spent her time in the bar 
racks teaching herself how to read and write instead of engaging herself in womens 
work": dusting furniture, sweeping floors, washing dishes, cooking, looking for 
flowers to put in vases, getting pregnant, taking care of babies, etc. 

She is also an astute student of how males use power. Hei husband, tie 
alferez , uses his information on Padre Salvi — the killer of Crispin to count 
the parish priest. Knowing how effective blackmail is, Doha Consolacion tries it 
herself. She makes Padre Salvi know that she knows what should not be uiowi 
about him. For this reason. Padre Salvi becomes powerless before Doha 

solacion. ^ 

Doha Consolacion has very few speaking lines. 1 he fust time die spea 
when she is made by her husband to mispronounce the name of hci damn corn 1 
try." Married to a Spaniard, she has to speak Spanish, which makes her forget laga- 
log. Then she discards both Tagalog and Spanish and communicates in tie a 
guage of gestures. Her speech development indicates her capacity for innovation. 
Here is a woman who is willing to discard established systems of communic 
because they do not serve her purpose — to give birth to herself. To express t 
music within her that is in dissonance with the music of the piocession tiat sie 
hears from the barracks that is her domicile, she silences Tagalog ant Spams i. 
Freed from these phallocentric/logocentric languages, she finds expression in lei 
very own form of self-expression — the Dance of the Medusa. In this ance sie 
gives birth to herself. Her emergent self is of course frightening to the alfeiezm to 
those who gaze at her for it subverts the patriarchal concept of woman. Doha 
Consolacion has transformed herself from a mans woman (as a desiiablc viigin, 


821 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND Bl Y(>\D 


prostitute, lover, and wife) into an imitation of rhc alfcrez fas the whip-carrving 
dancing partner of Sisa) and then to an androgynous being (as the “amiable" 
woman who looks out of her own window). 

She also subverts the bourgeois concept of woman. Instead of assuming the 
role of the “light of home" who provides a haven of rest and pleasure for her hus- 
band, Dona Consolacion makes a mockery of her own name: she is no source of 
consolation to her husband because she cannot even tidy up the house nor make 
an effort to be the desirable sexpot a husband wants to come home to. Neither does 
she fulfill the role of glorious motherhood, for in all likelihood she claims for her- 
self the right to her own body. Men can use it if they pay for it. It is not to be taken 
as a natural resource" as land where a husband can sow his seed and grow his chil- 
dren who will perpetuate his name. Neither does she consider it her dutv to honor 
her husband by packaging herself as her husband’s symbol of social ascendancy. 
Instead of dressing up in good taste as befits the wife of an alferez she creates her 
own style, which makes her look ridiculous in the eyes of the community and 
causes others to lose respect for her husband. She also subverts the working-class 
concept of a woman: instead of becoming a mother and dutiful wife, she shuns 
motherhood and is no asset to her husband. Industry, frugality, and meekness are 
not her virtues. She also subverts the colonial concept of woman: instead of being 
subservient to the white colonizers, she engages them in open confrontation. Nei- 
ther alferez nor friar can have their way with her. She meets the alferezs insults with 
insults, physical violence with equal violence. She blackmails the parish priest. She 
does not exhibit religiosity. On top of it all, she is not awed by any white man or 
woman. As far as she is concerned, she, like them, can also wield the whip and 
nothing prevents her from doing so. Indeed Doha Consoh tcion is a destroyer of 
the concept of woman of her time and clime. No wonder the man who sired her 
calls her the Medusa." 12 Snakes grow out of her head. Each is on the lookout for 
an Eve to tempt to commit the ultimate sin — the sin of disobedience. 

If we examine the Medusas story closely, we will see that she is one woman 
who has fought on all fronts: she has fought the alferez as man/social better/white 
colonizer. From the feminist perspective the departure of the alferez from her life is 
not a case of defeat but triumph. Freed from him, she can now explore the possi- 
bilities of life on her own terms. What will she not do? 

She has become so radical even for anarchist Simoun, who, as the then right- 
of-center Ibarra, is told by philosopher Tasio to beware of her. 


I he 1 Muse of the Civil Guard is as sharp as she is vicious. . . she reads 
the reports that her husband receives — Be careful! Eva was a good woman, 
sprung fiom the hands of God. . . Dona Consolacion is bad and it is not known 
from whose hands she comes from! ( Noli Me Tangere 160). 

In the chapter titled “1 he Rulers” this question is asked: Who were the rulers 
of the town. Not the mayor, the work says, for he was "an unhappy man who did 


822 


1*1 ( /ON MR NAN HI / Rizal and the “Woman Question 


not command Inn obeyed for lie did not govern, he was governed; he did not dis- 
pose, he was disposed of (Xo/i Me hinge re. 74). Who then governed? 

San Diego was a sort of Rome The parish priest was the Pope in the 

Vatican; the lieutenant of the Cavil Guard, the King of Italy in theQuirinal — 

(ibid.: ”~S) 

But Padre Salvi, representing ecclesiastical power and authority, and the lieu- 
tenant, representing state power and authority, pale before Dona Consolacion. 
Authority to exercise power is not vested in her by church or state but she, a woman 
living in a society where her sisters have been made by a colonial church and state 
the subjects of men, does not allow Spanish colonization to murder the spirit of 
her foremothers. Like the babaylan or catalona or chieftess of a barangay or the 
ordinary pre-Spanish woman of old, 1 ' who projects herself as a pintado, she is 
resourceful and plays the power game skillfully. Married for some years, she learns 
to protect her body from mens exploitation as sex object (she has one great \ ittue. 
“it seemed she had never looked at herself in a mirror” [78], baby factory (she does 
not give birth), or passive punching bag (“Both of them. . . beat each other up beau 
tif Lilly and gave free shows to the neighbors; vocal and instrumental concerts, with 
four hands, softly, loudly, with pedal and all (ibid.: 7/). 

It is generally conceded that the parish priest is the power in Philippine tow ns 
but not in San Diego where Dona Consolacion is the power. How did this come 
about? 

Dona Consolacion, the work says, “ claimed to have been with the P a7 *^ 
unfrocked with pina shirt and a saldkot , taking a walk very late at night . (i 1 
77) and whispers this information to her husband. Her husband uses this inforn 
tion, in addition to his information on the murder of Crispin in the coment, to 
put Padre Salvi under his control. Later, Doha Consolacion, who |* ea s 
husband s correspondence discovers that the alferez permits gambling, insi e i 
formation that could destroy him. From then on she has the lieutenant un ei 
control. . 

1 he question should now be asked: in spite of her misogynist portraya in t 
Noli, is she actually the person awaited for to lead the revolution that \\i 
people from gender, class, race, and national oppression? 

Ri/al’s View of Dona Consolacion and the Revolution 

From the point of view of Rizal the answer is a resounding No! In fact, Dona 
Consolacion stands for what a feminist should not be at that point in time in co o 
nial Philippines. We can assume this based on the other works of Rizal, foremost o 
which is the Letter to the Young Women ofMttlolos. In that lettei, Rizal laid dow n t le 
principles women should embrace if they are to get connected to the worldwide 
call to address the “Woman Question.” Summarizing the enumerated principles. 


823 


THE PHILIPPINE RKVOI.UTK )N ANI ) BI Y( )M ) 


Rizal advised women to liberate themselves from the teachings of the friars who 
have used religion to serve their colonial interests on earth, instead of the interest 
of the true God in heaven. Women should emulate the women of' Sparta In leach- 
ing their children civic virtues especially patriotism. Moreover women, if not 
married, should 

require of her lover a noble and honored name, a manlv heart to protect het 
weakness, and a resolute spirit which will not he satisfied with engendering 
slaves... When she is married she must aid her husband, inspire him with cour- 
age, share his perils, refrain from causing him worry, and sweeten his moments 
of affliction, always remembering that there is no grief that a stout heart can 
not bear and there is no worse inheritance than that of inf. um and slaverv 
(Collas 1957: 85). 

Rizal s advice to the women of Malolos is very much in keeping with what 
would later on be named u I hird World feminism.” This is a kind of feminism 
which is not an export of the western world or an import of the non-western world, 
contrary to what some critics say. I hird World feminism is a response of women to 
the challenges of! hird World realities: underdevelopment, mass poverty, and colo- 
nization/neocolonization. Rather than look at the “Woman Question” only from 
the gender perspective, I hird World feminism sees the subordination of women 
from the perspectives of the “National Question” and “Class Question.” In the 
early stages of the women’s movement in the Third World, what was prioritized 
was the “National Question” (Jayawardena 1994, Thi Tu 1978, Khaing 1984, 
Dancz 1987, lantiwiramanod and Pandey 1991 ). It was the belief that to liberate 
women, the nation should be liberated first from foreign colonial masters because 
a Motherland that is not free cannot possibly free her own daughters. Later, as the 
stru 8g^ e f° r national liberation progressed, it became apparent that the “Woman 
Question could not be separated from the “Class Question.” 

So engrossed have been women in the “National Question” and the “Class 
Question in the 1 hird World that they postpone addressing the “ Wc jman Ques- 
tion.” 

The question is again asked: Is Dona Consolacion, in spite of her misogynist 
portrayal, actually the person awaited for to lead the revolution that will liberate 
people from gender, class, race, and national oppression? 

Again, the answer to this question is made clearer with another question: 
From whose point of view? Rizals? Of previous readers of Rizal? Or of the symp- 
tomatic reader who gets educated by socialist feminism? From the point of view of 
Rizal, the answer is an unequivocal “No.” She may be a Fighter but does she 
know what is to be fought for? Remember that Rizal turned his back on the Revo- 
lution of 1896 because of his belief that long years of oppression had made the 
likes of Dona Consolacion hungry and angry. To put the bolo in their hands is to 
court trouble. I he revolution they are likely to launch will certainly be a revolution 


824 


I'l t /ON I l KNANni / AVcw/ and the “Woman Question" 


without reform. The bloodshed tor the intended liberation will all be in vain tor 
“the slaves of todav will be the tvrants of tomorrow" (Fernandez 1995b). I his ap- 
preciation of Doha Consolacion is rooted in the practice of previous elitist pro- 
ducers of text to assume that a woman cannot possibly have the capacity tor higher 
level intelligence, especiallv if she is poor and without formal education. At any 
rate, considering her propensity to alienate people because of her appearance and 
demeanor, no less than self-confessed feminist Lilia Santiago sees her only as a 
woman mimicking macho colonial oppressors and thereby dismisses the Muses 
revolutionary potential (Santiago 1992). Could she mobilize people to join the 
revolution? C ould women who have internalized their enemy for tar too long and 
far too well be able to identify with Dona Consolacions gender battles on the home 
front? 1'he d ance of the Medusa? Her language of gestures? And granted that she 
would join the movement for national liberation, would she not produce the divi- 
sions gender and class wars are likely to generate? And if the revolution for national 
liberation fails can the “Woman Question and the Class Question really be 
solved? 

Doha C 'onsolacion seems too far out for her time and place. And so Riza 
puts her in deep freeze. At the end of the novel, she looks out of the window in tu 
view of passersbv. She is port raved now as “amiable, one who drinks a lot, smoke; 
a lot; who lets her blue flannel blouse turn into an indescribable color, who h"C t 
ens voting girls, old women, and voting boys. Surprisingly, not included in the i;t 
of those she frightens are the men and women of reproductive age (who are nei 
ther young girls nor old women). Yet, we know' that these are the ven peop e w 

are challenged by the Medusa. . ttV „ 

From the point of view of the symptomatic reader, the answer is 
Though the novel has seen to it that Doha Consolacion does not develop from, 
unconscious to conscious feminist, the text produced bv a symptomatic iea ^ 
can reveal otherwise: already in Doha Consolacion lives socialist femme 
search of conscious mid refined practice. Women in search of their liberation 5 
know that the nlfcrez is not located only on one front; instead the alfiuz is oun 
on all fronts and the name of the game is indeed to fight on all Fonts. 1 ns is t e 
lesson which history has imported to women of Vietnam. Even befoie anno omlu ' 
the women have fought against their invaders, have joined actively in t le stiity^ e 
for nationhood, and have fought in the armed class struggle (MaiTii 11 
And after centuries of struggle, Vietnam has now become a peoples repu ^ ic. 
are the women of Vietnam at last liberated as women. 

Listen and listen well to the voices of two Vietnamese women. The first is 
that of a lawyer, the vice president of the Women’s Union and an author of the 
1 980 Constitution, while the second is that of Do I hi Ngot, president of the N in & 
Ian commune: 

1 he heritage of Confucianism, feudalism and capitalism runs deep. No 

generation could have changed as much as we have. We have been pushed by 


82S 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLU TION AND BEY( >NI> 


history. But we still do not have full equality. We have one of the most progres- 
sive wonderful constitutions in the world; but we cannot liberate women In 
the stroke of a pen. It is much harder to fight against obsolete customs than against 
the enemy. (She spent years in I hieu’s prisons)... Men and women cannot he 
made equal in a mechanical way (underscoring mine; hi sen 1 98d: 2-*tt). 


I am one of the millions of Vietnamese women who matured in the 
J hree Responsibilities Movement, taking charge of the families, social work 
and defense of our villages when our husbands and sons were .it the front. But 
the lingering vestiges of feudal ideology place a serious hurdle in our wav. (I 
have been president for 1 1 years.) But even today, some of my villagers stubbornly 
refuse to come to me, but instead go to the deputy president, a man , whenever they 
need a signature from the commune authorities. 

My husband, who fought in the liberation army in the south , was hilled in 
action in 1975. I was left with a daughter and was thus disadvantages l in two 
ways in the family of my husband because I had no son ; ansi in the commune , 
because I had been a widow. Some jeered at me: “ Look at the widow looking after 
court affairs!” Even women did not hide their jealousy. 

I was too concerned with my work to busy myself with such backbit- 
ing... I dont think any man in my condition could work so hard... Practice 
has shown women can do any job in the commune... (underscoring mine; 

ibid.: 250). 

At the end of the novel we can surmise that Dona Consolation is looking out 

of a window because it is mentioned on page 289 of the Noli that her usual place in 
the house is by the window. I his is a very powerful picture. It evokes memories of 
Padre Modestos letters to Urbana and Feliza informing the two young women that 
to be a proper woman one must not look out of the window. 1 But Dona 
Consolacion looks out of the window. It is her window. She looks at the passersby 
and the passersby look at her. 

I he picture of Dona Consolacion looking out of the window evokes the 
meaning of the term frame as in “frame up.” “Frame up” is associated with the 
underworld of crime. My symptomatic reading asserts that Rizal framed his tex- 
tual daughter. He made her into the Medusa who is willing to go all the way to 
achieve decolonization. Actually, Rizal is the Medusa. But he framed his textual 
daughter for his “crime.” 

Frame can also be used in the sense of “framing” her picture so that it can 
be hanged and displayed. Whoever passes by it, like the frightened boys and girls 
and the old women and men, not to mention women like me, will take a look at 
her and find out more about her. As a framed woman, like the Mona Lisa, she be- 
comes the object of the gaze.” Why is she smiling like her sister, Mona Lisa? Why 
does she appear to look at those who look at her? What do onlookers who feel that 


826 


1*1 ( /ON M RNANPl Z Riz^il and the “Woman Question 


this woman inside the frame is looking at them do about what they see in them- 
selves as they look at her? 

Indeed the svmptomatic reader who received instruction from socialist femi- 
nism must /should now appropriate portions of Rizals Fili for Dona Consolacion. 

Let it be written as it is written: 

Where are you, oh Dona (.onsolacion, who will dedicate your inno- 
cence, vour idealism, vour enthusiasm to the good of the country? Where are 
vou who will give generouslv of vour blood to wash away so much shame, 
crime and abomination? Pure and immaculate must the victim be for the sac- 
rifice to be acceptable. Where are you. Dona ( onsolacion, who together with 
the voung men and voting women, ls who are to embody in yourselves that life- 
force that has been drained from our veins, the pure ideals that have grown 
stained in our minds, the fiery enthusiasm that has been quenched in our 
hearts? We await you. Dona ( .onsolacion, come for we await you! (1 have sub- 
stituted Doha Consolacion s name with the nameless youth as a tribute to 
the Medusa who is mine to keep and share with all women. Vm may want to 
see Fili: 344-34 S). 

Notes 

1 . Rizal witnessed the “First Wave" of the womens movement in Europe. He had direct 
contact with feminists of his day. 1 he Noli was printed in Berlin, German), b\ the 
Berliner Buchdruckcrein Aktiengesselschaft run by the Zetzerinnen-Schule dcs Lette 
Verein which established the Typographische Institut in 1874. This trained women 
iri printing, considered then a “mans job but which the founding German feminist 
believed could be ably done by women, too, as Rizal himself acknowledged. On his 
way home to the Philippines he met a woman sent to India to write on the condi tic 
of Indian women. He admired this woman very much. See Fernandez, Rizal o 
Women and Children in the Struggle for Nationhood in Review of Ionian Stu 

Vol. I, No. 2, 1990-1991: 10-13. 

2. Inequality before the law makes women weak and then lumps them togethei 
the minors, the insane, and the disabled. 

3. Note that in the Philippines as in many other countries, rape is still considered not a 

crime against a person but a crime against chastity. 

4. The “Take Back the Night Movement" of women started in Italy. In the autumn of 
1976, an estimated 100,000 women from all over Italy marched in different cities. 
The following year in springtime, German women held a similar march (Anderson 
and Zinsser 1 988, 1 1:422-423). The movement has spread to other parts of the world. 
The idea is to call attention to the fact that since the night is not safe for women, 
considering that commission of crimes against women, like rape and mugging, hap 
pen at night, women have to be home before dark. Consequently, women lose op- 
portunities for empowering themselves: they cannot attend night school (the only op- 


827 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI.VONI > 


tion for mothers with small children); they cannot take gravcvard-shift jobs that pay 
more; they cannot earn more by taking overtime jobs; etc. J he “ lake back the night 
movement therefore demands making the night safe lor women. 

5. Venereal diseases arc called “ sakit babae in Tagalog, yet if not lor men women would 
not get these dreaded diseases. 

6. I did not find any evidence in Rival’s writings that would prove his disagreement with 
the patriarchal notion on motherhood. On the contrary, there is this text; Katipunan 
says that those who die single have no one to help them go to heaven because they 
were useless in this life. Woman, she says, is a flower that ought not to be sterile but 
give fruit” (Rizals Prose. 159). This text is followed by a criticism of the white priests 
who prefer the virtue of virginity to maternity.” At any rate, there is the sub-text on 
the women characters who did not become mothers: Dona Victorina (she wanted to 
but could not), Pepay (did she practice birth control in order to have control over her 
body as Lilia Santiago avers?), Dona Consolacion (did she deliberately avoid mother- 
hood by acting how man’s sex object shouldn’t?). 

7. The text on Cabesang Tales should be intertexted with texts such as this letter dated 
27 May 1890, sent to Rizal in Europe from his brother, Paciano: “In one of your 
letters, you tell me that in the opinion of the Justices of the Supreme C kuirt, we should 
refuse to pay to the Estate (Hacienda) in order that the case will be appealed to it. 
Many here have anticipated that opinion, not for the same purpose, but because they 
have no more money with which to pay. For this reason, the Estate presented to the 
justice of the peace a petition to evict the tenants. At the beginning we had hopes of 
a favorable verdict in view of the fact that the laws of the Indies were on our side and 
in accordance with an affidavit of ’86 or ’87 signed by some persons and released by 
the Court but whose contents they did not even consider. But now we know better. 
1 he amount mentioned in the case of eviction is less than that provided in the E. of 
C.C., because they claim immemorial possession, as if the silence of the ignorant, 
exploited tenants had given the exploiters a right over the property. Lastly, it is prob- 
able that in the courts of first and second instance we may lose the case, for the judges 
fear the intrigues of our opponents. In the trial twice I proved to be useful for having 
asserted the rights of the tenants and proved spurious the claim of the Estate. In spite 
of this, I m not hoping for anything good to come out of it; there (Spain) perhaps one 
can still hope for something. My stand will probably cost me dearly, for the friars of 
the Estate told some Binan residents that I don’t consider or pity our parents who are 
already very old. I he Governor told Gobernadorcillo Eusebio to try to win the case, 
for otherwise the friars might make trouble in the province. At present there are bands 
of highway robbers in the environs of this town and neighboring ones, and the lieu- 
tenant of the civil guards of this town (Calamba) told Eusebio confidentially that it 
was I who furnished arms to the bandits, and the worst thing of all was that the one 
who said this was a gentleman officer and Eusebio warned me that he would deny all 
that he said, as it was told him confidentially” ( Letters Between Rizal and Family Mem- 
bers'. 295-296). 


828 


PKCV.ON-FKRNANDEZ Rizal and the "Woman Question 


8. 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 


12 . 

13. 

14. 


Foremost ol the writers who discussed the Revolution of 1896 not only as a revolu- 
tion for independence but also as a class war are Renato Constantino (1976) A Past 
Revisited and Icodoro Agoncillo (1956) Revolt of the Masses. 

See Hernando Abaya's Betrayal of the Masses. 

The change of color signifies Dona Consolacions transformation from masculinized 
woman to one who is neither male nor female. 

Note how Dona Consolacion uses the phallic symbol, the alferezs whip, to turn 
against what it svmbolizes. This is another example of her eloquence in her language 
of gestures. Note also how she yawned in answer to the greetings of a friar. How 
more eloquent can anvone contemptuous of foreign colonizers get? Yet, the alferez 
and even Rizal thought her to have lost the power of speech. 

In Greek mythology Medusa was the only mortal of the three Gorgons. She had 
snakes on her head which turned into stone anyone looking at them. Perseus, aided 
by Athene, cut oil her head, from which sprang Pegasus, the winged horse, and 
Chrvsaor. 


All the earlv chroniclers (Pigafetta, Chirino, Colin, Plasencia, Loarca, and Morga) 
noted the high status of women in the Philippines. 

Considering Doha ( 'onsolacions character as a woman in search of total decolc ni 
zation, the make-up she puts on her face is not to be construed as war paint designed 
to make her competitive in the sex market but war paint put on for the fight on the 
racial and national fronts. Let us see whether this assertion can hold ground b\ [ 
senting the text as it is intertexted in the context of the assertion. Nc\cr had 
Serioras dark face inspired confidence in anyone even when she painted herse 
that morning it was greatly disquieting especially when she was seen ^oin^ ^ 
the house from one end to the other silently and as ii thinking about soinetl ^ 
rible and evil; her look had the gleam that a serpents pupil emits when cai G 
about to be crushed: it was cold, bright, penetrating and had something slin \, 
some, cruel... she soaked herself in her own bile: one might ha\e thought 
cells of her organism were being charged with electricity and threatened to explode in 
a terrible upheaval. Everything around her bent like spikes at the first gust of a st , 
she did not meet any resistance, nor find any high or low r place to discharge 
temper: the servants and soldiers kept away from her (Noli Me Tangerc. 240- 
read the text on the pintados written by a Spanish friar, Padre Francisco Colin w 10 
Rizal mentions in the latter's annotation of Antonio de Morgas Sucesos ce 
Pilipinas'. “Besides the exterior clothing and dress, some of these nati\ es wor ’ 
inside dress, which could not be removed after once put on. These are the tattooing 
of the body so greatly practiced among the Visayans, whom we call 1 intados 
reason. For it was the custom among them, and was a mark of nobility and bravery, to 
tattoo the whole body from top to toe when they were of an age and strength suffi 
cient to endure the tortures of the tattooing, which was done (after being carefully 
designed by the artists, and in accordance with the proportion of the parts of the body 
and sex) with instruments like brushes or small twigs, with very fine points of bam 


829 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLU TION AND BEYOND 


boo — The whole body was not tattooed at one time, but it was done gradually. In 
olden times no tattooing was begun until some brave deed had been performed: and after 
that y for each part of the body which was tattooed soyne new deed had to be performed ’ 
(Blair and Robertson, Vol. XL: 63-64; underscoring mine). Note, too, how she is 
coifed. She tied a kerchief on her head which is reminiscent of the putongni our an- 
cestors. Is the racial memory erased and slandered by the colonizers being retrieved 
from the dust bin of history by Dona Consolacion? Memory needs an address and 
this can only take place in deep silence. Is this why Doha ( Consolacion does not say a 
word? Is this why the text does not allow her to enter the pages of the hi l Pi So she 
could intertext her wordless text with this text of Miguel de Loarca written in the 
1 6th century? ‘ The Pintados are a courageous aiid warlike race ; they have continually 
waged war on both land and sea... They are greatly addicted to the use of a kind of 
wine which they make from rice and from the palm-tree, and which is good. Very 
rarely do they become angry when drunk, for their drunkenness passes off in jests or 
in sleep (ibid., Vol. 5:1 17, underscoring mine). 

15. Apparently Doha Consolacion has taken back the night, a feat for her time because 
of the prevailing patriarchal dictum that “women should be home before dark.” Note 
that because she has appropriated the night, she manages to seize an opportunity that 
can happen only at night: catching a priest in an unpriestly act, which comes in handy 
for blackmail purposes. 

16. Note that her blue (symbolizing the masculine) flannel has turned into something of 
indescribable color. Those unfamiliar with texts on the pre-Spanish women in the 
Philippines are likely to construe the masculinization of Dona Consolacion because 
she smokes big cigars and drinks like Bacchus. Morga’s text and Rizal’s annotations of 
this text afford us a trip down memory lane: “The natives of these Islands drink this 
liquor (aged tuba) in the day and night without end in their meetings, weddings, 
feasts and circles, accompanied by singing by a few so inclined and who come to 
drink and have a good time, although this habit does not carry with it, according to 
their estimation, any dishonor or infamy” (Morga, op. cit.: 248). To this text Rizal 
adds this annotation: It must be admitted that the Filipino people have improved in 
this regard, thanks perhaps to the wine monopoly. Today hardly can one see in the 
provinces one or so drunkard and in Manila only foreign sailors are given to this vice.” 
That drunkenness, however, was not dangerous, for Colin says: “But rarely do they 
become furious or wild; rather, after drinking, they preserve proper respect and cir- 
cumspection. They only become more gay and talkative and say some amusing 
things. But it is not known that none of them after leaving a banquet, even at a late 
hour of the night, fail to reach their home. And if they offer to buy or sell, and touch 
and weigh gold or silver, they do it with so much circumspection that neither does 
their hand tremble nor do they make a mistake” (Book I, 61). Rizal omits pertinent 
texts of Colin, such as this one: “ I hey eat sparingly but drink often; and when they 
are invited to a banquet, they are asked not to eat but to drink” (Blair and Robertson, 
op. at.: 66). Regarding cigar-smoking, see Ed. C. de Jesus (1980) The Tobacco Mo - 


830 


PF.CZON-FFRNANDEZ Rizal and the “ Woman Question" 


nopoly in the Philippines. The cover shows a woman mouthing an enormous cigar. In 
the inside pages are pictures of young and old women doing the same. 

17. Padre Modesto likens women to grapes. A woman looking out of a window is like a 
bunch of grapes that is asking to be eaten by male passerby whom the good friar lik- 
ens to hungry wolves. 

18. Castro’s translation uses the generic noun “man." I specify men and women because 
I reject separatism. I subscribe to the proposition that women cannot be liberated 
unless men themselves are liberated. In a session on gender-training for empower- 
ment during the NCO Forum in Huairou, China, in September 1995, I asked the 
women present il they had bothered at all to give gender-training to their husbands, 
sons, and daughters. laughter tinged with embarrassment reverberated in the session 
hall. When I shared with them my gender-training paradigm that sees men and 
women together, not apart, in the pursuit of feminist goals, I was met with approval 
by the majority. Not a few of the participants, especially Southeast Asian women, saw 
me after the session and discussed with me how we could form a group to enrich the 
paradigm and popularize it in the region. 

References 

Books 

Agoncillo, Teodoro. 1 956. The Revolt of the Masses. Quezon City: University of the Philip 
pines Press. 

Anderson, Bonnie S. and Judit P. Zinsser. 1 988. A History of Their Own. Vol. I and II. New 

York: Harper and Row Publishers. . 

Barthes, Roland. 1979. “From Work to Text.” In Josue Harari (ed.) Textual Strategies; er- 

speetives in Post-structuralism. New York: Cornell University Press. 

Blair, Emma and James Robertson. (1903) 1973. The Philippine Islands. Manda u>on & , 
Rizal: Cachos Hermanos, Inc. 

Brownmiller, Susan. 1975. Against Our Will; Men , Women , and Rape. New \or\ . tmoi 
and Schuster. 

Castro, Jovita V. trans. 1989. Noli Me Tangere. Translated from the Spanish. Quezon City. 
APO Production Unit Inc. Information. 

. Trans. 1991. The Revolution. Translated from the Spanish. Manila: 

ASEAN Committee on Culture and Information. 

Colin, P. Francisco. (1663) 1973. Labor Evangelica. In Blair and Robertson (eds.), T e i 
ippine Islands. Mandaluyong, Rizal: Cachos Hermanos. 

Co lias, Juan, trans. 1957. Rizal s Unknown Writings. Translated from the Spanish. Manila: 
Bookman, Inc. 

Constantino, Renato. 1975. A Past Revisited. Quezon City: Tala Publishing Services. 

Dancz, Virginia H. 1 987. Women and Party Politics in Peninsular Malaysia. Oxford and New 
York: Oxford University Press. 


831 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 


Dejesus, Ed C. 1980. The Tobacco Monopoly in the Philippines. Quezon City: Ateneo de 
Manila University Press. 

Eisen, Arlene. 1984. Women and Revolution in Vietnam. London: Zed Books Ltd. 

Engels, Frederick. (1884) 1975. Origin of the Family Private Property and the State. New 
York: International Publishers. 

Jaggar, Alison. 1983. Feminist Politics and Human Nature. New Jersey: Rowman &: 
Allanheld; Sussex: 1 he Harvester Press. 

Jayawardena, Kumari. 1994. Feminism and Nationalism in the Third World. Lahore, Paki- 
stan: ASR Publications. 

Javellana, Rene. 1988. Casaysayan nang Pasyong Mahal ni Jesucristong Panginoon Nat in na 
Sucat Ipag-alab nang Puso nang Sinomang Babasa. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila 
University Press. 

Khaing, Mi Mi. 1984. The World of Burmese Women. London: Zed Books. 

Larkin, John A. 1972. The Pampangans: Colonial Society in a Philippine Province. Berkeley 
and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 

Mai Thi Tu. 1978. Women in Vietnam. Hanoi: Foreign languages Publications. 

MacKinnon, Catharine A. 1989. Toward a Feminist Theory of the State. ( Cambridge, Massa- 
chusetts; London, England: Harvard University Press. 

Morga, Antonio de. ( 1 609). Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas. Republi shed and annotated by Jose 
Rizal in 1890. Rizal National Centennial Commission. 1 962. Historical Trents in the 
Philippines. Manila: Rizal National Centennial Commission. 

Rich, Adrienne. 1 986. OfWoman Born: Motherhood as Fxperience and Institution. New York 
and London: W!.W . Norton and Company. 

Rizal, Jose. (1887) 1989. Noli Me Tangere. Iranslated from the Spanish by Jovita Castro. 
Quezon City: APO Production Unit Inc. 

• (1891) 1991. El Filibusterismo. Translated from the Spanish bv Jovita 

Castro. Quezon City: APO Production Unit Inc. 

. (1889) 1976. Letter to the Young Women of Malolos.” In Rizal's Selected 

Writings. Manila: Technological Supply, Inc. 

— • (1890) 1962. Annotation of Morga’s Sucesos de las Islas Pilipinas. Trans- 
lated from the Spanish by Encarnacion Alzona. Historical Events in the Philippines. 
Manila. Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission. 

_. 1961. Reminiscences and Travels. Manila: Jose Rizal National Centennial 
Commission. 

• 1964. Letters Between Rizal and Family Members. Vols. MIL Manila: Na- 
tional Heroes Commission. 

• 1959. One Hundred Letters of Jose Rizal to his Parents, Brothers , Sisters, Rela- 
tives. Manila: Philippine National Historical Society. 

• 1990. Rizals Prose. Manila: National Historical Institute. 

Subido, Iarrosa. 1954. The Feminist Movement in the Philippines 1 905-1 955. Manila: Na- 
tional Federation of Womens Clubs of the Philippines, Inc. 


832 


1M c /ON I 1 RN AN PI / Riz*il and the “Woman Question 


Tantiwiramanond, Darunec and Shaski Ranjan Pandey. 1991. By Women , for Women, a 
Study of Women > ( )r^mi^itions in Thai Lind. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies. 

Tapales, Proserpina and Priscila Manalang, (eds.) 1990. U omens Role in Philippine History. 

Quezon C i t \- : t nivcrsitv C enter tor W omens Studies, University of the Philippines. 
Tirona, Marv Crave. 1990. “ 1 he Panuelo Activists. In lapales and Manalang, (eds.), 
op.cit. 


Journals and Periodicals 

Fernandez, Albina P. 1990- 199 Id. “Rizal on Women and C hildren in the Struggle for 
Nationhood. In Review of \\ omens Studies Vol. 1, No. 2. 


Unpublished Manuscripts 


Fernandez, Albina Peczon. 1995c. Feminism in Southeast Asia. In the ljuydoptdiii of 
Women's Studies. New York, London, Loron to, Sydney, lokyo, Singapoie. Flan ester 


Wheatsheaf ( i n - 1 h e - p r e s s ) . 

. 1996. “Si Rizal at ang Kilusang Kababaihan.” Paper read during the na- 
tional conference sponsored by the KAGUNARI, Departamento ng 1 ilipino a 
University of the Philippines College of Arts and Letters in celebration of the 
tennial of Rizal’s Martvrdom, 29 February- 1 March 1996 at the I ulungan^ Ke ' 
Bulwagang Rizal, U.P. Diliman Campus. 

1996b. “Rizal and the ‘Woman Question/ A Study of Colonial Politics 

with Flmphasis on Sexual/ Textual Politics. A doctoral dissertation submitt' 

College of Arts and Letters, University of the Philippines. 

. 1 994d. “Ang Literat i Prodaksvon ng Katipunan ng mga Ba^c \ 


1 10 pp. typescript. 


during the Inter 


„ a Century Hence: Rizal s Ideas on Liberty.” A paper read 
,nri n ,»l A<c,n,Wv of rhe Order of the Knights ot Rizal, Odenwald 


1 995e. "Rizal 


Halle, Williamsfeld, Cermany on 22 May 1995. , 

Santiago, Lilia Quindoza. 1992. “Pepay.” Paper read during the Internationa 5 

on the Centennial of the Publication of Dr. Jose Rizals El Filibuster ismo .f ‘ 3 

by the College of Arts and Letters, College of Law, U.P Vargas Museum, 0 

of the Philippines; National Historical Institute; and KAGUNARI, held on 1 - 
September 1992, at University of the Philippines, Quezon City. 


833 


A Hero, At Length 


Antonio M. Moi.ina 

Madrid, Spain 


H ave you ever known of any person whose life saw countless obstacles 
as would hinder him from becoming a hero, only to become one at the end? 
This has been the case with our hero Jose Rizal with his versatile accomplish- 
ments in varied disciplines of human knowledge and his unsurpassed love of coun- 
try. In his fruitful, if brief, existence appear certain indications of Rizal s heroic con- 
figuration and destiny. 

There is his almost undeviating practice of signing his name either in lull or 
simply employing his family name. It is next to impossible to find any writing of 
his signed with only his first name or with any of his several endearing nicknames. 
For instance, his autographed dedications of devotional books as farewell souve- 
nirs on the very day of his execution arc addressed to his mother and to his wife. 
The first dedication reads in Spanish: “A mi muy amada madre’ (To my very dear 
mothei) and the second is inscribed in English: “To my dear and unhappy wife 
Josephine. Both parting lines carry this signature: “Jose Rizal. Now, has any one 
of us ever signed with our full name or even with just the family name our commu- 
nications to so close a person like our own mother? Again, how should our wives 
react to any message from us signed in such formal fashion? It would seem that 
Rizal, in keeping his distance from concrete persons, avoiding a semblance of prox- 
imity or familiarity, manifests that he would be beholden to no one in particular, 
but rather left free to be loved and admired by all. Precisely the stuff of which a 
hero is made! 

Consider the other matter of his place of birth and that of his death. While 
Rizal is known to have been born in Calamba, I have yet to see direct evidence of 


834 


MOl INA A Hero, At Length 


this — like his birth certificate. But no such certificate exists. This is because the 
Civil Registry system was first established during the American regime, long after 
Rizafs birth. 1'here was a similar system obtaining then in Spain, but not appli- 
cable to the Philippines during Rizafs time. Births were recorded under the Span- 
ish administration through the baptismal certificate of the interested parry. The 
problem is that the baptismal records of the Calamba parish were destroyed during 
the fire that razed the church and convent of Calamba on 28 September 1862, a 
year after Rizafs birth and baptism. When the Spanish scholar Wenceslao E. Ret- 
ana thought of writing the first biography of Jose Rizal, seeking to establish the 
place and date of birth of the latter, he requested Irinidad H. Pardo deTavera to 
furnish him with the pertinent baptismal document. It was then that the loss of 
Rizafs baptismal record came to light. But Pardo de Tavera was fortunate to spot 
some so-called Reconstituted Records in the said convent where he found a certi- 
fication subscribed on the basis of the sworn testimonies of some witnesses, aver- 
ring that on 22 June 1861 a male child was baptized and given the name of Jose, 
being the son of Francisco Rizal Mercado and leodora Realenda. Let us overlook 
the inaccuracy of the family name attributed to Rizal s mother, whom we know 
was leodora Alonso v Quintos. Also, that the said Reconstituted Records do not 
give us Rizafs date of birth, but only that of his baptism. 1 hat he should have been 
baptized on 22 June does not necessarily mean that he was born on the 19th of the 
month. I was once the baptismal godfather of a boy who walked with me to the 
church for he was then seven years old. At any rate, what concerns us is Rizal s 
birthplace. That he was baptized in Calamba does not necessarily mean that he was 
born there. My son's baptismal certificate shows that he was baptized in Mandaluy 
ong, yet he was born in Manila, at the University of Santo Tomas Hospital. T lis 
uncertainty with regard to Rizafs place of birth adds to his condition as a iero. 
that he should not belong only to Calamba but to the whole Philippines as we . 

As regards his place of death, the monument dedicated to Rizal at w iat 
now known as Rizal Park was erected upon what was then said to be the exact spot 
where he fell riddled with the bullets of the firing squad. By the mid- 1930s, ow 
ever, research seemed to indicate that Rizal was executed a good number of meters 
away from the place first chosen. The pertinent marker was put up. Is there an> 
other hero in the world with two different places of death? 

But it was Rizal himself, who said in his farewell poem: El sitio na a 

importa” (The place matters not). This again mirrors Rizal as a hero, who wou 

not be fettered by material confines or limitations. 

One more query: How much of a hero did Rizal feel himself to be oi to e 
come? When in 1892 he returned to the Philippines to face possible charges of 
subversion and, therefore, the risk of being put to death, as duly alerted by his fam- 
ily and friends, Rizal wrote two parting messages, with instructions that they were 
to be opened after his death. One such message was addressed to his family mem- 
bers; the other, “To the Filipinos.” I remember a similar action taken by Common- 
wealth President Manuel L. Quezon before he underwent surgery in the United 


835 


THK PHII.IPPINh RKVC M.UTK )N ANI > PI Y( >NI > 


States. This was expected of Quezon, the duly elected president of the hilipinos. 
But was Rizal the elected leader of his people? Vet Rizal somehow sensed his mes- 
sianic mission. 

For all these, we discover a series of conditions, coincidences, and circum- 
stances in Rizals life, which seem bent on thwarting what Providence had in re- 
serve for him — a hero’s death. But these blind forces would prose no match to 
Rizals fated destiny. 

1. If Rizal had died at birth, obviously we would not now bas e a hero to 
honor. But such had been a great probability. As Rizal himself confided in his 
“Memorias de un Estudiante de Manila" (Memoirs of a Manila Student), his 
mother was on the verge of death when she delivered him. She w as spared only 
because of a vow made to make a pilgrimage, together with him, to the sanctuary 
of the Blessed Virgin of Peace and of Good Voyage, in Antipolo. All indications 
point to having to choose between mother and child. ( liven the moral persuasion 
obtaining in Rizals family, there was not the slightest intention to exercise one or 
the other option; instead, confidence was reposed in Divine Providence; nature 
would be allowed to take its course. I here was, therefore, a 50-50 chance for Rizal 
to have died at birth. But he hurdled this obstacle, if without his knowledge or con- 
sent. 


2. Although there is no direct evidence to establish Rizal s place of birth, the 
secondary and indirect proof convey moral certainty that it was Galamba. 1 he 
point, however, is that Rizal could have been born elsevvh ere, in which case his life 
would have been utterly different; most probably, far from the heroic. But since he 
was born in Calamba and at the time he was, he found himself involved in the 
agrarian problems of the place; he came to stand out as an active figure in the en- 
suing controversy; he gave grounds for suspicion as to his loyalty to the constituted 
authorities. 


3. Rizal began his studies in Manila at the Ateneo Municipal. But he found 
imself on the verge of being unable to do so. Indeed, after passing the qualifying 

animations at San Juan de Letran College as was required by law, upon seeking 
mission to the Ateneo there was every intention on the part of the Jesuit priests 
e use him admission on account of his rather small stature and his frailty, which 
y eared would not allow him to meet the academic demands of the institution, 
t was on y through the insistent representations made by Paciano, Rizal s brother, 
t ma e the Jesuits acquiesce to his request for admission. But, again, for un- 
n reasons, Paciano took Rizal to the Ateneo for enrolment past the date of 
registration. Through the intervention of Don Manuel Xeres Burgos, Rizal was fi- 
na y admitted. What if Rizal had not been admitted either for reasons of health or 
foi repoi ting late? Would he have ended up in some obscure provincial school de- 
nied the benefits of the academic attainments that would finally make him an eru- 
dite personality? 

4. After Ateneo, there emerged the matter of higher studies. Rizals mother, 
with unfailing intuition, sought to dissuade him from pursuing them, arguing that 


836 


MOl IN A .-1 Hero, At length 


he had already acquired all the knowledge he needed. Her recollection was that 
those possessing too much knowledge ended up at the scaffold. Although rebel- 
lious in spirit, it is known that Rizal was scrupulous in his filial obedience. His 
devotion to his mother would invariably move him to submit to her every wish. 
Yet he behaved otherwise: he would repair to Manila tor university studies. It Rizal 
had obeyed his mother, it would have meant Rizal turning his back on his beckon- 
ing fate. His would have been a placid existence, almost in complete anonymity. 

5. Some of his biographers say to the effect that Rizal sought the advice of the 
Ateneo rector, with assurances that he would abide by what the Jesuit Superior 
might advise. Rizals letter, however, had to be forwarded to far-off Mindanao, 
where the said rector was then sojourning. His reply suggesting that Rizal pursue 
some farming courses arrived too late. Rizal had already enrolled at the Faculty of 
Medicine of the University of Santo Iomas in Manila. 1 ask: What if the rectors 
letter had reached Rizal in due time? 

6. In the complexity of situations and events, enter now a woman: Segundina 
Katigbak. Shortly after enrolling at the University of Santo Iomas, Rizal made the 
acquaintance of this young woman from Batangas, "not the most beautiful woman 
1 have met, but 1 have known no one more charming, in Rizals own words. It is 
not strange, therefore, that he should soon fall deeply in love with her. It does not 
seem that she disdained his oblique and subtle offer. But, alas! That she should ha\e 
already been pledged to someone else bv parental decision! I hose days there was 
no defying filial duty. For his part, Rizal himself confessed to be wanting in reso 
fineness in such matters. If she had not been promised to someone else or if onh 
Rizal had had the nerve to press his own resolve, probably they would have joine 
their lives in holy matrimony, leading a quiet, uneventful life in a secluded pio\ in 

cial nook. But such was not meant to be Rizals lot. 

7. For reasons, as yet unclear, Rizal suddenly decided to cut short his stut ics 
at the university and persuaded his brother Paciano to finance his trip to Spain, 
ostensibly to resume his medical studies. Once in the Spanish peninsu a, 
found himself joining his young countrymen engaged in a reformist campaign. 
The movement was tolerated by the Spanish authorities, but in the Philippines t ie 
local administration looked at the young activists as dangerous subversfies. lza 
had started to become a marked man, that is, already a potential heio, a patnot in 
action. Suppose Rizal had not left Manila, had finished his medical stu its, an 
had devoted himself to the practice of his profession. Most probably he wou lave 

made a name for himself, but certainly not that of a hero. 

8. Rizal had gone to Spain to work for a doctorate degree aftei his icentia " 
course. But when he received from his brother Paciano the funds tor tie fees an 
other expenses in connection with the defense of his doctoral thesis, Rizal su en } 
performed a turnabout, defying even his brother’s pressing entreaties. Riza argue 
that a doctor s degree was needed only to hold a professorial chair at a facult) of 
medicine, something he did not relish at all. Instead, he spent the money on a tour 
of other European countries where he imbibed the best of western culture and es- 


837 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLU TION AND HI Y< >N1 ) 


tablished contacts with known leaders in intellectual and scientific circles, all of 
which offered the necessary finish to Rizals stature and personality. Would this 
have been the case if Rizal had ended up as a professor of medicine in a university 
either here or in Spain? 

9. Another woman steps in as we review the hindrances working against 
Rizal becoming a hero. She is Consuelo Ortiga y Rev, daughter of I )on Pablo 
Ortiga, former mayor of Manila, at this time residing in Madrid. Ri/al was intro- 
duced to her and, although she was more or less informally engaged to hduardo de 
Lete, yet she soon found herself drawn to Rizal, who reciprocated with caution. At 
the point of breaking off with De Lete to accept Rizal, the latter, mindf ul of his 
commitment to Leonor Rivera, thought it decent to write finis to the affair. I le did 
so in a poem entitled “A la Srta. C.O.R.” (To Miss CL ( ).R.), where, ever the gentle- 
man, in the most subtle of terms, he made known his negative decision. Yet Rizal 
could have married Consuelo and, in all probability, have turned into a run-of- 
the-mill middle-class husband in the commodious environment of Spain s middle- 
class circles. 

10. Years later, in Berlin, Rizal found himself with the completed manuscript 
of his explosive novel, Noli Me Iangere , the publication of which would pave the 
way to his patriotic martyrdom. This could have been prevented. How? Rizal 
found himself utterly bereft of the funds needed therefor. But, a man — a friend if 
you wish — one Maximo Viola, providentially crossed Rizals path. Generously he 
provided the money needed. I he novel was eventually published and Rizal took a 
step forward to his heroic end. 

11. Generosity again enabled Rizal to hurdle one more obstacle in his fated 
course. Against the opposition of family members and friends, he resolved to re- 
turn to the Philippines in 1887. But he had no travel fare. If unsurmounted, he 
would have had to remain in Europe, leading a colorless, if not meaningless, exist- 
ence. But Juan Luna and Felipe Roxas furnished the funds to cover Rizal s travel 
expenses. He therefore was able to go back to the Philippines where the authorities 
were afforded one more opportunity to mark Rizals every movement for future 
use against him in his prosecution and ultimate execution. 

12. Whilst in the Philippines, Rizal repaired to Calamba to join his parents 
and the rest of the family. Of course, he could have arrived some other time. But he 
did so exactly when an agrarian unrest had reached its climax. Either upon request 
or on his own initiative, Rizal personally intervened in the case by drafting the re- 
ply of the aggrieved parties — which did not please the estate administrators. The 
case was brought to court. Rizal felt he had better leave and did so, departing for 
Euiope once more. But it was too late: he was now a marked man and all because 
of his intervention, avoidable as it was. 

13. Upon his return to Europe, Rizal renewed his acquaintance with the 
Boustead family who resided in France. Following the rupture of Rizals engage- 
ment to Leonor Rivera, he started to look at Nelly, one of the Boustead daughters, 
as more than just a friend. But he kept his peace, for he knew that she was being 


838 


MO I INA A Hero. At length 


courted by his countryman Antonio Luna. Later, through prudent written ex- 
changes, Rizal was told bv 1 una that Nellv had broken oft their relations. Rizal, 
then, stepped in. 1 I is otter was not rejected. But Nelly set a condition of the affair 
to prosper: he had to give up the Catholic religion and instead join the Orthodox 
church to which she belonged. Rizal made it known that he did not conceive of 
religion as an overcoat that could be discarded at pleasure. 1 he subject was there- 
fore abandoned then and there. If onlv Rizal had been less serious and inflexible in 
this matter of religion! Whv, we would have lost him to history in faraway France! 

14. Rizal wanted once again to return to the Philippines to be with his fam- 
ily, at the time undergoing persecution on his account. But family opposition 
would not permit him to do so. On the other hand, he simply could not remain 
complacentlv in Lurope far awav from his kin. 1 here was, however, a third option, 
he could travel to 1 long Kong, which would bring him as close to his famih as 
possible. The blind forces adverse to his destiny came into play once more, kizal 
did not have the monev for the purpose. Would he give up? No; instead, he ap 
pealed repeatedlv to his friend lose Maria Basa to kindly advance the money e\en 
putting up his books as collateral to ensure refund of the same. At length, Basa 
acceded and unwittinglv not merely advanced the funds but also enabled kiza to 
advance in his pace to immortality. 

1 5. Once in Hong Kong Rizal took steps to establish a settlement in North 
Borneo for himself and his familv as well as fellow Filipinos desirous of lea\inp t \c 
Philippines in search of peace and security. Rizal, in this way, was practicalh 11 t* 
up every intent of placing hero and martyr. But his project was denied b\ 
nor-General Kulogio Despujol, deeming it unpatriotic as it would den} t 1 

pines of farm hands so needed to cultivate its vast lands. Rizal unpatriotic, n n c 
time, he dropped the plan. There was now no deviating from what ie 
come. p . | 

16. In 1892, he was summarily deported to Dapitan in Mincanao. & 
from the start and all through his close-to-four-years stay in that southern p 
Rizal insisted that he be tried in court for whatever charges there migit 

him. This was simply ignored by the authorities. What if his petition iac 
granted? Would he have been found guilty and forthwith sentence to cat 
sidering that, in all that time, the revolution had not broken out as }U. 

1 7. During his stay in Dapitan Rizal enjoyed rather ample free om ° 
ment. He used to sail the local waters in a boat of his own, unaccompame . g c ’ 
he made the acquaintance of many native traders who regularly p iec men vesse s 
to the nearby ports of Malaya and Borneo. Moreover, some membeis o ns am y 
and several friends offered to help him flee from Dapitan, with a boat av m^ ee 
chartered on one occasion, to rescue him. But Rizal invariably oppose am suc 
plans. He would not be branded a “runaway.’ Indeed, to so leave Dapitan wou 
entail rendering his return to the Philippines utterly impossible. 1 his Riza cou 
not bear. Rizal, therefore, did not escape nor did he consent to be tescue fiom 
Dapitan. 


839 


THE, PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND PI V( )ND 


18. When still in Dapitan, Rizal met Govcrnor-( icneral Ramon Blanco in 
the course of an inspection trip by the latter. Our hero acquainted the chid execu- 
tive with his plight and wishes. Governor Blanco promised to have him transferred 
to either Ilocos Sur or La Union. Later Rizal came to know that certain ‘‘country- 
men of his from Malolos” opposed any such transfer, for his part, ( iovernor-Gen- 
eral Blanco never made good his promise. One cannot help but wonder what 
would have happened had he been sent to cither of those two northern provinces, 
which subsequently proved to be far from the vortex of the revolution and joined 
the same only at its last stages. He would have been spared from incrimination. 
But such did not happen. 

19. Rizal’s sojourn in Dapitan was taking rather too long. Despite the varied 
activities that kept him busy, the place prevented him from ministering to his pe- 
rennially inquisitive mind and his scholarly propensities. Somehow he had to get 
out of Dapitan in, as always, a legal manner. The opportunity came from his friend 
Ferdinand Blumentritt, who informed him of the dearth of physicians in the Medi- 
cal Corps of the Spanish forces fighting in Cuba. Rizal applied for a position in the 
said corps. The favorable reply came rather late so much so that Rizal had practi- 
cally abandoned the idea. Rizal was allowed freedom to decline the position. But 
on second thought, he deemed it best to oblige. He would not have the authorities 
suspect him of some hidden reason for his rejection What if he had staved put in 
Dapitan? 


20. From Dapitan Rizal arrived in Manila on August 1 896, a dav or so too 
late to board the steamer that was to take him to Spain, whence to travel to Cuba 
to assume his commission in the Army. Under the circumstances, the governor- 
general ordered Rizal transferred to the Spanish cruiser Castilla , pending his cm- 
barking on the vessel scheduled to sail for Spain the following month. Somehow 
this came to be known to the Katipunan, which immediately hatched a plot to 
rescue him. Accordingly, Emilio Jacinto, a certain Guillermo, and some other 
members of the clandestine association, managed to get hold of the boat Cart dad 
that was to transfer Rizal. With obvious negligence the officers of the steamer 
Espana easily allowed Rizal to disembark and transfer to the Cart dad. On the way 
to the cruiser Castilla , E,milio Jacinto revealed his true identity and disclosed their 
p an to take Rizal ashore in safety. Rizal vigorously objected to such a plot and or- 

ere that he be taken immediately to the Spanish man-of-war. Inexplicably, he 
was meekly obeyed by his would-be rescuers who put him on board the Castilla. 

21. On 3 September 1896, the revolution had already broken out. Rizal 
sailed on board the Isla de Panay. He carried with him favorable letters of recom- 
mendation from the governor-general himself addressed to the Spanish ministers 
of war and overseas possessions, assuring that Rizafs deportment had been exem- 
pkuy and that he had no part in the current uprising, for which reason they were 
a.>ked to extend him every help in his mission in Cuba. One of Rizafs fellow trav- 
eler was Don Pedro Roxas, a prominent government counselor, sailing on a leave 
of absence which he had artfully obtained so as to leave the Philippines. Upon stop- 


840 




MOl IN A A Hero . At Length 


ping over in Singapore, Roxas invited Rizal to disembark for good, just as he was 
to do, and escape from possible incrimination in regard to the armed revolt. Rizal 
refused, alleging that he had good credentials to offset any such attempt. More- 
over, he could not countenance being branded a “runaway." Hence, Rizal returned 
to the Isld dc Pd tidy. Roxas was spared execution. 

22. Short lv upon his arrival in Spain, Rizal was made to board the steamer 
Colon , bound for Manila, to clear himself of charges based on allegedly highly in- 
criminating evidence linking him to the revolution. Duly alerted, his friend Anto- 
nio Maria Reeidor, residing in 1 ondon, immediately instructed his friend, one Mr. 
Buckley, in Singapore, to subscribe the pertinent affidavit in support of a petition 
for hdbeds corpus tiled with the Supreme Court of that city by solicitors Rodyk and 
Davidson on behalf ot lose Rizal, who, it was alleged, was detained without lawful 
catise on board the vessel Colon , sche duled for a stopover in that port. Juridically 
speaking the petition was flawless. Here was once more the golden occasion for 
Rizal to abandon the path that would lead to heroism. But some few hundred 
Spanish soldiers simple spoiled it for him, however unwittingly. 1 heir presence on 
board the Colon , in the opinion of the Supreme Court, converted the steamer into 
a Spanish man-of-war and, theref ore, divested the high tribunal of any jurisdiction 
to issue the requested writ. The petition was, accordingly, summarily denied. Riza 
therefore traveled with the soldiers who would have well not been there. 

23. Once in Manila, Rizal was subjected to interrogation, in the course of 
which he disclosed the terms of his interview with Pio Valenzuela. Rizal said t tat 
he had rejected Valenzuela's offer that he lead the imminent revolution which he 
considered premature and unfeasible. 1 his did not satisfy the authorities. Int 
they alleged Rizal’s legal duty as a Spanish subject was to have denounce t ic 
projected armed uprising. But would not that be asking too much. Between i 
loyalty as a Spanish subject and his condition as a Filipino, Rizal opte or 
latter. 

24. Confined in Fort Santiago, Rizal received the visit of one of is 

who suggested that a civilian lawyer be engaged to help the army defense counse 
chosen by Rizal out of a list of some 1 00 army officers. Punctilious as a \\a\s, iza 
refused. He bad full confidence in his Spanish counsel. Rizal s sistei, however, li 
sisted on seeing his defense counsel. Upon her departure, Rizal manage to sen 
note to Luis Taviel de Andrade, requesting him to pay no heed to iis sistei s re 
quest, for he had placed his whole trust in him and would allow no one to inte 
vene. Lieutenant Taviel de Andrade, holding his first loyalty to be that to ns c j^ nt ’ 
readily obliged. It was decreed that Rizal’s defense be handled by an ami) o icel 
but there was no prohibition for a civilian attorney to collaborate in his tas v. g ain ’ 
Taviel de Andrade was a man of honor and of righteous purpose, but di e now 

enough of the law to secure his client’s acquittal? 

25. Rizal was charged wi th the complex crime of- having establishe un aw u 
associations as a necessary means to commit rebellion. If Rizal had only been in 
dieted for founding an illegal association, for which, it appears, there was sufficient 


841 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BI Y< >M > 


evidence in the records, he would have been sentenced to the corresponding prison 
term, not capital punishment. On the other hand, had he been charged with rebel- 
lion, the records would show a dearth of evidence to sustain t be accusation. I fence, 
there was every possibility that Rizal would have had to be acquitted. Neither op- 
tion pleased the prosecuting officials who were bent upon securing the death pen- 
alty for Rizal, either on their own initiative or pressed upon by some extraneous 
sources. The solution was therefore to resort to a complex crime, for it entailed the 
imposition of the highest penalty provided for the greater crime: capital punish- 
ment for the crime of rebellion. What if Rizal had not been so charged." I le would 
have ended up in prison or fully acquitted. In either instance, no heroic death for 
him. 


26. Previous to his trial Rizal asked to be allowed to confront the witnesses 
brought against him in the proceedings. The petition was denied. It was done, to 
be sure, well within the law for the grant of confrontation was purel v discretionary 
on the part of the prosecuting officers. But what if these officials had used their 
discretion otherwise' Would not the witnesses have been shown to be unreliable 
and insincere, for they were Rizafs co-accused, in need of an scapegoat to be spared 
capital punishment.' Once discredited, these witnesses would not have given any 
grounds for Rizafs conviction. 

27. On 22 December, Rizal wrote Governor-General Gamilo de Polavieja to 
reiterate his innocence, expressly disavowing any connection with the armed revolt 
and volunteering to confer with the rebel leaders in Imus, Gavite, to dissuade them 
from pursuing the uprising any further. If granted, Rizal would have placed him- 
self on the side of the government and therefore most probably would have been 
cleared of all charges. But the governor-general simply ignored Rizafs petition. 

28. There is also the matter of the prosecution witnesses. How painful that 
t ey should all have been Filipinos! Why testify against a countryman and serve 
t e purposes of an alien government? Probably, as already indicated, they felt in- 
c ined to do so in order to save their own skin or, as some authors have hinted not 
too convincingly, they were coerced to so testify. In either case, had they only been 
ma e of sturdier stuff. But, they were no heroes, obviously, even if they did con- 
tribute to make Rizal one. 

2J. Let us now take a look at the court sentence rendered against Rizal. I rue, 
un ert e rules governing a court martial, its verdict need not expound the grounds 
eieo . Such happened with the case of Rizal. However, a review of the records 
wi s ow that the sentence did not meet the elementary requirement that its con- 
c usions e based on whatever had been alleged and proved — allegata et probata — 
at t ie coin t proceedings. Now the allegations, both oral and documentary, brought 
against Rizal could establish that Rizal had founded an illegal association — La Liga 
Fi ipina but there was no evidence sufficient to find Rizal guilty of rebellion be- 
yond leasonable doubt as was mandatory. Hence, Rizal could have either been 
given a prison term or acquitted. 


842 


MOl INA A Hero . At Length 


30. There remained one last possibility to prevent RizaTs heroic end. As Rizal 
was taken to Bagumbavan to face the execution squad, the Katipunan had sta- 
tioned some 200 members at nearbv Mavtubig in Pasav. Fhev were to await orders 
to march upon Bagumbavan and rescue Rizal. The orders were never given. Why? 
Because one man, no less than Paciano Rizal, our hero's own brother, dissuaded the 
superior officers of the Katipunan from so issuing the command, tor he argued that 
the incursion into Bagumbavan held might give rise to some cross-fire that could 
harm innocent victims in the huge crowd at the execution site. He would not allow 
such bloodshed. In fine, the so-called blind forces at work failed to wrest Rizal from 
his fated im mortal i tv. 


843 


Jose Rizal and the View from California 


Howard A. Dewitt 

Ohlone College, Fremont, Californio, USA 


Preparations in honor of the greatest Filipino patriot, DR. JOSh 
RIZAL, are progressing to make the annual celebration the finest they have 
ever had. 

The 1'hree Stars , / 5 November 1 929 


f An 30 December of each year, California Filipino communities hold 
a Day celebration. The purpose of this event is not only to honor the 
i ippine nationalist but to promote an identification with the Philippines. But 
Z a ^ so P rov ides Filipinos with a forum to criticize the inequities of Ameri- 

can democracy. From 1926 to 1946, this celebration helped California Filipinos 
define their place in the Golden State. 1 

T he life of Jose Rizal and his subsequent martyrdom not only made him the 
oremost national hero of the Philippines, but he also provided California Filipi- 
nos wit a symbol for their political activism. His views on Philippine indepen- 
ence ecame an integral part of the California Fili pino experience. The thoughts, 
ee s, » and influence of Rizal produced a useful ideology for California Filipinos, 
ut Filipinos were hampered by California history. 

Since the majority of California Filipinos migrated to the Golden State to 
work in the fields, there was an inherent prejudice against them. Like other un- 
skilled farm workers, notably the Chinese, Mexican, Japanese, and Asian Indian, 
the Filipino worker was subjected to barbarous working conditions and manipula- 
tion by laboi contractors. Filipinos also coped with California laws preventing full 


844 


I M W I IT Jose Riztil and the View frotn California 


civil rights, a miscegenation law making intermarriage difficult, and a segregated 
life-style. But the Filipinos who migrated to California viewed themselves differ- 
ently because they had been educated in the Philippines in the ways of American 
democracy. Sc') from their earliest days in California, Filipinos did not accept sec- 
ond-class citizenship. 1 he use of Rizals political ideas was an important source of 
Filipino progress. 


RizaTs Ideology in California 

Philip Vera Cruz, a well-known California labor leader, remarked that Dr. Jose 
Rizal was not only the first person to proclaim himself a Filipino, but he taught us 
how to deal with adversity. ' Fh is sense of being Filipino and identifying with the 
Philippines was Rizals greatest contribution. 

California Filipinos believed that Rizal was not a wild-eyed nationalist but a 
reformer who urged them to strive for greater opportunity. As a result, Filipino 
organizations in the Colden State worked in the mainstream of local politics. Cali 
fornia labor unions, the Democratic and Republican political parties, and patii 
otic organizations such as the Native Sons and Daughters of the Colden West, %ve ^ e 
approached by Filipino organizations with the message that they were hard wor 

ing and productive Americans. ^ _ 

Rizals arguments influenced the Filipinos not only to define their direction 
but to create organizations which would benefit them. Yet his civilized persona it} 
made it difficult for many to accept him as a revolutionary, lo his critics, Riza 
often appeared too conciliatory and willing to compromise his goals. Some o sen 
ers have suggested that he was a reluctant revolutionary. What he represente wa 
a type of nationalism which was cautious and carefully constructed. Fiist an 
most, Rizal was a hero who understood the importance of the s) mbols 1 1 
equality, and respect. These symbols guided Filipinos in demanding soua , c 
mercial, and educational reforms. Rizal s novel, El hilibustt i is??io, rein o 
quiet revolutionary attitude: “I do not mean to say that oui freedom must 

at the point of the sword.” , T i 

Californians were attracted to Rizals message for a numbei of reasons 
believed that Rizals influence upon the Propaganda Movement ant 11S P° 
an ilustrado made him a special nationalist. When the Propagan a 0 
emerged in 1 872, Rizal was only a young boy, but by the 1880s he was pai 
local nationalist tradition demanding independence. But Rizal warne 

lution was a dangerous game. . , p 

The California Filipino labor leader, D.L. Marcuelo, believed that the ro- 

paganda Movement was a lesson in politics that all Filipinos neede to tint ers 
Marcuelo, as a member of the Salinas and Stockton Rizal Lodges, continua > 
urged Filipinos to use Rizals methods. 1 hese methods led to fiateina societies, 
notably the Caballeros de Dimas-Alang, the Legionarios del Trabajo, an t e 


845 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< )NI ) 


pino Federation of America, which all organized to battle for better economic and 
educational opportunities. These organizations helped ( Californians to understand 
Filipino culture, and they exerted a strong influence upon the politics of the 
Golden State from the mid- 1920s to the mid- 1940s. ’ 

Another influence that Rizal brought to California was that of the ilustrado. 
Initially, the ilustrados were a small group of students who organized in Madrid and 
began advocating reforms. Many of the ilustrados , including Rizal, believed that 
the United States had a great deal to offer their country. I lowever, they were not 
happy with the Philippine colonial status. I he ilustrados preached a subtle nation- 
alism. California Filipinos often looked upon themselves as ilustrados. 1 ike their 
Philippine counterparts, California ilustrados were economically secure, well edu- 
cated, politically conservative, and determined to govern themselves. I hev also 
used the writings of their national hero to promote ilustrado arguments. 

Rizals novels Noli Me Tange re, published in Berlin in 1887, and /:/ bilibus- 
terismo , published in Ghent in 1891, provided th e core arguments for a Philippine 
nationalism. Rizal not only urged Filipinos to unite the archipelago, but he stressed 
the need to fight for reforms. Political and economic rights, Rizal suggested, went 
hand in hand with a new form of democracy. With a new American-dominated 
Philippine government the educational system was revolutionized, and this gave 
birth to an even stronger brand of Rizals nationalist ideology. 

Shortly after Admiral George Dewey’s victory at Corregidor, an American 
school system was founded and the writings of Rizal became an integral part of the 
curriculum. An African American historian. Dr. Carter G. Woodson, arrived in 
Manila with 26 missionaries to establish the local school system. By 1906, 
Woodson required that all students read Noli Me langere and Id h'ilibusterismo. As 
a result, Rizals image as a nationalist hero remained intact. His writings were a 
guidebook to Filipino political ideas and his legacy provided a primer for a newly 
defined Philippine nationalism. 5 

Unlike Emilio Aguinaldo, who had fought the Americans, and Andres Boni- 
facio, who founded the secret society Katipunan, Rizal advocated an American- 
style government. Just before his death, Rizal wrote a “Manifesto to Certain Filipi- 
nos which warned that independence by revolution was a mistake. The reform 
direction, Rizal argued, must come from above and not below, because only the 
educated classes understood the Philippines. Rizal was critical of Bonifacio’s 
Katipunan organization and believed that it worked against the Philippines. When 
the ilusty ados refused to join the Katipunan, this destroyed Bonifacio’s dreams for a 
new Philippines. It underscored how important economic growth was for Rizal 
and the ilustrados. But California Filipinos also had some degree of respect for 
Bonifacio. The Stockton newspaper, The Three Stars, in a lengthy front-page article 
su gg este d that Bonifacio was second to Rizal as a Philippine hero. This was one 
means of suggesting to Rizals detractors his importance in the California experi- 


ence. 


846 


mwm Jose Rizal and the Mew from California 


The Image of Rizal in the Philippines and California 

It was Ri/al who urged his countrymen to think of themselves as a nation. How- 
ever, Rizals impact went well beyond local nationalism. He also warned the Filipi- 
nos that they might become as corrupt as their former Spanish rulers. As Leon Ma. 
Guerrero suggested in The hirst Filipino : A Biography of Jose Rizat What’s the use of 
independence it the slaves of today will be the tyrants of tomorrow? I his com- 
ment was often quoted bv California's Filipino leaders during Rizal Day celebra- 
tions. For California Filipinos the views of Rizal on Philippine independence pro- 
vided direction for their own struggles in the Golden State. 

Guerrero argues that Rizal was “the First Filipino and this designation so- 
lidified his stature among California Filipinos. s It was Rizal, Guerrero reminds us, 
“who taught his countrymen that they could be something else. In California, 
the Rizal istas were determined to make their presence known and to challenge 
American attempts to restrict their economic, civil, educational, and employment 
rights. 

In 1933, D.L. Marcuelo, who owned The Three Stars, formed the Filipino 
Labor Union, and he credited his ideas and organization to Rizal. Marcuelo re- 
minded California Filipinos that Rizals writings and his life exemplified the \ir 
tues of Philippine nationalism; he provided the first important view of Rizals na- 
tionalism from a California Filipino perspective. It was a program built upon har 
mony, cooperation, and a sense of progress. But Rizals position as an American 
Filipino hero was the result of the new Philippine school system. 1 

Rizal s influence in the Philippines and Hawaii contributed to Filipino na 
tionalism in the Golden State. There were three changes brought about b\ his po 
litical ideas. First, Filipinos worded their arguments carefully in newspapers an 
expressed the m articulately in fraternal organizations, thereby gaining support fo 
their demands for equality. Second, the Rizal Day celebrations grew each }ear in 
importance and prestige and reminded Californians of Filipino economic sue 
cesses. Lastly, the various Filipino organizations and leaders demonstrate t eir 
ability to work effectively within the American system. While many ethnic groups 
were plagued by fears of radicalism, Filipinos were considered a model minority 
who deserved that their voice be heard. 11 


Rizal Day Celebrations 

Los Angeles held its first significant Rizal Day celebration in December 1926, with 
Hilario Camino Moncado as the chief organizer. From the time Moncado foun e 
the Los Angeles-based Filipino Federation of America in 1925 as a mutual-ai 
society, he used the Rizal Day celebration to further his own goals. California I i i 
pinos who followed Moncado were farm workers with strong religious feelings and 
they viewed him as something of a messianic figure. 1 - 


847 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLLH K )N AND HI Y< )NI ) 


Moncado carefully orchestrated the Los Angeles Rizal I )av in December 
1926 to include American and Filipino flags flying side by side in the streets. A 
well-publicized essay contest on how to become a better Filipino brought praise 
for Moncados efforts. Yet, to his critics, Moncado appeared more interested in 
impressing his American business contacts than in honoring Ri/al s memory. 
Somehow the Philippine patriot got lost in the celebration which focused increas- 
ingly upon Moncados deeds. 13 

In Los Angeles, the Filipino Federation of America made the Ri/al Day cel- 
ebration a major event. Bcnigno Cortez in The Three Stars suggested: “We (dan our 
celebration to be better than any celebration previously held. We will also trv to 
avoid unnecessary display.” The article warned that Filipinos should not forget 
“what Rizal Day means.” 14 

The useofRizals historical legacy helped the Filipino Federation of America 
expand from 34 members to almost 700 in a year. The number of Filipino Federa- 
tion of America lodges grew to 37. The truth was that Moncados career was one of 
misappropriated Finances, personal deals with large ranchers to employ cheap la- 
bor, and outright stealing of funds from the Philippine National Bank of 
America. 15 

From 1927 to 1929, The Three Stars was in the forefront of the movement to 
create a Rizal Day to promote Filipino goals. However, on 1 3 September 1929, 
The Three Stars complained that Rizal Day was being used by a few politically 
motivated Filipinos. I his criticism was aimed at Moncado and the Filipino Fed- 
eration of America. ‘Tor the success of the commemoration (Ri/al Day) does not 
mean the success of the few, but it means the success of all, and thus accomplishing 
a noble purpose.” 16 

The key to the rise of Rizal Day is the manner in which Filipinos used it to 
celebrate his political accomplishments while advancing their own agenda. One of 
the problems California Filipinos faced was the general hostility toward Asians. 
Filipino newspapers addressed this racial d ivisiveness and complained about the 
double standard in American democracy. Marcuelo was the most eloquent critic of 
the ingrained racism in California society, and he used Ri/aFs words to make his 
own points. At the 1928 Rizal Day celebration in Stockton, Marcuelo suggested 
that Rizal has all the superb qualities of greatness. He was the epitome of sound 
patriotism, the embodiment of the tragedies of his people 

There were many positive influences due to this celebration and a number of 
changes took place, strengthening California Filipinos. The rise of a Filipino press 
was an important change since these newspapers were instrumental in promoting 
Filipino educational, political, and economic gains. It was the Filipino newspaper 
that took up the key political issues of their community. 

The Rizal Day celebrations demonstrated the use of a specialized press to fo- 
cus attention upon civil rights. A number of California Filipino newspapers, nota- 
bly the Stockton-based The Three Stars, the Salinas-founded Philippine Mail , and 
the influential San Francisco newspaper Philippine News , published excerpts from 


848 


IMAM 1 I lose Rica l and the \ 7 cir from California 


Rizals writings. As these newspapers suggested, the legacy of Rizals influence be- 
gan in Madrid in December 1885, when he cofounded the organization and news- 
paper I at SnlidaruLuL and continued to inspire California Filipinos. In Salinas, 
California, the gateway to the Pa jam Valiev and one of the strongest centers of Fili- 
pino farm-labor activity, Rizals philosophy was the cornerstone of the Filipino 
Labor Union. Marcucio suggested La Solidaridad as the model for his newspaper. lvS 

Another wav that California Filipinos lobbied for reform was bv organizing 
Dr. Jose Rizal C 'lubs, which lodged protests over unjust laws and arbitrary govern- 
ment action. As these clubs multiplied so did the number of Rizal Days, and they 
fought against anti-Filipino movements. 1 he struggle for agricultural rights in 
small cities like Dinuba in the San Joaquin Valley prompted local Rizal Clubs to 
meet with citv officials. 

On 8 August 1 926, the Dinuba Sentinel expressed its concern over interracial 
dating and there were rumors of a local riot. A headline in the Dinuba Sentinel 
proclaimed: “i ll IIMNO BOY C RISIS ALMOST STOPS DINUBA S I REE 1 DANCE. 

I here were no riots and no rack il incidents as the Dinuba Rizal Club quieted the 
fears of local authorities. After a brief meeting with the Rizalistas, the shet iff an- 
nounced that everything was under control. 1 ’ 1 he Dinuba incident educated Cali 
fornians about the Philippines and the importance of Rizals ideas. 

Rizal s contributions to local nationalism had spread throughout California. 
The three Stars summed it up the best when Marcucio wrote: Once a great case is 
taken up by a worthy leader, his cause becomes the peoples cause. In California 
Filipino newspapers, Rizal was often compared to Washington and Lincoln be 
cause he was a political theorist who spoke out against prejudice, injustice, and ex 
ploitation.-’ 1 

Rizals image in California's Filipino press often appeared in letters, poems, 
and short stories. Sarah Isabel Keenan wrote of the Philippines: I hey ga\e men 

gave Rizal. What can we not hope for from a country that can give to 


best, they gave Rizal. What can we not hope for from a country that can gi\e iu t le 
world a Rizal!'"- 2 Comments like these appear in the Filipino press. You must un 
derstand that Rizal Day is not a day of rejoicing, it is a day of meditation, 

Three Stars suggested. 2 ' 

The Three Saw serialized the diary Rizal wrote while traveling in California. 
He visited San Francisco, arriving on Saturday, 28 April 1898. Upon lea\in D 
ship, he was told that he had to be quarantined in the San Fiancisco ustom 
House. By the second day of his quarantine, he was nervous and uncomforta 
have not eaten, it gets on my nerves," he wrote in his diary.~‘ 

Eventually, Rizal checked into San Franciscos luxurious Palace Hote an 
took a $4 room. He loved San Francisco and wrote enthusiastically about t e us 
tom House, the Golden Gate, and Market Street. He took the ferry to Oa an 
the railroad to Benicia, and eventually arrived at the California capital in acra 
memo where he ate a sumptuous 75-cent dinner. His experiences in the Go en 
State were not chronicled until 1928 when The Three Star* published his observa 
tions to publicize the negative treatment of California Filipinos. The T/net Stai> 


849 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI VOND 


summed up the Rizal celebration: “By the middle of December of each year, the 
local Filipino community starts preparing for the 30th of 1 )ec ember, a Filipino na- 
tional holiday.” 25 

The Rizal Day celebrations were organized so quickly that some journalists 
wondered if Rizal was not being lost in the festivities. “( )ne of the inconsistencies 
of democracy,” S.B. Martin wrote in The 1'hree Stars, “is that it typified a beautiful 
girl — ” Martin goes on to suggest that the promise that the girl gives is much 
greater than what she delivers. This allegorical example typified how California 
Filipinos used Rizal Day. It was a forum to express their concerns. 

A theme of Rizal Day celebrations in the San Joaquin V alley was the protest 
against unscrupulous agricultural labor contractors. From 1926 to 1930, a series 
of anti-Filipino riots in small agricultural towns such as 1 )inuba, Watsonville, and 
Salinas prompted these celebrations to focus on the low wages, poor working con- 
ditions, and prevalent racism hindering California Filipinos. Much of this racism 
was due to social stereotypes. 27 

Rizal Day prompted Filipinos to try to combat the negative publicity sur- 
rounding gambling, cock fighting, and taxi dance halls. An editorial in The Three 
Stars suggested that a moral code be instituted. A story about Luis 1 irona, the as- 
sistant treasurer of the Sacramento Rizal Day Celebration, embezzling funds served 
to highlight the moral tone that the Rizal Day celebrations brought to C California. 2S 

As one Filipino said, Rizal Day was designed “to combat the insidious propa- 
ganda of the predatory interests that are fighting tooth and nail to encompass the 
resources of the Islands. ” 20 I his criticism suggested that California Filipinos were 
also concerned about the exploitation of the Philipp ine economy and natural re- 
sources. The identification with conditions in Manila provided a broader view of 
issues among California Filipinos. 

A number of Filipino fraternal organizations were important in making the 
Rizal Day political statements effective. The Caballeros de Dimas-Alang single- 
handedly created a ground swell of support. In San Francisco, the Caballeros met 
each year at the Rizal Cafe as the acting grand master, A.J. Alcantara, made plans to 
publicize Californias celebration. In San Francisco, Rizal Day protested the segre- 
gated schools, the second-rate jobs as bus boy s and hotel porters, as well as segrega- 
tion in local clubs and restaurants. 30 

The Stockton Civic Auditorium was the site of the 30 December 1 928 Rizal 
Day celebration which more than 3,000 people attended. District Attorney of San 
Joaquin County Guard C. Darrah was an honored guest and delivered a brief 
speech praising Filipinos. After Darrah concluded his remarks, a number of Fili- 
pino speakers complained about the discriminatory laws and police misconduct 
which plagued the San Joaquin Valley. Then the keynote speaker, O.C. Parkinson, 
a local attorney, congratulated the Filipino population for its patriotic attitudes 
and economic contributions. “I hope the day will not be too far distant that the 
Philippines will occupy a proper place among the other free nations of the world,” 
Parkinson concluded. 31 The applause was deafening. Then B.L. Bitancor, the 


850 


ni AVI I I /osc Riziil iind the View from California 


chairperson, delivered a lengthv talk on Rizals teachings. He urged California Fili- 
pinos to reacquaint themselves with his principles, morality, and obligation to Phil- 
ippine independence. Marcuelo ended the celebration by characterizing Rizals 
“sound patriotism. 

1 he Rizal Dav celebration often led to infighting amongst Filipino factions. 
For two decades later the followers of Hilario Camino Moncado used this event to 
further their own interests, l he Moncadistas were a moralistic cult who argued that 
Marcuelo s greatness made him a candidate tor president of a future independent 
Philippines. When San Francisco Filipinos approached Moncado to form one 
statewide Rizal Dav committee, he refused. In angry protest. The Three Stars re- 
marked: “He (Moncado) is a human parasite and should be tarred and feath- 
ered.... 


But, generallv, Rizal Dav made Filipino political ideas known. Juan 
Sarmicnto, a Vallejo Filipino, organized protests against proposed immigration 
restrictions. He also provided information to labor organizations and the Ameri- 
can press countering the negative views of Filipinos in the work place. 1 his was the 
typical way in which Rizal Dav was celebrated in the San Joaquin Valley as the 
agriculturallv emploved Filipino population slowly moved toward better wages and 
working and living conditions. 

In small towns such as Porterville, Rizal Day was also a time to educate the 
white majoritv. This small farming community in the San Joaquin Valley had a sign 
on the outskirts of town reading “JAPS NOT WAN TED IN I HIS TOWN. 1 he Rizal 
Day committee decided to protest this sign. Porterville Filipinos protested this sign 
during a Rizal Day celebration. In the spring of 1930, the sign was taken down an 

progress made in local race relations. 3 * 

1 he Filipino image in the press as gamblers, drunks, and womanizers 
countered by the local newspapers. Marcuelo s The Three Stars was in the foiefront 
of the fight against gambling and other forms of vice. V' hat a pin that so 
youth should not have used his talents for a better cause, so said Rizal, out greatest 
martyr and hero,'’ 7 'he Three Stars editorialized T Marcuelo concluded b\ surest 
ing that all Filipinos “get together and raise a vigorous voice of piotest against ^an 

bling for if we don’t nobody else will. >( ' ^ 

Rizals name was used to call attention to Filipino wealth in the Go c en . tatc. 
In Stockton, a “Million Dollar Banquet” was held in October 1929 to onoi i i 
pino bond holders of the Union Deposit Company. 1 he 12 Octobu ce e olation 
held at Stockton’s Scottish Rites Auditorium included speeches praising tie i i 
pino economic contribution to the Golden State. 3 Frank Parker, manager o t e 
foreign department of the Union Deposit Company, sent a telegram congratu at 
ing Filipinos on their million-dollar bond purchases. I he Stockton Recoi note 
the economic progress of the Filipino community and praised theii fraterna o r g a 
nizations. 38 The Caballeros de Dimas-Alang was lauded by the California press as 
an example of Filipino patriotism and good citizenship. When the banquet con- 
cluded, Marcuelo remarked, “And unless we have the strength of character, hon- 


851 


THE PHILIPPINE Rf V( JI.ITI K )N AND PI V( >M ) 


esty of action and nobility of purpose, we are not worthy to stand at the bead of 
any project — be it fraternal or business. M> 

As Rizal Day became more popular, Filipinos were eager to attend more than 
one celebration. So Stockton Rizal Day organizers scheduled the 1 929 celebration 
for 28 December rather than the 30th. Carlos P. Jose, president of the Rizal Day 
Executive Committee, remarked that Stocktons hilipinos would travel to Eos An- 
geles and San Francisco to celebrate Rizal Day.’" Benigno ( .ortez in The Three Stars 
wrote: “We wish to bring out... that Rizals life is a vital, living force not only in 
our lives as individuals but also as a dynamic force in our national aspirations. 

Eventually, Rizal Day became a week-long celebration. From 24 1 )ccember 
to 31 December 1929, for example, the Stockton Filipino Community met 
nightly. In 1 929, there were 1 5 California cities with Rizal Day celebrations. ’ / he 

Three Stars looked back upon the earlier Rizal Day celebrations with pride and a 
sense of accomplishment. “Christian character and usefulness of its members was 
a legacy to Marcuelo’s continued leadership in the Filipino community. ’ He also 
warned Filipinos about the destructive attitudes of those who tried to use Rizal Day 
for personal gain. 

In 1930, the San Francisco Rizal Day celebration was taken over by a small 
committee, Community, led by a local insurance agent. The Three Stars called the 
leader a bright young man” but accused him of accepting bribes. 1 le made thou- 
sands of dollars selling raffle tickets, charging merchants for booths, and soliciting 
bribes for speaking at the Rizal Day. Eventually, there was a revolt and a town gath- 
ering brought 30 Filipino organizations to a meeting which placed pressure upon 
the planning committee. Community, was disbanded. As Marcuelo said, Rizal Day 

needed its rightful place out of respect and tribute to the Philippine national 
founder. 44 

One of the most successful Rizal Day Celebrations took place in Salinas on 
30 December 1933 when 2,000 people attended the elaborate ceremonies. Salinas 
was the focal point for Filipino labor organizations and the community college, 
Hartnell, which had a large Filipino enrollment. The education they received made 
it easiei to fit into the job market. For almost two decades, Filipinos had made 
inroads into local society. J he reason that this celebration was a special one was 
ecause of the successes of the Filipino Labor Union in local lettuce fields. I he 

o owing year the F.L.U. won a major lettuce strike in Salinas and by 1 937 received 
a Teamster Union charter. 

The Gieat Depression made labor issues paramount. The F.L.U. became 
moie active in planning the event. The 1934 Salinas Rizal Day celebration was 
orchestrated by the F.L.U. and there was a systematic attempt to involve women. 
As part of the festivities, the Filipino Womens Club was invited to present a newly 
written thiee-act play depicting Rizals martyrdom. 4S 

In Fresno, the 1934 Rizal Day drew a capacity crowd to the Hughes Hotel 
Ballroom. Z. Leymel, Fresno’s mayor, and Mitchel Briggs, dean of men at Fresno 
State College, were the featured speakers. Briggs praised Rizal and suggested his 


852 


PI Wi l l lose Riz-iil and the l lew from California 


importance in bridging the gap between Californians and Filipinos. Increasingly, 
politicians and educators attended Rizal Day celebrations as Filipino influence in- 
creased in the Coldcn State. 

A.H. Dinos, writing in the Philippine Examiner on 12 February 1946, sug- 
gested that Rizal Dav be “observed with peace and solemnity — Dinos was criti- 
cal of the banquets, the selection of a queen, and the general fun-loving atmosphere 
which had crept into Rizal Dav.* Often Filipino communities measured their 
growth and acceptance by Rizal Dav. In Vallejo, a small town northeast of San 
Francisco, Filipinos organized a celebration which led to increased community 
involvement, improved job opportunities, and renewed their sense of American- 
ization. From 1929 to 1941, Vallejo Filipinos had greater opportunities than the 
farm workers in the San Joaquin Valley or those who held porter or house-boy jobs 
in San Francisco and Los Angeles. It took a few years for Vallejos Filipinos to take 
advantage of these opportunities, but they used the Rizal Day celebration to work 
toward these goals. 

In preparation for the 1928 Rizal Day, the Vallejo Filipino community 
drafted a lengthy and complicated manifesto complaining about the lack of em 
ployment opportunities and the general discrimination against Filipinos. 1 he reso 
lution opposed any changes in the immigration law and emphasized Filipino Io\ 
alty. Vallejos Filipino population announced that they were an important pair of 
the politics of the Golden State. KS 

When Vallejos Filipino community urged that a united Filipino political 
organization be formed for a common celebration, there was resistance fiom 
Southern California. Hilario Camino Moncado and his Los Angeles followers 
made it clear that they would not unite. “The Los Angeles case is point ess, 
Sarmiento wrote. * l) His proposal for one fraternal organization to unify t lem e 
on deaf ears. It was a unity, Sarmiento suggested, that would make Riza P rou 
Soon, world affairs changed the direction of Californias Rizal Da) cele rations. 

On 7 December 1941, the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. Vallejo i if 
community leaders met that night to organize a unity day. In late Decern cr, a ca 
went out for Filipinos from Solano County to meet in Vallejo to celebrate t le 1 1 
anniversary of Rizals death and to announce that Filipinos would wot or 
American defeat of the Axis powers. A 28 December 1941 Filipino un O a ) 
held at Vallejos Veterans Memorial Building. The symbolism of thj^bui mg was 
used to suggest that Filipinos “are fighting with the United States. 

During World War II, a number of California Filipinos spoke out against the 
rampant injustices that continued to plague Philippine migrants. There was a so 
an insensitivity to Philippine history and culture. The Commonwealth Times e ito 
rialized that during a Rizal Day speech in Sacramento, a well-known state senator 
addressed his Filipino audience with little knowledge or understanding of t ie i 
ippines. This speech took place in 1 942, at a time when Filipinos weie joining t ae 
U.S. Army. The Commonwealth Times observed that “He spoke with little or no 
preparation, without even reading a book on Rizal — 


853 


THE PHILIPPINE REVO I t IK )N AM ) HI Y< >M > 


In the aftermath of World War II, Rizal Day underwent a dramatic change. 
Suddenly, the complaints of California Filipinos had a broader audience. Brigadier 
General Carlos P. Romulo, resident commissioner of the Philippines to the l nited 
States, delivered an address to the Filipino National Council of ( hicago at the 
Midland Hotel. He remarked, “Ours is one of the few nations which commemo- 
rates not the birth of a national hero but his death. ( alifornians applauded and 
suggested that their Rizal Day celebrations had never received the publicity and 
recognition that they deserved. ! 

In Delano, the 1946 Rizal Day celebration drew a cross section of Filipinos 
who suggested this small San Joaquin Valley agricultural communit\ open its doors 
to all Filipinos. 1 he program began with the local Filipino post of the American 
Legion presenting the colors. Then a series of speeches honoring RizaFs achieve- 
ments were mixed with some eloquent addresses on Filipino contributions to Cali- 
fornia history. s ’ An organization known as the Filipino I lomc Owners and lax- 
payers Community Council of Kern and Tulare Countv presented the Rizal Day 
celebration. Implicit in their programs was a message that Filipinos were not only 
patriotic but educationally and employment-wise an integral part of the local com- 
munity. I he 400 people who attended the event at the Veterans of Foreign Wars 
Auditorium in Delano were treated to an impressive series of speeches. But the 
Delano celebration was not as well attended as past events. I he crowd was older 
and the concerns of young Filipinos were directed toward finding a place for them- 
selves in the postwar economy. 

By 1946, the fire was going out of the Rizal Day celebrations as Filipinos 
looked to new directions. I he independence of the Philippines, the changing atti- 
tude of California Filipinos, and the opportunities to move into the mainstream of 
society blunted the civil-rights orientation of Rizal Day and led to calmer and less 
political celebrations. For two decades Rizal Day had provided the civil-rights is- 
sues, the sense of Philippine history, and the organizational skills to bring Califor- 
nia Filipinos into the mainstream of the Golden State. Had it not been for the 
words and deeds of Jose Rizal, California Filipinos would not have been able to 
make their way as effectively in the Golden State. 

Notes 

1 . Howaid A. DeWitt and Alex S. Fabros, Jose Rizal: A Filipino Nationalist ancl the Im- 
age hi om California , chapter 9 (Edwin Mellen Press, scheduled for publication). I his 
paper benefited from the criticism and research input of Professor Daniel Gonzales 
and coauthor Adjunct Professor Alex S. Fabros of San Francisco State University. I he 
material for this paper is largely derived from The Filipino American Research Project 
directed by Alex S. Fabros. 

2. Floward A. DeWitt, California: An Interpretative History (Dubuque, 1 979), chapters 
7 10, 1 2- 14, and Ronald Fakaki, Strangers From A Different Shore: A History of Asian 


854 


I'M W i l l lose Riztil and the View from California 


Americans (New York, 1989), chapter 6; Louis Bloch, Facts About Filipino Immigra- 
tion Into California (Sacramento, 1930). 

3. Interview w ith Philip Vera Cruz, 10 May 1082. 

4. 1 toward A. I VWitt, l io/ence In the Fields; Filipino Farm Labor Unionization During 
the Cheat Depression ( Saratoga, 1980), p. 43; Watsonville Evening Pajau dan , 23 Janu- 
ary 1930, p. i, and 1 I. Brett Melendy, ‘‘Filipinos In the United States, Pacific His- 
torieal Renew . 03 (November, 1974), pp. 320-347. For the Propaganda Movement 
and its influence, see O.P. Corpuz, The Roots of the Filipino Nation (Quezon City, 
1989, 2 volumes), vol. II, chapter 16. 

3. 1 .orraine |acobs, /• Hi pi nos in ( alifornia : brow the Days of the Galleons to the Present (El 

Cerrito, 1982), pp. 27-30,69-^0, 102-103. 

6. The Three St, trs, 1 December 1928. 1 , and David Joel Steinberg, The Philippines 
(Boulder, I ‘DO, third edition), pp. 64-69. hor an excellent introduction to the com- 
plexity of socioeconomic and cultural influences upon Rizal and the revolution see, 
for example, Alfred McCov and Edilberto C. de Jesus, Philippine Society History. Glo 
hal Trade and l ocal Transformation (Quezon City, 1982). Also, tor an excellent de 
scription of Ri/al's activities, see Steffi San Buenaventura, “The Master and the Fed- 
eration: Ethnic Creativity in a Socio- Religious Movement in America, a paper pro 
seined at the American Studies International Conference, University of California, 
Berkeley, 1980, and Steffi San Buenaventura. 1 he Master and the Federation. A 
Filipino American Social Movement in California and Hawaii,” Social Process in 
Hawaii. 33 (1991). pp. 1 69- 1 93. 

7. Leon Ma. Cuerrero, The First Filipino: A Biography of Jose Rizal (Manila, 1963), P- 
497. For other important biographies of Dr. Rizal see, for example, Austin Coates 
Rizal: Philippine Nationalist Ind Martyr { London, 1968); Rafael Palma, The Pride of 
the Malay Race (N.Y., 1949, trans. ed„ 1963); Carlos Quirino, The Great Malayan 
(Manila, 1940); and Bernard Raines, A People’s Hero { NA., 1371). 

8. Leon Ma. C iuerreru. The First Filipino, p. 284, 492. See chapter XIV in the Cuerrero 

volume for “The Reluctant Revolutionary thesis. For a popular view of Riza 
Philippines, see for example, Renato Constantino, lo Make Rizal Obsolete, 
Filipinos in the Philippines i Did Other Fssays (Quezon City, 1 966, 4th printing, 7 ), 

pp. 137-152. 

9. Guerrero, 'Fhe First Filipino, 496. f 

10. Interview with D.L. Marcuclo, 6 February 1930, James Hail Wood Papeis, 

Library, University of California, Berkeley, Envelope 1; Oral interview 

Dato, Wood Papers, Envelope 1; Howard A. DeWitt, Violence in the Fields: Filipino 

Farm Labor Unionization During the Great Depression , p* 43, h2. 

1 1 . For anti-radicalism in California, see Howard A. DeWitt, Images of Ethnic an Ra 
cal Violence in California Politics , 191 '1930: A Survey (San Francisco, 1)75) 
passim. 

1 2. David Thompson, “The Filipino Federation of America, Social Process in Hau air 7, 

pp. 24-35. 


855 


THK PHII.IPPINK RKV( )I.l I K )N AND B! Y< ) N I ) 


13. Steffi San Buenaventura, “The Master and the federation, pp. 1~3- 1 “N. 

14. Ibid., 1 September 1929, p. 2. for a brief description of ( California 1 ilipino organi- 
zations, see Howard A. DeWitt, Anti-Filipino Movements in ( iiltfomia: A History \ 
Bibliography ayid Study Guide (San Francisco, 1976), pp. “H-l 10. 

13. Michael Cullinane, “The Filipino Federation of America: Flic Prewar Years, 1925- 
1940: An Overview,” Crossroads 1 (February, 1983), ~ 1-83. and Francisco O. 
Dalumpines, M 1 he Life of Hilario ( lam i no Moncado and I 1 is ( on m but ions to F.du- 
cation, ’ (unpublished masters thesis, University of the Visayas, 1 9" 1 ). 

16. The Three Stars, 15 September 1929, 2. For problems with Filipino integration in 
California, see Howard A. DeWitt, The Fragmented Dream: Multicultural ( .alifornia 
(Dubuque, 1996), pp. 152-157. 

17. Ihe Three Stars, 1 January 1929, 1. 

18. Jose Rizal, I he Iruth for Evervbodv,” La Sol i da ri dad, 31 May 1889 is an excellent 
introduction to his thinking on the political process and organization. Also see 
Renato Constantino, A Past Revisited (Quezon Citv, 1973, 14th printing, 1992), 
chapter 10. 

19. Dinuba Sentinel, 8 August 1 929, 4; 1 6 August 1 928, 1 . 

20. The Three Stars, 1 December 1 929, 1 . The signific ancc of Rizal s writings are demon- 
strated in the defense of Filipino riots during a 1 930 riot in Watsonville. See, for ex- 
ample, Howard A. DeWitt, “The Watsonville Anti Filipino Riot of 1930, Southern 
California Quarterly, 63 (Fall, 1979), 291-302. 

21. The J hree Stars, 1 December 1930, 1 . On the Filipino press, see Donn V. I lart, I he 
I ilipino-American Press in the United States: A Neglected Resource, Journalism 
Quarterly (Minneapolis, 1977). 

22. The Three Stars, 15 July 1929, 2. The image of Rizal as a symbol of defiance is impor- 
tant in understanding his role in California-Filipino civil rights and labor move- 
ments. Rizal rejected independence by revolution. In his “Manifesto to Filipinos, he 
su gg este d that reforms if they are to bear fruit, must come from above, for reforms 
that come from below are upheavals both violent and transitory, quoted in David 
Joel Steinberg, The Philippines: A Singular and a Plural Place , p. 69. 

23. The Three Stars, 1 January 1929, 1 . Also see The Torch , Ang Bantay , the Little Manila 

limes , the I hilippine Herald Tribune and the Fit lipino hi former for comments on 
Rizal. 

24. The Thiee Stars, 1 January 1928. This Stockton-based Filipino newspaper printed 
Bit of Memorandum from Rizal’s Diary.” These fragments were of interest to Cali- 
fornia I ilipinos and were often used in Rizal Day celebrations to suggest the degree 
of insensitivity toward Filipinos. 

25. The Three Stars, 1 January 1929, 5. For problems faced by the Filipino in California, 
see Howard A. DeWitt, Images of Ethnic and Radical Violence in California Politics, 
1917-1930: A Survey, pp. 1 17-120. 

26. 7 he Three Stars, 1 January 1929, 14. 

F7 . Howard A. DeWitt, Violence in the Fields: California Filipino Farm Labor Unioniza- 

tion During the Great Depression, chapter 1 ; Howard A. DeWitt, Images of Ethnic and 


856 


PI W'l 1 I Jose l\i z-ii l and the l "tew from California 


28. 


29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 


34. 

35. 


35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 


40. 


41. 

42. 

43. 


44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 


Radical Violence in California Politics , pp. 31-32; Howard A. DeWitt, “ 1 he 
Watsonville Anti Filipino Riot ot 1930," Southern California Quarterly , passim. 

The Three Stitts. 1 lanuarv 1929, 5. For an analysis of the moral tone in the Califor- 
nia-Filipino community that followed Hilario Camino Moncado see, for example, 
Hilario C 'amino Moncado, Moncado Speaks (Baja California, 1955) and Hilario 
C 'amino Moncado, 020 Rica I Day Organization, Breaks AH Records of Any Filipino 
Rica/ Day ( clehratioti in America (Los Angeles, 192 ). 1 hese publications suggest 
how Moncado used Ri/al tor his own purposes. 

I he Three Stars, 1 lanuarv 1929, 16. 

Ibid., 1 August 1 929, 

Ibid., 1 lanuarv 1 929, 2 1 . 

Ibid, bventuallw Marcuelo helped to organize the Filipino Labor Union which was 
successful in the Salinas lettuce strike of 1934. See Howard A. DeW itt, 1 he Salinas 
Lettuce Strike of' 193*4,” Atnerasia, 5 (Spring, 1978), 1-21. 

The Three St, ns. IS October 1 928. 14. For another view of Moncado see, S.B. Mar- 
tin “Filipin-O-C I rams. The Three Stars, 15 September 1929, 5. 

S.B. Martin "Filipin-O-C hams, The Three Stars, 1 October 1 C ), -. Lor race 
tions in the area see 1 loward A. DeWitt. Anti-Filipino Movements in California: A 
History, Bibliography and Study Ctiiide, chapters 3-4; Howard A. DeWitt, Tit ,s 
mented Dream: Multicultural California, p. 132. 

The Three Stars, 15 October 1929, 1. 

Ibid. 

Ibid., 15 October 1929, p. 1. 

Stock to tt Record, 13 October 1929, 1 . 

The Three Stars, 1 5 October 1929, 1. For the role of Filipino fraternal organizations 
in California, see, for example, Mario P. Ave, “Characteristics of Filipino Or^ 
tions in Los Angeles," (M.A. thesis. University of Southern California, 
printed by R. and E. Research Associates, 1974). _ 

The Three Stars, 1 5 November 1929, 4. Also see Sonia Wallovits, “ 1 he i >P nl ° s 1 
California,” (M.A. thesis. University of California, Los Angeles, 1966, iepnntc > 
R. and E. Research Associates, 1972). 

The Three Stars, 1 September 1929, 2; 1 January 1930, L 

The Three Stars, 15 November 1929, 5. . ■ l 

Ibid., 1 December 1 929, 1 ; 1 5 December 1 929, 1 ; 1 January 1930, 1 . Interview 

y I *)83. Yont'da w;is a Japanese American longshoreman^^, taut 


Karl Yoneda, January 1VH.). Yoneaa was a — . 

labor dealings as a member of the International Longshoremans and Warehouse- 

mans Union, and he had many discussions with Filipino laboi Lac ers 

The Three Stars, 1 November 1930, 1. . , 

The Philippines Mail, 8 January 1 934, 2; Howard A. DeWitt, 1 he i ‘pmo 
Union: The Salinas Lettuce Strike of 1934, Atnerasia , 5 (Spring, 

The Philippines Mail , 8 January 1934, 4. 

Philippine Examiner, 12 February 1946, 3. 

The Three Stars, 15 September 1928, 3. 


857 


THK PH III PRINT RI V< )l.l I K )N AND hi V< )M ) 


49. The Philippines Mail, 23 December 1940, 1. bor the role <>1 Moik.rIo in ( alifornia 
history, see Howard A. DeWitt, I he Tragmented I)rea?n Multn ultin\il ( t ilifnrnia, pp. 
154-156. 

50. The Philippines Mail, 22 December 1 94 1,6. 

51. The Commonwealth limes, 17 September 1942, 

52. The Philippine Star Press, 26 January' 1 946, 6. 

53. Ibid., 26 January 1946, part 2, 4. 


858 


The Philippines a Century (W)Hence 

Jose Rizal and the Philippine Centennial (s) 


Sharon Di.lmendo 

De la Salle University, Manila, Philippines 


I n the Philippine Centennial Commission's Five-Year Plan, 1996, is the 
“ Iaon ng mga Bayani’’ (Year of the Filipino Heroes). 1 I he Year of the Filipino 
Heroes and the Jose Rizal Martyrdom Centennial, 1996, promises to be one of 
intensified interest in Jose Rizal, “the” National Hero. 

Yet there has been for some time a movement to depose him as the nationa 
hero. In recent years, Rizal's role as “the” Philippine national hero has been cia 
lenged by many people and for many reasons. Some would see the elitist Riza re 
placed — or at least put on par with — Andres Bonifacio, the Great 1 lebeian 
founder of the Katipunan, who led the 1 896 Revolution against Spain. Some ques 
tion Rizal’s status as the preeminent Philippine hero in spite of his repeated enun 
ciations of the 1896 Revolution. Some question Rizals position as the ero o 
Philippine freedom when he repeatedly and explicitly advocated not Philippin 
dependence from Spain, but rather full political assimilation into the Spams em 
piref But of all these challenges to Rizals preeminent position in the Pai { PP m f 
heroic pantheon, perhaps the most damning has been the issue of whet er iza s 
historical canonization was an American colonial project. 

1 he Independence Day celebrations of this Year of the Heroes centere not 
on the 1 996 centennial but rather looked forward to the centennial to come. 1 
There is some logic to this seeming incongruity: 12 June 1996 marks the )8ta an 
n i versa ry of Emilio Aguinaldos declaration of Philippine independence at awit, 
Cavite. It is odd that Independence Day of 1996, the Year of the Heroes, is ut a 
precursor to 1 998. The Centennial Commission itself displaced 1 896 the year of 
the Philippine revolution against Spain — with 1898 — the Philippine declaration 


859 


THK PMIIJIMMNI HW< )M I K >N AM > hi 'i < >M > 


of independence and the beginning of the Philippine- Amera an War as the Year 
of the Philippine Centennial’ in its live- Year Plan, and its logo features the dates 
“1898-1998.” In fact, some Filipinos are not even aware that there was a Philip- 
pine Centennial in 1996.' 

Jose Rizals position as “the national hero, his impact on the development or 
Philippine nationalism, and his place in the 1996 ( enienni.il seem free of the 
recurrent blurring of the borders between Philippine history and Philippi ne- 
American history. Aside from the controversv over the American colonial regimes 
encouragement of Rizal hero-worship, discussions of Ri/.il s life and works are re- 
freshingly free of the American factor. In other words, Ri/al himself seems to have 
had little engagement with America, even if America had actively promoted Ri/al 
hagiography for its own colonial purposes. But discussions of the American factor 
vis-a-vis Jose Rizal begin only after Rizal s execution by the Spaniards on 30 De- 
cember 1896. 'I here has been little or no discussion of Ri/al s connection to the 
Spanish-American War, the Philippine-American War, or American colonialism 
during Rizals lifetime. While it is true that the earlv American colonial icgimc 
encouraged Rizals historiographical canonization, it is also true that Ri/al was 
deeply influenced by America and that the American influence played a signif icant 
role in Rizal s conceptualization of Filipino nationalism. I bus, renewed examina- 
tions of the American factor in pre-1898 Philippine nationalism have significant 
implications both for current debates on Filipino historiography and for Philip- 
pine-Ameri^n postcolonial studies. A closer analysis of the connections between 
Wzals insights into America’s imperialistic ambition in the late 1 9th century and 
ow his predictions played out during the Spanish-American and Philippine- 
merican Wars also provides points of connection between the 1896 and 1 cS9cS 
1 hilippine Revolutions. 


R,/al ™ an American-sponsored Hero 

nalist critics have asserted correctly that Rizal s canonization as national hero 
tlv e ^ P rom °ted by the early American colonial regime. In Insight and Fore- 
rn- lato Constantino describes in detail the American colonial regimes choice 
• , r aS p. 1 ‘ acce P ta ble national hero: “The public image that the Americans de- 

a . 1 T^ no national hero was quite clear. They favored a hero who would 
not go against the grain of American colonial policy”' (Constantino, Insight 29). 
He also writes: 


It was Cjov. William Howard Taft who in 1901 suggested to the Philip- 
pine Commission that the Filipinos be gi ven a national hero... And now, 
gentlemen, you must have a national hero.”. . .In the subsequent discussion in 
which the rival merits of the revolutionary heroes were considered, the final 

choice now universally acclaimed a wise one — was Rizal (Constantino, In- 
sight 27-28)3 


860 


Dll MI NIK) I hr Philippines a ( runny ( W) Hence 


(Charles Bolden, one-time ambassador to the Philippines, described 
lalt s motivations more clearlv: “ latt quicklv decided that it would be ex- 
tremely useful for the Filipinos to have a national hero of their revolution 
against the Spanish in order to channel their feelings and focus their resent- 
ment backward on Spain. But he told his advisers that he wanted it to be some- 
one who reallv wasn't so much of a revolutionary that, if his life were examined 
too close! v or his works read too carefullv, this could cause us any trouble. He 
chose Ri/al as the man who tit his model (Constantino, Insight 28n). 

American Covcrnor W. Cameron Forbes explained the basis for Rizals desir- 
ability as a national hero in 1928: “Rizal never advocated independence, nor did 
he advocate armed resistance to the government. He urged reform from within, by 
publicity, by public education, and appeal to the public conscience (Constantino, 
Insight 29). 11 Constantino cites several other 

factors [which] contributed to Rizals acceptability to the Americans as the of- 
ficial hero of the l ilipinos. In the first place, he was safely dead by the time the 
Americans began their aggression. No embarrassing anti-American quotations 
could ever be attributed to him. Moreover, Rizals dramatic martyrdom had 
already made him the svmbol of Spanish oppression, lo focus attention on him 
would serve not onlv to concentrate Filipino hatred against the former op pres 
sors, it would also mitigate their feelings of animosity’ toward the new conquer 
ors against whom there was still organized resistance at that time... 1 he Ameri 
cans specially emphasized the fact that [RizaJ] was a reformer, not a separatist. 

He could therefore not be invoked on the question of Philippine indepen 
dcnce. Fie could not be a rallying point in the resistance against the im aders. . 

His name was invoked whenever the incapacity of the masses for self go\ern 
ment was pointed out as a justification for American tutelage. . . 1 he Americ 
decision to make Rizal our national hero was a master stroke (Constantine , 

Insight 30). 

Ultimately, wrote Theodore Friend, Rizal won the American vote for ° 
hero” over “other contestants [because] Aguinaldo [was] too militant, om c 
too radical, Mabini unregenerate (Constantino, Insight! 8). . . , 

But if Rizals heroic canonization was sponsored by the American co 
regime, clearly Filipinos themselves canonized him, even befoie his eati. 

Orosa has argued, “The Filipino people have been honoring Rizal as a Iiatic 
hero long before Taft came to the Philippines. If Rizal did not have the ma m^s o 
a hero, if he did not deserve to be our national hero, one thousand executive oi ers 
of any governors-general would not have made him one (Oiosa ~). mum 
Ocampo renewed the debate and concludes, 1 [Although the Ameiicans encour 
aged the hero worship of Rizal, the man was already a national hero to the 1 i ipi 
nos long before the Americans sponsored him as such (Ocampo 0. Renato Con 


861 


I'M I*. PHIUIMMNI Kl V< >1 II !( )N \NI ) HM< )NI > 


stantino summarizes such arguments, concluding that despite the American en- 
couragement (even stipulation) of Rizal hero-worship, I here is no doubt that we 
would have made RizaJ one of our heroes even without American intervention 
(Constantino, Insight 33). For Constantino, the issue is not a rnattei of deposing 
Rizal as a Philippine hero, but rather a matter of whether Ri/al should be preserved 
as the sine qua non of Philippine heroism (Constantino, Insight A A ). 

Constantino and Ocampo, two of the Philippines best -known nationalist 
critics, have definitively shown that while Rizal hero-worship was sponsored and 
encouraged by the American colonial regime, the Filipinos themselves promoted 
Rizal hero-worship, d his would seem to lav to rest the debate over Ri/al [as) an 
American-sponsored hero.” But Rizal historiography continues to beg the Ameri- 
can question. For example, Ambeth Ocampos Rizal Without the ( )vcrcoat begins 
with “Prologue ( 1 he First Word),” consisting of six essays, the first three of which 
explicitly focus on the American factor: 

Was Rizal an American-sponsored I lero? 

Rizals Trip to America 

Rizal s Anti-Americanism 

Rectos Rizal Bill 

Why Rizal is the National I lero 

Deflating the National H ero ' 

The fact that Ocampo begins his book with th e question of Rizals being an 
American-sponsored hero” foregrounds the issue until it seems the implicit foun- 
dation of the entire book. Why not begin the book with “Whv Rizal is the Na- 
tional Hero followed by “Deflating the National Hero”? Such a construction 
could naturally lead to the question of Rizals Americ an ism. But instead Ocampo 
c^ins his reevaluation of Rizal with the American question. I here are other issues 
with which Ocampo could have chosen to open his volume, such as the ongoing 
e ates over Rizals physical immortality (which Ocampo takes up in the essay, “Is 
izal Really Still Alive.'' in the “Facts and Possibilities” section), or Rizal s retrac- 
n °^ ^ Ocampo addresses in “Did Rizal Love Josephine Hnough to Retract?’ 
in e Women section). So although Ocampo himself dismisses the American 

question, he also implicitly foregrounds it as the leading (or perhaps lead-in) issue 
in reevaluating Rizal. 

Thus, there seems to be a curious ambiguity about Rizal and the American 
actor. Rizal stands trial in historiographical debates as a pawn of the American 
colonial regime. The debate seems to be laid to rest: Rizal is “guilty” by virtue of 
American-promoted Rizal hero-worship, but “innocent” because Filipinos hero- 
worshipped him anyway. They did before the Americans came and after the Ameri- 
cans left. But while the explicit debate over Rizals putative “culpability” in the 
American colonial agenda seems to be concluded, historians — as the structure of 


862 


HI I Ml NIX') I' he Philippines </ Century (W) Hence 


Ocampo s Riziil \\ ithoui the ( )vercoat demonstrates — continue to implicitly debate 
the issue. 


Revisiting Rizal and the American Factor 

Whatever one mav think ot the debate over the American sponsorship of Rizal, 
one tiling remains clear vet relativelv and curiously unexplored. Currently, the is- 
sue ot the Rizal/American factor begins onlv after Rizal s death. I here has been 
little discussion of Rizals aborted role in the Spanish-American War, Rizal s astute 
prediction in his essay “The Philippines a Century Hence that Americans would 
conquer the Philippines as the great age of European imperialism drew to a close, 
or the impact of American imperialism during Rizals lifetime — and how Ameri- 
can domestic imperialism was a significant factor in Rizals conceptualization ot 
Filipino nationalism. Widening discussions about Rizal and the American factor 
to encompass his career as a Propagandist and proto-nationalist (c. 1889-1896) 
and beyond his death to the Philippine-American War ot 1898-1902, may make 
the issues of Americas influence on Rizal, Philippine historiography, and 1 hilip 
pine nationalism more multifaceted and help connect the seeming disjunction 
between the Philippine Centennials of 1996 and 1998. 


ation 


Los Indios Bravos: Rizals Proto-nationalist Organize 

In the 1992 English edition of h! h i libus t evi s m o, Jovita \entura Castro \ * 

“Rizal is [the] Father of Pilipinas. He prepared the terrain for revolution by his 
works (especially his two novels) and the events of his life (his exile and ^ ^ 

gave it impetus contributing to [the revolutions] success (Castro 38-39). 
statement is a fairly standard take on Rizal as the “Father ot Filipino Nationa ism 
since Rizal cannot be claimed to have explicitly supported the 1 8 )6 Re\ o utio , 
is claimed to have had a fundamental influence (having prepared t e terrain o 
revolution”) , usually through his novels, 11 through his founding of t e a i & a ^ 
ipina as the first nationalist association, 12 and/or through his revo utionarj 
conceptualization of what we now call “Filipino : through a reappropriation o 
denigratory Spanish term “ indio." I will concentrate here on the latter two^act , 
which are interrelated, positing Rizal as the father of Filipino nationa ism in t 
ethnic/cultural rather than political sense. Rizal is credited with conceptua iz ^ 
“Filipino” as a term of ethnic and cultural pride rather than the Spanish co onia 
derogatory term, rehabilitating “Filipino” and indio as concepts towar 
tional ethnic unity. 

During the Spanish colonial period, what we now call Filipinos were n ^ r ’ 111 
fact, native Filipinos, but rather were the Spaniards born in the 1 hilippines. iesc 
insulares or Creoles were the “Filipinos” of the 16th through 1 )th centuries. ie 
distinction between the peninsulare and the insulare or Filipino was ctucia , as 


863 


THK mil IIMMNI R1 V< )H ' IK )N \NI > M 'i < >NI > 


Benedict Anderson describes it, the timing of ones birth decisively determined 
one’s place in the colonial hierarch}” 


[ I ] t was nearly unheard of for a creole to rise t<» .1 position of official 
importance in Spain... Hven if he was born within one week of Ins fathers 
migration, the accident of birth in the colon} consigned him to subordina 
tion — even though in terms of language, religion, ancestry, or manners he was 
largely indistinguishable from the Spain-born Spaniard. I here uas nothing 
that could be done about it: he was irramvlitibly a creole. . . < Anderson 5 58; 

emphasis original). 


The Spaniards, peninsularcs and insulurcs alike, discriminated against the 
inclios. I he friar orders only very slowly, and with great resistance, allowed inclios to 
be ordained. An example of early friar opinions of inclios comes from Alexandre 
Alignano, the great reorganizer of the Jesuit mission in Asia between 15 d and 
1606, [who] vehemently opposefed] the admission of Indians and hurindians to 
the priesthood in these terms: All these duskv races are verv stupid and vicious, 
and of the basest spirits. .. As for the mestizos. . . we should receive either very few or 
none at all; especially with regard to the mestizos, since the more native blood they 
have, the more they resemble the Indians and the less thev are esteemed by the 
Portuguese [or Spaniards]” (Anderson 59). I Portuguese Franciscans were as intoler- 
ant as the Jesuits, violently opposing] the admission of creoles to the order, alleg- 
ing that even if born of pure white parents [thev] have been suckled by Indian 
ayahs in their infancy and thus had their blood contaminated for life (Anderson 
60). Filipino Franciscans held comparable attitudes; as late as 1885, Franciscan 
friar Miguel Lucio y Bustamante wrote in Si lunching Huso Mncunnt (published in 
Manila) that the Filipino could never learn the Spanish language or be civilized... 
The Spaniards will always be a Spaniard [sic], and the inclio w r ill always be an in- 
clio... 1 he monkey will always be a monkey however you dress him with shirt and 
trousers, and will always be a monkey and not human... (Agoncillo, History 
1221). Fr. Lucios comment about inclios { failed) attempts to humanize themselves 
through clothing had specific relevance to the Philippine natives, who were re- 
quired to publicize their inferior status by wearing their shirts outside their pants 
(i.e., untucked). Of course the Spanish sumptuary decree which required inclios mo 
visibly identify themselves through dress reveals the anxiety Fr. Lucio y 
Bustamantes virulent statement manifests: the inclios were required to wear their 
shirts long precisely because, dressed in “shirt and trousers,” inclios might be mis- 
taken for peninsulares or insulate “Filipinos.” 

Thus, even in the late 19th century, Spanish colonialists used the term “///- 
dio to emphasize the inferior status of Filipino natives. It was in the face of such 
attitudes jhat Jose Rizal, then traveling in Europe, took a decisive step toward a 
“Filipino” nationalist consciousness. 13 Rizal was an ilustrado: one of the Spanish- 


864 


ni l M 1* NIX') The Philippines a Century (W) Hence 


speaking, upper-class indios who went abroad to obtain the higher schooling not 
available to indios in the Philippines. Many of* the ilustrados , like Rizal, traveled 
around Europe and concentrated in Barcelona, where they studied and began the 
Propaganda Movement, which lobbied tor Spanish reforms in the Philippines 
through the Propaganda organ. La Solidaridad T 1 Vicente Rafael describes the Pro- 
pagandists as a group of ilustrados whose “causes initially had an assimilationist 
nature: the granting of Spanish citizenship to Filipino colonial subjects byway of 
equal application of Spanish civil law to the colony and Filipino representation to 
the Spanish parliament. But as assimilationist hopes dimmed by the mid-1890s 
the more prominent leaders of the Propaganda Movement began to favor Philip- 
pine independence from Spain" (Rafael 137). 

But while the ilustrado propagandists pursued important political goals, they 
were also a sometimes rather dissolute group of wealthy young men. Like the later 
leaders of the revolution, the ilustrado members of the Propaganda Movement were 
prone to factionalism. According to Rafael, they also experienced some anxiety 
over their masculinity. The Propaganda Movement arose not so much out of an 
unalloyed desire to throw off Spanish rule, but rather from protest ovei friar abuses 
in the Philippines — abuses Rizal had publicized in cutting detail in his novel Noli 
Me Tangere (1886). In his article “Nationalism, Imagery, and the Filipino Intelli- 
gentsia in the 19th Century,” Rafael highlights the importance of anti-friar feeling 
as the basis for the Propaganda Movement: 

I he friars occupied a near-totalizing significance in the minds of the 
ilustrados and came to represent the negative limit in the formation of nation 
alist consciousness in the late nineteenth century... I he ilustrados saw 
Spanish fathers not only as figures of denial but also of excess (Rafael 137 138). 

l he friars’ excess was both sexual and economic: while friars were ostensib ) 
bound by vows of poverty and chastity, sexual liaisons between friars an t leu e 
male parishioners were common, and the friar orders held huge hacien as w 
they leased to indios at frankly usurious rates, sometimes in the absence o an} e^a 
title to the land. 15 Rafael argues that the ilustrados felt some anxiety about t eir own 
masculinity against the political power of the friars, those ecclesiastics wio wore 
skirts yet often were “fathers” in more than the purely liturgical sense, w o too 
vows of poverty yet were merciless landlords; whose vows implicitly P I( ^ C 11 
them from worldly power, although in reality the friar orders were extraor inan y 
powerful in the Spanish colonial government in the Philippines. The fiiars were, in 
short, theoretically emasculated, yet undeniably potent on many levels an 
ways to the detriment of the indios N 

It was in this climate — the Spaniards’ contempt for indios , the ilustrados po- 
litical efforts abroad threatened by disunity from within, the anti-friar factor 
that Rizal founded a proto-nationalist group, Los Indios Bravos. Due in part to a 


865 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND HI Y< >Nl> 


lack of funds because his family was embroiled in the Calamba hacienda contro- 
versy, and due in part to the factionalism in the Barcelona group, by 1889 Rizal 
found himself in Paris. Rafael notes: 


While attending the Paris Exposition of 1889, Rizal and his fellow Fili- 
pinos saw a Wild West show featuring Native Americans performing various 
skills on horseback. Impressed not only by their daring but also bv the enthu- 
siastic applause they received from the crowd, the Filipinos decided to form a 
mutual-aid association and call it Los 1 ndi os Bravos. Rizal himself had suggested 
the name, thinking to subvert the racist designation indio used by the Span- 
iards to refer to native Filipinos (Rafael 149). 

Rizals formation of Los Indios Bravos was important in the early stages of 
Filipino nationalism. Where La Soliclaridacl had an outright (assimilationist) 
political agenda, Los Indios Bravos was ethnic in nature. It was an act of what 
Benedict Anderson calls “Imagining Community, a crucial step toward national- 
ism. 1 If nationalism is, as Anderson proposes, a “radically changed form of con- 
sciousness, then Rizals conceptualization of indio as a term of ethnic pride is 
an example of this radically changed consciousness: an oppositional reconceptual- 
ization of the colonial denigratory term (see Anderson xiv). I his oppositional 
reconceptualization is a precondition for Philippine nationalism. With Los Indios 
Bravos Rizal turned the Spanish-imposed derogatory term into a term of pride and 
ethnic unity, asserting a Philippine ethnicity at a time when “Filipino was still 
appropriated by the colonial masters. Many nationalist scholars point to La 
Liga Filipina as being Rizals contribution to Philippine nationalism. Ih But Los 
Indios Bravos was an important and necessary step toward the formulation of the 
concept of the Philippine “Filipino, ” and thus was foundational to La Liga Fil- 
ipina. 

In addition to rehabilitating “ indio ’ from a term of shame to one of pride, 
Los Indios Bravos served several other important purposes for the expatriate ilus- 
trados. Austin Coates tells us that Los Indios Bravos used male bonding to fight the 
factionalism which threatened the expatriate ilustrados: “Dedicated to the idea of 
courage, [Los Indios Bravos’] ostensible aims were to keep the Filipino colony 
united and to encourage manly sports” (Coates 175). “Manly sports” were an im- 
portant factor in the ilustrados reassurance of masculinity in opposition to the 
ambivalent potency of the friar orders: “Posing with their swords planted firmly 
between th^ir legs, the Indios Bravos display a masculine alternative to what they 
conceived to be the menacingly androgynous and corrupt regime of the Spanish 
friars (Rafael 149-150). Coates also clai ms that the group was explicitly rather 
than simply implicitly separatist, writing that there was within Los Indios Bravos 
a secret inner group which, beneath the concealment of the code letters Rd.L.M., 
was pledged to the liberation of Malay peoples from colonial rule, a pledge made 
good first in the Philippines” (Coates 175). 


866 


1>1I M I N l X') I ' hi' Philippines a Century ( W)Hencc 


Whether Los lndios Bravos were, in tact, the earliest revolutionary society or 
not, Rizal's reappropriation of “ indio as a term of ethnic pride is undeniably an 
important movement in the early stages ot Filipino nationalism. Whatever his feel- 
ings on the Revolution ot 1896, perhaps Rizal was, in this sense, a revolutionary 
thinker. 

Yet what remains neelected in such discussions is the founding role the 
United States played in this significant formulation ot Philippine nationalism. 
Rizal's conceptualization ot “indio' as positively “Filipino was stimulated by his 
admiration tor American “Indians. We should remember that Rizals founding of 
the Los lndios Bravos group came after Rizal and some of the other propagandists 
saw a Wild West show featuring Native Americans at the 1889 Paris Exposition. 
Rizal's self-identification as an indio was not one he formulated only for the Los 
lndios Bravos. Rizal went to his death identifying himself as an indio. Coates (312) 
writes that at his trial, Rizal 

was ordered hv the judge to sign the notification ot sentence as required b\ 
law. [Rizal] declined... When the document was shown him, he drew atten- 
tion to the fact that he was incorrectly described as a Chinese mestizo (oik ot 
the aims ot Spanish governmental publicity on the subject was to pretend that 
he was not even a real Filipino), saying that he was an indio pin o. 

The significance of Rizal's conceptualization ot the Filipino indio as based o 
the American “Indian has largely passed without critical interrogation y P 

pine historiographers. Leon Maria Guerrero, the definitive translator o lza 

Me Tangere , the author of an important Rizal biography, and, perhaps \ notc 
dentally, Philippine ambassador to England in the 1950s, wrote in 
pino: A Biography of Jose Rizal ( 1 20): 

In Paris. . . Rizal and his friends called themselves the indios ban ‘ 
forming the traditional Spanish gibe into a badge of honor, for Rousse< 
his myth of “the noble savage” and James Fenimore Cooper 
Leatherstocking Tales had captured the imagination and the awe of " \ 

for the plumed warriors of the prairies. 

Guerrero relates this background to Los lndios Bravos withoi ’ } 

Guerrero's tone here seems sincerely admiring (from both Riza s perspec 
his own) for the American “plumed warriors of the prairies. . 

The importance of Rizal's basing his proto-nationalist organization c 
perceptions of American “Indians" is significant for two reasons, irst, an 
obviously, it brings to light an important but neglected fact. Riza s oimu ar *° 
Philippine nationalism was fundamentally shaped by the United States ong 
America acquired the Philippines as a colony. In other words, the su ject o t e 


867 


THE PHILIPPINE REVC )I UTIC )N ANI ) BI Y< )NI ) 


“American factor” in relation to Rizai — and its ramifications for Philippine nation- 
alism — significantly predates current historiographical discussions. 

Second, Rizal’s (and virtually every Philippine historian, including 
Guerreros) admiration for the “plumed warriors of the prairies was the end result 
of Americas domestic imperialism. At the close of the 20th centurv, which simul- 
taneously saw the “closing of the frontier,” performances such as the W ild West 
show were popular as an ersatz exhibition of vanishing Native American cultures. 
The only reason Rizai and his ilustrado compatriots were able to see American "In- 
dians as plumed warriors of the prairie” was precisely that Native Americans no 
longer were warriors of the prairie. Wild West exhibitions such as those that so 
impressed Rizai were possible only because they served as war trophies for the now- 
concluded Indian Wars. 

Rizai s uncritical admiration of the American "Indians” had tragic ramifica- 
tions for Filipinos during the Philippine-American "Insurrection” (later known as 
the Philippine-American W^ar). Ironically, Rizai could not foresee that the analogy 
he drew between American Indians and Filipino " mdios as a positive concept 
for Filipino identity would be employed with deadly effect just a few years later 
when Americans invoked the racist rhetoric and military expertise of the American 
Indian Wars against Filipinos during the Philippine-American War. 

Most of the American military leaders during the Philippine-American War 
had gained their military experience fighting the last Indian Wars during the late 
19th century. General Wesley Merritt, the first American military commander of 
the Philippine-American War, was “one of the Civil Wars boy generals who had 
matured in the Indian wars” (Miller 42). As such, "he thought he was better 
equipped to deal with ‘savages’ than was a naval leader” such as George Dewey 
(Miller 420). Brigadier General Henry Lawton, who led the campaign in Cavite, 
had also begun his military career in the Civil War, but had gained fame during the 
Indian Wars as the man who “captured the legendary Gcronimo” (Miller 70). 
(Ironically, Lawton met his death at the hands of the Filipino General Licerio 

Geronimo on 18 December 1899 during a skirmish in southern Luzon [Miller 
98].) 

These American veterans transplanted the tactics of the Indian Wars to the 
P i ippines, and transformed the insurgent Filipino “ indio into an “Indian” to be 
ea t with as the various Native American tribes had been. Colonel Jacob Smith 
was a vetei an of Wounded Knee who opined that “because [fighting] the [Filipino] 
natives [was] worse than fighting Indians,’ he had already adopted the appropriate 
tactics that he had learned fighting the savages’ in the American West” (Miller 94- 
95). General Henry Lawton agreed. Both he and General Samuel Young “were sea- 
soned Indian fighters who knew how to deal with savages and who would ‘pursue 
the rebel Filipinos just as they relentlessly pursued the Modocs and Apaches in the 
triumph of civilization’” (Miller 97; New York Times, 2 February [ 1 900?]). Lawton 
en § a § e d Filipino forces at Cavite on 10 June 1899. Although Lawton’s military 
success was doubtful, American newspapers nevertheless triumphantly related the 


868 


Dl l.MHNDO 77 /V ii l ippi ties a Centu ry (WO Hence 


story under the headline, “Success of the Moment against Filipino Braves'' (Miller 
71-72; San Francisco Cali 12 June 1899). The Boston Journal defended General 
Bell's reconcentrado policy (i.e., confining natives in a small concentration camp 
and practicing a scorched-earth policy outside the camp in order to cut insurgents 
lines of support), declaring that Filipinos lost little in having their houses de- 
stroved, beine only “structures of straw and branches, only a little more elaborate 
than Indian wigwams; " the Boston Journal concluded that Filipinos might profit 
by compulsory removal from abodes that long use and neglect have made unwhole- 
some ’ (Miller 209). The Boston Journal conveniently forgot that American hu- 
manitarian outrage against “Butcher Weylers reconcentrado policy had been a 
major factor in the United States' involvement in the Spanish-American War (Pratt 
398QW All in all, the expertise the American military command brought from 
the Indian Wars, and the American press and military s translation of Filipino in- 
dio ' into quasi-(Native American) “Indian could be summed up in the Kansas City 
Times' interview with an American soldier in the Philippines who explained the 
Americans' “adaptation] of [the] old frontier adage[:. . .] the only good Filipino is 
a dead one. lake no prisoners; lead is cheaper than rice (quoted in Miller 179 
180). 

In basing Los Indios Bravos on a sincere, if perhaps uninformed, admiration 
of Native American “Indians," Rizal, of course, did not know the violence wit 
which the similarity between Filipino “ indios ' and American Indians would re 
bound on his countrymen. Had Rizal had more familiarity with Americas his tor) 
of domestic imperialism, perhaps he would have intuited the indiol Indian rami i 
cation as the United States and its propensity for imperialistic aggression was \en 
much on Rizal s mind in 1889. That year he founded Los Indios Bravos anc pro 
dieted in an essay titled “The Philippines a Century Hence that the Unite tates 
might become the Philippines' colonial master. 

“The Philippines a Century Hence” 

It is important to remember that Rizal formed the proto-nationalist Los Indios 
Bravos in the same year that he wrote “ The Philippines a Century Hence. e 
debates over the American influence in Rizal s position in the Philippine nation 
ist pantheon have focused on America after Rizal s death, when deat la ma e 
him a heroic icon. The fact that Rizal was influenced significantly by America ur 
ing his lifetime — indeed, during the period that he was formulating his proto na 
tionalist positions — has been virtually ignored. Rizal s admiration for the Ameri 
can “Indians" was formative in his rehabilitation of the Philippine indio an it 
is in Los Indios B ravos that we see the germs of what Benedict Anderson has i ^ en 
tified as the “imagined community" that is the precondition for nationalism. Yet 
Rizal also saw America as a direct threat to the incipient Philippine nation.^ 

“Filipinas dentro de Cien Anos” (“The Philippines a Century Hence") was 
published in La Solidaridad from September 1889 to early February 1890. The 


869 


THE PHILIPPINE KEVC )I l I K )N AND BI Y( )NI > 


essay has two main parts. In the first part Rival warned the Spanish colonial regime 
that revolution was almost inevitable if it did not treat the Philippines more fairly. 
In the second part, Rivals analyzed global imperialism at the close of the 19th cen- 
tury and hypothesized that the United States would annex the Philippines. 

It is undeniable that Rizal did not approve of the 1896 Revolution against 
Spain. Ambeth Ocampo writes that “the ambivalent attitude of many I * i 1 i pi nos [to- 
ward Rizal is] based on the fact that Rizal was not the leader of the Philippine Revo- 
lution of 1896” (Ocampo 2). But it is not, perhaps, so much that Rizal did not 
lead the 1896 Revolution; he denounced it outright. Rival s implacable condem- 
nation of the Katipunan’s revolt certainly causes some problems for bis reputation 
as the pinnacle of Filipino nationalism: How can Rival be the “Father of Filipino 
nationalism” when up until his death he strenuouslv denounced the revolution and 
therefore implicitly insisted on the Philippines’ continued colonial subjugation? 
Filipino historians skirt this point; Rival’s position as “The National Hero” makes 
Rizals nationalism (and hence compulsory pro-revolutionism?) an article of faith. 
Philippine historians cope with the matter of Rival’s explicit and vehement state- 
ments against the 1896 Revolution in various ways. Some simply ignore the issue, 
focusing on other areas of Rival’s work and influence (such as his writ ing Noli Me 
Tangere and El Filibnsterismo y his Propaganda Movement activities, bis founding 
of La Liga Filipina, etc.). Others, such as Austin Coates, att ribute stronger pro- 
revolutionary attitudes to Rizal than evidence can support. And others implv that 
Rivals martyrdom was his final absolution; however lamentable bis lack of support 
for the revolution, Rizal died for the cause and the triumphant symbolism of his 
final moments exculpates him for any sins against Philippine nationalism.* 2 ' Yet in 
all the discussions of Rizal s feelings for or against revolution, Filipino historians 
often neglect “ The Philippines a Century Hence,” in which Rival made strong and 
ear statements on the inevitability of a revolution against Spain if it did not re- 
form its colonial rule. 

If the Philippines did manage to separate from Spain, by either peaceful or 
orcerul means, Rizal knew too much about global imperialism at the end of the 
19th century to be confident that the islands would be able to elude simply trading 
one imperial master for another. As the age of global imperialism came to a close, 
t e great imperial powers — England, Germany, France, Holland — were grasping 
at the few remaining conquerable lands while they fought to retain those they al- 
ready held. Reviewing the state of the European imperial powers. Rival concluded 
t at they would be diverted by the temptation provided by Africa, an easier (richer 
and less recalcitrant) target than the Philippines. “If the Philippines secure their 
independence after heroic and stubborn conflicts,” wrote Rival, “they can rest as- 
sured that neither England nor Germany, nor France, and still less Holland will 
dare to take up what Spain has been unable to hold” (Rizal 285). 

Within a few years Africa will completely absorb the attention of the 

Europeans, and there is no sensible nation which, in order to secure a group of 


870 


ni l MI-NIX') The Philippines a Century (W)Hence 


poor and hostile islands, w ill neglect the immense territory offered by the Dark 
Continent, untouched, undeveloped and almost undefended. England has 
enough colonies in the Orient and is not going to sacrifice her Indian Empire 
lor the poor Philippine Islands It is probable that England will look favor- 

ably upon the independence ol the Philippines, lor it will open their ports to 
her and a fiord greater freedom to her commerce. 

Germanv will not care to run any risk... because a scattering ol her 
forces and a war in distant countries will endanger her existence on the conti- 
nent. 

. . . Prance has enough to do and sees more ol a future in longking and 
China. 

...I lolland is sensible and will be content to keep the Moluccas and 
Java. . . Holland proceeds with great caution in Sumatra and Borneo, from fear 
ol losing everything. 

...China will consider hersell lortunate it she succeeds in keeping her 
sell intact and is not dismembered or partitioned among the European powers 
that are colonizing the continent ol Asia. 1 he same is true ol Japan (Rizal -SS 
286). 


Global imperialism in the east had provided an almost irresistible tempta 
tion to the nations of the west; as Rizal wrote, the example is contagious, an 
covetousness and ambition are among the strongest vices hieing any in ustria iz 
ing country (Rizal 287). Greed lured nations who had not previoush joinec t 
imperialistic race to snatch some ol the few remaining lands. But the race e on^c 
to the strong, and with the main European powers preoccupied in A nca c 
holding their existing possessions, Rizal concluded that only the Umtec 
might be strong enough to enter the Iray at this comparatively late ate. 

Perhaps the great American Republic, whose interests lie in the Pa ’ 
and who has no hand in the spoliation ol Alrica may some day dream ol lo 
eign possession. Phis is not impossible, for... Harrison manifested somet ^ 
ol this sort in the Samoan question. But the Panama Canal is not opened n 
[is] the territory ol the States congested with inhabitants — North An " 
would be quite a troublesome rival, il she should once get into the bi 
(Rizal 287). 


Rizal was right on nearly every count. America did have interests in tie a 
cific; Hawaii joined the Union in 1898 and more lands would pio\ide mater t 
and markets for a rapidly expanding industrialism. It may have been true, re ative y 
speaking, that “the territory of the [United] States [was not yet] congeste w it i m 
habitants,” but in 1 889 when Rizal wrote his essay, “Manifest Destiny was iapi } 
running out of territory. It was not perhaps the actual population density that was 
important at that moment; it was the ideological implication ol Manifest Destiny 


871 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEY< )NI) 


coming to an end as the westward movement halted at the Pacific shore. In Facing 
West: The Metaphysics of Indian-Hating a)icl limp ire- Build nig, Richard Drinnon 
follows Manifest Destiny from the colonial era to the 19th century and hevond. 
The case of the Philippines certainly supports Drinnons fundamental thesis that 
Manifest Destiny was too important an ideological movement to be allowed to 
stop because of something as simple as the closing of the frontier. Frederick Jack- 
son Turner declared the frontier closed in 1893. Tor Turner, t he answ er to the prob- 
lem posed by the loss of the frontier was to take Manifest 1 )estinv bevond the 
United States’ continental boundaries: Turner “drew hope from the current call for 
a more assertive foreign policy, for an interoceanic canal, for enhanced sea power, 
and for the extension of American influence to outlying islands and adjoining 
countries’” (Drinnon xiv). 

In 1896 — five years after Rizal wrote “ The Philippines A Century Hence” 
and the year the Spaniards would execute Rizal for a revolution he insisted he did 
not support — the Spanish-American War would give the United States an excuse 
to acquire lands in the Caribbean and the Pacific. Theodore Roosevelt (in 1898 
assistant secretary of war and lieutenant colonel of the Rough Riders during the 
Spanish-American War) 

championed U.S. intervention “to retain our self-respect as a nation. . . . But he 
really wanted a war that would lift the United States into the ranks of world 
powers. In strict confidence,” he told a friend, “I should welcome any war, for 
I think this country needs one” (Karnow 89 ). 

The Spanish-American War was just what Roosevelt was looking for; as Luis 
Camara Dery writes, “7o the Americans, the 1898 Spanish-A mcrican War was [in- 
deed] a splendid little war.’. . . [F]or it took them a minimum of effort and of casu- 
alties to bring about Spain’s downfall as a world power and to confirm Americas 
aspirations for world power status” (Dery 79). 

The Teller Amendment had specifically precluded the United States from 
gaining territory in Cuba, making America seem altruistic when it entered the 
Spanish-American War. And the United States, indeed, gave up annexing Cuba 
permanently. But the Teller Amendment only specifically precluded America from 
taking Cuba. I did not mention other Spanish territories. The United States’ inter- 
est in taking other Spanish holdings as the spoils of war surfaced quickly as the 
peace negotiations began. When President McKinley communicated with the 
American representatives to the peace talks in Paris on 1 6 September 1 898, he in- 
structed them to secure title to the island of Luzon only. Roughly three weeks later, 
he instructed the Paris peace commissioners to secure the entire Philippine archi- 
pelago (Pratt 400). By the time the Treaty of Paris was signed, the United States — 
which had explicitly denied that its purpose for entering the Spanish-American 
War was to gain territory — owned Guam and Puerto Rico in addition to the Phil- 
ippines. 


872 


I ) K 1.MF.NIX) The Philippines a Century (W)Hence 


During his exile in Dapitan, Rizal pursued several projects, including his 
ophthalmic practice, zoology, and running a boys' school which curriculum in- 
cluded formal subjects such as reading, writing, arithmetic, Spanish, and extensive 
physical education as well as agriculture and plantation management. Rizal also 
taught his students English. Fluent in several European languages, Rizal could just 
as easily have taught German. At the time, neither language was of much practical 
use in rural Mindanao. Was Rizal preparing his students for the American occupa- 
tion he foretold in “ The Philippines A Century Hence ? As Austin Coates writes: 

I he inclusion til [English in Rizal s Dapitan curriculum], a language 
which in the Philippines of those days was all but useless... in a remote place 
like Dapitan, but with FHipiiuis Dentro de Cien Alios in mind it was prescient. 

When a few years later the Americans came to Dapitan they were amazed to 
find how many young men there spoke English (Coates 262). 

That Rizal would teach his students English— implicitly preparing them for 
the colonial subordination he foresaw — is provocative given the importance Rizal 
placed on education as the prerequisite for both nationalism and independence. 
Did Rizal think of educating Filipino officials lor an American protectorate. Per 
haps not, but that is what he ended up doing; one ol his Dapitan students, Jose 
Asencro, became the governor ol Zamboanga (Coates 263). 

Concluding his meditations on a Philippine revolution against Spain an 
another country — probably the United States — taking over the Philippines, z 
predicted, “These and many other things may come to pass within somet in & 
a hundred years” (Rizal 287). Rizal severely underestimated the acuity o is own 
analysis; the revolution against Spain came a mere six years after rhe pu ication o 
his essay, and Americas acquisition ol the Philippines came only two a ears a te 
that. Rizal was wrong, too, in his hope that the lact that the takin 0 o co o 
ing “contrary to [America’s] traditions” would stop the United States iom acq 
ing the Philippines (Rizal 287). During his dealings with American re P^f* e ^ ta 
in 1 898, Emilio Aguinaldo bluntly asked American General Anderson it the i - 
ippines were to become ‘dependencies’ ol the United States, to w ic t e com 
mander responded that in 1 20 years his country had yet to esta "> * s ^"° onies 
‘I have studied attentively the Constitution of the United States an in in it no 
authority for colonies, and I have no fear,’ Aguinaldo concurie — n | IS c e * a< f ' 
as the Americans had intended (Miller 41-42).'* Aguinaldo, like ’ °P e r 
America’s history as a postcolonial nation would prevent the Unite c ^ tes rom 
taking colonies. For Rizal, this hope remained hypothetical because ae l not ive 
to see 1898. Aguinaldo staked the sovereignty of the first republic on his faith in 

America’s anticolonial foundation, and lost. 

In all the discussions of Rizal’s beliefs for or against revolution, two acts re 
main clear. First, as “The Philippines a Century Hence shows, Rizal was not op 
posed to Philippine revolution against Spain per se. Second, that he unequivoc y, 

873 


k. 


THE PHILIPPINE RE VC >1.171 K )N ANI ) PI Y( )NI ) 


explicitly, and repeatedly denounced the Katipunans revolution in /:/ f ilibuster - 
ismo) suggests that he thought it premature. According to Austin Choates, Rizals 
disapproval of the Katipunans plans for revolution was derived partly from Rizals 
class beliefs: he believed the Katipunan needed stricter leadership by a core of edu- 
cated officers (Coates 276)7 J But the more fundamental and practical consider- 
ation was “the besetting problem with arms” (Coates 2 1 9). ( a>atcs asserts that Rizal 
and his brother Paciano made plans to train an army in (he remote provinces, 
where they would be safe from the Spaniards until the hilipino forces were fully 
prepared to wage a successful revolution: 

[Jose and Paciano] went so far as making a selection of the most likelv 
places through which, in the event of ships and munitions being obtained. , it 
would be possible to feed arms into the country in remote areas where, with 
abundant food supplies available from immediate surroundings, an arms' could 
be raised and trained on its native soil, and be ready to strike before the Span- 
iards even know of its existence This. . . was a brilliant conception eminently 

capable of achieving success (provided the arms problem eoubl be solver!) because 
of the extensive territorial areas of the Philippines which had either never come 
within the scope of Spanish administration or were currently bandit-domi- 
nated, and which in either case enjoyed immunity from the friars intelligence 
system (Coates 219-220; emphasis added). 

The problem, of course, was that the arms problem had yet to be solved. The 
Katipunan was reduced to stealing guns from the Spaniards piecemeal: “Filipino 
employees at the [Spanish] arsenals, members of the Katipunan, were stealing rifles 
one by one, dismantling them, carrying them out in waste receptacles, [and] later 
reassembling them. It was ingenious, but to base a revolution on it pitted against 
the power of Spain was folly” (Coates 276). 

If Rizals analysis of the state of global imperialism in the late 1 880s was bril- 
liantly acute, he was less clear-sighted in his analysis of the Filipinos’ ability to suc- 
cessfully wage a revolution. Rizal could foresee America taking the Philippines, but 
he could not foresee Filipinos gaining their independence from Spain by force (and 
therefore, presumably, would have considered the war against the Americans two 
years later an even more hopelessly lost cause). When Rizal volunteered to serve as 
a military doctor for the Spaniards in Cuba, he did so in the firm belief that Cuba 
was fighting a war it could not win, precisely because of the same problem the Fili- 
pinos faced. Cuba was hopelessly outgunned and could not hope to win a war for 
independence without help from a foreign nation. In Cuba, that foreign nation 
turned out to be America. During Rizals meeting with Katipunan representative 
Pio Valenzuela, Rizal reportedly told him to study Cuba as a model for anti-Span- 
ish rebellion: 


874 


Oi l MKNOO The Philippines a Century (W)Hence 


Rizal said: “A revolution without arms should never be started against 
an armed nation. Its consequences will be fetal and disastrous to the country. 

I he Filipinos will necessarily have to lose owing to lack of arms... Cuba... 
counts on the help and protection of the United States — The Philippines does 
not reckon vet with the help of Japan, and I hope that she will help us because 
it will be difficult to stage a second revolution after the first fails (Agoncillo, 
“RizaP 280). 

During his trial, Rizal testified that he told Valenzuela during their July 1896 
meeting that the Katipunan should take Cuba as a model for anti-Spanish rebel- 
lion: “Let [the Katipunan] learn from what is happening in Cuba, where the 
people, although possessing abundant means and backing of a great power [the 
United States], and being schooled in war, are powerless to achieve their objectives 
(Coates 277n). 

But Rizal was wrong in his assessment of the Katipunans ability to wage a 
successful revolution against Spain without the help of another foreign nation. 
Despite the disparity in guns and ammunitions, the Katipuneros and other Fili 
pino revolutionaries defeated Spanish forces throughout most of the islands. When 
American Admiral Dewey came to take the major concentration of Spanis 
government officials and military personnel barricaded inside Intramuros (the 
walled city that was the Spanish capital of the Philippines) in August 1898, 
Aguinaldo's forces had been laying siege to the city for over a month. Aguina o 
had already declared Philippine independence on 12 June, and he and othei lea 
ers had established a Filipino government in 189/ V' 1 he Spaniards made a secret 
deal with the Americans to stage a mock battle for Manila (i.e., Intramuros rom 
which the Filipinos were to be deliberately excluded, so that the Americans co 
claim a victory over Manila and the Philippines in general. The Batt e o a 
nila” was staged on 1 3 August 1 898, and the Spaniards surrendered the cit> on t i 
same day. The next day, American General Merritt announced the esta is ™ ent 
of the [American] Military Government” (Constantino 214-215). But me i i f 
nos had been fighting a war for independence for two years, the revo ution . 
grown beyond the Katipunan, revolts breaking out across the archipe a^o to 
the Spaniards out (Constantino, Past2\2). By the time the Treaty of Pans was con 
eluded (10 December 1898), Constantino asserts, Spain actually contro e on > 
a few isolated outposts in the country. The Filipino people had won t eir war o 
liberation” (Constantino, Past 219). Thus we can see, asTeodoro Agonci o states, 
“Rizal was too cautious and logical to believe in the capacity of the unarme P eo P e 
to stand up to a powerful enemy” (Agoncillo, “Rizal 285). Had Riza ive on g 
enough to witness his peoples tenacity of purpose with nothing but bo os, s arp 
ened sticks, and a few firearms, and their astounding tolerance in me ace o 
wealthy Filipinos’ betrayal of the revolutionary cause, Agoncillo concludes, per 
haps [Rizal] would have admired the uneducated people more and revised his opin- 


875 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND NEY< >NI ) 


ion” about Filipinos’ ability to wage a successful revolution ( Agoncillo, “Rizal” 

285 - 286 ). 

It is one of the many ironies of Philippine-American historv that the Filipi- 
nos making war against the Spaniards in 1 896 were in some respects analogous to 
the Spaniards making war against the Americans in 1898. Ri/.al believed that the 
Katipunan could not win a war against the Spaniards as it lacked arms and re- 
sources. And that was exactly the situation of the Spanish regime in C 'uba facing 
war against the United States. For the Katipuneros, the arms problem boiled down 
to logistics and funding; they lacked the contacts and means to import large arma- 
ments into the Philippines without the Spaniards finding out about it. 

But for the Spanish regime in Cuba it was a matter of governmental denial 
that prevented the necessary arming for war. Given the Spaniards serious lack of 
preparation to fight the Americans, the Spaniards in ( aiba in 1 898 were not unlike 
the Katipuneros facing the Spaniards in Luzon in 1 896. “ Rizal mav have scoffed at 
the Katipunans grim determination to obtain guns, even if it meant dismantling 
and smuggling guns one by one; but at least the Katipuneros knew they were badly 
mismatched. When viewed in this context, the Filipino achievement against the 
Spaniards from 1896 to 1898 is courageous in deed, and Rizals lack of faith in the 
Filipino people correspondingly egregious. Given how militarily disadvantaged the 
Filipinos were against the Spaniards in 1896, and how military disadvantaged the 
Spaniards were against the Americans in 1896, it is all the more impressive that the 
Philippine-American War lasted as long as it did . J } The United States broke the 
Spaniards in Cuba in three months, and hostilities ceased one month later (12 
August 1 898). But it took the United States three years to conclude the Philippine- 
American War, and hostilities continued for years after a revolution Rizal said was 
doomed before it started. 


Rizal and the 1996/1998 Centennials 

Despite the nationalist debates of the 1 960s and 1 970s which attempted to replace 
him with Andres Bonifacio as the preeminent Filipino hero, Rizal remains the epi- 
center of Philippine historical hagiography — what one historian calls “Philippine 
Heroology. In 1996, the Taon ng mga Bayani (Year of the Filipino Heroes), Rizal 
remains the center of the centennial celebrations of Philippine heroism, due in 
part, no doubt, to the fact that 1996 is also the centennial of Rizals “martyrdom.” 
Yet that fact alone need not be the justification for making Rizal the almost exclu- 
sive focus of the centennial commemorations. And yet he is; for example, the 1 996 
Centennial was inaugurated by full-page ads in all the major Philippine newspa- 
pers commemorating Rizals life, death, and import to Philippine nationalism. On 
12 June 1996, Independence Day, no other Philippine hero received the same 
honor. Not Bonifacio, nor Aguinaldo, nor Mabini, nor Luna. In fact, there was 
not even a full-page ad giving a hero’s gallery collage to celebrate the Year of the 
Heroes; most ads on Independence Day instead featured the Philippine flag. Rizals 


876 


I U- 1 \ 1 1 \PO The Philippines a Century (W)Hence 


dominance of the Philippine heroic horizon is also revealed in the construction of 
the International Conference on the Centennial of the 1896 Philippine Revolu- 
tion, in which Rizal alone is the focus of one day, or roughly one-third of the con- 
ference. Such an allocation of time seems discordant given Rizals vehement de- 
nunciations ot the 1896 Revolution. 

Of all the oiutoine issues about Jose Rizal, the one which threatened to de- 
pose Rizal from his dominant position in Philippine historical hagiography was 
the issue ot American sponsorship. That issue seems to have been resolved to Phil- 
ippine historians relative satisfaction, yet the Rizal/ American debates studiously 
have been trained on Rizal s importance for Philippine nationalism post-1896. 

1 here is a curious denial that America could have had a significant influence on 
Rizal during his lifetime, and especially in his formation of early Philippine na- 
tionalism. As I have attempted to show here, Rizal was in fact deeply influenced by 
America during that important proto-nationalist period. Centennials are not or 
perhaps should not — be solely commemorative. While centennials provide the 
opportunity to commemorate, they should also provide the opportunity to reex 
amine. A fuller examination of the American factor in Rizals conceptualizations of 
a proto-nationalism will address a long-neglected aspect ot Rizals role in Filipino 
history. Ultimately, further examinations ot the American factor in pre-1898 Phi 
ippine nationalism have significant implications both tor current debates on Fi i 
pino historiography and for Philippine-American (post) colonial studies. 


Notes 

1 . The Centennial Commissions Five-Year Plan is as follows: 1994: “Centennial Con- 
sciousness;” 1995: “Centennial as a National Movement; 19)6. Hie \car or 
Filipino Heroes;” 1 997: “Propagating the Filipino Spirit; 1998. \earofthe lip 
pine Centennial.” “The meaning of [the] Philippine Centennial." Philippine Daily 

Inquirer , ; 12 June 1996, p. DIO. . 

2. For example, Rizal wrote to Ferdinand Blumentritt on 26 January 1 887, sa F ir J& r 
“under the present circumstances, we do not want separation from Spain. 

ask is greater attention, better education, better government employees, one or two 
representatives and greater security of our persons and property (quoted in Constan 
tino. Veneration 19). As Austin Coates notes, the constitutional right to represents 
tion in the Cortes, the Spanish parliament, was enjoyed by Puerto R^o 
“but not by the Philippines, which had no representation of any kind (Coates 71. 
Rizals “assimilationist” policy rested on his hope that the Philippines situation wou 

be improved if it could gain representation in the Cortes. 

3. In “Independence Day reflections,” Rina Jimenez-David writes, By the way, said a 
friend, at the tail-end of a conversation about the centennial of Philippine Indepen 
dence, ‘by centennial I mean the 1896 Centennial, not the 1898 one. bo which 
Jimenez-David s response was, “I didn't even know there were two of them (Jimenez- 
David 9). 


877 


THK PHILIPPINE RKVOLUTK )N AM ) BI Y< )NI ) 


4. 28 December 1946 Free Press account of the Philippine ( Commission meeting on se- 
lecting a national hero. Note that this article was written in 19*<S, the year of 
America’s granting the Philippines independence. 

5. From Joseph B. Smith’s Portrait of a Cold Warrior (New York: IP Putnams Sons, 
1976), p. 283. 

6. From W. Cameron Forbes, The Philippine Islands, Vol. I. (Boston: 1 loughton Mifflin, 
1928), p. 495. 

7. Rizal, Educator and Economist, supports Rizal’s theme of education as precondition 
for self-government by quoting a portion of Rr/aFs manifesto of IS December 1896, 
which states: “...I am one most anxious for liberties of our country, and I am still 
desirous of them. But I place as a prior condition the education of the people, that by 
means of instruction and industry our country may have an individuality of its own 
and make itself worthy of these liberties.” The authors of this book then make the 
following comment: “Rizal intentionally avoided the use of the term independence,' 
perhaps because he honestly believed that independence in its true, real, and strict 
sense should not be granted us until we were educated enough to appreciate its im- 
portance, and its blessings, and until we were economically self-sufficient (Constan- 
tino, Insight 30-31; Ella Hernandez and de Ocampo, Rizal, Educator and Economist, 
[Manila: R.P. Garcia Publishing Co., 1949], p. 94. 

8. I heodore Friend, Between Two Empires (Manila: New Haven: Yale University Press, 

1965), p. 16. 

9. 1 he sections of the book, in order, are: Prologue, Facts &C Possibilities, Family 
Others, Everyday Rizal, Legendary Talent, The Never-Finding Story, The Women, 
Epilogue ( I he Last Word), Postscript. 

10. Filipinas” is interchangeable with “the Philippines”; thus, it applies to the archi- 
pelago, not any specific person. 

11. In Imagined Communities , Benedict Anderson states: “In 1887, the Father of Fili- 
pino Nationalism, Jose Rizal, wrote the novel Noli Me langere, which today is re- 
garded as the greatest achievement of modern Fil lit. It was also almost the first novel 
written by an Indio’” (Anderson 26). The “almost” here seems a way of asserting 
Rizal as the greatest achievement of modern Fil lit” while passing over other writers 
who might be considered the first “ indio' writer. 

12. For example, see Cesar Majul, “Rizal as Father of Filipino Nationalism” especially 

pp. 54-55. 

13. Benedict Anderson notes of Rizal during his continental travels: I he [Spanish] co- 

lonial might not like what he saw, for Rizal was himself unconsciously a silent state- 
ment of racial equality... As those Spaniards who spoke to him quickly discovered, 
he might be an indio, but he expressed himself like a European (Anderson 66). 

14. The word “propaganda” here has none of the negative connotation that the word 
generally carries in the United States. The Filipino Propaganda Movement and its 
advocates, the Propagandists, simply propagated the political goals of Spanish re- 
forms and enfranchisement of colonial Philippines. 


878 


HI IMKNDO The Philippines a Century (WO Hence 


1 5. Rizal had come in direct confrontation with the Dominican order over its handling 
of the Calamba hacienda, part of which was leased by Rizal's family. In 1887. the 
Calamba issue came to a head, just as Rizals Noli was released in Manila. For a de- 
scription of the Calamba/ Noli Controversy, see Coates, ‘‘Furore," pp. 138-145. Rizal 
would expose the friars' merciless handling of indto tenants, especially in hi Filibus- 
ter i str to, published in 1891. 

16. I he cover of the Noli emphasized this point, showing a friars hairy leg beneath an 
ecclesiastic robe next to a whip and chain which, along with a helmet of the Civil 
Guard, denote the instruments of power and discipline of the Spanish friar orders 
closely linked with the colonial government. 

17. It is interesting to note that Anderson uses the opening of Noli as the example of 
imagining community through “print-capitalism (Anderson 26-2 ). 

1 8. E.g., analyzing Rizal's ideas of “national sentiment, a precursor of nationalism, Cesar 
Adib Majul writes that Rizal's “establishment of the Liga Filipino was Rizal s contri- 
bution on the organizational level and in the sphere of political action to the cause of 
building the Filipino nation" (Majul, “Concept, 2 0). See also Majul s articles Rizal 
as Father of Filipino Nationalism, p. 55, and Rizal and the National Community, 
pp. 3-4. 

19. Pratt notes that “of greater consequence than the eftect of the [Cuban] rebellion on 
U.S. economic interests was [the] effect on humanitarian sentiment in the United 
States, which deplored the misery and death among the reconcentrados (Pratt 3 )SC). 

I he journalistic response to Butcher Weylers reconcentrado polic\ versus Samue 
Bell’s reconcentrado policy is telling; see the Boston Journals comment (c. 190~) 

Bell’s implementation of concentration camps in the Philippines w ould be a h\ 
blessing by destroying unsanitary native housing. In contrast, another America 
newspaper emphasized the sadistic brutality of Weylers reconcentrado polic\ 

a few years earlier: “Blood on the roadsides, blood on the fields, blood on die 
steps, blood, blood, blood" (Miller 8, New York World, 17 May 18 )6.). 

Weyler" was Valeriano Weyler y Nicolau, governor-general of Cuba who had previ- 
ously served as governor-general of the Philippines (1888-1821). \Xe\ler w as g 
nor-general of the Philippines during the Calamba hacienda control ers) 

the Rizal/Mercado family was involved. ^ p,., 

20. Rizal, incidentally, would have agreed with Anderson. Warning Spain in 
ippines a Century Hence" that revolution was inevitable if Spain did not re 
policies in the Philippines, Rizal cited what Anderson would call the imagine^ 
munity as the decisive factor that would rouse the Philippines to reiolution. 

few years the present state of affairs will have been modified completely anc i ’ 
tably. Fhere now exists a factor which was formerly lacking the spirit of the 
has been aroused and a common misfortune, a common debasement has ur 

the inhabitants of the Islands" (Rizal 272). 

21. On 1 July 1896, Bonifacio sent Pio Valenzuela to Dapitan to seek Rizal s advice 

to urge him to flee. Rizal was clear in his denunciation of the revolution and his dis 


879 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND El Y( >N l ) 


approval of the Katipunan’s plans and methods: the revolution had fatal defects; the 
movement was low in funds, had insufficient arms and ammunition... and there 
were inadequate arrangements for reserves... [ Rizal j expressed absolute opposition 
to revolution on the basis of Bonifacio’s plans, advising further that revolution at this 
time and with these resources was premature and would certainly fail... I lis immedi- 
ate response to Valenzuela was to tell Bonifacio to put a stop to the entire thing at 
once... His assessment of it was that Bonifacio was leading his people into a suicidal 
exploit” (Coates 276). 

During his imprisonment at Fort Santiago in I )ecember 1 896, Rizal wrote the 
so-called “December Manifesto.” The Spanish colonial authorities suppressed the 
manifesto, which includes strong and explicit condemnations of the Katipunans 
revolution. In it, Rizal writes, “I was convinced that the idea [of revolution] was in 
the highest degree absurd, and, what is worse, disastrous for us. I did more. When 
later on, in spite of my advice, the outbreak [of the revolution ] occurred, I spontane- 
ously offered, not only my services, but my life, and my name as well, to be used in 
the manner they [the Spanish] thought best for the purpose of stifling the rebellion; 
for, convinced of the evils that it was going to bring upon us, I considered myself 
fortunate if by means of any sort of sacrifice 1 might prevent such useless misfortunes” 
(quoted in Agoncillo, “Rizal,” 278). 

‘I cannot do less than condemn, and I do condemn, that absurd and savage 
outbreak, plotted behind my back, which dishonours us Filipinos and discredits those 
who may speak in our behalf. I abominate its criminal proceedings, and I disown any 
sort of participation in it, deplore with all the sorrow of my heart the ignorant victims 
of deception. Return, then, to your homes, and may God pardon those who have 
acted in bad faith (quoted in Agoncillo, “Rizal, 284-285). 

In his last letters, written in Fort Santiago just before his execution, Rizal ex- 
plicitly insisted in his repudiation of the revolution, writing to Ferdinand Blumen- 
tritt: I am... innocent of the crime of rebellion”; and to his brother Paciano Rizal, “I 
assure you, my brother, that I die innocent of this crime of rebellion. If my earlier 
writings may have contributed to it, there is no means of denying it absolutely, but 
then I thought I had expiated the past in my deportation [to Dapitan]” (Coates 318, 
325). 

22. For example, Coates claims that by early 1889 “Rizal’s aim [in his La Solidaridad 
articles] was still assimilation with Spain. Rizal’s views by this time were more radical , 
but he had not yet revealed them. Publicly he was prepared to argue the cause of assi- 
milation, because any progressive public argument in Spain would be of use to his 
country; but privately he no longer had such confidence in assimilation. I he violent 
friar reaction to his novel [i.e. the Noll] in Manila, and the intransigence shown in 
the Senate, had drawn him nearer the idea of separation” (Coates 163; emphasis 
added). 

Similarly, around late 1891, Coates writes about Rizal’s views toward revolu- 
tion: “ It is quite possible that [Rizal] kn ew all along that the Liga could not succeed, 
but [he] pursued it nonetheless, partly as a final proof to Spain of his pacific inten- 


880 


ni l MI-MHO The Philippines a Century (W) Hence 


tions, partly to allow. . . a little more time in which to produce an extraneous change 
or even which might make armed revolution suddenly practicable and sure of success. 

“Above all, as his letters to Blumentritt show, he had abandoned even as a hope 
that police of assimilation. His aim. . . was now the total liberation of his country from 
Spain” (Coates 220; emphasis added). 

Here, as elsewhere in the Rizal biography, Coates ascribes revolutionary views 
to Rizal, but does not give evidence from Rizals writings, public or private, to sub- 
stantiate such claims. In the latter quote, Coates asserts that Rizals letters to Blumen- 
tritt prove a clear shift to an anti-assimilation, more pro-revolutionary position, but 
Coates does not give anv quotes from the Rizal/ Blumentritt correspondence to sub- 
stantiate this claim. Such substantiation is, I think, required given Rizals repeated, 
and explicit, condemnation of the revolution in his last letters and the December 
Manifesto.” 

Coates is not the onlv historian and Rizalist to project unsubstantiated pro- 
revolutionarv feelings onto Rizal. for example, in his analysis of Rizal and the Phil- 
ippine Revolution,” Teodoro Agoncillo concludes. Probably against bis wishes, 
[Rizal] denounced the outbreak of the Revolution as absurd, a useless expenditure of 
labor and life. It is thus his feeling for order in society triumphed over his feeling foi 
freedom” (Agoncillo, “Rizal,” 286; emphasis added). 

23. I he dignity with which Rizal lived his last hours, the normal pulse he exhibited in 
the moment before his execution, and most of all, his achievement in spinning 
around as the bullets hit him to die face upward (thus cheating the Spanish of the 
traitor's death to which they sentenced him) have become icons of Rizal hagiography 

24. “The Supreme Court partially buoyed the foundering president [McKinley, 1901] 
when it ruled that spring not only that the possession of colonies was constitutional, 
but also that not all guarantees in the Constitution need apply to such possession 
The legal reasoning behind the decisions of the Insular Cases was so tortured tha 
four of the five concurring justices could not agree on a single rationale to justify eac 
one of them” (Miller 1 57). The question of acquiring the Philippines, of the United 
States forcibly taking and ruling a colony, and Americas own history as a count } 
founded through revolution against its colonial master developed into agonized 
bates over “whether the Constitution followed the flag, the issue of go\ ernment only 
by consent of the governed, and related issues. See Millers Benevolent Assimilation fo 

an overview of many of these debates. 

I he American forces in Manila gave Aguinaldo half- assurances about 
United States' disinterest in the Philippines, but made sure that Aguinaldo did not 
have access to those from whom he could demand definitive answers. He also en 
sured that Aguinaldo was treated with deliberate informality' so as to downplay what 
discussions Aguinaldo had with U.S. officials. A characteristic example of the Ameii 
cans’ treatment of Aguinaldo’s forces is General Wesley Merritt s statement to Agu 
inaldo: “The government of the United States, you may be assured, [but] for which as 
its agent I can make no promises, will deal fairly with the Filipinos, but we must foi 
now insist for the good of all there shall be no joint occupation of Manila (Millei 44, 


881 


THK PHILIPPI NT. KLVc )I l I K )N 


,'I ) HI Y< )NI > 


emphasis added). For more details on Dewey. \ndcrson. Merritt. C >tis. and other 
American leaders’ dealings with Aguinaldo. see Miller, pp. 52. 

25. “But perhaps the most disturbing aspect of it was Be mitae 10 s implied admission that 
with no more than these limited resources the Katipunan membership had grown so 
large that its existence could not be expected to remain secret much longer, nor might 
he be able to restrain the enthusiasm of its members to make resolution at an early 
date. I his last, Rizal knew, broke one of the cardinal rules pertaining to successful 
revolution: that the leader must exercise over his nu n sufficient!) absolute control to 
be able to determine the exact moment for resolution to break out... Another flaw 
he detected in the Katipunan was that svhile its membership was strong among the 
poor and uneducated, it had insufficient backing from the rich families whose sup- 
port was indispensable if onlv in the sphere of fund raising, though also in organiza- 
tion and technique. . . What Bonifacio had assembled ss as a practically unarmed 
rabble” (Coates 276). 

26. In 1897, factionalism within the revolutionary forces led to a schism between the 
Magdalo/Cavite group, led by Aguinaldo, and the Magdisvang group, led by Andres 
Bonifacio. J he Magdalo group eventually triumphed and consolidated revolutionary 
leadership when it engineered the execution of Bonifacio on 10 Alas' 1 (SO . For a 
description of the Aguinaldo/Bonifacio power struggle, see ( onstantino, A Past Re- 
visited, Ch. XI, Revolution and C Compromise. 

77. I he Americans privately acknowledged Filipino control of the Philippines by June 
1898. On 16 June, the American consul in Manila reported to Washington that the 
insurgents have defeated the Spaniards at all points except [the] fort near Malate [i.e., 
Intramuros], and hold not only North Luzon to the suburbs of Manila, but Batanyes 
[sic] I rovince also and the bay coast entire, save the city of Manila (Dery 12). In 
contrast, see General Otis’ declaration to Aguinaldo that the mock battle of Manila 
conferred Manila to the Americans by right of conquest (see Derv 34-35). 

28. Captain Victor Concas y Palau, chief-of-staff for Spanish Admiral Pascual Cervera 
(one of the military leaders during the Spanish-American War), was convinced that 

Spain’s going to war against America [w]as a madness’ on Spain’s part and that 
when the war commenced the outcome was, as a mat ter of fact, already decided, even 
if a less powerful nation that the United St ates had taken part against us (Dery 80). 
For details, see Dery’s chapter on “The Spanish-American War of I 898: Why It Was 
Called Americas Splendid Little War.” 

29. Luis Dery gives helpful insight into how badly outgunned the Filipinos were in going 
up against the Americans. Most Filipino soldiers in the Lhilippine-Amei ican War did 
not know how to handle a rifle. This probl cm was exacerbated because the [ejxtreme 
scarcity of ammunition denied them the opportunity to practice shooting ‘because 
bullets could not be spared for target practice’” (Dery 40). Ammunition was so scarce 
that Filipino General Alejandrino (whom Rizal had recommended as the best leader 
of a revolution if there had to be one) admitted, “We took for granted beforehand 
that it would be impossible for us to sustain for more than 24 hours a determined 
attack of the [Americans]” (Dery 40). The Filipi no “insurgents’’ determination in 


882 


OKI M I- N l X } The Philippines a Century ( W) Hence 


the face of such military odds probably had a great deal to do with the Americans' 
comparing them to Apaches and other tribes of the American Indian Wars, but when 
the Americans were not invoking racist invective against /W/w-as-Indians, there was 
an occasional tribute to their braverv: '“Taking into account the disadvantages they 
have to fight against in arms, equipment and military discipline, said General 
Lawton, ‘thev are the bravest men I have ever seen. . . (quoted in Dery 64). For more 
details, see Dervs title chapter, “The Army of the First Philippine Republic. 

References 

Agoncillo, leodoro A. History of the Filipino People. 8th Edition. Quezon City: Garotech 
Publishing, 1990. (First Edition: 1 960.) Cited as History. 

. “Rizal and the Philippine Revolution. In Hi moldy: Kalipunan ngmga Pag- 

ddrol hay Jose Riziil, ed. Patricia Melendrez-Cruz and Apolonio Bayani Chua. Ma- 
nila: Sentrong Pangkultura ng Pilipinas (Cultural Center of the Philippines), 19)1, 
pp. 276-287. Originally given as a lecture at the University of the East, Sept. -6, 
1961, and published in Rizal Centennial Lectures (Manila: University of the East, 
1961), pp. 36-45. Cited as “Revolution. 

Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spt end of Nation 
alism. Revised Edition. New York: Verso, 1991. 

Anon. [Special Feature Section]. “June 12: Defining moment for nationhood. The Manila 

Chronicle , 12 June 1996, p. 22. 

Anon. [Special Project Section]. “The Meaning of [the] Philippine Centennial. 1 hilippine 
Daily Inquirer, 12 June 1996, p. DIO. 

Anon. “Renaming of Philippines to Rizal pressed. Manila Bulletin , 1- June 19)6, p. - 

Bernad, Miguel A. (S.J.). “The heroes of independence. At Random column. Tin P 
ippine Star, 12 June 1996, p. 9. 

Castro, Jovita Ventura. The Revolution by Jose Rizal. English translation. 
Nalandangan, 1992. 

Coates, Austin. Rizal: Filipino Nationalist and Patriot. Ermita, Manila. Solidaridad Pu 
ing, 1 992. Originally published in 1968 by Oxford University Press. 

Constantino, Renato. Insight and Foresight. Edited by Luis R. Mauricio. Quezon City 
Foundation for Nationalist Studies, 1997. Cited as Insight. 

. The Philippines: A Past Revisited: Vol. I: Pre-Spanish- 1941 . Quezon City: 1 he 

Foundation for Nationalist Studies, 1994. (Originally published 1 )/ 5). Cited 

Dery, Luis Camara. The Army of the First Philippine Republic and Othei Histoiua bssays 
Manila: De la Salle University Press, 1995. See especially Ch. 2, “The Spanish- 
American War of 1 898: Why It Was Called Americas Splendid Little War. 

Drinnon, Richard. Pacing West: The Metaphysics of Indian-Hating and hnpiu Building. 
New York: Schocken Books, 1980. 

Gagelonia, Pedro A. “Who Proclaimed Rizal Our National Hero? 1 he Weekly Nation, 1 ) 
June 1967, pp. 12-15. 


883 


THE PHILIPPINE REV( )I l I K )N AM ) 1W M >M > 


Guerrero, Leon Ma. The First Filipino: A Biography of f/r ( : Rizal. Manila: National Histori- 
cal Institute, 1977. 

Jimenez-David, Rina, “Independence Day Reflections. In At I arge. Philippine Daily 
Inquirer, 12 June 1996, p. 9. 

Karnow, Stanley. In Our Image: America's Umpire in the Fhilippine v New 5ork: Ballantine 
Books, 1989. 

National Commission for Culture and the Arts/Philippine < entcnni.il ( ommission. Con- 
ference Brochure, International (Conference on the C entenni.il of the 1896 Philip- 
pine Revolution. Manila: n.d. 

Majul, Cesar Adib. “Rizal and the National (iommunity. Panorama 1 2: l > (September 
1960): pp. 3-12. Cited as “Community. 

• “On the Concept of National ( Community.’ In l hominy: hultpunan ng mga 

Pag-aaral kay Jose Rizal. Edited by Patricia \1clciulre/-( ru/ and Apolonio Bayani 
Chua. Manila: Sentrong Pangkultura ng Pilipinas (( ultural ( enter of the Philip- 
pines), 1991, pp. 264-275. Originally published in I >ata Papers of the International 
Congress on Rizal, 4-8 December 1961 (Manila; |ose Ri/al National (Centennial 
Commission, n.d.), pp. 1 73- 185. (Cited as “Concept . 

• “Rizal as Father of Filipino Nationalism. Century Magazine, November, 

1961: pp. 48-56. Cited as “Father.” 

Miller, Stuart Creighton. Benevolent Assimilation : I he Americtt n ( oiujuest of the Philip- 
pines, 1899-1903. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982. 

Ocampo, Ambeth R. Rizal Without the Overcoat. Revised FCdition. Manila: Anvil Publish- 
ing, 1995. 

Orosa, Sixto Y. Rizals Place in Philippine Fleroology. Mobilways \ 1:4: pp. 2-/. 

Rafael, Vicente L. “Nationalism, Imagery, and the Filipino Intelligentsia in the 19th Cen- 
tury. In Discrepant Histories: Iranslocal Essays on Filipino ( .n It u re. F.ditcd by Vicente 
L. Rafael. Manila, Philippines: Anvil Publishing, 1995. 

Recto, Claro M. “A True Filipino Is a Rizalist.” Panorama (( October 1 962): pp. 2-5. 

Rizal, Jose. I he Philippines a Century Hence. Reprinted in Jose Riziil: Life , Works and 
Writings by Gregorio F. Zaide. Manila: National Bookstore, 1992. 


884 


A Turning Point in Rizal's Thinking 

The Liga Filipina as the Basis for a Filipino National Project 


Helene Goujat-Godet 
U niversity of Paris, Prance 


J ose Rizal, the Filipino national hero, dedicated a great part of his short 
life to denouncing the ills of the Spanish colonial system in the archipelago. The 
novels Noli Me Tangere (Berlin, 1887) and El Filibiisterismo (Ghent, 1891), Rizals 
best-known works, demonstrated this point while also revealing the reformist na 
ture of the solution he conceived for the country. With his project for the foun a 
tion of the Liga Filipina, the novelist and poet gave way to the organizer an mar j 
of action. We are led to ask why Rizal made a transition from literature to po itica 
organizing. 

An answer to this question lies in examining the Liga itself and determining 
the premises that led to its founding. Through a study of the Ligas statutes, we wi 
try to define the organizations objectives and show how these containe tie em 
bryo of a national project for the Philippines. 

The Liga Filipina as Fruit of Ten Years' Political Activity 

The Liga as Rizal first conceived of it in early 1892 in Hong Kong was essentially 
a civic and economic association dedicated to the goal of mutual protection or its 
members. It was given a very precise administrative structure, a Supreme Counci 
(a sort of Central Committee), Provincial Councils, and Popular Councils in cities 
and neighborhoods; the organization was intended to develop and expan 
throughout the country. Each council was to have at its head a chief, a legal advisor 
(fiscal), a treasurer, and a secretary. 


885 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOI l I K )N AM ) PI Y( )M > 


The organization of the Liga is described in detail in the Statutes, drafted bv 
Rizal himself: the Ligas goals; the hierarchical organization within each Council; 
members’ obligations and rights and those of the chiefs, the legal advisors and the 
treasurers; how funds were to be invested; and general provisions. 

The hierarchization of the basic principles and their wording remind us of a 
Masonic system. This is no coincidence since Rizal himself had joined a Masonic 
lodge in Paris. 

Although the Liga Statutes reflect a form of political activitv different from 
what Rizal had pursued up to 1892, the fact that he drafted it is not a surprise. As 
a turning point in Rizal’s life, the Liga marked the 1 Oth anniversary of Rizals voy- 
age to Spain at age 21, when he had decided to expose the alarming situation in 
Spain’s Far Eastern colony and to lift the veil on the abuses of political and reli- 
gious authorities. 1 his decision included the double objective of raising the con- 
sciousness of the Filipino people and persuading the government in Madrid to 
adopt reforms intended to give relief to the islands population — while assuring 
that it would remain under the Spanish flag. 

But as the years passed, the fervent hopes that Rizal placed in this strategy 
faded away. After 10 years of travel, studies, and writing politically oriented books, 
articles, and speeches, he returned to Asia, tired, disillusioned, and embittered 
Evaluating the results of his mission, Rizal concluded that he had in no way im- 
proved the situation of his country. Further, the publication of the Noli in 1887 
had given rise to brutal repression against Rizals family, which was subjected to 
confiscation of properry, jailings, exiles, and other humiliations intended to let the 
vulgar little mestizo ! know that the colonial power structure was by no means 
disposed to tolerate such insolence and ingratitude. J 

When he arrived in Hong Kong, Rizal hesitated between founding a school, 
devoting himself to his career as a medical doctor and ophthalmologist, and throw- 
ing himself anew into political activity. He chose the latter option, encouraged no 
doubt by the numerous letters of support he had received since bis return from 
Europe. Furthermore, the environment of the British colony stimulated Rizal and 
favored his move toward a more active and radical political commitment.' 

Although his spirits were lifted, Rizal did not ignore the lessons of the set- 
backs he had suffered, but instead made an uncompromising assessment of his past 
10 years of political activity. He reached the conclusion that the reason the goal of 
independence had not been achieved was that the forms of action chosen up to 
that point were ineffective. 

Rizal first asked himself whether novel-writing was the best way to raise the 
countrys consciousness. Perhaps what his friend Graciano Lopez Jaena had told 
him was true: his novels may have been too rhetorical and their readers may not 

have known what to make of them. 4 Another means of communication had to be 
found. 

Secondly, Rizal believed up to this point that the struggle for the Filipino 
cause had to have the support of Spanish politicians, intellectuals, and journalists. 


886 


( >( HI A r C iOlHT A Turning Point in Ri&tTs Thinking 


That was why he had made the effort to direct his work especially toward them, in 
their country and in their language. But the Spanish in general had shown little 
interest in the fate of the faraway Asian colony. Rizal came to doubt the effective- 
ness of the articles he had written with such care, for they seemed to move no one/ 

Further, it appeared to Rizal that the two Spanish political parties that alter- 
nated in power, the l iberals and the Conservatives, were both determined to main- 
tain the last vestiges of the Spanish empire at all cost 1 ' and were thus not inclined to 
make the slightest concession when it came to protecting established peninsular 
interests. 

In anv case, it was clear that the laws passed by Spanish kings had never been 
respected bv the colonial authorities. 1 he local civilian and religious authorities 
above all the latter — enjoved unchallenged power and unlimited rights over a sub- 
servient and defenseless population. 1 he repression suffered by Rizal s own family 
was a clear example of this. At the same time, progressive reforms decided in 
Madrid were hardlv ever implemented. Rizal reached the conclusion that the Fili 
pinos could no longer [dace their hopes in such reforms. 

Thirdly, Rizal had placed much hope in the actions of the Propaganda Mo\e 
ment, which he had founded with other Filipino students in Spain, but 
dismayed to see the group wasting its efforts on trivial concerns which pro\o 'e 


internal splits and harmed the effectiveness of the movement. . 

Rizal thus channeled his disillusionment into a new departure in critical 
thinking, based on a central principle: the Filipinos needed to hear a clear an pra^ 
matic political message in order to act on their own future without inteime 
On the basis of this principle, Rizal developed a resolutely novel politico messa D 
which took the organizational form of the Liga Filipina. It was the fruit ° a cr 
analysis of the previous 10 years of his political activity, and thus s 1 
turning point in RizaFs political evolution, in the context of constant \ Ltcr c 
ing relations between Spain and the Philippines, in particular under tie 
ministration of Valeriano Wcvler. 


The Liga Filipina as the Basis of a National Project 

The Statutes of the organization included five central objectives. 

1. unity of the whole archipelago into a compact, vigorous, an iomo D 
enous body; 

2. mutual protection in every want and necessity; 

3. defense against all violence and injustice; 

4. encouragement of instruction, agriculture and commerce, an 

5. study and application of reforms. 

I he first four objectives can be summed up by the words unity, protec 
tion,” “defense,” “education,” and “development.” And if any of these notions cou c 
be designated as the central one, it would be unity. In Rizal s view, the absence o 
unity among Filipinos left them helpless to defend their rights and dignity. 

887 


THE PHILIPPINE HI V< )I l I K )N \NI > IW Y< >M ) 


This unity was to take concrete form in «i “body. I he hui that Ri/al used 
this well-known metaphor — not unusual for a doctor clearK shows that the 
unity he envisioned was analogous to that of a living organism whose parts were 
interdependent and formed an indivisible whole ( compact, vigorous, and homo- 
geneous”). Further, the notions of protection, defense, and education were in har- 
mony with the body metaphor. 

The decisive point, however, regarding this conception of the nation as a liv- 
ing organism was the implication that it should be commanded by a single brain. 
Here, it becomes clear that Ri/al condemned as unstable the existing bicephal 
structure of power in the Philippines, involving two communities, political and 
religious. 9 In the political community, the Filipinos were identified as subjects of 
the Spanish crown whereas in the religious, they were identified as subjects of the 
Pope of the Roman (Catholic church. In Ri/al s perspective, this dichotomy not 
only prevented either community from functioning properly but also imposed on 
I i 1 1 pi nos a dual identity which prevented the emergence of an authentically Fili- 
pino identity. 

Thus, the primary objective of the Riga was to favor the formation of a 
“body,” that is, a third community, the Filipino community, whose members 
would identify themselves first of all as members of the Filipino nation. It would 
represent a radical break with the other two communities, which did not recognize 
Filipinos as such as they do not have the means to solve the country’s problems. 
However, it would not simply coexist with the other two, in parallel fashion; in its 
aspiration to improve the existing situation, it would compete with them. 

In other words, the Riga, by proposing a structure that offers protection, dc- 
fense, education, and development to its members, broke with the practice of sim- 
ply denouncing the shortcomings of the colonial administration. In fact, the Liga 
declared the colonial authorities unfit to govern the Philippines, emphasizing that 
they had failed to respect their most basic obligations and were, to a certain degree, 
guilty of committing the very abuses against which they should have been strug- 

g J ing. 

Indeed, by proposing to take charge of such functions as security, justice, and 
development of agriculture and trade, the Liga entered into direct competition 
with the civilian authorities, while its objectives concerning education challenged 
the monopoly of the religious order. In this vision, the national community would 
gradually gain strength and finally replace a weakened and useless colonial power 
structure, which would have no other alternative but to abandon the islands. 

Clearly, Rizal intended the Liga to be an instrument in the struggle for na- 
tional independence. But just as clearly, this project remained within Rizal’s un- 
varying ideological perspective according to which the struggle for independence 
must remain pacific and proceed via the education of the people. 

I he creation of the Liga was thus by no means a call to revolt, however ur- 
gent the circumstances may be, because Rizal did not wish to launch the Filipino 
people, unarmed and without outside support, into a war with Spain, which had 


888 


c;or|AT c;onUT A Turning Point in RizaTs Thinking 


by no means resigned itself to losing its remaining colonies. Such a war would not 
only be devastating, in Rizals view, but strategically futile fora Filipino people that 
was not ready to bear the responsibilities of independence; to reach this goaJ bv 
force would result in premature independence. 

Contrary to the claims of some, Rizal did envision the Filipinos free of colo- 
nial tutelage, but he feared that once they had broken free of the colonial frame- 
work, thev might be so badlv prepared and poorly educated that they would be 
incapable ol avoiding, as a nation, the very abuses and injustices against which they 
had revolted. In order to avert this danger, it would be necessary to organize well in 
advance to raise national consciousness and forge the unity that would be a pre- 
condition to the formation of a nation. In other words, the purpose of the Liga was 
to build the foundations of a national community so as to assure its readiness when 
independence came. 

Let us note, in conclusion, the double significance of the Liga Filipina. First, 
from the point of view of Rizals individual evolution, the Liga represents a new 
departure based on conclusions drawn from 10 years experience. But above al , 
the project of the Liga represents a new stage in Rizals political thought, demon 
strati ng that the most fundamental question in his mind was a postcolonial future 
for the Philippines. He struggled to found a nation, but not at any price, the na 
tion to which he aspired could not exist without responsible action and education. 

Rizal s unexpected exile in 1 892 and his execution four years later left the Liga 
an unrealized project. I did not plan to speculate on what its chances of succes 
might have been. It must be noted, however, that Rizals program helpe P aNC 
way for the Katipunan, the secret society founded by Andres Bonifacio, w 
to lead the armed struggle against Spain. 


Notes 


2. 

3. 


4. 


6. I 


This expression was used by Salvador Font, an Augustine monk, from P 

Tondo, a district of Manila. Q1 , 

The governor-general a, ,he rime was Valeriano Weyler (July 1888-November 1 891). 
See A. Coates, Rizal Philippine Nationalist and M^r(FIongKong, 1968), pp. 213- 
2i6. 

In a letter written to Rizal on 2 October 1891, Graciano Lopez Jaena wio 
that our countrymen back home will not succeed in finding the solution to the 
enigma and will languish in despair. You should, I believe, write another 
quickly gives the answer, so as to hasten the coming of the wonderful day 
demption.” Sec R. Palma, Biogt'afa de Rizzil (Manila), 1949, p. 197. 

These articles were published mostly in the bi-weekly journal, La Solidaudady 
first issue appeared on 1 5 February 1889. 1 his periodical was financed by an associa 
tion of the same name, led by Graciano Lopez Jaena. 
eon Maria Guerrero, The First Filipino: A Biography of Jost Rizal (Manila, 1963), 


p. 313. 




889 


1 


THE PHILIPPINE REVC )I l I K )N \NI ) El Y< >NI > 


7. F. Tensuan Leogardo, History of the Philtpfnncs: J he l )ci rlofoncut of a A ation ( Manila, 
1971), p. 1 18. 

8. Some of the more noted students of this group were Marcelo f lilario del Pilar, Cira- 
ciano LxSpey. Jaena, Eduardo dc Pete, and Mariano Pome, who had founded the asso- 
ciation La Solidaridad in Barcelona in late 1888 . 

9. Regarding this notion of community, see ( Adib Majul. V< ritujueof Ri/*ilsC. on- 
cep t of a Filipino Nation in Jose Rizal on His ( ientenary (Oue/on C .ity). 1063, pp. 

28-64. 


890 


RELATIONS 




J 


Cuba and the Philippines 

Roots and Common Struggles 


Abelardo Cueto Sosa 

Center for Asian and Oceanian Studies, Cuba 


C uban specialists on Asian studies have not worked systematically as a 
multidisciplinary team on the common points in the historical roots and in- 
dependence struggles of Cuba and the Philippines. Some Cuban historians have 
noted certain links found in the history of both countries, but the subject basically 
requires a serious collective effort among Philippine and Cuban academicians. 

In 1 995, the centennial of Cuban independence was celebrated. 1 his anni- 
versary is linked in time as well as in historical thrust with the centennial ol the 
liberation struggle ol the Philippines. 


Resemblances and Particularities 

Similarities between both countries arc also iound in their geography. Cuba is an 
archipelago open to the Atlantic Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, and the Gulf o 
Mexico. The Philippines is also an archipelago in the Pacific and having as its cen 
ter the island of Luzon. The climate and vegetation of both nations have much in 

common. . 

Because of their strategic geographic location and economic wealth, u a is 

called “The Pearl of the Antilles,” the Philippines “The Pearl of the Orient.” 

Both nations were Spanish colonies, the last ones to be free after blood) 
struggles. Like the Philippines, Cuba had to confront the United States, an emer- 
gent power that would change the course of its struggles, harass its patiiots, and 
hinder its culture and economy. 


893 


THK PH 1 1 1 1' PIN I RI V< >1 [ I K >\ AM ) HI 'n >M > 


\ 


In Cuba the confrontation with the l ’.S. government is a historic dispute 
dating even before U.S. intervention in our independence wars. It is a result of the 
U.S.’ desire to annex our country, which explains why even after the disappearance 
of the east-west confrontation and the Cold W ar. I '.S. intervention in C uba has 
continued and has increased, particularlv with the adoption of the I lelim Burton 
Law. It is a clear example of “globalization" and ‘ supranat ional government that 
the rich and powerful north reserves for the impoverished and weak south. 

Eurocentric historians state that Cuba and the Philippines were discovered 
by the Spaniards. I he “discovery’ that undoubtedly had a tremendous impact on 
autochthonous populations, whose development stage was quite different from 
that of Spain. For Cuba, the conquest and colonization had as an almost immedi- 
ate consequence the extermination of its native population. 

I he Indians,” as they were erroneously called by the Spanish coinjiustadores 
were relatively few. They were linked to the lower-level land potter culture of the 
other Latin American peoples such as the Aztec, the Maya, and the Inca, w ho could 
not survive colonial exploitation. 

In this sense, the Philippines was luckier. It had a population of bb ,B12 in- 
habitants as listed in the encomiendas in 1 . I hev constituted communities 

along the coasts and rivers and organized in social groups known as barangay. 
rhere were also certain forms of Asiatic feudalism in the Muslim south. I his popu- 
lation mix helped in the transculturation process and the formation of nationality 
during the conquest and colonization. Some kind of linguistic unity was main- 
tained through the use of Tagalog during the Philippine revolution.' Cuba, like 
other Latin American nations, had to make Spanish the vehicle for articulating its 
national identity. 

I he transculturation process is another historical similarity that links 
both peoples. Although maintaining their peculiarities, Cuban and Philippine so- 
cieties are products of crossbreeding, without the pejorative Eurocentric con- 
notation. I hese societies were the foundations on which national and European 

ements were integrated, giving rise to a new culture both autochthonous and for- 
eign. 


Nothing would escape that human and social fusion and enrichment mecha- 
nism from which the metropolis and the colony benefited. Music, literature, lan- 
guages, food, and religion would be touched by that magic realism born from the 
union of two different worlds. I hat explains why in Cuba African deities took the 
names of Catholic saints. In Elavana the people perform Spanish dances and in 
Madiid the people sing habaneras and the “women of the lower class wear em- 
broidered shawls. 

Another similarity can be found in the way in which the Philippines and 
Cuba were tied to the rest of Hispanic colonies in America by the commercial fleet 
system that Spain imposed on its colonies. A ship started from Cadiz to Havana 
and thence to Veracruz. Passengers and goods sent by land to Acapulco were loaded 
on another ship bound for Manila. The ship returned the same wav, full of eastern 


894 


SOSA Cuba and the Philippines 


goods. Hence C 'uba and the Philippines were terminals and key points of the system 
of- Spanish colonial transportation. 

The fleet system would lead to other forms of commercial exploitation that 
would generate monopolies and restrictions, almost identical in both countries. 
Demonstrations against the system emerged. 

Spanish colonialism was enforced in both colonies by means of two pow- 
ers — the military-administrative and the religious — to ensure stricter control of 
the colonized territories. These two powers functioned in the vast Spanish empire 
according to local requirements. 1 he extermination of the Indian population in 
Cuba in the early stages of colonization and their replacement by enslaved Africans 
did not allow the existence of encoinienehts directed by a religious order. In other 
Spanish colonies, religious orders were mainly composed of Spanish friars who had 
large tracts of fertile land. 

Encomioulds in C 'uba were mainlv granted as gifts from the king to those who 
participated in the conquest. 1 hey were also given to noble Spaniards and to a 
number of Indians. The cncomenderos ’mission was to look after the well-being and 
Christianization of the Indians under them but the encomienda became an exploit- 
ative system provoking mass suicides and numerous revolts among the Indian 
population. 

The military-administrative power acted as executor of the will of the Span- 
ish monarchy. The religious acted as the ideological and philosophic counterpart 
of the conquest. 1 he friars helped maintain colonial rule by preaching submission 
to the Spanish crown and nonviolence in order to receive both gifts and economic 
privileges from the metropolis. 

The homily of Bishop Santander for the Spanish forces fighting against t e 
Cuban mambises' who rebelled against Spain exhorted the Spaniards to fight wit i 
out quarter. It also assured them the sanctity of their cause. 1 his is a clear examp e 
of the implementation of governmental policy during the colonial peiiod. 

However, within Cuban history there are noble exemplars who constitute 
the national essence of the people of Spain. Among them w'as Spanish militar) man 
Federico Capdevila, a brave and incorruptible defender of victims in the incident 
called 11 I he execution by shooting of eight medicine students. 1 hese students, 
victims of an intrigue, were made an example to frighten Cuban patriots an to 
satisfy the most reactionary sectors. They were shot in Havana in 1873. 

Cuban history recognizes the gallant behavior of the Spanish Bishop 
Bartolome de las Casas, known as “ I he Defender of Indians. It recognizes the 
Cuban provost Felix Varela, a well-known teacher and philosopher, who favored 
independence and formed the first generation of Cuban independentists. Varela 
was considered by our national hero, Jose Marti, as the man who taught us to 
think.” 

There were also persons known for their compassion such as Fi. Espada, the 
priest who promoted education and public health among the population of the is- 
land. 


893 


THh PHILIPI'INT. Rl V< >M ' I M >N \NI > HI V( >M > 


In the struggles against dictator Fulgcncio Batista, another ( uban priest, ba- 
ther Sardinas, integrated with the guerrilla arrnv led by commander Fidel Castro 
and acted as campaign priest. 

The Revolts 

Protests of Cubans and Filipinos against the exploitative system erupted at the start 
of the conquest. They were observed even before ideas on motherland and nation- 
ality were clearly formed in both countries. 

In Cuba, indigenous revolts were promptly crushed. .Manifestations of disre- 
spect for the colonial authority among the Creoles emerged. C aeoles were descen- 
dants of Spaniards born in the country and were against the economic monopoly 
of the metropolis. There were insurrections of enslaved blacks and revolts of the 
Chinese cooli , who were hired to work in sugarcane fields under oppressive condi- 
tions. Farmers demonstrated for higher prices, land tenure, and free trade. 

Among the first actions challenging colonial rule was the participation of 
Creoles in the smuggling trade with England, France, and I lolland. 

The strong commercial monopoly that Spain imposed on its colonies hin- 
dered the Creoles who owned land, coffee plantations, and sugarcane fields from 
trading with other countries. Ignored by Spanish authorities in some instances and 
assisted by them in others, Creoles obtained huge benefits from the smuggling 
trade. 

In the eastern part of the country and mainly in Bayamo village things were 
so notorious that the Spanish crown sent special inspector I )on Melchor Suarez de 
Poago. After some months, the crown special inspector returned to Spain defeated 
by the sagacity of Creole smugglers and the complicity of colonial authorities who 
also benefited from smuggling. 

Since the conquest of Cuba Spanish colonizers had brought black slaves from 
Ffispanola. J he Cuban historian, Jose Antonio Saco, states in his book Slavery His- 
tory that the first document authorizing the arrival of black slaves to the country 

was dated 1512. 

Black slaves sent together with Indians to work in the gold washbasins took 
pait in revolts against their masters. The first slave rebellion recorded was in 1518 
in t e Cobre mines. I he few Indian survivors and black slaves fled to the moun- 
tains and forest areas where they formed villages, living as free persons. They 
oug t, in many instances successfully, the expeditions sent by colonial authorities 
against them. These villages were known as palenques , and fugitive slaves were 
named cimarrones and apalencados. 

In existence since 1550, these villages lasted until slaves added massively to 
t e in ependence forces during the war against Spain in 1868. 

Famous palenques that fought the expeditions sent against them were headed 
y renowned leaders such as Coba, Gallo, and Ventura Sanchez. Ventura led a re- 
volt of apalencados with the slogan “Earth and Liberty.” 


896 


SOSA Cuba and the Philippines 


The introduction of the plantation economy and the ample cultivation of 
sugarcane and large coffee farms created a greater demand for African slaves. It also 
intensified their exploitation, provoking during the 19th century numerous revolts 
and conspiracies. It also created the abolitionist movement. 

Abolitionists showed different tendencies. The most progressive ones con- 
demned slavery for its racial discrimination and exploitation of persons bv persons. 
Others saw the slavery system as an obstacle to the development of the economy. 
Hence thev pleaded for its suppression and the conversion of slaves into wage 
workers within the modern capitalist system. The most radical abolitionists be- 
came supporters of independence. 

So many slaves were brought in that enslaved and free blacks constituted the 
majority’ of the population. This situation was manipulated by the colonial au- 
thorities to dampen the independence movement. The authorities intimidated the 
rich Creole and other sectors of the population with the so-called fear of the 
black,” referring to the Haiti revolution, when black slaves killed their white mas- 
ters and forced survivors to leave the country. 

Colonialists used this argument against abolitionism. Conspiracies like the 
so-called “De la Escalera” were instigated by Spanish authorities frightened by slave 
upheavals in 1843 and 1844 to incite action against the nonwhite population and 
arouse suspicion among abolitionist and independentist Creoles. 

That the “De la Escalera” conspiracy was a stratagem of the Spanish authori- 
ties to preserve the colonial power recalls more or less similar experiences in other 
Spanish colonies. 

This may be seen in the charge of conspiracy against the Philippine priests 
Jacinto Zamora, Mariano Gomez, and Jose Burgos. 1 hese priests were executed, 
without the charges against them having been proved and even after the Manila 
archbishop refused to defrock them, casting doubt on the veracity of the accu- 


sations. , 

Other well-known Cuban anti-slave conspiracies were those imputed to Jose 
Antonio Aponte and Nicolas Morales, who were repressed with great brutality. 

Since 1847, when the first Chinese cooli was brought to Cuba, the country 
witnessed many slave revolts. Coolies came to Cuba from various parts of China 
and from Manila as so-called “hired Chinese,” a euphemism that concealed the 
characteristics of a new slave trade that emerged since England, the woilds first 
industrial power, opposed the African slave trade because machines would benefit 
its economy more. 

Cuban historian Jose Jimenez Pastrana states in his book Chinese in the His- 
tory of Cuba from 1847 to 1930 that “when the Chinese discovered that their work 
contract was no more than a farce, they reacted violently in many cases, rebelling 

or committing suicide ” Together with enslaved blacks, cimarrones , and 

apalencados , hired Chinese contributed massively to the independence wais. They 
were so brave that the Cuban patriot Gonzalo de Quesada, pupil and friend of Jose 


897 




THK I’HII IIMMNI RIM >11 I K >N AM > HI 'i < >NI > 


Marti, said about them, “'There was no treacherous ( aiban -C diincsc, there was no 
Cuban-Chinese deserter. 

Rural revolts were also numerous. 1 he most famous was the insurrection of 
tobacco planters” in 1723 as a result of the Spanish monopoly of tobacco produc- 
tion and trade. The repression of tobacco planters was so strong that it [nit an end 
to small tobacco planters in areas near the ( Aiban capital city. 

In the Philippines, according to ( iregorio F. /.aide in his book l he Pageant oj 
Philippine History. “A people loving freedom, with the virile blood legated by his 
ancestors would refuse to be brutalized and exploited by its masters, citing the fact 
that “to support its liberties and to oppose government abuses, it would take part 
in over 100 rebellions against Spain. 

1 hese rebellions show plainly that the desire for freedom of the C Aiban and 
Philippine peoples appeared even before the idea of nation was clearly defined. 

Almost all of them had to do with the inalienable right of individuals to lib- 
erty and justice. Most of them were related to land tenure and economic oppres- 
sion and most had as their main protagonists the people. 

I hey failed because not all historical conditions were ready. 1 hey failed be- 
cause the national feeling was not fully formed. It was so also due to fears and ra- 
cial, religious, sectarian, regionalist, and caudillist prejudices manipulated by the 
colonial authorities. They were also used by neocolonial forces following them, 
even in our wars of independence of 1895 and 1896, to divide and defeat rebels 
and patriots. 

However, all these actions catalyzed the process merging the interests of the 
Creole upper classes with those of the masses. From that fusion emerged the im- 
pulse that would sweep away Spanish colonialism. 

In both countries the struggle to attain independence was a long, difficult, 
and painful process. This was due also to kinship ties linking many independentist 
fighters with Spain. 

The Enlightenment and the Wars of Independence 

The similarities between the Cuban and Phil ippine experiences in nation forma- 
tion are due to the existence of enlightened upper and middle classes in both coun- 
tries. The independentist ideal was later developed by more radical sectors, fusing 
enlightened and liberal ideas with the interests of the people. 

This process started in Cuba at the end of the 18th century. In the Philip- 
pines it started about the middle of the 19th century. It had as its economic and 
social basis the emergence of a rich autochthonous class, composed of Creoles and 
their crossbreeds who began to develop their own line of political, economic, and 
social thought. 

At the start the Creole aristocracy did not pursue separation from Spain. Its 
aim was to make the Spanish government to adopt reforms. Hence, history calls 
them reformists. 


898 


SOSA Cuba and the Philippines 


Reformism in Cuba went through three stages, with several particularities 
and differences among them, but with common central aims. An example of the 
differences is the fact that in the first stage leaders of reformism suppressed the 
independentist feelings of the middle class and the popular strata supporting them, 
with the “fear of the black. This was so although there were already at the time 
independentist struggles fought by Latin American colonies against Spain. Re- 
formists of the second and third stages became independentists due to repression 
they suffered as a result of their reformist ideas. 

rhe central aims of reformism were: to make Cuba a province of Spain; to 
grant Creoles the same political rights given to Spaniards born in the metropolitan 
area; to have court deputies; to attain freedom of association, of expression, and of 
the press; and to cancel all monopolist and restrictive control on trade. 

All Cuban reformists had as a common concern the economic development 
of the country and the advancement of education, culture, and learning. All the 
main reformist leaders were individuals of great erudition. Among them there were 
writers and historians such as Jose Antonio Saco, an abolitionist who was also 
against annexation of Cuba to the United States; teachers of the stature of Jose e 
la Luz y Caballero; an entrepreneur, Francisco de Arango y Parren, a patron of arts 
and letters, Domingo del Monte. 

Even if the reformist leaders did not see independence from Spain as t e 
single and final course for Cuba, there w'ere events that demanded it. Sacos antian 
nexation sentiment, the brilliant teachings of Jose de la Luz y Caballero, an 
the cultural meetings held by Domingo del Monte all served to nouris i ^ a ^ lon 
alist thought. On 10 October 1868, Cuban independentists rebelle an me 
their slaves, starting the first war of independence against Spain, n ^wn as 
Ten Years War. Th ey were headed by a landowner named Carlos Manue e 
Ces pedes. 

Like the Cuban reformists Filipino writers such as Graciano Lopez Jaena, 
Marcelo H. del Pilar, Galiciano Apacible, Mariano Ponce, and Jose Riza , s o 
the same concern over economic and social development. Spanish aut lonties re 
garded them with suspicion because they feared their reformist ideas wou 

tribute to the creation of a national consensus. 

Political and economic reforms were supported by a propagan a movement 
exemplified by the publication of La Solidaridad \ headed by Rizc , e 1 a , 
Lopez Jaena. This Propaganda Movement without doubt contribute to r ^ 1 

ippine revolution. Rizals underground novels Noli Me Tangere an 
terismo inspired future independentists who read them secretly. 

The surreptitious distribution of propaganda materials and Riza s nove s 
implied the participation of a great number of individuals who also ecame is 

seminators of reformist ideas. . 

Rizals books masterfully showed all the flaws of Philippine society, le nov 
els are valuable literary jewels on account of their realism and the passion ren ere 
in their characters. 


899 


THH mil.imST. KhV< >M I K )N \\l>m m>\1> 


The Liga Filipina founded by Rizal brought together those who wanted a 
change in the political and economic status of the country, \mong its members 
was Andres Bonifacio who later formed the secret society called the Katipunan, 
which initiated the Revolution of 1896 and the creation of a Philippine republic. 


Jose Marti and Jose Rizal 

In spite of differences in their social background and political creeds, there are 
many things in common between Marti and Rizal. Both were concerned about 
their fellow human beings and the improvement of their lot. They had a similar 
sensibility, appreciation of beauty, and contempt for injustice. Both suffered dis- 
crimination from the peninsuLires and C >eoles, the pain of imprisonment and ban- 
ishment, and death in the hands of the colonialists. 

Both were precocious children. Rizal at eight wrote poems. 1 he voting Marti 
wrote the epic poem “Abdala,” an audacious work at the time because its main 
character is black. 

I he priests Jacinto Zamora, Mariano ( ibmez, and Jose Burgos were executed 
when Rizal was a child, leaving a deep wound in his memory reflected in some of 
his writings. Marti also denounced in his verse the horrors of slavery which he saw 
in his childhood. 

The academic formation of Marti and Rizal, their studies in Kurope, and 
their travels around the world gave their ideas universal dimension. 

If Rizal in his novels attacked the evils of colonialism. Mam's voice mobi- 
ized the people to fight for independence. In both their writings can be felt the 
intensity of their emotion and sentiment, pain and regret, hopes and aspirations. 

From Marti and Rizal Cubans and Filipinos learned to differentiate the colo- 
nial Spanish rulers from the Spanish people, from whom we inherited our values 
and passion and love for freedom and justice. 

I he Independents Struggles of 1895 and 1896 

The struggle for independence of Cuba and Philippines in 1 895 and 1 896 respec- 
tive y, are bound in time and community of aims. Both were the culmination of 
many years of pain and suffering in the fight to free our nations. 

However, Cubas independence from Spain did not bring true freedom. The 
powerful neighbor of the north intervened, frustrating our independence at the 
end of a long and difficult struggle. We were forced to become a republic that at a 
very high price was abolished for good on 1 January 1959. 

After 37 years of revolutionary triumph, that powerful neighbor still harasses 
us. We fight back; our resistance is based on the justness of our cause, on the uni- 
ersal solidarity, and on the heroic traditions of the Cuban people. It must be re- 
em ered that in their veins flows the blood of those who in Numantia and 
gunto preferred death to slavery. There were also those who rebelled on 2 May to 


900 


SOSA Cuba ai id the Philippines 


challenge the most powerf ul army in the world. We are sure that we will triumph. 
We believe that sooner or later it will realize that the Cubans have only friendship 
and respect for those who treat us with equity and justice. 

At present, the affinities that join Cuba and Philippine are maintained and 
enriched by their membership in the Nonaligned Movement and their permanent 
advocacy of peace, uni tv, and social development of their peoples. 

Notes 

1 . A/;v/;/^/vcomcs from the Malavsian term babvigay or boat. It refers to small commu- 
nities found on river banks and the coastal areas when the Spanish conquest took 
place. 

2. lagalog, a Malavo-Polvnesian language, is the basis of the Philippine national lan- 
guage. 

3. Mambi was the name given to those grouped under the Cuban patriotic forces that 
since 1 868 fought against Spain to achieve independence. It conies from an African 
term that means “son of fowl eating putrid things and monkeys. Spaniards used it 
pejoratively to refer to Cuban fighters. Rut the term became an honorific title for the 
patriots. 

4. The Hispanola as Christopher Columbus called it was the first Spanish colony. To- 
day it embraces Haiti and Dominican Republic. It is known by this name since seized 
slaves suspected of conspiracy were tied to a staircase to be questioned. 


901 


Puerto Rican Autonomismo 

A Secular Tradition 


Luis E. Aukai i 

University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico 


I n an interview with a Costa Rican poet on Spanish television several years 
Xago, the interviewer exclaimed: “What I cannot understand is how an excellent 
poet such as you remains unknown in the Spanish American world." “Well,” 
replied the poet, what happens is that in my country there are no guerrillas.” 
Something of the sort has happened in Puerto Rico, too. I he absence of monu- 
mental pre-Hispanic civilizations or of huge mineral sources of wealth during the 
colonial period; the absence of an armed struggle of mythic proportions against 
Spanish domination in the 1 9th century, with the majority of the Creole elite seek- 
ing instead through a civil and reformist route an autonomous relation with the 
metropolis; and its political evolution toward self-rule or autonomy under the 
nited States during the 20th century, have all given Puerto Rican history a more 
muted tone, difficult to discern in the loud cacophony of weighty, grave, and dra- 
matic international matters. Fidel Castro puts on a coat and tie, and it is front-page 
news in the world press. Puerto Ricos economic development is placed in jeopardy 
y enactment of a Congressional statute, and the news is buried somewhere in the 
inside pages of The New York Times. 


Cuba and Puerto Rico 

This oversight or inadvertence of Puerto Rico and things Puerto Rican, especially 
y is a visits larger Caribbean neighbor, is not new. For Cuba and attention to things 

u an have had a tendency throughout history to overshadow the developments 
in the smaller island. 


902 


AGRAIT Puerto Rican Autonomismo 


Cuba v Puerto Rico son 
tie un pajaro las dos alas, 
reciben Pores o balas 
sobre el mismo corazon. 


(Cuba and Puerto Rico are 
the wings ot the same bird; 
they receive Powers or bullets 
in the same heart.) 

Thus wrote Puerto Rican poet Lola Rodriguez de Tio in 1893. But it was a 
strange bird indeed, for its wings were hugely asymmetrical. One need only recall 
that by 1582 when the City of Puerto Rico scarcely had 1/0 vecinos , Havana al- 
ready had no less than 2,000 inhabitants and, at a time when an official decree had 
to be promulgated to prevent the depopulation of Puerto Rico, Havana became 
after 1 580 the Fastest-growing city in the New World. 1 Puerto Rico did not have a 
university throughout the colonial period, whereas the University of Havana \\ as 
founded m the 17th century. Neither did Puerto Rico have as imposing and im- 
portant a presence in the Spanish Royal Court nor a politico-financial estab is 
ment that could compare in power and influence with that wielded, for examp e, 
by the Marques de Comillas. 2 

Lastly, Puerto Rico would not experience nor create the social, econo mic> 
political, military, and diplomatic upheavals that the Ten \eais War (188 1 
and the resumption of the War of Independence in 1895 would un eas in 
It is not surprising, then, that throughout the 19th century, Spanish po lticianss 
Puerto Rican affairs through the lens of the Cuban experience. And it is t us mo 
than understandable that Puerto Rican leaders were frustrated at t c re us o t 
Spanish authorities to legislate autonomy for the island, for it wou e impru 
while Cuba was up in arms. It was, as the autonomist leader Luis Munoz 
lamented, as if for Spain Puerto Rico was but the fourth province of u 


The Early Stirrings of Political Life 

The inception of formal political activity in Puerto Rico occurred in 1809 in S 
German and in 1910 in San Juan, where the cabildos handed their instruction 
Ramon Power y Giralt, the island's delegate to the Coites de Cac iz in pain. ^ 
though different in detail and degree — the instructions of the hinter an city 
San German went further in terms of the reforms requested than the capita city 
San Juan, the seat of the metropolitan authorities, an element that became a con 
stant in Puerto Rico's history — both sought the creation of a local junta, wit i more 
or less metropolitan representation, with greater or less powers over loc matters. 
Historians find in that assertion of rights by the cabildos the fust manifestation o 


903 


TH1 l*MJI IITINf KIA’OII IION WDIil’.OM) 


what would become the main political current of the liberal ( reole groups: 
autonomismo . ' 

Autonomismo: Self-rule, Equal Rights 

Unlike the leadership of the Spanish American republics at the beginning of the 
19th century, or of Cuba after 1868, the ( .reole leadership of Puerto Rico would 
seek not independence by violent or resolutionary means but rather sell -rule bv 
civil or reformist efforts. I heir aspirations would remain throughout the centurv 
as a twin leitmotif, self-rule, either as full autonomy as in ( anada, or as a less asser- 
tive form of politico-administrative decentralization with equal rights with the 
metropolis. I hey would be defined or sought according to what the political con- 
ditions in the metropolis would allow, hut throughout the centurv would remain 
constant goals of the Puerto Rican liberal forces. 

Such was the case, for example, during the brief constitutional interlude of 
1823 and during the Junta Informativa tie Reformas ( 1866 I 86T convoked to 
assist in drafting the special laws by which ( aiha and Puerto Rico were to he gov- 
erned. So as to not be accused of seeking independence, Puerto Rican autonomists 
insisted that under Spanish sovereignty a formula of diversity within national unity 
could be achieved that would grant self-rule to the islands, while leaving matters of 
national sovereignty to the national Cortes. The special fueros or rights enjoyed by 
several Spanish provinces were presented as proof that it could he accomplished 
without disrupting national unity. In fact, the proposition went further, and it was 
argued that an ample autonomy formula would serve as a harrier against indepen- 


r" 


Independence and Betances 

ger re^\’ ^ ^ eve ^ 0 P ec ^ within the Creole liberal forces. Frustrated by the mea- 
to f U H ° Ver ccnt ury of reformist approach, a more radical group came 

independence by force of arms. Foremost among the leaders of this 
Emeter R e 8 un d° Ruiz Belvis, a member of the Junta Informativa, and Ramon 
to ctances, a mulatto physician trained in Paris. Together they traveled first 

I . orn ingo and then to New York where contacts with other Caribbean 
naries were made. Ruiz Belvis traveled to Chile to seek support for the 
g g revo t, there he encountered an untimely death at age 38. 
h ances continued his efforts from Santo Domingo and Saint Thomas, 
ssue Yis famous Fen Commandments of Free Men”: “We do not want 
f 5 L ’ WC '^ an ^ un ' on with Spain, but it is just that wc establish the conditions 
fivwU™ 1 e abolition of slavery; the right to vote on all tax measures; 


CJ c U1 SlclVCI 

• l r k '^’ on ’ °f expression, of the press, of commerce, and of assembly; the 
L • • 25 mS ’ the inviolability of the citizen; and the right to elect the local 

is political creed was not too different from the liberal Creole 


904 


AGRAIT Puerto Rican Autonomismo 


reformist program but expressed in a much more vehement and inflammatory 
fashion. 

I he immediate result of Betances' efforts was the Grito de Lares, a short-lived 
uprising in September 1868, during which a group of rebels captured the moun- 
tain town of 1 ares and declared Puerto Rico an independent republic before they 
were defeated by Spanish troops. s There is much debate as to the extent of the sup- 
port for the Grito. Certainly as an armed revolt it did not amount to much as it 
was easily quelled. And it did not precipitate a prolonged armed struggle as the 
Grito de Yara of the same year did in Cuba. 

But this is not to say that the rebel cause lacked broad-based support. The 
reports from the British Consul, for example, speak of large-scale dissatisfaction 
with Spanish rule and of secret meetings where toasts were offered that Puerto 
Rican soil be fertilized by spilt Spanish blood. But it is difficult to ascertain to what 
extent the consul or the vice-consuls were reporting from personal knowledge or 
merely parroting the views of Spanish officials. 1 he rush of the civil authorities to 
take over the judicial proceedings from their military counterparts as well as the 
relatively mild punishments imposed seem to point to a broader-based dissatisfac 
tion with Spanish rule. Whatever the case may be, the defeat of the men from Lares 
left very little doubt among the Creole elite that changes in the regime, if the) %\ere 
to come, would not come by way of arms but by civil political action. The triumph 
of the liberal Revolucion de septiembre or the Gloriosa, as it is also known in Spain, 
revived hope of reform. 


Betances and the Philippines 

Betances exiled himself to Paris where he became the representative of the Cubai 
independence forces and from where he continued to conspire foi the in epe 
dence of the two remaining Spanish Antilles. It was during these conspiracies t lat 
he came into contact with the forces that were fighting for the independence oft le 
Philippine Islands. 0 The first contact appears to date from February 187 > w en 
Betances wrote to Juan Bell ido de Luna in New York to open the pages oi La 
Independencia to a Filipino friend allied in the common struggle against Spain. 
There seemed to have been a well-defined strategy in Betances mind that t ie more 
independence fronts that could erupt against Spain, the easier it w ou e or a o 
them to eventually succeed. There are frequent references in Mariano onces 
Cartas sobre la revolucion 1897- 1900 about the “admiration that the name of Doc- 
tor Betances has always inspired We are grateful in our soul for the campaign 

that he wages in our favor." Betances served as a conduit for information between 
the Hong Kong Committee and the Cuban revolutionary leadership. In an 18)7 
letter to the Cuban leader Jose Alberto Izquierdo, Ponce writes: We are extremely 
grateful to the good will of the prestigious Mr. Betances and believe me out grati- 
tude will be eternal." 


90S 


THE PHILIPPINE HI V< >1.1 I K )N ANI ) HI Y< >NI ) 


Two matters regarding the Philippines were brought to the attention of 
Betances during his final days. One was the plight ot seven Pilipinos jailed in 
Valladolid. Betances would write to the 1 long Kong ( ommittee informing it of 
the situation and advising that an exchange of prisoners could be arranged with the 
Spanish government. 

The second matter dealt with the plight of a Puerto Rican lawyer, Manuel 
Rovira y Munoz, who had been taken prisoner by the bilipino rebels in Santa Cruz, 
Laguna. Ponce wrote Apolinario Mabini about Betances ("an old friend to whom 
our sacred cause owes much ) request for information, bven after Betances death, 
Ponce wrote to Mabini to grant humane treatment to Rovira y Munoz “given the 
friendship between his family and Dr. Betances. 


Of Autonomy vis-a-vis Independence 

Traditionally political historians have tended to focus on the independence move- 
ment and its leaders. I his focus continues to the present time, for example, in a 
recent thematic survey of 260 titles of general histories, books, essays, and articles 
dealing in one way or another with 1 898, 70 of the pieces dealt with independence 
whereas only 30 dealt with autonomy. 8 Phis lopsided proportion is even more sig- 
nificant if one takes into account that 1898 was the year in which finally an au- 
tonomous regime was inaugurated. 

The point, of course, is not to praise or bemoan this situation which, in any 
case, would be a useless endeavor. Writers write about what they feel they ought to 
write, and historians research what they feel they ought to research. The point is 
that just as Creole leaders of the past century felt that looking at the island through 
t e lens of the Cuban situation had a distorting effect in dealing with Puerto Rican 
reality, similarly trying to understand Puerto Rican history in the 19th century 
t rough the lens of the Cuban experience and, more to the point, t rying to under- 
stand 1 uerto Rican autonomism through the lens of Cuban or Puerto Rican 
in epen entism, equally distorts and does not permit adequate comprehension of 
e is ands history. Puerto Rican autonomism has to be understood in the specific 
rea ities of I uerto Rico. To see it as a timid, halfhearted, or watered-down version 
in ependence simply fails to address the conditions that spawned it and that 
ma e t ^ lc ^ orn inant political current throughout a whole century and beyond. 


Antonomismo: A Secular Tradition 

It is outside the scope of this paper to narrate the avatars of Puerto Rico's political 
eve opment. So to conclude I will merely state five reasons why an independence- 
iase , s ewed vision of 19th-century antonomismo does not provide an adequate 
approach to the islands history. 

First, it fails to account for the ascertainable fact that antonomismo , with its 
twin aspirations of self-government and equal rights with the metropolis, became 


906 


AGRA IT Puerto Rican Auronomismo 


the dominant political current for a whole century and more. Even today 95 per- 
cent of t he Puerto Rican electorate vote for parties that claim in one way or an- 
other to be inheritors of the 19th-century autonomist tradition.'’ 

Second, it fails to take into account that throughout the century it was the 
proponents of autonomy pushing the fight in Puerto Rico or in Spain that were 
recognized as the country’s leaders, not just by the Puerto Ricans themselves but 
also bv tbe political leaders of other Antilles. Jose Marti, the apostle of Cuban inde- 
pendence, had this to sav of Roman Baldoriotv de Castro, the leader ot the Partido 
Autonomist.! Puertorriquena: 


Baldoriotv did not have an atom of lackey in him... (Neither was he) a 
temporizer, a soft nationalist, a mere liberal relormer... He was a true creole 
who understood wisely the peculiar, American composition of his country, 

(who) accepted the existing conditions and used them to conform the coun- 
try to its constitutive elements, to base politics on the truth, to create a future 
based on honest work, on the love of his countrymen, to prepare the country 
for its natural destiny. 

For never has liberty gone so far in Puerto Rico, that Baldoriotv has not 
gone beyond it."’ 

lust as the mdependentistas “Ten Commandments of a Free Man’ did not 
differ substantially from the ideology of the liberal reformist Creoles, neither were 
the autonomists opposed to independence perse. They simply saw it as impractica 
and impossible to achieve in Puerto Rico given the lack of support for it. JoseCelso 
Barbosa, for example, wrote to independence leader Roberto H. To t ^at e 
would not find 10 leaders willing to come out in favor of independence. Luis 
Munoz Rivera told Gerardo Forets: “I am a believer in independence as an ideal. 
All the peoples of the world shall be free. I consider independence, owever, an 
impossibility in my country... I he masses have never fought nor will tie) ig 
with the same determination of the Cuban masses. But he added that if t le e orts 
for reform that would be discussed in Madrid were to fail,^ I return to uert 
Rico, via New York. . . arms in hand to liberate our land. 

Third, an independence-biased view of Puerto Rican history fails to re ^°& 
nize that it was not the mdependentistas m exile but the autonomistas in Puerto 
who bore the brunt of Spanish repression in the 19th century. Not even t e re\o 
lution at Lares provoked as violent a repression, humiliations and tortures on r ^ 
scale suffered by the autonomistas and other Creole suspects between August an 
November 1 887, persecuted with a zeal out of proportion with their mo est & oa s 
of self-government." 1 ' 

Fourth, the view of autonomistas as temporizers or soft indepen entistas ai s 
to recognize, further, their acute and realistic appraisal of Puerto Rican social an 
economic realities. Astrid Cubano lguina has demonstrated, foi example, how t e 
changing plans or platforms of the autonomist parties reflect the changing eco 


907 


I Hi: PHIUPPINI RIVOll NON WDlil^nND 




nomic conditions of the island. ’ In fact, adopting .1 uunp.ir.uivc perspective, 
Cubano Jguina demonstrates that the changes in the party, far from being an iso- 
lated phenomenon unique to autonovitstas or to Puerto Rico, were also occurring 
in the radical Latin American parties at the time. In ( ubanos view, the fact that 
through a political pact the liberal Creoles were able to come to power in Puerto 
Rico 1898 was a precocious development compared to othei radical parties in 
Latin America. 

Fifth, and lastly, the failure to focus on the 19th-century autonomy move- 
ment in its own specificity does not allow for understanding properh its transcen- 
dental and lasting legacy to Puerto Ricos political development in the- 2()th cen- 
tury. As Cubano Iquina aptly summarizes it: 

On the one hand, it left a conceptual body and a discourse of adaptabil- 
ity, a decision in favor of prudence or good sense and for peaceful means, and 
of beneficial or convenient agreements. 

On the other, it left a political elite qualified after years of preparation 
and waiting, that had finally savored power, and that would avail itself of the 
first opportunity to structure a politics of native resistance in the autonomist 
tradition of old . 15 

I he author refers, of course, to the brief autonomous government inaugu- 
rated in 1898, under the darkening clouds of the Spanish-Amcrican War. Puerto 
Rico was ceded to the United States by virtue of the Ireaty of Paris, “the civil rights 
and political status of the native inhabitants” to be determined by the U.S. Con- 
gress. Native resistance would begin anew, but now vis-a-vis an empire of a differ- 
ent culture, language, history, and juridical traditions. 

f he continental expansion of the United States had been undertaken under 
a vision of Manifest Destiny.” As the coiner of the term, John O’Sullivan envi- 
sioned that homogeneity was the factor that would make the United States empire 
an everlasting one. 1 he territory could be vast, but the similarity of laws and insti- 
tutions would make it compact, and the people would also be homogenous. The 
territories ceded by Spain and their “native inhabitants” created a problem not yet 
envisioned by the architects and proponents of continental expansion. Chief Jus- 
tice Taft summarized it in writing the opinion of the Court in Balzac vs. The People 
of Porto Rico . , 258 U.S. 298 ( 1 922): 


But Alaska was a different case from that of Porto Rico. It was an enor- 
mous territory, very sparsely settled and offering opportunity for immigration 
and settlement by American citizens... It involved none of the difficulties 
which incorporation of the Philippines or Porto Rico presents. 

But that is a story for another, forthcoming centennial. 


908 


ACiRAIT Puerto Rican Autonomismo 


Notes 




Manuel Moreno Fraginals, Cuba! Esp ana; Espana/Cuba: Historic comun (Barcelona, 
1 993 ), p. 3 ~\ For the population figures tor Puerto Rico see, for example, “Memoria 
de Melgarejo, Hole tin Historico de Puerto Rico , Vol. 1, 75-91. 

See Moreno Fraginals, “Sc origina la vid politica, pp. 157 et. Seq.; and Consuelo 
Naranjo Orovio v I o mas Mallo Gutierrez, eds., Cuba, la perla de las Antillas. Atas de 
Lis l Jordatias sobre "Cuba y stt His tori a, (Aranjuez, 1994). For a comparative per- 
spective of Puerto Rico and Cuba at the end of the 19th century, see relevant essays in 
Consuelo Naranjo Orovio and Miguel Angel Puig-Samper (comps.). La nacion 
sonada: Cuba , Puerto Rico y Las Pilipinas ante el 98 (Madrid, 1996). 

See, for example, Maria de los Angeles Castro, “El autonomismo en Puerto Rico 
(1808-1898): la siembra de una tradicion,” in Secuencia , Revista de historia y ctenctas 
soeiales (Num. 3 1 , lanuary-April 1995). pp. 5-22. Several general histories of 1 uerto 
Rico have been recently published, among these Blanca Silvestrini and Maria Do- 
lores Luquc de Sanchez, Historia de Puerto Rico: trayectoria de tin pueblo (San Juan, 
1987); Fernando Pico, Historia general de Puerto Rico (San Juan, 1)86), and Fran 
cisco A. Scarano, Puerto Rico, eineo sig/os de bistoria (San Juan, 1993 ). The best gen- 
eral historv book in English is Arturo Morales Carrion, et al.. Put) to Rico, A Political 
and Cultural History (New York, 1 983). For a useful introduction to Puerto Rico see 
Paquita Vivo, ed., Puerto Rico, 500 Years of Change and Continuity (Washington, 
D.C., 1991) 

See Castro, pp. 9-11; Pico, pp. 176-177; Silvestrini and Luque, pp. 271-279; and 
Scarano, pp. 433-436. 

There is an ample bibliography on the Crito de Lares. Sec 1 rancisco Moscoso, Para 
cstudiar el Crito de Lares/ Claridad Of special interest is Olga Jimenez de 
Wagenheim, Elgrito de Lares , sus causasysus hombres (San Juan, 1985), the first book 
to make use of the judicial proceedings held against the rebels. 1 here is an English 
version. Also of interest is Harold Lidin, History of the Puerto Rica?i bidependence 
Movement (San Juan, 1981). 

Felix Ojeda Reyes has devoted a lifetime to the study of Betances. Amon & his man) 
books are La manigua en Paris: correspondecia diplomatica dt Betances (San Juan, 
1984); Peregrinos de la libertad (San Juan, 1992); and together with Paul Estrade, 
Ramon Emeterio Betances: el anciano rnaravilloso (San Juan, 1 296). 1 am indebted to 
him for allowing me access to an unpublished manuscript from which I quote lil 
ally. 

All quotes are from Mariano Ponce, Cartas sobre la revolucion 16)7-1900 (Mam a, 
1932), as quoted in the aforementioned manuscript. 

Carmelo Rosario Natal, “Pd ’98 puertorriqueno en la historiografia. esbozo de un 
balance.” Paper presented at 1898: enfoques y perspectivas, a conference sponsored by 
Academia Puertorriquena de la Historia, April 1996. 

9. Sec Castro, op. cit.; and her brief, insightful “A Profile of Puerto Rican History, in 

Vivo (ed.), pp. 1 -9. 


4. 


6 . 


7. 

8 . 


909 


THI. PHlI.imNI- RhV< )I l M< )N AM ) \M ’t < )NI > 


10. Jose Marti, “I^ls Amillas y Baldorioty. in Patna. 2* Ma\ 1892; quoted in Boletin 
Historico de Puerto Rico , Vol. V, 1 40- 1 1 5. 

1 1 . Quoted in Pilar Barbosa de Rosario, De Baldorioty a Barbosa. historic del autonomismo 
puertorriqueno , 1 HH7- 1 H ( J6 (San Juan. 1957). p. SOI. 

12. “Apuntcs para un libro ( 1 896- 1 900), in I uix Munoz Rivera. ( )bras ( .ompletas, com- 
piled by Luis Munoz Marin, (Vol. HI. Madrid, 1925), pp. 9-1 1. 

13. Castro, “El autonomismo p. 17. 

14. hi hilo en el laberinto: chives de hi luchu politic a en Puerto Rico (agio A/A9, (San Juan, 
1990); and “El autonomismo en Puerto Rico, 188 '-1898: notas para la dcfinicion 
de un modelo de politica radical in Naranjo and Ping Samper. / a nacion so Jidda. 

15. Astrid Cubano Iquina, “Puerto Rico a finales del siglo XIX, a paper delivered at the 
Seminar Las Antillas espaholas de siglo a sigh*: Puerto Rico , Summer Session, 
Univcrsidad de Extremadura, Jarandilla de la Vera, 22-26 July 1996, p. 13. 

16. Anders Stephanson, Manifest Destiny, American hxpanswn and the Umpire of Right 
(New York, 1995), p. 47. 


910 


Philippine-German Relations, 
Before and During the Revolution 


Hermogenes E. Bacareza 
D ivine Woid Seminaty, Philippines 


I n dealing with the political and diplomatic aspects of Philippine-German 
relations immediately before and during the Philippine revolution, we ave to 
consider the general setting of German Weltpolitik 1 (world policy) and to examine 
in broader historical perspective Germany’s political ambition m the Far hast. 

Weltpolitik was the counterpart of the outburst ot imperialism in ng an in 
the latter part of the 1 9th century. William L. Langer, in his book 7 u ip omacy o 
Imperialism , says that in France and Russia the movement for expansionism 
essentially an artificial one, resting upon considerations ot nation prestige, some 
kind of explorations, and colonial enthusiasm. With England and Germany 

situation was quite different. , ( ■ j 

England was an industrial and commercial nation, depen ent or 
supply on foreign trade. In the closing decade of the 19th century, ter position was 
threatened by the economic rise of Germany, which was rapi y ecomin & , 
industrial and commercial country. 2 England, therefore, had to ace nvo ' S P 
rivals: France and Russia, which threatened to acquire Britis teriitoria P osse 
sions, and Germany, which gave her some trouble especially in t te ar 


Germany’s Political Ambitions in the Far East 

Germany was like a hungry lion bursting into Pacific wateis looking foi [. > 

the first place, she wanted colonies in the Far East for commercial pui poses, o 
ing with the current of neo-imperialism, 3 she needed markets in t e ar ast o 
her goods. From these markets she could buy products for hei own peop e. 


911 


THI PHII IPPINf RI-VOIITION \N|)Rh(»M) 


ondly, Germany planned to establish naval bases in the Far Fast where the German 
Fleet, which, as Admiral Alfred von 1 irpit/, its founder, had boasted, was ‘ second 
to none” in the world, could renew supplies. 

Germany succeeded, however, in establishing coaling and signal stations for 
German cruisers operating in the Far Hast in the Samoan islands. I hat was in 1 889, 
when a treaty was signed in Berlin by Germany, ( neat Britain, and the United 
States. 

In Kiaochow, the Germans appeared on l a November 189~\ and made an 
excuse for their appearance the murder of two ( icrman ( atholic missionaries, Fr. 
Franz Nies, SVD, and Father Richard I lenle, S\ 1 ), who were living in a village 
near Chiningschow in the province of Shantung. I he ( icrmans took possession of 
the isolated island of Tsingtao without resistance. In 1898, Prince Heinrich of 
Prussia, who had been sent by the emperor, obtained a 99-year lease of Kiaochow 
Bay, a splendid naval base, and at the same time secured for ( icrmany an acknowl- 
edgment that the whole province of Shantung was part of the ( icrman sphere of 
influence. 

Tense Situation in Manila Bay 

I he events in Samoa and Kiaochow had a parallel in the German-American 
stru ggl c ln the Philippines. Some of the German activities aroused the suspicion of 
Great Britain and the United States, especially at the end of the 19th century. For 
instance, Prince Heinrich visited the Far blast on the huge “club ship" Deutschland 
and dispensed hospitality with a lavish hand. The great steamship company, the 
North German Lloyd, was sending its largest vessels to the Orient. I he emperor 
displayed his naval power by sending to the Pacific a fleet of his most powerful 
warships. In Manila alone, the Germans maintained a powerful fleet which in- 
c uded the cruisers Kaiserin Augusta and Irene , with their convoys, a third-class 
cruiser Komoran , the armored cruiser Kaiser , the Prinzess Wilhelm , and the trans- 
port Darmstadt with relief crews of 1,400 men and a coaling steamer. Even the 
merican Admiral George Dewey feared the Germans, in spite of his being pre- 
pared for trouble with them. 4 

After the Battle of Manila Bay on 1 May 1 898, the navies of Germany, Great 
ritain, France, and Japan entered the bay in order to protect the interests of their 
nationa s in the Philippines. For Germany, however, this was not the main reason. 

s mentioned earlier, Germany’s ambition in the Far Hast at the close of the 19th 
century was to acquire colonies for naval stations of her growing powerful navy as 
we as or trade and commercial purposes. She was, therefore, eager to grapple with 
any power, even to grab the Philippines, if this was possible. 

FI Sl | Spicions were aroused by the overbearing behavior of the German 

. eet / 1 < t , , an ^ a ^ or exam ple> the cruiser Irene , which arrived first, had coolly 
lN , i-V e ^ mer ^ can admiral. 1 he Komoran , which followed, appeared with 
g ts at midnight and had to be brought up with a shot across her bow. 


912 


H.\c \RI / A Philippi ne-Clennan Relations , Before and During the Revolution 


Furthermore, the German navy men casually took soundings offMalabon and the 
mouth of the Pasig River and seized a quarantine station and a large Spanish offic- 
ers’ quarters. 1'hey landed the officers and men at Manila, supplied the besieged 
citv with officials and ladies on board their ships, and demonstrated other provoca- 
tive acts. In direct contrast to the German squadrons arrogance, the British, 
French, and Japanese navies observed the blockade rules. 

The climax of the German Fleet’s arrogance occurred in the famous Von 
Piedcrichs incident. Vice Admiral von Diederichs was in command of- the Ger- 
man squadron at Manila Bay. Being a close friend of Spanish Governor-General 
Basil io Agustin in Manila, he used to visit him at the governor-general s palace. The 
governor-general would return the call aboard the Kaiserin Augusta at night lor 
some hours. 

The friendship between the German vice admiral and the Spanish governor- 
general proved verv significant when General Emilio Aguinaldos men captured 
Subic. Aguinaldo s men were blocked by the Irene from attacking the Spanish gar- 
rison on Vs I a C irande. Admiral Dewey acted quickly and dispatched the Raleigh and 
the Concord to the spot. As they entered the bay, the Irene quietly steamed out. 

But Pewev was not to let the Germans oft so easily. When the Komoran was 
sighted one day coming up the bay, he decided this time she would not pass by 
without stopping so as to avoid the daily boarding visit. Calling his flag lieutenant, 
he ordered: “Mr Brumby, 1 wish you to go on board the McCulloch and stop that 
vessel. 1 order you. Sir, stop her!” 

The Komorati ignored the McCulloch's signals and a shot was fare across aei 
bow. The next day Vice Admiral von Diederichs sent a staff officer to deliver his 
protests. An interesting exchange of words followed: 

[ )ewev: And does his Excellency know that it is my force and not his, 

which is blocking this port? 

Officer: Yes, Sir! 

Dewey: And is he aware that he has no rights here except such as 

choose to allow him, and does he realize that he cannot com- 
municate with that city except by my permission? 

Officer: ( The German shrugged his shoulders.) One would imagine, Sir, 

that you are conducting the blockade. 

Dewey: l )o you want war with us? (Dewey challenged him to a fight.) 

Officer: Certainly not! 

Dewey: Well, it looks like it, and you are very near it, and (Deweys voice 

rose to shout J you can have it. Sir, as you wish. 

The situation appeared tense and critical. 1 he Americans were ready to fight* 
but the Germans hesitated for two reasons. First, the British flagship hnmoita ite, 
commanded by Captain Chichester, came up to Deweys support along with tie 
Olympia , proudly playing the American national anthem, the Stai Spangled Ban 


913 


THI PHII I PIMM PI V< >1 I IK )N \M > M < )N| ) 


ner/ This was indeed historical proof of the famous remark of Admiral Sims 
at Tuku, China, that “blood is thicker than water. A second battle of Manila 
Bay between Dewey and the ( iermans was narrowly averted. Secondly, I mperor 
William II of Germany did not want war with the Americans. 1 le wanted some- 
thing else. 

Germany’s Secret Plans to Conquer the Philippines 

Ihe documents of the German foreign Office, some of them with marginal notes 
of Emperor William II himself, revealed interesting ( .ernian plans for the Philip- 
pines at the close of the 19th centlirv. I he emperor and the C lerman foreign Of- 
fice deliberated seriously on three different plans: 

1) to make the Philippines a monarchy under a ( lerman King, or 

2) to partition the islands among the worlds sea powers, or 

3) to neutralize the first Philippine republic under the joint guarantee and 
protection of the world s sea powers. 

Let us analyze carefully the three plans and their implications. 

Hie First Plan: To Make the Philippines a Monarchy 

I he first plan was actually proposed by I lerr Kruger, the ( icrman consul in Ma- 
nila. His report confirmed a previous report made bv Prince 1 leinrich of Prussia, 
who was at that time in command of the ( German Asiatic Squadron. Kruger wrote 
the following: 

In the general opinion, the Spanish government in the Philippines is 
untenable. A bloody settlement of accounts with the natives is imminent at any 
hour. I he insurgents, however, do not on any account just want to change 
masters and exchange the Spaniards for the Americans, but they want to be- 
come independent, they do not think themselves capable of founding a repub- 
lic, but prefer a kingdom, which is to them a more congenial form of govern- 
ment. Great inclination for Germany! ’There are signs that the matter may pos- 
sibly end with the offer of the throne to a German prince. Gan the matter take 
us course or is it to be discouraged? 

Ambassador Leon Maria Guerrero, the author of the enlightening book. We 
hilipinos , made his observations on Krugers plan. He said this was “an extraordi- 
nar y roisconception on the part of Kruger, who does not seem to have had the 
slightest understanding of the philosophy of the Philippine Revolution. Two Fili- 
pino representatives had left Hong Kong aboard Deweys ship on 25 April 1898, 
ut Aguinaldo himself had not arrived on time. It was only on 1 6 May that he had 
oeen put aboard the McCullochhy the American consul in Hong Kong, arriving in 


914 


IVU \R1 / A Philippine- ( lerman Relations , Before and During the Revolution 


Cavite three daws later. Kruger, therefore, could not have had a more authoritative 
basis for his report than the gossip in Manila. 

Bernhard von Billow, then secretary of state in the German Foreign Office, 
who later became chancellor from 1900 to 1909, was more realistic than the gull- 
ible consul. I k* commented on Krugers report and submitted to Emperor William 
II the following observations: 

It mav be quite true that the Spanish regime in its present form cannot 
he maintained in the Philippines. 1 he question is whether the archipelago will 
he taken over bv a single Power or under foreign protection. Consul Krugers 
report is an added confirmation that the natives of the Philippines show scant 
disposit ioii to exchange the Spanish yoke with another direct and effective for- 
e-inn domination, lo subject the 1 lagalogs against their will to such foreign rule 
would probably he no east task. Should the Americans or the English try it, 
ihev mav have some unpleasant surprises, such as the french experienced in 
Mexico and the Italians in Eritrea. The inclination of the natives in the Philip- 
pines is to establish an independent state, which somewhat recalls the events in 
Formosa in the spring of 1895 when the leader of the independence party on 
that island telegraphed Your Majesty begging for your sublime benevolence 
toward bis fellow citizens, abandoned and unfortunate but resolved to fight. 

At that time various signs indicated that the French had suggested and encour- 
aged the Formosans declaration of independence. But their ideas of emanci- 
pation could not be realized because they failed to receive outside support. 

Biilow, who according to A.J.P. Taylor, the well-known English diplomatic 
historian, was the symbol of world policy. He warned Empeior Wi iam 

unless the insurgents in the Philippines gained the upper hand or at lca/t 
achieved notable success. Your Majesty s Government can hardh declare itee 
in their favor openly, or in favor of a change of regime, since such a procedure 
would, on the one hand, he in grave contradiction with the principle of le^iti 
macy, which forms the basis of our relations with Russia and Austria Hunga ) 
while on the other hand, come into conflict not only with America but 
with England, an important German move could cause a general reactioi 
against us.” 10 

On the suggestion of Kruger to make the Philippines a kingdom under 
German prince, Biilow made the following comments: 

The position of Germany, if she should assume the role of a protecting 
power of the Philippines and give that archipelago a German prince for a king, 
would in fact be more dangerous than the position of France three years ago 
when she planned to enforce the independence of Formosa. 


915 


THh mil IITIM Kl \ < >1 l I K )N \M>hl .(>M> 


If without first consulting the other powers, we v.cu i<> de e Luc th.it we 
propose to make the Philippines a ( icrm.in protectorate, these other powers 
would, in all probability, and no matter boss the n interests might conflict 
otherwise, unite in the urgent task of preventing an an hipclago with an area 
approximately 350,000 square kilometers from falling under ( .erman rule. 

I wen assuming that all the lagalogs were (<> take* up arms for ( icrmanv. 
it would not decide the issue, as onlv he who commands the seas can perma- 
nently hold the Philippines. In such a case- the ( .erman Meet would have to 
face overwhelmingly superior forces. I Icrc again is shown boss much damage 
was done to the true (.erman national interests, when stupidity and sloth hin- 
dered the realization of Your Majcstvs grand and magnanimous projects to 
strengthen the German Navy. 

In spite of Bulow’s being sometimes branded .is bas ing a narrow vision, he 
was evidently very realistic in assessing the diplomatic crisis facing the Philippines 
at this time. Unlike his contemporary, German ( .onsul Kruger in Manila, who was 
described as gullible, unrealistic, and ignorant of the philosophy of the Philippine 
revolution, Billow knew well that it was a risk for ( iermany to choose a German 
prince as head of state in the Philippines and to make the country a German pro- 
tectorate. On 18 May 1898, Billow sent Kruger secret instructions by code, de- 
stroying the first plan: 


I he idea of choosing a C .erman prince as head of state* in the* Phi I ippmes 
and eventually placing the archipelago under German protection has been 
definitely rejected by His Majesty, the Kmperor. Maintain therefore a negative 
attitude towards any soundings or approaches in this direction. C )hserve unob- 
trusively and report any signs that may indicate that one or the other Power, 
for example England or America, is attempting to establish itself permanently 
through negotiations with the insurgents. 1 


i he clear message was sent to Count Paul Hatzfeldt, the ( ierman Ambassa- 
dor in London at that time, and to Admiral Alfred Tirpitz of the German Navy 

High Command. 

However, the Filipino revolutionary leaders were not aware of the secret de- 
i er ati° ns between Consul Kruger in Manila, Secretary of State Bernhard von 
Btilow in the German Foreign Office in Berlin, and His Kxcellency f.mperor Wil- 
iam II of Germany. As a result of the secret instructions of Btilow to Kruger of 
May 18, 1 898, the German consul in Manila abruptly changed his manner in deal- 
ing with the Filipino leaders during the critical times of the Philippine revolution. 
Nevertheless, the Filipino leaders had not given up all hope of obtaining the sup- 
poit of Germany, as we shall see later in this report. 


916 


IVU \Rl /. A Philippine-Gernuin Re Lit ions. Before and During the Revolution 


The Second Plan: To Partition the Philippines 
Among the World's Sea Powers 

While the first plan was originally conceived by the German consul in Manila, the 
second plan was the master strategy of German Secretary of State Bernhard von 
Billow himself. In his secret memorandum of 14 May 1898, Bulow submitted to 
Hmperor William the second course of action. 


In mv most humble opinion, command of the seas will decide who will 
dirccdv or indirectly rule the Philippines. If England or America were to agree 
on a common policy, it would greatly influence the Philippine question. 1 he 
Russian, as well as the french press is already very much concerned with its 
eventuality and discusses the various coalitions and divisions which could be 
used to prevent the Philippines from falling into the hands of the Americans 
with England s consent, as a result of the deal between them. It cannot be de 
nied that the wishes of the Tagalogs would have less significance than the sup- 
port of either one or the other great sea power, even if it were justified to as 
sume that the natives do not just intend to play us off against the Spaniards 
and the Americans, as the Boers tried more or less to do against England three 
years ago and that thev really take the annexation to German) seriously 

Biilow believed that an agreement with one or more first-class sea powers 
would be advantageous to Germany's plan in the Philippines. He was comince 
that only a great sea power, aided bv another great sea power, could 'eep t e 
ippines. If Germany should take the initiative, she should have an agreement 
England and America, or even with England alone. Russia and 1 iancc vvcic out 
the question, since at this time, they were not much of a tlueat. As ii o\\ imsc 
observed, Russia and France, although allied with Germany, cou not stan \ 

against the Anglo-American combination at sea. . . . 

The Americans would not cede any pare of the Philippines tor the time being 
to any foreign power. They wanted to keep the country for themse \es. owe j , 
they later proposed an agreement with England, in which the 1 hi ippmes WOL 
be exchanged for the British possessions in the West Indies. But this c ic not app 

to the British. . ... . 

Germany, however, did not appear hostile to a partition of l ie n l PP u 
at least to the granting of bases of coaling stations to the various intereste powers 
In spite of American policy of keeping the Philippines for herself a one, mp 
William II claimed that the Philippines could not entirely oi in part pass into t le 
possession of an alien power “without Germany receiving adequate compensa 
tion.” 1 * What this adequate compensation was, could be seen latei when eput) 
Secretary of State Baron von Richtofen told the American ambassador in Ber in, 
Andrew D. White, that he personally supposed that Germany would like ful pos 


917 


TUI. mil IIMMNI R1 \ ( )I I I K >N \N I ) hi 'i i >NI > 




session of the Samoan and (Caroline Islands, with coaling stations in the Philip- 
pines, perhaps at Sulu. 

As events showed, the partition planned In Billow was not realized since 
there was no support from any foreign power. Most of the European [towers were 
only too happy to see that Americans had finally decided to keep the Philippines 
intact. 

The Third Plan: Neutralization of the First Philippine Republic 

Billow failed in his plan to partition the Philippines among the world s sea [lowers, 
Germany, England, and the United States. 1 le then formulated his neutralization 
plan which he believed could be the final solution to the Philippine- question. In 
his secret instruction to the German ambassador in London Billow wrote that ‘the 
neutralization of the Philippines is a harmless way of bringing the Philippine Ques- 
tion up for discussion once the Spanish regime becomes untenable and a change of 
possession unavoidable.” He was so obsessed by the idea of neutralization that on 
14 May 1898, four days before he wrote to London, he mentioned the subject in 
his secret memorandum to Emperor NX^ilham II saying: 

1 here is a third possible modus proccdctidu namely to secure the inde- 
pendence of the Philippines by neutralizing them and [dating them under the 
joint protection of a combination of sea powers. I hus a situation would he 
created similar to that of Belgium and the ( irand I )uchv of Luxemburg. 1 " 

Bulow reasoned that such a plan was advantageous, since it would keep the 
future open and a convenient time to act would eventually arrive. I h is would be 
favorable to Germany, which he believed would then be far more powerful at sea. 
He finally suggested that the ( icrman ambassador in I long Kong should ask Brit- 
ish Prime Minister Lord Robert Salisbury if 1 ler Majesty's ( iovernment would like 
a share in the spoils of the Spanish empire, or if she would not mind if England 

and the other powers concerned would not receive their shares in the immediate 
present. 

Apparently, Billow was emboldened to carry out his plan of neutralization by 
t e telegram he received on 14 June 1898 from Consul Kruger of Manila. Kruger 
reported that Spanish Governor-General Basilio Agustin had intimated to him 
at r c fagalogs would accept the Spanish promises of reform if certain powers 
would guarantee their fulfillment. Of coui *se, this seemed to be incorrect, since the 

i ipinos actually did not want reforms. They wanted freedom from Spanish domi- 
nation. 

Besides, the memory of Spain’s broken promises in the Pact of Biak-na-Bato 
was still fresh in their minds. 

^ ut ®ulow could not see the point. He still believed that only England and 
ranee, being naval sea powers at that time, could act as guarantors. He never men- 


918 


BAi ARl /A Philippine-Gcrman Relations. Before and During the Revolution 


tinned the Americans in his secret memoranda. Convinced that the German navy 
was powerful, he presumed that it could wipe out the American Navy without dif- 
ficulty, should there he a naval battle between the two. Bulow stated, however, that 
if the “question of guarantee” were really raised by a competent representative of 
the Spanish side, one would next have to wait for the reactions of the London and 
Paris govern men ts. 1 

Bulow was right. German Ambassador von Radowitz in Madrid reported in 
a coded telegram to Berlin that the Spanish minister of state had offered to hand 
Manila over to the powers for two reasons: there was no other way to prevent the 
victory of the Filipino revolutionaries, which threatened not only Spanish but 
European interests. Secondly, the intervention of France, Russia, and England 
would also make it easier for the Spaniards to make peace with the Americans. 

The powers, except England, accepted the proposal. England rejected it be- 
cause she believed it was breach of neutrality. Radowitz, however, suspected that 
England wanted to block the negotiations for peace and to force Spain to accept 
the conditions agreed upon between England and America. Even France and Rus 
sia were inclined to spurn the offer. 

fhe third plan proposed by the German secretary of state was not imme i 
ately given up. Emperor William 11 ordered Vice Admiral von Diederichs to sai to 
the Philippines from China so that he could form an on-the-spot judgment a out 
the Spanish situation, the attitudes of the natives, and all other outside influences 
which might affect the reserved campaign for the acceptance of the third P 

Von Diederichs arrived in Manila on 12 June 1898. What was actually his 
first report to Secretary Biilow? He wrote the following: 


fhe Filipinos are capable of forming and conducting a go\ eminent c f 
their own. Under Aguinaldos growing influence, the insurgents are fightin & in 
the American interest, but their final intentions as against E)ewe\ aic un 
known. Meanwhile they will have to give up to the victorious Americans be 
cause of their lack of means, organization and their shortage of leaders. 
European merchants prefer the rule of any civilized nation other than Spain 
They would like England best of all. The desire of the natives for self-determi- 
nation would probably favor the increase of our influence. 


The veracity of Von Diederichs’ observation was corroborated by the dL 
patch sent from Manila by Rieloff, the German consul in Hong Kong. Kruger -re- 
ported that the first American ground force, consisting of 2,700 men, ha an e 
on 1 July 1 898 after occupying Guam. On the Philippine situation, Krugei mace 
the following observations: 


Reciprocal distrust between the insurgents and the Americans is becom 
ing more evident. Last week 1 had two talks with Aguinaldo and his closest 
advisers. Fourteen provinces with over two million people arc not in the re- 


919 




THfc mil IITINf KJ-.VOll I I< >N \NDHi iOND 

volt. . . Insurgents arc holding hist to the plans of tut mug t< > t «t r main and seek- 
ing a closer association under solid form acceptable to h< »t h sides. once t hey 
can finish off the Spaniards and expel the Americans m am armed interven- 
tion by another power. 1 hcv liave alreads sent a written commission to the 
partisan, Antonio Regidor, residing in I on don. with orders t« > proc eed to Ber- 
lin to negotiate on a possible later association of ( k imam, ottering m return 
commercial facilities at a start. It is best tor < «er mam n > lca\ e t Ik insurgents to 
themselves in the coming days. . . and enter later into c loser and v. ider negotia 
tions with the insurgents after they have achieved independence. 

It is interesting to note how the Filipino leaders had ever conceived in such 
critical times the idea of asking help of the < iermans. 1 loss did thev come close to 
this idea of diplomacy? What caused them to hope for a ( lertnan intervention? 
History has still to uncover more facts about the matter. 

But historical events turned out differently. I he l .V Navy had wiped out 
Cervera’s Spanish Fleet in Guba before -i Inly. C )n 0 |ul\ LSOS, the l .S. Senate 
approved the annexation of I lawaii. The best American regiments were sent to 
Puerto Rico. And in the Philippines (jeneral I homas M. Anderson, commander 
of the U.S. Army, had already landed with the first contingent of the expeditionary 
corps. Because of these events, German Lmpcror Williams finally decided not to 
help the Filipinos at all. At the end of Rieloffs dispatch he wrote: ‘‘Antonio 
Regidor may appear here only when the Philippines will be completely indepen- 
dent/’ 21 

Immediately, Grafzu Eulcnburg, in attendance on the emperor at Moldo, 
sent a coded message to the German Foreign ( )ffice in Berlin saying: “1 I is Majesty 
remarked that Antonio Regidor in London may not come to Berlin until the Phil- 
ippines are completely independent. His Majesty orders the strictest secrecy in re- 
gard to the whole matter.” 22 

Baron von Richtofen, the deputy secretary of state, finally ordered the Ger- 
man consul in Manila to inform unobtrusively the appropriate quarters that the 
partisan living in London should not come to Berlin at this time because the situ- 
ation is still unclear: 

1 further inform you that the Japanese Government wishes the Philip- 
pines to remain Spanish, while the American representatives have recently 
given to understand that in the United States the supporters of the party favor- 
ing annexation of the Philippines are increasing continuously. It is true that the 
leaders of the nationalist party are demanding a plebiscite and are therefore in 
bad terms with the Americans, as the latter consider such a vote to be a serious 
inconvenience. In these circumstances, the greater prudence is required of us. 
Destroy these instructions immediately! ’ 


920 


1V\( \RI /A Philippine-German Relations , Before and During the Revolution 


This was decisively the end of all German ambitions in the Philippines. What 
would have happened it the Germans had conquered the Philippines? What would 
the hi li pi nos he now, as Leon Maria Guerrero asked in his article, “Kaiser in the 
Philippines, ii the Philippines had become a monarchy under a German king, or 
if it had been partitioned among the world sea powers, or it the first Philippine 
republic had been neutralized under the joint guarantee and protection of Ger- 
many, Lngland, France, and Russia? 

These questions are not within the province of history, but one thing is cer- 
tain: il Germany had succeeded in making the Philippines a beneficiary in an) of 
these plans mentioned before, then most likely the Philippines would have had the 
same fate as Kiaochow and the Samoan Islands had after the World War I. Ger- 
many would have lost the Philippines to the victorious powers. Culturally, the Fili- 
pinos would have had a German-oriented philosophy of life, much different from 
that of the Americans. Besides, the German language would have been the medium 
of communication in schools, offices, business quarters, and among the people. 
And lastly, fascism, which had already taken root during President Manuel L. 
Quezon's time, would have had a deeper hold in Manila before World War II. 

What Happened After the German Plans Failed? 

The three German secret plans to colonize the Philippines failed since the Ameri- 
cans were determined to annex the Philippines with full support from tie nns 
The Germans, however, changed their own tactics by doing everythin^ c ie ) c ° l 
to conciliate with the Americans. I hey hoped that with this change o tactics t ) 
could win American favor in their interest to purchase horn Spain tie 
and other Pacific Islands. As a matter of fact, the Germans succee e in pu ^ 

the Caroline, Palau, and the Marianne Islands, except Guam. German) s \ 
purchase the Sulu islands in the Philippines was shattered. The Samoan question 

was to be settled on a later date. . 

As a whole, the Germans were successful in their quest for naval and coa mg 

stations in the Far East, but as William L. Langer wrote. I loin a a G e * P° 
view, they could hardly be described as worth the hostility of the Unite 
of the opposition of England.” 24 


References 


2 . 

3. 

4. 


Golo Mann, Deutche Gschichte des 19, Und 20, Jahhunderts. 

William L. Langer, The Diplomacy of Imperialism, 1890-1902, vol. II, p. 15- 
The European Past , vol. II, Shepard B. Clough, Peter Gay, Charles K. Warner, eds. 
(New York: The MacMillan Company, 1964), p. 275. 

Edwin Wildmann, “What Dewey Feared in Manila Bay,” The Philippine Review, 
(August-September 1 92 1 ), 354-373. The other German ships were Princess Wilhelma 
and the transport Darmstadt with a relief crew of 1,400 men and a coaling steame 


921 


THH PHILIPPI NT. RhVC )I I I I< )N AND hi 'i < >N! ) 

Sec Leon Maria Guerrero, We Piliptnos . (Manila: I )ailv Star I ‘ubhshmg ( ompanv, 
Inc., 1984), p. 167. 

5. Nathan Sargent, Admiral Dewey and the . Manila ( ampat^n ( \\ ashmgtnn. D.G., 
1 947), pp. 70, 73. C iuerrero, op. cit., p. 108. ( )thcr ships o I the Xiiktiuim squadron 
were the Boston , Baltimore, (loti cord, and Petrel. 

6. Wildman, op. cit., p. 71. 

7. Langer, op. cit., p. 519. ( iuerrero, op. t it., p. 1 0. ( icrm.m 1 < >reign ( >Hk e. 1 )t>c. II, 
Die Grofle Politik, XV, 33-38. 

8. Ibid., p. 171. 

9. Cf. A.J.R Taylor, I he Struggle for Mastery m h.urope, ISaS- / 9/<S' ( ( )\ford. 19(S3). 

10. Guerrero, op. cit., p. 171 

1 1 . Ibid., p. 171. 

12. G.F.O., Docs. IV and V. 

13. Guerrero, op. cit., p. 173. 

14. G.F.O. Die Grofie Politik , I )oc. XV 7 , p. 39. 

15. Rippy, p. 170; quoted by Guerrero, op. tit., p. 1 *. 

16. G.F.O. Doc. IV. 

17. G.F.O. Doc. III. 

18. G.F.O. Doc. VIII, Guerrero, op. cit., p. 177. 

19. G.F.O. Doc. IX, Guerrero, op. cit., p. 178. 

20. G.F.O. Doc. X, Guerrero, op. cit., 178. 

21. G.F.O. Doc. X, Guerrero, op. cit., p. 179. 

22. G.F.O. Doc. XI, Guerrero, op. cit., p. 179. 

23. G.F.O. Dox. XII, Guerrero, op. cit., p. 179. 

24. Langer, op. cit., ii, p. 519. 


922 


Japan and the Philippine Revolution 


Grant K. Goodman 

University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansos, U.S.A. 


T he Philippines, that area of Southeast Asia closest to Japan geographic- 
ally, has had contacts with Japan at least since the 16th century, and in both 
Japan and the Philippines there have emerged two schools of thought about the 
nature of those contacts. For the purposes of this paper, I shall call the two schools 

the “seizure school and the “redemption school. 

Filipino proponents of the “seizure school ’ were those who, under the inf li- 
enee of Spanish colonialism and then of American colonialism, have interprete 
every Japanese contact with the Philippines — economic, cultural, immigration 
as part of some devious if covert plot to seize the Islands and to extend Japanese 
hegemony over them. 1 he Japanese counterpart of the Philippine seizin ists weie 
Japanese leftist intellectuals who, particularly during the 1920s and 1 )30s, as one 
facet of their ultimately self-defeating hypercritical retreatism horn Japanese po 
litical life, judged all of Japanese foreign policy in classical Marxist terms and t ieie 
fore regarded Japanese interests in areas like the Philippines to be motivated pure > 
by “bourgeois capitalist imperialist expansionism or seizurism. 

The “redemption school" in the Philippines consisted of those Filipinos who 
throughout the colonial era viewed the Japanese as potential saviors. The) saw 
the Japanese as fellow Asians whose geographic proximity, ethnic origins, and in 
dustrial and military achievements made them logical helpmates in the realization 
of Philippine nationhood. The core of this “school was represented by that strain 
of Filipino radicalism which was descended from the period of the Philippine revo- 
lution at the end of the 19th century, an era which had originally engendered the 
dream that the Islands could only free themselves with outside aid and that Japan 


THK 1*1 f 1 1 IPPINT H >M I U >\ \Nl ) IU < >M > 


was the only logical source of that aid. In Japan sustenance lor the redemption 
theory was provided almost entirely by .1 handful <>t zealous men of high 

purpose” or, more accurately, ultranationalist k sell stvled siif^erpat not s ) whose 
activistic energies and often romantically mysterious cabals belied their relative 
political insignificance. Nevertheless, their brand <>t Pan \siamsm coincidentally 
responded directly to the romantic idealism of that group <>t Filipinos \\ ho contin- 
ued to envision the Japanese as liberators from western colonialism. I hough in ret- 
rospect the lack of realism evident in the thinking of both I ihpmo and lapanese 
“redemptionists” seems obvious; the fact remains that , as in the case of the seizure 
school,” both an image of and a legend about relations between the two states had 
been created. Thus, with these two images — ‘ seizure and redemption in mind 
and recognizing the respective legends they have in turn spass ned. let me try to test 
the validity of these images within the context of Japans actual role m the Philip- 
pine revolution. 

When, after over two centuries of Japan's relative isolation, lapan was forc- 
ibly reopened to the outside world in the mid-19tli century, relations between the 
Philippines and Japan, which had flourished briefly in the late \(nU and early 17th 
centuries, were renewed. In 1874, an Imperial ( Commission was dispatched from 
Tokyo to Manila to investigate the possibilities of reinvigorating Japan Philippines 
trade. In 1 888, the Spanish Minister at Tokyo with the unoffic ial encouragement 
of then Foreign Minister Count Okuma Shigenobu and other Japanese leaders pro- 
posed the opening of the Philippines to Japanese emigrants, but the various reli- 
gious orders in the islands expressed their opposition, and the proposal never ma- 
terialized. 

The victory of Japan in the Sino-Japanese War ( I 894- 1 89S) and in particu- 
lar the annexation of laiwan by Japan aroused a certain apprehension on the part 
of Spanish authorities in the Philippines. To some Filipinos, however, this devel- 
opment seemed fraught with significance and hope. For the first time an Oriental 
people in emulation of the west had put into the field a modern army equipped 
with modern weapons and had defeated the vast and ancient but now decrepit 
Chinese empire. I he hope of many Filipinos was, of course, that they too like their 
fellow Asians of Japan could modernize and, above all, assert their national inde- 
pendence. For, after all, the remarkable triumph of Japan was positive proof that 
Orientals need no longer take second place to westerners. The surge of pride, racial 
and national, which was felt by educated and articulate young Filipinos can not of 
course be measured. Nevertheless, the evidence seems clear. Nationalistically in- 
clined Filipinos made a point of patronizing the few Japanese traders then in the 
islands. Contacts with Japan suddenly increased as a number of Filipinos went to 
Japan to live, to study and, most importantly, to seek political support for Philip- 
pine independence. The chronological sequence of Japan’s victory (1895) and the 
outbreak of the Philippine revolution (1896) against Spain is surely coincidental, 
but the inspiration derived from the emergence of a powerful Japan in the Far East 


924 


liOOHMAN Japan and the Philippine Revolution 


is demonstrated by the several ways in which the revolutionaries sought Japanese 
moral and material assistance. 

l or some time the secret Philippine revolutionary society' Katipunan had 
considered dispatching to Japan a committee to seek arms. However, in mid-May 
1 8 C )6, when the Japanese cruiser Kong appeared in the Manila harbor, the 
Katipuneros decided to negotiate directly, if possible, with officials of the Japanese 
government. The story persists that an agreement was signed between the Filipino 
revolutionaries and certain Japanese — using assumed names, a custom which inci- 
dentally was far more typical of the Katipunan than of the Japanese. 1 he purported 
terms of the supposed "understanding cannot by any stretch of the imagination 
be viewed as a magnanimous gesture by a great power to its eager revolutionary 
“brethren." For the Katipunan was supposed to pay PI. 5 million for 100,000 titles 
and 1 SO cannons plus a proportionate amount of ammunition tor these weapons. 
An immediate down payment of P300.000 was required with the remainder to be 
paid in eight installments. Obviously the Philippine revolutionaries could nor be- 
gin to meet such stringent financial terms, and the arrangement, if it ever existed, 
never materialized. 

A much more believable if less attractive version of the Konger recounts a 
brief confrontation between the visiting Japanese commander and a group of 
Katipunan representatives. The encounter was supposed to have taken place up- 
stairs above the Japanese “Bazar,” a Manila dry-goods store, one of whose Japanese 
employees arranged the meeting. Katipunero Emilio Jacinto presented the Japa- 
nese admiral with a letter addressed to the emperor requesting assistance for the 
cause of Philippine independence and suggesting that the potential role of Japan in 
the Philippines could be comparable to that of France at the time of the American 
revolution. Apparently embarrassed by the nature of the occasion the admiral re- 
plied rather formally and completely noncommittally that he was most p ease*, 
meet everyone present, that he hoped all of them would visit Japan an , a ' llost 
an afterthought, that he joined his Filipino hosts in their desiie to secure tiui in 
dependence. Certainly this latter account seems far more likxh and fat mor ^ ICt 
istic than the fanciful story of the supposed Kong agreement. It is not too 1 tcu t 
to speculate that when, as Teodoro Agoncillo has written, The hope o entici ^ 
the Japanese officials to help the Filipinos in their projected strugg e oi nat ° 
liberation vanished into thin air, the Katipunan fabricated the putpoite 
for the supplying of Japanese arms in order to arouse support for ant to piopa^c 
dize the struggle for independence among their own countrymen. 

Nevertheless, the hope ol the Katipunan persisted that aims an ammun 
tion from Japan for a revolt against Spain could still be obtained. Accoi ing to one 
source, Pio Valenzuela went as a representative of the Filipino revolutionary oi^a 
nization to Dapitan in Mindanao in June of 1896 to consult with Jose Riza a out 
the possibility of obtaining the much-needed ordnance in Japan. Rizal agree wlt ^ 
Valenzuela about the necessity for adequate armament in any future uprising an 


925 


T HI Hill I PIMM Rl-.VC )I l I J< )N \NI ) PI Y< )NI ) 


was supposed to have expressed the hope that Japan might pla\ a role in subse- 
quent Philippine events similar to that ot the l riitetl States is the revolt in Cuba. 
On the same occasion Rizal is quoted as having said: 

When I was in Japan, a Japanese minister put at m\ disposal three mer- 
chant ships with which to transport arms to the Philippines. I wrote a ric h I ill 
pino in Manila, asking him to lend me P200.000 for the purpose of purchas- 
ing firearms and ammunition, hut he refused to give me the loan, and so I re- 
turned here so that I could manage to procure all th.it is neeessar\ tor our 
emancipation. 1 

As far as can be determined, at the outbreak of hostilities in the Philippines 
between the revolutionaries and the Spanish authorities, that organ of the lapanese 
government which was most concerned and felt itscll to be most direct l\ interested 
was the newly activated Iaiwan Army. I he Japanese were still in the process of or- 
ganizing their control over the very recently acquired island of Iaiwan, and hostile 
action of any kind in an area as close to Taiwan as the immediately adjacent Philip- 
pines was of particular concern to the army which was responsible for the security 
of the island. I hus, immediately after the outbreak of hostilities the headquarters 
of the Taiwan Army sent a military observer, Iaeutenant-C olonel Kususe 
Yoshihiko, to the Philippines. After spending several months in the Islands Kususe 
returned to Iaiwan to recommend that an appropriate individual be sent to Ma- 
nila in his stead and continue to report developments in .1 situation that was still 
very fluid. Chosen for the post was one Sakamoto Shiroo ( 1 8~"2- 1 93 1 ), born in 

the former feudatory of losa and previously active in behalf of lapanese interests in 
Korea. 

Sakamoto left Iaiwan in March 1897 and moved into a house in the 
Binondo section of Manila. On the surface he acted as a civilian, posing as both a 
branch manager of an overseas trading firm with headquarters in Osaka and as a 
correspondent for Japanese newspapers. In the latter capacity he had remarkably 
ree access to both the Spanish government and rebel headquarters with the result 
t at he filed with the Taiwan Army headquarters some 1 10 carefully detailed re- 
ports on developments in the Philippines. This information was particularly valu- 
a le since, although there was a Japanese consular official in Manila, he could not 
possibly move about with the freedom accorded to Sakamoto. 

Sakamoto personally was deeply sympathetic to the rebel cause. On 15 Au- 
gust 1898, immediately following the end of the Spanish-Ameri< can War, he ad- 
ressed a most urgent telegram to theTaiwan Army Headquarters warning that the 
independence army was in dire danger of being overwhelmed by the United States 
Aimy and that Japan should not stand idly by. Sakamoto said that if one battalion 
o Japanese maiines were at hand, Manilas defense could be cracked, Aguinaldos 
independence forces would be greatly assisted, and Philippine freedom assured. 
A ter consultations, Iaiwan Army Headquarters replied: “This is not the time to 


926 


GOODMAN Japan and the Philippine Revolution 


undertake to manage [affairs) in the southern regions according to ideals. In order 
to prevent war damage in Manila do not get involved at all in the fighting directly. 
Protect the lives and property of the resident Japanese by maintaining strict neu- 


tral it v. 


Once more a proposed intervention, this time recommended by a Japanese, 
failed to produce anv concrete results whatsoever. The grave international compli- 
cations which would have been precipitated by any dispatch of Japanese military 
forces to the Philippines were verv well understood by those in positions of author- 
ity in Japan. 1 he militarv and, in particular, the financial debilitation of a Japan 
which had just fought its first modern war was also clear as was the desire to em- 
bark as rapidly as possible on the* economic development and exploitation oflai- 
wan. Thus, despite the efforts of a single favorably disposed Japanese agent, no 
Japanese aid was forthcoming, and the attitude of the Japanese government could 
only be described as “studiously correct. Nevertheless, both the Kong incident and 
the freebooting of Sakamoto gave significant impetus to the image and the legend 
of Japanese support for Philippine freedom, and in the excitement that surrounded 
the heroic but tragic Filipino uprisings of the 1890s, the reality of the failure of 
Japan to provide any help at all to the revolutionaries was completely submerged. 

On 17 June 1898, Felipe Agoncillo of the Provisional Revolutionary Gov- 
ernment in Hong Kong gave secret instructions to two emissaries, Mariano Ponce 
and Faustino I.ichauco, to proceed to Japan to secure loans, military assistance, an 
diplomatic recognition for the revolutionary regime. 5 A month later one Colonel 
Fukushima of the Japanese Army sent I.ichauco, who was now in Japan, a series o 
questions probing the actual situation and, in particular, the hnancia status o fie 
forces of General Aguinaldo. 1 he questionnaire and the replies we i t tians atec > 
Jose Anacleto Ramos (known in Japan as Ishikawa Tisumasa) who ut ear iu e 
to Japan seeking refuge from the Spaniards who had correctly suspected him of 
rebel sympathies. On 20 July, Agoncillo, whose code name was Respe, wrote gu- 
inaldo, whom he addressed’ as “Mr. Rost,” to let him know that negotiations to 

buy arms from the Japanese were ongoing. Further communications to & uina 

from Teodoro Sandico in Hong Kong seemed to indicate a strong likelihood that 
Japan would supply arms when and if an insurgency against the Americans we 

By 20 August 1898, however, Respe informed Mr. Rost more realistically 
that, “It appears that we shall obtain nothing from Japan — By letter o tic ^‘ 
date Ponce and Lichauco wrote “Mr. W. Jones (Gregorio Apacible) in on t> o ^ 
of their unsuccessful efforts to purchase guns in Japan. I once and Lie lauco, w 
straightforward about the fact that Japan did not wish to do anything to often t le 
Americans, also were concerned about the amount and availability of funcs 
Hong Kong were it indeed possible to purchase weapons in Japan. 

By mid-November a Japanese cabinet crisis was a new excuse for the Japanese 
to procrastinate again on the possible sale of weapons to the Filipinos. Apacible 
(code name “Kant' ) was also told bv Ponce that the Japanese sought more infoi 


927 




THhmil.imNI Rivoil IION \M)|i!V( )\1> 

mation on the certificate of deposit which the l i 1 i pi 1 1 < > emissaries assured them was 
in the Hong Kong Bank. Moreover, letters from lap. in to Aguin.ildo indicated that 
the Japanese continued to prefer to deal with lose Ramos who was on their pavroll 
at $40 per month. Clearly, since Ponce and Francisco Rivem. who had replaced 
Faustino Lichauco, hardly ever met key Japanese players, the\ were dependent on 
Ramos For their actual negotiations. 

Amounts of money, numbers of rifles, and quantities of ammunition contin- 
ued to be discussed in Malolos, Hong Kong, and Yokohama. At the same time 
Apacible in Hong Kong proposed to Aguinaldo that Rivero be relieved quietly 
because oF“the danger which he exposes the government to. Since Apacible had 
by mid-December secured sufficient funds to accomplish the long intended pur- 
chase oF armaments, he Feared that securitv w ithin his ranks might be compro- 
mised. He told Aguinaldo that he would henceforth use the address Ignacio 

Manila For telegraphing Further information about the proposed arms purchase. 
Ignacio was someone who could “be trusted bv us, he w rote, and he told Agu- 
inaldo to telegraph him “Carmen — f long Kong... because I base information that 
we are suspected by the Americans and they have sent secret police here. 

OF course, the Filipino representatives did not know that w hile they were 
en S a g c< J in those prolonged and frustrating negotiations to attempt to secure Japa- 
nese support For their cause, the American Minister to Japan, Alfred 1 . Buck, was 
reporting to Washington the encouragement he was receiving from the Japanese 
government to hold and govern these islands in the interest of peace, commerce, 
and good government.* According to Buck, Foreign Minister C )kuma Shigenobu 
deprecated returning the Philippines to Spain and warned against the Americans 
turning them over to the insurgents, who, without the necessary experience and 
ability to govern, would be unable to sustain themselves and insure a good admin- 
istration oFaFFairs. (Incidentally, the original dispatch described above was marked 
by hand “Seen by the President,” 28 September 1 898.) 

Clearly by January 1899, Minister Bud <. was fully apprised of the ongoing 
c orts oFthe Filipinos to purchase arms in Japan. The new foreign minister, Aoku 
uzo, however, assured Buck that “Japan could not and would not permit any 
step hostile to the interests oF the United States in the Philippines.”'' Interestingly 
on t at very same day, 9 January 1 899, F.miliano Riego de I )ios wrote from Yoko- 
ama to advise Aguinaldo (also known as Senora Rosalia Magdalo) oFthe com- 
p ete ailure oFthe Filipino attempt to procure arms in Japan. The next day Ramos 
an ivero were reporting the same disappointing news to Apacible in Hong 
ong. I hey wrote: Japan is like a girl who loves one and wants to say yes' but who 
oes not dare to throw herselFinto our arms for Fear of consequences. ” (> 

On 10 February 1899 Minister Buck reported Fi oin I okyo on what he saw as 
a reassuring meeting with Ito Hirobumi. Ito had expressed concern at the delay in 

l^ aC fl 1Cat '° n °^ t ^ le Philippines and expressed confidence that as an Asian he 
cou in uence the insurgents to submit. Ito further told Buck that the Filipinos 


928 


t iOOHMAN Japan and the Philippine Revolution 


were incapable of self-government and that "their only safety was in quietly sub- 
mitting to the authority and control of the United States." 

In terms of results one could only judge maximal efforts of the revolutionary 
emissaries in Japan to have been crowned with minimal success. Yet public opin- 
ion, such as it was in Japan at the time, seemed to be most favorable to the Philip- 
pine side. Most newspapers editorialized sympathetically. Influential leaders like 
Okuma and Ito were reported as strongly advocating self-determination for the 
Philippines. Private civic organizations and political parties issued statements in 
behalf of the Aguinaldo-led forces. However, beyond these verbal expressions of 
support, no significant concrete action was forthcoming. 

l he factors which created a climate of opinion in Japan which seemed to 
portend a positive response to the pleas of Ponce are quickly apparent. As a relathe 
newcomer to the world of international power politics and in particular to that late 
19th-century phenomenon realpolitik Japan was eager to assert her national iden- 
tity. Spain alone had protested against Japans annexation ofTaiwan after the Sino- 
Japanese war. Thus, support for the disaffected Filipinos provided a golden oppor- 
tunitv for subtle retaliation. Fishing a bit in troubled Philippine waters could per- 
haps also serve to upset those triple interventionists of 1896 France, Germany 
, nd R ussi a— whose joint pressures had humiliatingly forced Japan to revise the 
treaty with China and to return the prized Liaotung Peninsula. Japanese pride had 
also been injured by what the Foreign Office considered the effrontery of the 
United States and Spain in not inviting Japan to take part in the peace negotiations 
which led to the signing of t he Treaty of Paris, and the Japanese minister ,n Wash- 
ington went so far as to lodge an official protest. Furthermore, due to the lengthy 
and bitter Senate debate over treaty ratification neither Japan nor any other coun- 
u-v could at first be sure whether the United States would, in fttet, assume sover- 
eignty in the Philippines, and Japan did not intend to permit a strong European 

power to fill the Spanish vacuum. r c 

Another element which quite coincidentally seemed to e to tie cue it o 

the Filipino revolutionists was the desire of Japanese leaders both in an out o 
office to gain domestic political advantage by enunciating strong statements ax01 
able to the rebel cause. The political history of the first decade of the operation o 
the Japanese Diet under the Constitution of 1889 had been extreme) tui u ent 
Only the brief period of the Sino-Japanese War had provided a hiatus in 
struggle between the "ins" and the ‘outs — the oligarchs of the Meiji government 
and the so-called liberals in the House of Representatives. By marshaling support 
for the forces of General Aguinaldo, the liberals, who were simultaneous \ iai or 
ing and encouraging the Chinese revolutionary Sun Yat-sen, hoped to em anass 
the government for its failure to pursue a more aggressive foreign policy. For its 
part, the government, through sympathetic statements by high-ranking of icia s, 
wanted to make clear its intention of following "positive policies and not again to 
be "negative" as in the case of the Triple Intervention. However, all the public com 


929 




mi. mil ll’I'IM Rl.VC )l t I l< >N \NI ) HI Vl INI) 

merits of such men as Okuma or ho or their private confidences exchanged with 
the trusting Mariano Ponce and all the effusive propaganda with which the Japa- 
nese had subsequently surrounded their contributions to t be cause of Philippine 
independence do not contradict the reality of the lack of any significant help to the 
revolutionaries whatsoever. 

Pitifully limited though it was, the assistance provided to the I ilipino mili- 
tary forces by the very few Japanese soldiers who reached the Islands w as on Iv made- 
possible by the wholly unofficial efforts of a tins band of who were forced to 

conduct their activities with the utmost secrecy. Their involvement m Philippine 
affairs was totally without governmental sanction, and, in fact, mas have been as 
much directed at attempting to embarrass the Japanese government as ii was at 
helping the struggling Filipinos. 

Again, it is important to emphasize that these actions had neither the sanc- 
tion nor the support of the Japanese government but were carried out by individu- 
als who not only were in opposition to the government but w ho sought to embar- 
rass the government for what the shishi believed to be its weak foreign policies. The 
official position of the government of Japan both in word and in deed continued 
to be studiously correct. Private expressions by Japanese political leaders of svm- 
pathetic interest in the Filipino cause and even public statements in a similar vein 
were never translated into official actions. In fact, quite the opposite was true, for 
the Japanese government had made known through diplomatic channels that ")i- 
P an — disdained all interest in the Philippines if the United States proposed acqui- 
sition. Io disdain all interest once the Treaty of Paris was ratified by the United 
States Senate clearly meant to doom the Filipino revolutionaries to defeat. 

Perhaps one of the best explanations of the rnilpoliiik practiced by the Meiji 
oligarchs in their obvious “correctness” in the somewhat precarious Philippine situ- 
ation has been given by Plilary Conroy:* 

I hey [the oligarchs] were playing the game of diplomacy according U) 
the style Western states had taught them, practically, carefully, realistically. By 
tins they had brought Japan to the very edge of success in the great undertak- 
ing. treaty revision, a place in the sun for Japan, recognition as a full-fledged. 
Western-style modern state. Crusades and causes, whether liberal or reaeiion- 
ary, were anathema to them. 


Immediately Japan was militarily weakened and fatigued by her recent efforts 
m t e tno-Japanese War. But more significant perhaps was the desire of the J ap t 
nese government to consolidate the very real diplomatic gains alluded to by 
onroy, to assure her now “fellow” powers, especially Britain with which the An- 
g o-Japanese Alliance was beginning to germinate, that Japan was not a disturber 
° international peace and that the Sino-Japanese War had been a limited war 
oug t so ely to assure Japan’s “security” in an area (Korea) where her “national in- 


930 


, iOOPMAN Japan and the Philippine Revolution 


terest" had been directly threatened. Of great importance too was the desire of Ja- 
pan to maintain and increase friendly ties with the United States. It was, after all, 
the United States which had “opened Japan to the modern world, and it was the 
United States which had taken a leading role in fostering what for the Meiji gov- 
ernment was its most sought-after diplomatic achievement — revision of the un- 
equal treaties. In addition, the introduction of United States power friendly to Ja- 
pan onto the Asian scene could serve as a welcome counterbalance to such volatile 
and unfriendly states as t rance, Germany, and Russia. 

As 1 indicated at the outset, I hoped in this presentation to assess Japans role 
in the Philippine revolution in terms of mv proposed schools seizui ism and 
“redemption ism. It should he clear by now that the actual course of e\ents falls 
into neither category. And yet it is equally clear how both seizurists and 
“redemptionists could and, in fact, did interpret the above sequence to their own 
ends lor the “sci/urists" in the Philippines the interest which the Japanese govern- 
ment showed in the course of the Philippine revolution and the presence of Japa- 
nese in the Islands during the revolutionary years were sufficient proof of Japans 
designs on Philippine territory. For “seizurists in Japan the sam ^ e ' 1 enc 
cited to the same “inevitable" outcome. For “redemption^” in the Phi ippmes the 
“evidence" of Japanese support for Philippine independence was, w iate\er t 
facts, incontrovertible and a somewhat contorted picture of American rus 
of Japanese largesse was discerned. For Japanese redemptionists tie Isa PF 
ments of their self-appointed attempts at magnanimity only serve to cC 
them that, to use familiar American phraseology, stiiped pants n po i 
cign Office were .heir in, placable enemies and were utterly without understand, ng 

of Japans “real mission" to liberate colonial Asia. . , • « • 

- 1 Thus, in a situation where the Japanese government had behaved wtth.m- 
pressive international rectitude, images and legends which wetc 
foundly contacts between the Philippines and Japan in tic cccaccs t _ , 

evolved. 1'he Japanese government had no interest ^ in acquit mg a *Y^ trateo . ic 
relativelv remote islands which would certainly be both a po itica , ,, f 

liability.' Moreover, since it was the United States, a power considered as friendly a, 
any to Japan and the successor state to Spain, there was even less poss.bihty ol - 
cerm At the same time. Japans leaders at the turn of the century, whatever he r 

failitigs may have been, were hardly quixotic and would Sialism 
nesc power to have been embroiled in what in an eia 

must have seemed to have been a hopeless nationalist cause. Thus, there w e 
clearly larger considerations — treaty revision. Japans interest in o ' , [ : 

ceptance into the inner circles of the western powers that shape r c 
of Japan in the Philippine upheaval. Indeed, realism rathei than i ea isn 
vated Japanese policy toward the Filipino revolutionaries. Yet, i ea ism or, per ap 
more correctly, romantic idealization had created both an image an a e g en 
the role of Japan in the Philippines. 


931 


THK PHII.IPPINh RI V( )I t I K )N \M > hi Y< >\ I 


Notes 


1. These remarks were recorded by Pin Valenzuela as having been made to him bv Rjzal 
in Dapitan on 21 June 1896 and were repeated by V.ilen/uela in an interview on 2 
October 1947. I. A. Agoncillo, The Revolt of the Masses ((Quezon ( nv: l niversitv of 
the Philippines, 1 946), pp. 131-1 33. 

2. IrieToraji, Meiji Nanshinshiko (Notes on the history ol southern expansion during 
the Meiji period; Tokyo: Ida Shoten, 1943). p. 198. 

3. Translations of Documents Showing Relations Retween Insurgents in the Philippine Is- 
lands and Japan, J 898- 1 900, Manila, 4 January 1901, I )ivision ol Military Informa- 
tion, Division of the Philippines. The references that follow .ire from this source un- 
less otherwise noted. 

4. U.S. Ministers to Japan. Despatches. No. 191 . ( Confidential Reel S"’2. "* September 
1898. 

5. U.S. Ministers to Japan. Despatches. No. 191. Confidential Reel S~2. ~ September 
1898. 

6. Op. cit., No. 235, 9 January 1899. 

7. Op. cit., No. 257, 10 February 1989. 

8. H. Conroy, The Japanese Seizure of Korea: lHCsH- 1 l )l() ( Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, I960), p. 235. 


932 


Mexican " Inf ideates ” 
and the Philippine Revolts in 1823-1825 


Animus del Castillo 

Notional University, Mexico 


D uring the period of the Mexico-Philippine transpacific relationship, 
there was a continuous flow of " uovohisptwos to the Philippines. 1 hose sent 
there belonged to different social, professional, and even racial groups: Indians, 

mestizos , Creoles, and Spaniards. r , 

According to Maria Fernanda de los Arcos these immigrants can be classified 
under the following five headings: a) officials, b) voluntary reciuits, c) mere rants, 

cl) church members, and e) prisoners. 1 

Specially notable within this last group were the prisoners for vagrancy, army 
deserters, and people denounced by their own families tor having beha\e nn 
properly." However, during the 19th century we find a new group: that of the 
“ infidentes." More than 40 prisoners were sent from Mexico to the Philippines an 
the Marianas islands during the period of 1810-1821 for having committe 
crime of “infidencia" (disloyalty to the Crown, or treason). 


The Crime of “ Infidencia" 

The word infidente comes from the Latin in (privation), and fdentia ( con ^ 
dence), that is to say, lack of confidence and lack of faith owed to anot er, in tus 
case the monarch. The most official definition would probably be t at o 
“intelligencia con los enemigos del Estado para perjudicarle, oi association witi 
State enemies for the purpose of causing it damage. Infidencia or lack of loya ty to 
the Spanish crown or being an insurgent was very common during this peiioc 
throughout the whole of Spanish America. 


933 


THK PHII IPPINl. Rl Y< )H I K )N \M > hi 1 1 >M ) 


Cases of infidcncia were judged by the Real Sal.i del ( rmien. In |une ISO 1 ), a 
special Infidcncia Tribune was set up with the object of "observing, persec ut ing and 
punishing” all “addicts of the French .is these rebels were called. 1 luwever, due to 
widespread difficulties with the Spanish state throughout all of the novoluspanic 
territory, the tribune was unable to attend to all the cases, and mam of the trials 
were carried out wherever they occurred, without the required formalities. 

The degree to which the infidentes participated in the different insurgent 
movements varied, but the majority of those sent to the Philippines were people 
who were heavily involved: leaders, army deserters, people involved in the manu- 
facture and supply of arms, etc. 

I he crime of infide?icia was the cause for heavv punishment. According to 
the Spanish lawyer Manuel Landixabal: 

all those crimes intended to perturb or destroy society, or religion such as the 
crime of lesa Majestad, heresy, sedition, rebellion and any other of a similar 
nature should be punished in the severest manner possible, the seven t\ increas 
ing according to the greater or lesser degree to win ch the c rimes might damage 
society 5 

I his consideration meant that the same punishment was not given to all the 
infidentes or traitors. Juan Jose Martinez, a lawyer of that time, pointed out that: 

1 he most enlightened members of our just government consider that, 
whilst all such people may be thought of as seditious, rebels and traitors, not all 
have carried the crime to its ultimate conclusion, whilst , of the remaining ones, 
some have advanced more than others in their despicable career, and have done 
more damage than others to society and its basic principles, and for that reason 
some have suffered the ultimate punishment, and others onlv a longer, or 
shorter, and disagreeable prison term. All can be catalogued as “infidcncia,” 
but not all are punished in the same way....* 

Punishment 

Punishment varied according to the case: some were sent to the navy, or to 
eracruz, or made to work for several years in the capital's public drainage system. 
However, overseas imprisonment was one of the options most frequently applied 
^ the crown in order to rid itself of infidentes , and was equivalent to a kind of 
anishment. Overseas imprisonment meant that the prisoner could be sent, ac- 
cording to the severity of his crime, to Cuba, Puerto Rico, an African prison, the 
Marianas, and the Philippines. 

I he most dangerous infidentes were sent to the prisons farthest away. Accord- 
mg to a letter sent from Madrid to the Virrey of Nueva Hsparia in 181 5: “One of 


934 


PM t AS' I II I O Mexican “Infidentes" and the Philippine Revolts in 1S23-1825 


the remedies taken to pacify these domains, and which up to now has produced 
the best results, has been that of sending all convicted insurgents far away... 

1 fence, Manila would receive some of those insurgents most involved with 
the independence cause because the place was considered the most remote of pris- 
ons and therefore the safest for keeping the prisoners. 

C apital punishment was also frequently meted out to itifidenteSy its applica- 
tion depending upon the members of the council and the itifidetite in question. 
I lowever, upon presentation of a plea for clemency, capital punishment might be 
changed to overseas imprisonment. Given the remoteness of the islands, serving a 
sentence there was considered similar to capital punishment. 


The Pardon 

I he “pardon” was bestowed bv the authorities in certain cases as a fa\or to those 
imprisoned for certain crimes. 1 hese pardons had a series of conditions attached 
to their application, l or example, in 1813a pardon was decreed for infi enteSy ut 
was not “to be extended to those who were in prison at the time of its pu 

In June of 1814, the Virrey extended the pardon for infidentes for 30 days 
because of Fernando VI I s return to Spanish territory. In November 181 , anot e 
pardon was granted to include army infidentes, and assassination ( tsn majeJa 

hnnuvid) was expressly omitted as a crime. s 

The pardon as a recourse was applied to some infidentes* but it is ar & ua 
each particular case was fully examined in order that it be applied, an in t > 
the most “dangerous” prisoners were not freed. 

Origin of the Infidentes 

Many Mexican insurgents spent their prison terms in the 1 hihppines. Ac ^ 
to my investigation, the geographical origin of the infidentes varie , ' 

majority came from the central area of Mexico, from cities sue i as Q u e * 
Mexico, San Luis Potosi, or towns such as Huichiapan, Milpa Alta, etc. e c 
however, reports of South American infidentes se nt to the 1 hi ippines > 

San Bias and Acapulco, specifically by the Audiencia of Quito. 


The Protests by the Marianas and Philippine Authorities 

In view of the large number of infidentes sent to the Marianas and the Philippines, 
the authorities there began to protest to the Mexican authorities. Outstan ing are 
the continuous complaints by the governor of the Marianas about the increase in 
number of infidentes sent to that archipelago. According to a communication of 
May 1815 to the Mexican authorities, the Marianas was a country whose inha 


935 


mi. PI III 11MMNI R I V< )|( ll< )N \MiHI iu\|. 


itants were of a simple nature, and the arriv.il of these panic ul.it prisoners might 
have the effect of altering them. 

In 1814, the Marianas refused to accept the mfidente that arn\ed in the gal- 
leon Rey Fernando, and the authorities sent a communication to the nnemal au- 
thorities that: 

...they have sent to me. . . on the orders of Your I \t elleiu . three pi isoners to 
these islands, one is the cleric Don An.isuun Ben.ivente for Infieleneia. and 
punished with permanent banishment, another is Miguel Rivera for the same 
crime, and with a ten-year punishment . . . and Mar i.iiio Sala/ar. again the same 
crime, and for eight years. .. as a result I must remind Your 1 \eelle iuv that the 
Royal Document of May 30th, 1086 expresslv state s that, famished persons 
should not be remitted to these islands, and that in the possible ease ot igno 
ranee or lack of said document .. . that the governor in turn should not receive 
them but return them with the same escort and vigilantes.... 

Another of the arguments used bv the Marianas authorities for not receiving 
these prisoners was that in the islands there were no adequate installat ions for 
them. I he governor, in a letter of 1815 to the V'irrev, pointed out that “the princi- 
pal institute of the inmates of this presidium is very different from that of others, 
because they are employed to work in the fields and everything connected with its 
upkeep, and it could he affected.. 1 

I he prisoners roamed freely throughout the islands and, given the 
archipelagos small population, it would he easy for the prisoners to revolt or create 
problems for the authorities. 

f he prisoners, on not being accepted bv this archipelago, were remitted to 
the I hilippines. I quote the following case of 18 1 5: “I have not accepted said pris- 
oners and they are on their way to Manila, because, to he truthful. . . it is stipulated 
that such delinquents should not come to this destination, above all being as they 
are 1 infidentes ” 12 

I he flow of infidentes into Manila increased, including those destined for the 
Marianas but whom the authorities of Agana sent to the Philippines. 

I hese constant controversies between the authorities of the Marianas, the 
Governor of the Philippines, and the virreinal authorities over the infidentes re- 
sulted in the issue being presented to the authorities in Spain. The final word from 
Spain indicated that this type of prisoners he sent to the Marianas and the Philip- 
pines, hut in no way to another colony in America, and above all thev should not 
be sent to Cuba, as they had already caused problems in that island. The order of 
August 1815 indicated that: 

...the Military Council of the Indies. has resolved... that “infidentes" (con- 
victed insurgents, revolutionary trouble makers, enemies of the public order. 


936 


PII i \s I II I O Mcxiiiin “Infidcntcs" and the Philippine Revolts in 1S23-1S25 


and exalted sectarians of rebellion) should be taken to the Marianas islands and 
the Philippines, as ordered by His Excellency — 13 


The Return 

Due to the distance, and the time during which the i?ifide?Ues had to remain on the 
islands it was a remote possibility that they would ever return. Many began to have 
families, or set up businesses, etc., and with the passing of time, forgot about 
Mexico. ( )thers died in Asia before finishing their term of punishment. However, 
in the Cieticr.il Archive of the Nation in Mexico there is data on a few prisoners 
who did return to Mexico. 

A document from the authorities at Acapulco to \ irrey Kuiz of Apodaca, 
sought instructions about what to do in these cases: 

C )n the merchant boat Maria, at anchor in this port, is a Licenciado Jose 
helix l )ia/ 1 ion/. ties, of the King’s Infantry Regiment, who has come from that 
island. I le is a native of San Juan de la Ysla, corresponding to the jurisdiction 
of ( alimava in Nucva b.spana, and who. according to the documents 1 have 
seen, has been sent to Manila for six years by virtue of a decree made by the 
t iommander oft iuadalajara, because of his having been accused of supporting 
the revolutionarv group, and of all this I am informing S our Excellency so that 
I may be instructed as to whether I should let this person go free. Until 1 re- 
ceive such an order from Your Excellency 1 have given instructions tor him to 
be held at this port. Acapulco 1818. 1 * 

The Case of Epigmenio and Emeterio Gonzalez 

Among the inftdentes sent ro the Philippines and the Marianas weie some iin\ t 
rant members of the Mexican independence movement, specially tie rot ers 
Epigmenio and Emeterio Gonzalez of Queretaro, who took part in tie lteial . 
Academy’s meetings that were organized by the conjurados. Besides these two not i 
ers, personages such as Allende and Aldama assisted at these meetings. 

The participation of the Gonzales brothers in the independence movement 
was extremely active, in view of the fact that they were piepaiing a gioup of a n 
300 men at an hacienda near Huichiapan where they had set up a clan estine an 
workshop in their house, and in their gatherings they were discussing an oimu 
lating a plan for the organization of the future independent nation. 

T he Gonzalezes were denounced and detained by the authorities, an } 
coincidence Epigmenio’s trial began in the morning of 15 Septembei 1810 (tie 
day which now officially commemorates Mexicos independence horn Spanish 
rule). The trial took several years and gave Epigmenio the opportunity of organiz 
ing his fellow prisoners, as well as writing two insurgent pamphlets. La Ain o) a 


937 


THK PMII.IPPINT. Kl-V( )l l ! K >N \M ) hi Y< >M ) 


Queretana (The Queretaro Dawn) and ProcLvna a Ins ilcctmr^ < Proclamation to the 
Electors). In some of the documents related to the trial, paragraphs from * The 
Queretaro Dawn” are quoted: 

I know, quite clearly, that if some intriguing ( reole dem min cs me. I will 
die in a cell writing with mv blood the truths upon wlm li the justice of our 
cause is based, and with the honor of not having let myself be deceived In the 
hypocritical lies of our enemies, and displaying to the world that I earned out 
my duty to the extent possible, such is the obligation of an honest c m/en. and 
that in the end I had a true love for my country. 

Gonzalez as a Creole uses the concept of country. In his writings he fre- 
quently quotes this term and refers to Mexico as his “country. In I he Queretaro 
Dawn Gonzalez shows willingness to die rather than give up his ideas. In fact, he 
never denied the charges against him. 

I he Queretaro Dawn” was discovered by the authorities and was prohib- 
ited by the fribune of the Inquisition in July of ISIS, in an edict published in the 
Mexican Gazette , which describes the work as follows: 


... infamous document, incendiary, divisive, offensive, an incitement to heresy, 
and smelling of it, and definitely heretical in parts, and deeply injurious and 
offensive to the Holy Orders. 

The council decided unanimously to apply the death penalty to Hpigmenio 
for being a confessed and convicted delinq uent. 1 he sentence was carried out in 
Queretaro on 20 March 1816. 1 When a prisoner was sentenced to death, the sen- 
tence was remitted to the Viceroy for his approval, extension, or alteration. 

With the possibility of the pardon being applied to mfidcntc prisoners the 
Viceroy decided to consult with the Spanish authorities, and whilst Hpigmenios 
situation was being cleared up, his sentence was changed to that of imprisonment 
in the I hilippines. On 25 January 1817, the Royal Pardon for some of the 
infidentes was decreed; however, it arrived too late; Hpigmenio had already left. 

Epigmenios brother, Emeterio, suffered the same sentence, and in 1817 left 
the port of San Bias for the Philippi nes. Their stay on the islands for several years 
enabled them to get to know the life of the archipelago, and their ideas were surely 
heard by many people there. 

Manila would be Emeterio s tomb. Hpigmenio, however, managed to return 
to Mexico after 28 years of exile, once Spain had recognized Mexico's indepen- 
dence. Nicolas Bravos government gave him a hero’s welcome and provided him 

with a monthly pension of Pi 00, and an honorary post in Guadalajara where he 
died in 1 858. 18 

Hpigmenio Gonzalez is considered one of Mexico's “Founding Fathers ’; his 
emancipation plan and ideas about structuring of the new state had many follow- 


938 


nil c AS I'll l O Mexican “Infidentes" and the Philippine Revolts in 1823-1825 


crs. According to Hidalgo's biographers, the Gonzalez brothers had some meetings 
with him although their ideas about the new country differed. 

Lpigmenio's work was recognized by different Mexican governments during 
the 1 9th century. For the 100th celebration of its independence the Mexican gov- 
ernment issued a series of postage stamps with the principal heroes of the indepen- 
dence, and Hpigmenio Gonzalez was honored beside the figures of Hidalgo, 
Allcndc, and Aldama among others. His name can also be found on the statue 
which commemorates Mexico s independence on Mexico Citys main avenue, the 
Pasco de la Reforma. 


The Infidentes in the Philippines and the Marianas 

Available documents allow us to reconstruct the lives of the Mexican and South 
American infidentesm the Philippines and the Marianas. However, a more exhaus- 
tive research in the archives of' the Philippines and Spain is necessary in order to 
determine their possible influence in the archipelago, and especially on the armed 
anticolonial uprisings which took place there during the 19th century. 

We have evidence concerning the participation of some of these infidentes in 
the conspiracies in Manila against" the Spanish authorities, and, above all, in the 
insurrection of June 1 823 when, as a consequence of the American independence 
movement, the Mexicans who were resident in Manila and held important army 
posts were replaced by Spaniards. This caused an uprising against the Spanish au- 
thorities in which the Americans would have an important role. 

The uprising was led by a captain, Andres Novales, and on that particu ar 
occasion the insurgents managed to take over the local council (Ayuntaniiento 
Manila; but the movement was rapidly put down. Novales was taken to Fort San- 
tiago where they tried to get the names of his accomplices from him, ut 

gave them away and was shot. 1 '’ . 

In December 1823, a ship named Flor del Mar (Sea Flower) arrived at an 

Bias from Manila, flying a Spanish flag. In it were a group of infi intis \\ io 
been deported by the Philippine Spanish government for having taken part in the 
Novales uprising; the group included two clerics from Ecuador. In t e e ^ e 
Archive of Mexico there is a document describing the state of the islands and tie 
uprising. The document allows us to know some of the infidentes in tie u \ 

pines and their part in the Novales uprising. . T 

In 1 825, there were a few attempts to unite the Philippines with Mexico, n 
the Public Records Office in London, a document dated 1825 has in ormatio 
“about a conspiracy discovered in Manila, whose objective was that of uniting t 
colony with Mexico." 21 

This document refers to the conspiracy of the Vicente and Migue a meio 
brothers. However, we do not have information on the connection between t e 
Mexican infidentes and this rebellion, although the period and the precedent of the 
Novales uprising make it very probable that some were involved. 


939 


THh mil IIT1NI KIAOII I K i\ X v . I > Hi 1 « >* I » 

The Expression To Send to Manila" 

Meanwhile, in Mexico, in 1 845 the slang expression On i<n </ mnntLi to send to 
Manila) was used in relation to people who were pr< >blcmat n . p< »lit k ullv speaking. 
Carlos Maria de Bustamante, in his ll nuero Hermit I hn. del < nmlln. constantly 
uses the expression in his opinion against the government : it seemed only just 

to spread my opinion in print and I can he proud of ha\ ing .u luc\ ed it to the point 
of provoking in the Minister the desire to send me to Manila. 


Conclusion 


I he flow of in fide rites to the arch i pel ago is one < >f the most inipoi t.int elements in 
the relations between Mexico and the Philippines during tlu I 9th century, in view 
of the fact that their being sent there occurred at a moment pnoi to the political 
rupture that united Mexico with Manila or permitted the maintenance of a link 
between both regions. 

I he relations between two geograph ica 1 1 v distant /ones w ci e on I \ possible by 
way of individuals, in this case the infidentes who contributed to keeping alive the 
communication of the archipelago with \iexico. I hen families, businesses, and 
roots were to be found in Mexico but these people lived an important part of their 
lives in Asia. Some managed to return, like I rneterio, but many died in Manila. 
With Mexico’s independence, Iturbide invited the nipitinihi genera! of the 


Phil 


ippines to join this new country, thus maintaining the 


si rong links that united 


them in a climate of freedom and equality. 1 lowever, this proposal was turned 
own by the Spanish authorities in the Philippines and the archipelago remained 
united to Spain. Prom that moment on, the political relations between both re- 
gions were broken, but the Mexicans still in the Philippines continued to have a 
certain influence upon the transpacific relations. 

With the recognition by the Spanish government of Mexico s independence 
1 836, and the signing of the treaty of friendship between Mexico and Spain, the 
reason for the Mexican infidentes being held ceased to exist; thev were exonerated 
a " d al i°«d M return ,o Mexico. 

r e ideas that these Americans — Indians, mestizos , and C.rcoles — -had of 

°m an d independence, and which they took with them to the Philippines, 

I CC * a ^y influence those Filipinos who throughout the 1 9th century took up arms 
ganist the colonial government. The life of the infidentes in the Philippines and 
ananas needs to be studied more in order to determine their general condi- 
11S whether or not they were integrated into Philippine society. 

c I hilippine people as a whole maintained their distance from the Ameri- 
] n ependence movement although they were aware of what happened in the 
panish c °lonies. And the ideas of the American insurgents and the experi- 
^ S ° ex ico motivated many Filipinos to struggle against the Spanish authori- 


940 


Notes 


I >11 i \ s l 1 1 I i > Mexican "Infulcntcs and the Philippine Revolts in 1822-182^ 


1. M.i. hernanda de lot Art os. / migration a hi H pi ruts en el sig/o X\7II. 

2. I )tn iotuirw de Li Real Academia de la l.engtta hspafwla . 

3. Accord ini; tt> the Spanish Lower Manuel l.andizabals speech, Archivo General de la 
Nation (AGN), “Infidentia Archive, sheet 122-127. 

4. I rom the detente of l pigmenio Cion/ale/, AGN, ibid. 

5. AC IN, “Infidentia Archive, vol. SO, sheet 254. 

6. ACIN, “ I ntidcnc ia Archive, vol. S2, sheets 146-14 . 

7. 1 he (nan 1 lernande/ IXivalos C ollcction ot documents on the history ot the Mexi- 
can war of independence, 1808-IS21. pp. 48-550. 

8. Ibid. 

9. Ibid., sheet 252. 

1 0. Ibid., sheet 252. 

1 1 . Ibid. 

12. Ibid. 

1 3. Ibid, sheet 254. 

14. ACIN, Infidencias Archive, vol. 137, sheets 38 39. 

15. ACIN, Infidencias' Archive, vol. 7. 

16. La Cuiceta de Mexico, 11 July 1815. 

17. “...the Council has considered, and has condemned the first accused Epigmenio 
Gonzalez to death. ACIN, Infidencias Archive, vol. Sheets 1 18-121. 

18. Miguel I. Verges, lose, Diecionario de Insurgentes, pp. 238-29. 

19. Molina Antonio, America en hilipinas , p. 55. 

20. ACIN, Pasaportes Archive. 

21. Grajales Gloria, (l in a de documentos para la historia de Mexico en archives ingleses 
(siglos XIX), p. 30. 

22. Bustamante Carlos Ma. de., /:/ nuevo Bernal Diaz del Castillo. 


941 


The Petition Submitted by Rixal's Friends 
to Emperor Wilhelm II on 29 January 1S C )‘ 


KaRI.-J ll IN/ Wl< > N / I K 


Deusseldorf, German, 


T he historical events before and after the execution of lose Ri/al were 
observed with great interest by the Imperial (Consulate in Manila, which 
maintained close contact with the C ierman foreign ( )ffice in Berlin, father C >er- 
man consulates located outside the Philippines occasionally reported to headquar- 
ters regarding the movements of Spanish troops and reinforcements, contacts with 
insurgents, press information, etc. The ( Ierman emperor himself was eagerly await- 
ing a favorable turn of events for Germany in the ongoing Philippine revolution. 

I he story begins in the German Imperial Consulate in I long Kong 
on Friday, 29 January 1897.’ The German Consul to the British Grown Colony, 
Wilhelm Knapped found an unannounced meeting so important that lie sent of f a 
telegram to the German Foreign Office the following clay. ’ The Imperial Consul 
ater reported that four gentlemen of Malayan or mestizo appearance, obviously 
belonging to the higher ranks of local society, came to the consulate. They intro- 
duced themselves as Jose Maria Basa, Doroteo Cortes, Cortes' son, and a certain 
A.G. Medina, claiming that they were all natives of the Philippines. They courte- 
ously handed over a handwritten petition composed in knglish, which was to he 
forwarded to the Neues Palais in Potsdam, the seat of the (ierman emperor. 1 he 
pages or the petition were bound togeth cr on the left-hand side with a green silk 
ribhon 4 mm wide. It was written in English instead of German because the peti- 
tioners presumed that Wilhelm II would be able to read English fluently, as his 
mothei was the eldest daughter of Queen Victoria of England. I he consul told the 
gentlemen that he would first have to read the lengthy document, and asked them 


942 


t 


W 1 1 >\/l K 1'be Petition Submitted b\ Rizal's Friends 


to return the following week. In the meantime, a copy was made secretly. Directly 
following his next meeting w ith the tour petitioners on Monday, 1 February 189 . 
Knappe w rote a detailed report to the Imperial Chancellor, Prince zu Hohenlohe- 
Schillingsfuerst, eiK losing the copy ot" the petition. During this second meeting, 
the four representatives ot the Philippine insurgents in Hong Kong revealed the 
following information about themselves and their compatriots to Knappe. 

1) lose Maria Basa, longtime resident of Hong Kong, had emigrated from 
the Philippines in order to avoid being persecuted by the friars for political rea- 
sons. 


2) Doroteo C ones, a law\er, was exiled from the Philippines several years 
previouslv due to his purported subversive activities. He had lost all his sources of 
income alter being persecuted by the friars. 

3) A.C i. Medina, a teacher, lost his job as principal of a school in Manila six 
or seven wars ago alter suffering persecution. He then traveled to Hu rope and 
claimed to have been to several F.uropean countries, and Cologne, German). He 
apparently understood some Herman. 1 le was the spokesman for the gioup and 

conducted the conversation in French. 

Knappe summarized the language skills of the other three mem be is of the 
group w ith a single sentence: “The others understood only Spanish, certainly no 
Fnglish. The records of the Imperial Consul show that he had no command of 
Spanish, and thus the conversation was held primarily in French. 

The report continues as follows: 


lose basa and I >orotco Clones have maintained ongoing relations with 
the secret and revolutionary group called KA11PFNAN (Kataastaasai 
Kagalanggalangan Katipunan). It is the same organization which has . [w 
several wars preparing for the revolt. Mr. Medina returned horn abtoad wit 
the Floyd steamer liA ) 7:V6Y just six weeks ago in order to participate actively in 
the movement. 


The petitioners justified their right to speak on behalf of the 1 hilippine. 
surgents with the follow ing argument. Several daws earlier, a n isi ting en\o\ rc 
camp in the province of Cavite urgently requested arms for his men. He lac 
authorized by his leaders to ask his exiled compatriots in Hong Kon^ to ' 
petition to the Herman emperor requesting the intervention of the [ Huiojw 
powers and, in particular, C lermanv, as the natives of the Philippines and t 
ers had strong feelings of sympathy for Germany. 1 he figurehead of tieir 
ment, Jose Rizal, recently executed, had lived, traveled, and studied in Human) 
for around IS to 16 months of his short life, and had always spoken dgi > c 
Germany and its people. I he four gentlemen also claimed that theit moti\e 
requesting Herman intervention was to restore human rights and establish an in 
dependent republic. 


943 


THU PHII.IfTINT. Rl V( )M "I M >N \M > HI 'n >M» 

I he discussion then turned to details regard mg the ruilif.ir \ m ni.it ion in 
the Philippines. I he men admitted that as r lie i nsurgen t s la*. ked i >< >t 1 1 w eapons 

and ammunition, they had little chance against the sO.ooo well armed Span- 
ish soldiers that were currently serving t he ge >ver nineni. G 1 ‘ ,ru 1 r ns : ^ u dnan 
cial situation of the insurrection, the petitioners stated that the \ still had one 
million dollars in their camp in C .avite: he >wever. they were has mg eh 1 1 k tilt ies 
bringing these funds out of the country. I he ( onstil had the impression that 
the men did not expect a military victory over the Spaniards at present, but 
were firmly convinced that the Spaniards would not be able to maintain the 
upper hand in the future despite their supremacy in weapons and ammuni- 
tion. The people showed no signs of capitulating, and the rebellu >n \sould con- 
tinue after a brief interruption. I he yoke of oppression was unbearable, and 
thus everyone must decide for himself between tuntu rc on mount. 

In other words, the insurgents would cither be vie toriotis or per ish in upcom- 
ing battles. 


I he men claimed the insurgents were in a far better position, because 
they could always withdraw to the mountains, where they knew e\ei\ path. 

The Spaniards would not dare to follow them. The overall impression... was 
that there seemed to be enthusiasm for the cause among the insurgents, but 
there was no consistent leadership. When asked, the petitioners admitted that 
their people completely lacked the means to attack Manila. I his c ity w as in no 
apparent danger. 2 * * * * 

I he consul, Knappe, then returned the 30 handwritten pages and probably 
told the four gentlemen to send the petition directly to the Imperial Palace, with 
the excuse that his official position did not permit him to accept such an impor- 
tant appeal to His Imperial Majesty. From the context of the f iles and the so-called 
marginal notes by Wilhelm II at the top of the consuls first report, it can also be 
assumed that the petition was written because of the impact on the petitioners of 
zals untimely death at Bagumbayan field. 

It is interesting to read the German Emperors comment on this report from 

°ng Kong dated 1 February 1897. 2 7 Wilhelm II wrote in one of his marginal 
notes: 

I he information is in complete agreement with a report I have just re- 

ceived from Admiral Tirpitz 8 on the situation in Manila. The wish to come 

under German sovereignty is common (in the Philippines), as the treatment of 

the natives by the Spanish government, which is motivated by fear, (and, [the 

treatment?]) of the Mexicans by Cortes and his Zylotes [presumably, zealots — 

religious fanatics are what is meant here] (is not good in any way). ’ Rizal was 


944 


J 


\\ h >N/1 K Fhe Petition Submitted by Riziil's Friends 

onlv caught after someone was bet raved through the confession of a priest, 
hence there is terrible anger towards the latter (the friars!). 1 am determined to 
Iniv the Philippines at the first opportunity, or to take them away from the 
Spaniards when then liquidation comes. 

The files show that the “Kaiser, as the British in Hong Kong and elsewhere 
called him, was obviously the onlv person permitted to write such marginal notes 
and emphasize parts ol the text. I he consul s letter and the petition which was in- 
deed sent direu Iv to the Imperial Palace in Potsdam show these markings in the 
left-hand margin. 

Wilhelm II also read the following report from Knappc dated 7 hebruary 
1897, and approved the C on.sul s actions m the marginal note. 11 I he account 
reached the foreign Office on 1 0 March 189 . It reveals further details about the 
circumstances surrounding the petition. 

As to the insurrection in the Philippines, 1 have the honour of obedi- 
ently informing Your I hghness, following the report of hebruarv 1, that the 
Spanish C onsul appeared m mv office on the Mb of this month and related 
that the local committee representing the insurgents (in the Philippines) in- 
tends to submit a detailed petition composed in hnglish, bound with a green 
ribbon — he was privy even to such details — to one or several foreign represen- 
tatives (in I long Kong), or has already done so. 1 he petition requests an armed 
intervention on the part of the (huropean) Powers. 1 Before Don Jose de 
Navarro could continue w ith this remarks, 1 informed him given the current 
amicable relations between Germany and Spain, I would never accept such a 
petition. I hus, the discussion of this matter was concluded. 1 

The circumstances surrounding the hitherto unknown petition to the Gei- 
man emperor and the contents of the petition itself show that the commission of 
the Philippine insurgents in Hong Kong was inspired bv a rather unconventional 
political concept on the part of the leaders of the Philippine revolution gatheied in 
a camp in the province of Cavite. However, this idea must be interpreted as a des 
perate attempt to finally put an end to the endless suffering of the oppressed people 
of the Philippines with the help of foreign troops. 

The Philippine insurgents had found in Kaiser Wilhelm 11 a sympathizer to 
their cause, a monarch interested in entering into a relationship with the I hilip 
pines as a sort of protectorate of Germany. I his plan was of course not without 
self-interest on the German side. The emperor was determined to buy the 1 hilip- 
pines at the first opportunity, or send troops after events had turned in Geimany s 
favor. 

This interest is clearly illustrated, firstly by a secret, incognito investigation 
carried out by Rear Admiral Tirpitz in Manila between 25 December 1896 and 3 


945 


JHh mil.IPHIM HI V< )I l IK >N AM > HI t < »NI > 


January 1897, and secondly, through the observations made by Rear Admiral von 
Diederichs in June 1898 during a visit to the headquarters of the Philippine revo- 
lution in Old Cavite (Kawit). * 

However, Germany’s intentions and plans did not materialize, for at around 
the same time a young nation was beginning t<> pla\ a new role in shaping his- 
tory — the United States. 

Had this country not intervened when it did, the I ilipinos of today would 
have had much closer ties to Europe than to America, and Philippine history 
would have taken a much different course. 

To His Imperial Majesty The Emperor of German} 

I he following is the petition unedited. 

I he Humble Petition of the Undersigned, most respectfully sheweth 
(shows): 

1. Your petitioners are natives of the Philippines, now dispersed m different 
foreign countries, having left their own, owing to the intolerable abuses of 
the Religious orders, of the friars particularly and the dissatisfaction with 
the deficient Spanish Administration generally. 

2. I he natives of the Philippines are subject to heavy and excessive taxations, 
harsh treatment and are deprived of the rights conferred to the individual 
in all civilized countries. 

3. The Spaniards as a rule, are far from being industrious and willing work- 
ers, the only occupation they entertain is that of Government officials, lo 
support these idlers of their nation, who live upon the Public Ireasuiy, 
most of whom are pensioners capable of nothing, and others, dismissed 
public officers with pay (through the fall of Ministry) heavy impositions 
are being taxed to the prejudice of the natives who, having to satisfy same, 
find themselves almost in hard necessity of begging, and to whom in ex- 
change the post of Public officer is denied. 

4. I he worst of all, is the fall of Ministry in Spain, when this happens, which 
does occasionally, new satellites are being sent abroad, and those of the 
former Ministry are being dismissed with right to their salaries, increasing 
thus the number of public officials and pensioners. The Philippine Trea- 
sury is also saddled with having to support those officers who for some 
years have rendered services to the Government in Spain, these are being 
transported to the Philippines and as ultramarine officers are entitled to a 
larger pay exonerated from same the Government of the Peninsula from 
whom this obligation should not have been disburdened. 

3. It is obvious to every one this deficiency of their Administration, it is clear, 
it is proven the way in which they make their living and their natural ten- 
dency against industry. 


946 


\V1( >N/I K I'be Petition Submitted by Ri&d's Friends 


6. lhe Ireasurv of the Philippines has to defray many expenses which are 
due to Spain. 

1 or example the pension that is given to the Duke of Veragua and the 
Marquis of Pet mar alleging their being descendants of Columbus. 

S. \\ hat has the Philippines to do with Columbus who discovered America? 
And what has she to do with these Peers? 1 hey have not even been in that 
country nor rendered am services, and yet they are entitled to a perpetual 
pension. 

9. Id this is to be added the conservation by the Philippines of Fernando Po, 
a foreign territory in Africa belonging to Spain. 

10. As well as the pav of the Plenipotentiary Ministers of Peking and Tokyo 
and that of the C onsuls and \ tce-C onsuls in Shanghai, Amoy, Yokohama, 
Melbourne (Australia, Singapore, l longkong and Saigon, which should 
be defrayed by Spain being the Metropolis. 

1 1 . Another Nondescript Scandal and offence to economical principles is that 
of the Philippines having to defray the passage money and conservation 
of the friars and to pav salaries to so many Parish Priests who live in idle- 
ness, spending the ecclesiastical funds of the people, which expenses 
amount to over $ 1 ,3 1 1 ,788.00 according to the Estimates of the Philip- 
pines of the year 1894 and 1893 exclusive of some new Parishers and 
Missions established lately. 

1 2. l he friars apart from being defrauder of the people who accumulate large 
sums illegally in the name of the Religion, which they employ and invest 
in lands, building and shares, with large sums deposited in the Ranks of 
Europe, I longkong and Shanghai, and with many investments in differ 
ent directions, are as a matter of fact, in the Philippines not at the sen ice 
of the Religion, but simply established there with the object of speculat 
ing and deceiving people. 

1 3. These irregularities and crimes are allowed and approved of b\ the Span 
ish Government, for its own interest, as in cases of need it avails of the 
friars who are being threatened with confiscation of their estates and ex 
pulsion from the country as it happened in Spain in lS/>3, when friars 
were beheaded, many expulsed and their estates confiscated. 

1 4. The power they exercise in the Philippines is unlimited and their capacity 
equally without limit. Their corporation being rich, the directors hold the 
secular means of subjecting all men to their domination. I here is also the 
terrible demoralizing sway the priests exercise over the minds of their 
flocks by threats of spiritual denunciation; the extent of their domination 
over the common people can hardly be conceived. The State is under the 
Church which claims and is accorded supremacy, in one word, the Go\ 
eminent is not only corrupt but it is priest-ridden, therefore he whom the 
priest condemns is in sorry plight, the church and the State are both 
against him. Those acquainted with the Philippines can best tell how 


947 


n U mil I PIMM Kl V< )I t I K >N AM ) BI i < >M ) 

many cases occur in which a man obnoxious to the ( hutch has lost his 
land, wealth and liberty. 

15. rhe friars to satiate their infamous ambitions or ifu.in-, through am of 
their wicked scheme, they avail generally of their wealth, bribing the ( »ov- 
ernment, some ill-natured people, as they have done and succeeded in 
1872 by the sentence to death adjudged to the ( lergies. I >i lose Burgos, 
Jacinto Zamora and Mariano ( Gomez, parish priests of Manila ( athedral, 
the first two, and of the village of Bacoor. the- last 

1 6. This is simply because the unfortunate have been disputing their t ights as 
to the Rectory usurp by the Recoletans, r h.S fraudulent act was approved 
of by the Spanish C Government, nevertheless being against the prmc i pie of 
the ecclesiastical laws, through large sums of money invested in the wav of 
bribe. 

17. I bus they succeeded the banishment of the clergies, their enemies par- 
ticularly the three mentioned, having disputed their right to ( a i racy espe- 
cially Dr. Burgos having published in one of the home papers the robberv 
committed by a Recoletan friar who shortly after hav ing taken the posses- 
sion of the Curacy of the Village of Antipolo, vanished with the large- 
funds of the church including the precious jewelry belonging to the 
Blessed Virgin. 

18. In fact the director of the Recoletans caused to come to Manila, a 
Recoletan, parish priest of the village of Zambales who resembles very 
much Dr. Burgos and instructed him to proceed to ( .avite under this 
name to suborn the troops that garrison that small city, in order to rise in 
rebellion against the Spanish (Government, simply to have a ground to 
accuse as leader, this unfortunate man who sue c u m bed u n j ust 1 v .it the gi b- 
bet. 

I his Recoletan having accidentally met with the two Spaniards, officers, 
who were prisoners there through bad conduct one of whom is named 
Montesinos, he availed of their services and among the three succeeded 
the rebellion in the name of Dr. Burgos, who was entirely innocent of this 
infamous scheme. 

20. In the military process instituted against these three clergies, who were 
sentenced to death, and many others of good reputation and standing in 
Manila, acts in defiance of the law were being witnessed. I he victims were 
tortured and compelled to sign false declarations as it can be proven in the 
case of a retired navy sergeant named Saldua whom they compelled to 
confess in writing to be the Agent of Dr. Burgos in all his orders and com- 
munications, said to have been circulated, to those victims falsely accused 
as criminals. 

And to keep in darkness the false charge made against Dr. Burgos, they 
have maliciously omitted, when reading the death warrant, that in con- 
nection with Dr. Burgos which is to be found in the military suit. 


948 


\\ ION/1 K The Petition Submitted by Rizal's Friends 


22 . As to the unfortunate Sakiua in face of the declaration he was forced to 
sign with promise of forgiveness, made himself responsible for the rebel- 
lion. he was sentenced to die at the gibbet, where his existence was put to 
an end together with that of the three unfortunate clergies waiting anx- 
iously however, till the last moment, tor the forgiveness promised. 

23. I lis widow, in view of this infamy done toward her husband started cen- 
suring against the act of the Court Martial as having tortured and igno- 
miniouslv deceived him with the signing of the malign document, this, 
however, lasted onlv for a tew days, as she and her children disappeared 
forever. 

24 . It cannot be doubted, and it is believed even by the most humble people 
of the Philippines that the unjust execution of so many innocents and the 
disappearance of the whole family of the unfortunate Saldua are nothing 
but the result of large sums of money consigned to bribery, by the priests 
being interested in the execution of so terrible and inhuman drama. 

23. A government that acts under such an infamous principles cannot be ap- 
preciated by its subjects. 

26. The reason whv the Spanish power that be in its rules are so hated in the 
Philippines and because of the Spanish domination now in force has been 
to their knowledge, attained bv fraud and awful means. 1 he argument 
held between the Spaniards through their leader Miguel Lopez de Legaspi 
and the pettv King of the Philippines named Sikatuna was simply that the 
Spaniards onlv christened the natives of the Philippines, which they did, 
at the beginning alleging to be the basis of civilization, introducing later 
on by means of force, their obsolete domination which caused man) con- 
flicts between the natives of Cebu and Manila itself, and the Spaniards, 
though the former not approving the Spaniards fraudulent conduct. 

27. Phis just dissatisfaction with the Spanish Administration generally is jus- 
tified by the emancipation from Spain of all the actual Spanish Republics 
same being unable to bear any longer the intolerable Spanish \oke. 

28. There is Cuba now stained with blood for want of its emancipation! 

29. In view of this expositions the civilized nations will certainly recognize and 
admit that Spain has no right to power or control on the 1 hilippines 
soil — not only through the deficiency of its rules and principles, but in 
the face of agreement made between Legaspi and the petty King Sikatuna. 

30. It is lawful, it is reasonable that their liberty be given them, Spain did 
nothing for their benefit, Spaniards did not civilize them, the foreign na- 
tions are to be credited with the present state of commerce, industry and 
agriculture in the Philippines. The Spaniards have only introduced the 
Check- Deas and playing cards, which latter, is the origin of so many a 
vices that ruin a man. 

3 1 . As far as mechanical and mining industries are concerned, the foreigners 
should have the credit, they were who entrusted the natives, to them is 


THK PMII.IPPINI- \< \ V< )I t I K >N A N I ) Hl-Yc >NI ) 


due their thanks for their fitness, lor their ability. ci< being able to exer- 
cise and fulfill their respective duties. I here is the r.ulw.n from Manila to 
Dagupan, which is nothing bur a foreign concern, there the ( »old Mining 
Co. of Paracale and Mambulao belonging to the foreigners who have their 
own engineers, and the syndicate in a foreign country." I lie Spaniards are 
absolutely unfit for these lines, they have no knowledge, they have no 
capital and consequently there are abandoned still in all the island many a 
mines of Coal, Ixrad, Copper, Iron and Petroleum through their negli 
gcnce and ignorance. 

32. Apart from their being unable and unfit to civih/c the natives and the 
harsh treatment given them by the ( lovernment, t he friars are allowed and 
consented to prohibit the public native education being against the law 
which prescribes the teaching of the Spanish language!!! Natives of the 
provinces in the interior, who speaks different dialects are not conse- 
quently taught to read and write the Spanish, simply in order that the 
natives may not be able to communicate with Spain or to instruct them- 
selves by reading periodicals and books in the Spanish language which 
would show them the abuses (if the friars who defraud their money in the 
name of the Religion. 

33. The secular school Masters are, by these friars, subject to their being de- 
ported and disgraced in cases of disobedience to then infamous orders of 
not facilitating the learning of the Spanish by the poor natives. 

34. With such an Administration as that of the Spanish (Government in the 
Philippines, it is not possible to hope that people will sympathize with it, 
on the contrary, they hate, abhor and detest those who reduce them to 
slavery in a most miserable manner. 

35. This is what is going on in the Philippines, every one, poor and rich arc- 
dissatisfied with the Spanish government especially now that all sorts of 
tortures are being inflicted upon many honest persons, and deportations 
made, and still going on, of a large number of family men, of good stand- 
ing in order to defraud them and to own their estates, wealth, etc. They 
are falsely accused with the crime of being discontented with the Govern- 
ment and to be the leaders of the partisans of the Philippines indepen- 
dency. 

36. On the 29 th day of August 1 896, a revolt of little importance took place in 
a province in the interior, raised by a crowd of semi-civilized people, most 
of whom robbers. 

37. Ihese ignorant creatures were since 1888 bribed by the friars to raise a 
revolt with the view of having ground for them, the friars, to intrigue with 
the Government and denounce as leaders the wealthy people of the Phil- 
ippines. 

38. I hus they involved in their infamous plot the many unfortunate, inno- 
cent and peaceful citizens of Manila, Cavite and other provinces, who 


950 


\\ ION /I k Fhe Petition Submitted by Rizitls Friends 

were imprisoned, tortured and shot, leaving behind their cry tor mercy, 
bv the inhuman power that be!!! 

39. In view of this horrible c rime, and manv other cruelties and inquisitional 
acts attested bv the annexed issue of an Knglish paper of no example what- 
ever in the annals of the historv committed by a nation which is called 
civili/ed and C hristian. the natives, the people those creatures likewise en- 
dowed with human feelings could help sheltering the just indignation 
against the Spaniards. 

40. Their life being in danger, the inquisition introduced in their soil, the 
word merev being abolished and justice unknown what else can they 
hope? 

What is there left for them? 

41. Under such undisputable atrocities, the animal instinct of life preserva- 
tion awoke in them; there the struggle now in existence! There the politi- 
cal state of the unfortunate Philippines. 

42. Arrests were made and still being made to great numbers, until at present 
it is estimated that over 5,000 unfortunates have been collared, boul, dan- 
gerous, unfit for anv human being have been used, horrible death was that 
of 59 unfortunates who were smothered in the Dark Hole of Manila!!! 

43. When a native who is suspected t o be connected in the revolt of whom it 
is to the advantage of the Spanish, to consider connected, has been seized, 
his arms are bound back bv fastening strong cords drawn across the back 
to each elbow so tight and so long continued that the arm is invariably 
badly lacerated and cases have been noticed, as example one named Lerma 
whose flesh was so badlv torn that he lost the use of both arms before the 
end of his term. 

44. Innocents are taken to the torture chamber to confess a guilt never com- 
mitted and on persisting upon their innocence, they are first stripped and 
subjected to whipping with rattans — if this is not successful, good inqui- 
sitional thumb screws are brought into play and the poor wretches already 
half dead from the beating are bound to submit to their wishes — these 
machines were actually those used in the days of Inquisition and they were 
preserved and brought out by the priest of the Monastery of St. Augustine 
of Manila. This is but the beginning and by far the least of the tortures the 
suspects has to undergo before his fate is settled. 1 he prisoner is placed 
against a board wall and small nails driven through each finger, holding 
the arms out as in the crucifixion, until the suffering man cries out a con- 
fession, further the suspects are being bound and fastened in one position 
from which they cannot change, while a tap of water is so arranged above 
them that drop after drop falls on their heads causing great torture. 

45. Spain makes great pretensions as a Christian nation, and yet, she, with the 
connivance of the church indulges in cruel practices the most contrary to 
the merciful teaching of Christianity. 


951 


nn; miumNi ri \ c >m i k >n am > hi v< >m > 


46. The measures actually adopted for reformation In the Spanish govern 
merit in connection with the present revolt and its inhuman proceedings 
toward the wealthy and peaceful citizens of the- Philippines are. in fact, a 
crime against criminal and a punishable injustice saddled upon innocents! 
Admitting the Spanish government reserves the right to punish the parti 
sans of the rebellion presiding entirely from the facts of their, the Span 
iards having no right to domination in the Philippines, yet it is not just . it 
is not law to torture and finish with men who aspire for the- liberty and 
emancipation of their country. It is not lawful to torture to death a man 
for having entertained only in his mind and opinion of his own, to think 
is not a crime! livery man is free and human law does not condemn for 
what is sheltered in ones brain. 

47. Only in cases when that idea, or opinion, or thought is being put to effect 
against the provisions of law, in which cases some are punished accord 
ingly. 

48. I his is the reason why the people in a civilized country are not responsible 
to law for entertaining the idea of a certain form of government to be the 
best, therefore the death-dealt with the large number of rich Philippinites 
who were entirely strange to the revolt is a crime, that calls for justice. 

49. In view of these arguments and taking into account the- humamtary prin- 
ciples which distinguish the Government of your nation. 

50. Your Petitioners pray you to please accept this exposition and put in com- 
munication with the other powers, from which union of powers then the 
Philippinites most humbly implore its protection, praying to recognize in 
them the right to govern their own soil and to stop the tortures and mas- 
sacres now going on in their unfortunate country and to interest in the 
restitution, by the Spaniards, of their liberty, and independence of the 
Philippines, for which the Philippi nes will ever be warmly grateful, ac- 
knowledging the valuable assistance given them and the indemnifying the 
expenses of the military expedition that be sent to the said Islands for the 
attainment of their just and humble request and granting immunity to the 
nation that renders such a generous and humanitary protection. 

HONGKONG 29TH JANUARY 1897 
1 he President of the Commission 
Signed 

Doroteo Cortes 
Jose M. Basa 
A.G. Medina 


952 


\VH >N/l k I be Petition Submitted by Riz+ils Friends 


Notes 

1 . I would especially like to thank the helpful employees at the Political Archives of the 
f oreign t )tfue in Bonn, C iermanv, who provided a great deal of support during the 
months I spent researching this subject. All documents quoted and presented in this 
context were taken from these archives. 

Among the persons w ho have given research assistance for this paper. I wish to 
acknowledge fust of all Mr. Rudolf Bauscher Sr., a retired Russian teacher and former 
translator of various 1 uropean languages. Mr. Bauscher was of enormous help in 
reading the original old C icrman scripts. 1 1 is skills proved crucial in deciphering the 
deeper meaning of main of these findings, l or assistance on specific points and 
proofreading I am indebted to Mr. Rainer Weber from \\ ilhelmsteld (Noli \ illage), 
C iermam. and Mrs. Angelina del Rosario Banke from Vienna. Austria. Furthermore, 
for her untiring assistance in particular translations l thank Ms. Rebecca Vallach of 
I lofheim, C iermam, and New Vuk. United States. 

2. I he report of the Imperial C onsul. W. Knappe, with annex (A 2 00), addressed to 
the Foreign Of lice in Berlin, dated 1 February ISO”. 1 he annex consists of the secret 
copv of the (rejected) petition addressed to \\ ilhclm 11, contained in file R 1946 s ). 
The original petition bound w ith a green ribbon — is contained in the subsequent 
file, R 19466. Presumably, the reason for this was that the petition was sent — as ad- 
vised— directly to Ncucs Palais in Potsdam, where it was read by the Emperor, who 
added some markings. After processing the petition had been delayed somewhat, it 
finally arrived at the foreign Office in the Imperial Capital. 

3. Wilhelm Carl Oscar Knappe, b. 10 October 1833 in Erfurt, Prussia; d.5 February 
1910 in Munich, Bavaria. 

4. The telegram dated 30 January 1 89~\ sent by the Imperial Consul in Hong Kong, W. 
Knappe, to the foreign Office of the Merman Reich. It arrived the same day and is 
contained in file R 19463. It reads as follows: “Representatives of the Manila rebels 
wish to submit petition to me addressed to f I is Majesty requesting intervention of 
the powers in order to found independent republic. Refused to accept said petition. 
Knappe” 

3. Chlodwig, Prince zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfuerst, b. 31 March 1819 in Rotenburg 
a.d. Fulda, I lesse; d. 6 July 1901 in Bad Ragaz, Switzerland. He was Imperial Chan- 
cellor from 29 October 1894 until 17 October 1900. 

6. The following entry is found in Carlos Quirino's book, Whos Who in Philippine His- 
tory: “Basa, Jose Maria (b. Binondo, Manila, December 19, 1839; d. Hong Kong, 
July 10, 1907), patriot and propagandist. Received bachelor's degree in philosophy 
from the University of Santo Tomas, 1 860. Prospered with a distillery he inherited in 
Trozo, Manila. Belonged to a reformist group, was implicated in the 1872 revolt 
which led to Momburza's execution, then was exiled with others to Guam. He and 
the others were pardoned two years later, on the condition that they not return to the 
Philippines. He settled in Hong Kong with his family and became a successful mer- 
chant. His home was popular among transient Filipinos such as Jose Rizal, Marcelo 


THK PHII.IPPINT RI-.VC )I I I !< >\ W'l > HI 'i‘ >M > 

H. del Pilar, and C jraciano Pope/ Jaena. An ic rive prom* >trr < >f r hr Propaganda Move- 
ment, he donated money to the cause and smuggled copies < »t Ki/als novel and Di 
Solidaridad into the Philippines. When C icncr.il I milio Aguinaldn established the 
Hong Kong junta in 1898, he served on its revolution. irv committee and later, was 
appointed Director of Justice. During the Spanish American War. he and other 
wealthy Filipinos in exile offered money to the Ame rican government in exchange 
for granting protectorate status to or annexing the Philippines. I I i s remains were 
brought to Manila four years after his death. 

7. I he marginal notes written by Wilhelm II are. in the original form, incomplete and 
at times ambiguous. As it would be difficult to infer nuances in meaning from our 
present-day standpoint, these notes have been left as they are m an attempt to convey 
the original flavor of the text. 

8. Alfred von Tirpitz, b. 19 March 1849 in Kuestrin, Prussia; d. 1 benhausen (today 
Schaeftlarn) Bavaria. Tirpitz was promoted to secretary of the ( >erman navy after his 
return from Asia in 1897. 

9. I he meaning of this part of the sentence is unclear. I lie* re arc* t \s o possibi 1 1 1 ies: a cer- 
tain Cortes was oppressing Mexicans, or a group of Mexicans represented by ( ortes 
had a similar wish to come under C ierman sovereignty. 

10. Marginal note from the Hmperor: “Reply: approve actions of the consulate. 

1 1 . Wilhelm was born with a damaged left arm on 27 January 1 859 , at Potsdam, a town 
near Berlin, Germany. Pie was the eldest child of Crown I imcc 1 ncdrich (later Pm- 
peror Friedrich III) and Victoria, daughter of Britain’s Queen Victoria. In 1888 
Wilhelm became Emperor of Germany as Wilhelm II. After his exile on 9 November 
1918, he lived quietly as a country gentleman in Doom in the Netherlands until his 
death on 4 June 1941. 

12. The Spanish Consul in Plong Kong got the right information. The petition was in- 
deed bound with a green ribbon. 

13. The report of Imperial Consul W. Knappe, addressed to the foreign Office in Berlin, 
dated 7 February 1897, is contained in file R. 19465. 

14. See Article No. 42, “Aufstaendische hofen auf Deutschland. Krkundungen in Manila 
1896,” and Article No. 43, “Besuch im Hauptquartier der philippinischen Revolu- 
tion in Altcavite. Becbachtungen von Admiral von Dicderichs” in Boelcke, Willi A.: 
So kam das Neer zu uns. Die p reussisch -deu tsche Kriegsrnarine m Uebersee 1 822- 191 4 , 
(Frankfurt a. Main 1981). These articles are based on the same set of files as quoted 
above. 


954 


1 


ISSUES AND BEYOND 


The Pangulo Regime of the Philippines 
from the Philippine Revolution (1896) 
to the Present and the Future 


Rl MKilO E. Aciivu o 
University of the Philippines, Quezon City, Philippines 


T his paper is composed of six sections. Its introductory section identi- 
fies three types of democratic regimes — presidential, parliamentary, and 
pangulo — as well as their characteristic features. Sections 11, 111, IV, and V discuss 
the Filipino pangtdo regime, past and present. 1 he periods covered are those of the 
Philippine revolution ( 1 896- 1 90 1 ), the Commonwealth era (1935-1945), the sec- 
ond Philippine republic (1943-1945), the third Philippine republic (1946-1972), 
the fourth Philippine republic (1973-1985), and the fifth Philippine republic 
(1987-1996). The last section raises the question concerning which type of demo- 
cratic regime is appropriate to the Philippines and answers it. 

1 

There are at least three major types or models of democratic regimes — the presi- 
dential, the parliamentary, and the pangulo. T he American type of regime illustrates 
the presidential; 1 the English government, the parliamentary;’ and the regimes 
under Emilio Aguinaldo, Manuel E. Quezon, Jose P. Laurel, and Ferdinand E. 
Marcos arc examples of the pangulo. 

I he presidential regime is characterized essentially by the fixed term of the 
executive; the coequality or coordinateness of the executive with the legislature; the 
principle of checks and balance and separation of powers between the executive 
and the legislature; and the absence of a political party that unites the executive 
and the legislature. 


957 


Tin-. 1*1 III Il'l’INT HI V< >n il« >N \ N I > HI x >M > 


As a consequence of the fixed term of office <>t the cxciutivc. he cannot he 
removed from his office, except when he is impeached and indued tor termination 
of his term of office after being impeached. ( )wing t<> the principle of checks and 
balance and separation of powers, as well as the absence <>l a political party which 
unites the executive and the legislature, endemic struggle tor power or gridlock in 
the government frequently takes place in the polity: and bicephahc or polycephalic 
leadership occurs. 

I he parliamentary regime is characterized by t he doc t rmc of no t ixed term of 
office of the executive; the subordinate status of the executive to the legislature as a 
corollary of the principle of supremacy of the parliament : and the fusion of powers 
of the top officials of the executive and the legislature. 

As a result of the features of a parliamentary regime, no executive - or govern- 
ment can continue in office if it has lost the confidence of the - paihament: policy 
formulation and implementation in theory are smooth; and hiccphalic or 
polycephalic leadership in the polity in theory is avoided. 

J he pangulo regime has three principal features. I he fust is about the rela- 
tion of the executive to the legislature. Where the executive is < oouliuaw vv tth the 
legislature in a presidential system, and the executive is subordinate to the legisla- 
ture in a parliamentary system, owing to the principle of the supremacy of par- 
liament, in the pangulo regime the executive is supet -oidinnn to iIk legislature, 
owing to the principle of the dominance of the executive. I his chatacteristic is the 
most important feature of a pangulo regime. If this characteristic is absent, even if 
the two other features are present, a regime cannot be a fully developed pangulo 
regime. 

I he second feature of a pangulo regime is concerned with a cultural value 
which is prescribed for the political elite and the people in the polity. The cultural 
value of the pangulo regime is the pagdamay (sharing with and caring for one an- 
other) value. This norm prescribes that the political elite and the people in the 
polity must abide by the tenet of “Ang sakit ng kalingkingan ay damdam ng buong 
katawan.” (The pain suffered by the little finger is suffered bv the whole body). 

T his folk saying isTagalog, but the value prescribed by it is known to or found in 
all the major ethnic Filipino groups. Thus, the Ilocano equivalent is: “Uray la ti 
ktkitti magaradgadan, Isu arnin ti bagi ti masakitan.” (Even if only the little finger 
which is scratched, the whole body feels the pain). The Ciebuanos put this value as 
follows; “Angsamad sa kumingking, Pagabation sa tibuok laws.” (The pain of the 
little finger is suffered by the whole body). 

The third characteristic feature of the pangulo regime is concerned with 
the basis of the selection or recruitment of the executive. In the pangulo regime, 
the people elect the regime’s executive, either directly or indirectly. Phis charac- 
teristic is found not only in a pangulo regime, but it also obtains in the presidential 
and parliamentary regimes. Hence, all these three forms of government are demo- 
cratic. 


958 


\i il’Al (.1 The Pangulo Regime of the Philippines 


II 

A pangulo regime existed in the country during the Philippine revolution (1896- 
1901 ). The idea for this regime emerged and was concretized in the thoughts and 
practice of governance of Andres Bonifacio and Emilio Jacinto, the leaders of the 
first phase of the Philippine revolution (1896-1897). Bonifacio was the supremo of 
the Katipunan and the pangulo of the haring bayan (the sovereign people). Jacinto 
was “the Brains of the Katipunan" and the military commandant of- northern 
Manila. 

Both Katipunan leaders prescribed pagdamay. Bonifacio's teaching on 
pagdamay is found in his decalogue and that of Jacinto is found in his Liwanag at 
Dilim. Bonifacio enjoined the people and the Katipuneros, among others, the fol- 
lowing: “Insofar as it is within thy power, share thy means with the poor and the 
unfortunate. " * 

Jacinto's articulation of pagdaniay is explicit and more philosophical than 
Bonifacio s. Jacinto said: l ovc is the spring from which the needed damayan (shar- 
ing and caring for each other) flows If love is absent no community will last, tor 

it will vanish from the surface of the earth. 

It was, however, in the second phase of the Philippine revolution (IS 98- 
1 90 1 ) that a pangulo regime was established. It was Emilio Aguinaldo, the national 
supremo of the second phase of the Philippine revolution, who established the 
pangtdo regime. Phis pangulo regime had a constitution, popularly known as the 
Malolos Constitution (for it was made in Malolos, Bulacan), formulated in IS )S 
and promulgated in 1899. (> After the promulgation of the Malolos Constitution 
on 23 January 1 899, Aguinaldo was chosen and proclaimed as president of the Re- 
public of the Philippines by the Malolos Congress. 

Although the Malolos Constitution provided for a very powerful national 
assembly (legislature), subordinating the president to the Assembly, Aguinaldo 
was able to secure from Congress the approval of transitory provisions of the con- 
stitution suspending articles which would weaken the powers of the president to 
carry on the struggle for independence. One of these transitory provisions of the 
Malolos Constitution authorizes the government to issue deciees with the force °f 
law in order to cope successfully with questions and difficulties not provided b\ 
the laws" arising from unforeseen events “during the time the country ma\ have to 
struggle for its independence" while Congress is closed. s I hus, in spite of the con 
stitution, Aguinaldo was enabled to continue to play the role of national supierno 
which was his earlier position as national leader of the Philippine revolution. 

As regards the articulation of pagdamay by Aguinaldo, it was not onh foi 
Katipuneros, but also for all Filipinos, to rescue them from slavery and oppiession 
by Spain. 9 

During the Commonwealth period (1933-1945), a pangulo regime also ex- 
isted in the Philippines. There was a fundamental law for the Commonwealth, 


959 


THI-. milimNI HIV( )|l NON W'l ) Hi \i >N I > 

which was formulated and ratified in ISM* I ‘MS. Manuel I Quezon uas elected 
by direct vote of the people in 1935 .is the first president of the ( ornmonwealth. 
I he 1935 Constitution provided for a presidential government; therefore. Qu- 
ezon was supposed to coordinate with the National Assemble. Hut in spite of the 
presidential government established by the constitution, Quezon uas the national 
chief of the Philippines, for he set aside the presidential system and supplanted it 
by a patigulo regime. Joseph Ralston Hayden of the* I mversitv of Mulligan, who 
also served as vice governor-general of the Philippines before the ( ornmonwealth 
period, said that when Quezon submitted his initial legislat i ve program during the 
beginning of the Commonwealth era, he set up an office in the I egislative Palace 
and went there personally to see his bills through. 

Gabriel Fabella, former head of the I )epartment of i listnrv of tlu* l mversitv 
of the Philippines and member of the (.ornmonwealth National Assembly, stated 
that 95 percent of the laws enacted by the National Assembly came from Mala- 
canang Palace. 12 Jose Romero, who was a top official of the same National Assem- 
bly, characterized Quezon as follows: “President Quezon has become the central 
figure in the constellation of contemporary statesmen around which the other stars 
revolve and from whom they borrow their lights. 

Quezon expressed his adherence to the Filipino value of p<igr/<n>hiy in his pro- 
gram of social justice. Gripaldo observed that social justice was the cornerstone of 
Quezon’s social thought.” 1 ' 4 Quezon articulated his concept of social justice as 

justice not only for a few alone, but for all, especially for the poor workingmen 
who are, as it usually happens, injured in their rights; it is justice for everyone, 
now especially, when all are aware that the field laborers and factory hands are 
of the belief that they must be given that to which they are entitled. 1 


Ill 

Before the establishment of the third Philippine republic, 4 July 1946, a second 
Philippine republic was in operation in the archipelago from 14 October 1943, 
when it was inaugurated until 17 August 1945, when Jose P. Laurel, the president 
° sec ond republic, decreed that the republic ceased to exist. Phis republic is 
sometimes known as the Japanese-sponsored republic in Philippine history. 

The regime of the second republic was a pangnlo regime. Jose P. Laurel, who 
served as the president of the second republic, was chosen by the people indirectly 
t rough the National Assembly, the national legislature of the republic, which 
elected him as president. 

Laurel as chief executive was a dominant executive as leader of the polity. 1 he 
constitution of the second republic gave the president dominant powers in domes- 
tic and foreign affairs. 1 Laurel himself stated that th e position and power of the 
president of the second republic was dominant. Laurel said: 


960 


UiPAl O The P.tngulo Regime of the Philippines 

c the broad and centralized powers vested by the Constitution in the 
President ot the Republic. hardly any explanation is needed. In the inter-rela- 
tion ot powers ut go\ eminent a center ol political gravin’ must, in the nature of 
tilings, be provided. Mich center must necessarily be the Executive, especially 
in time ot war oi national emergenev... 

I his plnlosophv is not new. tor even in the so-called democratic coun- 
tries ot the wot Id tlie position ot the Chief Executive becomes quasi-dictatorial 
in c liar.K ter \\ hen so demanded bv extraordinary circumstances or by national 
crisis or emergeiu \ . 

The value of piigeLmi 4 /) was the principal reason why Laurel decided to serve 
as president of the second republic. He realized that accepting the presidency of 
the republic could cost bis life, for he could not be disloyal or traitorous to the 
Filipino people who w ere the central focus of his political philosophy and nation- 
alism . 1 1 he lapanese could execute him it he insisted on defending the national 
interest or the constitutional rights ot Filipinos. Laurel also knew that the Japanese 
were the conquerors of Asia, including the Philippines, and that the Japanese were 
the belligerent occupying forces in Asia. As the conquerors ot Asia, including rhe 
Philippines, with proven cruelty and absolute powers in the Philippines and else- 
where in Asia, they certainly could impose their absolute power and inflict their 
cruelty on the Philippines and the Filipinos. Also, Laurel realized that war was al- 
ways uncertain insofar at its outcome was concerned, and that the Americans could 
eventually emerge victorious. If this eventuality occurred all those who served un- 
der the Japanese-imposed republic could be tried for treason. But Laurel also real- 
ized that if men like himself refused to serve as top officials of the second republic 

there were terrible alternative consequences: rhe Japanese would head rhe govern- 
ment of the Philippines. The lapanese, ignorant of Filipino culture, traditions, and 
law, and well known for their brutality, could ride rough-shod over the institutions, 
traditions, properties, honor, and lives of the people. If unscrupulous and unpatri- 
otic Filipinos were allowed to run the country, the consequences would be as disas- 
trous as those that would result under the Japanese rule, or if not disastrous, at the 
least the national interest or welfare of the people or the nation would be endan- 
gered. I hc alternative policy to approach the issue for men like Laurel, therefore, 
was patriotic service and sacrifice for the national interest of the country and the 
best interests of the people by accepting the terrible and dangerous task of serving 
as top officials of the second republic. Ju 

Laurel's piigrLntuiy, therefore, was expressed as Rizal expressed his pagdamay 
for the Philippines by means of self-sacrifice or willingness to offer life for the re- 
demption of the motherland and the best interests of the people. This sacrifice was 
in imitation of Rizal who expressed this value in his farewell poem: Que es 
hermoso caer por darte vuclo, Morir por darte vida, Morir bajo tu cielo. 

After the interlude of the second republic, all the presidents of the third re- 
public that started on 4 July 1 946, attempted to establish a pangulo regime. Except 


961 


mi- run irnsi kivoii -non wi-hi »<im» 


for Ferdinand E. Marcos, ail the presidents failed r<> establish a funigulo regime, 
rhey failed because of two major facts: I 1) there was no sufficient crisis or emer- 
gency situation in their administrations that required the establishment of a 
pangnlo regime; and (2) the Congress and the Supreme < curt during then times 
were vigorous and successful in preventing the presidents from establishing a 
pangulo regime. Nevertheless, Romani observed that during the- period from 1946 
to 1 956, the presidents had the better of the- legislatures of the times. 

Romani said: “Constitutionally, organizationally, and politically, the Philip- 
pine President has the better of Congress, and except for recent events which point 
to a slightly different balance of power, he will continue to be a major actor in the 
formulation of Philippine public policy. 

IV 

Perdinand E. Marcos, however, was able to establish a pungulo regime by the mid- 
1970s. He became the dominant national leader with such roles as chief of state, 
chief executive, chief administrator, commander-in-chief of the Armed forces, 
chief of foreign relations, party chief, martial law chief, chief legislator (for a cer- 
tain period as sole legislator), and chief exponent of the ideology of the New Soci- 
ety. 2 ' Marcos was elected directly by the people as President in 1 965 and reelected 
in 1969. 

It was by means of his roles as sole legislator, chief legislator, and party chief 
that Marcos was able to unite the executive and the legislature. 1 I is roles of sole 
legislator and chief legislator were obtained through martial law which the Su- 
preme Court declared valid in Aquino vs. Enriler' The Supreme Court subse- 
quently recognized that the president during the martial law period could propose 
amendments to the constitution and exercise the role of sole legislator. 1 he presi- 
dent lost the role of sole legislator in 1 98 1 under Amendment No. 5 of the 1 976 
amendments of the Constitution. Amendment 5 stated that the President shall 
continue to exercise legislative powers until martial law shall have been lifted. 
Martial law was lifted in 1981. However, under Amendment No. 6 of the same 
1976 amendments, the president retained legislative powers to issue decrees, or- 
ers, or letters of instruction “which shall form part of the law under two circum- 
stances. First, the president had judged that “there existed a grave emergency or 
imminence thereof.” Second, “the interim Batasang Pambansa or the regular Na- 
tional Assembly failed or was unable to act adequately on any matter for any rea- 
son that the Presidents judgment required immediate action.** 0 

Marcos was also able to unite the executive and the legislature by means of 
t e Kilusang Bagong Lipunan (KBL) [New Society Movement] which was estab- 
ished initially as a movement. But subsequently it was transformed into a political 
party, which the Supreme Court recognized as a party in 1981. The KBL won prac- 
tically all the seats in the interim Batasang Pambansa in 1 978 and an overwhelm- 
ing number of seats in the regular National Assembly in 1 984. Before Marcos, 

962 


J 


\* iP \l O 1 he Pangulo Regime of the Philippines 

presidents used to be mere titular heads of their political parties, but in the 1981 
amendments to the constitution and bvlaws of the KBL the president was made 
party chief, it he was a member of the partw as well as presiding officer of the Cen- 
tral C Ommittee and National C onvention of the party. 2 

As chief exponent of the ideology of the New Society, Marcos also was able to 
fo rue tlu- unite of the executive and the legislature. Marcos started articulating the 
ideology of the New Society in 19^1. By the second half of the 1970s and the first 
half of the 198(K the ideology as expounded by Marcos had been focused on the 
poor. 

With regard to the value of pdgd*witi\\ Marcos articulated this in his ideology 
in the mid- 1 960 s, 1 9Ts. and the early 1980s, shifting the focus of his pugdamay 
from the general to the specific, although its main thrust — to make the Philippines 
great again —remained constant. 

The initial articulation of his pagdamay was general, but was also fervent. 

Thus, Marcos declared in his inaugural address as president on 30 December 1965: 

This nation can he great again We must renew the vision of greatness 

for our country.. . . We must awaken the hero inherent in every man.... 1 ask 
not for one hero alone among you but for many. In fact 1 ask for all of you to 
be heroes of our nation. Offering all our efforts to our Creator, we must drive 
ourselves to he great again. 2S 

By the 1 970s and the first half of the 1980s, Marcos focused hi spttgdanuiyon 
a specific target — the people in the grass-roots and the disadvantaged. What Mar 
cos said in 1985, his last book on ideology, reiterated and summarized his 
pagdtwiuy. I bus, Marcos declared in 1985: 

WA must intensify our efforts to reach our people at the grassroots, to 
make sure that government programs find expression in the daily lives of our 
people to draw the poor, the disadvantaged and the oppressed into the main- 
stream of development. Development which will give the people a meaningful 
stake in the future of the country is still the best response to elements that seek 
to destroy our society. 

c 

The expression of Marcos’ pagdamny in the mid-1960s was in imitation o 
Rizal whom he idolized in his student days and his later political life. Thus, Mar 
cos zeroed in on sacrifice and called for a politics of heroism. It was also in irruta 
tion of Laurel, whom he idolized as mentor at the University of the Philipp ines 

and to whom he was grateful. (Laurels ponencinm the unanimous Supreme Court 

decision which acquitted him and his father for the crime of murder in the 
Nalundasan case.)' 0 

Marcos shifted the focus 
mid-1 960s of targeting the nati 


of his pngdamay from the general position oi the 
>n to the focus on the people in the grass-roots an 


L. 


963 


I I if I'HII II'I'IM KIVOll I |C )N \M)HI in\|i 


the disadvantaged in the 1 9H)s and carl\ i9S0s haausi he had seen and experi- 
enced personally and closclv the plight and problems of the poor and the disadvan- 
taged after he had traveled all river the- countrv toward the end of Ins first term as 
president in 1968 in preparation for his plan to run for reflection in 1 969. Thus, 
he zeroed in on the people in the barrios. the- | )oor all over the country, and Filipi- 
nos in marginal areas and Mindanao. I his police uas his for the disad- 

vantaged. 

Marcos’ achievements as pan^uln in the realm of domestic affairs and inter- 
national relations cannot be denigrated as mam strategic leaders in the economy, 
culture, the mass media, the government, and other sectors of society had been 
doing, or are still doing. His achievements as /hing ul<> are significant and consider- 
able. 


I he following are significant successes of Marcos as funi^ulo'. the institution- 
alization of barangay democracy; dignifying and of f u lallv rcc ogni/ing the achieve- 
ments of Filipino artists and scientists; the establishment of the Mindanao State 
University and the Development Academy of the Philippines; the construction of 
the Cultural Center of the Philippines and the Philippine International Conven- 
tion Center; the restoration of the ancient walls of Intramuros and t he greening of 
the Quezon Memorial Circle; enactment of the first effective land reform law; the 
electrification of rural areas; the construction of extensive infrastructure — roads, 
bridges, piers, irrigation systems, airports — all over the countrv; the construction 
of various hospitals — the Heart Center, the I .ting ( Center, the Kidney Institute, and 
others; the completion of the Philippine Highway, the North Fx press Highway, 
the South Express Highway, the Eight Railway 'Transport System; and the building 
of thousands : of Marcos-type schools in the rural areas/ 1 

In foreign affairs, he reduced the 99-year term of the American bases to 25 
years; participated in the establishment and development of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN); broadened the ambit and orbit of Ph ilippir 


)ine 


international relations by opening diplomatic relations with communist countries 
sue as the Peoples Republic of China, Cuba, and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
pu lies, and promoted the establishment of a new world economic order based 
modernization and development of I bird NX^orld nations/ 


V 

In our study of the regimes or the leaders of regimes from the Philippine revolu- 
tion (18J6) to Marcos (1986), the general pattern is that pangulo regimes were es- 
13 1S j ? ’ ° r ^ c * lese wer e not established, at least, the administrations that ob- 
tained had executives or presidents who had the better of the legislatures. 

, u e / u ' no a< ^ rn ' n ‘ strat ' on is an exception. Neither did it have a president 
who had the better of the Congress. Consequently, the Aquino governments per- 
formance in both domestic and foreign affairs was dismal. Aquino could go down 
in i ippine history as the most ineffective president of the country. 


964 


AC » PALO The Pangulo Regime of the Philippines 


Because Corazon C. Aquino was an ineffective president, several political 
leaders such as former Speaker Ramon Mitra and several senators became critical of 
the presidential system. Consequently, they moved to have the 1987 constitution 
amended f rom the presidential form to the parliamentary type. Those legislators 
believed that the presidential system produced a weak government or executive. 

What is the explanation for the failure of the Aquino administration to es- 
tablish a pangulo regime, or even only to produce a president who had the better of 
Congress? 

C 1 

The answer to this question is that Aquino was a paradiix , a type of national 
leader who had neither a vision, much less an ideology nor a strong organization.” 
Vision and organization are political resources absolutely required for the effective- 
ness of a national leader. The term paradiix is a neologism, derived from the Latin 
word dux, a leader; and from a Greek prefix para, one meaning of which is irregu- 
lar, as in paramilitary. The polar opposite of paradiix is supremo , a type of effective 
leader, for he has a strong political organization to support his policies and a vision 
to provide him objectives, goals, strategy and tactics, to effect and implement his 
policies. 

Aquino did not organize and lead a political party, unlike Marcos who did. 
When colleagues or advisers advised her to organize and lead a part} 7 , she refused. 
She did launch the Kabisig movement, hut this organization was not a political 
party but a movement composed of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). In 
any case, it was too late in the day for Kabisig to give her effective support in poli- 
tics. It was launched toward the end oi her presidency and was bound to fiagment, 
for it was composed of disparate interest groups with conflicting or at least com- 


peting interests. 

As regards vision, she lacked one during her presidency. According to 
Amando Doronila, a political analyst, Aquino started her public career “without a 
vision — or call it political program. Her main motivation in the “yellow” rebellion 
against former President Marcos was merely to replace him because he was ex- 
tremely corrupt, he ruined the economy, he was outrageously repiessive and he was 
responsible for murdering Benigno Aquino. However, Doionila states that these 
“did not constitute a political program that offered the alternative to all that was 
seen as wrong and bad about the Marcos regime. 1 bus, the Aquino government 
was a reactive government, “a government of fits and starts... its best claim to sue 

cess is that it had managed to survive. 1 

As regards Fidel V. Ramos, who was elected in 1992 with a plurality of votes 
constituting about 24 percent of all the votes cast for all the seven presidential can 
didates, he has been attempting to establish a pangulo regime in the country and to 
serve as a pangulo executive. His pagdamay for the nation is aiticulated in his vision 
called “The Philippines 2000,” whose objective is to transform the Philippines into 
a new industrializing country (NIC) by the year 2000. ‘ 

Unlike Aquino who had neither led nor joined a political party, Ramos had 
a small political party, initially called Lakas lao, later Lakas EDSA, and very much 


965 


I HI. I'i ill 1 1*1*1 S. I Kf ■.< )| I l> ■■■•.I m .• I'.l 

later simply LAKAS, which allied with the Nation. ii I nnm ot ( hnstian Demo- 
crats (NUCD), a minuscule parts-. I let ice. durum t .he <. L ■< i n m\ in 1 09.2 and there- 
after the political party of Ramos was called I \k WNl < 1 >. In I *»*>■*. this small 
hyphenated party made a coalition with i \P> \N also a small parts, the shorter 
name of Laban ng Demokr.it ikong 1’ilipino. led In lormei Senate President 
Edgardo Angara. The coalition staved togethet until I * >' > S and the first three or 
four months of I 996. 

While the coalition of IAKAS I A MAN held, tlu- Kamos government was 
able to effect a remarkable economic turnaround in 1 as well as a qualified 
success in the field of politics, especially in the legislative arena where Ramos was 
embattled in pushing through Ins needed legislative proposals such as the value- 
added tax (VAT) bill and the ( »encral Agreement on I a 1 1 1 f s 1 1 a c lc- i < , \ I I ) legisla- 
tive proposal. w In his battle tor needed economic laws, Kamos was successful in 

1995. 

Ramos, therefore, is not a paradux like Aquino, foi Kamos is more endowed 
with political resources than Aquino, albeit the limited powei of his political re- 
sources. Nevertheless, a president elected only by a plurality of votes, supported by 
a weak or fragile party organ i/at ion , con side red as a la u led uc k exec lit i ve (for his 
term will be officially terminated by a prov ision of the I 98" < oust it ut ion in 1998), 
and with a limited program of government as articulated in I lie Philippines 
2000, Ramos definitely cannot establish a pttugulo regime. Neithei can he become 
a supremo national leader. 


VI 


I end by returning to the three kinds of democratic regimes- the presidential, the 
parliamentary, and the pangulo. Which of these three regimes is the most appli- 
cable to and appropriate for the Philippines by the year 2000 and beyond? 

In“In Defense of a Pangulo Regime, a Lilipino Presidential System”"’ I argue 
for the pangulo regime and against the parliamentary and presidential systems. 

Let me summarize why a pangulo regime is applicable to and appropriate for 
the Philippines. 

L By the year 2000, the several crises confronting the Philippines today will 
be aggravated by relentless and unstoppable forces. These crises are the population 
crisis, the environment crisis, the crisis of identity, the crisis of distribution, the 
ciisis of participation, and the crisis of government. In the nature of things, a re- 
gime led by a pangulo is the most effective in coping with those crises. 

2. I he pangulo regime is democratic. Supported also by the principles of lib- 
erty and constitutionalism, which have a long tradition in the Philippines, this re- 
gime is a liberal and constitutional democracy. 

3. The pangulo regime has a people-oriented and humanistic value — the 
value of pagdamay. 


966 


Ac '.PA I O The Pangulo Regime of the Philippines 


Notes 


A. 




5. 

6 . 

7. 


cS. 

9. 


10 . 


12 . 

13 . 

14. 

15. 

16. 


lor an authoritative article on the presidential term ot government, see Richard E. 
Neustadt. “Presidential Government/' David L. Sills, ed., International Encyclopedia 
of the Social Sciences (New York: MacMillan Company and The Free Press, 1968), 
Yol. 1 2, pp. * 1 5 1 -*5(>. 

l or an authoritative article on the parliamentary system, see Leon D. Epstein, “Par- 
liamcmarv Government," International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 11, 


pp. 1 19-t26. 


I discussed the pnngnlo regime in the following articles; 

a. “ Pangulo Regime and Civilization: Towards a Theory of Philippine Government 
and Politics," Solidarity, No. 102 (1985): 18-2 . 

b. In I Vfense of a Pangulo Regime, A Filipino Presidential System,” a paper read 
at the First National Conference on the Constitution on July 15-17. 1994 at the 
Asian Institute of Management, Makati. Mitueo. 

e. Flie Philippines from Communal to Societal Pangulo Regime,” Remigto E. 
Agpalo, Adventures in Political Science (Quezon Gin-: University of the Philip- 
pines Press, 1996), pp. 195-233. 

Teodoro A. Agoncillo. The Writings and Trial of Andres Bonifacio (Manila: Manila 

C 'entennial Commission, 1963). p. 1. 

Translation by the author of the original Tagalog in Jose P. Santos, Bubay at ruga 

Similar ni lirnilio Jacinto (Mavnila: 1935), pp- 34-35. 

The full text of the Malolos Constitution is included in The Development of the Phil- 


ippine Constitution (Manila: National Media Center, 1 974), pp. 31 46. 

See Felipe C. Calderon, “My Memoirs of the Philippine Revolution,” in Zotlo M. 
C hiking, ed.. Encyclopedia of the Philippines (Manila: Exequtel Flora, 1957), Vol. XV, 
pp. 215-216. The complete memoirs, pp. 192-24/. 

Malolos Constitution, “ lransitory Provisions, Art. )). 

O.IX Corpuz, The Roots of the Filipino Nation (Quezon City: AKLAH1 Foundation, 
Inc., 1989), Vol. II. The generalization of Aguinaldos pagdamay is based on his cir- 
cular letter to the Katipunan, mid-July 1 898, quoted by Corpuz, Vol. II, P- 306 
Fhe full text of the 1935 Constitution is included in the Development of the 1 v tp- 
pine Constitution , pp. 95-1 15. 

Joseph Ralston Hayden, The Philippines: A Study in National Development ! New 
York: MacMillan Co., 1955), p. 68. 


“Myth After Quezon,” Historical Bulletin, X (June 1966), 107. 

Not So Long Ago: Chronicle of My Life, limes and Contempoianes (Quezon City 
Alemar-Phoenix Publishing House, 1979), p. 127. 

Rolando M. Gripaldo, The Qttezon-Wins/ow Correspondence and Other Essays (Ma- 
n i la; De La Salle University Press, 1994), p. 131. 

Ibid., p. 1 32. 

Remigio E. Agpalo, Jose /? Laurel: National Leader and Political Philosopher (Manila: 
Jose P. Laurel Memorial Foundation, 1992), p. 212. 


967 




17 . 


18 . 

19. 

20 . 

21 . 


22 . 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 


34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 


39. 

40. 


mi. mu if’i'iM m voii iion > i-.i •.< >ni > 

I lie full text of the const it in ion of the see mid tcpiihl u 1 1 1 t s is nn hided .is \ppcn- 
dix 28 in Alejandro f ernande/. Intern, /nun. i! / ,iu in >:ne Relations l S 4 AS’ - / 9*/6 

(Quezon City: University of the Philippines Press 1 9 ” 1 pp * \u *5 
Jose P. Laurel: National ! '.curler, p. I 93. 

Ibid., Chapter X, pp. 317-345. 

Jose P. Laurel, ‘"War Memoirs, in / fn e P l nurd Inhute Pe< olid tion>. Pcapprais- 
als ([Manila:] Jose P. baurel Memorial houndation. 1 C K>2). pp 5f> 6 1 
These lines are excerpted from Jose Ki/al’s farewell poem, whose full text is published 
in Leon Ma. Guerrero, The f irst Ltltptno: A litogrnphy of /<> ( Pirn / ( Manila; lose Rizal 
Centennial Commission, 1963), pp- 48 1 482. 

John H. Romani. / he Philippine Preside )u~y (Manila: Institute of Public Administra- 
tion, 1956), p. 148. 

Remigio E. Agpalo, “The Philippine Executive.” Adventures m Political Science* pp. 

307-311. 

Also popularly known a.s the Martial Law ( .uses, 59 S( RA 1 83 H September 1 9 3)» 
‘1976 Amendments,” The Development of the Philippine ( onstitutton. p. ~\S. 

Ibid., p. 78. 

Remigio E. Agpalo, “leadership and Types of Leaders: locus on I erdinand E. Mar- 
cos and Corazon C. Acjuino,” Adventures in Political Science . pp. 259-260. 

!bid., p. 256. 

1 bid., p. 258. 

I his is the popular name of the case. It is formally cited in law books as People v. 
Mariano R. Marcos, et al, 70 Phil. 468 (22 ( )ctober 1 940). 

Adventures in Political Science, p. 260. 

1 b i d . , p. 260. 

I his type of national leader is one of four types of Remigio h. Agpalo s typology of 
political leaders. The typology is discussed in Adventures in Political Science, pp. 253- 
Corazon C. Aquino’s being a paradux is discussed on pp. 26 1 -264. 

Ibld *> pp. 254-255. 

Ibid -> p. 263. 

Ibid -> p- 263. 

Ibid -> p. 263. 

Remigio E. Agpalo, “The Philipp ines: Remarkable fconomic Iurnaround and 
Qualified Political Success,” Southeast Asian Affairs 1 995 (Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies. 1995), p. 271 . 

Ibld > PP- 267-270. 

See Note No. 3-b. 


968 


Authority and Power in the Philippine 
Political Systems of 1896 and 1996 


A.E. Lapitan 
U niversity of Doyton, Dayton, Ohio, U.S.A. 


T he Philippine Revolution of 1896 was a historic event in the political 
life of the Filipino people. Many scholars have studied and written about it 
in-depth. Few have established some connection between this past revolutionary 
struggle and contemporary political affairs in the Philippines until the advent o 
martial rule in 1972-1986 and the subsequent "people revolution” of 1986. is 
essay is part of the tradition of using the past to better understand the present an 
avoid the conditions for revolutionary struggle in the future. 

Revolution is a radical step tor bringing about change in a politica s>stei 
is often used as an instrument of last resort for the failure of more peaceful ap- 
proaches. The Philippine Revolution of 1896 was a last resort of the reform move- 
ment to bring about much-needed changes in Spains colonial regime in t e 
ippines in the latter half of the 19th century. ~ It was a direct challenge to pa 

colonial authority in the Philippines. . r 

Revolutionary movements usually develop over time under con ltioi 
inequality and political repression. More often, external and internal foices c 
together to create the conditions for the birth of the revolutionary mo\ ement. 
the case of the Philippine Revolution of 1896, a combination of developments i 
S pain and in the Philippines promoted its implementation. Spain in the attei a 
of the 1 9th century was a political system in decline. Torn by civil war, the forces o 
political liberalism finally won over absolutism and produced foi Spain a constitu 
tional government, however short-lived, in 1868/ 1 his liberal orientation roug t 
to the Philippines a governor-general who was more supportive of politica re 
form. ‘ Unfortunately, it did not last very long because in 1871 a repressive regime 


969 


rm t’Hii ii-iMsf mi \< >i i 1 1< >n i * mi 1 1 i 


was restored to power. It triggered t lie < avite Mutim and tin subs. ■< pu iit mar t \ r 
dom of the three priests: Com c-/, Burgos, and /.amor.i. I fuse dc\cl<ipnunts in- 
tensified the activities of the leadership of the reform movement m it mp.ig.mda 

abroad but it also activated more repressivi- me.isutes ftom th Sp a: n.mthoimes 

in the Philippines. It was under these conditions that the K.itij • as 1 >< >i n . the 

movement which provided the organ i /a non and leadership of i In Pin . ippme Revo 
lution of 1 896. 

I he Philippines was going through m.i|or social, economu and politua! 
changes in the beginning of the I 9th century. In I80‘), it was opened to world 
trade, which contributed to its economic development . foreign enterprises were 
established in Manila and thecountrv was connected In trade with othet capitals 
of the world. This development brought not onk economn pn.spents to a grow 
ing Filipino middle class but also introduced them to liberal ideas popular among 
European intellectual circles at the time. A few I ilipmos mu It as lose P Ki/al had 
the opportunity to travel and study in Europe and theii exposure to libetal ideas 
became more extensive.' The ilustrndo class became leaders of the Propaganda 
Movement abroad and, through their written works, promoted the development 
of Filipino nationalism. Others joined the leadership of the Katipunan and the 
Philippine Revolution of 1896. 

Objectives of the Study 

It may appear overly simplistic to compare the basis of authority and tin- structure 
of power in the Philippines of 1 896 and 1996 as a way of using the past to under- 
stand the present and the future direction of the count rv. After all, I 896 was much 
different from 1 996. The year 1 896 was almost the end of Spanish rule in the Phil- 
ippines while 1 996 is the 1 Oth year of the new republic under the I 986 ( (institu- 
tion. There are more differences than similarities between these two historical pe- 
riods. Yet a close reading and analysis of the sources of the Spanish administration 
of the Philippines during the last part of the I 9th century and contemporary Phil- 
ippines at the end of martial rule in 1986, particularly as it concerns the structure 
of power, reveals many interesting similarities." 

It is these similarities in the structure of power between the Spanish colonial 
system in the late 19th century and the contemporary political system in the Phil- 
ippines which is the main focus of this study. Conceptually, political power is a 
much different concept than authority. It refers to the role of an individual or 
group to establish the institutions and processes of a political system within which 
other individuals and groups must interact to promote their interests. 1 *’ 1’his in- 
cludes the power to establish the economic system, the financial system, the secu- 
rity system, and the knowledge system. 1 ^ In most political systems, whether they 
ate authoritarian or democratic in orientation, the structure of power is oligarchi- 
cal, which means that a Few individuals and groups exercise power to establish or 


970 


>v».Yfr;» of IS'H'.Uld ! K)K k' 


maintain t I k \ r^ \ : : at n »:i\ ami pnu ewes wt the poliiic.il >\ stem tor the promotion ot 
tlu n own w suai :: ;aio:s . nc^c uuimdu.iU atul groups control the eeonomie 
svMem. tiu- tinam s\su in. tm h\uiu\ swtem. as well a> the knowledge system 
within wim ii othei :nli\ ntu.iis ami gtoups must interact. I’ndcr .m oligarchical 
system, tiu nlig.iu In pla\ s the nuisu w h lie the others must dance to it. 

I he tomep: ot .uithotm. ini tlu otliet liatul. refers to the right ot an indi- 
vidual <u gtmip to iw v Mending to Max Weber, the right ot an individual or 
group to rule ma\ v onn tiom t .uinion. tiom charisma. or from a set ot rules. 
Ilu basis ot niuhoiu\ nun he uatimotial, charismatic, or legal-rational. A 
monarch s right elm authonts ovci his people is usually based on tradi- 

tion while an elcctnt piesuient s tight to mle usual 1\ has a legal-rational basis. 

I he colonial twit is ::i the Philippines undei Spain were appointed by the 
monaith w ho iii’kd Spain and hei colonies on the basis tit tradition. Hective and 
appoint n e go\ ei nnieiit ottiv 1 . 1 U m oMiteniporan Philippines, on the other hand, 
derive then light to i tile t lorn t he l v) Soc onstiiution and their exercise tit author- 
ity is legal rational. \\ hile there is a cleat difference in the bases ot the exercise ot 
an t hoi it \ in t olomai and t tin temporal ' a Philippines, there are significant similar i 
ties in the strut tine ot pohiic.il power, both colonial and contemporary l hilip 
pines had and ha\e oligarchical stuic lures ot power determined by o\\ net ship ot 
land. 

1 and ow net ship as a basis t > t economic and eventual political powet came 
from the introduction ot the concept of private property during Spains colonial 
regime. Ibis concept and the need for intermediaries between the Spanis i 
authorities and tlu* masses brought about the creation of the pnm'ipdlo class, a 
group of local administrative officials in the provinces who were vested b\ Spam, 
authority with political and economic power. By virtue ot their position as ac 
minist rativc and fiscal middlemen between the Spaniards and their own Pj^P 
the prnn'ipitU’s took advantage of their position and acquired foimal ownci.' \ 
large landholdings thus enabling most of them to acquire not only economic at 
'• • 1 ; Thcv formed the Filipino oligarchy 


political power but social prestige as wel 


wmiv.i. | i/m Miu.ii pic.Migc as wen. i 1 . • 

whose role was considered essential to the success ot the Spanish colonia aut \ 
in the Philippi nc*s. 1 be children of this economic oligarchy wctc pio\idcc 
tional opportunities at home and abroad and formed the nucleus of an 
largely provinciallv based, sociocultural elite known as the ilusmuh class. 7 

ustraclo c lass dominated almost all aspects of national life in the 1 hilipphus in at^ 
generations, which is the reason that it is appropriately identified as thr 11 'PP inc 
oligarchy. 

1 his paper contends that although the colonial system established b) ^P 
in the Philippines had a highly centralized structure ot authority deliver ">> tiac i 
don from the Spanish monarchy, it eventually became oligarchical in its stiuctute 
of power. This was so because the Spanish authority, in order to mk tic u 'P 
pines effectively, had to share the exercise of power with the print ipalin anc / mtm 


971 


THh I*H I LIPPI NT Ri V( )I l I l( )N AND HI )NI ) 


dos. I he breakdown of Spanish rule in the latter halt of the 19th centurv could he 
attributed to the rising national consciousness of the ilmtradn c lass and t he mabil 
ity of the Spanish authority to satisfy its growing interests. 

With regard to the nature of the contemporary political system of the Philip 
pines, the 1986 Constitution provided lor the establishment <>f a representative 
democracy with a government constituted by the consent of the people through 
free and regular elections. Political authority is exercised In a group of elective of 
facials and is based on the rule of law. The highest elective official in the count i v is 
the president and he shares the exercise of authority with an elective legislature, the 
judiciary, and with provincial/local officials. While the I 986 ( Constitution did es 
tablish a legal-rational basis of authority in the country, the oligarchical structure 
of power remained in place and was further reinforced by the democratic process 
of decision-making. I hus, the members of the Philippine oligarchs' remain vers 
influential in controlling the direction of national, provincial, and local affairs to 
safeguard their vested interests. Some bribe public officials, employ strong-arm 
tactics, and even commit political assassinations to insure their vested interests. I he 
composition of the oligarchy in contemporary Philippines is similar to the oligar- 
chy of the Spanish colonial period. Land ownership and entrepreneurial leadership 
remain the critical characteristics of the contemporary l ilipino oligarchs'. Most of 
them, after all, are the descendants of the pr'mcipalia and ilustrado families of the 
past. 1 hey have been successful in keeping their wealth within the family and they 
are very much the power structure in the Philippines today. 

Authority and the Structure of Colonial Government 
in 1896 Philippines 

Spain ruled the Philippines as a colony from 1565 to 1898. ‘ Until Mexico became 
an independent state in 1821, the Philippi nes had been governed out of Mexico. 2S 
This meant that Spanish officials commissioned to serve in the Philippines were 
sent from or through Mexico. 26 Orders from the Spanish monarchy and the gov- 
ernment ministers were coursed through Mexico. It was also Mexico and not Spain 
which provided the Philippines the annual subsidy to supplement the yearly bud- 
get of the government." 1 he Philippine-Mexican connection dui ing the Spanish 
colonial period was reinforced by the commercial relations between the two colo- 
nies brought about by the galleon trade between Manila and Acapulco. 2S The gal- 
leon trade made Manila a trading center for Spanish entrepreneurs to conduct 
business with China and Japan. I he galleon trade was also the only means of trans- 
portation and communication between Spain and the Philippines at the time. 

Spain established a highly centralized government in the Philippines under 
the leadership of the governor-general who resided in Manila. The king of Spain 
exercised ultimate sovereignty over the Philippines by virtue of conquest and the 
traditional role of the monarchy in Spain s political system. In Spain, the authority 


972 


I \!'I ! \N 


•;.'v I'i'lhpptfif SystCtflS of /«S’% 


iA the moii.ikln was delegated to the minister of ultramar (overseas territories) 
who was diu\tl\ uukemai with the administration o I colonial affairs, ineluding 
that ot the Philippines. I he minister ot uliramar was advised h\‘ the C ouncil ot 
the Philippines, the t omu it ot State, the t mine il ot Public Instruction, and a tew 
other otinial agencies ot the Spanish government/ 

\t the head ot thevemt.il government in the Philippines during the Spanish 
period was the governor general, whose official designation was "Covcrnor and 
C aptain Ccnctal. 1 hegovernot general w as appointed bv the king ot Spain, was 
responsible to him. and held ottue at the kings discretion." Representing the 
might and power ot Spain, he ruled \ i r t nal 1 \ as a monarch. As chief executive, he 
executed the laws ot the colotn; appointed and removed officials, except those 
whose appointments came from Spain; and sent representatives to and received 
their foreign counterparts from \sian countries. As captain-general, he was the 
commatulei in chief ot all armed forces in the Philippines: he dispatched military 
expeditions to othet count ties; ,uul he declared war and concluded treaties with 
other Asian sovereigns, because ot the union ot the church and the state in the 
Spanish colonial svstem. the governor general also acted as vice-regal patron, and 
in this capacitv, he nominated priests to ecclesiastical offices and parishes and con- 
trolled t he 1 1 nances ot t he missions. '■ l nt il 1 SO I , he also served as president ot t he 
Roval Audiencia or the' Supreme C ourt. 1 le exercised legislative power by issuing 
exec tit i ve orders and p roc I a mat ions which had the binding force of law and b\ gb - 
ing his approval to royal decrees that came from Spain. " 

fhe governor general, in the exercise of his extensive authority, was advised 
by several governmental bodies that were established during the colonial period to 
insure the effectiveness of Spanish authorin' in the Philippines which was exercised 
from quite a distance and more often at the sacrifice of accountability. 1 he earliest 
advisory body to the governor-general which was established by Spain in the 1 bib 
ippincs in 1584 was the Roval Audiencia/ 0 It was a judicial body with the func- 
tions of both advising the governor-general on matters of state and ot evaluating 
the conduct of the outgoing governor-general for abuses ot authonn. 1 be 
Audiencia was composed of a president, four magistrates of justice, a fiscal, an as- 
sistant fiscal, an mavor, and a number of start officials/ 1 It was an influen- 

tial body, in that its president, in the absence of the governor-general, was charged 
with the administration of civil affairs. It was a group which was never ignored by 
an incumbent governor-general both for its advice and its power to conduct an 
unfavorable evaluation of the governor-generals tenure. The other groups that 
were established by the Spanish colonial government in the Philippines were the 
Board of Authorities (created in 1850) and a Council of Administration (created 
in 1861)."' 

fhe governor-general exercised bis executive authority through the Secre- 
tariat of the Central (iovernment (created in 1874) which looked after all matters 
pertaining to foreign and domestic policy, provincial and municipal governments, 


Till*. mil IITINI RhVOI I \ H )N AM ) hi Y< >M > 


and the royal patronage.*’ Mis supervision and control over the affairs of the na 
tional government was done through various hoards and bureaus responsible for 
health, primary education, agriculture, prisons, and accounting. 

During the middle of the 19th century, the instability of politics in Spain 
began to manifest its effect on the colonial government, from IS Vi to 1N(>2. for 
instance, Spain had four constitutions, 28 parliaments, and 529 ministers with 
portfolios. 46 From 1835 to 1897, the Philippines had 50 governor generals, each 
serving an average term of one year and three months.* F.very time there was a 
change of government in Spain it meant a new governor-general for the Philip- 
pines. This short tenure of office required most governor-generals to depend upon 
Spanish officials with longer periods of service in the Philippines and on the local 
economic elites for political support in order to guarantee their success in office. 
I his dependency, in turn, weakened the power of the governor-general in favor of 
the oligarchy. I his was a major reason why the Spanish colonial authoritv was un- 
successful in ridding the colonial government of graft and corruption. 

I here was another arrangement in the colonial government which assisted 
the development of an oligarchical system. It concerned the organization of pro- 
vincial and local governments in the country to bring about complete Spanish con- 
trol of the people and the island territory. From the beginning of the Spanish colo- 
nial regime in the Philippines, there was recognition of the need to organize pro- 
vincial and local government to expand the authority of the Spanish regime into 
the periphery. In 1568, the Spanish authority in the Philippines established the 
encomienda system as the method for governing the periphery. I he encomienda was 
a grant of landed estates to deserving Spanish officials in return for their services in 
providing security and economic and spiritual well-being to the inhabitants in each 
estate. The head of the encomienda had the power to collect taxes from every man 
living on his estate. Many encomenderos treated their estates as commercial un- 
dertakings which led to the exploitation of the inhabitants living within the eti- 
comiendas. Finally, the encomienda system was abolished in 1574, but it was not 
until 50 years later that the system was completely stamped out. 0 

The encomiendas were transformed into provincial levels of government with 
alcaldes mayoresvj\\o exercised executive as well as judicial powers. S| The position 
of alcaldes mayores became very lucrative because the incumbent official did not 
only exercise governmental authority but also enjoyed the special privilege to en- 
gage in trade. Many Spaniards scrambled to obtain an alcaldeship, even paying 
large sums of money for the appointment, knowing that in a relatively short period 
of time they could amass a fortune. The appointments to these positions were 
made by the governor-general himself or on the recommendation of high officials 
in Spain. Many Spaniards who occupied these positions lacked proper education 
and administrative ability but they were almost always successful in their business 
enteipiises. Many of them became wealthy before the end of their terms of office. 
It was not until 1844 that the alcalde system of governing the provinces was 
changed by law. v * 


974 


M'.V";' *>/ IS'k' Aiut 1 


Both the r .uni .;. 4 svstem ot govmiing tlu* juovincc.s provided 

the cHiomaninos and the Au.iitU' »MYorr> with the opportunity to establish their 
economic base of powci along with their exercise of authority within their respec- 
tive territorial iwiisdniions 1 hen economic and political power rendered them 
more independent of the ventral government and for as long as they performed 
their tax voilevtim* fuiution vuivt.R tor il\ tor the central government, they were 
given more freedom to exercise then commercial and entrepreneurial activities. It 
was these vomnuui.il and cnticpieneunal actmties ot the cth'owewicros 'and iil- 
caliies nuiyoro that provided them with the opportunity to own large tracts of land 
and profitable entei puses and presented them from using their authority tot the 
promotion of the commimttN s mtciest. In combining government positions with 
entrepreneui lal undei taknn;s presumabb to reduce the cost of governance and at 
the same time ac lue\e local control, the Spanish colonial system in the Philippines 
had legitimized the pi.u me ot economic exploitation ot the people and overlooked 
the graft and corruption committed b\ its representatives in the provinces 1 his 
system was another conn ihutitn; factor in the development ot the e\et-N\ idenin^ 
circle of pro\rncial ohgarcln m the Philippines with whom the eenttal authorit 
must deal. 

Perhaps the most unpor t.uu >. harac tenstic ot Spanish colonial aclministr.uk • 
in the Philippines was none other than the union ot the church and the state, 
which resulted! trom one ot the purposes ot Spanish colonization, which was 
Christianization ot the people. I he spread e>t Roman C atholicism in the country 
came together with the process ot" pacification." In order to implement this o ’1“ 
live throughout the islands with limited military and civil resources, the Spam, 
colonial authority depeiuleel upon the church and its priests to lead the paet ^ 
tion process. I his mission openeel up opportunities lor the tegular ft kits not 
to evangelize the Filipinos hut also to learn the native languages and culture, '.yen- 
tually, the friars became the indispensable resource for Spanish ei\il ant u - 
establish their control over isolated communities. 1 his. in turn, est.n ts ue t 
political power of the friars and led them to acquire and own \ast ua y r y° ‘ ^ ^ 

support their politico-religious mission." 1 ’ The Spanish friars in the 1 11 'Pf n y 
members of the regular orders were expected to do missionary wotk atu ta 
parish work to native secular priests. 1 lowever, their evangelization an come 
work was so successful that parishes had to be established immet kite \ 
secular priests could minister to the spiritual needs of the new com cits. ^ ^ 

too few native secular priests to meet this growing need so the pum.tn tasy <■ 
administering the parishes fell to the Spanish friars. 1 ’ 1 1 his responsibi it\ opciuc 
up the opportunity for the friars to own property to support the ncccs o C KU 
parishes. Soon enough, this opportunity led the friars to amass large t tacts ° ant 
and their orders became wealthy landed proprietors whose contto extern cc to 
the people who worked the land."* They had so much political powet t ut t ic\ 
were successful in preventing the transfer of control of the parishes to tic nau\c 
secular clergy."' 


975 


THI J'f HI II'I'INI RI-.VOII I K )N WhHhnM) 


I he union of church and state, although an el lee use instrument f< >r lac dilat- 
ing the pacification of the country and the eventual conversion ol its population to 
Roman Catholicism, also created an environment winch contributed to the dis 
persion of political power from the center to the periphery. I he strategic position 
of the friars in controlling the parishes enabled them to develop their local power 
base, and combined with their ownership of large tracts ol land and commercial 
enterprises, to become the local oligarchy with which the central authorit\ had to 
deal. 

It is quite clear from the foregoing th.it the basis of authority was traditional. 

I he authority of the governor-general and his subordinates to govern the Philip- 
pines came from the traditional authoritv of the Spanish monarchy. I he Spanish 
monarchy exercised its authority in the Philippines by virtue ol the principle of 
discovery and conquest. Spain discovered the Philippines in 1S21 and governed 
the country continuously until 1 898. The latter half of the I 9th cenmn was a dif 
ficult period for Spain, for it was the beginning of the development of national 
consciousness among the Hlipino ilustrado class and their eventual demand for 
political reforms — reforms that would require Spain to treat the tlusinuios as the 
equals of Spanish citizens. When the demand for political reforms failed to pro- 
duce changes, the revolutionary movement took form and substance, finally, on 
26 August 1896, the Philippine revolution began; its objective was sell determina- 
tion and independence for the Philippines/’* 

I he structure of authority established bv the Spanish colonial government in 
the Philippines was similarly clear — a highly centralized government with power 
and authority handed down by the Spanish monarchy to the governor-general and 
other officials to rule the Philippines. The seat of Spanish authority was in Manila 
but its power was visible in the provinces, in the municipalities, and even in iso- 
lated villages. I he representatives of Spanish authority in the persons of the 
encomenderos , the alcaldes mayores , the gobernadorcillos, and the frayles were there to 
govern these administrative levels for Spain. They collected taxes, enforced the law, 
and in the case of the friars, ministered to the spiritual needs of the people. I hev all 
eve oped their economic bases of power through land ownership and business 
e ™; er P nses w hich they were allowed to pursue in the conduct of their government 

0 J ces. I hey were the oligarchy who became a part of the power structure of the 
co onial government. In its exercise of power, the central government had to take 
t e vested interests of this oligarchy into consideration. Demands for reform were 
not implemented by the central government because they conflicted with the 
vested interests of the local oligarchy. 

1 lie Philippine Political System in 1996 

The contemporary Philippine political system emerged in 1986 when the “people 
powei revolution and the Philippine Armed Forces forced an end to the Marcos 
eia of martial rule. President Ferdinand E. Marcos, who ruled the country from 


976 


:*ir 


1 AIM I \N 


SWf”;' ot lS K h> <itu{ 7996 


l 1 ) *2 m l*>8o. was forced to lelmqutsh power In the combined pressure ot the 
people, the military .uul the l tnted Mates government. He and his tamilv were 
exiled to the l titled States tot the sake ot preventing a hloodv revolution. Corazon 
( . Aquino. w ho v hallenged Mateos in the Snap presidential election of 1*986, was 
pro non i u ed the win tut ot the election and bee a me president of the count rv for six 
years until 1 992 

I hiring President \qmnos tenure the framework of the contemporarv po- 
litical svstem m the Philippines was l.ud out. She established a constitutional com- 
mission to draw up a new c onstitut ion. pushed through its ratification, and con- 
ducted the first legislative elect ions in 1 98 \ the first provincial/local elections in 
1*988, and the fust president ial election in 1992. 00 Before the end of her first year 
in office. President \qumos constitutional commission submitted a final draft of 
the const it ut ion which was c\entuall\ ratified as the 1986 C onstitution/' 

I lu* 1 1 >8(s C oust nut ton established a democratic and republican state with 
sovereigns and authority emanating from the people. It provided for a representa- 
tive democtacA in which people elected their representatives through a system ot 
free, regular, and competitive elections. I he president, the vice president, the mem- 
bers of the legislature, and provmciab local officials are elected by the people tot 
specific tenures of office to exercise their authority in accordance with the consti- 
tution. 1 he I 986 ( onstitution provides for executive power to be exercised b\ an 
elective president who shall serve a term ot six vears without reelection. An elec- 
tive vice-president with the same tenure ot office is also provided. ( andidates tot 
president and vice-president can run on the same political party ticket but \otcts 
select candidates for these offices separately 1 hus, in the 1992 presidential elec- 
tion, l idel Ramos of the 1 akas-NUC'P partv was elected president while Joseph 
Kstrada of the Nationalist Peoples Coalition got the vice-presidential position. 

I he legislative power was vested bv the 1986 ( onstitution in a bicametal legisla- 
ture consisting of a Senate and a 1 louse of Representatives. 1 he Senate is composed 
of 24 members nationally elected for a term of six years. I he 1 louse is composed of 
250 members elected f rom legislative districts for a term of three years. 0 1 he con- 
stitution also establishes limitations on the number of terms senators and members 
of the 1 louse Representatives can serve; two successive terms for senators and thicc 
successive terms for the members of the House of Representatives. 1 1 he judicial 
authority of the Philippine government is vested in a Supreme Court and lower 
courts established bv law. 1 he 1 5 members of the Supreme Court and the judges ot 
lower courts are appointed by the president and such appointments do not requite 
congressional confirmation. 

Hven though the Philippine government remained a unitary system, the 
1986 ("onstitution prescribes for local governments to be organized in the prov- 
inces, cities, municipalities, and btinmgtiy. Patch local government unit elects its 
own set of officials and, except for barangay officials, their term of office is foi three 
years. ' The 1986 ("onstitution expands the authority of the local governments, 
particularly in the area of raising revenues for regional and local development. 

977 


I III. mil IITINI Kl Y< )I ( IK )N AND HI '« < >\I > 


Because of the importance of the conduct of elections lor the selection of 
national and local officials, the I 986 C Constitution kept the ( ommission on flec- 
tions as a constitutional body with specific authority to enforce and administer all 
laws and regulations relative to the conduct of an election, plebisc ite, initiative, ref- 
erendum, and recall. I he Commission on flections is composed of a chair and 
six members appointed by the president with the consent of the- ( ommission of 
Appointment for a nonrenewable term of seven wars. I he ( ( )\lf I I ( . as it is 
more popularly known, is a controversial agency of the government because of its 
lack of success in conducting free and honest elections. 

From the foregoing, one can conclude that this is a rcprcsentai ive democ racy 
which is presidential in form with provisions for separation of powers between the 
executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and with the national government the 
more dominant level as compared to local governments. ( )ne can also observe that 
officials who exercise the main authority in government, such as the president and 
members of Congress, are elected by the people with specific terms of offices and 
that their powers are in accord with the law. The basis of authority in this political 
system is legal-rational because those who exercise authority are electee I by the 
people and because their exercise of authority is based on the const it lit ion and laws 
of the country. 

Having said this, it is necessary to focus on the conduct of elections because 
this is an important process in legitimizing the government officials mandated by 
the constitution to exercise governmental author ityon behalf of the people. In rep- 
resentative democracy, such as the form of government in the Philippines, repre- 
sentatives are elected by the peopl e to make and administer laws that would benefit 
the general welfare. I he election process is central to the legitimacy of representa- 
tive governments because the electoral results must receive a general level of accept- 
ability from the various groups of people that participated in the process. Such level 
o general acceptance is achievable if the rules and procedures of the elect ion pro- 
V1 es access to most groups that wish to participate in the election and if the rules 
an procedures are carried out by the election agency so as to produce electoral 
resu ts that are as honest as possible. 8 Otherwise, the election results will remain 
questionable and those officials elected under these circumstances will have ques- 
tiona e legitimacy in the exercise of their authority that could hamper their effec- 
tiveness as public officials. Some of these officials use raw political power to main- 
tain themselves in office. 

I he main problem with representative government in the Philippines from 
wr ^ mC s y stcm was established has to do with the conduct of elections. l> 
it ^ t e exception of the martial-law period, regular elections h a vc taken place in 
tel ilippines at both national and local levels as prescribed by the constitution 
an aws of the country. Participating political groups and candid ates in the Phil- 
ippines, as a general lulc, do not observe the rules and regulations for achieving 
^ree and honest elections because public offices are considered political assets for 
rent seeking, that is, for successful political groups and candidates to control 


978 


1 API I V 


w Systems of /<S’% »iw/ / 996 


the market tot the .iucns aiul benefit of a favored few. I ruler these circumstances, 
winning elections foi polituai groups aiul vaiulidates is the only acceptable elec- 
toral outcome \n\ means used to adiie\e tins goal of winning elections are al- 
lowed c\cn when tlu*\ ate m \iolation ot rules and regulations. Most of the time, 
political rjoups .itu 1 candidates get awa\ with bribers and use of violence against 
election of tu tals who insist on upholding the i tiles. s 

1 he piulosopln and ftamcwoik of democracy was already a popular idea in 
the Philippines e\cn before the l mted States came and imposed her version of it 
upon the count i\ and its people. Popular election as a svstem of selecting political 
leaders w.is a diffcictii mat let It was primarily an American system which was 
transplanted to the Philippines. It w.is based upon the competition between can- 
didates representing political panic's organized around programs for running the 
government. In the Philippines, where politics has been traditionally controlled 
bv a few families constituting the c\ onomic oligarchy of the country, it is logical to 
expect that the same small oligarchical cl. iss w ill form political groups and support 
candidates who will msuic the promotion of their vested interests, lolitical patties 
are oriented not to specific programs or ideas but to specific families and theii lent 
seeking objectives." Hective officials in the Philippines from the president to the 
local mimic i pal unnuilor win their positions with the electoral support of the eco- 
nomic oligarc hv and, oik e elec tech thev are expected to reward this tamih -oriented 

economic oligarchs hv using the state’s licensing power to preserve theit economic 

interests against prospective competition. hle'Ctoral support of the economic 
garchy is broadly defined to include Inn ing of votes, manipulation of the election 
results to favor their candidates, and even political violence to insuie pietcircc 
outcome. Post iiulepenelence Philippine governments, including the martia i 
regime of Marcos, have* he'cn prone to the dominance' of a combined [ 
and Manila economic oligarchy because the c'lecied government officials aic 
tant to apply the laws against violence and corruption to their benefactois ane sup 
porters. Some provincial economic elites like the Ouranos of k ebu and Me nt 
of ( ,avite have even used private armies to control their localities and there ^ 
more secure tenure over elected offices/ 4 ’ The close relationship between t n state 
and the economic oligarch)’ in the Philippine'S is extensive!) discussee in ,e 
works on Philippine politics bv bilipino and non-bilipino authors. It b a su I ' 
which requires extensive consideration and analysis which cannot be piopei ) et 
ered in this paper. . 

1 he authoritarian regime of Ferdinand Marcos showeel the elose co a 
tion berween the families of the economic oligarch)* anel the government. . 
his regime, Marcos openly challenged the power of his enemies among tie tiaei 
tional economic oligarch)' by arresting them anel confiscating theii P 10 f : 

order to strengthen the power of the state. 1 le expanded the iole of the state m t 

, V • . c , 1 Jo relatives that enabled 

economy by dispensing economic favors to 


them to build giant conglomerates in return for certain financial interests 
enterprises. I he Marcos strategy was so effective in bringing togethei t le 




I Hh VI fll IPPIM Kl V( )I I I K )N \N I > HI '» < )NI > 


nomic oligarchy and the state that the practice was popularly called c mm capital- 
ism. " ^ A combination of circumstances brought about the d< iwntall of the Marcos 
regime. Foremost among these circumstances was the failure of the Marcos provin- 
cial political machinery to deliver the blocks of votes in his support during the 
rigged elections of 1 984 and 1 986. ' ' 

Corazon C. Aquino became president in 1986 through the combined sup- 
port of the military, the urban middle class, the ( Catholic hierarchy, and the mem 
bcrs of traditional oligarchy who were opposed to Marcos. 1 let vie tore was brought 
about by the “people power revolution” which pronounced her the winner in the 
snap presidential elections of 1986. Her first responsibility was to bring order to 
a very unstable political situation and she did this by establishing a ( institutional 
Commission which was given the power to draw up a constitution. I he I 986 
Constitution, drawn up and ratified in a period when democracy had reached a 
very high level of acceptance in the Philippines, reestablished the framework of rep- 
resentative democracy in the country. Reacting to the use of excessive executive 
power by the Marcos regime, the 1986 Constitution weakened the power of the 
president and restored the position of Congress.' 1 I he restoration of Congress 
opened the window of opportunity for the traditional economic oligarchy to reas- 
sert its political power which had been challenged by Marcos cronies during the 
period of constitutional authoritarianism. K Regular elections again became the 
process for constituting authority and this process has elevated the tradit ional eco- 
nomic oligarchy to its previous position of power brokers. Thus, in the May 1 987 
elections for Congress, the traditional economic oligarchy was successful in reas- 
serting itself as a primary source of power in Philippine electoral poli tics when 166 
congressmen, or 83 percent of House membership elected, were associated with 
amilies of the traditional economic oligarchy. 91 This record of success was again 
demonstrated in the local elections of 1988 when 56 percent of local officials 
elected were found to be related to families of the traditional economic elites. It 
did not take long for the traditional economic elites to organize themselves and 
claim theii position in Philippine politics. Even President Aquino found it neces- 
sary to establish an alliance with the traditional economic elites to maintain the 
stability of hei government, which was under fire from both the military right and 
t e communist left. In return for the support of the traditional economic elites, 
resident Aquino lost the momentum of her political power in bringing about an 
e ective land reform legislation and she was pressured to return expropriated cor- 

porations to the old economic oligarchy. 95 The old system of rent-seeking was back 
in business. 

President Fidel V. Ramos, who succeeded Aquino in 1992, owed bis close 
election to the blocs of electoral votes generated by the traditional economic elites 
rom their political strongholds. It was these apparent electoral irregularities in the 
canvass of votes which led presidential candidates such as Miriam Defensor San- 
tiago to question the results of the presidential elections of 1 992 before the Com- 
mission on Elections, the congressional Electoral Tribunal, and the courts. 96 It was 


980 


I API ! \ 


Polineai Systems of 7896 and 79 96 


interest mj; to note that Picsnient Ramos tust exec mice order w as to gram eemenr 
manut.iv mi et s the nr.lu to import vement ci nt \ tree tor three vears.' this gave 
cement manul.K tuiei s an ad\anta*;e at a time when the prospect ot an economic 
boom in t he v oust t tu t ion business w as m v leai sill'll tor the Philippines. 1 here are 
prohabb main more rent scekuu; activities undertaken bv the traditional eco- 
nomic elites with the present regime to demonstrate their political power in Phil- 
ippine p» >i 1 1 u s H\ the same token. one v an probabb observe the resurgence graft 
and corrupt ion as well as polit ual \ lolence in the provinces due to the weak posi- 
tion ot the national uo\ eminent to entone its authority in areas w here the tradi- 
tional economn elites base more power and influence. 

While demovi.iv\ was iccsiahlishcd m the Philippines in 1986, political 
power remains ^ oiu entiated m a small ti.ulmonal oligarchs. 1 his is the major simi- 
larity between tlu slimline ot powei in the Philippines during the Philippine 
Revolution ot 1 S l )(> .uul vontempotan Philippines and may explain why the tltts- 
t ratio v lass si i iiua’led t o c on t rol the leader ship ot the Philippine Rcvolut ion of 1 8 ^6 
and win m 1 99o the Philippines remains uiulei the anarchy of the families ot the 
oligarc In . 

Notes 

1. See the works ot l ).i\ id I Steinberg, I 'he Philippines: .1 Singular and Plural Place, 
1982. .uul \ 1 1 red \\ \ue,n. ed.. I>; Amtnby of Emilies: Sut<- anti Emily tn the 
Philippines . p)0 j. 

2. Ciiegono 1. /aide. Philippine Political and ( ultural History, \ ok 1 P* 

3. Ibid., p. 1 00. 

а. I his refers to ( ieneral ( arlos Maria vie la lorre, Spanish govcrnor-gincial ot 
Philippines from 18(C) to ISM. 

5. /aide, op ci t . . p. 111. 

б. Ibid., pp. 1 12-1 13. 

1 he Katipunan was a secret revohitionarv society ot Hlipinos which was tounclc 

7 July 1892. 

8. /aide, op v it . . p. 1 ()(>. 

9. Ibid., p. 1 07. 

10. Renato C Constant ino, .1 History ofthe Philippines. 19 5, p. 106. 

1 1. See description bv Ciregorio b /aide, Philippine Political and C. ultural Histoi), 1 ) 6, 
Samira Burton. Impossible Ihv.nn. I l )8‘); and Alex B. Brillantcs, Jr.. Dictatorship atul 
Martial l.aw, 1 987. 

12. I his concept w as discussed in Susan Strange, States and Markets, 1 M3, latt 1. 

13. Strange, op cit., Part 11. 

1 4. Alfred W. MeC My, An Anarchy of Families: State and Family in the Philippines , pp. 

8. 

15. Robert A. Dahl, Modern Political Analysis, 5th ed., 1991, p- ^4. 

16. Robert H. Chilcote, l hcorics of l.ompariitive Politics, 1994, p. 


981 


mi. mil IITINI KIAOII NON \M»hh(»M) 


17. Chilcotc, Ibid. 

18. David J. Steinberg, The Philippines: A StnguLir t nul Pluutl PLin pp 2<> 2 n 

19. Eufronio N. Alip, Philippine History: Political, S oetaL luonopnu . *Sth rev ised ed. . 
1964, p. 242. 

20. Ronald h. Dolan, ed., Philippines. A ( .ountry S 1‘>‘M. p f>. 

21. Ibid. 

22. Zaide, op cit., p. 106. 

23. Constantino, op cit., pp. 147-148. 

24. Alip, op cit., p. 238. 

25. Zaide, op cit., p. 1 19. 

26. Alip, op cit., p. 250. 

27. Ibid. 

28. Ibid., pp. 199-201. 

29. Zaide, op cit., p. 1 17. 

30. Alip, op cit., p. 238. 

31. Ibid. 

32. Zaide, op cit., p. I 1 7. 

33. Alip, op cit., p. 239. 

34. /.aide, op cit., p. 1 17. 

35. Ibid. 

36. Ibid. 

37. Ibid. 

38. Ibid. 

39. Alip, op cit., p. 240. 

40. Ibid. 

41. Ibid., pp. 240-24 1 . 

42. Ibid., p. 24 1. 

43. Ibid., pp. 241-242. 

44. Zaide, op cit., pp. I 1 7- 1 I 8. 

45. Ibid., p. 118. 

46. Ibid., p. 116. 

47. Ibid. 

48. Alip, op cit., p. 242. 

49. Ibid., p. 243. 

50. Ibid. 

51. Zaide, op cit., p. 129. 

52. Ibid. 

53. Alip, op cit., p. 245. 

54. Zaide, op cit., p. 130. 

55. Ibid., p. 129. 

56. Constantino, op cit., pp. 62-63. 

57. Alip, op cit., pp. 250-251 . 

58. Ibid., p. 250. 


982 


rr:*:r SY'frm.* of IS^O and l K ) K H' 

So. Ihid 

OO t oiM.iir::'.' S' v it p oo 

(>1 Il>ui p o 

62 Ihid 

6 v n >ivi p * ' 

(>•* /auk « »p v : : ! o 2 

<o \ . . 1 \, . ..: w m R.uil P. de tdu/man and Mila A. Rctorma. 

i iis ( * : . >r : . ' r>r l^SS. p. 1 26. 

66. I hid . p 12 

o"V il >ii l 

68. //», \rt. VI l. Sections 1 

oo. \k < »»\ «»p v it p 1 ° 

”*( ) //» f P>Sn < \it \ 1. tioiu \ S. 

* 1 . 1 1 > i «. i . \ 1 1 \ I. \\ in»u ' 

^2. Ihid . \i t \ 111. S,, non * 

.V I I > 1 1 1 \ I t \. Si\ UOIlN 1 v\ S 

" t K.ml I’ vK ( ,U It!. 111 . Mil. I \ lwK'im.i. and l lena M. Panganib.m. "local Itovcrn- 
nun:, in l V t tii/man .uul lutoi nu. op cit.. pp. 2.>0 2.>S. 

3 f he l y) Si^ ( \tt l\ u . V\ 2 1 lh 

^O. Ihid. \ i t 1 \ v . Vv 1 1 1 2 

1 Ins was .i uiiuhision included in l u/vtmmda (i. lancangceu The AtMtotny of /’/<<- 
torol / 1 '> l >2 . 

"KS. I Ins ilc’sv i ipi mn is touiul in Robert \. IXilil. Modern Polith\d Aiulysis* 3th eek, 1 1* 

"’ 1 ) . 1 .iik angc o. op v 1 1 . . p . 2 S . 

(SO. 1 Ills concept w .is de\ eloped In economists to elcsc Tike a state w hie h gMs an c ntn. 

prenem an ai t ilk i.il ad\ .image In restru tint; tivedom ot entry into the market. See its 
application to the Philippines m Mc( ov. ihid.. p. 1 1. 

81. Ihiei. 

82. 1 u/ v i in i in la ( i . I a ik .in geo. 1 he l lee t oral System and Political l at ties in the l hili[ 
pines, in 1 V ( iii/nian aiul Retorma, op cit.. p. Si. 

83. I hid . 

84. Ihiek, pp. 8"" 88. 

83. Me( .ov, op eit ., p. 1 3. 

86. Ihiei., p. 2 1 . 

87. See lean ( irossliolt/. Politics m the Philippines. I ‘Xu, and Remigio Agpalo, I he Point- 
cut l life inift tin' People: .1 Study of Polities in Oeeidentul Mindoro , 10 2, as represen ta 
live works on Philippine politics. 

88. Mc( .oy, op e it . , p. 1 

89. Ihiek, p. 18. 

90. Ihiek 

91. Ihiek 

92. ( constitutional authoritarianism was the term used hv herdinand k. Marcos 
scrihe his martial law regime Irom 1972 te) 1986. 


983 


I HI. I'HII II'I'INl \<\ V< )!! IK >\ AN I ) hi X >\! > 


93. McCoy, op cit. 

94. Ibid. 

95. Ibid., pp. 18-19. 

96. Miriam Defensor Santiago was a presidential candidate defeated In I idel Ramos in 
the 1992 presidential elections. She won .i seat in the Senate »n 1 4 h)S 

97. McCoy, op cit., p. 19. 


984 


The “Martvr Image” as Rallying Point 
in Nationalist Consciousness 


C 'RIM IN \ 1 \ ANt.l 1 IM A 1'oRRI S 

LJni.vrsir\ of trie Philippines Momlo. Philippines 


M.irtvrs arc rare stars in the vast firmament ot humanity — hvcrv in- 
stance of martyrdom is distinct in magnitude and direction. Indeed, mart) rs 
are the meteors of histors thev flash acrivss the sky and light the wot Id and in 
the process consume themselves leaving an impression in the conscience of 
mortal men. 1 

A centennial celebration allows the present generation to look back at what 
transpired in its history to make possible the birth and growth ol a nation. It 
gives us time to reassess the lessons we have learned from the past, and in the pro- 
cess ol reflection we are able to understand ourselves and our collective conscious 
ness as a people. This paper reflects on some historical events, analyzes some recti r- 
rent themes, and of fers some explanation about our behavior as a people. 

1 wish to analyze certain emotional events in our history which produced the 
so-called “martyrs” and resulted in some form ot social change or transformation 
in our lives as a people. Webster defines a martyr as a person who is put to death ot 
made to suffer greatly because of religion or other beliefs. An article on Rizal iden- 
tifies some elements of martyrdom as usefulness ot life and dedication to a high 
purpose. ’ In the light of these criteria, 1 wish to discuss teuir events which occuried 
in a span of 1 23 years: 

a. the execution of Fathers Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora on 1/ Febtuurv 
1872; 

b. tlie execution of )ose Rizal on 30 December 1806; 

c. the assassination of Ninoy Aquino on 21 August 1983, 


985 


nu. mu im\’i kivom iion \\i>nn<>Ni> 


d. rhc execution of Flor Oontcmplacion on 1 M.uv I9‘)S. 

What do these persons have if) common' All <>f them du d a marts i s de.uh 
since they were accused of crimes bv the dominant political forces. I adi <>f them 
represented a sector of society which had the potential t<> cause trouble and there 
fore constituted a potent threat to an existing social order. 

I he three padres and Ki/.al were executed In the- Spanish authorities; \mo\ 
Aquino was assassinated during the Marcos regime: and l lm ( ontemphu ion was 
hanged by the Singaporean authorities. All of them claimed innocence except 
Contemplacion, who, upon her lawvers advice, admitted commuting the crime 
during a u fit of insanity." All of them were members of groups ulndi could 
threaten the status quo. The three priests were identified with the sec ulari/at ion 
movement spearheaded by the Filipino clergy. Ki/al was a membei of the Propa 
ganda Movement and classified as a ft li bust era bv the Spaniards. Aquino was a 
member of the political opposition to the dictatorship, while ( ontemplacion was 
one of the numerous overseas contract workers whose number continued to in 
crease because of worker shortage in Singapore. 

All of them were children of their own time. All of them rose to national 
prominence because they decided to be proactive. Thev were not to remain passive- 
victims of circumstance. They all took positive action to improve their status. I hey 
became representative of their class. 

Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora 

Hie three secular priests were implicated in the Cavite Mutiny of 20 January IS^2. 
Right after the m utiny was quelled, they were arrested and tried bv a military tribu- 
nal. On 1 5 February, they were condemned to death and on I February, exec uted 
publicly by garrote before a large crowd. All these events took place within a period 
of one month; the Spanish legal system moved swiftly for this particular case. 

What had they done to merit the ire of the Spanish colonial authorities? 
What in their political record implicated them in the mutiny' 

I hey were involved in the secularization movement, which sought to replace 
the Spanish friars with Filipino secular priests. The secularization controversy 
brought into focus the qualifications of Filipino priests to take control of the par- 
ishes. Of the three, Burgos was the best qualified, with a string of academic de- 
grees. Ffe had a doctorate degree in theology and canon law which he obtained with 
the highest honors. He was the son of a Spanish army officer and a Creole. Zamora 
was a contemporary of Burgos; both were appointed to serve at the Manila Cathe- 
dral, the seat of the Archdiocese of Manila. Gomez, the eldest of the three, was a 
contemporary of Fr. Pedro Pelaez, the father of the secularization movement. 

Both Pelaez and Gomez opposed the Royal Order of 9 March 1 849, which 
awaided four more parishes to the Dominicans upon the request of Fr. Guillermo 
Agudo, commissary-procurator of the Recoletos in Madrid, who opposed the di- 
vision of parishes and granting them to secular priests. Gomez was ordained in 


986 


1 S2-t aiul mikc then sci\cd .is parish priest of Racoor. Asa recognized authority in 
C'avitc. he was expected to defend the rights ot the Filipino clergy in his province. 
I < >gcthcr with I VI. u* / . he pu pared a position paper to explain the ecclesiastical con- 
ditions in the Philippines. Roth were v redihle defenders ot the Filipino clergy since 
( tome/ w.is .u c he same time t avite rn\if f mwe or head ot the clergy in the prov- 
ince undet \uhhishop \leliton Marline/ ot the See ot Manila, while IVlaez was 
sec ret a r\ to the archbishop. While their position paper was not presented to the 
government, it was published m l ( Lnnot Publico in Madrid on S March 1850. 

I hev organized the clci»*\ to i.use funds so thev could appoint an agent in Madrid 
to work tot the ie\ oration of the roval order. 1 hev tailed in this attempt and by 
l<S(vi most parishes m t a\ ite with the exception ot Racoor. had been reverted to 
the Recolctos or l Vninikans. which remained under hr. Ciomez. 

I he \ i 1 1 tie at ion ol the I 1 1 1 pi no clergy -continued unabated as manifested b\ a 
report prepaied In a io\al commissioner sent to the Philippines in IMM: 

I Lie the nat i \ e cw lesiastu s are. with tew exceptions, either a liability to 
the c Ierg\- or a danger to the colom . . .. 1 heir education in most cases does not 
make a deep enough impression to resist the ravages ot time. I heir moral con- 
duct is mcvitahh attested b\ the natural propensity ot Orientals to sensuality 
Rareh, \ei\ i.uclv. can then chastitv be held up as an example. Lastly, the in- 
c urable mdolenc e that is the dominant atll ic t ion ot their country renders them 
little suited to the proper performance of the pastoral duties which require so 
much zeal and such constant application. ‘ 

Burgos became heir to Pelaez (who died in 180^) through the publication 
his “Manifesto,” which passionatelv defended the qualifications of the I ilipino 
priests and branded as unfair Agudos attacks in the newspaper l.ii \tuLul Rur^o. 
was onlv 17 vears old, a theologv student at the University of Santo lomas, w un 
he wrote the “Manifesto, which sought to discredit the notion that Filipinos were 
inferior to their Spanish counterparts. At the same time, heassuied his leaelet. 
the Filipino priests had remained loval to Spain and had no intention to separat ' 
from the moth or country.' But the Spanish authorities had now become suspicious 
of the loyalty of the I'ilipino priests because publications began to appear 
Madrid championing the cause of the Filipino clergy. 

Zamora, a classmate of Burgos at the University of Santo lomas, was aj. 
pointed to serve at the Cathedral. During their days in the univeisity, the) werc 
drawn into an alliance with liberal thinkers like Joaquin Pardo de la\eia of ^t ie 
faculty of law. The liberal atmosphere fostered by Governor Jose Maria de la Torre 
encouraged professors and students in the colleges and universities to discuss issues 
and areas which needed reforms. In the same year, leaflets were citculatec in tie 
university accusing the Dominican friars of racial discrimination. Filipino priests 
in the colleges and the parishes were accused of fanning the anti-Spanish nstena 
among the students and some of them were subsequently expelled from theii posts. 


987 


THK PHII JPPINT RI V< )I t I l( >N \\|) HI Y< )NI ) 


De la Torre thereafter ordered surveillance of the foreign mail of priests, amoiu; 
whom were Burgos and Zamora, but the authorities failed to intercept am iik mm 
natory evidence/’ 

I he Cavite Mutiny provided the occasion to suppress the ac 1 1 \ it ies ot t he lib 
erals. On 20 January 1872, a Filipino sergeant named I amadrid led some 2S() 
native artillery and infantry soldiers and workers in a mutiny at the ( a\ ite fortress 
and killed around I 1 Spanish residents, droops were sent from Manila but the mu- 
tineers surrendered even before they arrived. The authorities acted switilv, shoot 
ing 30 to40 mutineers and taking the others as prisoners. Ricketts, the British con 
sul to Manila, sent this report to the Foreign ( )ffice in London: 

Among those who have been arrested there are, I hear. 12 or l a native 
priests, 6 or 7 advocates and several wealthy traders, all of them mestizos. 1 hree 
of the native clergy and 16 of the mutineers have been condemned to death. 

34 of the mutineers have been condemned to imprisonment for life, and sev 
eral other persons are, I understand, likely to he deported to the Marianas for 
terms varying from 8 to 16 years — As we are acquainted with the charges 
brought against the clergy and others who have been arrested and know noth 
ing of the judicial proceedings instituted against them, we are unable to dis 
cover the part played by them in the late disturbances 

Ricketts described the quiet scene prior to the m tit i nv, ex press ing bis opinion 
that the Spanish authorities overreacted to the event when they implicated the 
priests and other Manila residents. Disagreeing with the use of military courts and 
the summary dismissal of the three priests, he wrote: 


...that no rumors of tumults were heard of in any of the towns or villages in 
the interior; that no manifestations against the government took place among 
any portion of the native population at Manila; and that the people even of the 

town of Cavite remained throughout, passive spectators of the scene These 

islands being for the most part in a state of tranquility, the authorities might 
without any difficulty have committed the trial of the prisoners to the judges of 
the civil courts; they might have also given the accused the liberty of appealing 
to their sovereign; but instead of this, the investigation has been conducted 
from first to last by a military tribunal and the punishments carried out within 
24 hours after the notification of the sentence/ 

I he report ended with prophetic words regarding the impact of the execu- 
tion and martyrdom of the three priests: 

Such a policy might serve for a while to strike terror into the minds of 
many, but will it not also be the means of sowing the seeds of future troubles 
and disorders in the colony? And will the clergy easily forget the indignity 


988 




( 4 >r;», ;<>rm:ev 


thrust u;v ; \ti .mg -in; oi the Padre of Ikicoor, c he Padre ot 

ilin<>twi<>. .uui i K v Padre |.u into 


Wli.u was tlic inip.iv t ot the euuition ol the three priests? 

\ s indicated m the Untish vonsul rejn^rts. Spain was seen as having unjustly 
and without sufficient proof implicated the three priests in the mutiny* I hey ■ were 
therefore perceived .0 iiuiuis .uni won public svmpathv. hdmund Plaucluit 
v »rote .in article on the IS 2 e\ent in AV/ if di >' dt ux MotldfS in 188 » which was 
translated atul published m /.; s<>. ; ud ow I s 1'ehruary 1 8*)2. in commcmora- 

liori ot the 2()th Near of the three prieMs death. 

it did tun turn out to he a sorrowful parade ot criminals: instead it ho 
s.tnu a tiiumph.il velehi.ition I he elegant carriage which was pulled h\ the 
h.uuUomest horses in their silver studded hat nevses glittered m the sunlight. 

I lie rn.igmf u ent h \ ei \ ot the t «>» *Vn>» and of the lackeys. the s tanking and tin 
ghuet of then .unis, the Luge turnout of the population waving their handker- 
hiefs aiul greeting the three w ho had been condemned tor the crime, of dream 
nig tlu* peoples tieedom constituted the total picture which made it like 
s,nn I mm the tune the\ got out ot the carriage, they were disrobed ot tlui 
priestly gatments. .uui like hardened ru/i>*inrs. they were ha tide u tied hands aiu 
lect. . . . 

1 he whole da\ ot the 1 'mIi ot I chruary, up to the mottling 1 i 
tlu people never tired ot visiting the ehapel where the condtiiiiK p|^ui 
n,K d. On the Unli. l ilipmos from nearby provinces. I,kc 
Kapangpangan. Kahite and l aguna came to see once more those w torn \ h > 
called their p. irents. their three beloved martyrs. About *UL(H I 1 ^ font 
all in mourning black, crowded into the space between the 
gar rote plat forms. j| t | iat 

At seven In tlu- morning the doleful roll ot dr “ ,m > ann < ^^ ed upon the 

tile funeral procession was starting, and complete sti ncssc 

multitude. Saldua, wearing white and with a smiling Lice, he et 

■ ‘ j, but managed to greet 


’a smii ;„ S fcce,l-d,d.K« 4 u^ 

•titer him were the three priests. Burgos cried like a child, hut nl * in ‘ ^ 

1C recognized m me nugc 


with shakes of his head all his friends whom he recogm^' ^ Padre 
/.amora was like one dazed and unconscious of what was ] fT^'.ltitude who 
( iome/, with eves open and his furrowed brows up, 1 csSC< ^ j. ji 

k ."r'’ « I— J All miCof 

the mouths were murmuring their prayers. Lvcn w I 
crowd removed their hats. 10 

n . . , , . t ro : ns pire the leaders of the Propa- 

he martyrdom of the three priests served t in Riza l’ s essay “Ma- 

ganda Movement, as manifested in articles in Lti o c / ; . • r 

nil. on the Month of December , 872," and his dedicanon of El ^ " 
the three martyrs. Rizal would every now and tlten refer to t u r tier ma 


989 


I Ml PI III I PRINT Rl V< )|I'IK )N \M > !U Y< >NI > 


because he was not only personally affected by their death but he w as alsc > aw are of 
the public impact of the event, fie probably also had the premonition that he 
would die in a similar manner. 

Jose Rizal 

The Spanish colonial government accused Rizal of two crimes: the founding of I a 
Liga Filipina, an “illegal organization whose single aim was to ’perpetrate the 
crime of rebellion, ” and rebellion, which he promoted through his previous act ivi 
ties. 11 Fhe prosecution drew information from the dossier on Rizal which detailed 
his “subversive activities’’ some of which were the following. 

1 . I he writing and publication of Noli Me Unif'ere. the Annot<mon > to Morris 
History of the Philippines , /;/ hilihnsterisnio, and various artic les u hie h c r it u izei I the 
friars and suggested their expulsion in order to win independence. Fhe hilt was 
dedicated to the three martyr priests, “who were executed as traitors to the I at her 
land in 1872 because they were the moving spirits of the uprising of that year. 

2. 1 he establishment of Masonic lodges which became the propaganda and 
fund-raising center to support subversive activities, and the establishment of cen 
ters in Madrid, Hong Kong, and Manila to propagate his ideas. 

Rizal, in his defense, denied that he engaged in anv political activity from 0 
July 1892, after the founding of the Fa Riga Filipina, to 1 June 1 896, w hen Rio 
Valenzuela visited him at Dapitan to inform him “that an uprising was being con- 
templated. He told the court that in fact he “advised against it’ and he seemed “to 
have convinced Don Rio Valenzuela at the end of the interview, for later on, in- 
stead of taking part in the rebellion, he sought amnesty from the authorities. I le 
claimed that his name was merely “exploited ” since he was already “contented and 
resigned in his place of exile “because of the opportunity it gave me to do some 
writing” and he even “sought to go to Cuba as a volunteer. 1 ' 

On the Riga, he claimed that it “died stillborn” since he was exiled to Dapi- 
tan shortly after its founding. He denied that it was a subversive organization since 
some members had to abandon it in order to organize the Katipunan. He denied 
the accusations of those who had testified against him since the founders of Riga 
were not the same founders of the Katipunan. In fact, the persons who visited him 
in Dapitan were “persons totally unknown” to him. 14 

Fhe Spanish military court found him guilty of “the crimes of founding 
illegal associations and of promoting and inciting to the crime of rebellion” and 

sentenced him to death. He was to be executed at Bagumbayan on 30 December 
1896. 

Rizal was heavily guarded and accompanied by the Jesuits as he walked from 
Foit Santiago to Bagumbayan. He wore a black woolen suit and a derby hat and 
his aims were tied behind him. During the walk, he recalled his youth and his 
student days at the Ateneo. And in Bagumbayan itself, the Spanish troops held 
back the crowd while the artillery group stood on alert to prevent any attempt to 


990 


\ ,::ion*:h>r ( 'onsi'sou*nrs> 


rescue Ri/al i I 1 s biothci P.ui.ino. who had joined the revolutionary forces, was 
said to ha\e disvout.igcd gioups who might want to save Ri/al since they would 
not he ahle to mau h Spanish tuepower. 1 he fu mg squad was made iif'* ot Filipinos 
hut behind them were Spanish M'Uiiet s \\ ho would make sure that the death order 
was can ied out lust m vase the I thpmo soldiers reneged on their duty. Austin C raig% 
who wrote a hiogi aph\ of Ri/al published m 1 1 3, described the hero s execution: 

1 1 »s re^ui's! to he allow v \i to t.uc his e\ev lit loners was denied as being 
out of the powet ot the v omm.uulm*; of tieer to giant, though Ri/al declared 
that In did not descrw mu h a death. lor he was no traitor to Spain. It was 
promised. howe\et. that ius he.ul should he respected and as unhlindfolded 
and erei t Ki/ul mined ho h.u k to tcvcivc their bullets, he twisted a hand to 
i nd u a t e u t ulei the sliou l v i «. t w iiet e t he soldiers should aim as to reac h his heart. 

1 hen as the \olle\ vame. with a last supreme effort of will power, he turned 
and fell t.n e upw aids, thus u\ ei\ mg the subsequent shots of grace w hie h ended 
his life, so that in toi m as well as t.u t he etui not die' a traitors eleath — 

1 Ik tioops tiled past the dead hodv. as though reviewed b\ it. I ot the 
most v om maiul i ng ti»;u i e ot all was that which lav lifeless, hut the center ot all 
eves. \n oftiu i. i eali/mg the dec etu \ elite to eleath. drew his hanel kerchief ttom 
the d e.ul mans pocket and spiead the silk over the calm face — 

Sir I liij-li ( litlonl. wlu> became Governor ot' Ceylon, described the reaction 
ol the* onlookers m HLuk'U'oody \ Li^utnc. 

It was eailv morning. December 30, 1 800 anel the bright sunshine 
the tropics stteameel down upon the open space, casting hare! tantastie shad 
ows, and drenching with its splendor two crowds ot sightseers. I he one 
composed of Filipinos, cowed, melancholy, sullen, gazing thtough hope le 
eyes at the final scene in the liteot their great countryman the man who ha 
dared to e hampion their cause, and to tell the world the story ot theit misetie. , 
the other was hlithe ot air, ga\ with the uniforms ot officers and the kii^bt 
dresses of Spanish ladies, the men jesting anel laughing, the women shame le.. ) 
applauding with waving handkerchiefs and clapping palms, all alike mump j- 
ing openly in the death of the hated "Indian” and "brother ot the watei ut 
falo whose insolence hael wounded their pride. 11 ’ 

A wagon from San |uan dc Dios arrived after one hour and picked uj. v 

body. 1 le was laid to rest in his black suit and derby hat. 1 lis remains weie \ 
in a plain box and buried at the Paco cemetery. No outsider was allowed to witness 
the event and the exact burial site was kept secret for tear that Filipinos mtgu stca 
the body. Hut some members of the burial staff who were biends of the vi/a 
ily placed a marker at the site with the letters R.P.J. which stood fot Ri^a s inltia 
J.R.P, in reverse. 1 


9 C )1 


THE PHILIPPINE Rl V< )I I I K >N AM > HI Y< )N! > 

Henceforth, his death anniversary became an event that had t<» be com 
memorated. In 1897, on the first anniversary of his death, Sp.ini.iuls were still m 
control and they desecrated his grave while Filipinos brought flowe rs v. ith lagalog 
dedications to nearby graves. - I lis second death anniversary seas celebrated under 
more auspicious circumstances since the Aguinaldo government had become the 
recognized political authority and was presumably still in control before the \meri 
cans asserted their ownership of the islands bv virtue of the Irc.ity of Paris, which 
was concluded on 10 December 1898. 

General Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the Philippine Revolutionary t »o\ 
ernment, proclaimed 30 December as a public holiday and a day of mourning in 
an order issued on 20 December in Malolos, Bulacan. I he flag was raised at half- 
mast from noon of 29 December to noon of 30 I )ecember. / ii hulvpniflcui /</ m its 
31 December 1898 issue reported the details of the musical literary program held 
at the Club Filipino on Calle Alix to commemorate Rizal s death anniversary. A 
bust of Rizal was unveiled for the occasion and a crown of laurel leas es placed on 
its head. Rafael Palma recited a poem, Epifanio de los Santos played the guitar, 
while Emilio Aguinaldo, Pedro Paterno, and Paciano Rizal sent telegrams which 
were read during the program. 

I he American colonial government took over the commemorat ion of Ri/al s 
martyrdom and included 30 December as one of the public holiday s together with 
other American holidays, such as Washington Day. On 30 I )eccmber 1903 \\ ill 
iam Jennings Bryan delivered the Rizal Day address. A monument was also erected 
in Bagumbayan and Rizal declared a national hero. 

Ninoy Aquino 

Ninoy had always been a thorn in Marcos’ side. As the astute politician, it was 
public knowledge that he aspired to succeed Marcos to the presidency, but bis 
ambition was frustrated when martial law was declared. He was made to languish 
in prison on charges of subversion and other crimes. He claimed he “was accused 
of everything under the sun except graft and corruption and rape.” The nation had 
almost forgotten him when he resurfaced, campaigning for a seat in the Batasan 
from his prison cell in 1978. He was exiled from the Philippines on the pretext of 
the much-needed heart bypass, which he underwent in the United States. But 
when he started to fade from people’s memory, he came back against the orders of 
the Marcos government and met his martyrdom on 2 1 August 1 983, gunned down 
by an assassin as he stepped out of the plane. People were shocked at the effrontery 
of the act. 1 he initial shock turned into the indignation of millions of people who 
lined up the streets to witness the burial. The muzzled official press could not ig- 
nore the spontaneous and massive manifestation of sympathy and chose to high- 
light government attempts to maintain order under an emotionally tense environ- 
ment. Ramon lulfo reported the event for Bulletin Today on 31 August 1983: 


992 


> 'KKi s . \ r /»»;.; v I'ontt :n .Wtriorulist ( 'onsctotssrifss 

M.mil.i polucmcn doplovcd in the streets todav to forestall any trouble 
dm me. the tunci.il m.iuh tor c\ Senator lUmigim Aquino have been ordered to 
exert i se maximum tolerant e towards some mare hers who might taunt or pro- 
voke them 1 he onlet tame trom Brig. Men. Nareiso C abrera, Manila police 
thief, who has assigned (>M) traflit policemen, practically the whole trathc 
t< >rt e m the , it\ m the route to w hu h the march will pass. 

I he same news item reported that despite an announcement by hducation 
Minister Onohe IV C'oipu/ that there would be regular classes, 4, ^ private 

schools in the tounu\ observed a 'national day ot mourning called tor by a reso- 
lution prepared b\ the C ouikiI tor Private hducation and around percent ot 
Metro Manilas 1 . S million students were expected to join the tuncral procession. 
( kirdm.il Sin also called tot the creation ot a national reconciliation council to ad- 
dress the volatile situation which resulted from the assassination. 

1 he rest is hisioi \. 1 he "vc How revolution” toppled the Marcos dictatorship 
in bebruarv I l )N(>. Another martvrs death had stirred the nation to action. I he 
dictatorship ended and Nunn s w idow became president. Ninoy s impact on 
peoples consc lousness was recalled on the third anniversary ot his death in August 
immediatelv after the bPSA revolution. 

lo one who had never met him personally, he was a reminder of values 
like love lor freedom, tidcliiv to truth, concern tor justice, solidarity with oth 
ers, sensitivity to human sutlering. .. values tor which Ninoy Aquino lived and 
for which he finally chose to die." Phis observation, from someone who did 
not bother about Ninoy Aquino until after his death, underscores the impact 
he had on people. By his acts, he touched the lives, not only ot his closest asso 
eiates but also of complete strangers. " 


Flor Contemplacion 

Flor was an overseas contract worker hired as a domestic helpet in Singapore. S 
was convicted by a Sing. tporc court on charges ot double murder tot the tear 
Delia Maga, her tellow domestic worker, and Nicholas 1 iuang, bet tour 
ward. She was sentenced to die by hanging and several weeks betoie the dais ot ie 
execution, there were demonstrations in Manila, in Davao, and some ot tei 
in the Philippines which were directed against the Singapore government ant tit 
Philippine authorities. The flag ot Singapore was burned as a manifestation ot in 
dignation against what was perceived as an “inhuman act by an efficient but heart 
less justice system which sentenced an innocent Filipino maid. The street ra 
were also directed against officials of the Department of Labor and l.mp ou 
and the Department of Foreign Affairs who were perceived to be negligent in not 
helping and representing a beleaguered Filipino overseas worker. 1 heie wcic ast 


993 


THK PHIIJPPINI R! VOI L r I K )N AM ) hi V( )NI ) 


minute attempts to send fellow Filipino domestic helpers Vangie Parumog and 
Emilia Frenilla to Singapore to testify that Flor was framed In her employers. I hev 
claimed that Flor told them her employers killed Maga after her ward drowned in 
a pail of water during an epileptic seizure. Hut Flors Singaporean lawyer advised 
her to plead guilry and feign insanity in the hope that her sentence would he light 
ened. But all these activities were ignored. Flor died a martyr s death on 1 " March 
1995 at the Changi prison in Singapore. 

On the eve of her death, there were vigils at the Singapore embassy m Makati 
and in San Pablo, Laguna, her hometown. When her execution was confirmed by 
Alicia Ramos, the Philippine Ambassador to Singapore, the crowd wept and ex- 
pressed anger against the Philippine and Singapore governments. I he Philippine 
Constitution Association (PHILCONSA) likewise “deplored the bureaucratic at- 
titude and insensibility of the government to the plight of the overseas worker. 

Flors body was given a hero’s welcome upon its arrival at the Ninov Aquino 
International Airport as politicians and other public figures made sure that their 
presence was noted by media. She lay in state in her house and buried m San Pablo. 
I he press recorded people’s reactions during this period. 

J hey came from as far away as Cagayan and as out of the wav as Pala 
wan. In busloads and carloads, in bursting jeepneys and shim, tinted Pajeros, 
people made their way to the little town in San Pablo. Under the hot sun they 
lined up patiently, awaiting their turn to get inside the ramshac kle house where 
lay the body of Flor Contemplacion, accused murderess turned national saint. 

I hey had come to take a look, or perhaps rudely and unconsciously, to stare, to 
look in the eye something we have yet to understand but only feel as a people. 

1 hey had come to cry, to weep over pain and our humiliation, awash in that 
fellow-feeling we call pakikiramay , the sense of being bound together in a com- 
mon grief, inextricably linked within a closed circle of what lool vs like a never- 
ending wrong. 22 

Flors death focused attention on the plight of overseas workers who have 
been officially declared the new heroes” for earning precious foreign currency. 
Their remittances often spell the difference between a positive or negative national 
account. And yet individually, they were simply an element in the faceless mass of 
official statistics and numbers. Flor’s heroism might not fall within the orthodox 
paradigm of martyrdom in terms of a conscious attempt to dedicate her life to 
some ,high purpose or a conscious “willingness to undergo suffering and persecu- 
tion, but hers was the heroism of the Filipino masa and womankind who are 
forced to brave unknown global circumstances in the hope of improving the qual- 
ity of life of their families. 

Within the Filipino context, what could be a nobler purpose than to sacrifice 
for ones own children? Her death laid bare the shortcomings of the bureaucracy 


994 


I » WKl s ; 'v rr ^ /*<>;>;/ in X.itioru/ist ( 'onsciimsnms 

that mc.isutcd MHioanniMiiiv imp.Ki in terms ot dollars and statistics rather than 
in terms ot individual wclt.uc. I he Ramos government, conscious of its image in 
an election vear. rehe\ed important bureaucrats ol their posts, notably the see re- 
tar\ ot toicign atlairs and the sevretarx ot labor and employment, and promised a 
more canny polu v urn aid the overseas contract workers. 

The Impact of Martyrs 

I low do we explain the lilipino reaction to these deaths? Melba Padilla 
Maggav. a social anthropologist, provides a possible explanation: 

Si i angeh . n u ould seem that the \ erv thing that draws us to these deaths 
is not then unujueness hut their similarity no all the other deaths. It is as if sud- 
denl\. like the huromcnttido who erupts into an indiscriminate \ okanie rage, 
something in us snaps and a ripple ot indignation soon gathers into a tidal 
w rath that sweeps awav the nuglm and the strong. Lwia no, sobra no resonates 
m those depths ot us w hie h have seen and endured so much. It does not matte! 
it the icons are rather soiled. \\ hat matters is the clarity with which they repre- 
sent all the other deaths that haunt us and cry to us tor justice and retribu 
lion.... 

Hindi hi //,,/. was how our people put it, this sense of a common 
victimization, ot a fellowship in siiHering that now and again lises, a buried 
solidaritv that in acute moments ot crisis in our histon surfaces and surj ti 
us. 

1 wish to analv/e the impact of these martyrdoms within the eoncej 
lilipino loob. Much has been written about the loob. It reptc scuts tie it ' 
world-view of the l ilipino, his attempt to harmonize the objective ane " 
jective. It is the totality of his intellectual, emotional, volitional, ethica , ai 
capacities. ’* It is not confined to a static position but seeks out union anc ' 
ity with other loob in the process of pogpopobotoo or becoming nit ' 

Ang so bit ng bolingbingon ay (Lundam ng bitong boro wan. Man is a soeia eu ^ 
the experiences of other people affect him. Hi s pabibisangLot so npun 
ment with the other people deepens his loob and makes him a better person. 
loob is a factor for social change as balinisan and bagandahan ng bob become t ie 
criteria for evaluating the use of political power; the absence of loo xcomev 
reason for waging a revolution. The theory of loob becomes a theoi\ o 
change.** 

Loob is a process of human and social transformation which taw\s f 
cording to the following schema: 


995 


THK PHII.IPPINh RhV( )I l I K )N AND IU Y< )ND 


1 . Pan a tag na loob 

I 

2. Pagpukaw ng loob 

I 

3. Pagkilos rig loob 

I 

-3. Pakiktisa sa ibang loob 

I 

5. Pagsasabuhay sa loob 

I 

6. Pagbabago ng loob ng lip in uni 

The loob undisturbed is normally in a state of equilibrium. It is the sum total 
of a persons affective and cognitive nature. ( 1 ) The specter of a corpse disturbs tins 
state of equilibrium as the loob is affected by external events. Its value svstem is 
disturbed as it feels an unjust act has been committed. (2) It tries to assuage this 
feeling through some form of volitional action of expressing svmpathv with the 
martyr, like lighting candles and attending burial rites. The action purifies t be loob. 
(3) It finds comfort in other loob who are likewise affected In the unjust execu 
tion of a member of the community and results in some form of public manifes- 
tation of sympathy as joining rallies and demonstrations. 1 he loob is affirmed in 
these public events. Hindi ka nag-iisa is realized as the loob expresses paktkiramay 
with the fallen hero and experiences oneness with other nakikiramay na loob. 1 here 
is now a common sense of victimization and fellowship in suffering, (d) 1 be 
values it holds are strengthened as it internalizes the values learned from the martyr 
and from other fellow loob. I his cathartic experience transforms the person mo- 
mentarily or permanently. (3) I he experience is replicated in other loob results 
in social transformation. (6) Social transformation in the events cited took place in 
different forms. Gomburzas legacy found expression in the Propaganda Movement 
as exemplified by Rizal. Rizal s death affirmed to the leaders of the Philippine revo- 
lution the justice of their cause. Aquino’s death prompted the patient I m 1 i pi no to 
take action and culminated in the EDSA people-power revolution. Gon- 
templacions death prompted the Ramos government to reexamine its image and 
undertake some corrective measures. 

History becomes the final witness as to whether or not these martyrdoms 
resulted in lasting social transformation. 


996 


A .itwti t ihst ( otiM':ousnc» 


h,:Uw9i£ i oik: . 


Notes 

1. Pablo 1 t abaluu;. 1 he Sovereign l fVuacv of Martyrdom* Horizons Vol. HI (Oe- 
c cmlvi 1 * ><> i . p 2 ' 

2. 1 bid . p|> 2 1 2 2 

.V I « > 1 1 : i \ S v luim.u hei. Metro Manila: Ateneo dc Manila l ni- 

w r s 1 1 \ I’uss, 1 Os 1 . pp S 

• *. i Ini .u u > de i.i t om. 1 . s I nltppme History (Metro Manila: Bookmark* 

I IK . . 1 V) (>S i . p l 

5. 1 1 .msl.it u >n ot Butte's I he Manifesto. 

6. hum.K hei. /\Vro. :<';«>>/«/ n < /er\^V p|'. I 0-10. 

*7. Ku keiis tn 1 nut t ii atu ille. Manila. 10 Match IS 2 as cjuotcd in de la C.osta, Arttt/- 

tn Ri'tlippine PP 1 *o ISO. 

S. Ihul. 

0. Ihul 

!(). 1 iliuuiui Plain Inn. I Ik t uvne l ’prising of 18~2." Historical BuUrtinV<A. IV (De- 

c ember l l )('0). 1 l(v 

11. I Ik- ln.il ..t K,/.il. Pmhppim hnjuitrr. 1" lime R>%. 1 . This is a reprint ot 

I lu- ln.il o! 1 )i |o»c Ri/.il .ix u. him. t ibed In W.l . Ret.m.i from official Spanish 
iliKiimenis .nul edited. tiandaicd, aiul annotated hy hr. 1 loracio de la C osta. pub 
I idled In the Ateneo de Manila University Press in 1%1 on the occasion ot Rizals 
hn ih centennial. 

1 1. Ibid., p. (>. 

1 3. Ibid., 20 |ime 1 066, p. i . 

14. Ibid. 

Is. Austin C rait;, / I ife und labors of Jose Riztil (Manila: 1 hiltppinc l.ducatu 

( a)., 1013), pp. 2 - 0 ) 2s0. 

An evewit ness account ol Ri/al s execution by Juan lxbeio* a newspapet 
spondent who joined the revolutionary forces, was published in l.*i Republic* lilji 
on 2-1 I )ecember 1 SOS. 

16. Ibid. 

17. Ibid., pp. 2S1 2S2. 

18. Ibid. 

10. Bulletin lodny. 3 1 August 1006, 1. 

20. John 1. l.ogarta, “In search of a lit tint; memorial for Ninov Aquino, Mk ttnd l 
August 1086, 2u. 

21. I he Philippine Star, 18 March 100S, p. 12. 

22. Melba Padilla Maggay. “1 lor Contemplacion, Requiem for a People, „S unday In- 
quirer Mugtiziue, 2<S Mav 4-3. 

23. Ibid. 

24. Leonardo N. Mercado, S.V.D.. Elements of Filipino Philosophy ( lacloban: Divine 
Word University Press, 1974). 


007 


THI-; PHIUPIMNh Ri V< >1.1 I K >N AM ) hi 'i < )NI ) 


25. Albert I'.. Alejo, S.J., Tao po, Iuloy! Isang luiiuhis ng Png utum </ ./ / oob ng Lio (Qu- 
ezon City: ( )fficc of Research and Publications. Ateneo dc Manila l mvcrsitv. 1 k W0). 

26. Reynaldo C. Ileto, Pasyon and Revolution, PopuLtr Movement in the Philippine . 
1840-1910 (Quezon City: Ateneo dc .Manila l mvcrsitv Press. 1‘) 

27. I his schema was developed during discussions with I cothmv < las c l arul t.u ult\ 
members of the Social Science Department of the ( ollcgc of \ r t s .uul Sucnu-s of 
University of the Philippines at Manila. 


998 


\ 


Spanish Companies in the Philippines 
After the Revolution 


1 1 OKI N I INO ROPAO 

Umw'suUii Complutense de Madrid, Spam 


W e can bettci understand the reaction ot the Spanish conmuinit} 
to the end ol colonial dominance in the Philippines it we look at what it 
actually did rather than at what it expressed subjectively just after the deteat. An 
American report w ritten during the Japanese Occupation pointed out uneasih. 

Since the I’.S. acquisition ot the Philippines, Spanish residents ot the 
islands exerted economic influence disproportionate to their nurnhei (appioxi 
match' 1,000) through their extensive holdings ot agricultural land operated 
with native tenants only slightly above the level ot serfdom. 1 


1 hese companies survived long after the Spanish authorities wete ousted, 
born with special privileges, thev became strong enough to weather the new tc 
gime. I analv/.e the reasons for their survival, first by discussing the solution of 
Spanish companies since the end ol the Spanish rule in 1898 and the ptobkms 
they confronted, then bv providing a brief account ol their economic intetests 
during the Pacific War, and finally, by examining the reasons for their endurance 
during the American regime. 


Spanish Economic Interests After 1898 

1 here were few Spanish economic interests at the end ot Spains tulc in the 1 hilip 
pines. Although metropolitan companies had enjoyed the obvious pi i\ i leges -d NLn 
by the colonial government, the means to enjoy these benefits weie seaiee. Spanish 


999 


THI- PHII IPI’INl. HI.VOI.I I K )\ AM ) PI Y< )M ) 


capitalism was not much developed and the peninsula itself was ecnnomualh tie 
pendent, mainly on French capital. Spain lacked the neeessarv resources to profit 
From colonization of the Philippines; one of its more successful companies, the 
Com pan fa General de lahacos de Pilipinas or the lahacalera was owned m large 
part by French capital. Although Spain ruled the islands, other foreign companies, 
the British in particular, profited from the Philippines. 

I he weakness of Spanish capitalism, however, explains onlv partis win there 
were so few Spanish companies in the Philippines. Fhe case of ( uba, the other 
important colony lost in 1898, was totally different. Fhe so-called Jewel of the 
Flmpire, Cuba was where Spanish capitalists obtained huge profits that thev sent 
to Spain. Consequently, there was an imbalance within the empire w here the sun 
never sets : the Antilles (Cuba and Puerto Rico) were highlv prof itable for Spanish 
companies and they identified closely with Spain. I he Pacific colonies were less 
profitable and their cultural identification with Spain was limited to religion, 
r here fore, Cubas separation was a big loss: some of the most important banks in 
present-day Spain were founded at the turn of the centurv with funds sent from 
Cuba. 

I he loss of the Philippines was also much regretted in Spain, but the percep- 
tion was somewhat different. During the three centuries of colonialism, the* two 
countries were linked only indirectly and infrequently through \lexic o. I here were 
also scarce benefits from those contacts. F/ven today when someone loses some- 
thing important, Spaniards still say, Mas se perdio en Cuba (M< >re was lost in 
Cuba). 1 here is no such saying about the Philippines. I here was even a feeling of 
relief in Spain after the loss of the islands: “saving souls ’ and prestige had been the 
only reasons for maintaining the far-flung territories after 1605, when the idea of 
using the Philippines as a first step into mainland Asia had to he ah andoned. * 

I herefore, when it was known that the Americans wanted to buv the Philippines 
and Guam, Madrids only concern was how to get rid of the rest of the islands in 
Micronesia. Germany wanted to buy only three islands (Phonpei, Kosrae, and 
Chuuk) but Spain offered the whole Micronesia as a package and Berlin accepted 
immediately. I he agreement came so easily that it had to be kept a secret until the 
Treaty of Paris between Spain and the United States was signed. Selling territories 
with people like any other commodity did not concern the Peninsula, since the 
much-needed money helped it forget any possible qualms. 

With the new American rule, three factors undermined the economic might 
of Spaniards, physical attack, loss of privileges, and weakening of ties between 
Spaniards in the Philippines with Spain. 

Attacks by Filipinos and Americans against Spanish economic interests, 
which can be considered normal in a revolutionary situation, provoked the exit 
from the islands of a number of Spaniards. Others fled out of fear of becoming 
victims. I he most devastating attacks on the economic power of the Spaniards 
came just after the end of the Philippine-American War when the new rulers settled 
in office. One of their first measures was to divest the friars of their huge landhold- 


1000 


Ki 'P \t ' V\; < 'vnp.tmey in tJ*e Philippine* After the Revolution 

mgv \ 1 1 c- r ditfkuh lupHi.uions m which the Vatican took pan, the religious or- 
ders had to sell most ot their land to the l .S. government which later sold it to 
then tenants. I ti.it lands and holdings in the Philippines, therefore, were greatly 
reduced, although the religious orders got a good deal from the sales. 

Spanish i om panics suffered the loss of their privileges, which were now given 
to non Sp. miauls Privileges granted hv law were also taken away although more 
slowlv. I he Spaniards tried to maintain them as long as possible and negotiate tor 
a 10 veai period dm mg which thev would be given the same access as the Ameri- 
cans to the Philippine market. I his clause in the Paris Ireaty, however, meant few 
privileges as W ashington avoided taking measures that would also benefit Span- 
iards and toe used instead on gaining freer access to the Philippine market. Free 
access of Philippine products to \merica started only after 1909 through the 
Pavnc Aldt k h I aw. W ashmgton thus limited access by other foreigners who could 
have applied toi it mulct the most favored nation clause, a practice contrary to the 
“Open Pool polic v followed m t hina. 

( )n main occasions, pnv i leges held formerly by Spanish companies were lost 
simplv because of the Spaniards new status as foreigners. In shipping it became 
compulsorv to utili/e l .S. ships to export products out of the Philippines. 1 he 
prohibition on bin mg ships or using ships of foreign companies a fleeted mainly 
the Spaniards and particularlv the labacalera, the most important company in- 
volved in coastal shipping at the turn of the century. 1 he labacalera lost its leading 
position in ibis held. W hen it applied for the 21 routes oflered on a competitive 
basis bv the American government, its bid was rejected for being too expensive. 
With all these problems, the labacalcras fleet was reduced progressive!), from 
5,811 tons in 192b to 1,18b tons in 19-40. 1 he total weight of all fleets in the 1 hil- 
ippines was 43,000 tons; the weight of the 35 ships owned by the labacalera was 
no more than 1 ,000 tons. ’ Although the labacalera created the labacalera Steam- 
ship C 'o. as a subsidiary companv, this oflered only a partial solution. Its lack of 
ships damaged the companv. Its economic might was also reduced by the 1 135 and 
1 936 forced sales of some of its hacinulds such as San Luis and Apolonia in Negros. 
Because of the different measures taken “to protect its planters and tenants, an 
uneasy situation was created in the labacalera, reflected clearly in its internal docu 
mentation. " ,0 

I he desire to diminish the fortunes of Spanish companies was not exclusively 
American. I he Filipino elite also enhanced their wealth through regulations aimed 
at obstructing competition from other nationalities or directly forbidding their 
participation in some areas. Quezon, for instance, proposed an article in the 1 135 
Constitution prohibiting other nationalities besides the American and Filipino 
from participating in the retail and wholesale trade. 

I he loosening of ties with the Peninsula and within the Spanish community 
itself also led to the disappearance of Spanish political dominance. It became 
increasingly difficult to emigrate to the islands. Furthermore, many sons of 
Spaniards took Filipino citizenship and it became normal to have members of dif- 


1001 


THK miMPPINf Rl V( )lt I I( )N AM > hi i c >M ) 


fcrcnt citizenship inside a family, regardless of their plate of birch. I here were also 
conflicts inside the Spanish communitv due to the Spanish War I he colons he 
came deeply divided among three different groups Imterlv confronting c.u h other: 
leftist republicans and Basque hacoidcror, Falangistas fanatuallv hacking the 
Franco government; and the wealthy families whose ideologv was sironglv conser- 
vative (pro-Franco) hut whose allegiance was torn when World W ar II started 
their money was more attached to the United States rather than to Franco and the 
Falangistas. 

I hese conflicts did not result in violence hut prevented the commumt\ from 
acting as one. Most of the economic power remained with a group of w call In fami- 
lies who decided to adopt Filipino citizenship as a wav of protec ting their proper- 
ties, now threatened by Spains inclination to join the Axis and by Ouc/ons at- 
tempts to promote a Filipino upper class. : 

The Spanish Companies 

Directly or indirectly, the economic interests of the Philippine Spanish commu- 
nity — besides the missionaries — rotated around three companies: the* labacalcra, 
Andres Soriano & Cia, and Elizalde & Cia. 


The Tabacalera 

Founded in 1881 after the end of tobacco monopoly, the labacalcra soon after 
started handling abaca, copra, and sugar milling, as well as other businesses such as 
alcohol distillery and coastal shipping. When the Philippine revolution broke, the 
company was making profits — as in Hacienda La Luisita, Tarlac, or in one of the 
biggest cigar factories in the world, La Flor de la Isabela. The ’labacalcra tobacco 
storehouses, spread throughout the archipelago, also collected copra and other 
products. Up to World War I, the Tabacalera’s main profits came in decreasing 
importance from gathering and processing leaf tobacco, harvesting of sugar, and 
exploitation of haciendas. After the war, the Tabacalera started to prof it from the 
sugar mills, rice, and insurance. In 1941, it installed a paper mill which used the 
waste from sugar cane. Its golden years were in the period between the two world 
wars, when sugar accounted for most of the company’s profits which easily ab- 
sorbed losses from tobacco and from the decreasing share in the cigar exports to 
the United States, which plunged from 39 percent in 1 933 to 1 2 percent m 1 939. 
The 1 abacalera yielded high yearly profits except in 1933 (33 percent) and 1937 
(14 percent). It had the biggest number of employees in the Philippines, with 
Hacienda La Luisita alone employing up to 6,000 workers. I here were 200 Span- 
ish citizens on its payroll in its heyday . 1 1 The Tabacalera was also the main copra 
expoiter up to World War I. It became the main exporter of sugar (although not 
the main producer) with its peak year in 1934 when it sold 278,000 tons." 


1 002 


Ki M l \i ' V ( omp.ime* in :>V Philippines After the Revolution 


Andres Soriano & (ia 

Andres Soi mho s cmpiic w as built around his San Miguel Brewery, later San Miguel 
( orpoiation. I ndei Ins management since 1010 the company gained up to a 00- 
percent share in the heet market in 1028. Soriano diversified into yeast, dairy prod- 
ucts, uc, and soli dunks, including C oca C ola. 1 1 is connections with American 
companies were extensive. In the 1 030s he became more interested in gold mines 
as prues increased horn l .8. $30 to l .8.8*0 per ounce and, seemingly because of 
his leadership, pulled along with him a good part of the fortunes of the Spanish 
community. I le was associated with the Roxas family in companies such as Sorox 
8c C o. he also had companies m the l nited States, hrance (Ansor), and Spain, 
which he trec]uentl\ visited. 


lilizalde & ( o. 

1 he vast interests of the Mi/alde family were structured around \ nchausti N C o., 
later c hanged to Mi/alde Sc C ia w hen the descendants of the founder, less in\ol\cd 
in management, sold its shares. Its main companies were Klizalde Rope factor), 
Mi/alde Paint and Oil Factory, Manila Steamship, la Carlota Sugar Central, 
Ianduav Distillerv, and Pilar Sugar C entral. they made ropes (exporting two 
thirds of those made in the Philippines) and provided ropes to ships, produced 
paint, extracted oil from the lumbang tree, processed alcohol, and milled sugar. 
(The most important mill, and one of the biggest in the Philippines, was l a Car 
lota, on Negros Island), l he four Mi/alde brothers had distributed among them- 
selves the management of business and political connections. Manuel was ptomi 
nent in business. Joaquin Miguel was involved in political activity, becoming a 
director of the National Development Company. In M38, he was resident com 
missioner to Washington. 

Other businesses affiliated with the Spanish Chamber of Commerce NNere 
very much interrelated; those of Roxas, tor example, were connected 1 
Sorianos. 1 he other companies aff iliated with the chamber were banco dc las Is as 
Pilipinas; Banco Hipotecario cle Pilipinas; Philippine Sugar States, La Insu ar, 
Pabrica de Iabacos y Cigarrillos; La Yebana, Pabrica de labacos y Cigarri os. 
Commonwealth Insurance Co.; and Luason y Sampedro. 

Spanish companies had a large share in every export from the Philippines, 
probably with the exception of lumber. Lip to World War 1, the Iabacalera was the 
leading exporter of copra. In sugar it rose from the eighth to the third position. 


The Reasons the Spanish Companies Endured 


There are four main reasons for the comparative strength of the Spanish compa 
nies on the eve of the Pacific War: their close ties with Filipino society, the swift 


1003 


THK mil.ll'IMNh RI.V< )I.l IK >\ \NI > hi K >M > 


ness with which they adapted to the new regime; their relatively good performance; 
and their shrewdness in preserving their former privileges. 

Interconnection with Filipino Interests 

I here was a Hispanicized group in Philippine society that was mudi more exten- 
sive than the 4,000-odd citizens with Spanish passports. Most were Spanish mcsn 
zos who spoke Castilian and identified with the problems that affected Spam. I or 
most of them the land where they were horn was where thev would surelv die. I hey 
have been called “Hispanic Cosmopolites or “near-Spanish who were techni- 
cally Philippine citizens. 1 

It is useful to quantify their economic importance as a class. Iiu ite the data 
submitted by I hcodore Friend to the U.S. Senate ( Committee on leu nones m re- 
lation to investment in sugar mills: 49 percent was Filipino, 20 percent American, 
24 percent Spanish, and 1 percent cosmopolitan. Friend maintains that n is incor 
rect to ascribe the capital from the ( Ksorios, a C Creole family, as Filipino and that of 
the Elizaldes as Spanish. He restructures the figures: the cosmopolitans share rises 
to 25 percent; Filipino capital goes down to 39 percent; American goes up to 28 
percent; and Spanish plunges to a mere 8 percent, the investment bv the Iabacal- 
era. 1 * 

Adaptation to American Might 

Lay Spaniards who remained in the Philippines after 1899 adapted relatively 
well politically and economically — to the new colonial regime. Once they ac- 
cepted as impossible the return of Spanish domination, they saw American rule as 
one of their best options: the colonial situation was maintained by anot her western 
power which, best of all, opened up to them a large and prosperous market. I he 
best example of this adaptation is probably that of the Spanish Chamber of C Com- 
merce in Manila, which was the first advocate of free commerce with the United 
States, from mid- 1905 until 1908, noting the possibility of benefiting from the 
10-year period sanctioned in the Ireaty of Paris. 19 

One reason for the Spanish business community’s adaptation had to be its 
economic needs after a violent time; but another had to be the benefits that it per- 
ceived when the new masters arrived and settled. In contrast to the Spanish bu- 
reaucracy, the American government officials were reliable and less arbitrary. For 
instance, the main problem with tax collection in the Spanish regime was not the 
amount but the employees who spent the money after it was received. In its Offi- 
cial Memorandum in 1901, the labacalera declared: “Although peace seems to be 
leestablishing in the Archipelago, it is not yet clearly perceived what awaits us and 
it is not good yet to be too optimistic.” 20 

I he decline of the Catholic church in the Philippines did not necessarily 
mean the decline of every Spaniard. During the Spanish regime, lay Spanish citi- 


1004 


? ■'« M ’ W ' V /Vv Philippines After the Rerolution 


/ens and their businesses suffered like the rest of the society from the behavior of 
the dispropoi i lonateU pow cr tul v huu h. But as the American government satisfied 
the needs ot I ihpmos. n could also have done the same with the Spanish 

com mum t\ laime t »il tie Biedma. a pin t and writer touring the Philippines lor the 
Iabacalcta in lo> t. unics that ever\ lahacalera worker was anticlerical.* 1 ^et the 
Pal >acalera was founded In the Marquis de t omillas, a family name closely associ- 
ated with i he lesmt s. 

Spaniards adapted well 10 the new ideas of tree enterprise brought in by the 
Americans because, as m l atm \merica. those who had left Spain were the more 
cntrepreneiinai ones Spaniards m the Philippines preferred to work in business or 
as professionals than as bureaus rats. \ continuing problem ot the Spanish schools, 
for instance, was ihat thc\ lacked Spanish professors because they could earn more 
monev m business I he Spanish conimunitv in the Philippines was a \er\ wealth) 
one and the help extended to the poor Spanish (through the Hospital di Santiago, 
Auxilio Social, and others) usually were extended to bilipinos as well. I here were 
not main Spaniards m need. 

1 veil the religious orders seemed t o have adapted well to their losses in real 
estate after tlu* demise ot Spanish power. W ith the money received, they established 
the Philippines as then center for the bar l ast and expanded their business in the' 
rest of Asia, panic tilarh C hma. \\ hen new missionaries were sent to the 1 ar hast, 
some of them were se nt through the l nitecl States to the Philippines, and from the 
U.N. their final destination was decided: C hina, Japan, Philippines, and so on. An 
account bv C hi de Biedma affirmed that 


the lesmis have a paw nshop in Manila and control a good deal of the exchange 

business in I long hong, the* l Dominicans monopolized the renting ot tick 
shaws in Shanghai, the Recollects are the most important share holders in San 
Miguel Beer, more important than the Sorianos and the Roxases, etc. 

for its part, Washington was not interested in totally suppressing othei na 
tionalities as pressure groups in Philippine society, for as Ciiesecke points out, l t r 
cign capitalists might someday provide a lobby opposed to the independence ot 
the Philippines."' Spaniards and Americans shared the same interest in maintain 
ing the colonial status quo and in making the country dependent on the U.S. in 
order to maintain exports and generate profits, enabling the Americans to tocus 
more on hegemony-building in Asia. 


Modern Spanish Business 


The 40 years under American rule and the exports to a restricted market generated 
a bonanza for the economy. Like the rest ot business in the archipelago Spanis 
com pan ies bench ted . 


1005 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.LTK )N AND BI V( )NI > 


Among the reasons for this was the community’s demographic change. New 
immigrants from Spain boosted business in general, with young people arris mg m 
the Philippines after escaping from military conscription for the colonial war m 
Morocco. Also important was that most immigrants came from the two most in- 
dustrious regions of Spain — Basque and Catalan. The I\li/alde companies usually 
had only Basque employees; most of the sugar planters in Negros were Basques. 
The labacalera was set up in Barcelona, although there is not a clear pattern of 
contracting mostly Catalonians. On the other hand, the lessening of the adminis 
trative presence and diminution of the power of the friars meant a weaker presence 
of Castilians (which is what most Dominicans were) and Andalusians. 

1 he community, furthermore, could count on dynamic leaders such as An- 
dres Soriano, the Elizaldes, or Antonio Median, who exerted a positive influence on 
commercial activities, something that had not been possible in the 19th century 
when the government was under the dominion of religious fathers who saw trade 
with the enemies of Catholic Spain as the entry point of new subversive ideolo- 
gies. 24 

furthermore, Spanish companies had an important role in the moderni/a 
tion of production in the Philippines. Investments like that of Iabacalera in the 
1910s aimed to exploit Hacienda La Luisita and help the government finance irri- 
gation canals to facilitate cultivation of rice in an effort to extract greater profits 
from the land or more benefits for the company on a medium- to long-term ba- 
sis. 25 1 he Iabacalera also played a key role in changing 19th-century non-indus- 
trial sugar production to the central milling of sugar for the American market. " 
1 he labacaleras Central Azucarera de Bais and Elizaldes La ( kirlota led the race in 
increasing production in order to gain a larger share of the total trade in anticipa- 
tion of the quota system for duty-free access of sugar to the United States. 

The Banco Hispano-Eilipino played an important role in agriculture at the 
beginning of the century. 2 * I he 1948 census of the Philippines shows that the 
Spaniards owned more and better agricultural equipment than other nationals, 
including Americans. American citizens owned a total of P3.9 million (at P 2 to 
$1) worth of assets, 90.5 percent of which was the value of land itself with 1 per- 
cent the value of machinery. Spaniards owned a little more, 4.5 million, but with 
the value of land itself at only 85.2 percent and the value of machinery at 3.3 per- 
cent. In the case of the Chinese, farm equipment made up only 1 .8 percent of total 
assets. 29 

Spanish companies also invested in new sectors of the economy. Although 
they did not have access to the technologies that allowed American companies easy 
entrance into the pharmaceutical, photography, and car industries, they used Eu- 
ropean patents. I he first cement factory was started by the Recollects in 
Binangonan with a group of Manila businessmen, importing machinery made by 
Krupps and bringing in German technicians; and the first cellulose factory set up 
by the Tabacalera in Bais, in 1941, used an Italian patent.' 0 


1006 


KOI ' \0 ( 


n:r* in tJ*e Philippines After the Revolution 


Defense of Privileges 


Almost gu.u.inteed cxpoit to the I S. made too many companies in the Philip- 
pines mu ompet it in c. and main ot them probahlv could not have survived in a 
different emuonment. I ot instance. sugar was produced in the Philippines at a 
cost double that m ( uba ot |ava. I Ins was a general problem under American 
tutelage that allowed a company like the labacalcra to survive with such high fixed 
expenses. I he uMiipam was too big and continued to use traditional methods ot 
production whuli deterred it from profiting in sectors such as copra, where 
decisions on pricing and markets had to be made quickly. 1 he labacalcra was slow 
to adapt to the needs ol the market and. in the case ot tobacco, it tailed to consider 
new trends, such as the demand tor cigars with less nicotine or the growing popu- 
lartt \ ot cigarettes. So when it could not till its quota ot cigar exports to the 
U.S., other companies tilled the gap. In the Philippines, cigar brands like LI 
( Torino gradually lost us market share to foreign ones such as blue Seal, which 
was more aromatized and better advertised. In IT^h, the sa k' °1 foreign brancs 
began to surpass that ot local brands. 1 he labacalcra was conservative* but part n 
because with such high profits from sugar there was no incentive to restructure 
tobacco production, t iencrallv. the lack ot competitiveness afiected ever) sector ot 
the Philippine economy due to the benefits derived from tree access to the l .S. 
market. 

II the Spaniards managed to defend their privileges, it was due to theit intc 
gration into l ilipino society. I hcv benefited from the politicians reliance on cor 
porate funds. 1 he Spaniards seem to have played the political game well. Euroj: ean 
groups, even the British, formed beneficial alliances with Spanish companies, hr 
example, they backed the successful Roxas campaign in against the Chincve 

mestizo C )smena, although Roxas himself had no Spanish blood. I he\ prevailed in 

the drive against Japanese immigration.'* 

1 he Spanish companies also adapted the system ot favors and tompiuinugo 
and the like. The Tabacalera got around the 1.1-hectare limit on Litifiaidia by leas- 
ing out parcels and charging rent equivalent to IS percent ot production, while 
reserving the right to buv all or part ot the harvest ot sugar cane. 

In essence, the Philippine political and economic system differed little horn 
the Spanish one, which was the main reason why Spaniards adapted so quickly to 
the new situation. In both countries there was vote-buying in the countryside, 
caciquism prevailed, and political contacts were necessary tor business. 1 he con- 
struction of Hacienda La Luisitas irrigation canal benefited other lands and the 
favor would have to be paid in one way or another. A labacalera subsidiary, the 
coconut-oil producer Hispano-Philippine Oil Co., tor example, was never pioht 
able, but its continued existence was tor “political reasons totally justified aftei 
continuous pressure from our Filipino friends." 34 On the other hand, since 1923, 
the labacalera had a reservation fund ot 3 million pesetas for renovating its fleet, 


1 007 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOEUI H )N AM ) M Y< >M ) 


surely the company expected that it could influence legislation through its Fili- 
pino friends.”* 5 

New Relations 

The relations between Spain and the Philippines changed after ISOS. Shkc the 
turn of the century Filipino-Spanish relations were based on economn interests 
and religion, both strongly linked by the cultural affmitv between the two coun 
tries. I he importance of religion and the economy was not new. but the main 
change was the shift from state interests to private interests. 

Therefore, relations in the first half of the 20th centurv were not between 
Spain and the Philippines, but between Spaniards and Filipinos or Spaniards in 
the Philippines. From 1898 until the Pacific War, the state abandoned its role in 
maintaining these relations, which now became the concern of private corpora- 
tions, both religious and economic. I he most prominent Til I lispaim institu 
tions — such as the three Spanish casinos in Manila, ( Tbu, and Iloilo; the I lospital 
de Santiago; the Hogar San Joaquin; the Jai-alai; and even the l alange and its 
Auxilio Social — were created when private entrepreneurship was dominant and the 
state was relegated to financing trips by academicians and litcratn such as Vicente 
Blasco Ibannez or Federico Garcia Sanchfz. Kvcn the Spanish ( Consulate was given 
an allocation from the earnings of the casino at Manila, and its fiestas and other 
celebrations were paid for by the community. 1 he secondary role played bv offi- 
cials can be seen in the consuls lack of right to vote in the discussions at the Span- 
ish Chamber of Commerce. The community of wealthy families assumed the role 
of the Spanish state that was beset by domestic conflict and problems due to its 
never-ending adventures in Morocco. 

I rivate ties proved much stronger than official ones. I he above-mentioned 
institutions increased contacts between the two countries more than the state ever 
did. The year 1 898 marked a dramatic increase in mutual trade. The total exchange 
was I 4 million in 1898 and P7 million in 1900; at the end of 1920 the figure was 
around I 13 million to Pi 4 million, a substantial quantity considering that the 
American market had by then distorted Philippine trade (absorbing, for example, 
up to 99 percent of Philippine sugar exports). Trade between Sp ain and the Philip- 
pines subsided somewhat during the 1930s; the year before the outbreak of the 
Spanish Civil War it amounted to only P6 million due to the Crash of 1929 and 
the balance of trade in favor of the Philippines. Spanish authorities tried to miti- 
gate it, but Spanish companies such as the Tabacalera always reminded the Spanish 
government that money sent from the islands to Spain compensated for the defi- 
cit. In the end, Spain profited from the Philippines. 

The separation of Cuba and the Philippines from Spain had a similar result: 
the end of colonial rule boosted rather than restrained their relations with Spain, 
relations now based on equality and free of distrust and suspicion. With the Pacific 


1008 


!vt >1 > \l ' S;. ;r; ;/»<- Philippines After the ReioltittOtl 

War. Inmocr. t uhas iclations wuh Spain continued while the Philippines rela- 
tions with its tormei volom/er collapsed. 


Notes 

1. 


6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 
1 1 . 


N \R \ Bl \ Rc . Box IMS. Secret Report. 28 July 19-43. 

1 Ins resea rv h is part ot a Ph.lX resea re h tor the l niversitv ot Pokyo. Rico l. Jose 
helped in vonw mu; the I owlish version. 

\hhre\ i.u ions 

AM \1 R \idmo del Ministerio de Wuuos Pxteriores. Seccion Renovada. 

Bl \ Bureau ot Insul.u \tlairs. 

N \R \ National \n luxes and Records Administration. Washington. 

R( i Refold t .toup tN \RA) 

Piohahh the most interesting case was that ot Micronesia, an archipelago that \ u 
voked massive demonsuations in the mid ISSOs against German attempts to seize it. 
\ltei a mediation h\ the Pope. 1 eon Xlll. they stayed under Spanish sox cici^ntx, 
there was nexei a umipanv that could profit from the copra produced in the island.' 
and the profits were tot a C »erman cotnpanv established there, Jaluit Ciescllshatt. 
Rodao. llorentmo. /hpanolo en Siam. 9. I'na Aporracidn al Estudw de la 

Preseneui Htspana en .\su. Madrid, C SlC , 199 , p. 30. 

lor examples ot siuh violence. see Aguilar, Pilomcno \. Masonic C apitalistn 
Revolution in Negros m this same volume, and Mcl ennan, Marshall S. Chan .7 ^ 

I liini.in Pcologv on the C entral 1 u /on Plain: Nueva I cija, l 03-1 ); > P in 
McCoy and C . 1 V Jesus (eds.) Philippine Social History, Mai Trade andLocallnins- 
fornmtions (Manila: Atenco de Manila l niversitv Press, 19S-), PP- 0 0. 

Salamanca, Bonitacio S. I he hihpino Reaction to American Role . P)0l-l )13 (Quez 
City: New Hav. 1984), pp. 100-109. See also Giesecke, Leonard h History of Ann n- 
ciin l.cononuc Policy in the Philippines during the American Colonial 1 c nod, 

/9.)5 (New York: Carland Pub., 198M, pp. 60-01. 

Spanish legislation was limited in its time to establishing temporary [ tc 
rights. 

Ciiesecke, op. eit., 1 3(>. 

Ciiralt Raventos, limit, la C.otnpanta Ceneral de I abac os dc Pilipinas , in 
(Barcelona. Compafua General de labacos de Pilipinas. 1981), p. 163. 

Ibid., p. 1 49. 

Rodao, Horentino. “Spanish Palange in the Philippines, 1936-1 143, in Philipp 
Studies Vol. 43( 1 ):3-26. In lagalog, Ang Palange sa Pilipinas, 1)36 1 )45 (t 
Diosdado R. Asuncion), in Petdinand C Planes (ed.) Pagbabalik Sa Bayun. Mga 
Lcktura sa Kasaysayan ng His tori yographiya at Pagka ban sang Pdipino (N 
1 993), pp. 1 26- 1 84. Also see my “Ending the Priority ot Private Links. Spanis 
terests in the Par Past around 1948." To be published. Institute Cer\ antes, Mai 
1997. 


1009 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOI.LTK )N AM > PI Y< >NI > 


12. For the history of the company, it is useful to read the hook edited on behalf of its 
centenary. Giralt, op. cit., p. 318. Also, AMAF.-R. Bundle 29 10, exp. 20 Report In 
Francisco Ferrer, Madrid, 20 November 1945. 

13. Giralt, op. cit., p. 129. 

14. I here are many bibliographic references on Andres Soriano, se e among them the 
Memorial Issue of SMCEU Bulletin edited after his death. Manila, 1 1 >c > *S See* also 
Yoshihara, op. cit., pp. 32-53, passim. For documentation about him. although 
mainly of political character, NARA, R( j 120: Office of the I ligh ( ommissioncr of 
the Philippine Islands. F.ntry 2, book 52, with a folder titled Soriano. ( ommon 
wealth, 1942-1945” and RC , 350, BI A, Box. 1318. In AMAI R. Bundle 1 *3 T exp. 
26, a telegram by Gonsul Jose del Ga.stano, Manila, 1 3 1 )ecember 19* T 

15. Giralt, op. cit., p. 129. 

16. Friend, 1 heodore. Between Two hmpires: The Ordeal of the Philippine^. 1 920 I 9 /6. 
(New Flaven: Yale University Press, 1965), p. 1 18. 

17. NARA. BI A. Rg 350. Box. 1318, exp. 28712-9. hntry. 5. Secret Report 2N. 28 |uly 
1943. 

18. I his data can be read in the American (Chamber of (.ommeree /onrnal. September 
1 928, p. 20; in Friend, op. cit., p. 1 82. I )oeppers mentions i hat Spaniards possessed 
32 percent of the total milling capacity in Manila in 1 900- I 9i 1 . S o t ml ( ihange m </ 
Late Colonial Metropolis (Manila: Atcneo de Manila University Press, 198*0. p. 9. 

19. Salamanca, op. cit., p. 212. 

20. Giralt., op. cit., p. 104. 

21. Gil de Viedma, Jaime. Retrato del Artista en 1 956 (Barcelona: l umen, 1991), p. ^9. 

22. El Pais. , p. 22, 3-1-1991. 

23. Op. cit., p. 45. 

24. Aguilar, art. cit., pp. 4-6. 

25. On the problems of the project, see Giralt, op. cit., pp. 126, 146-148. See also 
Stanley, op. cit., p. 193. 

26. Giralt, op. cit., p. 1 58. 

27. See Friend, 1. I he Philippine sugar industry and the politics of independence, 
1929-1935, in Journal of Asian Studies, 22 (1963), pp. 184-185 and Doeppers, I). 

Metropolitan Manila in Great Depression. Crisis for Whom? in Journal of Asian 
Studies 50, 3 (1991), p. 516. 

28. Giesecke, op. cit., p. 113. 

29. Summary and General Report on the 1948 Census of Population and Agriculture. (Ma- 
nila: Bureau of the Census and Statistics. Bureau of Printing, 1956), p. 2239. 

30. Quirino, Carlos. Philippine Tycoon: The Life and Times of Vicente MadrigaL 1880- 
1972 , unpublished, p. 93; Giralt, op. cit., p. 219 passim. 

31. Doeppers, 1991, p. 524 and 1984, pp. 21-22. Menciones en Giralt , op. cit., 155-156. 

32. See, for instance, La Vanguardia, 23 May 1931, which criticized the bringing in of 
brides for Japanese agriculture workers. I here was, however, a complementary rela- 
tionship between the Spaniards and Chinese, as the main occupation ior Chinese 


1010 


KOI > \o y*. ( o*np.:nif* :n the Philippines After the Revolution 

iinmiiM.mis was small business. something very tew Spaniards engaged in. In C uba. 
on the u>mi.n\. the pawnshop jobs and the like were occupied hy Spaniards. 

( tit alt . op ^ it . pp 1 l 2S. 

Ihid . pp 1 (o <>(v 1 > 1 

C hi alt’s wotk itsclt mentions political pressures to have the law modified. We dont 
know whuh strings were pulled and what tavors yielded what results, hut surely 
\drian i >o(. president ol the lahacalera and close triend ot President Quezon, was 
mvol\ ed. 


1011 


Dean C. Worcester 
and the Philippine Revolution 


Rodn i v Sri i ivan 

James Cook University, Townsville, Oueenslond, Australia 


I n his 1889-1890 essay “ I he Philippines a Ccnturv lienee, lose Rizal 
rehearsed and refuted timeworn arguments deployed In’ Spanish colonialists to 
maintain the inferior status of Filipinos. Pie singled out writers and priests who 
would not only deny the natives of the country the capacity for virtue. Put also to 
impute to them the tendency to vice. ’ 1 Unless Madrid allowed Filipinos equality 
and liberty, he warned, they would declare independence “after steeping themselves 
and the Mother Country in blood.” 2 Then came Rizal s scenario of an independent, 
post-revolutionary Philippines as a player in late 19th-century world politics. 
There was the possibility that the newly liberated nation could fall prey to another 
imperial power. Potential predators included the European empire-states of Brit- 
ain, Germany, France, and Holland; China and Japan in East Asia; and, across the 
Pacific, the United States. In each case Rizal found that no threat to the Philip- 
pines was posed. The European powers were absorbed in their struggle for territo- 
ries in Africa and replete with other possessions. China and Japan were preoccu- 
pied with the western challenge. Although he conceded the United States “may 
someday dream of overseas possessions,” he ruled it out as a potential colonizer 
because of distance from its major east-coast centers of commercial and political 
power (the I anama Canal was not opened until 1 9 1 4), and the availability of land 
on the American continent. Moreover, there was every likelihood that the Euro- 
pean great powers would veto American participation in their scramble for over- 
seas territory. Although Rizal considered signs of an American capacity and appe- 
tite for empire-building during the Samoan crisis in the winter of 1 888- 1 889, he 


1012 


si l l !\ \\ / V.;»; ( \\ t 'nr*trr .tftd the Philippine Reivluti* 


concluded ih.it Xuu'ik.in culture, us “traditions, precluded its hill participation 
in the I nismess ol empire. 

Ri/al w as w rong to accept the anti-imperial traditions ot the United States at 
face value. I here were othet more belligerently expansive strands in American cul- 
ture w hu h had already made their Philippine connection. I hey were hilly embod- 
ied m a voting \meru an who. more than a decade earlier, had sailed across the 
Paulk, disembarked at Manila, and begun the task ot familiarizing himself with 
the peoples, llora. taun.i. landscapes, and natural resources ot the Philippines. He 
was 1 Van C . Woiccstei ' ( 1 SisCs UUu) whose collections ot Philippine data and 
images nurtmed the imperial dreams which led the l nited States to acquire and 
retain the Philippines. I le. as much as am Spaniard, could have been the target of 
Ri/al s caution against viewing the Philippines as a mine to be exploited, a re- 
source to satisfy ambitions. 

In l l ) l )(>, the centenarv ot the Philippine revolution, it is appropriate to call 
Worcester to mind, as a crucial figure shaping the Philippine-Ametican encounter 
in the late IMh and curb dOth centuries. \\ orcesters engagement with the 1 hi if 
pines, extending over 3 \ ears from 1 SS to his death in Manila in 1 V ** point, 

the significant role that an individual can assume in international history without 
ever having run tor political office. It also shows that international histon shou c 
be as much about culture as it is about economics and military powci. 1 he pucon^ 
dition to the American military occupation of the Philippines beginning in 
was a national sell-image, set ot values, and view’ of history which cast I ilipim 
fit subjects for American tutelage. In 1 9 1 3, while conducting a \ociterous 
paign against Philippine independence in the United States, Woiecster 
disclosed the importance of culture when he declared that the 1 hilippinc cju 
was about ethnology rather than politics 1 ' 

Worcester s career highlights the complex interplay ot cultuie and po\ 
determinant of United States-Philippines relations. He believed, w ith a quasi r 
gious fervor, in the universalitv of American values and institutions. In sc c ^ 
he was representative of the dominant strand in late 19th-centur\ Ame 
culture. It incorporated an ethnologically sanctioned inteiptetation o . , 

tory dominated b\’ a sequential progression of peoples through tic 1 J erar ^ 
stages of savagery, barbarism, and civilization. In the vanguaid was 
States, conceived only as an ideal, whose political and economic s\stem;, q " 
senting the zenith of human progress, were destined for expansion. American us 
ness (investment, trade, skills) was a transformative agent in the maicl ° cnl lza 
tion across savage, barbarous, or backward lands. After 1898, the 1 hi ippines rep 
resented the farthest reach of a westward-moving American frontier. Driven > r e 
internal logic of his own culture, Worcester deemed Hlipino lesistance to 
can rule as misguided and doomed as that offered by the indigenous fust nations 

of the continental United States. 

Worcester first visited the Philippines in 1887-1888 as one of three Umver- 

•lth 


sity of Michigan students in th 


e Sreere scientific expedition. He returned w 


1013 


THK PHII.IPPINI*. KhV< >1 I I K )N \NI ) hi .(>M) 


one of those young men, Frank Bourns, in 1890-1893 as the Menage expedition 
sponsored by the Minnesota Academy of Science. Me was one of <>nl\ a handful of 
Americans with firsthand experience of the distant count r\ when it became con- 
troversial American war booty from Spain in I )ecember 1 898. 1 hs rare, and ener- 
getically marketed, knowledge of the Philippines secured the confidence of the 
expansionist President William McKinlev. Worcester returned to the Philip- 
pines in 1 899, the dominant civilian member of the First Philippine 'Sduirman) 
Commission, and the only member appointed to the Second Philippine ( Lift) 
Commission where he overshadowed his fellow commissioners, panic iil.uk after 
chairman William Howard hafts return to Washington in 1 903. 1 le served as sec- 
retary of the interior in Manila under successive Republican administrations until 
his resignation was accepted by the newly elected I )emocratic president \ in MM3. 
After his campaign against Philippine independence in the l mted States, he re- 
turned to the Philippines in 1915, where he plaved a pivotal role m the develop- 
ment of three industries: coconut growing and processing, cattle* raising, and ma- 
rine transport. 

Worcester s books and other writings on the Philippines are his most influen- 
tial legacy. He coauthored his first scientific publication m 1 89 a on the* birds and 
mammals he helped collect. Some 38 subsequent publications on the* Philippines 
bear his name, ranging from scientific writings to his two influential books Ihe 
Philippine Islands and l he Philippines Past and Present. For manv decaeles his books 
on the Philippines were so widely distributed, and alternative publications so rare, 
that it was hard to avoid recourse to them. In the early 1 920s, a Filipino librarian, 
Isaac Lucero, undertook a study tour of American libraries. After visiting some 200 
of them, he was moved to comment on the pervasiveness of Worcesters books. Al- 
though he disliked them for their denigration of Filipinos, he conceded that there 
were no adequate substitutes available for readers seeking knowledge of the Philip- 
pines. The strategic importance of Worcesters books, particularly l he Philippines 
Past and I resent, can be gleaned from its reappearance in new editions at crucial 
junctures in Philippine-American relations. Its reissue in 1 920 and 1 930 coincided 

with the ascent of Philippine independence on the political agenda in Washington 
and Manila. 

Worcester was the dominant author of the Schurman Commission Report 1 11 
W y}?} 1 C ^ e mora ^ an d intellectual foundations for American imperialism in the 

P i ippines. The commissions “Preliminary Report” of 2 November 1899 was 
designed to quell electoral unease in the United States over acquisition of the archi- 
pe ago. Its propositions, however preposterous from the perspective of 1 996, nev- 
ertheless resonated with widely held American values and beliefs of the time. It 

advanced six key claims on the United States-Philippin cs encounter at the turn of 
the century. 

1 . Filipinos did not constitute a nation and lacked the capacity for self-gov- 

ernment. 


1014 


|\ W . V.;»; ( \\wr\tfr ,ifu{ thr Philippine Retvluth 


1 National iiut\ .iiu 1 international obligation dictated American occupation 
ot the Philippines and the induction ot its citizens into the values and practices ot 
demo*, ran. 

v Ncuhci the l nued States nor its officials had made commitments or 
promises regarding Philippine uulependence. 

■i. 1 he tii x i Philippine republic was inept, corrupt, and unpopular. Its crush- 
ing h\ Ameik.m lours aveited anarchical bloodshed. 

s. Philippine torses bore sole responsibility tor the outbreak ot the Philip- 
pine \mei u an Wai. 

(>. I he l nued States presence in the Philippines was altruistic, undertaken 
for the benefit ot 1 ilipmos. 

I he political struggle tot Philippine acquisition was fought out and won in 
the PMM) \metic.in ptesidenttal election campaign. 1 he outcome endorsed the 
Scluirman ( ommission findings and repudiated those Americans, like the New 
\ork senator. C arl Scluuv, who clung to an anti-imperial national self-image and 
refused to accept that American values and institutions were universal. 

I he commission propositions, with their derivative's and embellishments, 
threaded their wav through Worcester s subsequent writings on 1 hihppine Amen 
can relations. I hc\ had a profound influence on many other American w riters c n 
the same subject, establishing what one might call the Worcester school ot Ameri 
can-Philippine historiography, which persists in various wavs to this ea 
Worcesters voice and vision, more or less subtly adapted to clungin^ L 'irci 
stances, lived on in a series of works bv American writers W illiam Cameron 1 c v 
Ralston 1 lavden, A.S. Pier, Lewis Gleeck, Prank Jenista. John N lotgan Ciatc;, 

I lutterer, and Ronald bdgerton. 1 *' # , . 

It is notable, and somewhat puzzling, that the important American iut 
Cilenn May accorded W orcester and two of his most faithful disciples, or 
Hayden, a degree ot deference which contrasted with his harsh assau t c . 
Constantinos ‘disdain for objectivity in the same volume of essavs. k' f\liv 
on matters Philippine was hardly Worcesters strong suit. W hatever vc:[ ' 
offered Worcester is no match for the admiration maintained w 
who, despite great personal congeniality, reacted somewhat inteirqe * ^ 

portrait in l:\cmplttr of Americanism. While this is not the p tc 1 
Gleeck s critique in any detail, one of his comments illustrates t ic pown 
Worcester version of Philippine-American history: "What a far better p ac 
Philippines would be today, if only there had been more Worcesters. ^ 

Stanley Karnow's prize-winning book, In Our Image* reiterate 0 
claims of American altruism in the Philippines, 1 "' overlooking the extent 
Worcester himself was driven by the prospects tor American (anc persona P 
ration of Philippine resources. The latter tirelessly harangued American audiences 
on the “Commercial Possibilities ot the Philippines as a chapter in 
pines. Past and Present was entitled. He urged continued American hegemony over 


1015 


I HI. mil II'l'INT KI V< )l I 1 1< )N \NI ) HI Y< )M > 


the Philippines’ economy as a source of tropical products and as a market lor 
American manufactures. The “possibilities with which he was most concerned 
were those of benefit to his country, himself, and his family. 

Filipinos were sensitive to Worcesters exploitative impulses, and rutnois of 
corruption attended his public career. In its notorious birds ot Pre\ editorial. /•/ 
Renacimiento , echoing Rjzal’s anger at Spanish exploitation, accused Worcester of 
misusing his public office in the Philippines to possess all the data and the kev to 
the national wealth for his essentially personal benefit. Although Worcester mu 
cessfully sued for libel, his subsequent business career lent weight to the allegations. 
Moreover, there is Ralston Haydens artless reference in 1930 to Worcester’s Yard 
index” containing “valuable data on many different possible industries lot the Is- 
lands. "Conflict of interest has attracted little attention in the Worcester tradition 
of American writing on the Philippines. 

Worcester s indispensability as a source explains some of Ins historiographi- 
cal power. I he / hilippines Prist duel Present is a remarkable detailed account of pub- 
lic policy in the archipelago from I 899 to 1 9 1 3. To this must be added the numer- 
ous official documents and reports lie wrote on important policy areas for which 
he had responsibility as secretary of the interior, including agriculture, forests, 
health, lands, tribal peoples, and science. I hese are preserved as official records in 
the various Reports of the Philippine Commission between I 899 and CMC I hen 
there were polemics in which, drawing on the resources of his office, he defended 
the American colonial record and disparaged the capacity and/or morality of Filipi- 
nos. 1 hese included pamphlets on cholera and debt servitude in the Philippines. " 
Other more technical works were aimed at stimulating American investment in 
Philippine rubber and coconut plantations. :I ' 

Deeper in the archival substrata is a great mass of Worcester-generated mate- 
rial ranging from documents in Record Group 350 of the United States National 
Archives to voluminous material held by the University of Michigan in two collec- 
tions at Ann Arbor. I here is also a large cache of his family correspondence in the 
custody of the 1 hetford Historical Society, at his home village of Fh etford, Ver- 
mont. I is collection evidences Worcester’s obsessive energy in recording his Phil- 
ippme experiences and impressions and transmitting them to family members who 
carefully preserved the heritage. It constitutes a uniquely candid record of 
Worcesters multifaceted Philippine experience from his earliest visit, through his 
years as a public official to his subsequent successful business career. There are rich 
possibilities here for further historical research, including Filipino perspectives, on 
this meticulously recorded and intensely lived American career in the Philippines. 

As the passions associated with Worcester and American colonialism fade in 
most quarters, so too does the Worcester vision of a Philippines in perpetual thrall 
to American culture and power. The Philippines now participates in the building 
o new communities in Southeast Asia and the wider Asia-Pacific, a project inher- 
ent in the Philippine revolution. Worcester had an influential but flawed vision of 
the Philippines, though for the past and present only, as the title of his book shows. 


1016 


M I I 1\ \\ Dean ( U 


i ».ri.vr the Philippine Revolution 

I lc u)iiLl not u)Mu'i\c of .1 future without perpetuating the prevailing cultural 
\ allies anil power relations. I he challenge for Filipinos and their Asia-Pacific neigh- 
bors toilax is not onl\ to conceive a better regional future hut also, the much harder 
task, to hei|iieath it to succeeding generations. 


Notes 


1 Ki.mI. I 1 he Philippines \C enturv 'lienee. La Solidartdad. vol. 1, no. 10. 30 Sep- 
tember 1 SS 4 ). SS3. 

2 Ibid. \ol 1 . no. IS. > 1 t V tol>er 1 SS 4 k 0” l . 

3. Ibid., vol. 2, 1 I ebruarx 1S 4 M). aN 

a. 1 his p.iper ill aw s on the author s biography of Worcester. Sullivan, Rodney I . hxem- 
pLn of 1 ffic'f :» anvrri. I he Philippine ( areer of /V</w ( . U orvester. Ann Arbor: C. enter 
tin South and Southeast Asian Studies, I he l niversity of Michigan, 1001: 1 hilip- 
pme 1 dition. New IXiv Publishers. Quezon C itv. 1002. 

S. Ri/al. | 1 he Philippines \ C entur\ Hence. la Sotidaridad, vol. 1 no. 21. bt l\- 

c ember 1 NS 1 ). ~~S 1 . 

(). Sullivan. / \c>>:plar of Aoieneanism, p. I S 3 . 

M Akira Itive has pioneered this approach to international history. See Johnson, K. Ud.k 
( ))i ( idtnral (ironnJ kssjys in International History. C. hicago: Imprint l ublications, 
100*. 

8. 1 I is puhlii at ions are listed in Sullivan. Iwemplar of Americanism* pp- 3^8-301. 

0. W orcester, l Van ( \ /he Philippine Is Linds and their People: d Record of Personal Ob- 

servation and kxperience with ii Short Summary of the More Important laity in the 
History of the Archipelago. New York: MacMillan, 1 808; and The Philippines Past and 
Present. 2 vols. New N'ork: MacMillan, 10 la. 

10. Philippines Herald, 2a lanuarv 1023. 

I 1 . Report of the Plulippme ( ommission to the President [Schurman Commission]. 4 vols. 
Washington, l Ciovernment Printing Office. 1000-1001. 

12. Iorbes, W.C. /he Philippine Islands. 2 vols. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 1928: 
Ilavdcn, Is. " Biographical Sketch. In I he Philippines Post and htstnt. b> 
Worcester. New ed., 1 vol.. ed. R. Hayden, 2-4. New York: MacMillan. 1930; he 
Philippines: .-I Study in National Development. New' York: MacMillan. 1 H . Her, A.. . 
American Apostles to the Philippines. Boston: Beacon Press, 1950: Gleeck, l-k- Amtti 
can Institutions in the Philippines . 1898-19-tl. Manila: Historical Conservation Soci- 
ety. 1976; Jenista. 1- /he White Apos: American Coventors on the Cordillera Central. 
Quezon City: New Day Publishers. 1 98"; Cates, J.M. Schoolbooks and krags: The 
United Suites Army in the Philippines. Westport, Conn.. Greenwood lies., 

I loiterer, K.l . “Dean C. Worcester and Philippine Anthropology.” Philippine Quar- 
terly of Culture and Science 6, no. 3 (September 18^8); Edgerton, R.k. Dean C 
Worcesters Mission Among Philippine Upland lribes. 1 apci presented tt 
ippine Studies C Conference, Athens, Ohio, 2-4 August 1983. 


1017 


IHL PHILIPPINE REVO I I I K )N AND HI V< )NI > 


13. May G.A. A Past Recovered. New Day Publishers, Quezon < it\. PES See especially 

pp. 5, 181-2. 

14. Gleeck, L. “The Man You Love to Hate." Bulletin of the Awernan Hvtornal ( (diet 
tionlX), no. 1 (78), Januarv-March 1992, p. 62. 

15. Karnow, S. In Our Image: America's Image in the Philippine^ I omlon ( enmr\ 1990. 
p. 13. 

16. Worcester, D.C. The Philippines Past and Present. New eiL 1 voL ed. K. I lavden. 3 
74. New York: MacMillan, 1930, pp. 630-52. 

17. El Renacimiento, 30 October 1908. 

18. Hayden, “Biographical Sketch," p. 73. 

19. Worcester, D.C. A History of Asiatic (Iholera in the Philippine Islands Manila: Bureau 
of Printing, 1908; Slavery and Peonage in the Philippine Islands Manila; Bureau ol 
Printing, 1913. 

20. Worcester, D.C. Toconut Cirowing in the Philippine Islands. Washington. D.C Bu 
reau of Insular Affairs, 191 1 ; Rubber ( j rowing Industry of the Philip / >tnr hl.uul v \\ .isli 
ington, D.C.: Bureau of Insular Affairs, 1911. 


1018 


s 


Class Conflict in Local Politics 
in Early American Times 

Some Data from the Southern Tagalog 


t: \Rl 1 1. LaNPI 

Umwr\jt\ of Kansos, Lawrence Kansas, U S A 


S tudents ot Philippine history have described numerous local peasant 
revolts that have occurred — and been suppressed — during the course of the 
past several centuries in various parts of the Philippines. Less well reported has 
been class conflict of a different, nonviolent type that takes place at election time, 
when candidates who are seen to be champions of the poor run against champions 
of the rich. 

hvidcncc of the occurrence of such legal, nonviolent class conflict \wis dis 
covered in the course of a study of the histories of local politics in six southern 
lagalog provinces, conducted under the writers direction in the niid-1 )60s. 

In each of the municipalities and cities ot these provinces, se\ eral \etcran 
political observers were asked to describe the economic and occupational charac 
teristics of all mayoral candidates at every municipal election held during this cen 
tury. 1 hey were asked also to identify each candidates political pain affiliation, 
and to state whether he or she was a member of a named local faction or bd?i o. 
partial analysis of the resulting data, which did not deal with factions, was pub- 
lished some years ago. 1 My recent reanalysis of the original interviews from four of 
the six provinces — Batangas, Laguna, Marinduque, and layabas (the prewar name 
of Quezon province) — deals with this last dimension of local political competi- 
tion, the local bandos identified bv our informants. 2 The results ot that reanalysis 
are presented here. 


1019 


IHh PHI LIPPI NT. Ri V< )I I I K )N AM > Ml Y< >M > 


Findings 

In 51, or roughly one-half, of what now arc 1 1 I municipalities and cities of the 
four provinces, competing factions with distinctive local names could he identi- 
fied, but only for the years before World War II. I hese were the seats when the 
Partido Nacionalista was the dominant partv in most of the Philippines, and most 
local leaders were Nacionalista s, regardless of their factional af filiations, l or the 
years after the formation of the closely competitive two-part \ svstem that existed 
between 1 946 and the imposition of martial law in I 9 2 , our informants w ere able 
to identify almost no named local factions. Alignments within the new two part\ 
system, it appears, supplanted what previously had been competing Nacionalista 
factions. 

In 1 9 of these prewar factionalizcd municipalities, the opposing fac t ions were 
known by the names of prominent local families. Such inter-familial ri\ allies area 
well-known feature of local politics in the Philippi ncs and I shall give them little- 
further attention here. Of greater interest from the point of vieu of this paper were 
inter-factional rivalries in which the names of the factions revealed other, non-fa 
milial types of social division. I shall list these tvpes of factional rivalry and then 
will recount the factional history of one municipality in some detail. 

Most numerous among the non-familial factional rivalries were ones between 
candidates identified with a faction of the rich and a faction of the poor. Some- 
times the factional names themselves made the class basis of rivalry explicit. I bus 
in Catanauan, Layabas, Bando Malaki (big) and Bando Maliit (small) ran candi- 
dates against each other for many years. In Unisan, Iavabas, it was Bandos 
Mayaman (rich) and Anak Pawis (children of sweat). Pairs of factions with similar 
names opposed each other also in San Pedro, Laguna, and the I avabas (Quezon) 
towns of Real, Mulanay, and Infanta. 

Somewhat different factional names, that also implied differences in socio- 
economic statuses between the supporters of rival factions, pitted the /> oblaciones 
(municipal seats) against the barrios (villages). Thus in Pakil and ( ; avinti, I .aguna, 
in Sampaloc, layabas, and in Gasan, Marinduque, rival factions were called Bando 
Tagabayan and Lagabukid, or similar names. 

Iwo other municipalities, San Luis and Iaal, Batangas, had prewar factions 
with names that identified rivalries between the upland and lowland parts of the 
municipality. There, the names of the rival factions were Bando Ibabaw (on top) 
and Bando Halim (on the bottom). 

There were also various types of factional divisions that did not imply con- 
trasting socioeconomic statuses. In the three layabas (Quezon) province munici- 
palities of Pagbilao, Dilasag, and Polillo, longtime residents were aligned against 
more recent immigrants. 

In four municipalities, factional rivalry grew out of differences of religious 
affiliation or religiosity. In Paete, Laguna, and Gasan, Marinduque, the divisions 
were between Catholics and Aglipayans. In layabas municipality of layabas prov- 


1 020 


1 WPl ( 


.. < mfhit tn l (h\i l Politics in Kiriy American limes 


iiue. it was ( .nhoius against Masons, and in Sampaloc, layubas, the contest was 
between a ( entto taction composed ot the followers of the loeal priest and those 
who opposed his influence in loeal affairs. 

In the time muim ipahties of* kalayaan. l aguna; Panukulan, Batangas; and 
San 1 ins. Batangas. rival faetions had grown out ot disagreements over the location 
or relocation of the pobLiaofi.' And in Bangil and Bakih Laguna, factions had 
formed over the issue ot the unification or separation of these two adjacent mu- 
nicipalities. 

Somewhat ditterenilv. in Bav, 1 aguna, a taction ot younger leaders challenged 
a f.u t ion led In older ones. 

I heie were. finallv, eight municipalities where the names ot rival factions 
were taken from different compass directions, such as kiwltn\w (west) and siLingun 
(f.isi). oi I rum ditUivm colors, such .is puli (white), />///</ (red), and black). In 
some ot these mum, tp.iliiies, comments h\ the interviewers suggested th.it cl.iss 
differences were involved. In others. there were no indications ot am socioecc 
nomic basis tor the division between opposing tactions. 


A Factional History 

As an example ot a long standing nvalrv between tactions representing the wealth) 
and the poor, 1 shall summarize the history ot the municipality of San ledro. La 
guna. In that mimic ipalitv, the taction ot the rich was identified bv di tie rent names 
at different times or bv different informants: the taction ot the tich was called van 
ouslv, “ I'ducados,' “Samahan (Association), and the No Barking Mump. ^ 1 
opposing faction, representing the poor, went by the name ot \apak (barefoot 
Their electoral nvalrv, as recounteel by our informants, tuineel on a long stane it ^ 
dispute about the ownership ot the 1 lacienela San Bedro, which had given the 11111 
nicipalitv its name. 1 he hacienela hael been created in the year IS S, when the ai 
in question was grantee! bv the Spanish king to a Spanish nobleman, Don L/te 
Rodriguez ele Figueroa, as a revvare! for his military service. Before his death in ce 
bat against the Moms, Don hsteban made a will in which he provided t aac, i 
wife anel daughters were to elie without making their own wills, the haciene 
should be administered by the Jesuit Order, the income to be used tor the training 
of priests. His female heirs, having made no wills, the Jesuits, after theii e eat is, 
proceeded to administer the hacienda, using its income to establish and maintain 
the Colegio San Jose. * 

Ownership of the hacienda became a major issue in San Pedro durin^ t 
revolution against Spain. In early American times, President McKinley ordered an 
investigation into the rival claims to the hacienda lands. In 1 Ml, a group ec ) 
Trinidad Pardo dc Tavera filed a suit against the Colegio in an attempt to regain its 
lands for the townspeople. In presenting their case, they argued that the Jesuits 
earlier been ex pelled from the Philippines and thus had lost theii claim to tie la 
cienda. But a court ruled that the Jesuits were the rightful owners of the land, an 


1021 


r HK PHII.imNh KlA'Oi n K )N AN I ) HI Y< )N I ) 


the elite families of the municipality supported that decision. In the towns 

people rebelled, reportedly at Sakdal instigation, and demanded that the uovern- 
ment purchase the land for the benefit of the people. In response, soon to be Presi- 
dent Manuel L. Quezon decided that the government should indeed purchase the 
land. But apparently it never did, or did not make full payment tor the pure base, 
and the issue remained unresolved, and continued to fester. After World War II. 
the Educados joined the Liberal Party, while the “barefoot ones supported the 
Nacionalistas. That was the state of affairs when our interviewers visited San Pedro 
during the 1 960s. 

1 returned to San Pedro in 1996. It was unrecognizable. What m the l l )0(k 
had still been a largely agricultural community had become part of the unbroken 
urban sprawl of Greater Manila. The lands of the former 1 lacienda San Pedro now 
are occupied by factories, shops, and residential housing. A large proportion of the 
population consists of newcomers, who chose to move to San Pedro because of the 
towns proximity to the National Capital Region, where many of them are em- 
ployed. I he mayor recounted to me the typically urban issues that his government 
has to face. I he ownership of agricultural land is not one of them. 

I have recounted the factional historv of San Pedro, 1 aguna, because it illus- 
trates the centuries-long recollection, by its common farming people, of the details 
of an ancient grievance, an issue that continued to divide the leaders and voters of 
the municipality at election time well into the present centurv. It also illustrates 
what happens when urbanization and industrialization overwhelm an old agricul- 
tural community. 

Interpretation 

In a monograph published many years ago, I presented a model of the pre-Marcos 
Philippine political party system that was designed, in part, to explain the conser- 
vative nature of Philippine public policy.’ In that model, all major political parties, 
the Partido Nacionalista and Partido Democrata before World War 11, and the 
Nacionalista and Liberal Parties after the war, were portrayed as pyramidal struc- 
tures in which members of differing social classes occupied different 1 evels of au- 
thority. 7 he highest positions in each party’s pyramid — the presidency, seats in the 
Congress, and the provincial governorships — were occupied by men and women 
of substantial wealth. I hey used both their personal resources and the public funds 
under their control to maintain the support of lesser leaders in the hierarchies of 
their parties the municipal mayors. I hese mayors, individuals of wealth and stat- 
ure in their municipalities, in turn passed on portions of such national funds, 
supplemented by their own resources, to barrio leaders who then distributed them 
to their followers. The price for this downward flow of larges s was the upward flow 
of votes. As for the public policies adopted by the national government, these were 
designed mainly to promote the interests of the wealthier classes, whose members 
occupied most elective policy-making offices. 


1022 


1 Wl'i < ;r; / <>**;. Politic in h\trl\ American limes 


I he findings reported in this paper suggest that this model of the pre-Mar- 
cos political pari\ svstem recpiires some modification, at least at its lower levels. 
I here uas in m\ earlier model no place tor the independent representation of the 
interests of the poor. \s the partv leaders elected to public offices by the votes of 
the pool were usualK the most affluent individuals in their provinces and munici- 
palities. the\ ga\'e pr u>ri t \ to the interests of their own class. I hat explained why 
one ( ongress aftei the other balked at adopting serious measures of agrarian re- 
form. I he poor could press for redistributive change only by non-electoral means, 
that is to saw through protest or rebellion. 

I he data presented here show that in municipal elections, at least during the 
prewar vears, there was more opportunity to champion the interests of the poor 
than mv earlier model had suggested. In a substantial minority of municipalities, 
before World War 11, local elections took the form of periodic contest between the 
champions of the rich and the champions of the poor. Such contests took place 
both w ithin and outside the local partv leadership of the then dominant 1 artido 
Nacionalista. 

As I have stated earlier, w ith very few exceptions, local informants who iden- 
tified named factions tor prewar mavoral elections could not point to such factions 
after W orld W ar 11. But this does not mean that the social or geographic divisions 
reflected bv prewar factionalism were not present in municipal election contests 
after the war. In a number of cases, our interviewers mentioned that the members 
of one prewar faction joined one of the postwar political parties while the mem- 
bers of the opposing named faction joined the other party. 0 And in my most recent 
interviews, conducted in l c ) l )b, 1 found a handful of towns where named factions 
still existed. 

I must therefore revise mv earlier model of the Philippine political party sys- 
tem. In this revised model, local-level political party organizations must be seen as 
being somewhat independent of the corresponding parties as they operate at the 
national level. In national politics, high office holders, generally drawn from or be 
holden to the wealthiest sector of society, have been the main distributor. of pa 
nonage and other nationally funded benefits. 1 herefore, local-level leaders identi 
fied with each partv have found it necessary to support these national leaders \\ith 
the votes of their ow n followers. But in their own contests for municipal offices, 
local partv leaders and their followers can divide themselves into rival groups, re 
fleeting what thev perceive to be the most salient social, including familial, di\i 
sions in their communities. 

Phis brings us to the present. 1991 brought the enactment of a new Local 
Government Code, l hat code mandates the channeling of a substantial portion of 
the national budget directly to the provinces and municipalities. How these funds 
are to be spent in each locality will now be decided at the local level by local electee 
officials in consultation with local nongovernmental organizations and nice no 
longer depend wholly upon the beneficence of a member of the Congress. Electee 
and nonelected individuals in each municipality will now decide whether available 

1023 




THK PH 1 1 IPPIN1* RI-.VOI.l IK )N AM ) \\\ Y< )NI ) 


Funds will be spent to widen the street that passes the home of the mavor or 
whether it will it be used to improve the lot of the poor majority It local political 
alignments are indeed determined in whole or in part by local social divisions, then 
local decisions about spending may be settled by the voting power of different so- 
cial groups. I hat should make local elections more important tor larger numbers 
of people. Elections will become more socially divisive, but more meaningful as 
well. I hat is the purpose of elections in a democracy and should be welcomed. 

Before closing, a secondary finding of this studv should be mentioned: our 
data confirm the normality of bifactionalism in local Philippine politics. When 
competing named factions were identified, there were almost alwavs two ot 
them — no less and no more. That was the case even when, as often occ ui red, there 
were more than two candidates in a race. In the case of familv named factions, the 
prominent families that gave a faction its name might change over the vears as a 
new family’s candidate replaced that of an old one .is the factions leader. But in 
such cases too, in any given election year, bifactionalism was the norm. 

In its political bifurcation, at both local and national levels, the Philippines is 
not unusual. I here were two parties in Renaissance Plorence, the ( iiielphs and 
Ghibellines, champions respectively of the pope and emperor. Monarchists and 
Republicans, later transformed into lories and Whigs, and then into ( onserva- 
tives and Liberals or Labourites opposed each other in Britain from the 17ih cen- 
tury onward. Much of 19th-century Latin America was torn, both nationally and 
locally, by the often-violent struggles between Liberals and ( Conservatives over the 
issue of the political role of the Catholic church. Thus, bifurcation appears to have 
been the normal pattern of political division in ethnicallv homogeneous societies 
in pre-industrial times no less than it is today. 

Bifactionalism provides the normal structure for conflict whether contestants 
oppose each other with arms or at the ballot box and whether the policies at issues 
concern religion, ideology, class interests, or simple familial rivalry. It takes a ma- 
jority, but no more than a majority, to win an election. And it takes a strong oppo- 
sition to challenge a dominant majority. Minor factions, such as those sometimes 
formed by distinctive ethnic, religious, or ideological groups that refuse to join 
larger coalitions, are left out in the cold. 1 hat has been and will continue to be the 
normal pattern of local politics in the very homogeneous, Christian Philippines. 
Ethnic minorities, such as the Muslims of the southern Philippines, will be suc- 
cessful in advancing their interests to the degree that, as in the past, they join par- 
ties or coalitions that can win majorities at the polls. 

Notes 

1. Cad H. Landc, Southern Iagalog Politics, Northern Illinois University Southeast Asia 
Studies Program. 

2. I shall examine the interviews from Rizal and Mindoro Oriental provinces at a later 
time. No interviews were conducted in Cavite because the endemic political violence 


1024 


1 AN HI ( lass ( on the: tn I oca l Politics m Early American limes 


in that province made it unwise to send interviewers there, and in Palawan and Min- 
doro ( )u idcnt.il because ot the difficulty of traveling to and within these island prov- 
iikcs. (Conventionally, all ot these provinces are regarded as parts of the Southern 
I agalog Region. 

I his type ot tac tional division has been described by lVrtierra in his study ot a North- 
ern 1 u/oii (. ordillera municipality. Sec Raul lVrtierra, Religions Politics , and Rtrio- 
fiithty :n Philippine ( ofnmuntty (Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1988) 
pp. S 1 ) lVrtierra attributes this unusual geographic rivalry to the absence, in his 
highland munis ipalitv. of the tvpical lowland colonial-era plaza complex, where most 
ot the elite concentrate their homes. In such lowland municipalities, there is likely to 
be no disagreement anioni; the elite as to the proper location ot their poblacion. 
This appears to have been the same Colegio San Jose attended by the Philosopher 
lasio, mentioned bv lose Ri/al in chapter 14 of his novel A oh Ale Iange re. 

See Carl II. 1 aiule. leaden. Factions and Parties: The Structure of Philippine Politics 
(New 1 Liven: Yale Southeast Asia Studies Monograph Series. 1965). 

That happened also in the municipality described by lVrtierra. He reported further 
that with the abolition of political parties after the imposition ot martial L" in l)/2, 
the old factions returned as the main units of political competition in his municipal- 
ity. See lVrtierra, op. cit. Additional research in the Southern lagalog region, co\er 
mg the years since the 1 960s when our study was conducted. ma\ rc\eal similar dc 
velopments there. 


1025 


Folklore, Science, and Filibusterismo 
Between Empires, 1879-1901 


Paul Kramer 

Princeton University, New Jersey, USA 


It is good to limit the use of foreign words. The tendency to overuse them 
aside from being ridiculous leads to confusion. 

- Isabclo de los Reyes ( 1 887) 

When civilization meets with savagery or barbarism it always teaches it a 
new language. 

- John Wesley Powell ( 1 886) 


'VVVTiat does it take to think up a revolution? The Philippine revolution 
W could not have succeeded without military materiel, organized armies, and 
the relative weakness of the Spanish regime. But revolutions also involve revolu- 
tions in understanding. From the scattered complaints that people name in their 
everyday lives, revolutions require a gathering of grievances, the emerging aware- 
ness of communities of common interest and historical path. If revolutions need 
new ideas of community to succeed, they also provide fertile ground in which these 
new identities can form. The disruptive force of revolutions topples ancient au- 
thorities and pushes new voices onto the historical stage, redefining not only who 
can speak but what it means to speak in a political culture. Revolutions, therefore, 
produce not only new communities but the new languages that bind them to- 
gether, with new genres and the institutions that support them. Fimpires also re- 
quire their stories and storytellers. If revolutions rip open the field of authority, it 


1026 


KK AMI K l olklorr. \ srruY and I'ilibustcrismo Batumi Empirrs, 18*9-1901 


is the task of empires to close them, sweeping away discordant noises and delimit- 
ing the arena of legitimate debate to expert authorities. 

Today 1 will trace one such revolution in understanding, and the counter- 
revolution that followed it. I he revolution belongs to Isabelo de los Reves, the llo- 
eano journalist whose turbulent career included roles as anticolonial critic and 
political prisoner, labor organizer and founder of the Philippine Independent 
C 'him h. In the first part of this paper, 1 will examine De los Reyes folklore studies 
and the wavs thev redefined Philippine nationality in the years before the revolu- 
tion; 1 will then show how De los Reves stretched these ideas to new, revolutionary 
purposes after 1896. In the second part of the paper, 1 will analyze the American 
counterrevolution that followed t lie Spanish-American War in 1898. lo do this, I 
will look at the scholarship of Dean Worcester, American zoologist, whose expedi- 
tions to the Philippines in the 1890s enabled him to establish himself and his re- 
search as two of the intellectual foundations of the American occupation that 
would follow. If De los Reves' task had been to forge a new Filipino voice that 
would uphold the rituals and beliefs of the Philippine lower classes, it was 
Worcesters to justify American control of the Philippines with the authority of 
ethnological science. 

1 V los Reves was born in 1864 in Vigan, llocos Sur, to a wealthy family. His 
first exposure to folklore had been while a student in the Vigan Seminary, when he 
had been asked bv a priest to collect llocano superstitions in order to pro\e how 
unbelievable they were. More importantly, perhaps, was the influence °f hj s 
mother, a vernacular poet who wrote in what De los Reyes called a genuine!) I ili 
pino style. 1 ler writings scattered in correspondence or held in secrecy Dc os 
Reves had undertaken to gather them to honor the w'oman that was both his inspi 
ration and source of material. 1 f is duty to her would later be echoed in his passion 
ate nationalism toward his “motherland. “1 could and should have done some 
thing in return for the many kindnesses you showered upon me, he wrote in at 
address to her. “ 1 bus my great debt to you remained totally unpaid. 

The year 1880 saw two important developments that would bring nm 
closer to his synthesis of popular journalism, folklore studies, and nationa 
tat ion. 1 he first was De los Reyes' relocation to Manila and apprentices \ 
metropolitan journalism. While a student at the University of Santo Tomas, e 
would spend much of his time in libraries hunting for llocano ore, 3 
which he published in city newspapers. Mentored by Jose Felipe de D 

editor and teacher to the first generation of Filipino journalists, De os eyes 
brought into urban intellectual circles, invited to join the anticlerica a 
lodge that met in the bookstore Fa Gran Bretana, a center for Filipino critics of the 

Spanish. . , 

By the 1 890s, vernacular presses themselves had become some of the crucial 

institutions of anti-Spanish struggle. While earlier newspapers hat g rov 
official decrees, trade reporting, and the professions, the rise of a native \ ie;; 


1027 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 


a wide distribution provided a platform for anticolonial criticism and national 
identity. In 1885, De los Reyes attacked Spanish treatment of Filipino troops in 
the Caroline Islands, and earned himself a censorship decree. 1 I is own newspaper 
El Ilocano, founded in 1889, defined not only a new kind of editorial voice, but a 
new community of readers, with a wide distribution in 1 2 provinces of I u/on. De 
los Reyes filled its pages with enlightening news, folkloric details, and veiled cri- 
tiques of Spanish misrule. “All our aspirations are directed," he wrote, “toward the 
aggrandizement of the intellectual, moral and material life of the Philippines in 
general, and the Ilocanos in particular." 

The second event of 1880 was the founding of the first Spanish folklore so- 
ciety in Madrid. The late 19th century saw the rapid growth of folklore societies 
throughout Europe, as the middle classes wrapped their new-found political au- 
thority in the garo of a “civic religion." Invented tradition of this sort would give- 
historical legitimacy to bourgeois nation-states; middle-class pedigree would be 
written on a landscape of historical monuments and patriotic holidays, through 
national costumes and genealogical studies. Folklore societies were a crucial part of 
this effort, as middle-class scholars gathered the customs of the peasants as a mark 
of their own historical advancement and ability to corral the disorderly world of 
the lower-classes into scientific, published form. 

It was natural that such curiosity would extend quickly to Europe's colonies. 
B y age 20, De los Reyes had become the central contact for European scholars in- 
terested in the Philippines. I he Austrian ethnologist Ferdinand Blumentritt had 
asked him for details on the linguians from a trip he had made, and his submis- 
sion to a Spanish folklore journal had embroiled him in controversy but established 
him as a leading authority. In 1885, upon request from Spanish folklorists, De los 
Reyes issued his Llamamicnto al folklorismo," a manifesto calling for folkloric 
collection and organization in the Philippines itself. 1 More than any European 
countries, he wrote, this country needs to gather traditions, customs, legends, 
superstitions, etc., so that later, the scholars could compare them and Unravel the 
thousand mysteries in the past of these people." Such research should be all-en- 
compassing, including not only legends and traditions but “rites, beliefs, practices, 
superstitions, myths and childrens games, locutions, tongue twisters, turns of 
phrase of each locality, nicknames, witticisms, idiomatic expressions, and children's 
vocabularies, names of sites and places not apnearing on maps. ..." 

De los Reyes would undertake this task himself in his monumental El Folk- 
lore Filipino , completed in time for the Madrid Exposition of 1 887. With descrip- 
tions of Filipino religious festivals, the detailed varieties of anitos , the naming of 
places and the poetic works of his mother in Ilocano, the work set out on a com- 
prehensive survey of Philippine folk culture. He emphasized repeatedly the need to 
begin such work anew, that Spanish chroniclers had misunderstood much of what 
they had seen and recorded. The Filipinos had been “‘falsely painted by the brushes 
of stupid whitewashers ... who believed that something good could come from 
ridiculing the Indio." 


1028 


' n s ilibustcrismo . . 


Siuh Him h.ui led to ,t number of .scholarly mistakes by the Spanish, who 
mistook their own categories tor bilipino ones. "It seems that litao was the ant to of 
the sea ami the 1 i\ ei s. he noted, tor example, "and not a siraui (mermaid), a term 

introduced to the Philippines b\ the Spaniards In place of Spanish terms, the 

tolkloiist should substitute 1'ihpino ones. It is good to limit the use of foreign 
words, he wtoie. I he icndcncx to use them aside from being ridiculous leads to 
contusion. 

I V los Revcs work demonstrated the subversive effects that folklore could 
ha\e in colonies m u \olt. I uropean colonies were not supposed to have traditions: 
among colonial e lites there was onlv the ambivalent hope for progress, the fron- 
tier line between metropolitan civilization and local savagery, lo be a civilized per- 
son w.is t<) be able to declare a fading past that must be constantly coaxed back into 
the- present; colonial pasts, in contrast, were supposed to fade, with military, ad- 
ministrative and religious apparatus in place to guarantee it. lo frame a set of tra- 
ditions. even one that included superstitious rites and beliefs, was t o expuss oik s 
modernity bv a distanc ing effect. It was also to declare ones nationality b\ proxid 
mg evidence of historical continuity and persistence, and calling these customs 
forward as the common possessions of a people. 

While IV los Rexes had encountered Spanish opposition early on, Spanish 
repression tightened w ith the outbreak of the revolution in 18 C V. bx them l ^ 
Rexes anti friar polemics had reached a wide audience. A fexx xxecks before t 
execution of Ri/al, IV los Reyes was arrested on suspicion of subversion ant 
throw n into Bilibid prison. But he appears to have used the opportunity a.\ 
anot her opportunity lor folkloric collection: locked in among peasants, iex c i 
aries, and Masons, he began his composition of the Memoriasobic la Kexc 
1 i 1 i pi na' based on what he could learn from them. He xvould complete its fust [ 
in Bilibid, and its second after deportation to Spain and imprisonmei 
Mont juich C 'astle. 1 here he xvould complete his gathering of evolutionary 
among Spanish anarchists and labor leaders. . . r 

I he “Mcmoria” was the xvork of a furious collector, mixing ^eto v 
revolutionary courage and bravery with scholarly accounts of 1 ilipino c . ^ 

attacks on Spanish atrocity. It xvas also the work of a prisonei xxiitin^ f\ 

nation and remembered sources in the bowels of Montjuich, he hat cc \ ^ 

“over a worm-eaten board placed on top of two earthen jars, xvhici xxere . . 
companions in jail, guarded by two soldiers xvith fixed bayonets. But m teres g . 
many of the traits of He los Reyes' earlier folklore studies remain in t e ^ 
ria. He los Revcs, for exam pic, concludes the work with his account o fc 

ligion of the Katipunan.” The treatise mixed folkloric analysis with ie ty 11 
vival, presenting the Katipunan as the ancient faith of all 1 i lpmos, ce 
around the belief in the one god Bathala, and now brought to life again w t 

lutionary society. , .. . , 

For IX- los Reyes, „ was Katipunan, rather than friar Catholic, sm, that was 

the true religion of the Filipinos, with its own deity, rituals, and customs. 


1 029 


nil. mil.lI’I’INI Kl A'OIA I l< )N AND lil- V< )N! ) 


time, it had become corrupted by the influences of' the friar elite who took their 
own religion as the only good one. In an effort to avoid the ridicule of outsiders, 
there had been a “serious effort of the oceanic peoples to hide or dixfigme their 
religion before the eyes of strangers.... It had also become corrupted In its mix 
ture with the superstition of highlanders, further from the coasts, it loses its p U 
rity and it becomes more barbarous, as more superstitious and titan ili/ed ideas get 
into it.” 

Reyes’ work would bring the religion back to its pristine punts and present 
it in order to make it available to everyday Filipinos. It would reveal that although 
these appeared to be many Filipino religions, in fact, they profess onlv one. and 
the seeming difference of nomenclature consists in the varietv of dialects m the 
Philippines, but which expresses the same persons or ideas.” Its similarities to 
Christianity were due to its expression of the same Univers.i, Religion that ( atholi 
cism represented. I he ancient non-Muslim l ilipinos did not find it difficult to 
embrace Catholicism,” he wrote, “because they believed that thev were not losing 
anything by doing so.” 

I he Katipunan faith, however, proved to be more rational in its worship than 
Catholicism. It had, for example, been the friars that had introduced superstition 
to the Philippines, “mostly by some abusive and deceitful ministers, who have, or 
tried to cheat the believers... they were forced to invent thousands of miracles in 
order to confirm their idolatrous doctrines.” Quoting Ri/al, lie wrote, "We find it 
more pious to venerate the remains of the departed parents to whom we owe al 
most everything and which they call second gods on earth than to honor or revere 
the memory, bones, hair, etc., of certain saints, many of whom were strange mani- 
acs and of doubtful sanctity. For I)e los Reyes, saints were worshipped far aw ay 
from where they had lived, and martyred where they actually had. 

De los Reyes had begun as a seminary student collecting llocano customs for 
ridicule and the greater glory of Spanish Catholicism; he ended by showing indig- 
enous beliefs to be superior in morality to the Spanish overlord's. If in the 1870s 
and 1880s De los Reyes had in his writings gathered the beliefs of everyday Filipi- 
nos between a single set of covers, in the late 1 890s he had shown how those beliefs 
could erupt in a united force to throw out the Spanish colonizer and bring political 
groups and their ancient faith onto the historical stage. Whereas it had been the 
Spanish task to erase pre-Htspamc culture and place the islands on the path to 
Spanish Catholic salvation, De los Reyes’ call to “restore the past" was a radical one. 
His eai her folklonc studies had brought forward names of sites and places not 
written on maps.” His later work demonstrated how this “arsenal of data" might lie- 
used to remap Philippine society altogether. 

If the I hilippines in the late 19th century was a society tearing itself loose 
from its colonial moorings, the United States in the same period was a nation inte- 
grating larger reaches of territory, resources, and people into North American in- 
dustrial power. Even as Filipino intellectuals tried to understand and further the 
cause of revolution, the United States was developing scientific tools to suit an 


1 030 


KK WU K 


... l-ililniNtcriMUo HrtUYM f : n:ptnr>. IS"'* / *W 


expanding ^mpiu Reflecting on Western expansion and the Indian Wars, evolu- 
tion. u\ the* uies sikh .is that ot 1 ewis I lenrv Morgan described the slow historical 
process In whnh piimmxc societies were defeated and subsumed by “civilized 
ones mkIi .is industrial \mcrua. 

\i tlu s.ime tunc, the federal government created new forms of scientific re- 
seat V h tll.lt would aid the consolidation ot industrv and the incorporation of west- 
ern teintoiies beginning in the ISSOs. |ohn Weslev Powell, the explorer and go\- 
ernment scientist. s v a out to form scientific organizations that would promote the 
goals of i.uion.il w lute settlements in the west, and the total assimilation ot In- 
dians. I he gcologu a I sur\e\ would send expeditions into the remote reaches of 
w estern tei i itoi \ to measiue topographx, rain levels, and soil quality; the bureau ot 
\meiic.m I thnologx .u the Smithsonian would send researchers to Indian territo- 
ries both to preset xv what were sevn as dvmg culture's and to facilitate the execii 
tion of government police. 

It was .1 science almost completely at odels with the work ot lsabelo L c 
Reyes. 1 V los Rex es had restored the old names not written on maps; Powell had 
pa\c*d the we st w ith new name's, some' ot them the last names of his f t lit c \ 
irons in Washington. 1 V los Rexes had cautioned against the use of foreign words; 
Powell had argued that "civilized" nations inevitable imposed their language, x 
“sax age ones. I heir different institutional backing, too, led loxxell anc e 
Rexes to different genres: IV los Rexes medium and subject matte t iae ^ 

popular, while Powell s work, intended only tor experts, had been erica. 

language of scientific societies and reports. . • 

American expedition science such as Powells first reached the l hi >PP l y 
the researches of I Van W orcester. The young zoologist from Michigan ^ 
eled to tbe Philippines to investigate bird life in the late 1 SSOs anc e ^ 

spite of the harassment of increasingly paranoid Spanish authotitics, hosts 

his team managed to travel throughout the archipelago. Reliant on s [ v ^ 

as well as 1 i 1 i pi no trackers, guides, and carriers, Worcester foimee a : mnll | se 

tions of the people he encountered in his travels, bitst, as a zoo "races." 

was toward taxonomw dividing the groups of people he met intc " re Rtive lev- 
Seconel, like Powell, he attempted to rank these groups basee 

els of “advancement.” . i^ nc : nn ro- 

As a whole, Worcester's attitudes came down to a geneia e°ne c | e f C at of 

ward bill pi nos as a xvhole and a sense of white racial supuionn. c res at 

the Spanish and the formal acquisition of the Philippines ^ tie , i 

the Treaty ol Paris. Woreesrer quickly threw together a book and ,n xtpttlo 1« 

turcs an el interviews fashioned himself into the nations l ca f iliiinnlaces' 
pert." His “scientific" observations would soon become American co j 

the Filipinos did not constitute a nation but an impossible variety « 
races; certain groups would prove “incapable of civilization while even the cm- 

lized natives” were “utterly unfit lor sell-government. 


1 03 1 


THK mil.lIM’INI RIV( )l.l | |( >N \NI, |(| t < .\| > 


Worcester’s work so impressed President William NKKmles that In w.is 
quickly appointed to the Philippine Commission, a position he would hold tor 
more than a decade. Under his auspices, a new kind of imperial mk-ikc would sup 
plant the revolutionary researches of I)e los Keyes. Plus science would studs the 
islands’ population and natural resources with an eye toward then assimilation 
into the United States. But the coming of the American military had .dreads led to 
the destruction of many of the Philippines' cultural institutions of revolt. Militate 
censors shut down the islands subversive presses, confiscated issue’s ot ness spapers 
advocating independence, and arrested their editors and distributors. According to 
Major-General Frank McIntyre, censor for Cebu, the object of the censorship svas 
to eliminate propaganda against the occupying forces. I )e los Reves revolution 
ary Filipinas Ante Europa, an anti-American publication calling tor Philippine in 
dependence, was an early casualty, its circulation cut bv American prohibition. 

In 1901, the replacement of one set of institutions bv another was demon 
strated in a momentary meeting between I )e los Reyes and Worcester. I he folklor 
ist and revolutionary had returned to Manila in order to agitate for Philippine in- 
dependence but had been denied a press permit on the grounds of subversion. Ap- 
pearing before the Philippine Commission, he was questioned bv the voting zoolo- 
gist and commissioner, and protested the sedition law on the grounds that there 
was no such thing as a political “crime.” Worcester, frustrated with his answer, 
abruptly ended his testimony and instructed him curtly to take lus seat. As new 
American authorities emerged, they would dismiss I )e los Reves and his brand of 
journalism. James A. LeRoy, secretary to William I loward Taft and author on Phil- 
ippine subjects, described him as the author of “mostly worthless " pamphlets. 

I hese instances marked the triumph of one kind of thought over another. 
De los Reyes’ attack on the Spanish had been waged with the new tools of cultural 
nationality, a slippery concept that he had built across social dividing lines with the 
stuff of memory, custom, and superstition. Born in llocano regionalism and Span- 
ish liberalism, it had found its home on the outskirts of the Philippine revolution, 
and when the time came, De los Reyes would collect the lore of Masons, anarchists, 
and trade unionists just as he had that of laborers and milkmaids. If the late- 1 9th- 
century Philippine intelligentsia had struggled to think its way out of colonialism, 
the United States had spent the same period developing tools with which to under- 
stand and further an expanding industrial empire. American survey research and 
expedition science would justify the conquest of foreign peoples and enable the 
incorporation of new territories and their natural resources. 

It was folklore’s task to uphold and preserve the beliefs of the common 
people, and in De los Reyes’ hands, this would come to include the evangelization 
of fighting faiths such as the Katipunan. These voices, which challenged Spanish 
claims to authority, were also a threat to the new American regime. De los Reyes’ 
call for cultural and political independence would be undermined by press censor- 
ship and harassment, as the Americans established a formidable intellectual appa- 
ratus to discredit Filipino demands for self-rule. Faced with these obstacles, De los 


v . ... I ilibu\icrismo Brtumt Frupinrs, /S^ i} -I K) (U 

Kc\cs u\olmion would remain unfinished. The forest of auitos* herbal remedies, 
ami taiih neaieis. oiue rnluuled and suppressed bv the Spanish, would again be 
si lei u ed tlu \nuiuans. but in the wittv journalism that would blast the aetions 
<0 the \meiuan legime. t he Miln ersive theater that masked its polities in local sym- 
bolism. and e\en pett\ i esisianee against American provincial officials, the struggle 
l»>i Philippine auionoim would look well bevoiul the revolution in the years to 
c ome 


1033 




IN II RN \l IONA1 CONFERENCE ON THE CENTENNIAL 

or mi 1896 mu ippine revolution 

2 I 2 } \ui»ust 1996, Manila Hotel, Philippines 


ORO ANI/INC; COMMITTEE 


< 1 I \IR\1 \N 


( 0(1 I Allis 


CONN R1 \( l 1 >1R1 ( TOR 


tU lX ,1 I \N1> 1 IN ANC 1 


PROORAM COMMITTF.F 


SPONSORS COMMITTEE 


PR. SAl VAPOR H. LAUREL 

( hjirman 

Philippine ( entennial ( ommission 

COMMISSIONER CARMEN D. PADILLA 

bxecutire Director 

National ( ommission for i.ulture and the 

DR. SERAF1N D. QUIASON JR. 

Executive Director 
National H:stor:c**I Institute 

PR. SAMUEl K. FAN 

Member ; Executive Board 
National Historical Institute 


MR, QUIN FIN P PASTRANA 

Project Director 

Rizal Martyrdom Centennial Commission 

MR. RICARDO V. DE VILLA 

Project Manager 

Philippine Centennial Commission 

DR. BERNARDITA R. CHURCHILL 

Executive Committee Member 

Nittionul Commission for Culture and tin Aits 

Committee on Historical Rescan l 1 

MS. EMELITA V. ALMOSARA 

Deputy Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 

MR. LUIS J. MORALES 

Executive Director 

Philippine Centennial Commission 


1035 


If U PHIIIPPIM KI \ ( )l l I |( )N \ N I > |i| Y< )\'l > 


SOCIAL COMMITTEE 


PROJIiCT COORDINATORS 


Ramlah Adam 

University of Malaya 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 

Remigio E. Agpalo 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Luis PL Agrait 
Universidad de Puerto Rico 
San Juan, Puerto Rico 

Filomeno V. Aguilar, Jr. 

I he National University of Singapore 
Singapore 

Teresita Ang-See 

Kaisa Para Sa Kaunlaran, Inc. 

Manila, Philippines 

Jose S. Arcilla, S.J. 

Ateneo de Manila University 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Hermogenes E. Bacareza, S.V.D. 
Divine Word Seminary 
Tagaytay, Philippines 

Enrique Baltar Rodriguez 

University de Habana 
Havana, Cuba 


MR. IMNNY L CORIH / 

Executive Dim tor 

Philippine (lonventiom C ' l : itm < n p 

MS. MALI I I N R. Ql IA( )l I 

Project l )evelopment ( )ffn cr 

National ( annnunion for ( tilturc and the 

MS. LI I A ANC, DE J I SI S 

( tencral Manager 

Philippine ( .on rention ( )r^iini c nvj ( enter 

SPEAKERS 

Gregory I .A. B.mkolf 
University of Auckland 
Auckland, New /.ealaiul 

David S. Bell 

Eastern Washington l imersitv 
( dienev, Washington, l W.A. 

Raul J. Bonoan, S.J. 

Ateneo de Naga l ni\ersit\ 

Naga ( aty, PIi i I i ppi lies 

Claude Buss 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California, U.S.A. 

Belinda Ty- Casper 
Saxonville, Massachusetts, U.S.A 

Leonard R. C’asper 
Boston University 
Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 

Chen Yan De 
Xiamen University 
Xiamen 

I he Peoples Republic of China 

Chu Hong-yuan 
Institute of Modern History 
Iaipei 


1 036 


< >n[4t/:i£jr;( ( 'om muter. Sprains nd Moderators 


Austin C o.itcs 
Sintra. Portugal 

Dorothy B. Fujita Rony 
University ot California 
Irvine, C alifornia, U.S.A. 

Onofrc I). C orjni/ 

National I listorual Institute 
Manila. Philippines 

Baladas Ghoshal 
Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi, India 

Rosario Mcndo/a Cortes 
l niversitv of the Philippines 
Que/on ( nv. Philippines 

1 Iclene Goujat-Godet 
University ot Paris \ 11 
Sa i n t - N lau rice, France 

Abclardo C ucto Sosa 
( entro de (studios Sohre 
Asia v ( Keania 
1 lavana. C uba 

Go Bon Juan 

Kaisa Para Sa Kaunlaran, Inc. 
Manila, Philippines 

Nicholas P. C tishner 
State University of New York 
Buffalo. New York, U.S.A. 

Violeta L. Gonzaga 
SEACREST 

Baeolod Can*, Negros Occidental 
Philippines 

Sharon Dclmendo 
De l a Salle University 
M :»h!a, Philippines 

Luis E. Gonzalez Vales 

Academia Puertorriquena de la Historia 

San Juan, Puerto Rico 

Luis C. L )erv 
I )e Ui Salle University 
Manila, Philippines 

Grant K. Goodman 
University ot Kansas 
Lawrence, Kansas, U.S.A. 

Howard A. Dewitt 
C )hlone C College 
Freemont, California, U.S.A. 

Aruna Gopinath 
University ot Malaya 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 

I .o u rdes D i az- I rcc h uc lo 
Universidad de Cordoba 
Cordoba, Spain 

Rolando M. Gripaldo 

De La Salle University 
Manila, Philippines 

Reynaldo S. Fajardo 
Grand Lodge of Masons 
Manila, Philippines 

Cesar A. Hidalgo 
Academics Foundation 
Manila, Philippines 

Albina Peczon-Fernandez 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Frederick G. Hoyt 
La Sierra University 
Riverside, California, U.S.A. 


1037 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 


Xavier Huetz de Lemps 
Universite de Nicc-Sophia Antipolis 
Nice, France 

Reynaldo C. Ileto 
Australian National University 
Canberra, Australia 

Vivencio R. Jose 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Pensri Kanchanomai 

Kasetsart University 
Bangkok, Thailand 

Thomas Kiefer 

Harvard University Extension 

Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 

Paul Kramer 

Princeton University 
Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.A. 

Carl H. Lande 

University of Kansas 
Lawrence, Kansas, U.S.A. 

Antonio E. Lapitan 

University of Dayton 
Dayton, Ohio, U.S.A. 

Jose David Lapuz 

University of Santo Tomas 
Manila, Philippines 

John A. Larkin 

State University of New York 
Buffalo, New York, U.S.A. 

Brian McAllister Linn 

Texas A & M University 
College Station, Texas, U.S.A. 


Ghislaine Jeanne I>oyrc 
Institute of Research for 
Southeast Asia 
Paris, France 

Nagasura F. Madale 
Mindanao State University 
Marawi City, Philippines 

F rancis C. Madigan, S.J. 

Xavier University 

Cagayan de Oro C atv, Philippines 

Merlin M. Magallona 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Michael O. Mastura 
Manila, Philippines 

Isagani R. Medina 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Antonio M. Molina 
Madrid, Spain 

I^enjamin N. Muego 
Bowling Green State University 
Bowling Green, Ohio, U.S.A. 

Ambeth R. Ocampo 

University of London 
London, United Kingdom 

Elmer A. Ordonez 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines/ 
Lyceum of the Philippines 
Manila, Philippines 

Norman G. Owen 
University of Hong Kong 
Hong Kong 


1038 


( >nvjrjxrjr;{ < imwiirr. Spr.tkrrs arui Modmi tors 


Ruby R. Paredes 
University ot Wisconsin 
Madison. \\ is^onsin. I S A 

Ramon P Patcrno 
Philippine C cntenmal C 'oordmating 
( ommittcc l SA 
Washington. I VC’.. I S.A 

Sera fin I). Quiason 
National 1 iistorical Institute 
Manila. Philippines 

Robert R. Reed 
University of C alitorma 
Berkeley. C all lorn la. Ik S.A. 

Florentine) Rodao 

Instituio C ompluiense de Asia 

Madrid. Spain 

Felix 1. Rodriguez 
De Iai Salle University 
Manila, Philippines 

Isacio Rodriguez Rodriguez. O.S.A. 
Seminario Agustiniano Mayor 
Valladolid, Spain 

Rufus B. Rodriguez 
San Sebastian C College 
Manila, Philippines 

Hans Romeyke 
Forderkreis Jugend, Umwelt, 
Landwirschaft" e.V 
Weimar, Germany 

Rolando V. de la Rosa, O.P. 

Santo Fomas University 
Manila, Philippines 

Cayetano Sanchez Fuertes, O.F.M. 
Archive) Franciscano Ibero-Oriental 
Madrid, Spain 


Fan m a n ud Sarki syanz 
University ot 1 leidelberg 
1 leidelberg, Germany 

John N. Schumacher, S.J. 

Atcnco de Manila University 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Shcn Hongfiang 
Xiamen University 
Fujian 

l'lie Peoples Republic ot China 

Harry Sichrovsky 
Boltzmann-lnstitute tor China 
and Southeast Asian Research 
Vienna, Austria 

Demy P. Sonza 

Office of the Vice Governor 

Iloilo City, Philippines 

Rafaelita Flilario Soriano 
KAANAK 1896 
Manila, Philippines 

Rodney Sullivan 
James Cook University 
low ns v i 1 1 e , Aus t ra 1 i a 

Victor Sumsky 
Institute ot World Economy 
and International Relations 
Moscow, Russia 

Samuel K. Tan 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Paul Michael Taylor 
National Museum of Natural History 
Smithsonian Institution 
Washington, D.C., U.S.A. 


1039 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION AND BEYOND 


Teresita Miranda-7 chou 
University of Michigan-Dearborn 
Dearborn, Michigan, U.S.A. 

Perfecto M. Terra, Jr. 

The Filipino 

London, United Kingdom 

Lanny Thompson-Wbmark*; 
Universidad Je Puerto Rico 
San Juan, Puerto Rico 

Cristina E. Torres 
University of the Philippines 
Manila, Philippines 

Ricardo D. Trimillos 

University of Hawaii at Manoa 
Honolulu, Hawaii, U.S.A. 

Antolin V. Uy, S.V.D. 

Divine Word Academy 
Tagaytay, Philippines 

Otto D. Van Den Muijzenberg 
Center for Asian Studies 
University of Amsterdam 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 


Zdcnka Vasiljcvova 
Charles University 
Prague, Czech Republic 

Fidel E. Villarrocl, O.P. 
University of Santo Tomas 
Manila, Philippines 

Motoe Tcrami-Wada 
Atcnco de Manila University 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Karl- Heinz Wionzek 
I raining Center at the 

Regional Craft Association 
Mcttmann, Germany 

L. Shelton Woods 
Boise State University 
Boise, Idaho, U.S.A. 

Zhang Kaiyuan 
Huazhong Normal University 
Hubei, I he People’s Republic 
of China 


MODERATORS 


Shirley C. Advincula 

Ateneo de Manila University 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Jose S. Arcilla, S.J. 

Ateneo de Manila University 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Gregory E.A. Bankoff 
University of Auckland 
Auckland, New Zeland 


Florangel Rosario Braid 
Asian Institute of Journalism 
and Communication 
Manila, Philippines 

Ma. Luisa T. Camagay 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Alfred W. McCoy 
University of Wisconsin 
Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A. 


1040 


< *• v. cy < ’K'Kiiiec. Sptaken *md Moderators 


Mu had M C ullinanc 

l ni\etMi\ »>f \\ hvoiiMn 
Madison. \\ isu»imii. I s \ 


C arl 1 1. Lande 

l Inivcrsiry of Kansas 
l awri'iKc, Kansas, U.S.A. 


Mk holas P. C nslincr 
St \N 1 mpirc State C ollege 
Buffalo. New \oik. I s \ 


John A. Larkin 

State University of New \ork 

Buffalo, New \ork, l .S.A. 


Ma. Serena I. Diokno 
l niU'rsitN of (he Philippines 
(Quezon C 1 1 \ . Philippines 

Jose N . I ndriga 
l mversit\ of the Philippines 
Quezon ( u\. Philippines 

Doreen G. Fernandez 
Ateneo de Manila l*niversit\ 
(Quezon C itv. Philippines 

Lsperan/a B. Cathonton 
l ’niversitv of the Philippines 
Manila, Philippines 

( irant K. C loodman 
l Jniversitv of Kansas 
Lawrence, Kansas, U.S.A. 

Aruna Gopinath 
University of Malawi 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 


Benito H Legarda, Jr. 
Manila. Philippines 

Felipe M. de Leon, Jr. 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Ruby R. Paredes 
l niversitv of NX iseonsin 
Madison, NX iseonsin, l .S.A. 

M. Rajaretnam 
Institute of Policy Research 
Kuala 1 utnpur, Malaysia 

Evelyn C. Soriano 
Ateneo de Manila University 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Mary Grace A. 1 irona 
Commission on the Role 
of Filipino Women 
Manila, Philippines 


Rolando Delagoza, C.M. 
Commission on 1 Uglier Education 
Pasig Cary, Philippines 


Helen Tubangui 
National Historical Institute 
Manila, Philippines 


Cesar A. Hidalgo 
Academics Foundation 
Manila, Philippines 


Wilfrido V. Villacorta 

De La Salle University 
Manila, Philippines 


Regalado I. Jose, Jr. 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 

Ricardo T. Jose 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon C'itv, Philippines 


L. Shelton Woods 

Boise State University 
Boise, Idaho, U.S.A. 


1041 


L 


Index 


A 

.iKu a prodiK t ion I'M. J.v> 

Ab.ul. 1 11.1 11 (' V) S 

\b.ul S.mtov IVdro ^^2. A00 

Ah.iv.i. ls.ihclo (> 1 S 
Abcjucl.i. Ansclmo 
Alnib.ik.u. Sh.uilul I l.isim "l(> 

Aluikc. 1 t.uk isc o M* 1 ) 

Ac co. \ltcrcs |u.m 1 1 \ 

Ac he. Rah.i 1 1 0 
Ac huicgui. IVclro S. 8S 
Ac t.i dc Icjcros m ng N.iik 0(vl 
Ac [a ng N.iik 6(>(>, Cs(sS 
Acl.in. C .u los 08 1 . (iS2 
Adi.i. C 'oust amino (>•»"' 

Adi.i. Icrcmia.s (v|S, (vf, 6*8 
Adi. itc 6 1 1 

Adriano, Numcriano (>78 

dgtlMtl "*>9 

Agb.iv.ini, Aguedo 0 1 2 
Aglipav. C iregorio 263. 603. 61*4, 613. 
617, 623, 663 

Agoncillo, 1 clipc 2”, 136, 262, "11. 
02" 

Agoncillo, Icodoro A. (A), 1, 02, 1M. 

220, 28", 622, 632, 661, 664, 023 
Agudo, Hleutcrio 388 
Agudo, Ciiiillcrmo 333, 086 
Aguilar, Manuel (lonzalez 142 
Aguinaldo, Baldomcro 16, 22, 33, 3 * 
436, 667, 660, 708, 769 
Aguinaldo, Caispulo 667 
Aguinaldo, Emilio xvi, xvii, 3, 4, 7, 

10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 19, 24, 25, 
26, 27, 28, 35, 36, 40, 54, 55, 
64, 68, 67, 73, 78, 80, 81, 130. 
133, 134, 135, 203, 338, 411, 
421, 424, 431, 434, 451, 472, 
547, 591, 897, 620, 630, 633, 6.34, 
664, 668, 674, 683, 688, 710, 711, 
735, 846, 913, 928, 959, 992 


Anustin. Kisilio 630. l ^l3, 018 

Akut. Uldurico 6"9 

.1 /,;//£ Dios 593 

Albav 188 

JMs 46, 220 

tili.iUuis ~94 

Alcantara. A.J. 850 

Alcazar, Andres 32 

Alcjandrino. Jose M- O. l l)> - • 

135, 344. 592, 59". 598. 623, 


624 

j.mdrino. Mariano 59_ 
rt.i Kiitipmuni 5 1 
no 93 

xandcr \ 11 299 

xandrian (Papal) Bulls 35 
m. Monette 526 
anso. Lorenzo 152, 586 
insoXll 146, 152. 155. 1^6 
anso XIII 156 
ara. Agustin 149 
Datu 657, 661 

.nano, Alexandre 864 
1 . Eufronio M. 653 , 

uldin-Kalbi-Julkarnain 710, 

,n. Henry T. 559. 563, ^65 
ston. Smith 4 .i 9 
aeda, Paulino 588 

uniranoy Salcedo, Enr.que 12/ 

ieri. Cardinal 250 
nan. Rafael R. 465 

arez, Alejo 7 l6 
ar ez, Dionisio 668 
ar ez, Emilio L. 613 

arez, Jesus 374 
arez, Mariano 10, 37, 666 
arez, Pascual 22 
arez, Ricarte 669 

arez, Santiago V. 7, 80, 406, 694 
arez, Vicente 652, 658, 661 
arez y Tejero, Luis Prudencio 147 
nna. Encarnacion 101, 514 


1043 


THh PHILIPPINE KI-.VOIATION AND hi Y< ) N I ) 


Amango, Cipriano 558 
Ambaguin, Cristobal 113 
ambarayat 709 

American 8th Army Corps 5 1 0 
American War of Independence 54 1 
Amirul Kiram 709 
Ananta Toer, Pramoedya xviii 
Anderson, Benedict R. 590, 602, 617, 
864, 883 

Anderson, Thomas M. 29, 920 
Andres Soriano 6c Cia 1 002, 1 003, 

1069 

Ang Katagalugan 9 

Ang Katipunan at Paghihimagsik 7 

Ang 'Ianda ng Cara y Cruz 366 

Angara, Edgardo 966 

Aniag, Juan 85 

animism 615 

anting-anting 543, 558, 568, 615 
Anton, Manuel 328 
Aoku Shuzo 928 

Apacible, Caliciano 344, 697, 899 
Apacible, Gregorio 927 
Aparicio, Agapito 374 
Aparicio, Manuel 354 
apoderados 670 
Aponte, Jose Antonio 897 
Apostol, Cecilio 632 
Aquino, Benigno S. Jr. xvii, 965, 985, 
992 

Aquino, Corazon C. 965, 977 

Aquino, Melchora 648 

Aquino, Servillano 37, 592 

Araneta, Juan 539, 546, 547, 549, 550 

Arejola, Tomas 81, 344 

Arellano, Cayetano 622 

Arellano, Deodato 80, 96 

Arenas, Rafael Diaz 171 

Arguelles, Agustin 491 

Arguelles, Manuel 17 

Army of Liberation of Pilipinas 3, 21 , 

31 

Arnedo, Jose Ma. 1 44 
Arolas, Juan 710 

Artigas y Cuerva, Manuel 341, 372 
Artiguez, Bartolome 586 


Asantor. Prancisco 588 
Asedillo. Icodoro 6*8 
Asericro, Jose 8” \ 

Asilo dc Malabon 632 

Association of Southeast Asian Nations 

(ASEAN) 96* 

Ateneo de Manila 688 

Atcneo Municipal 89 

Ateneo University xxi 

Au Ji-jia 697 

Audiencia 47, I *8 

Augustin, Basilio 16, 2-», 28, 29 

Augustinians 2D, 2*8. 208. (>05. 

606, 611, 704 

Austrian Monthly Renew for the ( )nent 

335 

autonomismo 904, 006 
Autonomous Region in Muslim 
Mindanao 762 
Avancena, Ramon 18 
A u ’d ken mgs x v i i i 

a wit 73, 76 
awsatuha xxiv 

Ayuntamicnto 162, 163, 625 

i> 

babaylan 204, 205, 207, 545, 5-j.s, 
550, 551, 825 
Bacerra, Manuel 344 
Baesa, Juan 588 
Bagong Katipunan 74 
Bagu mbayan xvii, 843 
bajo de campanil 756, 750, 761 
Balagtas, Francisco 73, 74 
Balanzag, Datu 1 1 9 
Balasbas, Mauro 17 588 
Balat 8 1 4 
Balat’s mother 8 1 5 
Balinan, Luisa 106 
balitaw 529 

Ballesteros, Benigno Quiroga Lopez 341, 

361 

Ballesteros, Luis Lopez 145 
Balot, Bartolome 2 1 7 
Baloyog, Magdalena 109 


1044 


I nticx 


Ball.l/.U. lull.ui B.ls v O ' 0 

BaL\n 1 » I r>c Prop.? o' Porto A\v«> 90S 

Baiun i iisp.mo I dipino 1 OOo 

B.unlo Ibabaw l 0 JO 

Baiuh » Il.ilim 1020 

Baiuh > Malaki 1 0 JO 

B.uuio M.ilut 1 O JO 

Bandos \l.iv.im.»n 10J0 

h»tn\**n "'So. *>*s 

\ I.!) : (> * * 
luM'liLit SJS 
Bailing. lose 280 

B.ii|iii. Wa /11 M.uln Butu \bdul Mo. ^23 

Imranga) 22 t 

B.ir.ir luliim II IS 

Barasuam 4 *3. oJO 

Barcelona. Santiago v|-i 

Barih. I uicn/o JS J 

Barlm. forge 2(>3 

Barranguirer, C olonel t2l 

Barraruddm II "4)9 

Barrows. Pavul 62. 0 3 , 66 

Barsana. Bernardo 388 

Basa, lose Maria 83, 90. 839, 9-i2 

Basa, Roman 9(> 

Basco y Vardas, lose *86. 384 
Basliee Isles 382 
Basilio 1“*9, ^S3 
Batasang Pambansa 96 J 
Bates, John C 638, “'l 3, ""13 
Bates Treaty 632, 033, 638, ""10, ""12, 
"MO, ""1"", “'IS, ""10, 723, ""23, 
726 

Bathalismo 003 
Baticlc, Jeannine 080, 494 
Batista, Fulgencio 896 
Battle of Agusan I till 633, 634 
Battle of Binakayan 691 
Battle of Cagayan 634 
Battle of Macahambus 633 
Batto, Juan 1 06 

Bautista, Ambrosio Rian/ares 17, 81, 

82, 367 

Bautista y I am, Ariston 283, 344 
Bayang Magiting 643 
Bay iing laga log 93 


Bccbcc. Pedro l 18 
Beeerra, Manuel 134 
Bcecrra, Nicholas 23*6 238 
Bclarmino, \ ito l~*. 22. 3”, 42 
Bell. Ceorgc 3-3 
Bell. Id . 38. 4 1 
Bclvis. Segundo Ruiz 904 
Benedictines 63(> 

Benedieto. leodoro 346 
‘benevolent protection zones' 4 l 
Benitez. Conrado 62 . 63 , 66 
Bemad. Miguel A. 83 
Bernardo, Ramon 8 
Betances. Ramon Hmeterio 904 
Beyer, Otley 603 

Biak-na-Bato *6 12, 13, 14, 13, 23, 
2“*, 82, 83. 134, 204, 423, 424, 
314 

Bina, Monica l 1 2 

Binuya, Cornelio 1 19 

“Birds of Prey" 1016 

Bismarck 32, l 6 

Bitancor, B.L. 830 

Black, Cyril 671 

Black Hole 444 

Blanco, Antonio 372 

Blanco, Ramon 7, 1R 13, 33, 94, 

133, 294, 403, 409, 410, 411, 412, 
421, 448, 430, 639, 840 
Blanquera, Francisco 388 
Blood Compact 73 
Blumentritt, Ferdinand 49, 32, 33, 

54, 73, 95, 376, 774, 840, 1028 

Boer War 177 

Boestamam, Ahmad 461 

Bokal na Katalinuhan 643 

Bolactala, Maria 1 1 1 

Bonaparte, Napoleon 489 

Boncal, Baltazar 217 

Bonifacio, Andres xvi, xvii, 7, 8, 

11, 53, 35, 66, 67, 69, 73, 75, 
79, 80, 95, 100, 134, 203, 409, 
414, 456, 591, 597, 623, 624, 641, 
649, 664, 667, 707, 735, 769, 900, 
959 

Boniquet, Alonso 1 15 


1045 


I HK PI III IIMMNI KI V< )I \ I K )N AM ) !U V( )NI > 


Bootsma, N.A. 406 
Boschen, Frederick W. 573 
Bourbon dynasty 1 52 
bourgeois feminism 817 
Bourns, Frank S. 621, 101 4 
Boxer Rebellion 179, 699 
Bradley, Francis Herbert 173 
Braudel, Ferdinand 734 
Bravo, Luis Gonzalez 1 5 1 
Bravo, Nicolas 938 
Bray, Howard W. 27 

Breves Apuntes sob re la Cues t ion cic Curat os 
de Filip inas 255 
Briguiboul, Marcel 484 
Bringas y Taranco, Francisco 144 
Brinton, Crane 469, 478 
British North America Acts 1 79 
Britton, R.S. 478 
Brugmans, I.J. 406 
Bruguirrc, Marianne Bastid 479 
Bryan, William Jennings 992 
Buck, Alfred E. 928 
Buenaventura, Antonino 517 
Bugarin, Andres 1 1 9 
Buisan, Rajah 109 
Bukal na Pananampalataya 643 
Bulan, Pablo 557, 562 
Buller, Alexander 4 1 1 , 412, 416 
Bulosan, Carlos 506 
Burgos, Jose 58, 73, 76, 90, 248, 

254, 271, 690, 897, 986 
Burgos, Manuel Xeres 836 
Busa, Lucas 560, 566 
Butu, Hadji 71 5 

c 

Caballeros de I )imas-Alang 845, 850 
Cabarrus, Francisco 486, 489 
Cabelin, Pedro 109 
Cabesang Tales 8 1 9 
cabezas de bar an gay 224, 794 
cabildos 903 

Cabiling, Ignacio 109, 110 
Cabitac, Cayetano 588 
Cabugao, Eusebio 588 


cacicjuism "'3*' 

Cadi/ Constitution ""0. * 00 , »‘)2 
( la gay an Valley 1 80 
( ,ailles, [nan 623 
( .alamba land dispute 0 1 
Calatraba, Mariano 588 
Calderon, Balta/ai Fernandez 58a 
Calderon, Lsperan/a Mian 1*8 
C .alderon, Felipe 632 
( California Filipinos 8 a * 

( .alirnan, I msa 1 0“* 

Caliuag, • •rant is^o 11 2 

( .alixto, Jeremias 6 1 2 

Calle de la P.scolta 626 

( calle del Rosario 626 

( calle San Fernando 626 

( .alma, Nicolas 1 1 a 

Calvo, Juan 485 

Camagay, Maria 1 msa 168 

Camba, Andres Garcia 120, l a6. 1-C 

Lampomanes, lose 1 levia 02, 258, 

297, 341 

Campos, Marline/ 133, 13o, 152 
Lamus y 1 lerrera, Manuel Felix 111 
( ainda, N. 85 
( .andon Republic 6 1 5 
( lano, Juan 28"^ 

(canon, Fernando 10, 3 7 , 81 
Ca novas, Jose 501 
(.apdevila, Federico 805 
(Capistrano, Nicolas 654, 655, 661, 

676, 677 

Capitania General de Pilipinas TS5 

C.apulong, Dionisio 1 12 

ca rgado res 572 

Carillo, Pedro 90 

(Larlism 147 

car list as 146 

Carlos III 144, 353, 485 
( .aros, Alonso 1 1 4 
Carriedo, Faustino 286 
C^arro, Andres 604 

Carter, William 1 L 562, 563, 565, 567 
casas de caha y nipa 1 6 1 
casas de materiales fuertes 1 6 1 
Case, James F. 683 


1 046 


Index 


( .isino \ Vue. Pedro 

( .lM|>lt . I luo 1 0(> 

( .isU'I.u. 1 miho 1 ^ 1 . 1SJ. *44 
( .tstcllo. lost Pu|UC M'S. >(■»'' 

C .isi illt* jos. lu.m SSS 
( .istlli C'|OS. 1 cot do S t SS 

( .i n 1 1 1 1 1 > . Pedro \nu>nu' 146. 423 

C .imiII.i \ Imu iuv. lose \i > *S 

C .istio. | ulcl S'H'. 4 H)2 
C .istio. |o\ it. i \ nmir.i S(> % 
edt.ilon.: S J \ 

C .tt.in.iu.m 1020 

nit*inc' SS(' 

( .i\ .imu. K'sus \l.i >0 1 
( .i \ itc* Minim **S. "A 1 JO. 130. 131. 

1 *2. 29<i. l >“*0. 9S6. OSS 
nititi'nio 6(>4 
ntxll tine* 3X» . (>M . <>”*2 

iM^uiort's 1 \ 

( ch.dlos, Kirtolomc 388 
inluLis \\ i, 1 S(>. *0)0 
C enteno. lose JO"* 

C ennui Revolutionary Ciovernment of the 
\ is.iv.is S-i^ 

( cron, Alvaro Saavedra 33"’ 

( 'ert i, l rbuno 230 
( ,hucon, ( lemente 6~*8 
C hufee, Adna R. 000 
elm teres 386 
( 'hupellc, P. 1 . JS"’ 

C 'harles 11 2*t6 
Charles III 2-r 
Charles IV 283, 338, -ISO 
C'have/, Clementino 681 
Chen Shao-hai 60S 
C'hesques, Don Manuel 106 
Chichester, Captain 013 
Childers, Joseph 86 
( 'hind Mail 44 5, 436 
Chinese Filipinos 684 
C Chinese revolution 470 
Chinese uprisings 683, 687 
Chivunao revolt 383 
Christie, Clive 602 
Chu Hong-yuan 469, 478 
Chuidian, lelesforo 689, 1068 


Chun Yung wiv 
C'ineo Cremios 486 
Clavcria. Nareiso 46, 3"*, 1 49 
Clement XI 23 1, 232 
Clifford. Mary Porita 63” 

Clom.m, Sidney A. ”13 

Cluh Popular 6”6 

C oates. Austin 328, 866, 883 

Codigo C ivil 810 

Codornio v Nieto. Antonio l”l 

C'otradia 64” 

C'olegio de San lose 622 
C'olegio de San Juan de l.etran 89, 293 
C'olegio Pio l atino Americano 261 
C olegio San Jose 1021, 1 069 
Colegios de Misiones de Ultramar 234 
C'olin. Francisco 216 
C 'olorums 61, 64 , 649 
C omhes, Francisco 108 
Comenga, Rafael 430, 668, 1068 
C omite de Retormadores 1 * 
commercial agriculture 19 
Commonwealth period ”36, 800, 9>9 
Commonwealth Times, The 8*>3 
( io ;;; m u n ist A Liu ifest ^18 

Communist Party of the Philippines 84 

Community Inc. 832 

Companfa General deTabacos de Pthpinas 

633. 1000 

Compania Progresista 01, 1068 
cotfiposo 84 
Coneello, Alberto 368 
concentration camps 43 
Concepcion, Venancio 18 

Conciliar Seminary ot San Carlos 34 
Confraternity of San Jose 1 3 1 
Conroy, Hilary 933 
Consejo de las Indias 334 
Consolation, Dona 816, 830 
Constantino, Nazario 689, 1068 
Constantino, Renato 71, 183, 329, 836 
Constitution ol 1812 144 
Constitution of Cadiz 128 
Contemplacion, Flor 986, 993 
Cooper, James Fenimore 397 
copra exports 191 


1047 


THE PHILIPPINE RKVOLITION AND HI VOND 


Corbin, Henry C. 563, 565 
Corn, Sheriff W. D. 567 
Cortes, Doroteo 50, 73, 91, 92, 297, 
904, 942 

Cortes, Tomas 170 

Cortez, Benigno 852 

Council of the Indies 250, 252 

Council ofTrent 88 

Council of War 90 

Count Floridablanca 487, 488 

Count of Montezuma 252 

Crame, L.O. 93 

Creoles 77 

Crespo, Manuel 47 

Crimean War 175, 178 

criollos 787, 790 

Crisostomo Ibarra 815 

Crisostomo, Manuel 92 

cristinos 146 

Cruz, Philip Vera 845 

Cruz, Valentin 7, 8 

Cruzat y Gongora, Fauto 46 

Cry of Baire 157 

Cry of Balintawak 70 

Cry of Pugad Lawin xvi, 71 

Crystal Palace 273 

Cubano Iquina 908 

Cuenca, Felix 668 

Cuenca, Fernando 543 

Cuerpo de Libertadores 655 

Cuerpo de Vigilancia y Seguridad 628 

Cuesta, Jose 131, 132 

Cuevas, Pedro 769 

Cultural Center of the Philippines 964 
Curry, George 564, 566, 567, 573 

D 

Dacanay, Julian E. Jr. 168 
Dagohob, Enrique 558, 568 
Daily Press 443 
Dakula, Datu 716 
Daligdig, Capitan 655, 661 
Dampier, William 582 
Dangat, Aman 586, 587 
Dangat, revolt of 586 


Dapitan 6, 30, 33 *. 83 l) 
cLir-ul-hLnn ^ 30 . ^38 
Darma-Bakti 463 
I )arrah, ( .. 830 
Darwin, (diaries l ' 7 9 
DasdLin at I nhsnhan 03, 200 
Dasmarinas, ( ibmcz Perez 222 
I )avid, Francisco 236 
Davidson, James \V. ■* C. * *8 
Daza, Eugenio S. 366, 360 
De Acuna, Pedro Bravo 226 
De Aguilar, Rafael Maria 47, 1*1. >3 *. 
372 

Dc Alcarrasa, Juan 2 1 7 

I )e Alpa, Martin 83 

De Anda, Simon Salazar 1 18 

De Andrade, Luis Tavicl 8 *1 

I )e Aquino, Thomas 1 1 8 

De Arandia, Manuel 46 

De Arango y Parreno, Francisco 800 

De Arevalo, Mateo Joaquin Rubio 371 

I )e Asis, Francisco 1 30 

De Ayala, Adelardo Lopez 1 20, 1 32, 

154 

De Balmis, Francisco Xavier 283 
De Benavides, Miguel 226 
De Bevoise, Ken 182 
De Biedma, Jaime Gil 1003 
De Bucareli v Ursua, Antonio Maria 787 
De Bustamante, Carlos Maria 940 
De Castro, Evaristo Perez 149 
De Castro, Joaquin 232 
De Castro, Roman Baldorioty 907 
De Cespedes, Carlos Manuel 899 
De Comillas, Marquis 903, 1005 
De Comyn, Thomas 486 
De Corcuera, Sebastian Hurtado 46, 

222 

De Coria, Joaquin 76 
De Couto, Jose Manuel 142 
De Dasmarinas, Luis Perez 685 
De Dios, Emiliano Riego 22, 668, 928 
De Esquivel, Esquivel 85 
De Figueroa, Esteban Rodriguez 1 02 1 
De Folgueras, Mariano Fernandez 1 4 1 , 
144 


1048 


Index 


I V C i.un/.i. Francisco ~\SS 
Pc Gau huorcna. Andres F. 2^ 

Pc C iOkoa hca. Mariano 1 D 

1 V ( iom. M.irtin 1 1 2 

I V ( iov.uiu’n. Pedro 3-H 

Pc Govantcs. 1 cl i pc Maria 1 ~*0 

Pc C irau \ 1 igucras. C asimiro 1*|9, 1 3() 

Pc C iiicvara. Picgo 3 9 

Pc 1 labsburgo. Maria C ristina l 3(> 

I V 1 Icrrcra. lose C ahe/a 1 33 
Pc 1 Icrrcra \ Figueroa. Joseph 2 l ~~ 

Pc Iturbidc, Augustin 338 
Pc I/quicrdo. Ralacl ”, 3*l0 
I )c | c s 1 1 s , C »regona 66~* 

Pc Jesus v 1 duarda, Raldomcro 
I )c Jongc. J.A. -4 0(> 
l V la C ru/, Antonio 1 1 9 
Pc la C ru/, Apolinario 131 
Pc la C ru/ Palaris, Juan 6M 
Pc la C ru/, Pedro 338, 369 
Pc la ( ru/ v Achov. Apolinario 369 
Pc la Lscosura, Patricio l S3 
Pc la 1 leras v Grespo, Carlos 1 1 
Pc la 1 u/ \’ C aballcro, Jose 899 
Pc la Pena, Nicolas 1 6 
Pc la Rama, Isidro S42, 349 
Pc la Rosa, Agustin 369 
Pc la Rosa, I : rancisco Martinez 146 
Pc la Torre, Carlos Maria 77, 90, 129, 
133, 339 

Pc la Torre, Jose Maria 987 
I )e la 1 orre, 1 aiis ~T8 
Pc Labra, Rafael Maria 133 
Pc Lara, Hnrique Polo 612 
Pc Lara, Sabi nia no Manrique 113, 114 
Pc las Alas, Antonio 463 
Pc las Casas, Bartolomc 893 
Pc Lavczarcs, Guido 106 
Pc Legazpi, Miguel Lopez 73, 93, 99, 
107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 216, 
218, 336, 794 
Pc Lemps, Xavier Huetz 160 
Pc Leon, Felipe P. 314 
Pe Leon, Manuel 83 
Pe Lete, Eduardo 838 
Pe Loaysa, Jofre Garcia 357 


Pc los Hems, Martin 196 
Pc los Reyes, Crisanto 90 
Pc los Reves, Isabclo 89, 603, 611, 

617 102^ 

Pc los Reves, Ventura 192 

Pc los Rios, Piego 16, 18, 658 

Pc los Santos, Andres Sancillan 369 

Pc los Santos. Epitanio 66, 298, 663 

Pc los Santos. Marcclino 689, 1068 

Pc 1 una. Juan Bellido 905 

Pc l uzuriaga, Jose Ruiz 59 

Pc Mas, Sinibaldo 149, 301, 688 , 89 

Pc Medina, Juan 107 

He Mendoza. Juan Gonzales 116. 606. 

1068 

IX* Mirafiores, Conde 148 
IX Montemolin. Conde 151 
De Mora, Luis Arias 680 
IX* Nebrija, Antonio ~84, 86 

De Norzagaray. Fernando 23 1 
IX* Olivares, Juan Garefa 21 
IX Onate, Antonio 118 
IX Orleans. Luis Felipe 149 
De Pena Plata, Marquis 409 
De Poago. Melchor Suarez 896 
De Polavieja. Caniilo 842 
De Quesada, Gonzalo 89 
De Ribadeneira, Marcelo 10“ 

De Rivera, Fernando Primo 11, 14. 

133, 134, 423. 424 
De Saboya, Amadeo 152, l' 1 "’ 

De Salazar, Domingo 222 
De Salcedo, Juan 604 
De San Agustin, Caspar 247 
De San Martin, Jose 338 
De Santa Justa y Rufina, Sancho 247, 
355, 371 

De Santo Domingo, Pedro 1 1 8 
De Silang, Diego 608 
De Silva, Juan 116, 117 
De Sucre, Antonio Jose 3," > 8 
De Tagle, Pedro Perez 142 
De Talavera, Juan 584 
De Tavera, Joaquin Pardo 85, 987 
De Tensa, Alonso Fajardo 1 17 
De Tio, Lola Rodriguez 903 


1049 


THh PHIUIMMNI. Kl VOl l"! K )\ \M) HI V( )NI > 


De Tournon, Charles Thomas Maillad 
246, 251 

De Urdaneta, Andres 357 
De Vega, Lucio 42 
De Velasco, Julian Ignacio 2 1 9 
De Veyra, Jaime C. 617 
De Viana, Francisco Leandro 485 
De Viga, Diego 246 
De Villacorta, Enriquez 671 
De Villalobos, Ruy Lopez 357 
De Vi ray, Gregorio Bernardo 1 1 8 
De Vizmanos, Manuel Saenz 144 
De Wereldkroniek 405 
Decade of Women 820 
Decalogue 69 

Decreto de Instruccion Publica 788 
Del Carmen, Joseph Mariano 1 19 
Del Castillo, Antonio Canovas 135, 

152, 155 

Del Castillo, Francisco 7 
Del Castillo, Joaquin 585, 586 
Del Castillo, Jose Jimenez 7 
Del Monte, Domingo 899 
Del Pan, Jose Felipe 1 027 
Del Pan, Rafael 344 
Del Pilar, Gregorio 22, 37 
Del Pilar, Julian H. 295 
Del Pilar, Marcelo H. 49, 53, 73, 76, 
91, 130, 294, 344, 623, 641, 687, 
735, 766, 797, 809, 899 
Del Pilar, Pio 16, 37, 41, 100, 427, 
691 

Del Pilar, Toribio Hilario 92 
Del Prado, Vicente 674 
Del Rosario, Anacleto 285 
Del Rosario, Hermogcnes 85 
Del Rosario, Jose Maria 669 
Del Rosario, Mariano Vivencio 632 
Del Rosario, Tomas 344 
Del Val, Merry 261 
Delatado, Doroteo 588 
Delgado, Martin 18, 36 
Deloso, Rufino 655, 661 
demography 188 
Desde Manila a Europa 273 
Despujol, Failogio 59, 133, 839 


Development Academy o! the Philippines 
964 

Dewev. George 3. 2~L 29, 5S. 1 

411. 42T 612. “T 1. "'12. s *<>. 
868. 912 

Diario de Manila ” 

Diarymig iilipnw 9 2 
I )iaz, A I fere/. Nicol.is 2 1 8 
Diaz, Casimiro 222 
Diaz, Valentin 35 1 
I )iez, I lilarion 355 
I )imas Haw 96 
I )inos, A. I . 853 
I Jinuba Sentinel 899 
Diocno, Ananias 18 
I )ios 1 )ios 557 
d is ciplina ri 0s 6 5 3 
I )israeli, Benjamin 33’" 

I )iwa, I .adislao 95, 666 
Dizon, Jose 351 
doceanistas 145 
Dogmatic Theology 259 
Dominican Colegios de Misioneros 2**8 
Dominican Order 89, 106, 130, 15-*, 
203, 288 
I )on 1 iburcio 8 1 7 
I )ona Victorina 8 1 6 
Dormer, ( Commander 4 1 2 
Ducos, Jose 109 
Duggan, Stephen 476 
Dungan, Doha Maria 106 
Duran, Joaquin 366 

E 

Flarl of Granville 418 
Flarl of Iddesleigh 418 
Lari of Kimberly 408 
Eastern Miscellany ; 7 he 472 
ecological imperialism 198 
Economist 454 

EDS A Revolution of 1986 762 
educados 1021 
education 89, 90, 94 
Educational Decree of 1863 672 
Fqercito Eibertador 20 


1050 


Intir v 


Hirw I'S 

/.( ..;>>;<> * v *>8" 

/ . ( ; 2 M'. 2 " (v> 2 

/ . / .v \ 1 ^ M'S, (>32 

/ / / S(> 

/■//•*.> V.; * N 


/. ! :'nu wu. *>1. *M. I *9. 

2 o. '>v “*S v "9S. SOS. 

S O. S ib. Sb V S"0. SS>. S99 
/ / / :.:p:*io 102S 
llttiobo M' ' 

/. I {a tiiiU' dc i.: Rci'OtUkiOfi ('32 

// K.itipu n.m o l . f >ten>9no rn 

iihpm.is * 

I I ( huntc (> ' ' 

llR.i^o 1 s 1 

/-/ Rrn.ii tfwrnto S 1 
/•/ S/^A> / -it run f >(' t 
I h.is S 1 * 

I I i/alde N C ta 1002, 1003 

1 mmanuel. \ u tor 1 *0 

( -m ornrntirt <" \\i\. 33 

cnannmuLi ION. 111. 60”, "9*. 80S 

1 ndava. \ 1 Iglicl 38 

1 i ul k ot t , C « . 1 v 1 69 

1 ngeK. Friedrkh 1”8, 283, ”03 
Fuilightenmcnt 3 \ 1 . “*32 
1 mile V Akedo, Pascual 1*0 
P.niiques, In. in 1 1 6 
Fan iques, M.m.i 1 1 6 
Fnriques, Rafael 200 
Fnriques, Rodrigo 1 l 6 
Hscolta 162, 626 
F’scuela Normal 388 
Fspartero, Baldomero 1 * 0 ) 

Kspia, luan 388 
Kstevan, IVdro 1 10 
Kstovel, C .ci 1 1 1 o 388 
Kstrada, Joseph 0” 

Estrella, Agustin 83 
Estrella, Salvador 3"" 

EulenFmrg, Ciraf/u 020 
European revolutions 140 
Evangelista, Edilberto 10, 81, 397, 663 
excLmstriiciofi 34 1 

exports, Philippine 100 , 102 , 201 , 203 


F 

Fahella. Gabriel 960 
Fabre, 1 uis 388 
1 ajar Asia 963 
Fajardo. Alonso 1 1” 

Fajardo, Reynaldo S. 33” 

Faulkner, W illiam xviii 
he, IVdro 36” 

Febiger. I eo ” 1 ” 
l ived. Pablo 300 

Federal Council ot the \ isavas 19 , 26 
Federal ista Party 81. 39", 800 
Ivderalistas ”9 

Federation of America, Inc. 89 
lelipe 1\ ”86 

Felipe, Julian 314, 690 
Feli/ardo, Cornelio 9 2 
teminist theories 808 
Ferdinand \ l 338 
Ferdinand \ 11 338, 490 
Fermentino. Antonio 363 
Fernandez., Agustin 36 
Fernandez, F. 

Fernandez, 1 eandro H 101 
Fernando VII 128. 141. 142. 143, 

145 , 148 

Ferrer, Baltazar 63" 
filibustew 3 . 93 

l ilipifiiis Ante Europa 1 032 
Filipinescas 32 
Filipiniana Book Guild 182 
Filipinism 688, ^3 1 , 1068 
I-ilipino Federation of America 845, 848 
Filipino Home Owners and Iaxpajers 
Communin’ Council 854 
Filipino Labor Union 847, 852 
Filipino National Council ot Chicago 854 
Fine Arts Exposition, Barcelona, 1884 59 
First Philippine Assembly 74 
First Philippine Commission 1014 
First Quarter Storm 61, 71 
First republic 26 
Fiske, Bradley A. 631 
Fito, Tomas 373 
"Flora me at Laura” 7 4 


1051 


THK PHlUPIMNh RI-VOI.LTION AND HI V( )NI ) 


Flores, Luis 18 
Floridablanca 489 
Font, Salvador 357 

Forbes, William Cameron 363, 565, 861 

Foreman, Albert W. 565 

Foreman, John 112, 284 

Forets, Gerardo 907 

Foronda, Juan 605 

Forrest, Thomas 749 

Fortca, Julian 587 

frailocracia 301 

Franciscan Order 9 

Franco-Prussian War 176 

Frazer, James 173 

Freemasonry 540 

Freemasons 75 

French revolution 66, 470, 541 
Freud, Sigmund 173 
friar estates 192, 203, 205 
friars 10, 19, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 

94, 105, 106, 544, 546, 547, 795, 
797, 864, 866, 975, 1030 
Friend, Theodore 1 004 
fugaz 234 
Fullon, Leandro 18 
Furnivall, J.S. 406 

G 

Gaceta de Manila 237 
galleon trade 45, 47, 142, 160, 183, 
607, 625, 626, 972 
Galura, Felix 592, 593, 598 
Ganap Party 648 
Garcenes, Mariano 655 
Garchitorena, Andres 85 
Garchitorena, Angel 85 
Garcia, Centeno 364 
Garcia, Felipe 92, 297, 298 
Garcia, Luis Angel 166, 171 
Garcia, Miguel 372 

Garcia, Pantaleon 22, 24, 34, 38, 39, 
41 

Garcia, Prudencio 656 
Gardener, Cornelius 570 
Garzon, Jose 588 


Caspar de San Agustin 223 
Gatmaitan, Blasa 295 
( iatmaitan, ( iarlos 9 * 

GAIT 966 
(jeh Sho-yan 4"' 6 
( jenato, Manuel 85 
( ienato, Ramon 629 
genrn cbico 593 

Gcronimo, Liccrio 16, 3”*. 100, SOS 
Gil y Guzman, Mariano 55, 365, •*!•* 
Globus 405 

“Gloriosa’ of 1868 4"*. 905 
gobernadorcillos 77, 220, 22 t 
Godov, Manuel 489 
Godoy, Miguel 232 
Goethe 279 
C joldblum, ( diaries 1 69 
Gomburza 48, 49, 58, 296, 985, 990 
Gomez, Dominador 84 
Gomez, Feliciano 90 
Gomez, Mariano 58, 90, 248, 090, 
897, 986 

Gomez, Maximo 133 
Gonzales, Jose 85 
Gonzalez, Fanetcrio 937 
Gonzalez, Epigmenio 937 
Gonzalez, Manuel Die/ 357 
Gonzalez, Simeon 655, 656 
Gonzalez, Teodoro 668 
Gonzalez, Wenceslao 656, 661 
Goodman, Grant K. 923 
Government Gazette 451 
Governor’s Palace 625 
Goya y Lucicntcs, Francisco 483 
Gran Oriente de Espana 34 1 
Grancsa, Antonio 85 
Granja mutiny 1 46 
Grant, Frederick D. 557 
Gray, George 3 1 
Greene, Francis V. 23, 29, 630 
Gregory XV 249 

Gremio de Mestizos de Binondo 1 1 9 

Gresa, Tomas 360, 365 

Grey y Formentos, Fernando FL 34 

Grimarest, Pedro 147 

Grito de Lares 905 


1052 


Index 


( .r no vie 8 .\\ a 1^2. 9()8 
C hi. mil. i ( 1 \ 1 1 10. I"'. R>. OS, 203. 

2'°. 2 *1. M<>. SS(). (>2“*. (>28 
( iii.inii.i ( i\ il \ eterana 62” 
l iiinrnn. \m.ulo *1. S i. 1S2 
( tiierrero. I ernando Ma 208. SJ"*, (>>2 
(lUerrero. 1 con Ma 101. 28^. (>08. 

s r 

( »uerrero. Milagros ( . 102. 230 

( .tier rero. Ratael (>02 
( .tier uela, 1 t.uk i ^v. o 8 
( »ue\ .u r.i. ( l.uo 8(>(^ 

( .uli.i. Ranajil 230 
( .null. ( .lov.inm Battista 280 
( tiiulom. 1 nr ujuc 368 
( till Ik k. | . M . 1 (>0 

11 

{ 1 abib Mura "*13. ”10 
hticcnfirro* 230. 8 *3, So”. 880, 881 
1 I.k ienda 1 a 1 uisita 1 002 
1 I.k ienda Nan Pedro 1021 
hacinulas 0, "*8, ”0, 201, 200. 208 
1 l.ulji Bum ” 1 3 
1 l.ulji Miisin ” 1 o 
I l.ulji l 'sm.m ^ 1 \ 

1 lakko K hiu 964 

hambarajah ”49 

Hanggang hailan Pa 03 

I lare-I lawes-C kitting law ol 1033 4*28 

1 larouel, Jean-Louis 160 

Hart, I )onn V. 1 60 

Hartmann, Arnulf 3”4 

Hamm Ar-rasid, Datu 700 

I lassan Uprising 7 1 7 

1 lat/deldt, Paul 016 

Hayson, Thomas R. 713, 721 

Hayt, Stephen 862 

Hegel, Cicorg Wilhelm Friedrich 63, 

70, 173, 730 

Hegelian-Marxist tradition 741 
Heinrich of Prussia 012 
Henle, Richard 012 
Hcnriquez, Pedro Calderon 218, 220 
Henson, Mariano A. 808 


Henrzi, Gary 86 

1 lernaez, Julian 8**2 

Hernandez, Julio 18 

Herrero. Casimiro 183 

1 lerrero, Ulpiano O.P. 83 

Hibik ng Pilipinas 03 

1 lidalgo, C esar A. 882 

1 lidalgo, Felix Resurreccion 89 

Higgins, Sabina 846 

Hilario, llburcio 02, 800, 802, 80S 

Hill, Amos 869 

Hispanic Cosmopolites 1004 

1 listorical Conservation Society 182 

Hizon, Maximum 1”, 302 

1 lo 1 Isiao-tung 4”8 

1 long Kong Committee 008 

Hong Kong junta 18, 20, 2 , 624 

1 longkong Daily Press 408 

Hongkong lelegraph 2 , 458 

1 loogerwerh Evert-Jan 406 

House of Representatives 97 

How, Robert L. 618 

Huelva, Jose 883 

Hufton, Olwen 48 

Hugo, Victor 2 7 9 

link movement 74, 84 

l inks 61, 69, 70, 897 

Hulog 669 

Hunta Central 141 

Husin, Datu Amir 14 

Hutton, Franklin S. 5 7 0, 5/2 

Hyatt, Stanley P. 565, 870 

I 

Iban, Candido 7 
Ibannez, Vicente Blasco 1008 
Ibarra, Anselmo de la lorre 369 
Ibrahim, Anwar xiii, xxi 
Ibrahim. Haji Yaacob 461. 462 
ideology 72, 75, 82, 83 
idjang 586 

Iglesia Filipina Independiente 623 
Iglesia Sagrada ng Lahi 642, 649 
Ileto, Reynaldo Clemena 82, 85, 192, 
229, 406, 638 


1053 


TUI. PHIUIMMNI RI.VOl l I K >N AM ) HI Y< )NI ) 


Him, Datu 1 1 9 
Iling, Magdalena 107 
Illera, Agustin Malfaz 378 
Illustrisimo, Agapito 642, 648 
“Ilocano Myth” 609 
I locos Norte 131 

Ilocos Sur Guerilla Union One 61 5 
Ilustracion Filipina 284 
ilustrados 64, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 
78, 79, 81, 83, 88, 192, 204, 229, 

230, 487, 607, 609, 615, 616, 620, 

621, 622, 624, 628, 634, 649, 687, 

737, 765, 766, 784, 789, 790, 846, 

865, 866 

Imagined Communities 590 
Imam Milan 722 
Imam Shariul 723 
Imprenta Revista Mercantil de J. de 
Loyzaga y Cia 272 
Inang Bayan 9 
Indanan, Panglima 717 
Indian Wars 868, 1031 
indios 48, 58, 76, 79, 89, 246, 249, 
250, 258, 542, 688, 749, 766, 790, 
796, 863 

Indonesian Republic 461 
indulto 57 

indulto de comercio 46 

Infantry Regiment No. 73 17 

infidencia 933 

Ing Emangapiran 595 

Ingoli, Francesco 249 

Innocent XI 250 

Inocencio, Mario 90 

inquilinos 10, 75, 224 

Inquisition 489, 540, 54 1 , 550 

Institut Kajian Dasar 467 

insulares 77, 863 

International Year of Women 820 

Intramuros 161, 411, 625 

Irrisari, Martin 218 

Isabela II 89, 150, 151, 154, 338 

isabelinos 1 46 

Ishak Haji Mohamad 461 

Ishikawa Yasumasa 927 

Islam 739 


Islamic studies ” S8 
isothymia "'33, "'3” 

Isquierdo, Mariano ^6 ^ 

I thud Idjang 586 
Ito I Hrobumi 028 
I/quierdo, (ose Alberto 005 
I/quierdo, Rafael i"\ 133 

J 

Jacinto, Emilio 53, 60. 60. “*5. “M, 
96, 736, 840. 023, 050 
Jackson, hrederick 8^2 
Jamahil Kiram II 638, "’08, "'10, ^23, 
769 

James, William 1 "*3 
Jamila, Pangivan Inchi "" 1 ^ 

Japanese Imperial Arms 380 
Japanese occupation 642, 6 i8, 800 
Jara, Josela 528 
Jara, Matias 147, 148 
Jaramillo, ( ieneral 4 1 6 
Jaudenes, Perm in 24 
Javier, luistacjuio 35 1 
Javvi documents 70 7 , 7 ()0 
Jesuit (.ollegeol Manila 2 1 
Jesuits 55, 154, 216, 218, 488, 656, 
658, 659, 767, 1021 
jihad 750, 751 
joangas 1 1 2 

Joaquin, Modesto 502, 505 
Joaquin, Nick 506 
Jocano, Felipe Panda 603 
“Jocelynang Baliwag” 518, 524 
Jokson, ( iregorio 665, 666 
Jorde, Elviro P. 373, 374 
Jose, Carlos P. 852 
Jose, F. Sionil 505 
Josef, Manuel 671 
Joseph, Franz 334 

Jovellanos, Mclchor 486, 487, 489 
Jovcn, Ofcrino 592, 597 
Juli 81 1 

Julkanain, Datu 714, 715 
junta 4, 16 
Junta Central 142 


1054 


I tulcx 


lum.i tic l.i Kc.il C omp.im.i dc i ilipmas 
* S ^ 

junt o dc ret \irf:nnento I 

lum.i I ntor m.it i \ .1 tie Reformax *H)4 

Jit r.: iricntdiii > * M 

K 

K.ib.inkal.m 

hdbdnuicdbdn *() V L 2S 
K.ib.n.i.mg Makabavan 'l 
Kabigt mg. Maximo 3' 

Kabisig 4(*S 
hodotihin 4)6 '21 

ho hod j uni '04. '22 
Kjhitpon. Xgoxon ot Btth*is 542 
A 'ti/ngtif f\ t iyo 43 

hiii n^mrros 23 1 
Kal.iw. Maximo M. *'5 
K a 1 ,i w, 1 codoro M. 3‘H. 54 
KoLixodn '. 96. 690 
Kalbi, I bin “'l l, ' 1 5 

K.il ll^.ipi 464 

K.ilum l bin ' 1 5 
hint hid id 584 
Kant, Immanuel 'tO 
Kapatiran (vi l ) 

Kapisanan Makabola Makasinag 649 
Kapitan C ailon 642 
hiinuixtittin ”09 
Kiirtilyii 69, ”9, 96 

hdSdttldhdll 10 

hiisultdtuw '09 
Katigbak, Segundina S3”* 

Katipunan xvii, 0, ', 0, 14, 18, 10, 
40, S3, 53, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 69, 
73, 7 4, 75, 79, 80, 81, 95, 96, 99, 
133, 588, 592, 593, 628, 649, 
653, 658, 660, 70', 708, 735, 
752, 765, T 67, 889, 900, 925, 970, 
1029, 1032 

Katipunang Hiwalav 668 
Katipuneros 409 
Karunao, Raha 108, 110 
Kaum Muda 460 
Kern, H. 406 


Kes.mian Melayu Muda 460 
Kheil. Napoleon M. 4, 5 

Ki Hajar Oewantoro 463 
Kilat, 1 eon 50'. See dlso Quilac, Leon. 
Kilusang Bagong Lipunan 962 
Kiram-k arpenter Memorandum 25, 
'26 

Knappe, \\ ilhelm 942 
homos 530 
horido 528 
Koxinga 113 
Kreiskv, Bruno 336 
Kudarat, Sultan 109, '50 
hidinhmg 525 
hinnintong 528 
hi nidi nun 513 
Kuo ling-yi 4'8 
Kususe \oshihiko 926 

L 

La Aurora Queretana 93 
La Carlota 548 
l a Lpoca 364 
id Fe 364 

La Llor de la Isabela 1002 
hi Froilocrocio Filipino 29 , 300 
La Gran Bretana 102' 
hi hn pro nt d Nuevo 93 
hi Independencio 81, 632, 633% ^5 

id Juventud Escolor Liberal 

La Liga Filipina 6, 53, 73, 79, 95, 

1 S2, 203, 592, 689, 767, 797, 809, 
842, 863, 866 , 900, 990 
hi Politico Espdfwld en Filipinos 300 
Li Republicd Filipino 546 
id Soberonio Monocol en Filipino s 
9 ^ 296, 299, 300 
hi Solidoridod 6 , 49, 78, 79, 80, 91, 
93 , 132, 178, 294, 298, 300, 
301, 332, 378, 505, 733, 737, 
767, 809, 849, 865, 866 , 889, 
899, 989 

Lo Verdod 77, 359, 987 
LABAN 966 
laborantist 300 


1053 


THE PHILIPPINE REVOIA' I K )N AND Hi Y< )NI > 


Lacandola, Carlos 1 I 1 
Lachambrc, Jose 456, 667 
Lachambrc, Rafael 134 
Lacour, Challemel 4 1 8 
Laesamana, Francisco 1 1 4 
Laesamana, Martin 1 14 
Lacson, Aniceto 539, 547 
Lacson, Evangel ina Hilario 600 
Lafont, P.M. 169 
Lagman, Alonso 1 14 
Lakan Dula 105, 108, 110, 111, 112, 
220 

LAKAS-LABAN 966 
LAKAS-NUCD 966 
Laktaw, Pedro Serrano 344, 346 
Lalo, Dona 106 
Lamant, Pierre Lucien 169 
Lambdin, Captain 655 
land conversion 202 
land ownership 197, 199, 206, 220 
land use 197, 199, 206, 220 
landed estates 215, 221 
Langerbruch, Herr 294 
Lapiang Malaya 74, 650 
Lapu Lapu xix, 685 
Lardizabal, Manuel 934 
Lardizabal y Uribe, Miguel 491, 492, 
494 

Larkin, John A. 590 
“Las Pilipinas dentro de cicn anos” 734, 
869 

Lau-Chichon 694 
Laurel, Jose P 465 
Laurel, Salvador H. xiii 
Laurel, Sotero 94 
Laws of the Indies 784 
Lawton, Henry 36, 38, 868 
Lazarra, Cenicio 559, 566 
Leano, Agustin 607 
Lecaros, Juan Francisco 146 
Ledesma, Simeon 655, 661 
Legarda, Benito F., Jr. 622 
Legionarios del Trabajo 845 
Leo XIII 257, 262 
LeRoy, James A. 67, 640, 1032 
leyenda negra 54 


Lcvmcl, X.S. 832 
Liang ( 2ii-chao 606. 60~ 
liberal feminism 81"', 818 
Liberal Party I 022 
I .ibcral Union 1 3 1 
liberalism 80, 06, 100 
Lichauco, Faustino 02~\ 028 
Lijphart, Arend *00 
Lilod Madaya ^30 
Lim, Ariston Bautista V>0 
Lim, Mariano 603 
Lim, Wenceslao 603 
Limahong 1 1 2 
Limang Fadhana 6 m. 6*C 
Limjap, Jacinto 680 
Limjap, Mariano 620, 680 
Linn, Brian Mcallister 336 
Liongson, Francisco 302 
Lippay, Alexander 3 1 3 
Lirag, Paulino 308 

Literary and Scientific University 621 
Litonjua, 1‘duardo 680, 1068 
Llanera, Mariano 22, 308 
IJorente, Julio 81, 344 
Loa I ico 694 

Local Covernment Code 1023 
Lochcr-Scholtcn, Llsbcth 406 
Locke, John 100 
Lodge Revolution 344 
London Spectator 4 
Londres, Rafael Cabal fin 687 
Lopez Jacna, Craciano 81, 01, 344, 
597, 687, 735, 800 
Lopez, Roque 16, 18, 33 
Lopez, Vicente 145 
Lorenzana y Bultron, Antonio 787 
Los Lrailles 93 

Los Indios Bravos 79, 863, 865, 866, 
869 

Loyzaga y Cia, D.J. 273 

Lucenca, Manuel 400 

Lucero, Isaac 1014 

Luciano, Victoriano 446 

Lucio y Bustamante, Miguel 864 

Lukban, Vicente 17, 37, 41, 352, 

557 


1056 


huifx 


1 un.i \ n t « » iu« » 1 22. M. 'o. S2. 

>»»>. Si 2S"». v»t. MO. s|“* b V)^, 

(4 1 V (>1 (»2 t. C' 2 N. (' (vSO % 11 . 

s >' ) 1 ( )(,S 

I mu . | ii. ui V si. so \ (>SS. OS 1 ). 

S vS 1 0(>S 

1 un.is |um«» M.u tin '<'2 
1 mu's. 1 uninr.o 1 1 t 
I nni:.it » 1 ' 1 

lun>a\ *v' * 

I 1 1 SO III* 1 «>dgC ' * 1 * 

M 

M.i Ssu Ii * 

M tl |)im. \polm.mo win. 2(>. tt. so, 

•*>S. s(v (0). SI. SS. i )(>. 20*1, (>23, 
(> t 1 . *11. * >S. O0(, 

M.U .thebe Se outs SOS 
M.U apagaL loan 1 1 > 

Mae Arthur \tthui 20. 3(>, vS. 030. 
(>oo 

M.uAitluir. I Douglas 01. (>0 
M.u co. Antonio 1 33 

Maelamba. 1 sagani t V ( 0)3 

Maelava ’'SO 

M.ulelcl.l, C hi. II to 1 1 S 

Madlangbavan, 1 Velio 113 

Madrid Imposition ol 1SS^ 102S 

Macstrc dc C ampo 1 1 0 

M.u; I s - 1 1 aelvangbata, Ambrosio 1 1 1 

Magalona, Ventura 5*0 

Magat Salamat S t 

Magdalo M 10 . "S, SI, 00 t 

Magdiwang A 10 . "'S, 00 t 

Magellan. Ferdinand \i\, -I S, 685. 7(>S 

Maghiganti chapter 

Maglcnti, C lon/alo 1 00 

??iagsabi ! 23 

Magsanop, Juan 113, 116 
Magsarili, ( ornclio 006 
niti^uindiUiiWU kirini 7()9 
maguino () MarLniaray 1 10 
maharhka 1 1 A 

Majul, Cesar Adih 70, SS, 101, 740 


Makabulos. Francisco 16, l . 22. 37, 
3 v h *11, 100. 592, 0~4, 695 
Makapag.il, l.azaro 666. 669 
Makapili O lS 
Makiman. Ysavcl 116 
Malik Bennahi “*52 
M.ilolos Congress 2S. SI, i)_ 7 136 
Malolos C onstitution 2S, 204, 335, 
~3o. 9 SO 

M.ilong, Andres 113, l IS 
M.ilraux, Andre S04 
Malvar. Miguel 22, 3 "A Oh 42. 205, 
023 

mambises 80S 
Manacuil, Andres 114 
Manalastas, Joseph 1 18 
Manapat, Dolores 93 
Mandar, 1 iilario 680 
Mangalindan. Francisco 118 
mangayao "'SO 
Mangingin, Sultan 769 
Maniago, Cristobal 1 14 
Maniago, Francisco 1 13 
Manifest Destiny 871, 8~2, 908 
Manifestation of 1888 347 
Manila Cathedral 409 
Manila Hotel xvii 
Manila Observatory 441 
Manila Synod 45 
Manila limes 565, 570 
Maniquis, Fruto 85 
Manlapaz, Francisco 1 14 
Manook, Pedro 109 
Manuel, Liberato 94 
Manuvu 758 
Mapa, Gregorio 85 
Maramba, Daniel 674 
Marcos, Ferdinand E. 71, 976 
Marcuelo, D.L. 845 
Maria Clara 811 
Marianas Islands 296 
March Jose 895, 897, 900, 907 
Martin, S.B. 857 
Martinez, Dodoy 681 
Martinez, Juan Antonio 144 
Martinez, Juan Jose 934 


1057 


THK PHII IIMMNl Rf.VOI I I ION AND hi V( ) N I ) 


Martinez, Meliton 987 
Marx, Karl 70, 178, 279, 283, 740, 
793 

Marxist feminism 817 
Masada 586 
Masaryk, Tomas 779 
Mascardo, Tomas 22, 37, 666 
Masonry 90, 96 
Massacre at Balangiga 4 1 
Matanda, Raha 105, 110 
Maura Law 78 

Maxilom y Molero, Arcadio 36 
Mayordomo, Celestino 355 
McCrea, Rufus 562 
McCutchcon, John 634 
McIntyre, Frank 1032 
McKinley, William 4, 5, 26, 28, 29, 
30, 31, 32, 39, 40, 136, 1014, 
1032 

media anata 1 1 3 
medicos titulares 1 89 
Medina, A.G. 942 
Medina, Isagani 690 
Meiji era 744 
Mclayu Raya 461 
Melian, Antonio 1006 
Melliza, Reymundo 27 
Mendez, Alferez Antonio 2 1 7 
Mendizabal, Juan Alvarez 146 
Mercado, Pablo 679 
merepeda sa posed 756 
Merritt, Wesley 24, 27, 29, 30, 408, 
624, 630, 868 

mestizos 48, 74, 77, 78, 79, 89, 542, 
609, 687, 688, 1004 
Mexican War 178 
Meysapan revolt 200 
Mga Gunita ng Himagsikan 7 
“Mi Ultimo Adios” xvi, 96 
migration 190 
Miguel, Joaquin 1 003 
millenarian movements 74 
Miller, Marcus P. 32, 33, 36 
Millini, Nuncio 250 
Min Pao 697 


Mindanao State- l mversitv 96 * 

Ming I )vna.st\ 60 * 

Misuari, Nur xx, ^62. ’63 

Mitra, Ramon 965 
Mohamad Basn *6 * 

Mojares, Resil B. 169 
Mojica, Arnbrosio 3~* 

Mojica, 1 )icgo 666, 669 

Molina, Antonio M. 5 16, 528, 65 s 

monarchism 299 

Moncado, I lilario ( amino S-f, 853 
Monroe 1 )oc trine 1 ""8 
Montalan, Julian 42, 8 ^ 

Montenegro, Antonio 668 
Montero v Vidal, Jose 23 S 
Montes, Ramon 368 
Montojo, Patric io 1 35 
Morales, Nicolas 89'"' 

Morayta, Miguel 327, 332 
More, T homas 44, 793 
Moret, Segismundo 154, 34 1 
Morga, Antonio 732, ^68 
Moro Islamic Liberation Front ”'•*9 
Moro National Liberation Front xx, 
749, 762, 801 
“Moro Problem’ 710, 731 
Moro problematics 738, 751 
Moro studies 738 
Moro Wars 4, 6, 569, 660, 749 
“moroism” 731 
Mount Banahaw 642 
Muda, Raja 767 
Muda, Rajah 715 
MucTIe de la Reina 626 
Muelle de Silva 626 
Muhammad Amilusin, Datu 721 
Muijzenberg, Otto van den 407 
Munarris, Lduardo 85 
Mura, Habib 715 
Murgos, Carmclo I). A. 93 
Murillo, Fr. Pedro 107 
Muslim Mindanao 83 
Muslim renaissance 744 
Muslims 26, 708 
rnusyawarah xxv 


1058 


Index 


\ 

N .u alahan . \polmano oSS. oSO 
\ .u i» »nal i s( a Pa r t \ 4.?. SOU. 1022 

\.U hMl.lIhUs ' * . S ! 

\.ii;u.il. lose C ahllo > '0 
Naked \t.i|.r d: 

Nakpil. luho ’S . >SJ. S 1 \ 

V/. :nitLi'*ni case 0(> > 

N.mud. Pedro SXS 
Napoleon I 1-4 2 
N.inok'on III 1 o 
N.ipoli iMlk \\ .1! s 2 I 8. • * S ( > 

Narodnt I 3 

Wirotim l\dtttha 4 
Nartasul 10 

\.n\.k7. K.imon Maria ISO 
National t ommission lor C uliure and the 
Arts \iii 

National l Vvelopment ( ompanv 1003 

National I lisuuu.il Institute \iii 

Nationalist Peoples C oaliuon 0 

Natividad. Mamerto 13. 663 

Natividad, Manuel SS 

Navarro, Piego 3SS 

Navv C aptain C , lass 63 1 

Nay clan 38*4 

Na/c o. C ommander ” 1 6 

Negros Republic 1 0 

Ncponniceno, Alvaro 331 

Net. lose l) 4. 3-46 

Neri, Bernardo 683 

New People's Army ~M , 332, 801 

New Society 062, 063 

Nies, I ran/ 0 1 2 

Nilad I odge 3-46 

Nixon, Milton C i. 6 1 6 

No Parking C iroup 1 02 1 

Noccdal, ( Candido 1 SS 

Noli Me Unipere xvii, 1 8 , 04, 330. 

333, 300, "Mo, ”3, 808, 838, 
846, 863, 86~\ 8M), 883, 800 

NoOSt’S of ( r ft/ SS 310 

Norie, 12 W. 420, .*30 

Noriel, Mariano 22, 2 l, 34, 634 

North ( lerman C Confederation 1^6 


XortJ*-i 'hi tut Doily News -4 -40 
\ 'orth-i hi thi Herald 440, 44 1 
Northern Alliance M0 
Northern l u /on Military Zone 3 
Novales. Andres 1 44, 930 
noi'ohispanos 033 
No/aleda, Bernardino 363 
Nune, Prince 1 10 
Nunez, Tomas *423. 386 
Nvdegger, \\ illiam 618 

o 

O'Higgins, Bernardo 338 
Okurna Shigenobu 024, 928 
Ola, Simeon 42 
Olioli 2r 

Ons;junvo, Poroteo 680 
On*;pin, Roman 689 
Orcullo, Eugenio 666 
orde/ianzas de burn gobierno 46 
“organic intellectuals 3 
Orge, Antonio 234 
Oriente Nacional de Espana 341 
Orosa, Sixto 4. 101 
Ortiga, Pablo 838 
C 9 rt iga v Rev, C.onsuelo 838 
Ortiz, Estacio 374 
Ortueste, Pedro 16 
Osmeria, Sergio 336, 309, 623. 100 
Osorio, Francisco 602 
O'Sullivan, John 908 
Otis, 1 dwell S. 30, 32, 33, 37, 38, 
137, 621, 634, 712 

P 

Pabalan, Mariano Proceso 393 
Pabavo, Apolinario 634, 661, 678 
Pacana, Cavetano 678 
pacificacioti 7 31 

Pact of Biak-na-Bato 13, 33, 60, 133, 
612, 633, 674, 733, 018 
Pact of HI Pardo 1 66 
pacto de retro 1 83 
pacto de sangre ”66 


1069 


THK I 1 HI I. IP PINK RKVOI.UTION AND HI- Vc )NI ) 


Padilla, Carmen I). xiii 
Padre Camorra 81 1 
Padre IOamaso 81 1 
Padre Florentino 819 
Padre Modesto 826 
Padri Salvi 81 1 
Pagbuaya, Datu 108 
Pagguho ng Republika 667 
Pagulayan, Luis 106 
Pakpak, Amai 659, 661 
Palanca, Carlos 428, 687 
Palaris Revolt 117, 118, 671 
Pallu, Francois 245, 249 
Palma, Jose 516 

Palma, Rafael 65, 96, 101, 632, 796 
Palmero, Miguel 939 
Palmero, Vicente 939 
Pan Ho Wu 685, 687 
Pan-Islam ic movement 460 
Panganiban, Jose 344 
Pangiyan Inchi Jamila 710, 715 
Panglima Indanan 723 
Panorama Politica cle la Pc pub lie a Tihpina 
98 

Papa Isio 197, 204, 205, 207, 545, 
550 

Paraiso, Enrique 85 

Pardo de Tavera, Trinidad H. 285, 621, 
622, 636, 800, 835, 1021 
Paredes, Quin tin 465 
Paris Foreign Mission Society 245, 249 
Parker, Luther 595 
Parkinson, O. CL 850 
Partido Democrata 1 022 
Partido Federal 623, 624, 632 
Partido Nacionalista 632, 1020, 1022 
Paseo de la Reform a 939 
Pasion cling Talapagobra 84 
Pasiong Dapat IpagAlay sa Puso ng Taong 
Bab as a 93 

Pasiong Dapat Pagalab nang Puso nang 
Taong Bab as a 299 
Pasquier, Roger 1 69 
Pastells, Pablo 329 


Pasteur, Louis 2~'9 

pasyon o l , “M, ~‘o. \s sv j >o. 

813 

pasyon pilapil ""4, 2 tt) 

Paterno, Maximum 689, 1068 
Paterno, Pedro IS, *23, C3. 688 
Patino, Ieodoro \(iH 
patron-client relationship ""5 
Patronato Real 5a. 222. 2 *6. 2a9, 
251, 264 

Paua, Jose Ignacio 686, 66 1 
Pavia y Lacy, Manuel 1 SO. 1 S2 
Pawa, Jose Ignac io 22 
Payne-Aldrich Law 1001 
Payo, Pedro 2S9, 296, 29"\ 361. so s 
Peace Commission ""62 
Pedrosa, Ramon 1-L 
Pelae/, Pedro Pablo 2- *8, 2S2, 2 5 s, 
255, 25 7 , 3SS, 086 
Pelae/, I imoteo 802 
peninsulares 77, 86 a 
People s ( Court 648 
PepingDilat 93 
Per; lies, Francisco 169 
Peralta, Manuel 372 
Perea, Rafael S88 
Perez, ( Cecile 1 68 
Perez, Roberto 642 
Philip II 45, 24 S 
Philip V 246, 252, 338 
Philippine Assembly 81 
Philippine ( Commission 42, 43, 564, 
1032 

Philippine (Constabulary 42, 550, SSI 
Philippine exports 1 83, 1 84 
Philippine Independent (Church 1027 
Philippine Mail 848 
Philippine Medical Association 622 
Philippine News 848 
Philippine Revolutionary Records 692 
Philippine Scouts 42 
Philippine Social Science 475 
Philippine Society and Revolution 84 


1 060 


huirx 


Philippine \iniiu.ui W.u 9. 5, 6. 39. 
>'>. *0. * 1 . IV <>S. SI. 1SS. 20-1. 

>00. *>**. o02. 603. 6l9. 
olo. o^. o')'). -99. SoO. 8o3. 
SoS. S *(>. 1000. 101 5 
Plullimorc. RoIh i 1 9 1 ' 
l*i. I*io ooN. 90. 1 OoS 
Pi \ M.Ugall. 1 UIKIHO l 52. 155, 3*9 
l*i. uij;. 1 bin 6 5 
I *i l.ii . Mat heo 1 1 
Pilar l odge SO 
1 *mu 'Mid. \i;uedo 08 l 
I’inol. lean 1 tu 1 09 
I 'mini .is. I iu .is ‘'‘So 
' l*i coni; l tos (>•**!. 09 
I’l.u.i. Icodoro 95, >5 1 

1*1. ito ii. 9> 

Plain. Inn . 1 dmund OS 1 ) 

Podhotskv. |.M. ”9 

l*ola\ ieja. C amilo 11, 1 3. 133% 9l0, 

*21 

polos 

polos v srrr/i Kh 0 M , 0 2 

Pomp.k . Isidro 558 

Ponce. Mariano 20, 20, 52, 399, 696, 
899, 905. 02"" 

Pons, P. 2-1 

Pope 1 eon \lll 156, 299 

Pope Pius I\ 33~' 

Poponton incident 568 

population growth 100, 188, 10 , 201 

Posadas, \ icente I t * 

Powe II, John Wesley 1031 


Power y C I i rail. 

Ramon 903 


Pratt, C 'apt 

ain 

658 


prnicipiilcs 

77, 

83, 106, 200, 2 

16, 

217, 

218, 

220, 221, 229, 

230 

584, 

971 



principiiliti 

74, 

75, 77, 78, 79, 

81, 


83, 200, 220, 224, 658, 670, 
736 


Proclania a los ldectores 938 
Propaganda Committee 80 
Propaganda hide 245, 246, 249, 251, 
252 


Propaganda Movement 10, 19, "*‘4, 

. ""8, ""9, 9**. 296. 298, 300, 
301, 603, 60”*, 610, 612, -08, 
-32. -35. -52. - 9 -. -99. 809, 
8**5. 865. 8-8, 88", 899. 9“U 
986, 989. 996 
Protocol ot 1885 “*19 
Provincial C ouncil 654 
Provisional Revolutionary Government 

13-1. s.r 

Puente de 17s pan a 626 
Pugad l aw in 909. 526 
Pulahan Revolt 556 
Pulentang. Gat 1 10 
PUT HR A 963 
Puyo, Pain M9, ~16 

Q 

Qen Sheng 685 

Qi )ian Seng 686 

Qin dynasty 685 

Qing dvnasty 695 

Qioit' won Sinico 25 , 262, 269 

Qudrat -66 

Quesada, Juan 674, 695 
Quezon, Manuel L. 61, 336, 473, 

476, 597, 599, 624, 835, 92 U 
960, 1022 

Quilat, I con 18. See <iho Kilat, Leon 
Quioquiap 300 
Quirino, Carlos 833 
Quiroga, Bcnigno 29' 

R 

Rabaza, Eulogio 388 

Rabcdcs, Francisco 463 

Rafael, Vicente L. 863 

Ramos, Bcnigno 642, 646, 648 

Ramos, Fidel V. xvi, 963, 97 

Ramos, lose Anacleto 92, 927, 928 

Raon, Jose 46 

Raya Madaya 759 

Real Cedula 786 

Reales, Pedro 148 


1 06 1 


HU mil 1 1 * 1*1 N I- RI-.V( )I l I !< )N AND Hi V( )NI ) 


reconcentraclo policy 869 
Re co pi lac ion dc Leyes dc los Reyn os dc las 
Inclias 44, 56 

Recto, ClaroM. 1 9 1 , 465, 789 

“red pasyon ” 84 

Reeves, James R. 714 

Reformas Borbonicas of Carlos III 786 

Regidor, Antonio Ma. 841, 920 

remontados 234 

reservas 222, 224 

Retana, Wenceslao K. 271, 288, 300, 
373, 835 

Reverter, Agust in 149 
Revista Mcrcantil 273 
Revolucion dc septiembre 905 
Revolutionary Committee 547 
Revolutionary Congress 62 1 , 634 
Revolutionary Government 654 
Revolutionary Government of the Visayas 
18 

Reyes, Severino 655 
Reysio Cruz, Emilia S. 5 1 9 
Rhys, Ernest 1 0 1 
Ricafort, Mariano 145, 148 
Ricart, Juan 347 

Ricarte, Artemio 16, 17, 22, 24, 34, 
37, 41, 74, 83, 352, 505, 593, 
646, 665, 666, 667 
Ricartistas 61, 649 
Richardson, Jim 194 
Riguera, Elorencia 610 
Rillo, Santiago 665, 669 
Rios, Isaac E 689, 712, 1068 
Rivera, Eeonor 838 
Rivera, Luis Munoz 903, 907 
Rivera y Garcia, Braulio 370 
Rivero, Francisco 928 
Rizal Day 844 

Rizal, Jose xvi, xvii, xx, xxi, xxiii, 7, 

49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 56, 59, 66, 
67, 69, 73, 79, 94, 130, 203, 
285, 294, 328, 344, 414, 443, 
444, 451, 452, 462, 478, 597, 
623, 641, 687, 732, 773, 783, 
793, 844, 899, 925, 970, 985, 
990, 1012 


Rizal Lodge 8 - 1 5 

Rizal. Paciano 1*7 22. S~\ 59, ss 
Ri/alistas 6 1 . 8 *G 

Roa, Vicente R.u ines 65 *. 661. 6 6 
Roa/ v Racines. ( apt.iin 6~~8 
Robertson, John *25 
Robinson. William * 5 ) 

Roca, ( arlos 409 
Rodil, Jose Ramon 1*8 
Rodrigue/, I .n ricj i ie Baltar 125 
Rodriguez, Isacio Rodrigue/ *53, *“* * 

Roman, Alonso 21"’ 

Romanticism 1 ’•* 

Romero, lose 960 
Romero, Marcelino 588 
Romualde/., Norberto 528. 5 SO 
Romulo, ( larlos 1 * 68 , 69, * 28 . «X 5 » 

Roosevelt, I heodore * 1 , * 2 . 1 * 5 , 261 

676, 8^2 

Root, Brenda I )avis 608 

Root , Elihii 7 1 6 

Rosea, Ninotchka 503 

Rousseau, Jean (accjues 1 00 

Rovira y Munoz, Manuel 906 

Roxas, Felipe 838 

Roxas, Francisco 628, 689 

Roxas, Jose Bonifacio 85 

Roxas, Manuel 68, 262 

Roxas, Ecdro 689, 840 

Royal Audiencia 57 

Royal Company of the Philippines 

Royal Ordinance on Pacification 105 

Rupas, Raha 1 07 

Russian revolution 470 

Russo-Japanese War 177 

s 

Saavedra, Francisco 604 
Saco, Jose Antonio 899 
Sagasta, Fraxedes Mateo 135, 155, 341 
U Sago t nang Espana sa hibik nang 
Filipinas” 93, 299 
Saguisag, Agustin 217 
Sahira, Pangiyan Rutri 717 
Sakamoto Shiroo 926 


1062 


Index 


Vika\. M.u.ino •1.'*. ~*4. S3 

Vlkd.ll MoNCtncnt * t. <>4S. O'M). 1022 

Vikikm. 1 bin * 1 

Vil.mga. Mtricilo Navarro 3()“" 

Vilas. ( )iimun 1 <>. 1 S 

Vila/ai. \ntomo 2 l\ >32 
Vlk Clio. \ u ente S 3 
Salisbury. lord *12. il 3. 4 1 ~ 

Sahsbur \ . Rober t l M S 

Salmcron. NkoI.is 132. 13S 

Salvador. Felipe SOo, 308. 300 

Salvador. Morses '44 

S.im.ih.m 102 l 

S.m Isidro ile M.uu|uina 2 1 S 

s.m |u.uiclelcu.in (> 1 1 . OSS 

S.m 1 1 i.i n k o Strait 3(vS 

S.m 1 oren/o tie I I 1 scorial 334 

S.m Miguel Brevverv 1003. 1000 

S.m Miguel C orporation 1003. 1009 

S.m Miguel de M.ivumo 13 

S.m Miguel, 1 ueiano 3*4. 3”, 40, 4 1, 

* 2 , 000 

S.m Miguel, 1 ucio S3 
S.m Pedro, l ueio IX si"" 

S.uk Iu/, Federico C larcia 1 00S 
S.mc 'ho, \ icente 1 4 
S.mei.meo v Closon, Clregorio 83, 102, 
OSS 

Sandatahan 20 

Sandico, Teodoro 10, SI, 344, 332, 
s 14, 027 

Sanganbavan, Pedro 110 
Santa Iglesia 300, 308 
Santander, Praneiseo d e Paula 338, 803 
Santayana, Agustin 740 
Santiago, lose Puriano 00, 331 
Santiago, Miriam Defensor 080 
Santos, Valentin 74 
Sapinoso, Sixto 008 

Sari Paduka Dayang Davang Piandao 18 

Saria, Agustin 42 

Sarmiento, Juan 831 

Sarrat Revolt 78 

Sawyer, Frederick H. 608 

Scheans, [Daniel 613 

Schuck, Charles 710 


Sehuek. Id ward "10 

Selmek. lulius 1 0 

Seliumian C ommission 13”* 1014 

Seluirman, Jacob Cold 022 

Seliutv, C arl 1013 

Scott, 1 high " 1 8, "'24 

Scott, James 230 

Scott. W illiam Henrv 230, 614, 623 
Scottish Rite 340 

Seecuul Philippine C ommission 1014 
Second Philippine Republic 060 
Second Propaganda Movement 4 
Seminarv of San Clemente 231 
Senate 0 

Scpov rebellion 1”8 
Seven Years W ar 340 
Sevilla, Mariano 238, 202 
Sevilla, Rosa 632 
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley 33 
shifting cultivation 109 
Sidotti, Cianbattista 246, 232 
Sikatuna ~3, 03, 00, 108 
Si lang, Diego 1 1 8 
Silang rebellion 118 
Si ling Labuvo 03 
Simoun 170, 783 
Singapore Free Press 4, 2 , 28, 444, 
447 

Sino-Japanesc War 024, 020, 930 
Sinsei Malai Kensetsu Sha 463 
Siripada 1, Sultan 1 10 
Sisa 810 

Sison, Peofilo 463 
Sitvar, Manuel 17 
Skocpol, 1 heda 478 
Smiley, S.E. 713. 713 
Smith, Frederick A. 572 
Smith. Jacob 868 
Social Contract 100 
socialist feminism 810, 813, 825 
Socialist Party of the Philippines 84 
Sociedad de amigos del pais 334 
Society of Physicians and Pharmacists 
622 

Solibnen, Alonso 1 1 5 
Solidarity 506 


1063 


i m mu ippini hi \ ( >i r i k >\* am > pi y< >m > 


Soliman 54 
Soog, I )atu 7 1 6 

Soriano, Rafaclita Hilario 590, 598 
Sorox and Co. 1003 
Sot a 548 

Soto, Juan Crisostomo 593 
Soult, Marshal) 149 
Southern Alliance 710 
Southern Luzon Military Zone 37 
Southern Luzon Zone 37, 41 
Southern Philippines Council for Peace 
and Development 755, 762 
Southern Tagalog 1019 
Spanish Chamber of Commerce 1003, 
1004, 1008 

Spanish colonial policy 44 
Spanish Inquisition 492 
Spanish September Revolution of 1868 
296 

Spanish Treaty of 1878 714 
Spanish-American Peace Commission 
262 

Spanish-Amcrican War 258, 546, 612, 
656, 860, 863, 869, 872, 926, 
1027 

Spanish-Anglo-( German Protocol 709 

Spectator 28 

Spencer, Herbert 173 

Spcngler, Oswald 733 

Sperry, Commander 716 

Speth, Lmil 567 

St. Claire, W.G. 27 

St. Ignatius College of Manila 2 1 8 

Straits limes 27 

Stranded Whale, I he 510 

Sturtevant, David 82, 574 

Suarez, Mariano 657 

Sucesos de las Is las Pilipinas 732 

Suez Canal 89, 90, 178, 330 

sugar crisis 191 

Sulayman, Raha 794 

Sulse, Juan 573 

Sun Yat-sen 478, 696, 929 

surat sug 707, 709, 710 

Sy Quia, Gregorio 693 


I 

I aal. ( .m/ 68( ) 

I abacalcra 1 000. 1001. 1 ( M)2 
I ac lot mao, Luis 112 
I aft ( commission 205 
Lift, \\ illiam 1 inward 1 20. 1 ^ 

908, 101a. 10*2 

I ahil, 1 lad ji 1 
I a i pi ng Rebellion 685 
I alatag, 1 )< >ming< » 118 
lalmon, Yonina 558 
Ian I )ianu> 69 a 
Ian-( .an 694 
Lmdang Sora 6 O'" 
langgulan 648, 6 *9 
I arming, I )atu 1 5 
I ao-( Tien 69a 
tarsi In 75], "'5"' 
larsilo 820 

I atlong Persona Solo I )ios 6 a 1 . 0a3. 

648, 650 
taxation 186, 187 
I avlor, Alan 590, 597 
Laylor, John Roger M. 90, a0“\ 635 
I avlor, W.( .. 555 
leatro Sabina 593 
Iecson, Irinidad 352 
leducdiic 558, 569 
lejeros ( convention 82, 95 
Idler Amendment 8" T 2 
I elleria, Manuel 1 47 
I en I housand Seeds 510 
Ien Years War 899, 903 
leodoro, Basilio 85 
lercio de Voluntarios de ( lagavan 654 
Lerin, ( ’atalino Sionco 370 
Lerrero, P.milin Centeno 156, 339, 

358, 659, 1068 
textile production 185 
“The Philippines a Century I lence” 869 
I bird World feminism 824 
I hompson, I )avid 855 
three Stars, The 846, 848 
/ h ree- Co rn ered Sit n , The 510 
I hucydides 745 


1 064 


Index 


l h \ Ilins ' % 1 
I K'Mip 0 | Tiber to 300 
Iu ntsm Publn Band C ommittee h 2 
I * n i» ». ( .jsi m i to 1 <>. 1 

1 into. Manuel 1 > . 332. 012, 


<>1 % 


inn*. M.irim 1 09 
i« 'ii^Non. I Vpna ^ 1 S 
irona. ( .muIkIo I tt.t OOO. 008 
non.i. 1 ).ui lei S t SS. 008. 669 

i rot u. I ms 830 
tob.u v o ituliiNtr \ 1 i M 

mluuo monopoK IS *. 008 
1 1 h le I . Robe 1 1 o I I . 9() 

I olentmo. \t turo M. *104 

I I iknt mo. \urclio SI. 8.C Sl) 3 

liilcniiiio, lose Iveses 3">1 

1 ok i o. I .i/.iro 42 
| olstoi . I t*o 2 9 
1 oinlinson. lanis 488. 4 M 

lop.uio. ( .isei.mo }^2. W " S 
i 1 , ,»r io ~3 >32, 000, 668 

| op.K io. 1 iu rio 
| oieio. 1 )iep> Minus/ Ml 
loiiluo, l ei n.uule/ 22} 
lories, Isuloro 22 
| our el 1 1 Monde 35 
I'rc.itv of Berlin 1^5, 1 6 

Ire, UN of lldelonso 489 


I Ve.it v of Paris 26, 2T 31. 32, 34, 
p>3, 130, 1 3~7 l~ s > 38eS, 6 6, 
-K), s^2, 8^5, 908, 929, 030. 
1001, 1 00-1, 1031 

Trcchuclo, Maria 1 ourdes Piaz 108 
Trevithick, Robert 2S0 
’ I Viangulo cle 33" 3 * 1 
Triangulo laliba 349 
Trias, Mariano 10, l - *, 3 , 38, 41, 


332, 695 

I ribunal cle C aientas 1 34 
I rillo, |ose 308 
True l hrtiloguc xxiv 
Tsinoys 08a 
Tuason, Antonio 1 1 0 
Tubangui, 1 Ielen R. 2^2 
Tuctncan, Ghividin 384 
Tugani, I Vd i ‘o 11’"' 


TulcLts Siuing 3 2 “* 

Lilian, Francisco l 1 ” 
tulisarjn 10, -*23 
I upas. Francisco 108 
I "upas. Phelipe 108 
Hi pas. lupas 103 
1 li roc . I lenri 33 
Fydings-McDufTie Law -*"'3 


u 

l\S. Army 40, 4 1, -*2 
University of Havana 903 
Gniversity of Santo Tonus 77, 80, 92, 
90, 129. 13a, 248, 283, 293, 611. 
022, 688, "'*88, 837 

I niversity of the Philippines 129 
l’ ray, Maria 109 
l rbatia and b'cliza 820 
I'rios, Saturnino 638 
Uto, Patu 03"’, 639, 661, 730 


v 

vagamitjuios 202, 216, 223, 224, 
223, 231 

vagrancy 233, 239 
Valenciano, Cayetano 388 
Valenzuela, Pio 7, 73, 80, 95, 414, 
628, 690, 841, 874, 925, 990 
\ alenzuela, Sancho 414 
Vamcnta, Cipriano 680 
Varela, Felix 895 
Varela, Luis Rodriguez 144 
Varona, Francisco 542 
Vatican 249, 263 
Vatican 11 251 

Vela, Gregorio de Santiago 372, 374 
Velarde, Murillo 247 
Veles, Nicolas 1 16 
Velez, Apolinar 661, 676, 678 
Victorino, Bernabe 85 
Viliers, F.V. 425, 426 
Villacorta, Francisco 355, 373 
Villafranca, Faustino 271 
Villanueva, Ariston 668 


1065 


THi hHIIIIMMNI RIVO! EIION AND hi V( )\D 


Villaruel, Morcntino 85 

Villasis, Andres 558 

Villiers, KM. 420 

Vi n cay, Pedro 1 16, 1068 

Viniegra, Paigenio 666 

Viniegra, Wenceslao 37 

Vinoya, Agustin 607 

Viola, Maximo 774, 778, 838 

Virreinato de la Nueva hspana 7 85 

visit as 606 

Vito, Pructuoso 42 

volunteer militia 16 

Von Bulow, Bernhard 915 

Von Dicdcrichs incident 913 

Von Kotzebue, Otto 145 

Von Lesseps, Ferdinand 334 

Von Tirpitz, Alfred 912, 916, 954 

w 

Walker, Kdward Henry Rawson 413 

Washington, George 474 

Watawat ng Lahi 643 

Weber, Eugene 469, 478 

Weltpolitik 9 1 1 

Wesseling, H.L. 407 

Wcyler, Valeriano 133, 343, 659, 887 

White, Andrew I). 917 

“white man’s burden” 4, 28 

Wilhelm II 945 

William II 914, 915 

Williams, Oscar E 4 1 0 

Williams, Raymond 84 

Wilson, Woodrow 473 

Wise, Hugh I). 567, 568 

Wolf, H. 412, 413 

Wo Iters, O.W. 740 

“Woman Question” 808, 820, 823 

Wood, James Earl 855 

Wood, Leonard 559 

Wood, Robert 427 

Woodson, Carter ( L 846 

Worcester, Dean (2 636, 1013, 1027, 

1 03 1 

World War II 589, 597, 615 
Wu Han-fang 474 


V u Ku.mg 685 

X 

\l)l Mill ( nil " l\ln 69 ’ 

Y 

Y.mgco, I uis EH. 080. | 068 

Yap Island 1 55 
Yluv, Agustm 588 
Ygua, I nsik 69 \ 

Ylao, 1 ms 1 1 I 
\ nandoni 109 
Young Filipinos C2 
Young, Samuel 868 
Younghusband. ( ,eorge [ohn » 08 . \ 
428, 930, *31 . HE , V| 
Ysavel, I )ona 1 0” 

Yu-dongco 69 } 

Yu- Kan 474 
Yulo, Jose Y. 465 
Yuson, Allred 50 -7 

z 

/aba 466 
Zalasar, I lilario 233 
Zamora, ( !arlos 546 
Zamora, Felipe 689, 1068 
Zamora, Jacinto 58, 90, 248, 690 
897, 986 

Zamora, Manuel 285 

Zanjon Peace 1 55 

Zapanta, Faustino Villareal 3H) 

zarzuela gnuule 593 

zarzuelas 83, 593 

Zhang Bing-1 in 697 

Zheng Bingshan 69 1 

Zhou Nanjing 69 1 

Zialcita, Fernando 1 69 

Zola, F’mile I 73 

ZOPAI) xx 

Zorrilla, Ruiz 1 55 

Zti Hohenlohe-Schillingsltierst 94 ^ 

Zultieta, (demente Jose 665 


REPUBLIC Or ; HP PHlLiPpr'cc 

L hi , ' 

P ‘ WE c ^re,VN(AL COMMJSfui 

1 H,s C0PV ls presented ra 


COMPLIMENT/j^y cgpy 







Wm 

1 <^p> ' '" v ** 

k «, : — ** 


... _ 

'MMni'i 

R';^|pjH!r^* v ■ r ' ijf ’ -i 



• ■ : k - 

ltft r ^ 

r**.\1\ V 


f jS j 



