" A leader of the masses who has in- 
variably emerged triumphant from political 
tempests quieting them with the magic 
trident of his personality; a hero in peace, 
as others had been heroes during the 
propaganda days and the revolution, who 
has by his glorious acts written his name 
forever into the history of our libertarian 
struggles — there, gentlemen, you have the 
silhouette of the leader, MANUEL L. 

QUEZON. ' 



Claro M. Recto 
President 
1934 Constitutional Cotivention 



1978 Manuel L. Quezon 
Centennial Souvenir Program 



FOREWORD 



he nation marks today the 1 00th birth anniversary of one of its distinguished sons — 
MANUEL L. QUEZON. 

Here in Quezon City, we remember him as the founder of this sanctuary of more 
than 1.4 million Filipinos, But to the nation, he is more than just a national leader after 
whom a city and a province was named. To those who knew the ravages of war, and to 
the youth who cherish freedom and dignity of a people, Quezon is a hero, a legend 
whose image lives for as long as the national flag reigns supreme over Philippine skies. 

As a fitting tribute, the 1978 Manuel L. Quezon Centennial Committee has deemed 
it proper to put out this souvenir program on the late president's life, his achievements, 
and the memoirs of those who were close to him. We have tried as faithfully as possible 
to record the events in his life — as a restless youth, a proud father, a fiery nationalist, a 

brUliant statesman, a great leader — hoping that we can understand him better and inspire 

US in our quest for nationalism. 

For us whose independence has been his greatest concern, we can offer no less than 
to remember him with the greatest esteem and honor that a people can give to its 
abdicated leaders. Let us celebrate his exploits. Let us be guided by his principles. Let us 
chermh his ideals. e ^ 




GERARDO G. MAGAT 
Chairrnan 
Subcommittee on Souvenir Program 



CONTENTS 



Foreword 2 

Me^aps ^ « 4 

IliiQ Gjiide #1 Ethics and Citizenship ^9 

Proclamation No. 1726 10 

Executive Order No , 502 12 

Manuel Luis Quezon 1878-1944 - 15 

Manuel L, Quezon at Close Range _35 

Manuel L. Quezon and I ^ 36 . 

Quezon as I Knew Him ^7 . 

Quezon and the Campaign for Philippine Indepe ndence 41 

Program of A ctivities -- August 18, 1978 ^49 

Commemorative Activities — August 19, 1978 50 

Quezon Partyless Democracy — Foreninner o f New Society S2. 

Quezon City: y From an Ardent D ream to a Gleamin g Reality 54 

Qu ezon Memorial Circle — A Tribute to a Beloved Le ader 59 

Manuel L. Quezon: Ama ng Wikang Pambansa ®2 

Ang Wikang Pambansa — Noon at Ngay on — — ®® 

Manuel L- Quezon The Legend that is . , . 68 

1978 — Manuel L. Quezon National Centennial Year 79 

The 1978 MLQ jfjatiQnal Centennial Celebr^tifm Eagej^^ C^mittee ^ ® | 
gubc0CTiiit^sM , Wi 

The 1978 Quezon City MLQ Centennial Celebration Com mittees 89 

Acknowledgments ^ 92 



3 




4 



TAN6GAPAN NG PANGULO N6 PILiPINAS 
(OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHLIPPINES) 



M E S S A G E 



On the centennial birth anniversary of President Manuel L. Quezon, we take 
occasion to pay homage to a foremost statesman, patriot, and leader. Althougn 
Quezon was not privileged to witness the full flowering of our independence, we 
remember him as one who endowed us with an unshakeable faith in ourselves ana 
who instilled in us the profound conviction that we can be masters of our own 
national destinjf. 

We. who are heirs to the visions and struggles of Quezon, must P'^f^f /'^f^ 
freedom to chart our own future. As we march along the road that takes us fatefuiiy 
to political normalization, we have much to learn from the counsel ofsustamea ana 
effective political action so eminently exemplified by Quezon. For we are now f^ea 
it essence by the challenge of national self-strengthening, of building the structures 
of a rtew politictU order on the basis of what we have achieved. 

It is incumbent upon us all to nurture our independence in "'f^'/'l^^ 
u^uld fulfill our deepest aspirations and promote national development Ana our 
^mmi^Tt to thU task wUl alone determine whether or not we are true and worth 
l7^ Tt^ ZoTand struggles of Manuel L. Quezon. I trust that f^occ^^on^ 
i^ire^ to draw wisdom from his deeds and teachings as we face the modem 
chaOenge of buUding a vigorous, dynamic, and prosperous society. 






We the citizens of this Republic are indebted to our forbears and leaders for 

our high privileges. . i 

We live in the dignity of a sovereign state. We shape our lives, our destmm^^ur 
national identity by our own hands. 

Democratic processes are maintained through the instrumentality of a 
^vemment shaped by ourselves. Notwithstanding critical situations in our national 
life, civil liberties are preserved and guaranteed to us by our fundamental laws. Our 
police and prosecution systems are not perfect. But in our judicial system delays to 
defeat tfte ends of justice are minimized, the rule of law is upheld, the majesty of 
human rights is respected. Our government leadership is bounded to us; its policies 
and objectives are responsive to our paramount interests. 

We are thus stiU supreme. Tyranny is not brooked; freedom is maintained; 
dictation, especially by mob action, is abhorred. We live in peace. Dissidence is 
controlled. We go about our tasks in tranquility. We look to the future with security. 

We have not attained the economic mUlenium; but with God's blessings, no one 
in our country dies of hunger; no one goes about naked; no one has no roof over his 
head. We have a government that is advancing the economic, the social and the 
cultural well-being of our people. 

There are not very many nations on the face of the earth where these blessings 
may be had as the normal conditions of life vouchsafed to their inhabitants. 

We often forget to remember and be grateful to those who lived lives dedicated 
to the maintenance of our freedoms, the attainment of rational progress, the 
advancement of the national economy, the promotion of our well-being. 

One of these men of revered memory, to whom we are dedicating this 
Centennial Year^ was Manuel L. Quezon. 

All facets of national development he coriceived were achievable through one 
inspiration — ruitionalism. 

"JVatidiurfigm," he said, "is a tremendous force that strengthens and solidifies a 
nation, that activates national interest, that preserves the best traditions of the past, 
that adds zest to the ambition of enlarging the inheritance of the future, that 
enriches the sum total of mankind's cultural, moral and natiorml poss^ions through 
th0 individml and characteristic contribution of each people. " I 




PIO PEDROSA 
CSiairman 



On iffie tk^^ first centennial celebration of the 

birth of the late President Manuel L. Quezon, it is my fervent hope that our people 
whom he served so loyally and with great distinction will always remember the great 
icfeiw ^mt iame fNm hIs fnkA imd the great deeds that he achieved for all of us, 
Quezon spent the last four decades of his eventful and fruitful life in the service of 
his country and people while holding the following positions: provincial fiscally 
provincial governor, delegate to Uie First Philippine Assembly, Resident 
Commissioner to the U.S.A., Senate President, and finally as First President of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

President Quezon left many and imperishable legacies to his fellow citizens 
among which may be mentioned his demonstrated courage in fighting for our 
freedom and independence in peace or war, his brilliant record as a young practising 
lawyer, his vigorous campaign for Philippine independence law in the United States 
of America from 1909 to his death in 1944, his skill and wisdom in the performance 
of his duties and responsibilities as Senate President and subsequently President of 
the Philippines, his dynamic and inspiring leadership not only of his political party 
but also of the country, his ardent nationalism, his unquestioned honesty and 
integrity as a public official, and his absolute loyalty and total dedication to^the 
welfare and happiness of his beloved Fatherland. 

It is also my hope that our people will continue to remember the great Quezon 
in the years to come and will forever bear in mind his appeal to all Filipinos, thus: 
*'My fellow citizens: There is one thought which I want you always to 
have in mind, and that is: that you are Filipinos, that the Philippine is your 
country and the only country God has given you; that you must keep it for 
yourselves, for your children, and your children's children, until the world is no 
more: and that you must live for it and die for it, if necessary. 

The Philippines of tomorrow will be the country of plenty, of happiness, 
and of freedom. It will be a Philippines with her head raised in the midst of the 
West Pacific, mistress of her own destiny, holding in her hand the torch of 
freedom and democracy and pointing the way to the teeming millions of Africa 
and Asia now suffering under alien rule: a Philippines, heir in the Orient to the 
teachings of Christianity; and a republic of virtuous and righteous men and 
women, all working together for a better world than the one we have at 
present*' 




Today marks the 100th birth anniversary of one of the great men who 
*° ^ founding of an independent nation in this land — 
MANUEL L. QUEZON. 

More than four decades ago, while the nation was in the throes of preparing the 
foundation of this Republic, President Quezon declared, "My task is not only to set 
up a government of tiie Commonwealth that will last for ten years but. to lay the 
foundation for the government of an independent state that will last as long as the 
world lasts, " 

To President Quezon, it was always ^'Country above everything else,'" His 
greatest desire was to see the Philippine flag fly high and supreme over Philippine skies. 
Although he passed away just when the dream he relentlessly pursued was almost a 
reality^ he left a priceless legacy of love for freedom and belief in our capability to 
govern ourselves. 

Today, we are one people united in spirit, vibrating with life and purpose and 
optimistic of the future because the foundation of this Republic is strong as ever 
and, with the Almighty's help, ''will last as long as the world lasts.'' 

What better Uibute could we offer him, whom we owe a lot of what we are 
now ? - 



(Mrs.) ADELINA S. RODRIGUEZ 
City Mayor i 



1 



QUEZON'S CODE OF CITIZENSHIP AND ETHICS 



J. Have Faith in the Divine Providence that guides the destinies of men 
and nations, 

2. Love your country for it is the home of your people, the seat of your 
affection and the source of your happiness and well-being. Its defense is 
your primary duty. Be ready to sacrifice and die for it if necessary. 

3. Respect the Constitution which is the expression of your sovereign 
will. The government is your government. It has been established for 
your safety and welfare. Obey the laws and see that they are observed 
by all and that public officials comply with their duties. 

4. Pay your taxes willingly and promptly. Citizenship implies not only 
rights but obligations. 

5. S^f^S^^^d if^^ purity of suffrage and abide by the decisions of the 
majority. 

& Love and respect your parents. It is your duty to serve them 
gratefully and well. 

7. Yalue your honor as you value your life. Poverty with honor is 
preferable to wealth with dishonor, 

8. Be truthful and be honest in thought and in action. Be Just and 
charitable^ courteous but dignified in your dealings with your 
fellowmen. 

9. L ead a clean and frugal life. Do not indulge in frugality or pretense. 
Be simple in your dress and modest in your behavior, ^^^r^ 

10. L up to the noble traditions of our people. Venerate the memory 
of our heroes. Their lives point the way to duty and honor. 

11. Be industrious. Be not afraid or ashamed to ^^^^^^^^ l^^^^^ 
Productive toU is conducive to economic security and aaas lo 
wealth of the nation. nnt easily 

12 Rely on your efforts for your progress and happmess. Be not easuy 
Sscouml^d. Persevere in the pursuit of your legitimate ambitions, 

13. Do your work cheerfully, thoroughly, and well Work badly done is 
worse than work undone. Do not leave for tomorrow what you can do 
today. 

14. Contribute to the welfare of your community and promote social 
justice. You do not live for yourselves and your family alone. You are a 
part of society to which you owe definite responsibilities, 

15 Cultivate the habit of using goods made in the Philippines. Patronize 
me products and trades of your countrymen. 

16 rise and develop our natural resources and conserve them for 
posterity. They are an inalienable heritage of our people. Do not traffic 
with your citizenship. 



MALACANAN PALACE 
MANILA 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

PROCLAMATION NO. 1726 

DECLARING 1978 AS MANUEL L. QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL 
YEAR AND DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL 
INSTITUTE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION. 

WHEREAS, the year 1978 marks the birth centenary of the late 
MANUEL LUIS QUEZON, first President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines and one of the foremost leaders and statesmen of our people; 

WHEREAS, President Quezon had served our country with great 
distinction in peace and war from the Revolutionary period in 1898 to the 
time of his death in 1944; 

WHEREAS, Quezon rendered signal service to our country and people 
as provincial fiscal, provincial governor, delegate to the First Philippine 
Assembly, Resident Commissioner to the United States, President of the 
Philippines Senate, and finally as President of the Philippines (1935-1944); 

WHEREAS, it is important that the valuable contributions of this great 
leader to the political emancipation of our people and the promotion of oiit 
national propess during his stewardship of the government be inculcated in 
the minds of our citizenry, particularly the youth of liie land; 

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the spirit of service and self -sacrifice 
demonstrated by President Quezon should always be remembered by the 
present and future generations of Filipinos; and 

WHEREAS, it is of prime importance that the heroic deeds and 
unquestioned loyalty and patriotism of this man from Baler should be 
projected and emulated; 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 
1978 as Manuel L. Quezon Centenary Year and designate the National 
Historical Institute to take charge of the celebration and to undertake the 
following activities in coordination with the Executive Committee created 
for the purpose: 



10 



1. Prepare the general program of the centenary and submit a copy 
of same to the President of the Philippines for his information; 

2. Promote and direct commemorative celebration throughout the 
Philippines; 

3. Collect, edit and publish the important speeches and state papers 
of President Quezon that have not yet been publfehed; 

4. Erect a fitting and inspiring monument or memorial in honor of 
President Quezon in places where it should be erected; 

5. Conduct a nationwide contest in painting and sculpture and in 
music that shall appropriately and properly honor Quezon; 

6. Initiate and sponsor the holding of a three-day Congress or 
Convention in Quezon City to the building and progress of the 
Filipino nation; and 

7. Coordinate with the Bureau of Posts relative to the issuance of 
commemorative stamps and cause the issuance of commemorative 
medals for the Quezon Centenary; 

January 9, 1974. 

The Institute is likewise empowered to caU on ^y^^^^':^"^; 
office or agency of tie government, indudmg °' 
controUed coiporatioiu,. for such Mrfstance as it may need m the discharge 
<rf its fUnctioil relative to the centenary celebration. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the 
seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st of March in the year of pur Lord, 
nineteen hnndxed and seventy ei^t. 

(S6D.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS 
President of Philippines 



By the President: 



(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA 
Presidential Assistant 



11 



MALACAf^iANG 
MANILA 



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 502 

CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE 
PLANNING AND EXECUTION OF COMMEMORATIVE ACTIVITIES 
FOR THE 1978 MANUEL L. QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL 
YEAR. 

WHEREAS, the year 1978 marks the birth centenary of the late 
MANUEL LUIS' QUEZON, first President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines and one of the foremost leaders and statesmen of our country; 
and 

WHEREAS, it is deemed proper and fitting to commemorate his 
Gentennial year with appropriate activities and/or ceremonies to impress our 
people of the invaluable contributions of this great leader to the political 
emancipation of our nation and the enhancement of our national growth; 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the 
PhSippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby 
constitute and create an Executive Committee to formulate plans and devise 
ways and means for the successful execution of appropriate activities and/ or 
ceremonies for the commemoration of the 1978 Manuel L. Quezon National 
Centennial Year. The Committee shall be composed of the following: 

Hon. Pio Pedrosa Chairman 
Hon. Jorge B. Vargas Co-Chairman 
Hon. Emilio Abello 

Hon. Aniceto Alcala, " 

Governor of Quezon Province 
Hon. Adelina S. Rodriguez " 

Mayor of Quezon City 
Hon. Luis Etcubanez, Vice-Chairman 

Lieutenant Governor, 

Sub-province of Aurora 
Hon. Estrello T. Ong, 

Mayor of Baler, Quezon 



Hon. Jose Rono, Minister of Local Vice Chairman 

Government and Community Development 
Hon. Juan Manuel, Minister of Education 

and Culture 

Hon. Cesar Virata, Minister of Finance Member 
Hon. Juan Ponce Enrile, 

Minister of National Defense 
Mrs. Zenaida Quezon Avancena 
Mr. Manuel L. Quezon, Jr. ^ 
Rev. Pacific o Ortiz 
Mr. Serapio Canceran 
Hon. Esteban de Ocauipo 

Three other members appointed by the President of the Philippines, 

The Committee shall coordinate with the National Historical Institute 
which is designated in a separate proclamation to coordinate with the 
Committee in the celebratiqn Of the centennial year. The Chairman is hereby 
empowered to request any agency of the Government to assist in the 
discharge of the Committee's functions and duties and to designate such 
personnel it may require for the purpose. 

The Budget Commission is hereby dhrected to appropriate the amount 
of P500,000 out of the funds of the National Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated to carry out the commemorative activities and/or ceremonies 
the Committee vrill undertake. 

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of April, in the year of our 
Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-«ight. 



(SOD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS 
Ptesident of the Philippines 



By the Pn^ident: 

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA 
Fr^idential Assistant 



13 



1878-1944 

One hundred yeais ago, whfle churchbells were ringing to usher the. 
feast day of San Luis, a child was bom to a Spanish speaking couple 
in Baler, Tayabas. The child was christened Manuel Luis, the second 
name after the town's patron saint 

The mother, Maria Dolores Molina, was a beautiful Spanish m^fiza 
and a school teacher for girls. She was a devout Catholic and she wished 
her son would someday become a priest. The father, Lucio Quezon, was 
a retired sergeant of the regiments 'of the Spanish Army and a sdiool 
teacher for boys. He wished his son would someday become a soldier. 

The couple had a joint income of 1»12.00 monthly and owned a 
2-acre rice land. Being the only FUipino family who spoke Spanish and 
could converse with the three Spanish officials in the town, they were 
h^hly regarded in the community. 

The young Manuel learned his fust lessons in Spanish, arithmetic 
and cathechism from his mother. From his father, he learned lessons in 
honesty - "A liar deserves no respect Always tell the truth regwdless of 
the consequences" — which had become his guiding principle m life. 

When he was seven years old, he was sent to live with Father 
Teodoro Fernandez, a Franciscan friar, to study religion, geography, 
history and Latin. When Father Fernandez was transferred to Manila, 
Manuel, who was then nine years old, went and stayed with the good 
priest at the Franciscan convent where he worked as a messboy while 
studying at San Juan de Letran College. When Father Fernanda! was 
reassigned to the province, Manuel transferred to his father's cousm. He 
didn't stay long in that house because of the distance to the school 
which he had to walk four times daily. He entered as a boarder at 
Letran. 

Young Manuel's penchant for breakii^ rules always broi^t him to 
an audience with his teachers. His honesty, however, always spared him 
from the rod- the common means of discipline during those days. He 
excelled as an athlete in track and field, a triaining which proved useful 
during his guerilla days. 

With his diploma in Bachelor of Arts, Summa Cum Laude safely 
tucked in his baggage, he went home to Baler one summer vacation only to 
find his mother ill with tubereulods. Upon his mdther's death, his father 
revealed to him their financial indebtedness. Unless he found means 
to support himsetf through college, he just had to stop. When classes 
reopei;ied Manuel weiit back to Manila accompanied by his father. He 
^nt to the University of Santo Tomas and presented himself to the 
Duectof of Interns, Father Tamayo, who had been his professor in 
Letran. He was granted free tuition, room and boaid in exchangie for his 
tutoringjervices to students who needed coachinf! in Math. Assured of 



IS 



Manuel's capability to handle crises ta life, Lucio Quezon took him aside 
and said, "My son, I shall be going back home in two hours, I won't 
bother you with any advice. Just be good to yowt feUowmen. No matter 
how high your station in life may be, never forget that you came from 
poor paients and that you belong to the poor. Don't forsake them, 
whdtever happens," 

That proTCd to be the last conversation between father and son for 
when Quezon went home to Baler after the occupation of Manila by the 
U,S. Army, he found out that his father together with his brother had 
been xaurdered by Hhe bandits. 




Law Studies 

/i t UST, he established friendship with Sergio Osmena, Sr. and 
Vicente Madrigal, two friends who later on played important roles 
ill hii lifa He also made acquaintance with Emilio Jacinto who became 
l&e secretary of the Katipunan and Flaviano Yenko who became a 
general in Aguinaldo's Army. 

During his fhst year of Law at UST, there was an incident that 
ahnoet sidetracked his studies in Law. There was an old Dommican priest 
wlio for reasons known only to him advised Quezon to tBke up a course 
in dogmatic theology. Remembering his beloved mother, he gave the 



16 



fonnerly his teacher at Letran and who therefore knew him too well 
Father Vaquero's reaction upon seeing Quezon in his room was that of 
disbelief. When Quezon, in a voice that he purposely made to sound 
meek as was expected of a would-be priest, explained that he was going 
to study priesthood. Father Vaquero roared in laughter and said ''Who 
deceived you into believing that you can be a priest? Get out of here 
and proceed with your law course." And out went the ex-future priest. 



Wl 



Philippine Revolution 
'hen the U.S. Army occupied Manila, law classes were closed and 
- - Quezon went home. (That was when he found out about his 
father's death). The Americans won the war and a peace ^^^^^^ 
Spain and the United States was signed ^^^"^^'ZTJS^r^Z 
Mppines from the former to the latter. 

FiUpSo revolutionaries who were made to believe that if the Filipmos 
hZd tiie Am«icans against ihe Spaniards, f ependence wo^be 
graited by the United States. Upon signing ^^^^^^J? ^"Jj' ^f^^ 
created and sent the First PhiUppine Commission to "^PP^^'?^ 
the instructions that their purpose was not to subjugate the FQipmos but 
to educate and train them in the art of self-govemment. _ .„^^„ 
Meanwhile Emilio Aguinaldo. leader of the Phihppme ^ev^u^on 
convened at Malolos the first FiUpino Congress and the JPhihppme 
Republic was formally proclaimed. Hostilities between Americans and 
Filipinos worsened. , ^, 

On February 4, 1899, Manuel L. Quezon made the decision that 
from then on he would cease to be a mere obseryer_ m his country s 
struggle for independence. He went to Villacorta m Pantaban^ and 
offered his services. He was commissioned 2nd "tJTJ^ 
swiffly promoted to Ist Ll. by Gen. Llanera for captunng ^'^^^^^ 
roaming Ihe town of Aliaga, Cabanatuan. lUter, Gen. ^'J"® 
transferred his seat of government to Cabanatuan ^d Q«ezon was 
detailed to form part of Ws staff. One of the assignment he sucoe^idly 
carried out was to accompany Gen. Benito Natividad, one of the nght 
hand men of Gen. Luna, who was Wounded in the battle of Calumpit, to 
Bayambang in a hammock. Foi this, he was immediately promoted to 
Captain Bored with office work and ashamed of having reaching the 
rank of Captain without participating in actual battle, he requested for 
an assignment to the front He Dwa assigned to Gen. Mascardo in Porac, 
Fampaaga and there he was an eyewitness to the lopsidedness of the war. 
He later wrote, "Filipino courage matched old Spanish arms but the 
Filipino-American war Was no war. It was slaughter, plain and simple," 
Mal:aiiji epidemic hit the Filipino forces in the jun^es of Bataan and 
Quezon was not spared. 



17 




When news ol Agumaldo s capture 
hy Gen. FuMtcrti in I^kiimti reaeh^ Geri. 
Mascardo, Quezon was ordered to verify 
the report. Thus one early morning in 
April 1901, Quezon, haggard and ema - 
ciated, surrendered to Lt, Miller at the 
slope of Mariveles mountain, Lt, Miller 
brought him to Maiacanang where Gen, 
Arthur MacArthur (fath&r of Domgtes 
MacArthur) showed him Gen, Aguinaldo ^ 
a prisoner, defeated and helpless, "i felt 
the world crumble before me," he said of 
liis poignant meeting with liis chief. 

, While trying to adjust his life to the 
new era, he stayed with the Alberts at Ron- 
quillo St. in Sta, Cruz. One day* without 
warning nor explanation, he was arrested 
and imprisoned at Postigo gate, a dungeon 
where about thhly Filipinos practically slept 
on top of each other. When he was released, 
he was a sick man suffering of a nervous 
breakdown. He was confined at San Juan de 
Dios. Once he recovered, he landed a job as 
clerk in Monte de Piedad. 

Law Practice 

In April 1903, Quezon was admitted 
the Bar, (The American government 
enacted a law allowing anyone who has 
finished three years of law studies to pibac^ 
tice law after passing the bar exams.) Tie 
joined the law firm of Francisco Ortigas with 
a starting salary of F I 50 .00 a month plus the 
right to accept his clients. Not long after 
he opened his own law office and was 
swamped with clients. He set a double 
standard policy with his fees; the rich 
he charged dearly and the poor he served 
gratis^ 

Jn October 1903, he went back to 
TayabdS to take up a case against a man 
who falsified his father's signature m 
acquire their 2 -acre farm. Il« won th^ 
case. He was offered the post of pro- 
vincial fiscal in Mindoro and after six 
months m that place he was ,tJilj|S£^ia®d 
|0 T^ltlgatS. 



The Mason Case 




Senate President Manuel L. Quezon and 
Speaker af the Hotm Ss^^ Qsmem, Sr, 



WhUe fiscia of TayjJbas he handled a celebra- 
ted case which involved a lawyer, Mr. Ma- 
son (a fictitious name), who wanted to register 
in his name different deeds of sale of agricultural 
lands. (At that time, fiscals were at the same 
time registrars of deeds) Quezon took the papers 
but due to the volume of work he was preoccu- 
pied with he was not able to attend to it. A week 
later, Mr. Mason's secretary inquired about the- 
papers and Quezon told him he has not attended 
to it yet. One hour later Mr. Mason stormed mto 
Quezon's office and demanded that he register 
the deeds of sale wittiout delay. The Quezommi 
temper came to force: he got hold of ^ ink- 
stand and ordered Mason out of the office or 
else he'U smash the Ihing on his fece. When 
Mason left, Quezon examined ttie papers 
and found to his consternation that the do- 
cuments covered sales of thousands acres of 
lands planted with about 50,000 coconut trees 
including 2 to 3 hundred workmg ^J^ft^^ 
the total cost of the properties exceeded P60,^ 
000.00. This led him to investigate and ne 
found out that the owners of these properties 
were in jail. Mr. Mason had offered to defend 
them for P300.00 each, the amount to be paid 
onde they out of jail but as a guarantee he de- 
manded their land with the coconut trees and 
working animals. They had signed the docu- 
ments WiHidut understasidihg a WPi^ w it- 

Quezon filed 25 estafa cases against Mr. Ma- 
son. Mr. Mason got four of the best lawyers in 
Manila to defend him. The case attracted atten- 
tion because it was the fir.st tim« since the Ame- 
rican occupation that an American and a Iqwyer 
at that has been the subject for prosecution by a 
Mlipino prosecutor. Quezon finally won the case 
a^d My. Mason wpuid have been imprisoned had 



When Quezon ran for Governor of Tayabas in 1905, he won 
overwhehningly. The same happened when he ran for a seat in the 
Philippine Assembly in 1907. He was voted Floor Leader (Sergio Osmena 
was the Speaker of the House) and was appointed Chairman of the 
Conmxittee on Appropriationsw 

Resident Commissioner 

During the American regime, the Philippines was represented m the 
United States Congress by two Resident Commissioners. Quezon 
was interested in this position. When the Philippine Assembly received an 
invitation to the International Congress of Navigation in Russia, Quezon 
volunteered thmking that the experience would get him nearer to the 
post of Resident Commissioner. He arrived in Russia too late for the 
Congress but the trip gave him a glimpse of the conditions in other 
countries like Japan, Berlin, Paris and the U.S. 

At the last session of the Philippine Assembly, he was elected 
Resident Commissioner to the U.S. to succeed Pablo Ocampo. On 
December 24, 1909, he arrived in Washington to assume the post he 
coveted most. 

English Lessons 

Until he became Resident Commissioner, Quezon didn't know how 
to speak English. His education was all under Spanish friars and his 
anti- American feelings kept him determinedly privy from English. 

During his term as Fiscal of Tayabas the American governor of 
Tayabas, Col Bandholtz, offered to teach him English and they sat down 
for a few lessons which made little progress due to the pressures of their 
work. 

As Resident Commissioner he realized that his language handicap 
was a major obstacle in the performance of his duties. He hired a teacher 
to give him lessons in grammar but after fifteen lessons he figured it 
would take him a long time to be able to speak English foUovdng the 
standard method of learning. He was impatient because he wanted to 
deliver his first speech in the U.S. Congress. He embarked on a 
conscientious selfHstudy with the aid of Spanish-English dictionary, 
newspapers, magazines and book& He attended social affairs without the 
aid of an interpreter. 

One day in May, five months after his arrival, he stood before he 
membees of the U.S. Congress land eloquently conveyed the Filipino 
people^s earnest degij^ for independence, "Ask the bird, Sir, who is 
enclosed in a gojden cage if he would prefer his cage and the care of the 
owner to the freedom of the ^ies and the allure of the forest.'* 



20 



President Quezon before tite 
IZft Cangresa, 




Jones Law 

Quezon's most significant achievement while ^^^4^"^?*,?''^^ 
was the passage of the Jones Act whidi provided that the Filipino 
people will be granted mdependence as soon as a stable govemmeet is 
established in the Philippines. 

He resigned as Resident Commissioner and without engaging m a 
pohtieal campaign he was elected Senator and eventually benate 
President 

In 1918, Quezon headed the first Independence Misfsipn td U.S. to 
submit to the U.S, Congress the petition of the Filipino people foi? 
independence. Aboard the ship was his cousin-fiancee Aurora Aragon- 
Wien the Shinyo Mam docked in Hongkong in December 14, 1918, 
Manuel L, Quezon *ad Aipoxii Aragon got married in a simple 



21 

i 



at the American Consulate. Three days later, a simple chutch wedding 
was solemnized at the Catholic Cathedral in Hongkong, 



Dona Aurora 

'T^ he quiet wedding was the culmination of 12 years of engagement. 

X Way back during the American occupation of Manila when Quezon 
went home to Baler and leamed that his father passed away, he stayed 
with his mother's sister, Zeneida, who had two dau^ters» one of whom 
was Aurora. Later, when he became Fiscal of Tayabas, he returned the 
kindness by inviting his widowed Aunt Zeneida and her daughters to live 
with him, Aurora was then a blooming teenager who had ambitions of 
becoming a teacher. Quezon sent her to the Philippine Normal School in 
Manila. 

Quezon was ahceady governor of 
Tiyabas when he and Aurora realized 
they were in love. Doha Zeneida ob^ 
jected to then- marriage and it was 
only the year after the matriarch of 
the family had passed away that they 
were able to follow the dictates of 
their heart. Dona Aurora proved to be 
a perfect wife> capable and under- 
standing* to the debonair and dynamic 
Quezon, In his book, the Good Fight, 
he wrote, ''Twenty four years of 
married Ufe with the same wife have 
proved that matrimonial happiness 
does not depend upon the noise of the 
wedding* Nor for that matter upon 
closing one's eyes to the sight of other 
beaulaes and running away from their 
company during the period df one^s 
engagement." 

Ihe couple had four children: 
Maria Aurora (who in April 1949, 
died in an ambush together with Dona 
Atirora and brother-in-law, Philip 
Buencamino III), Maria Zeneida (now 
Mrs. Avancefia), Luisa Gorazon Paz 
(who died in infimcy) and Maauel, Jr. 



The first First FmtSy in Malacanang. 
From left, younger daughter Maria 
Zemida; First Lady, Dona Aurora; 
elder daughter Maria Aurora,* Prem- 
dent Qu^m G^d son Mmml 




m 



T 



Fbad to Malacanang 
he years that preceded his presidency were years of unceasing 
campaign for Phflippine independence (See Quezon and The 
Campaign for Philippine Independence, page 41). When he returned 
home from the U.S. on April 30, 1934 after the Tydings-Mc-Du£fie Iaw 
which created the Commonwealth and set the date of Philippine 
Independence to July 4, 1946 had been approved by Pres. Roosevelt, he 
was given a hero's welcome and his overwhelming victory in the 
Presidential election that year was proof of his tremendous popularity. 

On the morning of November 15, 1985, before the high digmtaries 
of the U.S. government and thousands of Filipino people who came for 
the historic occasion, Manuel Luis Quezon, newly inducted first president 
of the Commonwealth of the PhiUppines exhori»d his countrymen to 
"help build a government that must not only satisfy fl»e passmg needs of 
the hour but also the exacting demands of the future." 

Laying the Foundations 

Save for the difference in curcumstances, the Quezon that entered l^e 
portals of Malacanang in November 1935 was not unlike the 
Quezon who faced Gen. Arthur Mac Arthur in April 1901.. He was still 
the same soldier locked in his coimtry 's struggle for independence. He was 
still ibe same man aflame with aspirations and vision for the Filipino 
nation. 

This time, however, he didn't feel "the world crumbling before 
him." He saw a bright horizon beckoning the nation that had bestovrod 
upon him its supreme trust and confidence. 

The policies and laws that were enacted during his administration 
reflected his areas of concern, his sensitive grasp of the peoples 
sentiments and his uncanny foresight to the needs 6f the futujfe 
generation. _ ^ , 

The first law of the Philippine Commonwealth was the National 
Defense Act which provided the establishment of a national defense 
force President Quezon asked Gen. Douglas MacArthur, then the chief 
of staff of the U.S. Army to be tiie adviser of the Philippme 

Commonvroalth. «j«^„w« 
Steps to improve tiie pUght of the common man were undertaken 
which resulted in tiie enactment of tiie Minimum Wage Act and the 
Baght-Hour Labor Act. The first fixed tiie mmimum wage at Pl.OO a day 
and the second provided tiiat workers should work only eight hours a 
day dafly in order that tfiey can have time for recreation and rest. 

Social justice was one cause Quezon unceasingly championed. He 
pioneered the land reform concept whereby large estates were purchased 
by the government and resold to the tenants in smaU lots on easy 
terms of payment. 



November 16^ 1935. Manuel L, Quezon taking his 
oath as the first President of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth. Below^ the crowd that witnessed the 
historic occasion. 



He gave full support to woman suffrage: **One reason which 
motivated me to sign the Woman Suffrage bill is the thought which I 
hate in the future, when I am dead, my daughters will receive orders 
from the gove]^^^ of the Philippines on matters affecting their 
famUies, &eir lives^, ilieir happinefis and yet th^ will not have any say on 
the matter," 

He designated Tagalog as the basis for a national language: "We may 
borrow for a time the language of other people but we cannot truly 
possess a national language except throu^ the adoption and use of oAe 
of our own,'" 

On November 11, 1941, flie Filipino people went to the polls f6f 
the second time Quezon was reelected for another term. 

The Filipino nation's journey towards stabQity and independence 
was interrupted one morning by an infamous act that dragged the wbolif 
Asia and for that matter the whole world, mto turmoil ' ~ 



The Second World War 



D<|^vmb(^r 1941. V\^Ue Pres, Quezon was in Baguio with his 
aughter /.eneida, son Nonong and his private secretary Serapio D. Cance- 

thr. ), Secretary Vargas called up from ManUa to announce 

rnn*H u ''^ ^'^^^^ ^^^^ Pearl Harbor had been bombed. Pres. Quezon 
uuian I bdieve it but when Japanese planes roared over PhUippine sky 

aJid homhed Camp John Hay, he 

kniiw it was only the be^ning of 

ghmmer events to come, 

^ Nicto arrived late in the 

aftenuion Lo fetch the President 

and reported that Clark Air Base 

had been bombed. They f)a.s^ed by 

the Quezon Family farm in Arayat, 

Pampanga and picked up Dona Au^ 

rora and Baby. Upon arrival in their 

Marikina house he learned that Ni- 

rhols Air Base had also been 

bomfjcd. Me immediately convened 

th*» CouncO ©f State. The meeting 

undpf Ihi^ mango tree in Marikina 

b<??**tim** a daily scene until their de- 

[>artu ra fdr G&tm^doj. 



The Council of State meeting under 
the mungo irge. 




Top left: Four days before 
Christmas, President Quezon 
communicates to the people via a 
radio broadcast from the air raid 
shelter in Marikina. Behind are 
Secretary Vargas and PLOT Pre- 
sident Joe SteuenoL Son Nonong 
i*m h0 seen at the background. 

Top right: Gen. Douglas Mac Ar- 
thur arrives in Marikina to greet 
President Quezon on his wedding 
mniuersary^ 

Right: His weary face reflecting 
the turmoil the country wa^ in. 
President Quezon prepares the 
government for an emergency si- 
tuation. With the President are, 
from left. Secretary Vargas, Gen. 
Valdez, Justice Secretary Josr 
Laurel and Chief Justice Jose 
Abad 3anto$, 



Mra Quezon, Mrs. Mac Arthur, Pre- 
sident Quezon, young Mac Arthur and 
Baby Quezon in front of a tunnel in 
Corregjidor. 



Meainvvhile, Gen. Homma's forces were 
closing in on Manila from north to south. 
On December 12, 1941, Quezon was in- 
fotmed by Gen. MacArthurof theplan to 
evacuate to Corregidor. He first refused to 
evacuate because he felt he should be with 
his people in their darkest hours. Mac Ar- 
thur explained that his personal safety 
was not a personal matter but of great im- 
portance to the government of the Phflip- 
pines which he was head. As long as he 
was free, the occupation of Manila or even 
the entire Philippines by the Japanese 
government would not have the same sig- 
nificance under international law as when 
he had been captuied. 

On December 18, President Quezon 
took Dona Aurora to see the destrui::tions 
m the city. Ibis was the last time he was 
seen by his people. 

On the morning of December 24 1941 
Quezon caUed his last cabinet meeting. 
H18 final instruction was, "Do everything 
m your power to minimize the sufferings 
of the civilian population/' 




In the afternoon, he left for Corregidor. With him were members of 
hig fimfly. Vice President Sergio Osmefia, Sr., Chief Justice Jose Abad 
Santos, Major General Basilio Valdez, Col. Manuel Nieto, Dr. Andreas 
Trepp(a Swiss lung specialist). Dr. Benvenuto Dino, Col.Egmidio Cruz, 
Rev. Fr. Pacifico Ortiz and Serapio Canceran. 

U.S. High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre, Gen. Mac Arthur and 
members of their family and staff were also in Corregidor. 

President Quezon and his family stayed in Malinta Tunnel. The 
mental and emotional anguish, the dust and the dampness of tiie tunnel 
all conspired in ravaging his health. His tuberculosis had recurred and he 
was constantly seized with fits of heavy cou^iugXHe was once confined 
of TB in a nanitailnm in Mbniovia) GiOifomlja.) 



Off to Aostrafia and tiie U.S. 



Amidst the craahing echoes of war, Pres Quezon took his oath of 
ofGee for tiie second term before Chief Justice Abad Santos in solemn 
Ibiialgiiral ceremonies in Corregidor. 

The worsening situation necessitated their transfer to the an occu- 
pied territory of the Philippines. On Feb .'20, 1942, they left Corregidor 
for the Vis ay as in two groups: President Quezon and bis family. Vice 
President Osmena, Sr., Chief Justice Abad Santos, Gen, Valdez, Father 
Ortiz and Col, Nieto went aboard the submarine Sword fish. Lt. Col 
Jaime Velasquez, Andres Soriano, Dr. Trepp, Dr, Dino, Col. Cruz, Sera- 
pio Canceranwent aboard the inter-island steamer, Don Esteban. They 
rendezvoused in Antique and proceeded tolloilo, Negros and later to Min- 
danao. Abad Santos decided to stay behind in the Visayas where he was 
later executed by the Japanese for his refusal to take his oath of afle- 
giance to the Japanese government. From Mindanao, they enplaned to 
Australia, where they boarded the luxury linexFresident Coolidge for San 
Francisco where they took a special train to Washington. 

Upon their arrival in Washington in May 1942, Pres. Quezon imme- 
diately put the Philippine Commonwealth govemment-in-exfle to func- 
tion. He addressed both Houses of the U.S. Congress urging the libera- 
tion of the Philippines. He was constantly in conference with President 
Roosevelt. He participated actively in the meetings of tiie Pacific War 
Council and^aM^ne of the s^atories of the Atlantic Charter- 




President Quezon and his /itmiy bmgM^ &3? Pi^^mi Siommlt 
their Qfiivid m Washington. 



He attended to all these despite his worsening health conditio^. 
Pres. Quezon's term was supposed to have expired Dec. 30» 1943* 
"Hie U,S. Congress, howevei;* passed a joint resolution providing for the 
extension of the term of office of the President and Vice President of the 
Philippines imtil the restoi^ation of .tiie Commonwealth government in 
the Islands. 

But tiiere comes a time in the life of every man when the d^ire to 
live in order to accomplish a noble task is not enou^ to hold the mortal 
body together- The President's lung aihnent took a turn for the worse* 
He was moved to a sanitariimi in Saranac Lake» New York. In bed, chil- 
ling and coughing, he was perpetually worried about the Filipino people 
— the @9unt men and women who were counting on the promised libefiei^ 



The Pacific War CouncU. Great Britain^s Prime Minister Wmston ChWchM 

and US. President Franklin D. Roosevelt are seofed in /hmfc jPlN^d^mt 
Manuel Quezon is second from right ' ' 



tion. He wrote to Gen. Mac Arthur expressing his earnest desire to join 
i^e liberation forces even if he was to be carried in a hammock. Gen. 
Mae Arthwi^^ im. a pledge, "I wfll btingyou in tiiumiai to Mtofla 
at file point of my sword ." 

Gen. Mac Arthur never got to fulfill his pledge. In fhe mammg of- 
Ai^t 1, 1944, e^hteen days before his sixty -sixth birttiday, Manuel L. 
Quezon, paladin of Philippine Independence, passed aw^. 

"Of all men of all time", Gen Mac Arthur eulo^zed. "None mote 
truly merited the appellation of Patriot-Statesman. Few could, as he, re- 
place the uniform of the soldier with mantle of statescraft, yetmamtam 
with a voice and pen in undiminished vigor tfae ciusading fight ?i toe self- 
same cause forwhich he had fought by toe violence of anns. (ETT) 



Present Quezon handing Col. Egmidio Cruz his decoration for accom- 
pliOtingtt aecKt mission during the war as Dr. Benvenuto Dino lookn on. One- 
•esf last pictures taken of the sick President at Saranac Lake. 



\ 




m 




A fter two years in Arlington Cemetery be$ide the Hmmortals" of the Uni^ 
ted States of America, President Quezon^s remains were brought home and 
interred at the North Cemetery on August X» 1946. Photo shows the caisson 
becBTing his renuuns approaching the grweisi^i 



34 



I 



MANUEl L QUEZON AT CLOSE RANGE 



'*It was o^-when I saw him lying lifeless 
(moments aftesr te expired) did I realize how 
feifly great tihe man was," recalls Serapio Can- 
ceran, private SQCmt2Ty to President Quezon for 
seven years. '*As they say, you never realize the 
telfi i?^a^ n i^mgmM'fmi Um It:" 

From March 1937 until the last day of Pre- 
sident Quezon's life, Mr. Canceran was with him, 
aaraaifete ^eti needed. **H©^fe#ei7e<! tib 
|g^ar hours/' Mr. Canceran relates. Regardless 
W^efbei; it was high noon or midnight, if he re- 
meiJibered something impdrtint, he would ask 
Adong, his valet to call me. 'Canceran, Cance- 
ran/ Adong would wake me up in the middle of 
the night. *You are called.' In my drowsiness, 1 
would asks 'By whom?" and Adong would reply, 
'Who " Who else indeed but the impulsive 
ga4 unpredictable Manuel L. Quezon. 

One had to be always on his toes when 
workmg with iSie indefatigable President. Even 
now, Mr. Canceran's face light up in affection 
and admiration when reminiscing his days with 
the great patriot- It was not seldom, though, 
thajt he found himself on the uncomfortable end 
p£ tbe President's famous emotional outbursts, 
jiife^: ii^ fiSae Don Alejandro Roces, owner of 
tliife ffVT newspaper chain, excitedly mentioned 



to the l^esident he was sending to Manila (they 
were in Davao) a copy of Canceran 's notes on 
his just-concluded speech. Without ascertaining 
if Canceran had indeed committed his notes to 
Don Alejandro, President Quezon berated him in 
public. Canceran felt so bad he thought of le- 
^gniiig. In tile evening. President Quezon spot- 
ted Canceran moping at the deck of the Presi- 
cfential yatch, Casiana. "Canceran," he called. 
"Have you had your supper yet?" When he an- 
swered in the negative, the President put his arm 
around him and said, ''Come on, let's eat. "How 
can yoii hazbor ill-fedingis towaid such a man I 

Manuel L. Quezon was a colorful personality 
with an unerring sense of drama. He possessed 
that magnetic combination of charisma and ma- 
chismo, which attracted a multitude of out- 
stretched hands and adoring faces wherever he 
went. He trusted his people and minted witti 
them sans overbearing security men. 

His prescience was remarkable. He once 
remarked, "I hafve a haunting feeling ^at T shaU 
not live to see the Philippine Independence." 
True enough. He died two years before his 
dream of Philippine Indepexidence becarhe a 
reality. 



President Quezon with his 
family and some members of 
his Staff m Washington. Stami- 
ing from left: Serc^io D. 
Canceranj Col Jaime Velas- 
quezp Gen, BmUo Valdez, Col 
Bgmidio CrmSf mid Pacifi- 




It has been a rare privilege for me to 
have knowTij worked with and served 
under all our PresidentSj from Quezon to 
Marcos: Quezon and Osmena during the 
Commonwealth regime; Laurel during the 
short Hved Japanese sponsored Republic 
of the Philippines and Roxas, Quirino, 
Magsaysayj Garcia, Macapagal and Marcos 
since tlie establishment of the Republic of 
the Philippines, historically tJie third 
republic. 

Deeds are more eloquent than words. 
Judge a man by hfe acts and not by his 
words. A man's character may be gleaned 
&om the way he conducts himself- The 
life of any man^ and especially that of 
great men, is full of incidents which 
illustrate his true nature, his character. I 
personally know of many incidents which 
vividly portray the character of Ftie^dent 
Quezon. 

A few months before the general 
elections of 1928, Senate President 
Quezon and Speaker Roxas, with some 
Cabinet members and other high officials, 
visited Cagayan, possibly to assess the 
political situation and endorse the 
candidates of the Nacionalista party. I was 
then the Provincial Governor of Cagayan. 
Although I belonged to the Democrata 
Party, the opposition, I invited the 
l^rovincial and municipal <rfficials, 
prominent persons and political leaders of 
the province to come to Tuguegarao to 
meet the Quezon-Roxas party. President 
Quezon and Speaker Roxas had occasion 
to confer with the local officials and with 
the political leaders of the Nacionalista 
Party, I do ndt know what transpired in 
their private conference with the lq(ja! 
Nacionalista leaders. 



MANUEL L. QUEION AND I 

by 

Ambassador Proceso E. Sebastian 




I 



Ambassador Proceso Sebastian has the 
rare distinction of having served in aU the 
branches — executive, legislative, and judi- 
ciary — of the government. He was a mem- 
ber of the fnst PaiUamentaiy Mission and 
2nd Independence Mission to USA. His 
ambaasadotial stints have brought him to 
China (Nanking), Rome, Brussels, Holland 
and Indonesia. Now ^6, he spends most of 
Ua tinie wilting lilii mernc^. 



( Continued on page 38) 



OUEZON AS I KNEW HIM 

by / 

Ambassador Jose S. Iiaurel III 




Ambassador Laural belongs to the poU- 
ttcaDy &mous Laurels of BBtaiig&& He ob> 
tained his B.S. degree from Imperial 
Military Academy of Japan, U.B from 
MLQU, and Ll.M from UP. He had served as 
ambassador to Japan and chaiiman of the 
Philippine Panel, Philipptnes4«pan Joint 
Commission. He is presently the president of 
The Philippines-Japan Society md Philippine 
Ambasfiadom Associatloii. 



My knowtedge of President Manuel L. 
Quezon was derived mainly from the 
brief stint I served, when I was still a 
young man, as his junior military aide. 
Tbat was during the period from 1938 to 
1941, or, more correctly, during 2 years 
of this period. 

In 1934, while only 20 years of ^e, I 
was on my way to Rollins College in 
Florida, U.S.A., on a scholarship grant. 
When my ship stopped over in Hon^ong, 
I was surprised to receive a cryptic 
telegram from my father instructing me to 
proceed directly to Japan and enroll 
instead at the Imperial Military Academy. 
I did so without question, as was expected 
then of a good son, but also not without 
wonder. Later I was to find out that it 
was Quezon who had su^ested the 
sudden change of plans. 

Quezon explained to my father that 
there were enough Filipino students going 
then to the United States and that in any 
case we knew enough about that country. 
By contrast, our knowledge of Japan was 
virtually nil. Quezon felt that Japan was 
the emerging power in Asia and that, 
therefore, we should know more about 
that country. My father agreed. 

Being the first FUipino to be admitted 
by what was then the West Point of 
Japan, I must admit I had a difficult time 
specially durmg the initial years. But, as 
they say, hard wotk and persewrance 
finally willed out and in 1938 I was able 
to complete my course of study including 
the required tour of duty at the Imperial 
Guards Division. In the same year I was 
commissioned by the Commonwealth 
Government probationary 3rd lieutenant 
in the Philippine Army. And it was in this . 
capacity that I was soon enough pulled 
out from my assignment with GHQ and 



37 



Reminiscences 



Ambassador Sebastian ; 



During the public meeting at the town 
plaza of Tuguegarao, after informing our 
distmguished visitors of tiie needs of the 
province and our request for help as 
stated by the previous local ^eakers. 
President Quezon got up and among other 
thmgs said: 

"I am a great admirer of Governor 
Sefbau^tian. He went with me to the U.S. as 
a member of the First Pairliamentary 
Mission. I must confess that I have learned 
to like him and admire him. As you 
probably have read in the papers, when 
Governor Wood gave a luncheon at 
Malacanang in honor of the provincial 
governors, I asked Governor Sebastian to 
speak for the Governors.'' 

"Governor Sebastian is not only a 
very competent and very able man, but" 
he continued, "he has a very BIG 



Bresident Quezon paused to observe 
effect of his words. The public was 
astounded. An. ominous silence followed 
fmim QiiegoB with his incomparable 
I^Mieal astuteness, thm released, a 

^ ''tS^mmt S^astian has a big defect, 
^eause he is a liMOClATA. He should 
^ % ^f^ci0#«*ista. If he were a 
i^^Qn^teta, he would* get more fundi f ojf 
ym and more improvements wdiM tome 
to mmmm. i have tried to convince 
mm t# jote our party but he invariably 
answered that haling been elecl^i as a 
©emoerata he should remain a 
MemmtMB:, i^et us admire him for his 
manly staiid and for his loy^ to hk 
^%ry few pmple have this couirage 
r, I wish to tell you that ajthough 



he is a Democrata, if, I were a voter of 
Cagayan, I would gladly vote for 
Governor Sebastian." 

Such a frank statement, coming from 
no other than President Quezon, who was 
also the President of the Nacionalista 
Party, was received with loud and 
defeaning cheers by the crowd, who 
responded with the words: "'We will 
certainly vote for Sebastian again." 

The above incident, small and 
insignificant as it may seem to a man of 
Quezon's stature, clinched my reelection 
as provincial governor to the chagrin of 
my vulnerable opponent, former 
Governor Honorio Lasam of Tuguegarao. 
At the popular reception which I gave at 
my residence after the meeting, some 
Nacionalista leaders told the President 
that former Governor Lasam was 
disgusted, to which President Quezon 
retorted, " I have already sounded and 
talked to all leaders, who openly admitted 
that the people of Cagayan would like to 
see Governor Sebastian reelected, because 
he* h'as done very well. We should not 
thwart the people's will." 

Another incident which illustrates the 
character of President Quezon was the 
ease of Manuel Blanco, who was the 
Provincial Fiscal when 1 was the executive 
Jlidge of the Court of First Instance of 
iloilo. 

Ope day, Asst. Fiscal Ignacio Debuque 
to msr office to show me a telegram 
from Mlilacanang instructing Fiscal Blanco 
to rigport on a certain case. Fiscal Blanco 
Wai then on vacation. So I told Assistant 
Fiscal DebUqiie to conduct the desired 
and submit his report to 

(Cpfitinued on page 40)' 



m 



Reminiscences 



Ambassador Laurel 

detailed as the junior aide-de-camp to 
President Quezon, on his direct order. 

President Quezon was in 1938 already 
60 years old, whereas I was only 23, less 
than half his age. Moreover, this was the 
President of the Philippines, my 
commander-in-chief, the domineering, 
temperamental, bushy-browed Quezon 
with whom even American 
governor-generals picked their words and 
trod ever so softly- You can, therefore, 
imagine the trepidation with which I 
approached my extraordinary 
assignment. 

Yet, by and large, I was to find it a 
memorable and rewarding experience. My 
tour of duty as aide to President Quezon 
is in fact one of my most treasured 
memories that I take much pride and joy 
in recollecting. My reason is that it gave 
me the rare opportunity of knowing one 
of the greatest figures of our race, to 
assess him at close range as an ordinary 
human being , with all his strengths and 
weaknesses and divested of the trappings 
of authority. 

My most enduring remembrance of 
Quezon is about his thoughtfulness. As I 
look back now, it seems that he was 
forever asking me how I was every time I 
reported for duty. I do not know if that 
was a reflection on my physique at the 
time — I weired only 120 pounds then — 
but in any case I was always deeply 
grateful for his constant concern for my 
well-being. 

One would think that a man who had 
spent practically all his life in the 
rough-and-tumble of politics, and 
unavoidably made not a few enemies. 



would develop a kind of ruthlessness, if 
only in self-defense. Yet, despite his 
exteirior image, Quezon was surprisingly 
soft-hearted. One could easily glean this 
from his tenderness toward his wife, the 
self-effacing Dona Aurora, and their three 
children. Not equally perceptible was his 
kindness toward others, including those 
with whom he did not see eye to eye. 

Quezon as I remember him had a deep 
sense of gratitude. Durmg my daily 
association with him for all of two years, I 
was more often than not privy to his 
remarks and his conversations. Yet I do 
not remember ever hearing him say 
anything unkind against any one to whom 
he owed some favor, whether great or 
small. Of these persons, he always spoke 
with warm affection. 

For ^1 his well-publicized outbursts of 
temper, Quezon also had a contagious 
sense of humor. This was perhaps his best 
redeeming virtue — the counterfoil to his 
countless and terrifying "Pufieta! " that 
often reverberated in Malacanang. Many 
were the times when I caught him in a 
good mood, and he would recount to me 
a few of his youthful escapades, usually 
romantic. I would listen fascinated, with 
eyes wide with wonder and, yes, envy. 

For all his dynamic and energetic 
leadership, Quezon was in bad health. 
Apart from the lung ailment that was 
finaUy to claim his life, he had chronic 
coughs from, which he suffered 
innumerable and punishing attacks. 
During these attacks, I would carry him 
bodily to his bedroom, usually from the 
ground floor up a long and seemingly 
endless staircase. This was to me my 



39 



Ambassa^jor Sebastian . 



Ainb95sador Laurel 



Maldcanang. I do not know what 
hiqppened atfterwards but the next thing I 
koew Freddent Quezon had ordered the 
disQ^sal of Fiscal Blanco. 

A ffw weeks after this incident, I 
i^md myself in Bdalacafiang, and there 
Met Fiscal Blanco, who was trying to see 
^ President. When the President saw 
WtmcQ he flew into a rage. After the 
e3^Io$|ve outbujcst, qUite natural for an 
hnpiiM^ and a teinperainelltal man like 
Prei^ient Quezon, 1 quietly told Ihe 
Pl^sident that Fiscal Blanco was at that 
time on vacation and that it was Fiscal 
iPi^buque, who later became Judge of he 
C^uit of Fiist Instanee, who was then 
AcHrig; Fiscal; The PFesident ttlzned to lile 
aaid iB^ed me why 1 had not mlormed 
hiM eiyriier ol thite. 1 ezpliined that I had 
neter been a^ed about the matter, and X 
nev^r had a chaiiee to visit ManOa 
sihce this inciden^^^ 

Ff om his fit of angsr, he arrived at a 
ealitn< deci$ion and the President 
announced tbat he will study the eas^ 
fur^hfr. A few d^ys later, ]f iseal Blanco 
fas mm only X0iiis;tat0d as FroionGiia 
Fiscal- was promoted by the President 
|^(ilg^««lLr«^e of l&e Oouit of First 
^tdmm. Bl«§ico died a few yeais 

afp. I^fore he died, hsi Messed the 
^immms^ of Frigi#nt Quezon. 



heaviest duty, literally, for he had an inert 
wei^t of about 160 pounds. Yet I 
remember it now with pleasure. In lighter 
moments, Quezon would tease me about 
my build and even ask me to feel his own 
biceps. He was proud of his muscles. 

His real strength was, of course, not in 
his muscles but in his character, in his 
indomitable aspiration for tiie freedom of 
his people, in his driving desire to fight for 
it. In fighting this good fight, he was in his 
own element, so to speak, and no 
adversary was too strong, no opponent 
too formidable. Even the Americans 
respected him. Quezon was no brown 
lackey of Washington. I saw Quezon talk 
witfa a number of them, including the 
iUiperious General MacArthur, and he did 
so on equal terms, without fawning or 
submissiyeness or obsequiousness but 
always with ease and dignity, as befitted 
the leader of his nation. Those moments 
never failed to fill me with deep pride. 

it is now forty years since that day 
When I first nervously reported to 
Plcesident ^^^d L. Quezon as his junior 
fiulitaty aide. 1 have known since then 
fiflany other leaders of our country, some 
of whom I also had the chance to observe 
at dose raii^ and to appraise for their all 
toQ^human qualities. 1 can say 
OStegOrically that, in comparison^ Quezon 
Stands head and shoulders above all of 
He i$the one I remember best 
immm 1 thiiik he was the beit. 



QUEZON and the CAMPAIGN for 

PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE 

by 

Nicolas Zafra 
Professor Emeritus of History 
University of the Philippines 



August 19, this year, is the late Manuel 
L. Quezon's 100th birth anniversary. 
By this time, too, he has been dead 34 
years. 

Death is oblivion to ordinary mortals, 
but to Quezon it is a security of place in 
Philippine history. Future generations are 
not likely to foi^et him or any of the 
landmarks of his political career many of 
vtrhich are now important events of our 
contemporary history. How is the time to 
indulge in fond recollection of the great 
events of Quezon's life. Admittedly, the 
outstanding episode of his life was his role 
in the campaign for Philippine indepen- 
dence — the "sacred cause" of the Fili- 
pino people. 

The grand strategy for the campaign 
for independence was worked out by 
Sei^o Osmena during his incumbency as 
Speaker of the First Philippine Assembly. 
It called for two distinct courses of 
action: (1) for members of the Assembly 
to demonstrate their capacity for states- 
manship through the hi^ quality of their 
legislative labors, producing legislation 
evincing concern for the welfare of their 
people. This part of the strategy was 
meant to erase the impression then held 
by a considerable portion of the American 
people that the Filipinos lacked the capa- 
city for self government The other part 
of the strategy was aimed at winning and 
preserving the friendship, goodwill and 
sympathy of the American people toward 
the Philippines and the Filipino people 
and their aspirations for independence. 

^^uezon's role in the campaign for 
^^independence passed through two 
stages: (1) 1908-1923; and (2) 
1923-1935. In the first stage, Quezon 
carried out his assignment in the campaign 



41 



under the supteme command of Speaker 
"^Osmena. In the second stage, as a result of 
the 1923 power struggle in the country, 
Quezon displaced Osmena as leader in the 
campaign. 

The first important move in the in- 
dependence campaign was the election by 
the Philippine Assembly of Quezon as 
Resident Commissioner in the United 
States. At the time of his dection, 
Quezon was floor leader in the Assembly. 
In his actuations as a member of that 
IwHiy, he displayed a brilliant mind, a 
charming personality and a spirit of dedi- 
cation to the cause of Philippine In- 
dependence. 

In May. 1910, Quezon delivered h]$ 
maiden speech in the U.S. Congress. It 
was faas initiail move in the. campaign for 
independence. In accordance with the 
campaign strategy laid down by Speaker 
Osmena. Quezon conveyed the apprecia- 
tion and gratitude of the Fffipmo people 
tor aU the benefits that they received 
from the United States. "My country- 
men/' he said, '•are grateful, deeply grate- 
ful f 6r an the benefits the U.S. Govem- 
Hient has conferred upon them." But he 
reminded Congress of the Fflipino peo- 
ple s asptaation for independence. "But 
despite an," he said with an the force of 
his eloquence, "we stiU want indepen- 
dence ... Ask the bird, Sk, who is en- 
closed in a golden cs^e and the care of his 
owner if he would prefer his cage and the 
care of his owner to the freedom of the 
and the aUure of the forest." 
In 1912, the Democratic P^aity gained 
full control of the Government of the 
U.S. Resident Commissioner Quezon took 
advantage of this turn of events to secure 
a change in the governorship of the Philip- 
pines. W. Cameiron Forbeft was then 
Governor-General of the Philippines, He 
had an exceUent record during hiis in- 



cumbency as a member of the Philippine 
Commission. He improved the means of 
travel and transportation in the country 
by building a network of good roads and 
bridges. Kennon Road which made Baguio 
with its healthful climate easily accessible 
from the lowlands is a monument to his 
administration. Moreover, he had close 
and friendly relations with the country's 
political leaders and prominent elements 
of Filipino society. But Resident Com- 
missioner Quezon felt that it was his duty 
to secure a new man for the governorship 
of the Philippmes whose attitude towards 
the Filipino people's independence aspira- 
tions was unequivocaUy favorable and 
sympathetic. How he went about in pur- 
suance of this purpose is told by Quezon 
himself in his autobiography as follows: 
"President Wilson one day sum- 
moned me to the White House and 
asked my opmion as to whether a 
new Governor General should be 
appoint or whether Governor 
General Forbes should be left in his 
post. To a Filipino, with Oriental 
ancestry, a little Spanish blood and 
mostly Spanish education — which 
p^acticaUy aU that I then had, - the 
question was very trying indeed. 
Friendship to me has a re^ meaning 
and personal favors are nevet forgot- 
ten. On the other hand, I had come 
to Washington to perform a sacred 
duty. I measured my words and gave 
President Wilson the following 
answer: "Mr. President, if it is your 
intention to disregard the Democ- 
ratic platform and merely carry on 
the policies of the Republican Ad- 
ministration, then you can find no 
better man for the job than Gover- 
nor General Forbes. If, on the con- 
trary, you intend to take immediate 



42 



steps, as in my opinion you should 
tfi^Vto i&afice good the new histd^i^ 
mmtnitment of your party to grant 
jtid^pefideoce to the Philippines as 
soon as possible, then Governor 
Forbes can neither be the spokesman 
for nor the executor of yo^r poJidet 
in the PhUippines-" ^ ^^"^^ 

As can wdl be seen from the above 
quoted passage, Quezon's approach to the 
problem before him was admirable. It was 
a model of finesse which undoubtedly 
made a deep impression on President 
Wilson. In effect. President Wilson 
appointed Francis Burton Harrison as 
Ootefnor General of the Phiiipplnes. He 
was a friend of Quezon. With his 
appointment Quezon had for sure 
something to do. 

The administration of Harrison was a 
landmark in the history of America's 
colonial venture in the Far East, It was 
friendly, helpful and sympathetic toward 
the Filipinos arid their political 
aspirations. He allowed the Filipinos 
through their political leaders to intro- 
duce changes and practices in the colonial 
^vemment which expanded to the fullest 
extent possible Filipino participation in 
the administration of national affairs, 
Forebdst among such changes was the 
creation upon the recommendation of the 
Filipmo leaders of the Council of State. 
This body was composed of the Governor 
General, members of the cabinet, the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives^ 
the President of the Senate, and the floor 
leaders respectively of the House of 
Representative and the Senate. Member- 
ship in the Council of State was renewable 
at the beginning of a three-year period. 
New members were chosen from the party 
which wpn in the last national election. 



The Council of State was supposedly to 
act as an advisory body to the Governor 
General. Actually, it was the supreme 
goviprnin^ body of the Philippines. 

Creation of the Council of State 
brouj'ht to the Philippine govern- 
ment a distinctive feature of the parlia- 
mentary system of governtnertt, namely, 
the union of the executive and legislative 
branches of government Under the new 
arrangement, members of Uie cabinet 
could appear on the floor of the Legisla- 
ture to explain or defend jHroposed 
measures relating to their mspectiTe 
offices^ a practice common in a parlia^ 
mentary system of government based on 
the principle of ministerial responsibility, 
The Council of State gave the FOipinos 
an opportunity to experiment with a 
semi-parliamentary system of government. 
But Governor-General Wood did not look 
with favor upon the experiment- He be- 
lieved it placed him as the represenUtive 
of American sovereignty in a position of 
lesponsibility without the corresponding 
authority. Under the circumstances, a 
clash was inevitable between him and the 
FUipino leaders in the Council of State. In 
effect, a controversy over a case involving 
an American member of the police force 
of the City of Mantta, which was under 
the jurisdiction of the Department of the 
interior, brought Governor Wood in a 
head-on coUission with the FiUpino 
leaders in the Council of State. As a 
result, the Filipino members of the 
Council of State resigned from that body. 
Governor Wood accepted their resigna- 
tions. Subsequently, Governor Wood 
allowed the Council of State to go out 
exi&ten«3e. 



m 



The administration of Wood was a 
dark day indeed for the cause of 
Philippine independence. Apart from the 
fact that Governor Wood was openly 
opposed to the Filipino people's inde« 
pendence aspirations, the permanent 
source of funds for the expenses of the 
campaign for independence was cut down 
during his administration. The Philippme 
Independence Fund which the Philippine 
Legislature had created was, by a ruling of 
the Insular Auditor, Ben Wright, and, 
presumably on Wood's order, declared 
illegal. The Filipino people, thenceforth, 
had to provide through individual contri- 
butions funds for the campaign. 

The death of Governor Wood (1926) 
gave the Filipinos an auspicious occasion 
to renew their efforts in the campaign for 
independence. The first important task 
awaiting them was to obtain the appoint- 
ment of a suitable successor to Governor 
Wood. To attend to this matter, Quezon 
and Osmeria constituted themselves into a 
commission to go to the United States. 
Quezon's choice for the governorship of 
the Philippines was Henry L. Stimson, 
former Secretary of War during the presi- 
dency of Waiiam H. Taft. In their confer- 
ence with President Goolidge, the FUipino 
Conamissioners recommended Henry L. 
Stimson for the governorship of the 
Philippines. They visited William H> Taft, 
the first civfl governor of the Philippines 
who was at the time Chief Justice of the 
U.S. Supreme Court, to ask his support 
for Stimson's appointment They of 
course saw Stimson. Stimson at first 
would not at all consider the offer pre- 
sented to him^ But Quezon would not 
take "no" for an answer. Bringing to bear 
all his power of persuarion^ he reminded 
Stimson of his own words that the govern- 
ment of the Philippine was a grave resr 



ponsibility resting on the United States. 
Although Stimson did not give a word of 
acceptance, Quezon and Osmena left the 
conference with Stimson fully confident 
that Stimson would not refuse the offer if 
it was officially presented to him. In 
effect, a few days later, they read m the 
newspapers that Henry L. Stimson had 
been appointed Governor General of the 
Philippines. 

The case of Stimson is an interesting 
incident in the life of Quezon. It 
reveals a notable facet of his character. 
Quezon was fully aware of Stimson's 
opposition to Philippine independence 
and yet, surprisingly, he wanted him so 
much for the governorship of the Philip- 
pines. Quezon came to know Stimson 
intimately when the latter visited the 
Philippines at the height of the contro- 
versy between Wood and the Filipino 
leaders in the government. With his keen 
perception of human character, Quezon 
saw the depth and sincerity of Stimson's 
concern for the safety and welfare of the 
Filipino people. Of Stimson, he said in his 
autobiography: **no representative of the 
U.S. in the Philippines had won my res* 
pect and even my personal affection 
than did Governor General Stimson" 

As Governor General of the Philip- 
pines, Stimson won the friendship, good 
will and cooperation of the FUipino 
people. He revived the Council of State 
thereby reestablishing the semiparlia- 
mentary character of the Philippine 
government. Stimson's administration 
generated such a spirit of cooperation 
among his colleagues in the government 
that his name became synonimous with 
"cooperation." 

But, to the great disappointment of 



many Filipinos, Governor Stimson did not 
stay long in his post. Soon after the 
teauguration of Hooror as PtesM^fflit i§f #g 
United States, Stimson was called back to 
Washmgton. He was made Secretary of 
State in the cabinet of President Hoover. 
At that time, ominous developments were 
taking place in Eastern Asia which caused 
no Uttle concern to the Government of 
^ UiS^ B^Sm ^ Bm^sy &f state, 
it was Stimson's responsibOity to take 
adequate measures to safeguard America's 
interests in the Far East. Accordin^y, he 
launched what has come to be known in 
American diplomatic history as the 
"Stimson Doctrine/' The **Doctrme" gave 
notice t© 4jh» ^<»fd^^t^^ the U.S. would 
not admit as legal any situation brought 
about by the violation of treaty agree- 
ments, 

During the administration of President 
Hoover, a severe economic depress 
mon hit the ISS* Many sectors of the na- 
tion's economy felt its disastrous effects. 
Factories closed down, banks suspended 
iafeir operations, mMions of families suf- 
ficed the loss of life's savings. The U.S. 
Government was asked urgently to pro- 
vide remedial measures. Strangely enough, 
oiie suggested measure of relief was to 
grant independence to the Philippines. 
The reason behmd the proposal was 
&ikt American industry would be relieved 
from the competition of duty-free 
products of the Philippines in the U.S, 
&6trmiAe trade* 

Obviously, the situation in the United 
States was greatly favorable to the cause of 
independence. The Filipino leaders were 
not slow in taking advantage of the situa- 
tion. A new mission was created com- 
posed of Senator Osmefia as chairnjail 



and Speaker Roxas as co-chairman. The 
OSROX as the Mission came to be knpwn 
was instructed to obtain independence 
for the Philippinies im^Jer the most favojr%- 
ble conditions- 

In Congress many proposals were 
submitted for the solution of the Philip- 
pine problem. Out of these, one was fmal- 
ly framed which counted with the support 
of the majority of the members in both 
Houses of Congress- Kiiown as the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting^Bill, the measure was 
approved by substantial majorities in both 
Houses of Congress. But Congress ignored ' 
the presidential vets and quickly repassed 
the Bill- As enacted by Congre^, the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act bore the title 
PHILTPPINE COMMONWEALTH AND 
INDEPENDENCE LAW. 

The Act provided for an institutional 
process in which successive steps were to 
be taken, namely: (1) the calhng of a 
constitutional convention to frame a 
constitution for the Philippines (2) sub- 
mission of the constitution to the people: 
(3) regulating trade relations between the 
U S. and the Philippmes; (4) withdrawal 
of American sovereignty following the 
expiration of a ten-year period; (5) im- 
position of duties after independence; and 
(6) acceptance of the Act by the Philip- 
pine LeiJslature, 

The approval of the Independence 
Law was viewed as a glorious culmination 
of the FUipino people's historic struggle 
for liberation. Surprisingly, however, 
Quezon was not happy over it. He found 
certain provisions of the Law objection- 
0Ae. One was that giving the U.S. the 
right to retam military and naval bases in 
flie CDunl^^ Another was that relatmg to 
commercial relations of the Philippmes 
with the United States. The retention of 



4$ 



military and naval bases, Quezon pointed 
out, would give the Philippines the 
shadow not the substance of indepen- 
dence. As regards the commercial provi- 
sions, Filipino opposition was justified on 
historical grounds. When the U.S. imposed 
firee trade upon the Philippines with the 
Payne-Aldrich Act, the Philippine Assem- 
bly opposed the move. It feared that free 
trade would eventually bind the Philip- 
pines to the U.S. with strong economic 
ties w^ch would make it difficult for it to 
realize its independence ideal. For the 
U.S. now to grant independence to the 
Philippines without giving it reasonable 
time to adjust its economy to the condi- 
tions and realities of independence would 
be unjust to the Filipino people. 

The Independence Act gave ties to a 
nationwide controversy in the Philip- 
pines. One group, the Pros, led by Osmena 
and Roxas, called for acceptance of the 
Law. The Antis, led by Quezon advocated 
rejection. In the Senate, Quezon clashed 
in a memorable debate. In speeches brist- 
ling with wit and punctuated with bril- 
liant flashes of eloquences, they defended 
their reispective positions on the Inde- 
pendence Law. In the House of Repre- 
sentatives^ Roxas doquently explained 
the raierits of the Independence Law. 
When subfnitted to a vote in the Legisla- 
ture, the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act was 
decisively rejected. The L^latme next 
^olved to send Quezon to the U.S. to 
isk for a modification of the Law or for 
the enaetitieiit of the new one mote 
acce^t^ble to the Philippines. 

MaMy people at the time even among 
&tose who supported Quezon in the fight 
over the Hare-HaweS'^Cutting Act thought 
that the rejection of the Independence 
Law was a risjky ventufe which exposed 
the cause of Philiii0ine indtoendehce to 



the danger of indefinite postponement to 
an uncertain future if not of total loss. 
Quezon himself must have been aware of 
this danger. When he left for the U.S. in 
pursuance of his mission, it was certain 
that he knew he was carrying the burden 
of a great responsibility. 

In Congress, the leaders who worked 
so hard for the passage of the Indepen- 
dence Law were no longer enthusiastic 
over the PhUippine problem. They were, 
understandably, irked by Quezon's seem- 
ing vacillation on the issue on indepen- 
dence for his country. Their attitude 
toward Quezon was cold if not openly 
hostile. In a confrontation between them 
and Quezon, Senator Joseph Robinson 
told Quezon, referring to the Indepen- 
dence Law, to "take it or leave it." 

Quezon wasnotat all daunted by the 
hostile attitude of the Congress leaders. 
He bided his time. He wrote a memoran- 
dum for President Roosevelt on the ob- 
jectionable features of the Independence 
Law. Next, he arranged with the White 
House for an appointment for him to see 
President Roosevelt. 

In the White House conference, 
President Roosevelt told Quezon he 
agreed with Quezon's criticisms of the 
Independence Law. But he assured 
Quezon that the U.S. was willing to revise 
the law in a manner that would be just to 
botii the American and the Filipino 
peoples. The President's assurance natural- 
ly pleased Quezon. It gave him good rea- 
son to claun that his mission was after all 
a success. In effect, shortly after the 
establishment of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, a Joint Preparatory 
Committee on Hiilippine Affairs was 
created to study economic problems of 
Philippine independence and propose 



46 



III. THE TYDINGS-MeDUFFIE INDEPEND- 
ENCE ACT 



(PoBLic-No. 117— 73D Congress] 
(H. R. 8573] 



An Act 

To provide for the complete mdepmdence of the Philippine Utmdt, to provide 
for the adoption of a eonstlnaion and a form of govtmment for the PbtUppau 
hisnds, and for other purposes. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, 

CONVENTION TO FRAME OONSTITirnON FOR PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



SFcnoN I The Phaippine Legislature is hereby authorized to pro- 
viS*e elecrion of delegates w a constitutional convenaon, wbch 
Th n 'i::et^ te hall of the^ouse of "P-^ iTlSetSly t 
Philippine Islands, at such time as the P^J-Ppm^ ""^ ^^^^ 
but not later than October '934, to formulate and c^t a consa^^ 

for the govermnent of the Commonwealth of '^"^^ 
subject to the conditions and qualificauons prescnbed ui this Act, cn 
shall exercise jurisdiction over all the territory ceded to the Unitea 
States by the treaty of peace concluded between the United States ana 
Spain on the 10th day of December 1898. the boundaries of which art 
set forth in article III of said treaty, together with those islands em- 
braced in the treaty between Spain and the United States concluded at 
Washington on the 7th day of November 1900. The Philippine Legisla- 
ture shall provide for the necessary expenses of such convention. 



legislative changes. The FiHpino member- 
ship in the Committee was headed by Jose 
Yulo, a well-known commercial law 
expert. 

In pursuance of the Roosevelt-Quezon 
understanding, a new independence bill 
was drafted. Known as Tydings-McDuffie 
it passed both Houses of Congress and 
signed into law by President Roosevelt. 
On May 1, 1934, the Philippine Legisla- 
ture formally accepted it. The institu- 
tional process was thereby set in motion 
that would lead eventually to indepen- 
dence for the Philippines in 1946. On 
November 15, 1935, the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines was set up with Quezon 



and Osmeiia as President and Vice- 
President respectively. Both were re- 
elected totheii respective posts in 1940. 

In 1943, the eight-year tenure of 
Quezon as fixed by the Constitution as 
amended was due to expire. Before the 
expiration dale arrived, Quezon gave 
notice of his desire to continue as Presi- 
dent alleging that, in the emergency 
through which the Philippines was passing 
on account of the Japanese occupation of 
the country, the interests of the FilipiAo 
people required that the status quo as 
regards the presidency should be conti- 
nued. Announcement of Quezon's intent 



^gave rise to a serious crisis in the Philip- 
pine Government in exile. Osmeiia, how- 
ever, volunteered to refrain from claiming 
his right of succession to the presidency 
for the sake of national unity and out of 
legard for Quezon^s physical condition. It 
was a magnificent gesture of abnegation 
on the part of Osmena. It aborted the 
crisis. Together with Senator Tydings, 
.Osmena worked out a plan of action for 
tlffe U.S. Congress whereby the status quo 
as regards the presidency of he Philippines 
wa& legally continued. 

By that time, Quezon's health had 
^ greatly deteriorated. The ravages of 
tuberculosis had wrought havoc on his 
constitution. He was bed-ridden. He was 
dangerously close to the brink of death. 
Death finally came to him on August 1, 
1944. It was a dear sunny day in 
mid- summer that dawned that day. 
Father Pacifico Ortiz, S.J., Quezon's 
chaplain, celebrated as usual mass for 
Quezon. The Gospel read at the mass was 
from theeighthchapter of Matthew. The 
passage happened to be one of Quezon's 
favorite readings from the Holy Scrip- 
tures. It tells the story of the centurion 
Whose servant was seriously iU. He begged 
Jjsus t0 come and heal him. Jesus said 
that he would come. Overwhelmed by 
Jesus Vlandhess,vaie centurion repUed: 
bir, I am not Worthy to have you come 
under my roof. Just say the word and my 
boy will be healed." my 
Shoi7% after the mass, news came 
over the radio of MaeArthur*s forces 
having made another landing which 
brought them more closely to the Philip, 
pines. The news greatly exdted Quezon. 
In his excitement internal hemorrhage set 
in causing him to vomit blood. A few 
moments later, Quezon was dead. But he 



was happy in the thought that the 
day of liberation of his beloved country 
was near. 

News of Quezon's death came to the 
Philippines through secretly hidden radio 
sets. The Filipino people deeply mourned 
the passing of their great leader. Not a few 
among them wondered with no little 
feeling of concern whether the Philippines 
could have another Quezon in the forsee- 
able future. However, those who are 
familiar with the nature of the historical 
process in the Philippines are not at all 
concerned about the problem of political 
leadership in the country in the years to 
come. Philippine history amply shows 
that the Filipino race has the potentiality 
of producing leaders with the intellectual, 
moral and patriotic grandeur of Manuel L. 
Quezon. 



48 



PBOGRAM OF ACTIVITIES 
August 18, 1978 



3:00 P.M. UnveUing of the marker, declaring the 

Quezon Memorial Circle as National 
Historical Landmark under Presidential 
Decree No. 260. 

3: 15 P.M Opening of the Quezon Museum at the 

Quezon Monument. 



4:00 P.M Unveiling of the historical marker 

installed at the monument in the 
quadrangle of the Quezon City Hall 



COMMEMOHATIVE ACTIVITIES 

August 19, 1978 



I 

6:15 A.M Transfer of President Quezon's 

remains from the North Cemetery 
to the Quezon Monument and 
Mausoleum 

n 

7:45 AM. Requiem Mass 

Main Celebrant His Eminence 

Jaime L. Cardinal Sin 

Co-Celebrants Msgr. Francisco Avendafio 

Rev. Fr. Pacifico Ortiz, S,J. 

8:30 A.M. Arrival Honors 

8:45 A.ML ; Blessing and Entombment of 

President Quezon's Remains 

9:00 A.M. Floral Offering 

a. His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos 

and the First Lady Me. Imelda R. Marcos 
, b. Mrs. Zeneida Quezon-Avancena and 
Mr. Manuel L. Quezon, Jr. 

c. Flower Drop: Philippine Air Force 

m 

9:15 A.M. Civic-Military Parade 

Participating: 

Barangay Brigades 
Integrated National Police Batallion 
Composite Batallion of the Armed 
Forces of the Philippines 



IV 

10:00 A-ML Commemorative Program 



rme 



PKOGKAMME 

' 10:00 A.M. 



The National Anthem GHQ Band 

Opening Remarks Hon. Adelina S. Rodriguez 

Mayor, Quezon CSty 

Presentations of Commemorative 

Stamps, Coins and Medal Hon. Imelda R. Marcos 

First Lady and Minister of 
Human Settlements and Ecology 

Introduction of Recipients . Hon. Anacleto C. Alcala 

Governor, Quezon Province 

Centenary Stamps Gen. Felizardo R. Tanabe 

Postmaster General, Bureau of Posts 
Mr. Manuel L. Quezon, Jr. Assisting 
The Quezon City Museum The National Museum 

(To be received by Mayor AdelinaJ (To be received by Director 
S. Rodriguez) Qodofredo L. Alcasid) 

Centenary Coins Hon. Gregorio S. Licaros 

Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines 



Mrs. Zeneida Quezon-Avancena 

The Quezon City Museum The National Historical Institute 
(To be received by Mayor (To be received by Prof. Esteban 

Adelina S. Rodriguez) A. de Ocampo) 

The National Museum 

(To be received by Director 
Godofredo L. Alcasid 

Centenary Medal Chairman Esteban A. de Ocampo 

National Historical Institute 
His Excellency President Assisting 
Ferdinand E. Marcos 

Presentation of Resolution of the Executive 
Committee to His Excellency President 

Ferdinand E. Marcos .Hon. Jorge B. Vargas 

Co-Chairman, Executive Committee 
1978 Manuel L. Quezon National- 
Centennial Year 

Presentation of the Guest Speaker . . . .Hon. Emilio M. Abello 

Co-Chairman, Executive Committee 
1978 Manuel L. Quezon National 
Centennial Year 

Address by the Guest of Speaker .... .His Excellency FERDINAND E. MARCOS 

President and Prime Minister of the Philippines 

Hon. Pio Fedrosa 
Chamnan, Executive Committee 
197S Mimuel L. Quezon NationM Centemdal Year 
Master of CeFemonies 



51 



QUEZON'S PARTYLESS DEMOCRACY 

by 

Carlos P. Romulo 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 

The second national struggle for Philippine independence was in large 
measure the handiwork of the late President Quezon. During that long 
struggle, he mobilized the entire political, legal and moral resources of the 
people, forging the unity which firmly established the identity of the 
Filipino nation. 

It should surprise no one that he should leave enduring political and 
social legacies which even today bear a lasting imprint on the national body 
politic. Like President Marcos, he was a creative statesman of the highest 
order. The American colonial regime was America's experiment in exporting 
its own brand of democracy. President Quezon turned it into a Philippine 
experiment in a ceaseless effort to discover novel forms which suited the 
temper and reflected the values of the people whom he guided into maturity. 

Realizing that if the "good fight*' was to be won he needed a strongly 
cohesive nation behind him, he developed a government that was in all but 
name an authoritarian regime in order to give strong central direction to the 
efforts of Filipinos to win political and economic independence. 

As Senate President, he opposed nominal independence which in his 
view would give his people only the "freedom to starve" and vigorously 
urged the revision of trade relations between the Philippines and the United 
States. He opposed the retention of American military bases in the 
Philippines on the ground that it would make Philippine independence a 
farce. While willing to consider the continuation of naval stations, he insisted 
that the Philippine government should have an equal voice in their 
operations. 

Of independence without essence, he would have none. One of his best 
known aphorisms runs as follows: "I prefer a government run like hell by 
Filipinos to a government run like heaven by Americans.*' In actual fact 
what he did say was the following: *The best government is a government 
run by Filipinos.*' 

It is a mark of President Quezon's prescience that these issues, to this 
day, constitute important elements in our efforts to strengthen the basis of 
the friendly relationships between the Philippines and the United States. 

As President of the Philippine Commonwealth, with the struggle for 
emancipation already half -won, he turned his attention to domestic affairs. 



52 



FORERUNNER OF NEW SOCIETY 



Believing that the Philippines must ultimately rely on itself for the 
protection of its territorial integrity, he established the national defense 
force as his first act as President. 

President Quezon was an eminently pragmatic statesman and never 
feared to innovate when convinced that it would redound to the benefit of 
the nation. He abolished the bicameral legislature and established an 
unicameral body, a kind, of forerunner of the Batasang Pambansu, He 
foresaw that the need for national unity would be even more urgent after 
independence and began developing a political philosophy conducive to this 
end. He proposed in effect the abolition of political parties and urged a 
"party less democracy" in which all segments of the piopulation would be 
represented in order to give everyone equal voice in the shaping of the new 
nation. 

"The first fetish that we must discard," he declared, "is the discredited 
theory that democracy cannot exist without political parties," Political 
parties were "not essential to, but on the contrary (were) evils in, a 
democracy," 

"The second slogan that must be thrown overboard," he went on to 
say, "is the theory that in a democracy individual liberty must not be 
restricted . , . The exercise of liberty is good for the people only when it is 
accompanied by self-restraint. It is the abuse of liberty which is today causing 
the disappearance of liberty in many parts of the world." 

President Quezon's efforts to create new political mstitutions were 
complemented by a deepening interest in social and economic affairs. He was 
the first to recognize that political stability had its true basis in economic 
development and that a retarded domestic economy would give rise to grave 
social discontents which would inevitably threaten national stability. In 
consequence social justice became the watchword of his administration. 

It is easy to draw parallels between President Quezon and President 
Marcos, and in many respects comparisons are inevitable. If true, then we 
may conclude that the New Society is the inheritor of a tradition and 
President Quezon, dead of a mortal ailment before his work was completed, 
had left a lasting legacy to the nation to which he devoted his best energies 
and, in the end, gave up life itself. 



Excerpt from the speech delivered by the author during the symposium on "Quezon^s Social 
and Political Le^cy to the Filipino Nation." 



S3 



QUEZON 



In tracing the history of any other 
city» one might begin with its name, 
its early inhabitants, its port, or the types 
of early architecture. Here in Quezon 
City, one has to begin and end with its 
founder and his dream. It is a 'Quezonian 
landscape,' just as fascinating in its way as 
anything that nature has created in the 
ridges of Tagaytay or Bpguio. For the 
physical, political, economic and 
socio-cultural components of the city are 
the manifestations of his dream for the 
place and its people. 

In his address before the members of 
the National Assembly on September 18, 
1939, Quezon expounded on his dream 
for a "... capital city that, politically 
shall be the seat of government; 
aesthetically the showplace of the nation 
~* a place that thousands of people will 
come and visit as the epitome of culture 
and spirit of the country; socially, a 
dignified concentration of hxmian life, 
aspirations and endeavors and 
achievements; and economically as a 
productive, self-contained community/' 
The late President's endorsement of the 
creation of a capital city was the fruitition 
of the efforts of a group of people who, as 
early as 1904 according to a historian, has 
conceived of founding a place for the 
impending excess popufatioh of Manila. 
The quest culirainated with the passage of 
Commonwealth Act No. 502 by the 
National AssemMy, whieh was sigtied by 
I^esident on Octo^r 12, 1939, creatmg 
Quezon City. 

The type and rate of growth mi ttead 



.from an ARDENT DREAM 
' to a BLEAMINB REALITY 

towards which Quezon City developed its 
own image and identity have been greatly 
influenced by plans in the past aimed at 
providing an appropriate environment for 
an identified group of people envisioned 
by the late president. The Frost Plan was 
prepared to crystallize this vision. But it 
was shortlived for in 1948, the Capital 
City Planning Commission was created 
and the 1949 master plan for the capital 
city was laid based oh the same concept 
and direction — that which would provide 
not only residential lots for the small 
employee but also jobs for the un- 
employed and where constitutional 
offices will function in an atmosphere of 
dignity, freedom and human happiness. 

Partially, this plan was implemented. 
Through the years, the city administration 
was guided by the zoning ordinance to 
arm itself in directing, controlling and 
regulating development. In 1976, urban 
planning was given the needed boost with 
the completion of the Quezon City 
Comprehensive Development Program, 
wherein the conceptual land use plan was 
incorporated. One of the goals of the 
general plan is to direct the physical 
development of the city and its environs 
in relation to its social and economic well 
being for the fulfillment of the rightful 
common destiny, and to serve as the basic 
frame of reference for all administrative 
and regulatory measures relating to the 
physical development of the city — the 
zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, 
urban renewal, and the capital 
improy^Ment expenditures, among others. 



I 



Cubao 42 years ago,. , 

Presidmt GSmon looking for a miiuble $iU for hk 



'7 dream of a capital city that, poli- 
tically shall be the seat of go vernment, 
aiBsthetimlfy Oie ^wpiace of the 
rmtion — a place that thousands of 
people will come and visit as the epU 
fiMie of future and spirit of the coun- 
try; socially a dignified concentration 
of human life, aspimtions , endea- 
vors and achievements; and economic' 
ally as a productive^ self-contained 
community/' 




m 



Today, 39 years after its founding, 
Quezon City can boast of several 
achievements which partially fulfills the 
dream of Quezon for the city. On the 
institutional front, the most notable 
accomplishment is the construction of the 
permanent seat of government at 
Constitution Hills — the Batasang 
Pambansa Complex — which was 
inaugurated on June 12, 1978 by His 
Excellency, Prime Minister Ferdinand E. 
Marcos and Hon. Imelda Romualdez 
Marcos, First Lady, Minister of Ecology 
and Human Settlements and Governor of 
the Metropolitan Manila Commission. 
Eighty-seven other national government 
ministries, commissions, bureaus and 
offices are based in the city, either housed 
in government buildings or renting in 
privately-owned edifices. The city is also 
proud of having social facilities for 
meeting the needs of its le^dent for 
health and medical care, housing, 
education, culture and protective services. 
It has a total of 27 hospitals, 14 clinics, 
37 he^ilth centers^ 143 public and private 
elementary and secondary schools, 10 
public libraries, 37 parks and playgrounds, 
a stadium, a coliseum, six police precincts 
and several police outgosts, and nine fire 
stations. 

The city is also the sanctuary of more 
than 1-4 M residents, distributed among 
the eight government housing projects, 
some 429 private subdivisions, and 
individual properties. Although it has its 
share in the national government's 
perennial problem of squatting and urban 
blight m certain areas, the matter is 
properly being attended to in the city's 
Zonsl Improvement Ptogram. 

A m^or central business district has 
also been realized in Cubao area, mainly 
through the initiative of the private 
sector. Commercial strip development has 



also been developed in the city's major 
thoroughfares, notably in Aurora Blvd., 
Epifanio de los Santos Avenue, E. 
Rodriguez Blvd. and Quezon Avenue. 
Already, secondary growth nodes have 
been identified for development, to serve 
as alternative commercial centers to the 
existing ones. 

Another dominant characteristic of 
Quezon City, which perhaps sets it apart 
from other cities and municipalities in 
Metro Manila, is the presence of large and 
well maintained parks, simulated 
woodlands and open spaces for leisure and 
recreational purposes. Existing open areas 
include the parks and wildlife office, the 
botanical garden, the Bernardo Park, the 
Quezon Memorial Circle (which is given 
separate treatment in this maga^ne), and 
the La Mesa Dam Park. Preservation areas 
like the La Mesa Reservoir and Balara 
double as recreational areas. The city 
administration is eyeing on this 
characteristic of the city to enhance its 
identity. It being the only city in the 
region that can boast of its unspoiled 
natural setting, plans are afoot to make it 
the citadel of a true living environment — 
the "Garden City" of the metropolis. 

Presently, industrial development 
activities are concentrated in two areas of 
the city. One is located on the area 
bbunded by the Marikina River, the Paag 
boundary, E. Rodriguez Ave., and the 
j.M. Baesa Compound. A similar zone is 
also found in the area bounded by Damar 
Village, Bonifacio Subd. (south), the 
Caloocan-Quezon City boundary (west), 
thc» Tullahan Creek (east) and the 
proposed Republic Avenue (north). The 
approved land use plan for Quezon City 
encourages such type of development 
within the given boundaries. 

Quezon City still has a lot of 
potentitds tor future development. The 



S6 



President Quezon m^tecting the construction prog- 
ress of the miiitary camp. Beside him is Gen. 
Basilio Valdez, chief of staff. Behind him are for- , 
mer Quezon City Mayor Tomas Morato and Gen. 
Mateo Captnp^. 



foregoing description of buUfe-up areas 
constitutes only 40% of its total land area 
of 153.6 square kilometers. A table is 
provided to give an overall picture of the 
estent of land dfevdopm^t 



Land Use 


Area 






(Sq.Km.) 




Residential 


46.53 


28.0 


Commercial 


1.99 


1.2 


Open Space 


3.32 


2.0 




6.35 


4.0 


Industxid 


7.98 


4.8 


Undeveloped IfefNiideB<|ii/ 




Institutional 


87.11 





This is Quezon City in a capsule form. 
At this stagjs of its development, it cannot 
be denied that its development has 
faithfully been inspired by the vision of 
its founder, and that its future growth, as 
envisioned in its conceptual development 
plan, is a fulfillment of his dream. The 
city administration is working towards 
this direction. On the 100th 
commemoration of the founder's birth, 
what better gift can be offered than this 
assurance that his descendants share hi^r» 
dream ardently, and are working towards 
its fulfillment (LTC) 



* 



QUEZON MEMORIAL CIRCLE: A TRIBUTE TO 
A BELOVID LEADER 



T T ow does a people express its 
XI ftttitudt to a leader who has 

championed its cause for freedom? How 
does a nation thank its President for 
espousing social justice, nationalism, and 
independence at a time when the country 
IS struggling for nationhood? 

The city government has proposed the 



development of the Quezon Memorial 
Circle into a park to serve as a fitting 
gesture of gratitude to its leader, after 
which the park was named. Aptly termed 
as a Memorial, ihe park shfdl be n 
transformed mto a national landmark in 
memory of his achievements and greatness 
as a nation's leaden 




unticirflii 1 Flaygrqjjncl 




Park Restaurant 

In addition to the existing Memorial 
Monument and foundation, the proposed 
development will include the following 
major elements: children's park and 
piayground with skating rinks^ bicycle 
routes, play structures like monocoques, 
totem poles, tree houses and other 
playground fixtures; a lagoon whieh can 
be stocked with fish for game for 
children, an aviary^ an oceanarium, an 
open amphitheatre for cultural 
presentations, an exhibition gallery for 
continuing art display and exhibits, and a 
park restaurant to cater to the people 
mitmg the pairfe. 

60 



The concept is to develop the area as a 
natural setting for all these elements, 
which are interrelated by means of 
meandering pathways to simulate the 
natural growth of a wa^^tftiMl %is 
development becomes the backdrop for 
the Memorial Monument to enhance its 
formality and scale and to give it mor^ life 
and meaning. 

MulLi tiered platforms radiating tmm 
the existing fountain will be introduced. 
This will serve as the center of a number 
of circumferential pathways to be flanked 
by trees of different species. The areas in 
between %b pathwi^ 'M' $0mW$^ 



into gardens and sitting areas. 

Prom the wooded areas on the east, 
the Quezon Memorial Monument will 
stand in the background as a towering 
terminus on (he west, appropriately 
draped by other vf^>oded areas beyond the 
Elliptical Road. 

Around the Monument will he large 
tlsfe of flowering and orBamental plants 
on mounds designed to have a gentle rise 
from the periphery to a point where it 
H^ei^ ill tweeting po0l suiTounding ike 
ttqi&ument. On the east, on the same axis 
j|S tlie monument and the fountain, is a 
f^ndship Fi^^t'^M^ ai^ to be planted 
Wll^ t»eea Mm diff^ent i^^ysi^ 



Aviaries & Lagoon 

Species which are compatible with the 
local dimate. 

The project implementation is prog- 
rammed on a five-year basis and is estima^ 
ted to cost P30 It is anchored upon the 
active participation of the public » in close 
partnership with the government. Upon 
completion, the park is expected to serve 
the needs of Met^politan ManOa resi- 
dents and tourists for lecreafflional and 
leisure facilities. 

The city will provide for continued 
maintenance and supervision of the 
deyelopment of the entire area^ M nfffilf 
opiated on a self 4i|iiida^ ii^il^^ <3 



QUEZON: AMA NB WIKANS PAMBANSA 

>?< Tinno Lapus 



**Maaaring gamittn noting pansamantala 
ong wikang banyaga, ngunit hindi tayo 
^akapag-aan^in ng tunay na wikang 
pambmsa kung hindi sa pagpttU paggamit 
at pagpapaunUxd ng isang wikang. sariling 

Manuel Luis Quezon 



Ang wika ay kaluluwa ng alinmang 
bansa. At sa ganang sa atin, ang Wikang 
Filipino ang ating Pambansang Kaluluwa. 
Nasa wika ang pinakamabisang unawaan, 
pahatiian at ugnayan ng mga tao. Ang 
wika ang ts^apaglahad at tagapag-laxawan 
ng kaisipan at damdamin ng bawa't kina- 
pal. Sa katutubong wika naipadadama at 
naipalalaganap aiig katutubong ugali, mga 
panuntunan at likas na kalinangan. Sa 
sariling wika nasusukat, napapatnubayan 
at nasasagisag ang pagtatamasa at pag- 
aangkin sa maraming kalayaan at maka- 
pangyarihang pagsasarili; hindi lamang ng 
isang bansa, kungdi maging ng kanyang 
mga mamamayan. 

Naaalinsunod kaipala, sa gayong 
batayan, ang Pangulong Manuel L. 
Quezon, sa isang kalatas sa luiang Asem- 
blea Nasyunal nuong ika-27 ng Oktubre, 
1936 ay kanyang pinanukala ang paglikha 
sa Surian ng Wikang Pambansa. 

Ayon sa Pangulong Quezon, ang kons- 
titusyon ay nagtatagubilin sa Batasang 
Bansa na gumawa ng hakbang tungo sa 
pagpapaunlad at paggamit ng isang kara- 
niwang pambansang wika, batay sa isang 
luniiral nating wikain. 

'*Ang mamamayang may isang bansa 
at may isang lahi ay dapat magkaroon ng 
isang wikang sinasalita at nauunawaan ng 
lahat,'* ani Quezon at ang dugtong pa 
niyang sabi, ''ang wika ang pinakamatibay 
na buklpd ng bayan at magpieipaunlad sa 
kaissdian ng pambansang mithiin, mga 
hangarin at ng datndaming pambansa.'^ 

Anupa't ns^atatag nga ang Siiriaiii ng 
Wikang Pambaiisa, sa bisa ng Batas ng 
Komonwel Big, 184 at sinusugan ng Ba- 



tas Big, 333 upang magsagawa ng karam- 
patang pag-aaral at pagpapasiya sa pag- 
babatayang salita ng wikang pambansa, 

Kasudlong nito, ang Kautusang Taga- 
pagpaganap Big, 134 nuong Hunyo 18, 
1938 ay nagpapahayag na Tagalog ang 
pagbabatayan ng wikang pambansa. At sa 
kasunod na kautusan Big, 263 na pinag- 
tibay ng Pangidong Quezon nuong ika-1 
ng AbrH, 1940 at iyon ay nag-aatas ng 
paglalaan ng pondo sa pagpapalimbag ng 
*'Bokabularyong Ingles-Tagalog'' at ng 
"BalarOa ng Wikang Pambansa/' 

Pagpapatupad sa kautusan ng Pangu- 
long Quezon, itinakda ng Kagawaran ng 
Paturuang Bayan nuon, ang pagtuturo ng 
Wikang Pambansa sa ika-4 na an tas ng 
mataas na paaralang publiko at pribado at 
iyon ay magsasapul sa ika-1 9 ng Hunyo^ 
1940. 



Ang Kawanihan ng Pagtuturo, nuong 
ika-15 ng Nobyembre, 1940 ay nag utos 
din sa lahat ng mga tagapamanihala ng 
mga paaralan na magkaroon ng pitak sa 
Wikang Filipino ang lahat ng mga paha- 
y agang parapaaralan. 

Batay pa rin sa Batas ng Komonwei 
Big, 570, pinagtibay ng Kapulungang 
Bansa nuong Hunyo 7, 1940 at nUagdaan 
kaagad ng Pangulong Quezon, ang Wikang 
Filipino ay itinalagang m^ng isa sa 
wikang opisyal.ng Pilipinas at ang batas ay 
magkakabisa mula sa ika-4 ng Hulyo, 
1946 o sa takdang araw ng pagkakaloob 
ng Estados Unidos sa ganap na kalayaan 
ng ating bansa, Sa pan ah on ding yaon ay 
itinakdang dapat na maging handa na ang 
mga aklat na pampaaralan sa panganga- 
siwa ng Kawanihan ng Pagtuturo at ang 
kaanyuan o kawastuhan ng mga salita ay 




'"Ang fmmanmyang may kang bansa at isang kihi ay dapat magkaroon ng isang wika': 



63 



nasa pagpapatibay ng Sxirian ng Wikang 
Pambansa. 

Lahat ng Punong Tagapagpaganap na 
sumunod ng panvinui^ulan sa Pangulong 
Quezon ay pawang nagtaguyod sa mga 
adhikaix^ tungo sa lalo pang pagpapa- 
\mlad at pagpapalaganap sa Wikang Pam- 
bansa. 

Sa magkapanunod na panunungkiilan 
nina Pangulong Osmena, Roxas at Quirino 
ay nagsa^ul ang pagtuturo ng ating sariling 
wika sa lahat ng mababang paaralan sa 
buong bansa. Nang panahon ng mga 
Pangulong Magsaysay, Garcia at Maca- 
pagal dumagison ang paturuan hanggang 
sa mataas na paaralan sa buong bansa. 
Napatalaga na rin nuon ang taimang pag- 
diriwang sa Linggo ng Wika tuwing ika-13 
han^ang ika-19 ng Agosto at nakatuon sa 
paggunita sa anibersaryo ng kaarawan ng 
Ama ng Wikang Pambansa, sa Pangulong 
Manuel L. Quezon. 

Danga't ang Isdong makatuturan mara- 
hfl na pagpapahalaga at pagdakila sa 
Wikang Pilipino ay ang Kautusang Taga- 
pagpaganap Big. 187 ng Pangulong Ferdi- 
iiand E. Marcos. Nilagdaan noong ika-19 
ng Agosto, 1969 ang kautusan na nag- 
aatas sa lahat ng kagawaran, kawanihan, 
tanggapan at iba pang sangay ng pama- 
halaan na gamitin ang Wikang Pilipino sa 
lahat ng opisyal na komtinikasyon at 
transaksiyon ng pamahalaan. Kaugnay pa 
rin ng pagdakilang ito ay ang pagkakasulat 
din sa Wikang Pilipino ng Saligang Batas 
ngl973. 

Pagalinsimod pa rin sa simulain ni 
Quezon ukol sa sariling wika, ang Pangulo 
at Punong Ministro Marcos sa pagtanggap 
na opisyal ng mga embahador o sugo ng 
ibang bansa ay wika natin ang kanyang 
ginagamit. Kung Pilipino ang sinasalita 
niya sa mga dayiihan, higit niya itong 
ginagamit sa pakikipag-usap sa kanyang 
mga kababayan, saanmang panig ng bansa 
siya magtimgo, kaugnay ng kanyang mase- 
selang pananagutan. 



"Ang pangarap ko," anang Pangulong 
Marcos kaugnay ng pagpaparangal sa ka- 
arawan ng Pangulong Quezon nuong 
1973, '^ay makausap ng tuwiran ang 
pinaka-abang mamamayan saanmang 
sulok ng atii^ bansa sa pamamagitan ng 
ating katutubong wika. At sa gayong suka- 
tan ay mithiin ko rin na ang pinaka-abang 
mamamayang iyan ay tuwiiaz^ makapag- 
pahayag ng kanyang naiisip at nadarama 
sa pamamagitan ng isang katutubong wika 
na bumubuldod sa atin." Ang pawakas na 
sabi nuon ng Pangulong Marcos, "Sa Wari 
ko ay unti-unti nang nagaganap ang mithi- 
ing iyon sa pamamagitan ng Wikang Pili- 
pino. Nananawagan ako sa lahat na mag- 
kaisang-Mlos tayo tungo sa ating kaluwal- 
hatiang pambansa. Ang Wikang Pambansa 
natin ay ang Pilipino. Sikapin nating 
yumabong, lumakas, maging matipimo at 
lubusang lumaganap ito sa bisa ng ating 
paggamit, Ang matagumpay na paglaganap 
nito ay isang dakilang gunita sa alaala ng 
Pangulong Quezon, ang Ama ng Wikang 
Pambansa." 

Ang nagpasidhi sa pagnanasa ng Pa- 
ngulong Quezon na magkaroon ng isang 
wikang magi^ng talastasan ng mga Pili- 
pino ay inixdat na may kinalaman sa isang 
pangyayaring naganap sa Casiguran, sakop 
ng nuon ay lalawigang Tayabas (Quezon 
ngayon). Ayon sa salaysay ni Modesto 
Bantolan, punong potograpo ng Mala- 
kanyang nuon, ang baryong pinuntahan 
nila ay nararating lamang sa pamamagitan 
ng bangka. Ang nasabing pook ay pinama- 
mayanan ng mga Dumagat. Nang umahon 
daw sila sa dalampasigan, nagtakbuhan 
ang mga Dumagat. Hindi upang salubu- 
ngin ang bagong Pangulo ng Komonwel, 
kungdi upang magsipagtago. Nagalit daw 
ang Pangulong Quezon. Pinatawag niya 
ang Tinyente del Baryo at ang mga gurong 
nay on at inutusan niyang tipunin ang mga 
tao sa loob ng paaralan ng baryo, Nang 
naroroon na ang mga mamamayan, nag- 
salita j:aw sa wikang Tagalog ang Pangulo. 



64 



aitibensaEyD ng kaarawan ng Pangulong 

Quezon nuong Agosto 19^ 1959, ang 
Wikang Pambansa ay opisyailiakiiulalang 

^fiiyar *'P9Hfld ko mal aUnnnn ang inyong 
mga pangangailangan kung ulcu ay tinatak- 
fauhan ninyo na animo ay nakakita ng 
hnng dambuhala? Ako ay nagpilit mag- 
saclya rito upang tujungan kayo, hindi 
u^pimg kayo ay takutin. Tayong lahat siy 
pawang Filipino at magka-kilawigan 
naman tayo. Nais kong Luwii'ang marinig 
mula sa inyo ang inyong pangangailangan 
sa akin at sa pamahalaan." 

Tahimik na tahimik daw ang mga tao. 
Ibinadya ng kanilang mga anyo na sila'^ 
n^iaamo ng tila bato-balaning pangungU- 
sap ng Pangulong Quezon, Makaraan daw 
ang Oang sandali, umugong ang isang 
sigawang "Mabuhay ang Presidente." 
Kasunod nito, ang pinakapuno ng tribu, 
matapos humalik ng kamay sa Pangulo ay 
nangusap sa Tagalog-Dumagat: *^Salamat 
po, Presidente; Tulong sa amin doktor at 
gamot.*' 

Sa naganap na pangyayaii ay tumuon 
daw sa isipan ng Pangulong Quezon ang 
bisa ng pakikipagtalastasan sa wikang 
^arili, lalo na sa ating mga karaniwang ka* 
babayan. Hindi nga raw naglipat buwan 
mula nuon, nagpadala siya ng kalatas sa 
K^ulungang Bansa at ipinanukalang lu- 
mikha ng isang suriang mag-aaial at mag- 
papasiya ng wikang opisyal na sasalitain 
ngmga Pilipino. 

Kaugnay ng pagkalcapatibay sa na- 
banggit na nating Batas ng Komt)nw6l. 
Big* 184 na lumikha sa Surian ng Wikang 
Eambansa, ang Pangulong Quezon sa pa- 
in^magitan ng kanyang Kautusang Tfe^a- 
|>agpaganap Big. 134 ay hinirang ang mga 
ijiangangasiwa sa nasabing Sudan. Sila ay 
#ig mga sumusunod: Jaime C, de Veym 
(^amar-Leyte), 'tagapangulo; Santiago A. 
F onacier (Eokano), Filemon Sotto (Cebu- 
ano), Casimiio F, Perfecto (Bikol), Felix 
S. Salas Rodriguez (Panay-Biaaya) at Ha^ji 
Butu (Moro-Muslim), mga ka^wad. M 
Cecilio Lopez (Tagalog) ay hinirang- tia 
kagawad at kalihim ng surian* . 




Si J\mgulong Quezon sa tiarap ng mga mamamaym. 

Makaraan ang itinakdang panahon ng 
batas, nagpasiya nga ang Surian, na T^a- 
log ang pagbatayan ng Wikang Pambansa. 
Ang pagpapatupad sa kapasiyahan at ang 
pa^aan ng mga kaukulang gugulin ay 
kaagad na pinagtibay ng Pai^ulong 
Quezon, Ang lubusang pagpapalaganap sa 
Wikang Pambansa ang itinadhana ng Batas 
ng Komonwel Big- 570 at nilagdaan ng 
Pangulong Quezon nuong ika-7 ng Huuyo, 
1940. 

(Ang paggamifc sa "Pilipino" kapag 
tihatukc^ ang Wdcaiig Pambansa ay ant 
paksang tinurol ng Kautusang Pan^a- 
gawaran Big 7, nang nuo'y Kalihim Jose 

Eomero ng Pagtutui^ at iyon ay sa 
panahon ng panunungkulan ng yumaeBg 
Pangulong Carlos P, Garcia J 



AUG ATIN6 WIKAN6 PAMBANSA 
NOON AT NBAYOH 

ni 

Eduardo Ramos Bautista 



Gaano kahalsga ang pagkakaroon ng 
isang wikang pambansa? Aug pagkaka- 
roon ng isang wikang pambansa ay napa- 
kahalaga lalo pa at kung ating lilimiin na 
ang ating bansa ay pulo-pulo at sa bawat 
xehiyon ay may ibang salita. 

Kailangan natin ang isang wikang 
bibigkis sa ating magkakabalat mula sa 
Aparri hanggang Jolo. Ang suliraning ito 
ang nakatawag ng pansin ng yumaong 
Pianguiong Manuel L. Quezon. Kaya siya 
nagpunyagi upang magkaroon ng kalu- 
tasan ang suliraning ito. Sapagkat kimg 
mamala^ng ganito ay parang nakikinita 
niya na tayong magkakababsyan ay 
wdang kaisahan, watak-watak at walang 
pagkakaintindihan. 



Kaya ang ating mabunying pangulo ay 
bumuo ng isang lupon sa pamimili ng 
ating magi^ng wikang pambansa, at sa 
kalipunan ng mahigit na walumpong 
wikain (dialects) ay napili ang Tagalog. 
Dahil dito ay nagpalabas si Quezon ng 
isang kautusang pampangasiwaan na may 
bilang 134 na naghahayag ng pagkakaroon 
ng isang wikang pambansa na batay sa 
Tagalog. Noong 1939 ang batas ng Com- 
monwealth Big. 184 na nagtatadhana na 
ang Tagalog ay siyang pangunahing ba- 
tayan ng Wikang Pambansa at nagtatatag 
ng isang Surian ng Wikang Pambansa ay 
nilagdaan din niya. Ang mga hakbanging 
ito ng Pangulong Quezon ay waring di pa 
rin nakasiya sa kanya, kaya ang Batas 
Commonwealth Big. 263 na kanyang 
pinalabas ay nagtatakda ng kautusan ng 
pagtuturo ng Pilipino bilang asignatura sa 
mga paaralan at kanya ring nilagdaan ang 
batas big. 570 na nagsasaad na ang wikang 
Pilipino ay magiging isa sa opisyal na wika 
sa Pilipinas. 

Kung mayroon man laban sa wikang 
Pilipino ay higit na nakararami naman ang 
bilang ng mga nagmainalasakit dito. Sa 
katunayan ilang taon pa lamang ang naka- 
raraan nang ang punongrlungsod sa May- 
nila ay nagpasimimo sa pagsasalin sa Taga- 
log. Katulad halimbawa ng city hall, Ma- 
harniladna, ang overpass-underpass ay 
naging Lagusnilad at maging ang kanyang 
tungkuling alkalde ay lumalagapak na Gat- 
puno ang kinalabasan. At napakarami 
pang iba katulad ng mga karatula ng iba't 
ibang sangay ng pamahalaang lungsod. 
Ma^ng ang ating pambansang pamahalaan 
ay nakiisa rin sa naturang pagsasalin, 
sinimulan nila ito sa iba't ibang kagawaran 
at kawanihan hanggang sa ating mga salapi 
maging papel o metal man ay sa wikang 
Pilipino na rin nalilimbag. 

Ito ay patunay lamang na ang wikang 
Pilipino ay tinatanggap ng nakararami, 
marapat na payabungin natin ng ang 
Wikang banyaga ay di na natin hiramin. 

Namulat ang marami isang araw na 
tayo nga ay mayroong wikang sarili na 



dapat gamitin at palagan25)in. Salamat sa 
Diyos ang naibigkas ko, ito na marahil ang 
bunga ng pagpupunyagi ng Pangulong 
Quezon. 

Sa paano'y walang pangingimi na gina- 
gamit ang Filipino maging ng mga taong 
"class." Dati-rati ay para sa mga katulong 
lamang sa bahay ang ating wika anila. At 
kapag ang kausap ay may sinasabing tao 
ay "habla Espanol" sila o dili nanian kaya 
ay '^king's English" ang gamit nila. 

Sa larangan ng sining ay ks^ima-puna 
rin na nagkakaroon ng balani ang mga 
duIang-Tagalog katulad ng itinatanghal sa 
PETA ma^ng sa mga "English speaking 
communities." Ang pelikulang pilipino na 
dati*rati ay para sa taong nakabakya 
lamang ay dinudumog na rin ngayon. Sa 
telebisyon, nangunguna naman ang mga 
palabas na nasa wikang Pilipino at upang 
makaalakbay ay nagsisike^ ang iba na 
gumawa ng pamamaraan. Sa musika ay 
lalo na Nariyan ang Juan de la Cruz na 
nagpasimimo sa kanilang "Ang Himig 
Natin" na sinundan ng pamamasyal sa Lu- 
neta ni Rico Puno na hinahabol naman ng 
Laki sa Layaw ni Mike Hanopol kasama 
ang mabangong si Sampaguita. At sa 
ngayon nga ay alam na alam maging ng 
mga batang paslit ang awiting "Anak" ni 
Freddie Aguilar, inaawit ng mayaman man 
o mahirap. Kayganda ng ating musika 
kapag aawitin sa sariling wika natin. 

At ang misa ng Bayan, higit na maka- 
hulugan para sa mga mansinampalataya 
ngayon hindi na tulad noong araw na 
sagot lamang ng sagot at dahil sa hindi 
naman natin naiintindihan ay nagiging 
tampulan pa ng biro maging ang banal na 
salita sa konsagrasyon. Nagugunita ko pa 
ang isa kong katanungan sa matanda sa 
bahay noon. "Bakit sa pakikipag-usap sa 
Diyos ay ibang dila ang gamit natin, hindi 
ba tayo mauunawaan ng Diyos kurig sa 
ating wika natin siya kakausapin? 

At sa panimulang pag-aaral ay sini- 
sik^ na palitan ang pa-apple-«pple at ban- 
yagang coloring book. Mayroong pagta- 



tangkang isinasagawa ixgayon ang isang 
pangkat ng mga manunulat sa pangunguna 
ng makatang si Virgilio Almario sa pag- 
kikihtal sa isipan ng mga bata ng kaisipang 
Pilipino. At ito ay sa pamamagitan ng pag- 
lulunsad ng mga kahanga-hangang Aklat 
Adama ng NCP. 

Ang bagong kamalayang ito sa ating 
wika ay masasabing bunga ng pagsisiksp 
ng ating Pangulong Quezon. Kaya*t saan 
man siya naroroon ay tiyak na maligaya 
siya sa nagaganap na kamulatang ito. 

Ang wika ay parang apoy buhusan mo 
at mamamatay, gatungan mo at lalong 
mag-aalab. Ihambing natin ang mga hak- 
bangin ng Pangulong Quezon sa pagpapa- 
ringas ng 2^oy. Nagparingas siya noon na 
bagama't atay-atay lamang ang gatong 
noong nakaraang henerasyon ay di nama- 
tay ang apoy na iyon at nagatimgan 
naman ng maliyab na kahoy na kinaka- 
tawan naman ng bagong kamalayan 
ngayon. natin . . . tungkulin natin bilang 
isang tunay na Pilipino na liunagmg 
maging maalab nang ang ^oy na pina- 
ringas ng Pangulong Quezon ay mamala- 
ging nag-aapoy. 



"Show me a people composed of 
vigorous^ sturdy individuals, of men 
and women healthy in mind and 
body; courtedus^ brave, industrious, 
self-relimU purposeful in thought as 
well as in action; imbued with sound 
patriotism and a profound sense of 
righteousness; with high social ideals 
and a strong moral fiber; and I wUl 
show you a great nation . , , that will 
emerge victorious from the trials and 
bitter strifes of a distracted 
world...'' 



THE IE6EMD THAT IS-.. 




*\ ..civility is the consummate 
flower of culture and civUization for it 
embraces all the virtues and in turn 
sustains and enhances them all " 



A lover of life and mingB bemiiftil 
A metkulom dresser and a good 

damper. 

Top photo shows President and 
Mrs.- Quezon in a Malacamng re- 
ception with Secretary Vargo^s and 
former President Mpidio Quirino. 

E^ht, the first couple welcome 
US. M101 €ommi$sioner Mc Nutt. 

Opp osite page/ 'One of the ten 
h\^t dressed men in the 
v orld/' according to John 
imiher, author of Inside 
Asia. 



7% 




Pres. Quezon observed no regular hours and followed no definite 
pattern of activities. He ate when he was hungry and slept when 
he felt drowsy — habits all too familiar with persons flose to him 
like his Executive Secretary Jorge Vargas and Senior Aide Manuel 
Nieto, shown above keeping pace with the President 



^'Individual liberty is based on the 
(U^acity to support one's self. A man 
unable to support himself is a slave, 
though he may not want to be one. It 
is foolish to speak to independence, of 
liberty, if one cannot maintain that 
independence, that liberty. 




President Quezon listening to Sen. Benigno Aquino, Sr. with Secretary 
Vargas and Justice Secretary Jose Yulo, Sr. 



n 



"As a good father, i ao not warn 
my children to suffer the hunger and 
privation that I suffered, I do not 
want them to be ^shirtless' as their 

father had been, not because to be 
poor is a dishonor^ but becau^ it is 




The President takes ta farming at hU Kdledian 
farm in Are^a^ PamparigiL 



1 




''We have just laid the foundation 
of the new edifice, faithfully carrying 
out the mandates of the Constitution, 
We have erected the supporting pUlars 
foursquare within the guideposts and 
landmark traced in that great docu- 
ment Just how well we have succeed- 
ed thus far is not for us to judge but 
for posterity to decide.** 




President Quezon delivering a speech — an audio-visual experience. 



7« 



1978 - MANUEL L 



amm .centenni aj. mn 



lebrate as it marks an 
histoiy of man or nation 



August 19, 1978 is the 100th birth an- 
niversary of Manuel L. Quezon — Father of 
Ibflippme Independence, Champion of So- 
cial Justice, Patriot, Statesman. As a fitting 
tribute to the great leader. President and 
Prime Minister Ferdinand E. Marcos issued 
Proclamation No. 1726 declaring 1978 as 
Manuel L. Quezon Centennial Year and de- 
signating the National Historical Institute 
tp take charge of the celebptioii* He also 
fe^ed Exemitive Oirf^ WbV Sfe creating 
the Executive Committee headed by Don 
Pio P^drosa (see page 81 for complete 
tm^B^Ham j^lib^G^^^ lite and 
cute tjiis jrear'a commemoisdave activities, 

RecogdissiHf enormous task ahead^ 

the Executive Committee created subcomr 
mittees to take charge of the particulars of 
ISke vaiicms activities (see pagja 84)^ 

Quezon City, President Quezon's dream 
city, ushered the year-long celebration with 
a symposium on ''Quezon^s Social and Poli- 
jpcd Legacy to the Filipino Nation'* on 
febmary 28* 1978. Uie Ifflmstty of Educa- 



*iif Ihe tetewt 0f Srieulcffting upon 
the youth the invaluable contribution of 
Pl^dent Quezon to the; political emancipa- 
Wtin i9f the nation msd me enhan<^m^i 0f 
national growth, has scheduled nationwide 
week-long (Aug- 14—20) celebiatioii revol- 
ving around the tiieme, "Manuel L. Que- 
to thie Kew Sociefyf * 

^e Executive " Committee through its 
Ifspective subcommittees is conducting a 
ti^onwide competition on Painting, Sculp- 
ture, Music, Oration and Literature (Essay) 
depilating the life of President Quezon. 
^Mi^alkiB are file following: 

Fainiing Sculpture 
First Prize P7,000.00 P7,000.00 

Second Prize 5,000.00 5,000.00 
XbildPmf 3,000,00 3,000.00 

!|^^iyi^»ble Mentions —PI ,000.00 eacfc 



High School 
First Prize 
Second Prize 
Hiird Prize 



PI ,500.00 
1,000.00 
500^00 



PI ,500.00 
l,000-<>0 

soo.oa 



Three Honorable MentiGns --P200,00 eojh 




QU0t speakers during the symposium include Ambi^mdur Jose Laurel ill^ Hon. Emitio 
4ll^fe md Minister Carlos Ramuh. Also in photo ata Mrs. N^l Qu^zorv-Avanaena, 



79 



Colleguite 

Fiist Prize Pl,500.00 Pl,500.00 

SAcond Prize 1,000,00 1,000.00 

Tbiid Prize 500.00 500.00 

Hizee Honorable Mentions — WOO .00 each 
Choral Composition 

First Prize ^,000.00 
Second Prize 5,000.00 
Third Prize 3,000.00 

l%ree other prizes— WOO .00 each 

Deadline for submission of entries will 
be on November 2, 1978 Awarding of prizes 
will be he^d at the Carlos Albert Session 
Hall, Quezon City Hall on November 15 to 
coincide with Ihe 43rd anniversary of the 
Commonwealth of Ihe Philippines. The 
Awarding Ceremonies will cap the one-day 
congzess on ''President Quezon's Role in 
Nation Building" that is scheduled on the 
sam^ day at the same place. All inquiries re- 
gaiding the above-mentioned contests may 
be directed to the 1978 MLQ Centennial 
Secretariat Office, 4th floor, Publications 
Division, The National Library, T.M. Kalaw 
St , Manfla. 

The Quezohiana state papers which in- 
clude mess£^es, speeches and other manus- 
cripts will be collated and edited for possi- 
ble pubiicaifion. Undarta&ing Ihis activity is 
ihe Subcommittee on Quezoniana papers. 
Ihe Subcommittee on Quezoniana Publica- 
tion, on the other hand, is evaluatiiig writ- 
ten works on President Quezon submitted 
to the Executive Committee for possible in- 
clusion in the Quezoniana literature that is 
proposed td be compiled. 

The National Media Prodiiction Center 
has prepared a documentary film, the 
poiiion of which is about President Que- 
zon. It wQl b0 shown on TV and movie thea^ 
tres. Ihe Central Bank Monetary Board has 
approved l&e minl?^ of twenty-five and 
fifty-peso coiii^ featuring tile portrait of 
Manuel L. Quezon and the Bureau of Post 



is issuing MLQ centenary stamps and postal 
folders. 

Ihe center of August 19 celebration is 
the Quezon Memorial Circle in Quezon 
City where the towering Quezon Monu- 
ment is located. At the mbnimient's base- 
ment is the Quezon museum (where a Que- 
zoniana exhibit is being held) and mauso- 
leum where President Quezon's remains 
will be transferred from the North Ceme- 
tery. It is idgnificant to note lhat the same 
flag used diuing his burial in 1946 is being 
used for this sole^)ln occasion. 

The town of Baler, Aurora Subprovince, 
birthplace of the late President has started 
their festivities as eariy as July 31 with the 
coronation of Miss Donna Buenconsejo as 
Miss MLQ Centennial Celebration by Mrs. 
Zeneida Quezon Avancena. They have been 
having diana, mass, parade and cultural pre-- 
sentations daily up to August 20. 

Liucena City, capital of Quezon province 
has lined up activities be^ning August 13 
which include civic parade, opening of ttie 
Gintong Yaman ng Quezon, unveiling of- 
the MLQ Photo Gallery Mansion House, co- 
ronation of Lakcanbini Ng Quezon^ sports 
tournament, on-the-spot painting contest, 
oratoricied contest and helicopter diow 
among others. Highlight of the one week 
celebration is Ihe Awards Ceremony and 
Testimonial Dinner in honor of ihe out- 
standing Quezonians of 1978. 

All over Ihe country, cities, towns and 
barrios will observe in various manners the 
birth centenary of the man whose greatest 
gift to the^ Filipino nation was the priceless 
legacy of freedom with dignity. 

But the best way to observe the Manuel 
ii. Quezori birth centenary is to remember 
him in ojuf heartsi and resolve within our- 
led'^e&toUve up to his ideals and aspirations, 
it was he himself who otice said that a na- 
tion revercBits heroes best by being "strong, 
dynapic and £r^. He hdis Idd the f ounda- 
tion> It 1$ up for ua to caorq^ on. 



80 



Hon, Luis Etcubafto 
Vice-Chairn}ai> 




Hon. Estrello T. Ong 
Vioe-Chairman 




Hon* Juan Ponce Enrile 
Member 



Hon, Cesar A. Virata 
Member 




1978 MANUEL L QUEZON NATIONAL CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION 

SUBCOMMITTEES 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON PAINTING COMPETITION 



Chairman 



Interim 
Chaimian 



Members 



Dean Jose Joya 
College of Fine Arts 
University of the Philippines 
Mrs. Virginia Flor Agbayani 
Assodate Dean 
College of Rne Arts 
University of the Philippines 
Prof. Felipe Padilla de Leon, Jr 
Department of Humanities 
College of Arts and Sciences 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON MUSIC COMPETITION 



Chairman 



Members 



Dean Ramon P. Santos 
College of Music 
University of the Philippines 

Prof. Bayani M. de Leon 
Ministry of Public Information 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SCULPTURE 

Chairman — Dean Napoleon Abueva 



Members 



College of Fine Arts 
University of the Philippines 

— Prof. Solomon A. Saprid 
University of the East 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON LITERARY CONTEST 



Chairman 



Members 



Ministry Juan L Manuel 
of Education and Culture 

Mrs. Hortensia F. Benoza 

Assistant Secretary 

Ministry of Education and Culture 

Hon. Ricardo Trinidad 
Acting Director 

Bureau of Secondary Education 
Ministry of Education and Culture 



Prof. Florenclo Concepcion 
College of Fine Arts 
University of the East 



Dean Alfredo Buenaventura 
Centro Escolar University 



Prof. Ed Castrillo 
University ^f the Philippines 



Director Antonio Dumlao 
Bureau of Higher Education 
Ministry of Education and Culture 

Director Minda Sutaria 

Bureau of Elementary Education 

Ministry of Education and Culture 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON QUEZONIANA PAPERS 



Chairman 
Member 



Director Serafin D. Quiason 
National Library 

Mrs. Luz S. CastaPieda 
Chief, Publications Division 
National Library 



84 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON ORATORICAL CONTEST 



Chairman -> Director Ponciano B.P. Pineda 

National Media Production Center 

Members - Director Gregorio S. Cendana 

National Media Production Center 

Director Florentino Daus 
Bureau of Broadcast 

Director Lorenzo J. Cruz 

Bureau of National and Foreign Information 

Mrs. Estela Dagulo 

Ministry of Education and Culture 

JPtrtJtTcatlons t>iv!$ion 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON QUEEONIANA PUBLICATIONS 

Chairman - -Director Serafin D. Quiason 
National Library 

Members - Hon. Esteban A. de Ocampo 

Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 

Prof. Alejandrino Hufana 

Librarian, Cultural Center of the Philippines 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON LOCAL COMMEMORATIVE CELEBRATIONS 



Chairman 



Co-Chairman 



Minister Juan L Manuel 
Ministry of Education and Culture 
(Asst. Minister Vedastro Suarez) 

Minister Jose Rono 

Ministry of Local Governments and 

Con^nunlty Development 

(Mr. Rene Maglaya) 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVITATIONS 

<Chalrman - Director Cristobal Osoteo 



Co-Chairman - 



Presidential Protocol Officer 
MalacaRang 

(Mr. Mauro Bustamaiite) 
Ambassador Rafael Gonzales 
Ministry of Foralgi Affwrs 
(Vioe-Consul Antonio Pratts, Jr.) 



Memben - Hon. Pio Pedrosa 

Hon. SerapioD. Canceran 
Professor Mauro Garda 



85 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONGRESS ON PRESIDENT QUEZON'S 
ROLE IN NATtON-BUILDING 



Chairman 



Dr. Onofre D. Corpuz 
President 

University of the Philippines 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL MARKERS 

Chairman — Hon. Esteban A de Ocampo 

Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSFER QF REMAINS 



Chairman — 
Cd-Chairman ^ 
Members — 



Hon. Serapio D. Canceran 

Atty. Ramon Valencia 

Rev. Fr. Pacifico Ortiz, SJ. 

Hon. Minerva Genovea 

Judge, Branch 1 

City Court, Quezon City 

Hon. Justiniano Cortez 
City Fiscal 
Quezon City 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON EXHIBITS 

Chairman - Hon. Jorge B. Vargas 

Memberis - Mrs. Avelina S. Castaneda 

Chief, Spedal and Commemorative 
Events Division 

Niational Hfstorical Institute 

Miss Carolina Afan 
Chief, Filipiniana Division 
National Library 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RELJQIOUS CEREMONIES 

Chairman ^ Hon. Justiniano P, Cortez 

City Fiscal 
Quezon City 



Members 



Hon. Pacifico Punzalan 
judge. City Court, 
Que29Dn City 

Atty. P&r^lta 
Director of Libturfes 
Quezon City 



Hon. Ulpiano Sarmiento 
Judge, Branch 9 
CFI, Quezon City 

Dr. Consuelo Villarosa 

Heal Officer 
Quezon City 

• Lt. Col. Bernabe Oreha 
Ministry of National Defense 



Mr. Margarito Raymundo 
Museum Research Assistant 
National Library 

Mr. Benito Cagahastian 
Supervising Architect 
National Museum 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCE 



Chairman - Hon. Esteban A. de Ocampo 

Cliatrman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 

Vice^Chalrman - Atty. Anselnno 0, Regis 
City treasiirer 
Quezon City 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SECURITY 



Chairman - Major General Fabian C. Ver 

Presidential Security CoTnmand 
MaJacanang 

(Lt. Col. Fi lemon Agustin) 
SUBCOMMITTEE ON STAGE CONSTRUCTION 



Chairman 
Members 



Engineer Celso Batallooes 
Quezon City 

Ambassador Rafael Gonzales 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(Vice- Consul Antonio Pratt s, Jr. 

Director Cristobal Osoteo 
Presidential Protocol Officer 
Malacanang 

(Mr. Mauro Bustamante) 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON PARADE 



Chairman 
Co-Chalrman 



Minister Juan Ponce Enrile 
Ministry of National Defense 
Gen. Tomas Karingal 
Northern Police District 
Quezon City 



Gen. Fabian C. Ver 
Presidential Security Command 
Malacanang 

(Lt CoL Fi lemon Agustin) 



Mr. Francisco Alvarez 
Cultural Affairs and 
Tourism Officer 
Quezon City 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON PROTOCOL 



Chairman " Director Cristobal Osoteo 

Presidential Protocol Officer 
Malacanang 

(Vice-Consul Antonio Pratts, JrJ 
(Mr. Mauro Bustamante) 



CoXhairman - Ambassador Rafael Gonzales 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(Vice-Consul Antonio Pratts, Jr.) 



87 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON CENTENARY STAMPS 



'Chairman - Hon. Felizardo R. Tanabe 
Postmaster General 
Bureau of Posts 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON CENTENARyjMEDALLIONS 

Chairmaa — Hon. Esteban A, de Ocampo 

Chairman and Executive Director 
National Historical Institute 

Members - - Prof. Galo B. Ocampo 

Technical Consultant on Heraldry 
National Historical Institute 

Mr. Edgar Lee 
Emblem Designer 
National Historical Institute 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON PUBLICITY 



Chairman 



Mrs. Mylah de Leon 
Office of the Mayor 
Quezon City 



SUBCOMMITTEE QN PRINTING OF PROGRAMS 



Chairman 



- Atty. Ahselmo O. Regis 
City Treasurer 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOUVENIR PROGRAM 



Chairman 



Vioe-Chairman - 



Members - 



Arch. Gerardo G. Magat 
Executive Director 

City Planning and Development Office 

Quezon Qty 

Mr. Francisco Alvarez 

Oiltural Affairs and Tourism Officer 

Quezon aty 

Mr. Luis T. Cruz 

City P\m\mni and Develqpnttnt Office 

Quezon Qty 

Miss Ellen T. Tbrdesillas 

aty Piannirig and Development, Office 
Quezon Gty 



88 



MANUEL L. QUEZON CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION COMMITTEES 

(QUEZON CITY) 



Mayor ADELIN A S. RODRIGUEZ - Over-all Chafmian 



EXECUTIVE COWWIITTEE 

Atty. Anselmo 0. Regis - Chairman 

Mr. Celso A. Ferreras, Sr. - Co-Chainiian 



MEMBERS 



Mr. Francisco B. Alvarez 

Archr Luciano V. Aquino 

Atty. Braulio A. Arrlola, Jr. 

Mrs. Commemoracion M. Concepcion 

Fiscal Justiniano P. Cortez 

Dr. Fe Viilanueva Fernandez 

IVIr. Eduardo T. Fiel 

Mr. Alberto M. Galarpe 

Judge Minerva C. Genovea 

Mrs. Estrella P. Gerardo 

Brig. Gen. Tomas B. Karlngal 

Judge Leonor Ines Luciano 

Arch. Gerardo G. Magat 



Atty, Benigno C Nagrampa 
Col. Salvador G. Narcelles 
Mr. Jose Paculdo 
Atty. Felicidad A. Peralta 
Mrs. Veronica A. Ramos 
Col. Ernesto San Diego 
Atty. Manuel T. Santos 
Judge Utptano Sarmiento 
Engr. Pantaleon P. Tabora 
Atty. Jose T. Torcaaator 
Atty. Ramon R, Vaflencia 
Mrs. Lourdes B. Vergara 
Dr. Consuelo G. Viltarosa 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCE 



Mr. Silverio SJ Cruz Chairman 
Mrs. LourdesS. Ranees Co-Chairman 
Mr. Altierto M. Galarpe 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MiLtTARY AND CIVIC PARADE 

AND WREATH LAYING 



Brig. Gen, Tomas B, Karlngal Chairman 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON PROGRAM AND INVITATION 

Atty. Manuel T, Santos Charrman 
Mrs. Veronica A. Ramos Co-Chairmen 
Atty. Benign o C. Nagrampa 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON PHVSJCAL ARRANGEMENTS 

Engr. Pantaleon P. Tabora Chairman 

Engr, t^lso P. Bat all ones ^ Co-Chair man 
Col, Ernesto San Diego Members 
Mr. Jose Paculdo 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MASS 

Fiscal Justin iano P, Cortez Chairman 
Judge Pacifico Punzalan Co-Chairman 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RECEPTION AND PROTOCOL 

Judge Leonor Ines Luciano Chairman 
Mrs, Conmemoracion M, Concepcion Co-Chairman 
Mrs. Ditas Racelis Member 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CULTURAL PRESENTATION 

Mr, Francisco Alvarez Chairman 
Mrs, Estrella P* Gerardo Co-Chairman 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIALS 

Mrs, Veronica A» Ramos Chairman 

Mr. Francisco B. Alvarez Co^ChaJrman 
Mrs, Loudes B. Vergara 



90 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOUND SYSTEM 



Atty, Bent goo C Nagrampa 
Col. Ernesto San Diego 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON PUBLICITY 

Mn Floreotino A Lapus 
Mrs. Mylah de Leon 
Mrs, Brenda P. Tuazon 



Chairman 
Co-Chairman 



Chairman 
Co-Chairmen 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON QUEZON MEMORABILIA 

Any, Felicidad A, Peralta 
Atty. Jose T, Torcuator 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOUVENIR PROGRAM 

Arch. Gerardo G. Magat 
Mr- Francisco B, Aivarez 
Luis T. Cruz 
Ellen T Tordesillas 



Chairman 
Co-chairman 



Chairman 
Co-Chairman 
Member 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND TRAFFIC 

CoJ. Ernesto San Diego Chairman 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH 

Dr. Consuelo G. Villarosa Chairman 
Dr. Fe' ViUanueva Fernandez Co-Chairman 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON BARANGAY PARTICIPATION 

Mr. EduardoT Fiel Chairman 
Atty. Braulio A, Arriola, Jr. Co-Chairmen 
Mr, Carlos Ranees 
Mr* Dante C. Santos 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSFER OF REMAINS 

Atty. Ramon R. Valencia Chairman 
Judge Ulpiano Sarmiento Co-Chairmen 
Jud^ Minerva C. Genovea 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPORTS ACTIVITIES 

Mr, Alberto V. Felipe Chairman 



Ackno^^^mrats: 



Our heartfelt gratitude to the following: 

Joige Vaigas Filipiniana Foundation^Natio- 
nal Historical Institute and Honesto Vitug for 
making their Quezoniana collection available 
to us. 

Mr. Serapio D, Canceran for giving us a glimpse 
of Manuel L. Quezon — the leader, the man. 

ft»f. Maozo Garcia, Floideliza Mflitante, 
Rowena Perez and Ditas RaceOis for providing 
us mvaluable assistance in our seemfaigly end- 
less seaieh for materials. 

And to each and every one -who made €be 
publication of this souvoiir program possible. 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOUVENIR PROGRAM 
August 1978 



n 



ord to add to the 
stature — intellectual and spiritual — of 
MANUEL LUIS QUEZON. That is an im- 
possibility. We might as well attempt to 
retouch a masterpiece done by an im- 



Justice Frank Murphy 
Former Governor General 
of the Philippines 



