r 



( 



spc!29 



THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

An address delivered by Major General Basilio J. Valdes, P. A. 

Aboard the US AT REPUBLIC, June 1 1, 1946 

. c£> 

The Philippine Archipelago was dis^vered by Ferdinand Magellan, who first reached the eastern 
Philippine Island of Samar on March 16, 1521 . These islands pertaining to the Indonesian group were named 
by the Spanish in 1 565 “Las Filipinas (the Philippines) in honor of their King, Philip II. The Philippine 
Islands are Situated between 21 degrees 10 minutes and 4 degrees 40 minutes North Latitude and between 
1 16 degrees 40 minutes and 126 degrees 34 minutes East Longitude. They lie off the coast of Southeastern 
Asia directly across the China Sea, 500 miles east of Hong Kong. There are altogether 7083 islands in the 
Archipelago, which extends 1, 1 50 statute miles from north to south and 682 miles from east to west, Only 
462 islands have an area of one square mile or more. The area of the entire Archipelago is approximately 
1 15,600 sq. miles, or slightly less than the combined land areas of Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia and 
West Virginia. y 

The largest Islands are Luzon, in the north, which covers a land area of 40,§14 sq. miles, and 
Mindanao, in the south, with an area of 36,906 sq. miles. The so-called Visayan Islands; occupying a central 
position between these two great islands, are much smaller in area but are nevertheless important. Five of 
them, namely Samar, with an area of 5,124 sq. miles, Negros, with 4,904, Panay, with 4^145, Palawan, with 
4j500 and Mindoro, with^794 sq. miles. The islands of Cebu, Bohol, and Masbate are smaller in size. The 
population of the Philippines is approximately 18,000,000. 

jrviv SPANIS H RXPHR1MENT IN GLOB AT GEOGR APHY 

The Spanish historian; Antonio Pigafetta, who accompanied Magellan on his expedition to the 
Philippines, was fortunate to be aboard the "Victoria", the only ship that returned out of the five that had 
departed from Seville. According to Pigafetta, Magellan, anxious to obtain adequate food supplies forjhis 
crew, extended his explorations. Passing the island of Bohol, he arrived at Cebu, at that time a native town 
of several thousand inhabitants. Pigafetta found evidence of extensive intei^island trade. He observed that 

Q 

Cebu merchants in 1521 w#re in possession of balance scales, weights and measures and had a good 
knowledge of the relative^value of commodities. 

Fired by a tremendous enthusiasm to Christianize the populations of the newly-discovered lands, 
Magellan was able to convert and baptize 800 Filipinos, including Humabon, their Chief or Datt/ Magellan 
was killed by Chief Lapu Lapu in hand-to-hand combat soon afterward, while assisting the Christianized 
Cebuans in a fight with the natives of the nearby island of Mactan. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 1 2:54 PM 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 10:34 AM 



o 



1 of 6 



spcl29 



Still searching for the Moluccas, the expedition passed by a small number of islands of the Cagayan 
Sulu group, the island of Palawan, where was observed with interest the native sport of cock fighting, and 
landed finally at Brunei, a strong Mohammedan town on the northwest coast of the island of Borneo. 
Pigafetta states that Brunei consisted of two sections: one, that of the native Dyak Malay population, the 
other, that of the Mohammedan Malay, who were in possession of gunpowder and numerous brass cannons. 
The expedition then sailed to Mindanao, where native pearl fishing^excited their interest. Finally the island of 
Tidor, one of the Molucca islands* 250 miles south of Mindanao was reached. Abrade agreement and form 
of treaty was arranged with the Raja^ Almanzar, of the island of Tidor, and Yusef of the much larger island 
of Gilolo (Halmahera). At last it was possible to get down to the real purpose of the expedition, namely, 
trade. A trading post was established, and it was hoped that these islands could be held against the 
Portuguese. The Spaniards exchanged cloth for a rich cargo of cloves, sandalwood, ginger, cinnamon and 
gold^ It was decided to send one ship, the Victoria, back to Spain under the command of Juan Sebastian 
Elcano by way of the Cape of Good Hope, following the established Portuguese route. The other remaining 

ship out of the original five was to return to the Spanish colonies in America. This latter ship was never 

& 

hqard from again.£ The Victoria sailed first to Timor^ another small island of the Moluccas, and then through 
the Indian Ocean, around the Southern end of Africa, finally reaching the Portuguese Cape Verde Islands, 
wh^re Elcano anchored, hoping to obtain supplies. The Portuguese governor became, suspicious and gave 
orders for the seizure of the-lvictoria. Elcano raised sail, arriving at San Lucas, Spain; September 6, 1 522, 

e n 

with only 18 men left of the original company of 234.-25?tr. Spain welcomed the return of the expedition. 
Elcano was given the significant coat of arms showing the clove^the cinnamon, and the nutmeg^ plants, also 
a globe with the inscription "Primus Circumdedisti Me."* 



The voyage designed to appropriate for the Spanish, the trade with the East Indies already 
established by the Portuguese, actually led to the discovery of the Philippines to the Western World. It 
incidentally brought about the first circumnavigation of the globe and set in motion the cultural forces that 
have operated from that time on to isolate the people of the Philippines from earlier cultural affiliations and 
from physically related populations in Indonesia. At the same time it magnified the importance of Manila as 
the commercial center of the Far East and the port through which the Kingdoms of Eastern Asia exchanged 
their wares. Here came great fleets of junks from China laden with stores. Morga, the historian, wrote in 
1609, a detailed report of this trade, enumerating their merchandise, which included all kinds of silks, 
brocades, furniture, pearls and gems, fruits, nuts, tame buffaloes, geese, horses, mules^ali kinds of animals 
and even birds in cages, some of which could talk, sing and perform a thousand tricks. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:54 PM 



2 of 6 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 10:34 AM 



spcl29 



Each year a fleet of 30 to 40 Chinese Junks sailed with the new moon in March, (he voyage across 
the China Sea, rough with the monsoons, occupied 15 or 20 days, and the fleet returned at the end of May 
or the beginning of June. Between October and March there came each year Japanese ships from Nagasaki 
with wheat, silks, object of art and weapons, and took away from Manila the raw silk of China, gold, deer 
horns, woods, looney, wax, palm wine and wine of Castile. 

From Malacca and India came fleets of the Portuguese, subjects of Spain with spices, slaves, 
Negros and Kafirs, and the rich products of Bengal, India, Persia and Turkey. From Borneo, too, came the 
smaller craft of the Malays, who frorn^r their boats sold fine palm hats, slaves, sago, waterpots and glazed 
earthen ware. From Siam and Cambodia also, but less often, there came trading ships. Manila had become a 
great emporium for all the countries of the East. 



The commerce between the Philippines, and Mexico and Spain, though it was of vast importance, 
was soon limited by action of the crown. It was a commerce which apparently admitted of infinite expansion, 
but the shortsighted merchants and manufacturers of the Spanish Peninsula clamored against its 
development, and it was subjected to the severest limitations. Four galleons were at first maintained for this 
trade^They were dispatched two at a time in successive years from Manila to the port of Acapulco, Mexico, 
These galleons were ships of 600 and 800 tons and carried troop reinforcements, mail and Mexican silver for 
trade with China. Later the number of galleons was reducStf to one. The solitary galleon was freighted with 
the pick of all the ri^h stores that came to Manila. According to the historian, Biscaino, the profits were 
enormous - 600 to 800% These galleons became tempting and romantic prizes for the pirates, and many fell 
into their hands. 



THE ORIGINAL INHABITANTS 



The Negrito is usually referred to as the earliest immigrant to the Philippine^The Tagalogs speak 
of the Luzon Negrito as the Aeta. Characteristic of the Negrito is his diminutive size ; his frizzy hair, his 
black skin color, and his meager culture. He may be considered as a true pygmy, with an average height of 
$lss than four feet nine inches. To thos^of you who have served in New Guinea, this description will bring 
back to your memory the natives of those areas. This racial type has diminished very much in the Philippines 

through death brought about by intermarriage and unsanitary living conditions. In Luzon, the Negrito can be 

Os 

found in the mountains of Zambjles, Pampanga and Tayabas. During the Japanese occupation, they rendered 
very valuable assistance to our guerrilla forces, by ambushing and attacking Japanese patrols in the 
mountains. The bow and arrow is his chief hunting weapon, although game is frequently trapped or snared. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:54 PM 



3 of 6 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 10:34 AM 



spcl29 



The original language, as well as the entire culture complex of the Negrito, remain and probably 
will continue to remain unknown. In every instance wh&re the Negrito language and Customs have been 
expertly examined, it has been clearly established that both were borrowed from neighboring Filipino groups. 



It is believed that the Indonesians came later to the Philippines presumably in superior numbers 

from widely separated dispersal points. The Malayans came at a still later date. One usually refers to the 

0 

Malay as the most representative ^f the Indonesian peoples. He possesses much more initiative than the 
earlier Indonesian immigrant peoples. He is a great trader and possesses a certain political sense which 
enabled him to form large political organizations that in a short time, penetrated but did not entirely control^ 
all of Indonesia. 



SPANISH COLONIZATION 



The Spanish did not colonize the Philippines until 1565, when a soldier by the name of Legaspi and 
a priest whose name was Urdaneta were sent to establish the colony and convert the people to Catholicism. 
Spain brought to the Philippines not only the Christian religion, but also the Spanish language and the 
culture of western civilization*Beautifiil churches were built in all parts of the Islands, man^of which still 
stand erect, silent witnesses of Spain's great work as a colonizer. The University of Santo Tomas, the oldest 
under the^American Flag, was founded in 161 1 # Many thousands of students have gone through its portals 
of learning. Many of the great men of the Philippines^ who made history during the Spanish domination as 
well as during the American regime, were graduates of Santo Tomas. 

Unfortunately, however^. the later years of the Spanish rule were characterized by despotism and a 
complete disregard of the rights and sentiments of the people^ Several young Filipinos, studying then in 
Spain, France and Germany, in a common effort, published a newspaper in Spain, and in a manner worthy of 
praise and admiration^ bravely aired their grievances in well-written articles. Among the most outspoken was 
Dr. Jose Rizal, a young physician and & graduate of the University of Madrid. He published two remarkable 
books "Noli Me Tangere" and "The Reign of Greed", - fearlessly exposing Spain's cruel^ and rotten 
administration of the Islands. 



Against the advice of Dr. Rizal, who counseled a passive resistance, the people revolted in 1896. 
The revolt was suppressed and Rizal, who was accused of being the spirit behind the move, was 
treacherously brought back from Spain where he was sent with a guaranty of immunity and executed by a 
firing squad in Luneta on December 30, 1896. A marble slab marks the place of execution.j^The spirit of the 
people, however, had not been subdued and when the United States declared war on Spain in 1896, the 
Filipinos revolted again and assisted the American forces as well as they could. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:54 PM 



4 of 6 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 10:34 AM 



spc!29 



THE AMERICAN REGIME 

When the treaty of Paris was signed, the Filipinos thought that the United States would turn over 

the country to them, as she had done with Cuba. When this ^did not take place, the Filipinos felt that they 

had gotten rid of a cruel master^jTust to fall prey to another^ After two years of armed resistance, the 

Filipinos realized that the United States had not come to the Philippines in a spirit of conquest, and to milk 

the country of its riches, but to assist the people to get back on their feet end train them in the science of 

self-government. You brought into the country American teachers, opened public schools even in the most 

remote areas, and made education and learning compulsory to every child and youth in the land. Today, you 

find hundreds and hundreds of well-trained Filipino engineers, physicians, lawyers, nurses and teachers, all 

products of America’s program of education in the Islands. In addition, you brought engineers and road 

builders, and doctors and nurses. You introduced the use of serums and compulsory mass vaccination. The 

pock-marked faces of the older adult population are not observable among the young. We 6an proudly boast 

£ 

that there has not been a single $ase of smallpox in the Philippines since 1913. The early removal of all lepers 
from various parts of the islands to a leper colony established in the island of Culion, eliminated the danger 
of the spread of leprosy. Potable water supply was^established in Manila and other larg^enters of 
population. Even isolated barrios are provided with good drinking water from Artesian wells. Thus the 
spread of disease caused by the drinking of contaminated water has to a large extent ceased. Manila has 
become one of the cleanest cities in the Far Fast. 



JAPANES E DREAM OF AGGR ESSION AND EXPANSION 



When the Japanese attacked the Philippines an December 8, 1941, they, saw at last the realization 
of their dream of conquest, which they had been nursing for over three centuries. The Spanish writer, 
Antonio de Morga relates an incident which appears in^-history as an ominous forerunner of the 1941 
aggression. During the rule of the Ming Dynasty in China (136g - 1643), commercial relations between 
China and Japan were rippled by Japanese corsairs, which pillaged the coasts of Southern China. Tfrkr 
powerful Shogun Hideyoshi, a very ambitious and aggressive Japanese ruler observed a hostile attitude 
toward China. lnJ592, he ^ast his eyes on the Philippines, £ and he dispatched a message to the Spanish 
governor, Gomez Perez Dasmarinas, demanding the recognition of his supremacy otherwise he would 
enforce it) by an invasion and devastation of the Islands. The frightened governor, not prepared for such an 
attack nor willing to lose the profitable trade relations with Japan, sent an embassy under the leadership of a 
Dominican friar to the Taiko to whom he offered a treaty of amity. Hideyoshi promised to desist from 
military action on payment of a yearly tribute. 1^1593, the conditions of the treaty were stipulated, 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:54 PM 



5 of 6 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 10:34 AM 



spcl29 



according to which the Japanese promised to dispatch annually to Manila ships freighted with provisions, to 
stop piracy and to grant passports to Spanish captains for the safety of their ships 



THE AMERICAN EXPERIMENT 

When after the signature of the treaty of Paris, President William McKinley made the statement, 
4he Philippines for the Filipinos", the whole world laughed at America's idea of colonization. But when 
Japan attacked the United States as well as the English and Dutch possessions in the Pacific, the old 
colonizing powers of the Western World did not laugh anymore. Much to their surprise, they realized that 
the American experiment had not failed. There they saw how the Filipinos rose in arms and fought Japan 
side by side with their American friends and benefactors^he forty-five years of close association had 
created a mutual loyalty and friendship that stood the acid test in the battlefields of Bataan and in the tunnels 
of Corregidor. Neither the British nor the Dutch could boast of the same loyalty and friendship from their 
subject peoples in their Far East possessions. You may be assured that the Filipinos will always be ready to 
fight side by side with the United States in the defense of her territories and her democratic principles of 
government. 



THE FI LIPINO HOME 

Let me finish this talk by giving you a concise picture of the Filipino hc^rie. The Filipino i]^ a lover 
of home and devoted to his family. He will go out of his way, and undergo and hardship or privation to help 
not only a member of his immediate family, but a distant relative as well. He has a profound respect and 
admiration for womanhood, and considers his mother, his wife or his sisters as the Queens of the Home. He 
is, by nature, very sensitive to the Anglo-Saxon type of jokes, and will deeply resent any disrespectful 
remark made on the female members of his household. You will find the Filipino homes always open to 
Americans. Try to win their friendship and avoid committing any mistake that may destroy their taist in you. 
To you enlisted men, I advise that you endeavor to visit the Filipinos in their homes. Do not Judge the 
Filipino people by the type of men and women that lurk around barracks and Army camps. 



Printed on : 07/23/98 12:54 PM 



6 of 6 



Last Updated : 07/23/98 10:34 AM 



