THE PHIUPPINE TUBERCULOSIS SOCIETY 

1893 Rizal Avenue, Manila 


May 8, 1954 


The Honorable 

Members of the House and the Senate 

Philippine Congress 

Manila 

Gentlemen : 

Without publicity or even giving the parties affected an oppor- 
tunity to be heard, the House has just passed on seconid I'eading H. 
No. 2053. Thi^ bill will, in effect, deprive the Philippine Tubei-culosis 
Society of at least PlOO, 000.00 every year. 

Under existing law, charitable institutions authorized to conduct 
benefit races may determine for themselves where to hold those races. 
In previous years our Society has divided its races equally between the 
Manila Jockey Club and the Philippine Racing Club in the sincere be- 
lief that the income which we would earn in each club would be more 
or less the ^ame. During the last five years, however, our records 
show that earnings from races held in the Sta. Ana track of the Phil- 
ippine Racing Club have been P505,000.00. less than the income which 
we have obtained from an equal number of races in the San Lazai-o 
track. Our Board of Directors has, therefore, decided to hold all fu- 
ture races in San Lazaro. The resulting increase in our revenue will 
obviously benefit the many thousands of tubercular patients who de- 
pend on U.S for help. 

The Philippine Racing Club management attempted to prevent 
this by taking the matter to Malacahang. President Magsaysay, how- 
ever, has decided that our Board may decide for itself where to hold 
our charity races. It is because of this decision that H. No. 2053 
now proposes to amend the racing law by, in effect, making it com- 
pulsoiy for charitable institutions to hold half of their races in the 
Sta. Ana track even if thi,s will mean much less revenue to these 
institutions. We appeal to the members of Congress 'not to pass this 
bill To do so wiU prejudice the interests of the tubercular patients 
tvhom toe are trying to help. ' - 


Ve7-y respectf'idhj, 


THE PHILIPPINE TUBERCULOSIS SOCIETY 
By: 

iSgd.) BASILIO J. VALDES 
Vice-President 


