RECORDS OP THE PRESS CONFERENCES 
OF THE 

PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 
-0- 
1936 




i 




mSB 0(Xf JUUDR2S8 
0? nx PBISIDEST OP TBS mUPFZHB 

touwjLUflffiAL ms) 

mr 10, mt 

1. ite ivMis-oftiTo niflht 
a. ttt ifctrtf Biu 

4* Ijftor pxoblMi 

8. an Fsdzo tMMoi sltatlM 

6. rtm B«v«itt« Bill 

8* Urn MSM^mmo RBilvajr pirojaot 

mTM» 1996 
!• iSBAis amd caliro 

8* mnrganlirtlom 
4. Dirsotor H. Cnui 
8* TBiiiqlgi— Bt 

7. Industrifts 
8* iii«atios 



Xo. Itti9 jfAm ooo t m m om 
U* Land LMms 

1. Tte pr»sidcBt'0 Mp to ttai 

Tftlitftd StatM 

8. Aammllm in tte azbt 
4. SMliaristio coBflTsM 
8. HiBAaia» 

MMttmlSmm la th^ Amr iealA 
7* SaMiptlm of jxmatioBs from TaxMi 

PabLle TToiks 

JtolMM of am 

10. Tte High COMlstloner 

IX. Povsra of tho mslAoit of tte 
TAitod States 

8KPTBMBSR 4, X988 

1. Coi^ariiig Xffpt and tha Ftiiliipinaa 
8* Biport of Raaldttt OOMUalaaor wadaa 
8* Bonds of irorld Var vataraas 
4* ftm fajards oaM 

8. HlBlBC 



- 3 - 

6. The MoYeoeat to Depart fr<a the 

Bloameral ssrstMi 

7. The Pension Syston 

OCTOBER 2, 1936 

!• Prevention of Cruelty to Aninala 
3. Jepanese Settlers in Davao 

3. Mr. Hermenegildo cruz 

4. Nationalization of the police Force 

5. Organizing a Bureau of Mines 

6. Baby Bonds 

7. Justice Recto's Resignation 

OCTOBER 16, 1936 

1« ippoinlment of Agoits for the soois ty for 
the Prevention of cruelty to Anloals 

2* The Pension System 

3. The Flood in Nueva Ecija 

4. ReforestatioA 
9. quinine 

6. Henp 

7. Sugar 

8. Bills passed by the National Asssmhly 
9« High £(pots of connionweallh GoverniasBt 

10* The Bombing Stpree 



5. DcnOaioft sUtM 



8. rand for Uttebtsdness 



6. Pureliase of BiaolanOaa 
T* OoTttxiuBnt Bonds 





PRBSS CONFERHICB H0T5S 
JULY 10, 1936 



THE PRESIDENT. Good morQing, gentlenen. Sit dom 
please • Well, I am ready to answer your q^uestions. 
/ fttE (e) ABNAIZ-CALYO FLICgT 

THE PRESS. Mr. President, are you going to approve 
the bill noir before the Assentoly for the Arnaiz-Calvo 
flight? 

THE PRESIDENT. Well, that has not passed the House 
yet, I thought you are going to ask me if I ^ going tg ) 
sign the homeBite bill. 

X, ; rite - HOMESITE BILL 
THE PRESS. Wll you, Mr. president? 
THE PRESIDENT. Of course, I wilK^S^ 1 recommended 
it. (HomeSite Bill.) 

J RE -HIGH nnwMTSSTQNER MUkpHT 
THE PRESS. Mr. President, have you heard something 
about the High commissioner making progress in Washington 
in his conference there? 

THE PRESIDENT. Nothing as yet, but I have no doubt 
that a conference will be held next winter, and I think 
the preliminary conversation should be called for autumn, 

THE PRESS. Have you recommended somsthing regarding 
the situation in Davao? 



z 



THI PRSSIDSIiT« lio, nothing as ft* 

TBB PRSSS. Is it tms that you asked for tbo 
rstOBtion of comissioner liizphy as ths united States 
Hic^ OOHBissionert 

THE PRBSIDKW. Yes, Vat eTidently, they hat© decided 
there him(@ran* 

This Boxnlng I vas Infonaed that the resls^tlon 
Of Mr. liizphy will not be aeted until after septemh« 
15, idiidi Beans that they are givise hlM a ohanoe to 
OGBs baek. 

THS FH S3S. There did you see that informationt 
THK PRS8ID8IIT. That is In today's paper. 

e 

The reports of the papers as published this aom- 
ing Jostifies the fact, that is to say, it seens 

that the President Is not accepting bis resignation be- 
eanse he is giving hisi two months lesTe of abssnoe 
vithout pay fros septcnbcr 15th. That seoss to Indicate 
he vill continue to be such High oonisslotter without 
pay until after the eleotlon in No^e^ber. I regret Twy 
aieh that he has to resign and ic jnll) regret aers if his 
resignation is to be definitely accepted because I really 
think that he had been an excellent High ooaaissionar • 
Is knows our problems here and he is deeply Interested 
in the success of this gowernasnt, but, of course, we 
eannot expect th a to consider our cgr giatiog ) in the 



- 5 . 

lipplnet as being isore iaportant thai their probl 
at hmm* Bat i am sorry to see hia resign* I suppose 
Xf, Jones will do very well as « Eifljl ooMissioner as 
Governor Ifiirphy for I do not betHsTS that se ean find 
a better mn than nr. Jones, I had never had the 
slightest Idea lAm Governor uurphy left lisnlla that 
he alght resign and decide to run. i did not have sadi 
an Idea* 

I think lie was urged to run. 

Tes, it is a great ooarplliBent to tiie oomilss loner. 
I think it. In a way, to be a splendid recopiltlon of 
his wozk in the Fhilipplne^(^^^ the fact that he 
has been urged to lun^to be a candidate for governor in 
hlB om state. 

LABOR PRQBLBM.S 

TH5 PRESS, nr. President, is the labor situatioJ 
appearing to be serious? 

TSB PRSSICSffT. lhat do you mean? 

THK PR5SS. fell, they are going to have a d«aons« 
tratlon aw>iig thouelves and that oay have some connection 
vlth agitation in the provinces. 

THE PRBSIDSHT. 1*U, I do not beiieve that there will 
h% say danger of public distarbanea by that deaonatratton. 
Of course, I was not in favor of a dsBanstration'ln the 
lagiaiatlve Building. I thought that if th<y had •< 




petition to make^they oould sand that petition eithar 
through tha aail or throBi^ • ooiBittaa, hut the prao- 
tioe of having a daaonstratlon in front of tha Lagia- 
-^p^-"^^* ia^not rights is not the proper way of doing 
it. I never (&ava) any objection to a dacxonstration 80»* 
where elae or in aone part of ^e eity, and I newer 
fear that there will be any diaturbanoe. I do not think 
there ia danger of a aerioua diaturbaace in tbe Phi- 
lippines; certainly, the government ia prepared to 
^uell any attempt at pub lie dia order. 

Jig- SAH PEDRO TOKASAN SITUATIOff 
THE PRSSS. BO* about the aituation in San Pedro 
Tunaaan? 

THIS PR7SIPSXT. tell, the aituation in San Pedro 
Tunasan ia not so bad as It appears in the newspaper 
reparta. I attt for the president of saa Pedro Tunaaan 
and told him that he better warn the peqple from that 
town; that I won't countenance any action on their part 
that lould indicate a defiaace of the order of the 
courts; that if they atteapt to uae violence againat the 
constituted authoritiea, by OoshI I would take drastic 
steps against th«m» and the president told me that there 
waa no danger of a serious trouble. Certainly, I recea-> 
asaded the enactment of this bill aa indepradeat of the 
aituation, in that tom or in any oth»r torn. I alaply 



Mlm that ♦hat ooc^t not to be tovnaltt/ ^oeallz) 
la aaj larg« a«tat« ovnad ^7 an Individual. Our peopla 
hare haTe the right to ohoose their national official*, 
and the people wbo are living in a land which is o»ne4 
hy aome indiTiduala or corporationa ara not entitled 
to exareiae the rigjit of suffrage (if for no other 
reason). The govamaiant ought not to ejcpropriate theaa 
Itfuds and aend/^he peqplal[ aaa^ who occupy them ao that 
they may have their ovn hoaea* It is a utter of sound 
OOTarnBent^not heoaasa I feel that those pec^le ars 
floing to cause the governaeat any trouble. I en going to 
try to expropiriate all theae lands that are occupied for 
hoaea and are owned by these large baoiendaa. without 
goinc any further* I will not allow theaa big haoiandaa 
to have a place that is almost within the city limits 
where people oan^liot tay the lots where tbeir houses 
ere built( !^ wlta ooacnt* It is outragaotts^ (ind i aa glad 
the govemaeat ^ the Philippine lalan^ is permitted to 
•sgropriate all these lands* 

tHS PRSSS* DO you hope to buy these big haciendas? 

TBS PRSSIDSHT. Vs esn not do that beeauae we Ao not 
have the aeaey, and beeidea I an not ^uite sure that we 
are going to buy thesa big haeicndaa. In tht first place, 
the gpwamaent ia going to lose a lot of money, and in tba 
saeond place, I do not aae any reason for buying these 



Inds iHimi w» hare nany public lands, vhi^tlie people 
ean buy; but certainly, I am going to buy every portion 
of an hacienda that is being occupied by tovna or bar- 
rios, Nov^ve bave the San Pedro Tonasan, the Tjan jfr* 
clettda, the towi of Dinalupihan , the ¥*\ole municipality, the 
the towi of Saa JE^ae l, the towi of San lldef oneo, the 
barrio of BaoLaraa, Fara&aque, I think there is also 
a barrio in C oncepoion , lialabon, also in S anta Mesa , and 
these are the lands to be expropriated by the gOTerBBCBt 
and aold to the actual occupants. And I «i going to tell 
the fisoals of all the prwinces vhere these lots are 
loeeted that ^lenerer there is a Judicial order for the 
exeoation of soae case, it is for then to ask to stay 
the execution until the gOTemment can finance, either 
by expropriation prooeedingior through the Toluntary sale 
of these l«ids« My idea is that if m oan'^ot come to an 
agreement, to a reasonable settlcaant of these lands, i 
am going to the courts, but if the proprietors take ad- 
vantage of t he situation and exact from the ^vornment too 
hi|^ prices, I em going to institute expropriation pro- 
eeedings. 

TBS HiSSS* 16 that purehase for public use? 

THl PRSSICIRT. »>• Ordinarily, m could not eagpro- 
priate any property exeeipt for pifelic mse . but the cons- 
titution of the Philippines has a special provision whieh 
authorises the gOTemment to do this, and that is why ve 



•anjiot Institute expropriation proceedings; without 
that I could not eacpropriate. The Legislature could 
not pass a law authorizing the sjcpropriatlon pro- 
oe^dings, hut the framers of the constitution haTa 
foreseen that we hare this hidden problem so they pro- 
vided it in the constitution and gave the govemnjent 
the power, so the (Xesi3lature )passed the law, and that 
is sufficient* This will settle one of the serious 
problems that we have in the Philippines, a mattar that 
should have been solved long, long time ago* Well» some 
of these towns have not given the government a peso with 
i^ich we can build schools, or a presidencia, for saae of 
these places are( ^erritoi^ . I am now convinced that these 
problems, that is, the relations between the large landed 
home owners and their tenants can not be on Just basis* 
There are, however, two cases here in the Philippines of 
large haciendas vAiere the people are perfectly satisfied 
and contented. One is the Calamba Sugar Estate and tha 
other is the Calauag Estate, and I think that the Bozas 
Haciendas in Batangas are in the sane situation* Now, the 

people are paying because the lands which they ask are 

s 

the lands producing crops, ;80 they can pay from the pro- 
ceeds of the crops. The treatment is parfectly reasonable 
Many people are perfectly satisfied in Calamba. No one 



-8. 



OVM that haelcBda for ^yeryho^ is pacing ap bis daas. 
If that oan be done in the trsatftent of the people in 

these other haeiendas 

TH8 PRBSS« So the cr6p|^ bas eonething to do» ha8^3) 

It? 

THH PRKSIDBHT. Yea, and the CalQuag hacienda is pro- 
ducing chiefly rioe. Here is vhat they have done. In the 
first pleoe, the hacienda aade a study of hov to produce 
the largest naabar of eava y per heotare. They are pro- 
dueiag, on the airerage, more jsarans per heotare in ca- 
lauag than In other fields here in Luzon. The result is 
that the fellov who voiics there gets more from the land 
after cultivation becanse the hacienda has taught him to 
plant and to «ork on his rioe field, and he is given the 
right kind of seeds. Jfov, naturally, that fellow is 
getting suf 11 dented orop that gives him a sufficient 
■esBS of livelihood. How, aside from these two haciendas 
that I have mentioned, the practice of some is, vbstt 
they land money to the people who are working on their 
haciendas, (2) money at 6 or 7 or 8 per cent 

intcnrest nt the bluest, while the others are <&arging 
the poor 50 jer cent or 100 per cent interest. They take 
the palsy from the tenants during the harvest at a very 
low priee and lead thd palay, or moB«y, during the plant- 
lag season at the highest rate of interest, so that wh«i : 



lend the aoney during the planting oeaaon, they g«t 
tvioe as mneh. And that is the way they have exploited 
the poor fellows in sone plaoes. 

THS FHESS* Is thers any otter crop in Oalaaha 
besides sugar? 

TH3 PRiSSILEJfP . I think they have sugar , paly, 
copra, leaked the Secretary of Laljor to go and find 
out why the people get rich on these lots* The provi- 
sion of law is very good, for they can not sell or 
aortgage the land until they have paid the governnent: 
iiX9Xk they have paid, then thoy can sell the land to sone 
other company at the prioe sold by the ^vernment. so 
you see the law, as passed by the National .vssenbly, is 
perfeot. In other words, from the experience that we had fr 
the purofaese of friar lands where soDie the smartest ftl- 
lows get the benefit and the poor devils are the loser, «• 
hsve been able to enact a law that Is not so bad as the 
law before. 

6, BILL 
( ^PHB PRTOIPSlg j If the ^sen4>lyCcS>pess this revenue 
bill, I intend to ask authority to increase the Philippine 
tariff rates. I think tha l one of the most important du» 
ties of a civilized gorernnent 1b to take core of the 
insane and to acooaoodate then properly; so if the 
Assesbly raises the necessary revenues, my hope is tlst 



10 - 



within the next tvo or three years we oan talcs care of 
ftlX the insane in the miipplnes* the sme Xhingi «• 
do for the leopers. 

THE PHHSS. Are you going to establish different 
statiooa? 

Tffls pRssipisirr. Te»* 

<^ lis^AlRLINg3 in THS PniLIPPIHgS 
^ yROM yORBIGN COUNTRIES 

THK PHi^S* Mr. President, is thsre any move to 
eonneot the Philippines with Java hy air? 

FRSSIDSMT. Nothing has ooae to my attention 
officially. I undeBstand that there is some one ilio has 
heen oonsideriae (about) that , bat «e oouid not do that 
without consulting the State Department at Washington. 
Personally I am in fawor of facilltBting the air trans- 
portation in the Philippines in ev(=ry direction, ( jhatw) 
(hkVB it) with America, wdth Europe, etd. tJQder the Mii- 



lippine Constitution an eaT a Irl Ine such as the Britiih* 
Amerioan, or for example, the United States airlin^ osn 
be granted and peimitted only to land, or some privilege 
of that sort. Before I answer that question I wlib to read 
tha constitution. I belieye that all the Constitution 
prowMms is that the Philippine government should have 
%hB right to ran the neans of oemBuni oat Ions; I do not 
kftow if it provides that only nationals can do it. (The 
FresidMit read^i^ the constitution.) 



(jgomiinaine.l ) Here la tlw quest ion. If ttiey want 
a fra&ohlee, i do not think they can have a franohlae in 
tte Philippines, if they vent only permission to aL Igtat 
here and reoeive passMe^z's or mail, perhaps they miisht ••• 
but I do not think ttey sen have a franchise. 

THB PRISSS. do the goreraaent oan not grnt franehise 
for an op ration of an airline? 

TBS PRgSIDBTT. Cwy and there is doubt as to that. 
Ihe ruling of the Attorney General vas that the Phi- 
lippine gOTernaent could give than a license or a pentit 
to land here eithout franchise from the Legislature, but 
the Attorney Gtfisral also aeooaaended that they should 
better get a franchise to xaaKe sure. I think ve oan give 
a revocable permit » and such permit, of course, is aibjeot 
to be withdraen any tiae. How, in the eaae of Pan-American 
Airways^ they could not afford to do it, or certainly the 
jiaer5ca& Govemaent oould not give the subsidy without a 
franchise becanse at any time, ths govemaent oould with- 
draw the permit from them, and there will be no basis for 
the subsidy. If that is a question regarding this cpvera- 
Bent*8 entry into on American contract whereby ths govem- 
aent of the United States is to give the coapany the subsidy 
for a awber of years, it is clear that since th^y have a 
permit which the ^vemmentof the Philippine Islands could 
withdraw gay timj ?the^8ttbsidy^giLJJ. — ±::>^that is whj^ 
the Attorney Gemerel re comae nded that th^ secure a 



- 12 - 

fpanohlae bafbre ttoy oaald be given a subsidy. But If 
it is only a aattar of landing here, tte «»Teinnan:t ean 
gi¥a that pemit and in t ha easa of tha pan-Amariean 
Airvaya» this vaa datenlnad, and it was organized, for 
the purpose of establishing oonneetlon between America 
and the Philippines and the Ifcp seat, of ooarse, with 
other Orlmtal oountriea, makiag tha Fhllipplnea tha 
■ala port. • 

THE PRRSS. Vhat will be the process then of granting 
this franehise? 

THl PRBSIDaarP. Well, it depends; If that is a fran- 
chise, we ceiTnot grant it for the Constitution prohibits 
it. If they want a pamlt, l think we oou4d,but this 
gOTernoent would not grcmt any jiarmit without an under- 
standing with the State Departaent. 

THE PRESS, so such a peiBit would not require legis- 
latlre enaetasnt? 

1HS PR .SIDSHT. I do not think ao because it rsally 
giwes no right. If It is a peimlt to land, we can deny 
that pemit any tiae and we can charge them for the pri- 
tilege of using the land in the prenises. 

THS PHSSS* So the airplane and subsidy service do 
sot need permits at all? 

9RB PFSSXDEirr. ttet is what I think, rh^ would need 
pszmiealon to enter oar porta, for our ports are oar ports. 



- 14 • 

TOtt se«» Its history is this. When the civil c«Bttl8«l<« 
••tahIi8tL«ft ft olTil govenuient, they bad no inoome, thay 
had no revenues, so the president had to levy tariff » 
aA« hy Qoshi ve got that right from that time on. 

THE FH1SS« How about the gentlemen's agreament 
with ^apan? 

TOS PRBSIDSIfT. we oan not put tariff on the 
Ajneriean goods. 

TRS PRUSS. How about on Japanese and other arti- 
<3Les, do you have that right? 

TBI PRSSIDBfT. Yes. 

THE pniSS* Is that eontemplated as a legislative 
saaotment? 

THE PRESIDIWT* I do not tMnlc we are going to pass 
any tariff legislation pending the trade conference 
betweem the United states end the rhilippines because 
the tariff legislation that will be enaeted in the Phi- 
lippines will depend upon the terms of the trade confe- 
rsnoe. But I am considering asking the Legislature to 
grant the President of the Philippines the right to 
raise the pnsent tariff if nrK^when a tariff commission 
that abould be created so reoommends. i do not know 
whether the A.ss6mbly would grant that power, but i am 
going to ask the Assembly to give that power because 
until that power is given to the Chief Executive, it is 



- 15 - 

CEtlag to be very difficult for us to start n«v indastrlss 
in ths Phlllpplns Islandft^ and sinoe we eosteirplate tba 
•stnbliitoeat of nev induitries^ there ou^t to be this 
elnntlcity in our tariff so that, if and when that is 
aeesssary, the tariff may be raised to protect horns in- 
dustries. 

TRI PRESS. v;ottld you impose some limits on ths 
tariff leeialation? 

TSS PRSSIDSigT. X em going to ask as mudh as iCO 
per cent. 

YHE PRSSS. What is the limit in itterioen tariff? 

TR8 PRSSIDEST. Fifty (50) per eent. The reason wl^^ 
I want to ask 100 per cent is that our tariff laws had 
been snaotsd many.aany years ago and there are oases shere 
tlis 50 per cent iBersase in the tariff may notaooomplish 
the purpose. 

THE HiSSS* Will there be a plan to reduoe the 
tariff? 

tRS FRSSIDOnr. I am not prepared to answer that 
tnestion. I do not beliewe that the Assembly ought to 
grant that right. I think that the Assmibly ean grant tl» 
power to increase, but not the power to reduoe, beoauss 
the poser to reduce will mean to give the chief Ezsoutiwe 
the power to reduce the rewemes or to do away idth the 
rswsBiiss. Jttst imagine, if they ean grant the chief Ex»« 



outiT« the power to roduco the tariff loo per oeat. 
nat'e tantaaount to giving the Executive power to re- 
duce certain revenues, end no law-^kliig body will ewer 
grant the power. X think the Fresideat of the United 
States has the power for the reason ^t power has been 
given to the president in view of his power to nogotlate 
trestle 8 • But we have no powers to negotiate treaties 
in the Philippines. How oan I ose that power? 

THIS PRl^SS. But the Cuban tariff on sugar was re- 
duced by recip local agreeoent? 

THE PBBSIDSHT* Tes. In the ease of the President 
of the United States, the congress of the Qhlted states 
•an grm t that power to the President because under the 
const itutloa he has the right to negotiate treaties and 
the negotiation of treaties involves the question of 
lowering the tariff. 7e have no power to negotiate trea- 
ties, and as I sadd before, I am not aire whethor we 
<fill] ask for that power. I have very serious doubts idie- 
thsr I oould be granted tba$ power in view of the faet 
that the Chief Sxeoutlrs of the Philippines has no right 
to negotiate treaties* Vhether such ri^t should be 
granted to his, I do not know. 

T8S PRBSS. When do you think you will make these 
reeonnenftations? 

THS FHSSlDJixiT. Ri^t away. Very »on;^I «o not know 
lAethar the iMamVlj will grant than. I have not oanvassed 



I? 



the sentimsnt in the Assestly. 

THJ PRBSS. Will thi« be considered in the omlng 
trede oonfereaoe? 

THS PRBSIl>BfT. Tee, exactly; because thie le what 
aight taappen. The trade agreeaeat that the phllippliie 
Qovornaei]^ say enter into with the cover zmait of the 
United States Bsgr depend upon oertain protection that 
the Philippine Sovenuaent has to give to certain iveri- 
ean indnetrlee as eonpensatlon for the protection that 
the iUaerican uarket has given to oertain Philippine in- 
dustries. No«» if it should be felt that in order to get tlie 
fiOTernaent of the United States to give that protection, 
ve have to raise our tariff on certain articles, the 
Chief Szeoutive would not be in a position to enter Into 
this agreoncat with the Government of the United States, 
nnless he la given this power to raise this tariff, so 
in order that w e mmj be fully prepared to participate 
in thi s trade conference and have power to aake nego* 
tlatlons, it is necessary that the Chief Szeoutive be 
granted by the Assembly, before the trade conference is 
held, the power to raise tariff in the Philippines. 

THB PRESS. It has two purposes then? 

THK PRB81DTOIT. Y*** *1» first one is to protect 
the bryiMf indastries. 7h9 second is to place the (Joveroment 
9t the Commonwealth in a position v^ere it can enter into 



•Ci^MMBt With the GoTernment of the tmited State* ! 

j 

vhen the trade oonforenoe Is held. { 

THB PRESS* Are you planning to make any new «p- 
pointasnts, Mr. President? 

THE ^KBSJtmt. Hot yet. Not appointments of aiqr 
iaportaace. ' 

THS P^TESS. Are you Infomed of the Jueteng sltua* 
tion in Lagana? 

Tas PRSSlr£!3T. 7e are taking a hanA in that. The 
Secretary of the Interior has a man there aho is inrea- 
tigating that situation. I am prepared to give you aom* 
information about it» but this is not for pub li oat ion. 
I m morally convinced that the wife of Governo r caSllea 
has been running that Jueteng and I am also convinced 
that the poor governor did not rant her to doit. Bat while 
Cailles is one of the greatest heroes during the revolu- 
tionary period, brave as he is, he is afraid of his wife. 
Th» only questicn we are trying to determine is irtiethor 
it is true thafr Urs. Cailles has stopped her Jueteng since 
I sent word to the Governor that unless that wife of his 
stopped that Jueteng, I was going to remove him from office. 
I am a very gsod friend of cailles. I admire him. He is 
one of the best governors the Philippines hss ever had. 
That is proven by the fact that Cailles is the only man 
ia ths Philippine Islands that has been re-elected four 
or fiwe times as governor, fie had a strong opposition. 



but whuk h9 ran for goveraor, he m elected and elected 
by tbe ooBBBon people beoeuee the rich aad the political 
leaders ia Lagona have always been against Cailles. UJ 
party has always had a very strong influence in Laguna. 
Th*y MTer Aieeeeded in electing a man for representotive 
who did not have the support of my party. Ve always 
elAoted our aon. ShensTar Cailles was a candidate, he 
ssiie out with the s upport of the poor ^eople . And think- 
ing so highly of hiB, I sent word to hia that i las going 
after his Jueteng. I gave hia about one month. After a 
■mth elapsed I sent one of his aost intinate friends to 
tell him that unless he could stop his wife, I would re- 
more him without much Investigation. The report that I 
have received is that his wife has really stopped, and the 
fellow who told me that is convinced and that he is willing 
to spent money to get a lawyer for cailles. Veinzheiaer is 
a pretty honest gentlenma. He believes in autocracy and 
he likes Cailles because he seems to be aatooratie, but 
at the same time he does like this Jueteng. I sent him to 
tell Cailles, to stop hie wife and he did. He said: "Mr. 
President, 1 am convinced tbat the wife of cailles has 
stopped, and therefore I am going to defend him. Do not 
mix up in t ls case. 1 am going to find that out.*" i sent 
for the constsbulary officer in Laguna - he ie one of 
the best officers that we have. He told me he is convinced 



- to • 

that the nlfe of Callle* ha» atopped. Of oouraa, ay 
politioal associates in Laguna *o wars against Caill««» 
told that the constabulary offloar is a false witnoss 
baaaase his wife is the friead of the wife of the govflr- 
nor. But 1 do not believe that because I am really In- 
clined to believe that the Governor's wife st4ppad at ths 
tlM I sent word. Bat still I am having thst investiga- 
tion coaAieted, and I should like to havs a dhanes to 
suspend Callles bsoause if I saspsnd Oaille** 
going to put the fear of God into the heart of every 
provincial governor of the Philippines. The mlnttte I sus- 
pend Caillas every provlnclja Rovernor of the Philippine 
Island jrJll see that the laws of this o<wn try are 
forced « But I can not suspend hia until I have mors 
prima facie svidenoe that his wife is running Juetaag. 

Weinzhelmer told me that he is afraid of tl^e wife 
of Callles. 3ha is really a most aggressive wife. It is 
pitiful to see that a brave soldisr, who is never afraid 
of anybody, is afraid of his wife, (laughtor) and I 
having that piopeeiy investigated. We shall never be able 
to stop Juetei« until t ho people are oonvincsd that the 
wife of callles has stopped. ^ ^d^cu^ ^^<'C<i2^^u^ ^ 



THE PHBSS. Have you any plans for the Tourist ^ 
Bureau? 

TSS PR183D9IT. I v&nt to ostsbllflii the right kind 




- ai - 

of a TouriBt Bureau. I hare adopted a policy of not 
•pradlog public funds unless ve can aceoaplisli the 
purpose for which the money is being spent, and I an 
iaoiinad to believe that irtiat tre have spmt for tourist 
propaganda so far has been wasted. There are a few things 
that we have to do before we seriously attempt at the 
business of attracting tourists to the Philippines. The 
first is to have good hotels, not only in Manila, but in 
other places in the Philippines. Oontlemen, I have been 
traveling ayself, and it makes no difference hoi? beau- 
tiful a country is. If you get to a place and you do not 
find a good hotel, you inned lately feel a dislike far 
the piece, and outside of the Uanila l{otel in Manila, re 
have no good hotels in the Philippines, irot even In Ba» 
guio, I am advising the l&nila Railroad to builc a 
hotel in Baguio, a good hotel, and ooiafortable« <&iall 
hotels will serve in eertaln places in the Fhilippines; 
one in Albay, right there near the top of Mayon volcano, 
from where you oan see the most beautiful sceneries in 
the Philippines. ought to advertise AXhaj, Ve ought 
to have a hotel in cebu, Mindanao. In Lanao, far instance, 
there is a »i^j»lf ioga t^^ ^7e ought to have a nice 
hotel In Pangaslnan. 7te have to havo a nice hotel in 
Atiiaonan, on the other side of tha Island of XAi?x>n. Thw 
is a fins beaoh there. 7e ought to spend real Boney for 
publicity. W« luivs b««» spendlag BOQey which has served 



- 82 - 

ao purpoae. 

'Urn ought to do this systematically with(D real 
planning^ and l am for It. The first thing ve have to do 
is to cotaplete our lines of ooamunleat ion «• one reaeon 
why I want to finish the railroad line from here to the 
Biool region. Another is to laprove our inter-islmd 
transportation. It is a abamm that ve do not have better 

'intcr-island trauSi)ortation, I am Qoing to instruct the 
collector of customs to inspect every( jSimed) boat that is 
learing the port of Manila^ and if thajr do not hare, as 
many of then do not have now - if they do not haw the re- 
quired life-saving ajsparatus, they ought not to be por- 
«itt«d to sa3u any trip, i do not want/ what happemed to 
the "Morro Castile" to happen again. I aa going to compel 
thesa people to conduct fire drills for their crew and 
to have the necessary life boats in every internal aid 

trasportation. That is the next to which I as going 

to direct ay attention, ThenC l^am goin^ to require these 

boats to be very oleaa, tty goodness, tha insanitary con* 

dition of these boats is a shane, 

THE PH'^SS* That can you do about tourists In the 

PMlippln/ (Island^ 

THIC PPlSinRffT, Ve hawe to improve our aeaos of oosna* 

nicatlon, our aooojOBOdatioAS. 



- 85 - 

TBS PRSSS. lhat about patting a hotel at Slbul 
Seringa? 

TSIS PRSSIDKMT. Tas, that is a nioa plaoa, too. 
Thar* ia another plaoa irtiera «• have to have a hotel. 
^hm la ap eUal water in Karivelea. it has the aaM 
aerita aa that water called **uiihea'* whloh ia good for 
people H'-fering froa high blood presgure. ^have tha^ 
(water ia MariTelea^ and ) I en trying to aecare an expert, 
one eiperittiead in <*uahea** to giro traata«t and if I 
find a Aan, I as going to build a hotel. The high blood 
pressure is affecting the Filipinoa here, and that will 
be a good business. 

THB fBXSS. This place of having a propaganda office 
for tourist, what will be the basia for its organization? 

TBS PRSSIDSHT. I belicTe that we ought to organise 
a society of iaericans and Filipinoa, -people wto are knows 
to be intereatad in fcasntiag the ooauD< rcial relations 
between the two oountriea, because it is for the benefit 
of both. Ve are going to get some influential Aneiieaaa 
to help us form a aoclaty of this kind, (an^ Ihere ia in 
Miariaa what we call a Japan society, and I do not sea 
why there should not be a Filipino aociety. If we can 
have that society and with our tourist office working 
in cooperation, we could properly advertize the Phi- 
lippines. 



- 24 . 

THS PRBSS. Will that be® offlolal or 
offlclalt 

THE PRESIDKNT. TJnof f loial . 

THB PRESS. Are these eooieties serving the pur- 
pose? 

THB PRBSiDarr. Tea. ihat lapan aooiety In Tokyo 
i« a won^^^aaaoclation, but what they haye in ive- 
Plea ie( i_dajBned on^anlzatloa ). 

TH« PRESS. Anything more In the Mindanao railway? 
( Ui-uc^JS^ PRBSIDENT. I am gping to have that. If theflP) 
Cgislaftprj) will authorize Ae to issue the bonds, i am 
going ahead with that. I have the report of the Manila 
Railroad aad Mr. Paez advised tts to build that. He thinks 
we ean have vary cheap tremsportatiozi^tbBreby develop- 
ing the Maria Cristina water power. I gave instruction 
when I went to Lanao to protect the forest around that 
waterfall. They have started making caiggins , and I 
stopped that right away because that is a government 
reservation* and Paez said that that would be the means 
of transportation as it will serve the purpose. The idea 
is to build roads as t^/idiVtn for tbat. 

IHS PRESS. How long do you think it would take to 
finish the project? 

THB PRESIDBHT. I think that can be finished in five 



- B5 - 

JMr». Also the poMT plant, ttet Is why dsvolopnent of 
mndsnao will poidly mmmn m grwit Inoroaee in the weath 
of tho camtiy. Tho long stu^y I hm devoted to tha ei- 
toatlon Of iflndaneo. eomrinees m that the wealth of the 
eonntry would be at leaet five tloes as it is today, if 
we start deireloping l^U^tenao in prefereaee to Uxxon — 
If yoo eo^pare whet tte profit of Miodsnao nould he, I 
■saB if yoa compare it with other Islands, since tls re 
sre no floods and no typhoons there whereas in Lu&>n, 
for instaaee, ercry three years, we lose oat crops either 
beesQse of the typhoon or the flood. By floshi Tou don't 
haws that in Mindsnao sad then with this cheap power a^i- 
lahle. landatuto is really the sreatest thing that th^ eooh- 
txy has* 

IKE FM88. Voold that hs a rise granary in the Phi* 
lippiaa lalmdst 

TBS PRBSXCm. BK»t asoessarily, because Lnzotl can 
jK^nee tttoh riee. But I want to Ccarr^ two million people 
d^r^ng the next four years and if i can (earr3^ thwi t^^ere 
CSS bayonet, I will do it. Two aillion oore people^ yoa 
see • that is sgr ambition. 

TBV PR1S8* Hr. Frssident, liiat has beooae of ^he 
goirelmaent aid to HoUo and Csbn railways? 

TS2 PRXSXDKiT. Mothiag. I doubt very auoh whether 
the Asserit)ly will authorize the parohase of the Railway 



of C«btt. Ibu kaowt that n«xt y«ar, or two rears froa now, 
tte fforamment obligations to guarantee the interest on 
these bonAs will expire and by that time, if we do not 
buy tbose shares, they will not be able to cont5nae 
Tanning that railroad, and I do not believe the Assembly 
will authorize the purohsse of the ceba railway beeause 
that is a losi&g proposition. No way of improriag that 
Panay Railway. I do not know. 

ansa tiM ago, l think, the Assembly ttenght of pur- 
ehRSihg that, at least to show some good will to those 
people, but the opinion qf my advisers is tbat it will cost 
lots of money to ^£he Philippines, foe ) the operation will be 
a constant drain on the treasuzy, and moreovar_the govern- 
meat has no moral oblig ation/ iAatever<^i_ the principal , 
Cot the money rendered .3 ^ 

THS PHSSS. How about the guarantee of interest when 
it 0:39 ires in two years at the end of 1937? 

T!TE FRHiSirsrrr. I telegraphed them that they can go 
ahead Circularizing, but I do not want to give them the 
impression that the Philippine Governmat is oosmittsd to 
ths proposition of purchasing it. while I was personally 
la favor of it, after having founS out that this would 
bs a constant drain to the government of the Commonwealth^ 
I would not dare to reoommend it to tbe Assembly. I would 
not assnms the responsibility of recommending the porohass 
to the Assembly beeause my infosnation now is that even 



Z7 



If we proe«9d with thm rallwagr* posalbljr it woaXd not be 
to malbi aoBaort except the penay Railway, iX we could pur- 
obiae it at a very low priea. Bat -fiie celm railway la a 
loaaa« 

/a. y?RTO 
THS ?Rn8* Bow ab<Mt MaoArthor^a report i^ggeatiic 
^t the popalatioa mU^t be 18 instead of 14 jBiilion?. 
THl PRiSSiraiT. I aa going to aak t he dTegi ala ttt ri l 

• » \ 

Am aooQ aa thior paaa these revmae laws» I am. going to 
aak for an appropriation for a eenais. That ia rety im- 
portanty geatleoaa* I juafe want yoa to know that wo seen 
not intoUigoitly oaloe any plMa hara ia the philippfnea 
to eoaply with the proviaiona of the oonatitution that 
«a giwe faellitiea or oppc^'tunitiea to every ohild. of 
age, or for tlis divervi-fi cation or our oropa, or tha 
aotahliihi&ent of aeaeaaary iaduatrieo^ .d^til wo have a 
eaaiioa cf tike plillippl&ea which ^ella as oar popalatioa, 
what «e oonawMy aaoh article that we prodaoe, what ia* 
dxatriea we aov have* Va eaifnbt do anything that ia 
intdligently planned cntil we haa» taken a oenasa of 
lalanda, ao l am going to reoovMBd Jtkat a eenaoa be 
taken and I eaqpeot to tcUca the aoat Inexpeoaive oenaua 
that has owr been taken for the i%ilippinea. For thia 
foaa<»i, I aao^et to use tho Philippine Amy to do aoae 
work in eomteetloa with that eaftaaa and uae the toaob era 
alao and the Bcuiieipal troaaaxara and aoat of tho m» 



jloj—m of the national gdvemiiftat «o that we maj not be 
obliged to draw personnel outside of that, but I think 
we can hare a ecasus of the Philippines by about one-third 
ot one- fourth of what the previous census cost us. 

THS PHSSS* SO tar ihat was the cost of 1918 oeneus? 

THB PRKSIPBHT. Tiv million pesos. I think we e«n 
have a eenaus of the Philippines for l-l/£ million. I hats 
to do that. We haTe to do that. 

TBS PHBSS. lhat do you say about the ReTenue Bill? 

THI PRSSIDIHT. Well, I do not «ant to be appropriating 
funds. We could properly get from the accumulated surplus 
because any expenditure that is not an ordinary expmditure 
of the garernmeat can properly be taken froai the accumulated 
surplus, and ve ha to SI million pesos accumulated surplus 
but out of that* we have only nine million peso^ that is 
absolutely unencumbered, and I do not want to reduce fur- 
ther the 9 million pesos that is absolutely unencumbered. 
Vs eould properly take it from there, but I do not want 
te do it until I get ths Assembly to pass the Revenue Bills. 
If the AssemliLy has passed seme Revenue bills, we can all- 
ford to redut^e a little ^dt the accumulated 8uiplU8« but 
with the present revenue of the government and with the 
prsMnt ss^enditurss where our ba3anee is only one million 
pesos, I do not want to reduce the accumulated surplus. 
If 1 reduce the acoumulatsd surplus, I shall find myself 
in an ombarrasslng position. Iherefore, I em not going to 



- » - 

reduce the aooumulated surplus of Ihe goveraaeBt until 
the AeeeiA>l3r has passed tte Revenue bills. 

Oliiswill be on Jauiary Ist, 1937. to this our 
airplus is still SO Million, but by Jamary Ist next 
year, our acoumulated surplus will be 31 million pesos* 
HOW, if the Assembly passes sons Revmue bills, «e nay 
keep the accumulated surplus at the present fisure, vhich 
is 39 million pesos* ¥e megr raise it* 

THE PBBSS* frill there be a big drop this year froa 
the ijemj bill? 

TH8 PRSSIDSflT. Iferely, it came out from other ex- 
penses* HOW, for i&stanoe, it o«ds out from othsr expeases* 
(jQrJ)J^r instanee, (it eame ouj ) from the purchase of the 
railway bonds* I have invested from the treasury S«i/£ mil- 
lion pesos for the purchase of the Railway bonds. But that 
has been a very good investment beottise we have made suf- 
fioiently, considering what we have to pay, and we are 
mUcing about 25 million pesos out of t^t pu^^se* 

THS PRESS. Toor messege to t he (^^dLat^ya) ind i oat ed 
that it is off the press now? 

THB PRSSIDSHT* Tes. ml, gentleaim, unless yon 
have more to aak that I could tell you - — I am glad 
to have seen you* Good-bye* 



PRESS COI^PERENCE BOTES 
JTJLY 24, 1936 
11:00-12:00 M 

THE PRESIDENT, Gentlemen, I am ready for questions. 
I have nothing to give to you on ray own initiative. 

ARHAIZ AKD CALVO 

THE PRESIDENT. I think that question can better be 
answered by the Assembly. I understand there is a proposed 
bill in the Aasembly to give a flying eross or something. 
The Assembly is going to enact a general law, as I was in- 
formed yesterday, patteraed after a similar law enacted 
the Congress of the United States regarding decorations, etc. 
€ind after passing that law they are going to pass a resolu- 
tion authorizing the President to give, as I understand it, 
a flying cross. 

THE PRESS. Posj^ibility of making a special dispen- 

satlon? 

THE PRESIDENT. I have not discussed that question 
with the Chief of Staff, but I am going to give themotsnmis- 
sions in the Reserve force. He does not seem to be much 
of an invalid who has been disabled by the flight from here 
to Madrid. So I think that two or three years more or less 
will not affect his usefulness. 

MILITARY FLECT 

OTE PRESS. About the military fleet. 

THE PRESIDETfT. YOu mean the air? Well, I canliot 



- 2 - 

anawep that question ofr-hand because I do not remember what 
the Army has recommended. We do not really Intend to acquire 
the number of -aeroplanes than «e will actually need for the 
Instruction of our pilots and for the maintenance of public 
order here* The acquisition of the aeroplanes that may be 
needed by the Philippines after Independence shall have been 
recognized will, I suppose, be acquired Juct prflior to the 
granting of that independence, I>urlng these ten years so 
many changes can take place In t he type and machinery of 
these aeroplanes that it will be a waste of money to try to 
get these planes. Besides, they get old too soon and there- 
fore we are golrsg to be very conservative in the acquisition 

of aeroplanes for the time being, 

/ REORGANIZATIOMy 
THE PRESS, Wto.t progreii Tslfeing made in the reorga- 
nisation plans of the government? 

THE PRESIDEHT. Outside of what I have actually done, 
it has been recommended by the Survey Board that we standar- 
dise the positions in the government so tlmt each position 
doing certain work will be given the same ailary whatever 
the Bureau Is, 

THE PRESS. Any possible reorganization of the Bureau of 
Science? Any chance of reopening that? 

THE PRESIDENT, Why, is there a plsua against that? I 
have not heard any plan, certainly not from the Bureau, and 
I want to say, in frankness, my adviser here was against it, 
Dr, Roxas* But I decided to do it because it seems to me so 
perfectly a simple and common sense proposition what the 



- 5 - 

Bureau of Science now Is engaged In certain kinds of work 
that are^ln my opinion, plainly not^ or ought not to be^ Its 
work. For Instance, they engage In giving Injections against 
hydrophobia, it Is all right for the Bureau of Science to 
have assumed the responsibility of preparing the serum, but 
It Is a waste of time for them to do that which ought to be 
the work of some other office, 

TBE PRESS. The preparation of vaccine to be taken 
from the Bureau also? 

THE PRESIDENT. Because onee the Bureau of Science 
has shown how It Is done, we expect other Bureaus of the 
goveriment to do It. We want the Bureau of Science to 
devote Itself to the work of scientific research and every 
diswovery they make, one they have proven It a success, 
will be turned over to any department of the government 
that needs It. But we want to concentrate the work of the 
Bureau of Science on research. That Is what we want to do. 
As I said, my adviser here was against this, and if you 
talk to some scientists In the Bureau of Science, they will 
eonvlnoe you that no change sho|Qd be made and they uss 
such coBipllcated technical words that it Is Impossible to 
argue with them, so we Just use common sense. We want the 
Bureau of Science to be the instrumentality of the govern- 
msnt to promote scientific research and to help us to dis- 
cover the use of our raw materials for new industries. We want 
tbui to discover something. We want to give to some other 
Institv^tion the work^y dewolcMjug fchem . Unless we did that ' 



th. Bureau of Science In the end would be an industrial 
e.tabllsbment. They will be giving Injection^^^drophobla, 
they will be giving injections to animals that ie attacked by 
this kind of sickness, they will be making matches, they 
will be making hats, etc. My goodness, not a Bureau of Science. 
A8 a matter of fact, we will try to do in the Philippines 
idiat the Mellon Institute is doing in Philadelphia. I am going 
to get some expert from the United States to come here and 
to tell U8 what to do along these lines. That is what I am 
going to try to do. 

THE PRESS ♦ That is a research they are going? Will 
that expert concentrate on a crop or group of industriesT 

THE PRESIDENT. We want him to organize that Institution, 
or a similar institution. 

THE PRESS. Will that absorb the Bureau of Science 
eventually? 

THE PRESIDENT. It might. It will not absorb the 
Bureau of Science. The Bureau of Science will be converted 
into that. 

THE PRESS. Cihanglng the Bureau of Science into "Re- 
search Bur au," Instead of Mellon Institute. 

THE PRESIDENT. That Is what we should like to do. We 
want really to develop It to make it a practical institution 
at the disposal,not only of the government, but of private 
companies. We want that institution to be converted into 
a sort of ^ an adviser for everybody, so that if the Bureau 

^ AT. If there is a corporation for ins- 
of Science has found or ii 



- 5 - 

tanee tha^ls considering the establishment of^ new Indus- 
tries, they can go to the Bureau for advice and the Bu- 
reau titll he obliged to) give It* I„ other words, we want 
to make this Bureau, not only an Instl tut Ion for the gover- 
mient, but an Institution for private enteiprlses • 

Bat that Is really the reason why we are taking from 
the Bureau ce tain work that has become routine work, so as 
to give the Bureau more time to do things that are new, that 
Is, In a few words, tbat the^ consider new, I have never 
been able to convince any one of those fellows and It Is 
useless for any layman to argue with them. You will find 
yourself In five minutes where yoi^o not expect to be, and 
certainly It Is Impossible to answer their arguments. I 
just decided not to argue at all. 

DIRECTOR H. OKPZ 

THE PRESS. ?&at about the appointment of Director 
t 

Craz. 

THE PRESIDEMT. I have sent It to the Assembly. 

THE PRESS. Ihy have you appointed him? 

SHE PRESIDEHT. He has been recommended by the 
Secretary of Labor and by some labor leaders while other 
labor leaders are opposed to It. 

THE PRESS. Did not Cruz reslgnt 

THE PR^IDEBIT. I knew something about that. The 
Secretary of Labor wanted to have an investigation of the 
eas« of Mr. Cmiz, and Mr. Cruz wanted also ^wan^ecb to have 
that investigation. But I think the Chief Executive had 



- 6 - 

lost Ilia confidence In the man when it is a question of 
the Chief of Bureau or any officer that is holding posi- 
tion by appointment, TOien the Chief Executive loses ^1« 
confidence in the man, it makes no differeni^e what the 
reason is, hecause the responsibility rests 'irith the man 
who makes the appointment. "There is a great difference he- 
tween a position in the Civil Service which a ban bccu]>ies 
through certain specific requirements of the la*,* H^™t«r« 
that, he is protected in hlg right by the law, ^Ji^ can\not 
be removed without investir^atlon and conviction; but^ the. 
men idio are occupying positions in the government only 
through mere appointment of the Chief Executive^ there lis 
no need of any reason other than the fact that the Chief 
Executive is not satisfied and the man should step out. I 
just advised Cruz to resign. There is no use arguing wil^k 
the Chief Executive. The Secretary of Labor thought that, 
an injustice ha^^been done Cruz. The investigation was 
never made. We advised Cruz and advised Secretary Torres 
to do what iX'was their duty to do, namely, to present his 
resignation. 

«fHE PRESS. The Supreme Court any connection with 

that? 

« 

THE PRESIDENT. I do not remember that. There was 
something. 

I want to say this and I want to say it publicly. 
I would not accept a dictum of the Supreme Court as suf- 
ficlent reason for removing a rran from his office. The man 
.^.^ ...rd and he wph not a party, in the sense 



•* 7 - 

that he was not accused of what the Supreme Court said he 
was guilty of. in the first place, the Supreme Court has 
n0 business passing Judgment upon administrative officials. 
That is going too far, unless they are considering a ease 
where the public official is made responsible for some acts 
of dishonesty or something like that where the coirrt has 
decided whether the man Is guilty or not. 

Particularly my friend. Justice Malcolm; that was^ his 
specialty, to set up In the court as the last tribunal on 
ptbllc morality, etc. 

I want to say that if there is any charge against Cruz, 
I should like to have that in my hands. Here is another state- 
ment I desire to make. When a charge is presented against 
a public official, it is not necessary that the evidence 
presented should be sufficient for conviction if the case 
was a criminal case. In a criminal proceeding the duty of 
the Jtidge, in case of doubt as to the guilt of the accused| 
Is to absolve him. In a administrative cases, in case of 
doubt, the man sli^ould be separated from the service and 
the reason is that you do not need anybody inihe government 
service in whom you have lost your confidence, and there is 
nobody who has acquired a title to the position he holds 
in the government service. The public has the right to.have(^ 
absolute confidence in the man in the government service. 
The minu'ce^ pl>ff there Is reasonable ground for doubt as 
to the hoesty of the man in the government service, he should 
be out of the service because fone n»n) must have absolute 



confidence In the nan In the government service , Vho mimifwi 

UtttO Lliuj ii ! monnbl e grouiia xui - doubt aa Ui^ iimibtilj ^ 

ef fh a wnn Im th e sovopiimaiit flei ' vlLB^ li e Bliuuia liiJ uul r . 
ftfj-hn n e iwto e . b e o ft iAoo tlio item ' iviju lia^Kj' absolute con- 
fidence in his integrity, and if there is doubt as to his 
honesty, to ask his^ resignation, I do not wish to remove 
hlan but to ask for his resignation. 

THE PRESS, Cruz, not a question of honesty? 

THE PRESIT^'ENT, The Chief Executive thought that he 
was incompetent. The Chief Executive was entitled to 
have his own opinion, because it is a responsibility. 
Now, I do not share that oplnicni, I am more than inclined 
to agree with what the Secretary of Labor thought that 
Cxniz is competent. We have not had a labor leader in 
the Islands who knows more about legislation on labor 
matters than Cruz does. He is one labor leader that 
was really a working mf*v before he entered the service 
of the government. He worked with his hand. He is not 

one of those professional politicians that have become^ 

^ J 
by the grace of God political leader^. He was a work- 
ing man, and I think he knows as much about labor 
matters as anybody and therefore I do not object to his 
reappointment. If the Assembly does not want to confirm 
his appointment, I reappoint him. But I want at 

least to place myself on record as having faith both in 
his ability and his honesty. 



THE PRESS. Figures on imemployment that the De- 
partment of Labor has submitted to you? 

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I do not blame the Secretary 
of Labor. He tried to get some information from all the 
provinces as to unemployment. Some of the statistics 
that they f^the provinces gave^as the number 

unemployed ci...:jDt ^ur^ than the inhabitants of the pro- 
vince. I think the only reliable data is in Manila. 

THE HiESS. Report of 55% unemployed this year. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is veiy hard except through a 
census to determine ifliat is the number of unemployed in 
the Philippines because we have seasonal laborers here. 
The man who works In his rice farm works three months a 
year or five at most. Now^ after the harvest that fellow 
is unemployed because he refuses to work. He thinks he 
has done his work for the year and a very vigilant gover- 
nor will count him among the unemployed. It Is the same 
thing with the copra. In scne provinces they harvest co- 
pra th»ee times. In others four. The harvesting of the 

-Ut ^^e^^^^^tJ*^ ^ ^1^" For two months and a half 

» hat rollov; ID doaa^i^ ^thlng. We have to educate our working 
men in the field to^ In raising chickens, hogs, and plant- 
ing vegetables^ the rest of the time that they do not occupy 
In farming. I am having now prepared a bill regulating the 



- 10 - 

relationship between the tenants and land owners and I 
want to put in that bill a provision requiring a land 
owner, who is a kaaaina , to give him so much, a lot for 
his house, and that ai i jtTi^^^h ^ sufficient for him 
to raise a few pigs there and a few chickens and to plant 
vegetables. In that way there ;vill never be a danger of 
hunger in the Philippines when the rice crop fails. These 
people will have always some ting to do^and we do not nave 
to worry about unernployment. lliey are doing It in Batan- 
gas, the one province in the Philippino^JtelfetebB that is 
demonstrating hoTv self-surjporting tho Philippines can be. 
In Batangas if the price of rice goes down, it makes no 
difference; the man from Batangas is not lacking food for 
tinemployitientj he is working^ and when the time comes he 
has a house; he has chickens and he has pigs; his wife is 
weaving or doing something, we really do. not need any 
iparket. If we Imitate what Batangas is doing^ nobody can 
defeat the Philipj>ines. Those fellows are never complaining, 

TENANCY 
THE PRESS. What lawV 

THE PRESIDENT. A law regiaating the tenancy and 
landowners. 

THE PKESS. How large? 

THE PRESIDENT. Everything that he ^ets there will 
be bis. That will be in the interest^ you know of the 
land'^wner even If he does not get anything there because 
he will have a contented worker - a man mho will not 



- n - 

apend his time Joining associations. He will have something 
to do every day. 

INDUSTRIES 

Hy attention was called to tl» fact that there are 
many towns in the Philippines that have many local Indus- 
tries which have been disappearing because they do not 
receive the support of the government. But according to 
Mr. MeyerSy the President of the Chamber of Commerce, 
they have not been able to organise themselves properly, 
so "Uiat no capitalist Is willing to take what they produce, 
because when they find a market for a certain kind of pro<* 
duct, they will require money, for Instance, and the 
people of the town refuse, they will Just go on doing Itf 
Mr. liters tells me that until our h6me Industries here are 
willing to adopt standards and produce them In sufficient 
quantities f or e xport^ ttas they will not make any progress, 
and I am considering that suggestion very seriously that 
the government take the leadership In educating the people 
to the need of standardizing their products even in ths 

•ase of home Industries, and I think ias^ is right. We ought 

A. 

to do something along these lines. 

My attention has been called to the fact - and I am 
having It studied now - that there are mai^ articles that 
we can produce here In the Philippines which we are Import- 
ing - articles of wMch the government is a buyer in suffidant 
quantities to establish the Industry In the Islands. TrW k 
I VD. having studied whJalSdaer that can be produced and I am 



- 12 - 

giving Instructions to the Bureaus to buy locally what they 
can buy locally* We are producing in the Philippines several 
goods that ^^^^^^^7 needs i*iich we use to import at very 
*hlgh costsj^for instance^ ^iH ^'Ml,-^ We used to Import hats 
costing every soMler J?'12.00 each. Only the hat. We are now 
making hats for the Array out of coconut and is going to cost 
^•00 each, V/e used to import Iron beds. We are making beds 
of wood and we are ^^233^=S¥e soldier^ the kind of bed he 
uses when he goes h(xne. These soldiers do not sleep in iron 
beds with mattresses, etc^in their houses. As a matter of 
fact, I never did myself. They sleep on bejuco or cafla , 
and we do not make the soldier during the time that he is 
a soldier, a citizen of the country that is not ^ the 
Philippines because we make him live in Philippines* 



e in 



We are only inqproiylng his food, the t==55it'and the quality 
so that he will be healthy. We are improving his ways of 
living so that he will be sanitiary. We are teaching him 
cleanliness, etc. In other words, we are making him live 
as he could if he went back home. We do not want him to 
get the habits of being not satisfied when he goes back 
hone* 

EDUCATIOH 

Now, there is a very Important thing I want to give. 
The preliminary reports mbmitted to me by the Council of 
Education, which I have read, has reveiled one greatest 
weakness of tl» educational system that we have established 
In the Philippine Islands. I am not blaming the Bureau of 



- 15 . 

Education* I am blaming the govemnent. But we have been 
waatlng in opinion 4/5, at least 3/4, of the money we 
have spent for education In the Philippine Islands. The 
result from our system of education is by no means in 
proportion to the amoimt of money that wo have spent.^ I will 
explain to you what I mean* The investigation made by the 
Council of Education reveals the fact that only a very small 
proportion of the children that go to school remains in 
school five years. The proportion of those who leave tii© 
school in the second or third year is very high. The result 
is that when they leave the school they are almost as illi- 
terate as when they entered the y^school^ so that the money 
spent for two years for ©very one of these children has been 
money thrown away. The resiilt has also been this. We have 
not increased the literacy ^ tlie Phllippino Tsl nndw . In 
pr portion to the number of children that are going to 
school or are in the schools, so that our figures and our 
stiitlstics as to the number of children thatie have In 
the schools, the number of schools tfebt we have do not provd 
the progress that we are making in converting our people 
into literate people. The Council of Education did not 
suggest any remedy^ -eaad I think there is a remedy. I am 
going to make con5>ul8ory for every child iftio enters school 
his remaining In school for four years so that once a 
child enters, he or she has to attend school for four years. 

THE PRESS. You can make it very efficient? 

THE PRESIDENT. I am referring to the number of years 



- 14 - 

that will he required for the elementary instruction. It 

is that number of years he shor-ld be required to go through. 



TI3B PRESS. Supposing in the beginning of the school 
year, he can afford and In the third year he cannot? 

THE PRESIDENT. There is no reason why he can-not 
afford in the second o^ third year because that is a free 
education. Moreover, I am going to propose to the Assembly 
to pass a law making elementary education compulsory. I do 
not know what the Assembly will do to make it take effect 
three years from now. I can recommend to make the law take 
effect immedlaltely because we have to have the necessary 
approp3?iation for that. We have to know «^as±:3£t!S=55?=g5P(55i"ot 
school buildli^gs will be required and we have to build tliese 
buildings befpre we can enforce the law. We have to know 
how much bpney we require every year and we have to provide 
3as» that n/ioney,. Therefore, I cannot recommend fiOF that law 
to take effect iDmiedia^ely. I" three years, imless we are 
negligen/t, we ought to know the number of children, J^i^^ch 
money will be required to build thbs* schools^ana we^have 
been able to provide the funds for these. We are considering 
this duty of lihe Philippine government under the Constitution. 
The Constltutlpn is not very direct, but is sufficiently ex- 
licit to make It the duty of the government. Whatever the 
"H^^B^^ek^ does with reference to making elementary education 

compulsory in the '^'^'^'^^'^'^^^^•^^^^^^^^^ 
InfluenSi' as I haye with tb© U^ym^h to pass an act 
compelling every child who enters school to remain in school 



durir^ the ,ears that are „ece.,ary to complete hla ele- 
mentary education* 

THE PRESS. There la age limit in the United States. 
THE PRESIDENT. You Icnow the institution provides 
for the education of tlB adult also. Tj^ough the Constitu- 
tion simply says citizenship education, that requires im- 
plicltly the training of those men to read and write if 
they do not read and write. But I do not know yet what we 
can do about that. O^ere are many things that are being 
done^but they are disconnected with one another. 

THE PRESS. The Army to be used for literacy campaign? 
THE PRESIDENT. They will be used. Thay will be used 
in time of peace. We have to take the census. The first thing 
to do is to take the census. Every time something is pre- 
sented to the government regarding education, we find that 
we have no facts to build upon because we have not ha^a 
census for eighteen years. The cost of the last census 
was »5,000, 000.00. The Philippine government canliot spend 
5 million pesos to have a census^ but we must have a census 
and, therefore, I am going to Instruct the Army to use our 
trainees as census takers* We are going to use the Army, 
the teachers, the municipal secretaries, every employee of 
the government to take the census because we must have the 
census. We will make the men work without any increase. It 
will cost one and one-half million pesos because we have 
to publ2|!^it, etc. I never realize how badly this government 
needs a census When you are confronted with such statistics 



4) 



• 

It 

9t 



•H 

# 

V 

A 

0 



s 



i 

g 
o 



O 



<D 
U 

s 

H 

I 

a 
0 
t-i 

I 



0^ 

m 

H 
O 
O 



I 

H 
•H 

■8 




0) 
« 

>> 
H 
0) 

o 
m 

O 

a 



m 

O 

o 



9 



H 
A 

.a 



'd 

H 
O 
-P 

(D 

d 
o 

I 

> 

o 

•H 

H 
0 
fit 

m 

o 

S 
I 



§ 5 



H 

§• 



S 

•P 

O 

o 

O 

u 

i 

H 

Q) 
P« 

0) 

<D 
EH 



'd 
od 
q) 

H 

o 

H 

iH 

o 

o 
m 



o 

m 

u 
o 

H 



o 

S 
o 

(Q 

O 

H 

•H 

CO 



(D 



O 

o 
m 

o 
m 

I 



5 



P 



•P 



> 

-P H 
H ^ 

5 S 



4^ 



5 



45 
O 

s 

H 

s 

H 
Pi 
O 
O 
Pi 

I 

0) 

s 

O 

<D 



I 

OQ 

O 

43 
O 

I 



I 

+> 

o 



•H 
10 



I 

a 

o 

Pi 
O 

5 
S 



-P 



o 

§ 

H 
Pi 

I 

-P 

s 

•P 

S 

H 



ss 
«) 

I 
s 

«P 

o 

•p 

•p 

g 
s 



H 



« 

I 



- 17 « 

to any degree that may discourage the minlag Industry in 
the Phillppinee, Hy Impreaaion is that tbs Philippine 
government and the Filipino nation has in storage a great 
wealth in oyxr mines* The preliminary reports of the Boroau 
of Science would justify the belief that tMs is one of 
the richest countriea in the world in mines, including oil. 
If we tax these mines now and thereby discourage the develop- 
ment of mines in the Philippines, we and nobody else 
be the losers* So while I believe at present the mining . 
industry is paying -eery little and that the income from wlil i-l i 
can and should be increased, I do not believe that wo ought 
to go far in that, so as not to discourage the investments 
in mines« If ouj? trade relations with the United States 
based on their present tems shotald be instantly radically 
altered upon the inauguration of the Philippine republic, 
the Philippines has seme hope of meeting |ihe situation 
which would arise until the Isla^s has found another market 
or has created new Indus trie s • ij^ining iiidtis tries in the 
Philipplne^£steiaS», I think, if they are properly encouraged 
during these ten years, can produce enough to compensate for 
tl» loss of the privileges we have in the American market 
and so it is very essential that the government use sound 
judgnent in dealing with the mining industry in the Islands. 

I intend to discusss with the Aasembly, for instance, 
the proposed develppment of the oil industry here^ Ilobody 
knows for sure iriaetfeer we hawe oil in the Philippines. 
The report of the Bureau of Science and some geologists 



- 13 g 

that have been sent to the Philippines by certain oil 
corporations in America Is to the effect that we have 
oil In the Islands. Well, I do not believe that we have 
sufficient capital in the Philippines to develop these 
oil mines. a?he amount of money that la necessary to make 
first the e3q)loratlon, then the drilling, etc. is too 
great, and such corporatl onf| have been formed here to en- 
gage in oil at a capital of ?25,oqo or ^50,000, or some- 
thing like that, are rather on their face value, a ;}oke, 
and therefore what I am considering to do is toow to get 
the government to enter into a contract with some oil 
corporations that have ^got^ O credit ^ a lot of money for 
doing this work of exploration and when the exploration is 
made, if there is oil, get the government to enter into 
contract with them. 

Speaking of those cases in the co- rts, I want to 
•ay this: When I ordered the investigation by the DepsLPt- 
ment of Agriculture and Department of Justice of these 
oil corporations in the Philippines, I was not Inspired, 
as everybody must recognize, by any desire to prosecute 
anybo^. I was inspired to protect the public purchasing 
the shares that today have no value wiiatever. The public 
ought to be informed that bo sufficient ei^loratlon has 
been made in the Philippines for nobody knows for sure 
that there is oil in the country. Not even the best geo- 
logftsts could say that because any sufficient exploration 
has been made and even after an exploration when tlie ex- 



- 19- 

ploratlon has shovrn that a certain locality has oil when 
the actual drllllne Is mada it ma^ yet result In a failure. Any 
share in the oil industry is not worth anything, Tlierefore, 
my desire was to protect the public. But evidently these 
people who are buying these shares do not care to be pro- 
tected^ and if that is going to be the attitude of the 
public here in the Philippines, I am not going to waste 
(i^vernment time to protect them* ( A. 

The more fact that those people are entering contracts 
with these companies that have secured license from the 
Department of Agriculture, the mre fact that they entered 
into contract with those companies gave the people in the 

provinces the belief that there was oil there and when 

J 

the shares were sold^they paid enormoris^for those shares, 
when, as a r.iatter of fact, the only contract was with 
the Vacuum 011| all that they wanted wais the right to ex- 
ploro» They have already gone^^idj ."'') 'ny regret^ because that 
Is the coaqpaay that could have rendered great service to 
the Islands. As a matter of fact, they spent lojfts of 
money. They sent a geologist here, who visited the Philip- 
pines, and was ready to pick up those places which ought 
to be explored and I think the company was ready to spend 
money. You know it costs millions to do this drilling, but 
the Secretary of Justice held the opinion that they could 
not do this woito here and they just gave it up» If the 
Assembly will approve the policy permitting the government 
to enter into contract with the oil^ company to make the 
drilling, that when they find the oil they will be permitted 

^.n 1 Inn til- nil I ftiidjiiifldaaiaaaaB^^Ltifl -^""^ ^^^»-»^- 



M 

09 

a 



o 

§ 



4k 



> 
O 

Pi 
at 



I 



o 

u 
o 

§ 

o 
o 

o 
cd 

CO 
(D 



4:* 

CQ 
4^ 



1 

5 



\ 
I 

o 



§• 

H 

© 
> 

'd 

19 

•H 

H 
O 

& 



(D 
6} 



M 



>» 
+i 
H 

0) 

o 
u 

I 

> 

•H 

O 
O 
O 

09 



00 <D 



o 
o 

H 
Pi 



I 

4^ 



I 

H 
4^ 

# 

4^ 
CO 

f 

m 

<S 

o 

4J 
O 

I 



o 

(D 

O 
■P 

& 



o 

Q 
O 
CQ 

iS 

o 
o 
-p 

IQ 

o 

I 

•2 
«H 



i 

o 
o 

% 

tQ 

u 



+5 

g 

CQ 



O 

I 

•p 

•P 

PI 

g 

o 

© 

o 

i 

H 
H 
O 



5 



H 
CO 



4i 

e-i 



i 

o 

I 

o 
.Q 

O 
•P 

O 

U) 

09 



4:> 
0$. 



I 



A 
o 



I 

4^ 



0 



I 

H 

g 



O 
4^ 



4^ 

u 



O 
H 
Pi 

O 

0) O 
Pi 'd 



4^ 



O 



4^ 

B 

H 



5 



o 

u 
o 

H 



o & 

O 

o 

■P at 

H .p 

03 « 

C ,CJ 

O -P 



+3 

(d 

•H 

•p 

O 

to 
Pi 

(D 

a 

fi 
o 
o 

c 

s 

M 

to 



(a 

s 

Q 

O 

4J 

4^ 
CO 

•d 

I 

(D 

$ 

o 

o 

xi 
^\ 

I 

as 

p; 

o 

4^ 




i 



s 

H 

5 



H 
H 

3 

o 



s 

4^ 



• 

4:> 



O 
O 

s 

o 



o 

45 



4^ 



- 21 - 

to do It. There la nothing in the Independence Act to 
prevent that. A? a matter of policy, of course, I won»t 
be in fav5r of getting any foreign corporations to do the 
exploration work of our oil here. 

THE TRADE COI^EREHCas 
THE PRESS, Plans for the trade conference? 
THE PRESIDENT* I am not going to f ortti@ part of the 
delegation, but I am eontemplating going to tiie United 
States next October or November, I want to take part in 
the preparation of the agenda of the conference* I am 
trying to get the government of the United States to have 
that trade conference take place in the Philippines* TlilS 
IS NOT FOR PUBLICATION. I will tell you why, I think the 
preparation of the agenda In the Philippines before the 
trade conference should take place in Manila^ first, be- 
cause we can~hot afford to spend too much money in sending 

our delegation, and it would be some saving if you can 
have the conference here, A few thousand pesos means 
Bome thing; to the United States it means nothing* In the 
first place, as a means of publicity for the Philippinos, 
while we have the trade conference here, everything we 
do will be news* If that trade conference held in the 
United States, it may get some place in the newspapers 
for the first week* After that nobody is going to pay atten- 
tion to it* Here in the Philippines it is a very important 
news and will be advertising the Pliilippines during the trade 
conference* Lastly, everybody knows that when an American 
comes to the Philippines, he begins to feel differently 



- S2 - 

about the situation In the Philippines. He hegins to 
see how much the Philippine trade means or nay mean in 
the future. He begins to see how much it means to the 
prestica or^erica to have some kind of connection with 
us here and that fellow is in Washlncton, he may think 
only what the rrmi in N^rth Dakota wants; when he is here 
ha thinks in terms of the great national interests of the 
United States and, therefore, he will be sympathetic to 
what we are trying to accoc^llsh. That is most important. 
I am sure if the tradd conference is held in the Philippines, 
every American member of the dele<xatlon will be for us. If 
it is held in the United States, every American meniber of 
that delegation will do what every representative of Harry 
Lawson wants to do about stigar, 

LAND LEASES 

TIIE PP.ESS. land leases, companies are restricted? 

THE PRESIDE14T. Tiiat has nothing to do with mining 
exploration. Tliat law does not affect minesf The National 
Development <3ampany is not going to be engaged in agricul- 
tural enterprises. If it does, we might just as well say 
good-bye to the National Development Ccanpany, 

Here is the limitation. The same coirqpany can~ilot 
be interested in another company in excess of 30 per cent 
interest. So that if there are two mining corporations or- 
ganized in the Philippines to exploit oil and one of them 
owns 30 per cent in another corporation, that caiTnbt work 
in the Philippine Islands any more. That is tlie only llmi- 



PRESS CONFERENOB NOTES 
AUGUST 14, 1936 

THE PRESIDE. Good mornii^, gentlemen. Please 
be seated. Well, l am ready for your auestlons, 
^= i» TRIP TO TOE UNITED STATES 

THE PRESS. Mr. President, have you any special 
plan for your projo sed trip to the United States? 

THE PRfiSlDENT. Nothing* 

THE PRESS. Have you fixed the date for your trip, 
Mr. President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have none for my trip be» 
cause out of ninety per cent of every hundred trips 
that I make, the original plan is always changed, 
(laughter) So, if I change my plan, that will be news, 
THE PRESS. Are you planning to cross the Pacific, 
Mr. President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Tes. 

TAQAYTAY RIDGE 
THE PRESS. Mr. President, can you tell us something 
about the Tagaytay ridge? Do you have any plan of trans- 
ferring the oapitol of the government to Tagaytay? 

IHB PRESIDENT. There is no such idea to transfer 
the capital. In the first place, that is not a very 
large ridge, but I have a pOAU of transferring the ca- 
pital there as has been recommended by the Bireau of 



2 - 

public works tbat it would be advantageous to create a 
new city there, and I understand this plan of improving 
Tagaytay had been adopted by the Government, at least 
by the Department of Public Works long before I became 
president. One day, irtien i went to Uang, I found that 
they were building a road from the crossing of that road, 
that is, from Mendez-NuSez to Silang and, i called one 
of those meii/i."What are you doing?", i asked. "We are 
building the road to Manila through silang," was the 
answer. That is the road where I used to pass to go to 
Tagaytay. I said: "You stop that and if the Bureau of 
Public Works orders you to go ahead with the work, tell 
them that I gave you instruction to stop it," I thought 
then that it was one of Ihe unnecessary roads we were 
building, so two months thereafter, Hillisas asked me if 
I gave orders to stop the building of the road, and I 
answered him, "yes.* 

"Why Mr. president,^" he said, "that is a very Im- 
portant road because if this road will be improved, it 
will make Tagaytay accessible to Manila, and Tagaytay 
is one of the nicest places in the Philippines. Tagaytay 
is mudi cooler, three degrees cooler than Manila, and it 
is never warm there." Well, I said to him that « would 
go one day with him fclere, and I went. 



«• 3 ^ 

I went to Tagaytay with WllllaBie. it was a very 
hot day, and we started at ten o»olock in the oorning. 
My idea was to arrive there before noon because it is 
only an hour's ride from Manila, it vas last iaa^ and 
when I left ManUa^ I was perspiring all the way through 
and upon my arrival I walked throi^gh the ridge and when 
I oaae back to ay car, I found that my perspiration had 
already dried up* It was so nice and cool, and I adced 
if there was water. They told me that there was suffi- 
eieut water for a population of 15,000, and if the popu- 
lation should increase, still they would have enough 
water. As I have said, I walked through the ridge, and I 
found it to be the most beautiful place in the Philip- 
pines. If the gpvernment is going to spend money in 
building this road, we better think of something big here. 
I en. planning to talk to tl» owners of the land and ask 
them if they will give the land free to the government 
where streets have to be built and if they are going to 
sell it at a very low price, every piece of land that 
nay be needed for public purposes. If they will, we will 
go ahead with it; otherwise, we wUl just stop. My idea 
will be to create a city there, chartered city, like 
Bagnio and have Arellano prepare a plan for the City and 
take advantage of every place that is worth taking ad- 
vantage of for people to snjoy the beauties of nature. 
From Tagaytay, you can see Laguna de Bay and the Cttina 



sea. YOU can .ee VbtiA.b very well/.i&e aunset is 
■arvelotts, and yOin you look toward the lake, you 
bebold the most elorlous sl^t of the place, i want 
to hare the f&nlla Hotel a branch there, a golf court, 
a place for a national build a fine park, etc. 
In oth^ words, I should like to build a modern city 
thsre and if that ie done, we will have the busy people 

in Manila, at least, to spmd their week ends. When 
the road is finished, it will be fine and what inrprovesents 
we could not in Baguio. we will ^here. The busy peo* 
pie can jiox ^0~%o Baguio as often as they want to be- 
cause of the distance. If XbBjSPf they go occasytflonally, 
and if they go, they have to abandon their lork, which is 
not the case liien thqr "to Tagaytay for you can reach 
tha place or return to Manila in an hour. If you leave the 
place at 7, you will afive in Ihe qffice at 8. In other 
words, the people who have business in Manila can spend 
their week ends in Tagaytay. i\nother advantage Tagaytay 
has over Baguio is that Tagaytay is within reach of the p 
people of Middle class who can take adirantage to take 
their vacation in Tagaytay, wMch they cannot do in 
Baguio. so we are studying now this matter, I am not 
going to do anything until we have secured the land at 
a ver/y low price for public use, like golf court, hotel, 
roads, parks for the city, school sites, municipal build- 



Ings, etc. 

THE PRESS. Will there be a government building 
like offices of the governiBent? 

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I do not know. I should like 



to have the land, and in case the lq^ alot4 >e cares to 
build their Offices there, why, they can do it. They 
can hold sessions there^too — we coald have the Ls- 
gislativs Building transferred to Tagaytay, we could 
have a branch of the tJniversiV there. I hare always 
found out that the University of the PhillEpines has 
been located lAiere it should not be located in tbe 
c«Qter of this metropolitan city. The boys are exposed 
to all kinds of taaptations and all sorts of things. 
Tagaytay is a place where the boys would lave a fine 
elimte and where they will have no occasion for going 
to places that are not the places for young people to 
go ifliose health might be affected, and I think that with 
the exception of the college of Medicine, the whole 
University may be taken there. The only question is the 
•jpense. But Dr. Booobo suggested to me that if the Na- 
tional Government could use for its offices the buildings 
of the Unirersity, instead of building the offices of the 
government we could do it. If they coild use the building 
of Ihe University At would be good because the people would 
not have to go from one place to another. I do not know 
whether it is favorable or not. I have not gone as far 

as that • 




- 6 - 

We are going to prepare Tagaytay as a place for 
tourists, as a place for business men living in J»nila 
end as a place for the middle class who want to go for 
a change as there is a difference in climate between 
Manila and that place. That is tl» most important use 
of the place for tourists once the real is made, and I 
do not believe that any person who comes to Manila does 
not gp to Tagaytay. 

THS PRESS. Will Tagaytay be a good place for 
sightseeing to tourists? 

THS PRESIDIMT. Yes, but I am not doing anything in 
that connection until we build hotels. That, in my opi- 
nion, is the first thii«. We have to advertize the 
Philippines, and people who corns here will see, not 
only the place inside, but also see places outside. AS 
it is now, we do not have gsod hotels to go to, and 
people do not live on sceneries alone; Ifeesr also live 
on bread. My own experience as a traveler is that^unlew^ 
I innM a good bed and place to stay, by Gosh I I ^a^=^ 
leave the place immediately with anger and disappoint- 
■ent. But we have very few places in the Philippines that 
can be developed for tourists' purposes. One is Tagaytay, 
and m Mindanao there are also several places. Mindanao 

is a wonderful place, 

THE PRESS. DO you not think that if Tagaytay is pur- 
chased and the government build hoteis so that the Manila 



lU Uv. ^ br«iok th^*. It wUX not di«,oar.f 
private ««pitait 

PHKSIEWT. ttalw. thv Ittlld tb. hotel, 

on the R,ad.. Hobody to b. lat^-oafd in tho 

^.iaaa. of bmildi^g hotA.; i am aot latcraatad In 
1»lldlng hotil. at aU, Of oooraa, tha govanmant haa 
•ada lota of Inraatmenta. bat If anybody aboald offar 
to b«r Manila Hot A for P600.000. I would lot it go. 

iOKMitALiga jn TRW. ^lagy 
rsn PRESS. Baa Aaaaablpiaa O^a brought to your 
attantlon tha allagad aao«alie^ h parchaali^ aa^iiaa^ 
mH t1 ^ tha Philippina 

TffS PRSSiraiT. no, nobody hn« brought thoat to my 
attaatioa azoapt tha nawapapdra, and i taU you it la 
floing to ba a Tary atraaga tULng if anything that app- 
aara in tha aavapapara ahotad ba trua aaiS of whiah i 
know nothing about , l <k> not oaad Qppna to t all it to 
aa baaaoaa I would have known it avan without anyona ' 
tailing it to aa. 

OTCgARISTIC GOmRSSS 

TH5 PR8S8. la the gov maent taking a in the 

pr^aratiott for tha arrival of tha dali^ataa to tha la^# 
riatio congraaa? 

Tax PRlSIDWr. air. 

MSXDMSMO 

THK PRMS. 9mm tiaa ago, in oar diaouaalon of tha 
DawaA aituation, yon aaid that yon would atu^y and parhapa 



- 8 - 

you would reooBBMid it to the Legislature. Is tliat In 
line in this jperiod of the Legislature? 

THB PRESIDENT. Well, have you not read my message 
about Davao? That settles the <|ie8tion« I said evory- 
thiog about it in that message of mine to the National 
Asseably. 

THE PRESS. But you said something about cons true t- 
ing a railroad line there, l>ir. president? 

THE PRESIDENT • As a natter of fact, we ere doing 
it. There are many people working there now and they 
are going ahead with that road^ working from three 
different j^ovinees. We are gaining time in that way. 
They are going to meet, that is, we have started from 
three different places, so as to accelerate the woik, 
and I expect to make an automobile trip next June froa 
DaTao to Cagayan. 

THE PRESS* I think the District Engineer is send- 
ing many men to work on the road. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, many of thase fellows will 
raaain as settlers there. Tou know Trtiat I am going to do 
is this. I will have the Bureau of Lands survey all the 
lands along tl» roads; we would not permit the people 
^to take land except at a distance of 60 meters on 
either side of the road. We are reserving the land 
beyond that. The land connecting with that is being 
>^ubdivlded for hOMsteaders. O^a iiomesteads will be 



•© that tte frcat of tb« boKestead will b« toiard 
tha road and win not iM^vvry wlda. nia idaa Is to giva 
to aa sattjr paopla aa poaalble tha opportunity to own 
land. Then naxt to tiiat la the land tbat wa ara ra- 
••mng fop tlia ocrporatlona to taka. m other worda, 
wa do not elva tha roada to corporatlona and wa ara 
^^••wrrlag lands ftor xoa4«>tliat wlU peralt the omera 
of tha pablle lands that ara begrond to taka thslr ppo- 
dttota to thi aAitt ioad« wa ara not golne to ptxslt die- 
arlAinat Jon of any aopt es haa bean done In the paat, 
and wa ara galng to give prefaxaBoa to the nea iftio have 
baan vcrklng on tha road, to man fpoa otter pzovlnoea 
who ara coning thara with a little capital to biiy eara- 
baM and iBplenanta and aetUe there* 

THS PHB8S. flfeara will you oaa thla 60 net era, Kr. 
fraaidant? 

TOJ* r " m oaaa wa want to extend the road 

and to'^t-Ui traaa along t»e roada. Too see, tho rtiliip. 
pinaa 1& a not country and li^e very road ia Jxc^ tdth 
traaa, pacpXe walk almig the aide road. 7a hara lost a 
lot of acmir* I aoan. It la gdng to coat the gowarnsent 
a lot of money to raaerwe laida auffloloit for tha loada 
to ba widened. I think that 50 yeara from now we almil 
hawa amoagh roada. I think do amtera la Moogh for rotia, 
for wa may ba trmwalllag In aliplanaa; pejhapa avaa la 



- 10 • 

tolas to the oay be trat»llliig oa tn* 

•Jr aad I2t« fteaLd«iit wUl be on tte air, 

MK PRESS, nr. PrealdfBt, In oocmeetioii with thi 
«a«lle» In the mrehese of Anrqr etwHee, hae Aa»eably« 

(^118 reported to you atoit It? 



m mJKSBSHT. I do not know anything *out it. Aa 
1 }km% aaldy I aan only that i aa not Snforasd about 
it. Veil, I aa goiae to keep it hot for aoae of theae 
people beoanae I believe that that Matter ahould hsve 
been brotg^t to ay attention. They are aakiag the Invea- 
tigation» and X mt act placing aay obatable in tbat, that 
ia, any inveatigation that > he Satloaal AaaeabLy nwf eare 
to aake along that line will be aelooaa, but the chief 
Ii»«itiTe auat be infer aad fir at beeauae it ia diaree- 
paatfnl on their part - what they are doing nov. Of 
eoirae, I wait to aake the Invoatigation wh«B ttere ia 
ground for it. I think the charge la that the amy ha a 
beaght aeToral reiolTera at a vary hi^ prlee. »hat did 
th«r bay? 

fBI PBS8S. BefDlTera, beda. eto. thir that in 
oaae of beda eoating 1^ eaeh offered by ons aaa preferred 
to bete at f? of the aaae Material. 

tBS PRSSir^VT. If that be tine, the man vho aooepted 
the bid will lave to go to jail. Beda of the Material 



- 11 • 

••lling at ri2 wa« pref erred to bed* ooetlng p7 each, 
why. tbet Mane en Inoreaee of the population of the 
laity. You see vhat «e are doing in thi i»y is this: 
vo have tea^kf guns for the Amy and we have saved 
••Teral Million pesos out of this, in the end, when 
we hawe bought the rifles that we need, we eould save 
from 15 to 20 million pesos, in the purchase that we 
have already made, we have saved already S>*iilllon pe- ^ 



THB PR?:ss. Tft 11, Ml, savings oobc^ from the pvr* 
ehase of rifles only, ar. president? 

TH8 PRSSZDSST. Tas, before we bou^t rifles at 
froa $30 to |45» now we buy thm at from |S to |8« And 
we are Baking a lot of those pur chases. 

TRS H18SS. Are you at liberty to disclose whether 
thase rifles are good? 

THK FRBSIDBMT. Tea, and all I know is that they 
are A»erloan aras* 

THS PRESS. Can you tell us the shipment of these 
rifles? 

tfB PRSSIDSSr. I think they are around 50,000. 
THE PRBSS* Has the government taken any step in 
puroteeiBg artillery of heavy ara? 

THK PRKSIDBSirr. Wa are going to buy soae of those. 



lion OF DQ»A»r;^n» s yj^n ta^ 
THE PRSSS. Kbat do you think of tli» aeasure now 
*To^ m r.gax^n^j^;i^^ tonatod to aba. 

rltftble and raligloua It-tltatlone be €,x(iiaptad from tha 
pajmnt of Inherit anco tax? 

TH8 PrtSSIDaNT. I as agninst tha axflaption, Xbr this 
r«M0B. Tbm goraraBant^i^ at ieaat, this govarniaent^ la 
•pandlng aooay for educational ptoposes, for cherltpbla 
iaetlttttlona and if that ia tha caaa, why should t tiara 
b« •XM^tion whan the donation la intended for a ohart- 
table purpose, why should It be axaaptad froa the pamant 
of taxes when the govaraMot Is alao doing that work? 

THS HI ESS. a9w has thla tax exeaptioB gone thus far? 
THB PRSSID2KT. I ondaratanci tliara la no exemption, 
sad <r oourset thm'a waa no exaqption. I at ill prefer 
that the exeaption ba atrieken off. 2 onderatand there 
ia no exeaption in any of thoae thinga. Tall, the aoat 
oharitabla institution is the goTarBaaafc any way. 

> Pl?BLIC . 0513 
THS Ifr. Pr«»aident, have you approrad tha 

faydratalio plan in Infaata, Tsyabas? 

. IHS PRSSIBW. I do not know anything about It. 
THS PRS38* Bat there ia a bill presented fore 
tha ifatiooal Asseatoly 

tHl FSES2P8NT. It Is not surpriilttg ttet notice 
of this sort waa publiahad before the president should 



15 - 



It. tet I ftB oritlaixiag kj own people end i ea 
CoUg to aeloi It hot f ^g^^a of theM. For instance, 
tim aerald published the other day with this headline: 
*tHB SOHm BOARD IS TUXM THROUCH ITS HAT. THS ROAD 
lOAJSD SAIS SDHBtHIHO.'* I have not seen the report, b*t 
ft Bareld reporter tried to oooenmieate it to the cheiraein 

thie Board, ihy, thle mm printed before i saw it. It 
ie an official discourtesy that the report is published 
before it le aubeltted to the T>re8ideat. it is «n offi- 
cial discourtesy, of course, I do not blane the reporter 
for publishing It for if i were the rsporter, i would stesl 
the news if i could, but in that ease, I understand the 
report was giwen out beibre It^tas eulsaiitted to me. ^ihen 
ooMBnioat lone are addressed to the President, the preei- 
deat is the only one that can giv* thftt to the press, the 
other party has no ri^t to giro it. Medy has the ri^t 
to tell to the prees, anything abdut the ccotersation had 
hetween the Presldeat and another person, but khat hap- 
pans is that t he ninute they Icawe ae, ewerybot^ knows 



what it is abont. 




the Bouee* c^i, the inl^xmation giiea by tlat aeatber^ of 




gantlMii, what happened lOiere,.! haws en nnderstwdinc 



■ith in* Hi^ Oo»l.«ionep that whm%rw I wish to aaks 
tt»e of hl« omce I «jt fri» to oall. which I think i« 
wy nice and «raciou« fop the High Coa2itiwal oner to do. 
Ittfl In View of that, on »>re than one oooaaioii, I hawe 
aaicod ur. Jonee to go over a oertaia aatter tl»t has 
•MIS hearing on financial aig?eot, and to let me know his 
wlsws about it. sell, ur. Jones never expressed aqr viaws 
whsMwrn- I asked HI* to give a 11 ttle mtmna&nm ex- 
pressing bis argxaenks in Ifevcr of xusa; he does not ear 
^ a«ain«t this heeanse it 1* ««alnst a eertaln prece- 
dent, etc. that is the way he does things, even thoi«h 
I hare asked Mm to glwe ae his views, sow, in this pari 
ticttlar case, I have a project for the issa^ee of sev«n 
JsUlion peso bonds and I e^ed Hr. Jones that bs personal- 
ly go over that and let as Khowwhat he thinks about it. 
^?ell, :,tr. Jones Juat wrote down the argoamt pro and con. 
the eood elds and the bad side, but he expressed no opinion. 
i?ell, one day the Chaliman of the Public ««r ks of the House, 
Mr. Cuenoo, oaas to see ae and he was aoooapnled by ano- 
ther BSBibar, no, he was Mr. Marabut. asked ae if i 
9»ia« to rseoanoad to the Hatlonal AssoahLy a bdU au- 
thorizing the isauanoe of seven ^uilon peso bonds, i aaliji 
I was not am yst beoause i was studying the neaorandoa 
Mr. Jones had given as. Teil, he left me. ifow, about 20 
aiaates latecr, Haxario asked as, "Mr. President, is it 
tms that the office of the Hif* Maissioaer objects 




- 15 - 

to ttm isaxffiiee of the mmrm WllioB p«tto bond*?" I 
anmred^ a> . mi^ toiu UXi^Ji— .^..^^ print that beoftUM It 1» 
Itoll of dynanito.* i »ald, -call ?cr«a« and hav« him 
talaphon^iil the a^vag^i^rs not to print it booauee it 
in full of dynaait©." Misario told biq tbat it van not 
nooennnry boeauso tnaso van nobody boaides him that knew 
•boat tlat . «l am tha only one who fcnowe that, pr«- 
eldont." mdently^ that atatamont of Meiario that nobody 
•a« given thin nevs came truo^and I forgot all about It, 
ibsday morning, na aattaal, at giro o'clock, I walked 
mround the building, i had a terrible teadaohe. Evidently^ 
I got an indigent ion ( ^m~l'"oaM»') f rom calauang. I »^ent ^o 
mar zoom. I got the Bulletin and I sav tbire thla news. 
1 immediately got out of my bed with fever and all, anA 
X got my pen and i myself wrote my statement, i felt very 
bad about it; I know that Jones would give hi a own 
atatement • Aft er all, he was the most affected about that 
a«wa. I do not knov how cuenoo stated the matter, but I 
hptwa an idea. The trouble about these reporters is this. 
Z aiq^poae cneneo tcid Kazario that tha president does not 
know whether he is going to issue the bonds beoanse there 
la some doubt about it after my consultation with Jones. 
kM I have said, X knew what was g^ing to be the reaction 
to 1lio«a news beeauso X said that that is charged with 
dynamite, nueaco might have underatood I was hesitating 
baaanma the High commlas loner was objeeting. as a matter 




- 16 - 

Of fact. ttou^t t.»t . ^.i:^;^' 

Tinougnt that Jonea( ys ora^ . He cama 

(A*""^* ^ »<«r, and he ansrored- 

-B.o«tt» hare. fP„ th. b,eln„ing to the eal. he has not 
•zpresaea anything., j t„ia .llUe^that Mr. Jones doe. 
not express sn opinion, he Jnst call. att«tlon to argu- 
-eats in favor of this on48ainst that. .to. Re is adopt- 
ing a rery ,i.e and eonsirvatlve policy. n.e paper. lU, 
"U- Philippines Herald" and -The Tribune" to rtlch I 

ttmnkfui. did not take notice of the fact, they Just 
iresumed it. But the editorial of the fclletia. and. 
peSmps. it is well that it did happ«. because i hop. 
that because it happened, it .ill never happen again. 

TBS PRKSS. But Mr. President, the use of the »ia 
--leohievous" in your statement is the reason for «-itlng 
that editorial. 

THE PRSSIPiarr. no.. W. aUth, no <ae has the right 
to say of this gDvernaent in that language, and i am not 
gBlne to permit that euch language be uMd long as i 
«■ the head of thia ffova,-n»...*, 

Comlssioner "put thumbs doraS The goTarment of the 
OOBBoiwealth deserves to be respected. lh«n you said <uc^ 
-put thUBa>8 down-, you are treating the governnent of tie 
OowaoxiTOalth as ^gn^)rmi by Irresponsible kids, you could 
Just as weU say that the Hl^ ConuBlseloner ha^sone ob- 
jection^ or dcubts the wisdom of the Issuance of tide 
bond. But when you epeaic of that gpvernaent as Irresponsl- 
ble, by Gosh I you <ju8t deserve to't^ . . , 




.a 

U 

o 
m 

0) 



I 

ft 



O 

u 
o 

o 

o 

4» 




01 

ti 

JS 

4» 



S 




- 18 - 

Of tto« Qormnmmt of tbo oonioavMlth. it afipaared that 

there vaa en agxaaaant betveon the Goveniamt of th* 
COBKomrealth end the High conaisjs loner, -you aee th» High 
COBttlsaloner has tte rkfljtit to express an oplolon, of oour«a» 
mt Immt in tho spirit of hclpfultt«»». The posit loo of 
msh COMBisalonor has been crwited by congress, not with 
any idea of entoarrasolng the Govemnent of the ooanonssalth, 
but with the idea of being lmly£\il tc i;he coverniBent of 
the COMBonwealth, and, of course, to safe^iard the in- 
terest of the Onlted States who is the sovoroign power. 
Veil, the mgh Oondseloner has three rights wlilch, 1 
think, he hee la his article, expressed very well, ihe 

« 

CMnissioner has the right to be ooaejtlted, the right 

to adTise and the right to warn, it is it, a Joint responsi* 

hility in a way with the iunerioen people, like saoeess of 
the ipoTsraaent will be a credit to Aserioa as Mil as to 
^ Philippines. If we fail here, it «111 be a discredit 
to the Philippines as sell as to the united States, li^^^ 

Jtr tha Hl£^ coonissloner, after I have consulted him, can 
sdvise aaything^imll und gooU; bat after getting his 
opinion in t ose matters within Uis jurisdiction, i still 
ireserTe the right to aet a^iinst his advi/(e. If i think 
that I should (jave^to) d o it. Bat if he ICQOws that after 
getting bis opinion, we decide otherwl ss, which aigr not 
be to the interest of the goTernuent or of the pes >le, he 
could say: "Kr. president, I do not want to interfea-e with 
this ease, that is jtmt privilege, but as a eeU-wisher of 




th. interest of the repreaenta2e« of foreiga paper.. 
It is eaid that the beet tlme/ ^> o r B o nding oeir. that ,11 1 
be printed m the largest number of papere dTlU beTg )^ 

^^^^^^^^^or. lYlday; at least, that la idiat 
I have heen told. How. gentlemen, it la up to you tJ 
choae the hour and the day you want to hold our oon- 
fere. As for ae, I cen aeet you any day. except sa- 
turday and Sunday because l think you are more Inclined 

to enjoy a little vacation on those days, so just fix 

the day among yourselves. 

THE PRESS. Mr. President, I wish to suggest that 

we hold our conference alternately, that is, one Friday 

let^hold our conference in the morning and .the(nexg^^-/^^,^ 

Pridey in the afternoon, .. f 

THE PRISIDISNT. I think that i»ili be all right. 

Good-bye, and thank you gentloien. 

o 0 o 



PRSSS CONFBHSHCE NOTES 
SKPTnMBBR 4, 1936 



THB PaasiDBHT. Good afternoon, gentlmen, please 
be seated. Now, i am ready for your questions. 

JgSIS POLITICAL CONDIT ION OF EflYPT COMPARED T7ITH P.I . 
THE PRESS. Mr. President, what do you say about the 
political oondition of Egypt as compared with that of the 
Philippines? 

THE PRBSIDEWr. I have no objection to tdlking to you 
here regarding this question, provided our onversation 
does not go out of the four walls of this office. The 
affairs of the state, of any other state, is not for 
publication. VOiat do you wish to know Mrs. Nathorst^ in 
connection with this state of affairs in Elsypt? 

THE PRESS. Just the policy, Ur. President, that would 
indicate that nations like the United States and the Phi- 
lippines, that is, for instance, the ten year transition 
period— will it be the same in Bjgypt and a little bit 
different in China, or is it a ... 

THE PRESIDENT. It is very hard to answer that quest- 
ion, for in the relations of these great nations where 
their former colonies hare demonstrated more than what it 
appears, whether in the newspaper or in any other manner, 
are not 7^' ifg e. acts which tend exactly to show (as ten 
what kind of a government exists in those fomer colonies. 



It ~ .any years ago that i first read about as 
^-<^«^^ent nation, and yet in tMs last concession, 
their understanding or t he// agre«ent between England 
•nd I^t seems to indicate that j%,pt was no more inde- 
pendent than the Philippines under the .ones Act. i never 
believed that .^pt was really independent, so i do not 
know how far self-govenment will go, and when i speak of 
self .government, i do not necessarily use it in the AugLo- 
^^^^^:J ^'^^ independence which may or may not 

be^<»ttpie4-»Uh self-government. I do not know how much 
real independence is given to Kgypt. 

They are going to increase the fbrce wy much, and 
the Egyptian government will build a route between Alex- 
andtia and the canal zone and there make a garrison of 
British troops. 

In other words, instead of stgland having soldiers 
they are going to have soldiers in the air. (Laughter,) 

And they speak of a system of 3gyptian government in 
which Sgypt establishes her own army, infantry, etc. 

Well, I think that after the lapse of ten years, 
%3rpt will have much indenpendence or little independence 
ns she is now under those conditions, of course, we have 
to take into consideration the situation of England there, 
fiigland is a very important question. To have the Suez 
CflBAl under her complete control where she oonsjSers 
tgrpt as her strat^ical position to Egypt, she looks for 




- 8 - 



the necessary soccour to control the Suez canal, ^ain 
her interest In the Sedan will :„alce it very hard for 
laglafld to recognize complete lndep«.dence of Egypt 
without jeopardizing her control over the Suez Canal 
aod her interest in Sedan, m case ^feypt so desires 
al!ter having become completely independent to be allied 
with some European nations other than England, again, 
that is the situation with regard t o Egypt, and she will 
always insist upon having an air base there and a naval 
base in Alexandria. To that extent, Egypt will never be 
absolutely ii^ependent, in my opinion, 

THE PRESS. But it is suggested that England attempt 
to make friends instead of 

THE PRESIDENT. You mean that the Egyptian will be 
satisfied? 

THE PRESS. Yes, Mr. President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I am not aware of it. As I have said, 
I am not blaming England for what I am going to say for i 
do not wish to have it implied that I recognize the right 
of great nations to sacrifice, the right to independence 
of the smailer nations with respect to their national 
interests, to the interest of the great nations, but 
the fact is that no nation is going to give up any power 
that she has when by giving up that power she is going 
to Jeopardize her means of defence or her national in- 
terest. The reason is that it makes independence in 



- 4 - 



eno- 



crtala co. .Uhout due regard to right, of „ 
ther as caanictir« with his o«.. Kationa have only one 
reaction, and that is in their interest, con- 

.idering it as supreme a s^^^T^y other interest. 
That i. the Situation, so i do not believe that England 
will give up. i»,w that will affect the .^tlans, whether 
they will create in the mind and the hearts of the Bfeyp- 
tians tHis further concession made by n^giand iftiich from 
■y point of View is purely apparent, I am not in a position 
to answer. The way it looks, sngland seems to have told 
Kgypt this: "NCw^ gentleman, you have all the independence. 
If we do not want to have you with ua, it is all right, 
but we think we might be able to do you seme good if you 
will potmit us to have a naval base and an air port in 
Alexandria so that we may serve us your defense against 
any of the European powers that may attempt to confer 
^gypt. 30 if you care, we are willing to sign a treaty 
OP an alliance with the offensive and defensive allies." 
Perhaps the Egyptians would accept it if the matter was 
prestefted in that way, might have accepted with real 
satisfaction to give Sngland a naval base in Alexandria 
and air ports; but if Qogland is retaining that power 
and damaadlng it, I do not think that it will breate 
fair sentiments among the Egyptians there. That much, 
I am in « position to say. 

Qua reason why I objected strongly to that pro- 
viaion of the Bare-Hawes-Cuttiiig Law which gives the 



^"^^ to retain -llltarr raeer,.- 

tl«. 1„ the milppi„ 1, , ^^^^ 

— «.l»e to k,ep th. .gitatloa 1„ the PMllppli.e,. 
•oner or later. •» gi„ thoaa amy raaar^tlons out and 
tton>b, create a aental attitude here on the part of our 
P~Ple towards a altuatton. brought about b, the arrane.. 
mmt agreed upon between the milted states ana the Fhl- 
lipplne.. It tate. .uch longer tl.e. It ,OBld be di fferent 
^LilJSSLlSSS^^ in the Tydlnes-iicDurfle Law, that the 

would be returned if ana 
SLStTSn Jo^tM Phllipplnee. now. i believe that is not 
the kind of relationship that ml^t be agreed upon be- 
tween the United states and the Philippines evm after 
indepeadenoe has been established hsre, shloh will be in 
the interest of both countries and which wiU be consls- 
tait idth the dignity and self-respect of the govemaent 
of the Philippines, and yet if that aray reseryatJon 
vere provided in the IndepcoAefioe lav, that would have 
prevented any kind of relat") onshlp to continue after 
iBdependenoe has been established here, because the 
rabid deaagogue would continue the agitation during 
these ten years and sake the Filipinos feAl that what- 
ever relationship there hns been with iunerica— ever since 
the administrative macblnr ry of governBsnt has been 
established and expressly with the AHerioan eapltal ond 
all those functions of which we are getting tired 
bearish. Nbv, tbst is «y opinion of the situation in 



iBTPt, but as I jm-^ , . 

I d<> not mat, in any waj, 

to \m quoted, i ao not 

^••^ statMidnti publl8h«d, 

OHR PRBSS. Presia«.t. lU m relea.. 

tt.9 report of co-BlBelonar Pare*., of M. «r« 

TH5 PRKSIDJSOT. I pro«l., th. -ornlBg paper, th.7 
oouia p«bn.h It. I ao ^ ..„olat.. to br«k 

that engageaent. 



BONDS Oy T QRLD WAR VliyPffPAWc; 

THB PRESS, nr. Preoident, itiat do you say about 
the bonds of the Filipino and African ▼eterans of the 
lorld «rap? 

THS PRZSirmr. WeU. I have had a talk with Jones 
personally and I even want the Philippine National Bank 
to advance the aoney^but the president of the Bank said 
that there vas some objection bec«ase if they give the 
■oney to somebody who haijpens not to be the person entitled 
to receive it, the Bank has to sustain the loss, so i 
suggested to ur, Jones that seally payasnt should be made 
in the Philippines. In ay opinion, under the laws of 
congress, the one that ought to assume that responsibility 
1» ths national City Bank of New York. The National city 
Bank of New York is one of the meid>ers of the Federal 
resarvs system. The National city Bank teat the Government 
of the Philippine Islands in a law suit upon the ground 
that(by'bel^^ member of the federal reserve system that 



Firtlcalar law «uld not aj^ly to them. »ell. i told Mr. 
JoBoa^that 1 am surprised io see that the National city 
Bank refuses to have anytliag at all to do with this 
ihlch involves a rosponsihiliV, when they are so willing 
to claim rights Which they aUbga^ia ccodng to the. as 
ifiwbaca of the federal reserve. I ,aat the bank to do it, 
for I think, unter the law, they should do it. i have 
sailed the attention of thTcoiSl as loner, tl»t is all I 
have dene. I really want to be 4»f help to these feUois. 
This is a great deal of aoney if it wUl be se t bare, 
but I cannot very well compel the Board of Dirootora of 
Ibe Buk to do certain things that are not authorized 
by the c barter. 

THS SR KSS« Ur. President, if the Treasury of the 
Philippine Govommont will act as an agent of the Treaaa- 
ry of the United states Government in taking such obliga- 
tions, w511 that be possible under the lav? 

THE PH;.SlLv.NT. .Vall» I liave not done anything more 
than that beoause the matter has not been discussed 
directly with me by Trashing ton. That is, the question 
has been discussed with the HleJi comndsal one^ and the 
High Commissioner has asked me what he is going to do 
i^t tl»t, whether it should be paid through the national 
Bank, end I said that aa far as I am concerned, if the 
HiUippine BStional Bank refuses to pay it, we could not 
do anything, unless we eonend the charter of the bank. 



Bttt. Of course, i a« going to protect the interest of 
these people. The High Ccwii.. loner has not spoken to 
Me about it. 

THB PRESS, ur. President, there are appr^imately 
fiTO thousand veterans waiting for these bonds, and 90% 
are Filipino veterans who are actually in acute vent. 
The bonds may be paid through the Provincial and Mtmi- 
olpal Treasurers, the city Treasur rs of Manila^ and 
Baguio and Philippine postaasters nay certify identifi- 
cation of the former soldiers, certificates of identi- 
fication must be supported by f ingerfrints of the ve- 
terans and the bonds accompanied by the certificate 
■ost be sent to the Treasury of the united states in 
Washington for payment. 

THE PRBSIDENT* Well, if that Is the case, how can 
there be any possibility of not Identifying these fellows? 
If they are from the town, they are easily identified 
because even the dogs can identify them. 

THB PRESS. They are willing, Ur. President, to pay 
in the United States and to authorize here to pay the 
bonds, but the condition imposed is that if a certain 
person is paid and he is not the real pa>son, who will 
stanfl responsible for him? 

TUB, PiiiSSIDHWT. MT. Jones told me that they are 
willing to send the money and have any one of our banks 
■ftke the i>a9Bent. What are the usurisrs going to do about 
that? 




tnat was AU0ist 11 when Washington sought my opinion 
regaling this matter, i recommended that theee officials 
who have been authorized to certify, should be peimitted 
to pay the bonds in the Philippines, and this mornihg 
I notified Washington to the effect that these five 
thousand veterans, American and Filipinos, are desti- 
tute, and that in order to save them from the pangs of 
scrupulous m^ney lenders, I request that Ihey be permitted 
to cash their bonds in the Philippines. 



THE PRESS. Mr. President, when will you announce 
the Fajardo case? 

THE PRESIDENT. I sent the papers to Vice president 
OsmeSa for his comment. 



THE PRESS. Mr- President, have you been informed 
of the anomalous transactions going on in the stock mar- 
ket? 



THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I am looking into them. Ihey 
transact business by going around the law. I am going 
to have, very soon, a draft of a bill for submission to 
the mtional Assembly, similar to the national security 




-Bg=-» FAJARDO CASE 




- 10 - 

act Of the United states to be enacted here. I want yop 
to know that I have looked into every detail of what is 
going on in the fetock market and I even had a conference 
with Our bankers here. tmUe everybody says that there is 
a lot Of gambling going on, which is not a very healthy 
condition, they do not seem to fear that any possible 
crash may come as a result of them. The banks are not 
in any my seriously involved in those transactions. 
They have loaned no money, except on very good securi- 
ties, securities of corporations that are already pay- 
ing dividends. They are loaning money, knowing that the 
dividends are actually being paid^. They still don't 
give as much money as the value of these shares, consi- 
dering that these are paying dividends. They leave a 
vary safe margin so that as far as obligations of the 
banks are concerned, they are not doing anything that will 
likely impair their liq.uid conditions regardless of what 
may happen in the market. That is all right; they are 
taking the necessary precaution and in many cases, when 
they accept these stocks, they do not accept them as 
securities at all. In other vords, they take securities 
which are sufficient for the laon they are making and 
thegr only take these stocks as additional securities. 
So the bank is sure. iUid nobody could sufrgest how we can 
stop this gambling, although we have to find some way of 
stopping the selling of shares that have no proven value 



* 11 • 

.t all. The law, of ,he Philippines provide for that 
case. Kobody ha« the right to sell shares unless he Is 
authorlzea hy the Treasury Departnant. But « to 
«» farther; ,e are consMerlng oo«pelling these corpo- 
ratious before they sell their shares, to «lce a state- 

Ment of what they have o-p 

jr uave, or whit they have really found, 

get those statements verified by competent engineers 
appointed by the government, and only after that has been 
authorized, should they be allowed to sell their shares. 
I think that will be helpful. 7/e can3ot go very far in 
the preventive measures that we are Taking for that may 
result in stopping lUrther development of the mining 
industry and p^aps stop t^e flow of capital from out- 
side into the Jslands. We have to be careful that in 
applying the remedy, we do not kill thl^^^. But I 
am interested in protecting the public from these pro- 
fessional swindlers because l do not want to discourage 
the Itellows who invest in these mines. This is the first 
time that the people are taking their money out of their 
old trunks, and it would take thirty years before they will 
ever attempt to make any investment. (LauphterJ 

THE PRESS. And some of these corporations, Mr. presi- 
dent, have found a way of selling their shares before 
they are incorporated* 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I have seen sone subscriptions 
made before the incorporation, they have to do tiiat. i 
do not object to that, for that is perfectly iegal, a man 
Who puts his money and is innocent, U faring chances 



- 18 

for; after aU. there niay be or nay not be any gold at 
all. But here is whre the swindling c(aies. A aan comes 
along with a share worth ?500 and says, "We hare this 
corporation engaged in mine. Do you want to buy\»y 
shares? And many will pay two or three times &e Wlue 
of the share, Peqple in Ihe provinces think t^tN^V. 
these mining corporations are earning mucb mon^ akd' V 
Ihe W3r«e part of it is, that the people insist\upoh 
being taken in this original association because they 
think that they are getting on tte grouhd and >JLat«pvon 
they will be able to sell their shares at ona-^ ^ndred 
per cent profit. In the case of the person who J is doing 
the selling^ it is all right^but the poor fellow who buys^ 
thinking there is gold and afterwards finds th^re is no 
gold,{^ is certainly being swindled* But how am I going 



stop that? If I do, I shall obstruct the futuksp develop- 
» nt of the mining industry. Of course, those who elreacly 



have mines aid have sufficient ce5)ltal , PiJ^ly hav® 

to control monopoly. If we pass a law prohibiting that the 
only Filipinos that would be allowed to iUrther develop 
are those already in business, and that they will see, 
before making the sale, irtiether they have the mines or 
not. Those who will do, of ccurse, will do it In good 
faith while some other corporations are interested only 
in finding subscribers and in the organization of the 
company itself, and once they have the moneyi In a short 
tim it disappears. 



- 13 - 

Of course, there are very few corporations who 
have hig capital, hut I em not afraid. I was a little 
hit uneasy for ahout lo or 15 days, I am going to try 
to prevait that because that is pure swindling* But I 
am not gjing any furthar, nor do i want to scare the 
people, hy giving the impression that the whole thing 
is crooked. And wo ere getting a lot of money outside. 

And I am going to punish some of tiiese companies 
advertising things that th^ do not have. That is a 
deliho.ate fraud upon the public in general. Of course, 
there are good companies that have been selling their 
stocks at mucdi higher price, but Iihose that get higher 
prices through the publication of news that are so 
carefully worded that give the public the impression 
that they^re is much profit, are reelly committing fraud. 
And hy Gosh I I may have one of these cases investigated 
because the people who gave the statment that they knew 
what they ha^ and they knew ?iiat effect the publication 
would have on the public, must be punished. That is one 
thii^ you have, the right to intervene because tlie public, 
in general, has the right to be protected against adver- 
tisemmt of Uiis sort, ^oraebody knows that his property 
is worth only four hundred pesos, he knows how many shares 
of stocks he has and then ho goes oit with the statemmt 
given to the public that his property is worth ten or 
sixteen million pesos, he is delitiarately defrauding the 

public « 



THE PRESS. Mr. President, there is a talk about the 
possibility Of a movement to get away from the unicameral 
system of Legislature, would you please tell us sonething 
about this matter? 

THE PRmsiDENT. No, I do not think there is any 
aoreaait. I want to confess that I am not very strong 
for this unicameral legislature, but perhaps as by force 
of mental habit, I would feel more at ease if our Legis- 
lature were composed of two chembers. Despite that feeling 
on my part, however, I am not thinking of starting any 
campaign to have the Constitution amended because we 
ought to giv^±he Constitution t^^c banc e to( g^eveLopliira) 
work outC£_d_aJ)we(^cg)see(get^r) there are (an^ provisions 
that do not meet actual conditions^^^^^) we should allow 
it to work until such time^ as the^ have been demonstra- 
ted. Now I am inclined to believe that the best policy 
is not to touch the constitution, to let it st^d so as 
to accustom the people to look upon (the Constitution^ as 
S0B» thing not to be dianged in accordance with the mood 
of the country to any given time, but something to be 
respected, defended and maintained so long as ■! any one 
of its provisions not proven unworkable in actual 

application. My frank opinion about this bi-cainBral legis- 
lature is that if the constitution provided a senate 
elected through* the nation, that Legislature ccmposed 



- 15 - 

Of a senate elected by the nation at large and a 
National A.Be«»>iy elected by diatrtots, wouldOSS) 
give/ ua a very strong Legislature and would(^ 
•erve/ other purposes not directly competed Mth le- 
gislative action that wculdCh^i^of great benefit 
to the country. For instance, a Senate elected by the 
nation at (large wuldCwJ) contribute/ to the strenglhe- 
ning of the national sentiment and consciousness among the 
Filipinos, for every one of these senators iio^ld(^^r7^^f^ 
and aot/^ as representatives of the nat ion^rather than of 
a district and in turn the electorate would( 5a^ realiz^ 
more fully their national solidarity, when, besides the 
Presiden^and the Vice president, they eLeot// ///j^a^ltk^ 
officials as their national representatives, such as 
BE mbe-s of the Senate. The creation of the Stfiate so 
elected wou Id Qiav e^ do away with those so-called pork 
barrel system because eveo^y senator has to work upon 
projects from the standpoint of the nation's Interest 
and the reason why a certain saiator would ^ave^ aojtjj^ 
in this %ay is first: The election of a S^ate at large 
would create a sense of re^onsi bl lity towards the 
nateon, i&ich the former senate did not have; second, 
because from his political interest, a senator wcxild 
feel that it is better for him to act in the interest of 
the nation instead of in the interest of any locality 
for he knows ho could not be elected by the voters of 
that locality alone, that he is not expected to woik 
for any given district but for the whole nation. 



• 16 • 

30 I advooatad that the Natlonid oreate a 

M-camaral i^ste* of Legl.uture with m senate tweeted 
by the nation at large and a KatJjonal Assaably elected 
by districts. The reasoa why the Asaaably decided fitoa- 
lly for one Legialature is that thsre was a dlfferaice 
of opinion as to how senators should be elected. There 
were no sufficient jaembers of the Constitutional Con- 
went ion that fawred the election at large and «i«n thla 
proposition was sulmitted, it was defeated, it happened 
like this: »?hen the proposition was presented that the 
seabers of the Seziate be elected at large, those in fa- 
vor of the proposition wted against it» and those nem- 
bcra of -title constitutional convention who wanted that 
the nambera of the Senate be elected by districts, voted 
£n favor of the election at large^and the proposition 
that senators be elected by districts was defeated. So, 
finally, the only thing that cane out of that fight was 
a unica&eral syatea of legislature. That being the re- 
salt, I an not going to start a move, to change the 
unioaneral eystem to a bi-cameral ^sten of legislature. 

With tlB creation of the National Asseiably, they 
tlwiselvos created, through their rules, an instrument 
whaiBhy a second disoasslon of a moaaire already approved 
by the '.ss«bly may bo Wd. The advantage of the aaanre 
presented for a second discussion by the comittee on 
Style on Third Reading is that it has the power to order 
the printing before the bill Is voted, wlj^ finally by 



• 17 - 

th« AB.ambly. This oo««lttae hae tto ri^ht to introAio. 
»DdMQt8 Of those kinds, aw«dments in form, and tta» 
Assaably practically does not diacuss thosa ai»Mmente. 
Th^ Just acoq^t th« as tmbmltted by the Ccwiittaa on 
Style on Thira Reading that may offer amendments .f- 
fecting the substance of the biU, ao to speak, -men 
they introduce these amendmeata, it is their duty to 
print the OQendinents separately lYom ths bill and to 
oall the attention of the AssembLy to the fact that ttere 
is this important amendment • Then the Asaembly votes on 
that oiaadment. There is no more discussion to avoid 
vaste of time, but they vote separately on every aaend- 
aent. In this vay a mistake that mi^t have been made 
in the bill as first approved can be renedied by the 
Oonittee on Gtyle. It is a very good idea and it dirai* 
nishes the danger of reaching a hasty conclusion by 
unieaneral system, so the Assembly it^^l^f has created 
its oiti chamber. 

Wxm wc had Ihe Philippine Asseifcly the Chalruaa 
of the so-called .Gonmit tee on stylo wa ttie Hon. Sergio 
Osmera, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
Bs got every bill thatiies passed and refrote it as 
many *imes as he wanted^ and sent it back. That is ons- 
thing, of course, v^. ioh I was not able to do. If it 
vas a meritorious work, we have to give the credit to 
nr. OaneSa, aid I gladly admit that he did ths work. 
The time *an senator Oa««8a was the Speaker of 



- 18 - 

Of RepreiM^ntatiye. ar« before there mr. two 
hoaees. after a« ^^rir^ dl.oa..lon by the house 
of tboae bills, he had a hand In the preparation of 
all of them, if the house had succeeded In amei>dli« 
a certain bill, ho still had his last chance as 
Chairman of the Comnilttee on style. He went over ali;^ 
bills passed by the house and he louM not let any bill 
go by until he had fixed It. And he went further than 
that. Kvaa If after the bill had been approved, If there 
was any thing wrong which had to be corrected, he ttlll 
had a chance to change It. (Laughter,) It Is a credit to 
Senator OsnaSa because he he)4 a treaendous power without 
aatfaorlty of law, constitutional cr anything, but this 
Is due to his patience of going over all those bills 
irtilch he had personally attended to. 7ell» I nerar did 
that for ttiese two reasons: Ih the first place, ay 
Alnd has never good at details; details just give ma 
dizziness; second* I never had the mrve to tell the 
trutl^ of revising all those measures that had already 
passed the house. And the third reason Is that as long 
as senators exercised that power and *iie members of the 
^use knew I did not have the nerve to 0> over those 
bills, there was nobody who actually took the patience 
bat senator OsmeKa, because they knew that there was 
a man Who was always al ert, vigilant, that took upon 
hlfcmslf the responsibility of gplng over these bills. 
Ir«-y Chalr«.ii of the committee liked to take charge of 



8 



43 



I I 



H 



i 



S 

o 

O 



O 

o 

s 



8 



s 

8 



<<<> 



.4 
o 



a 
8 



43 



0) 

o 

9 

« 

§ 

f-l 

o 
o 

>» 

o 

o 
d 



m 

a 

m 

M 

S 



s 

o 



00 

o 

a 

o 



f 



0 

I i 

4 g 



S 
6 

H 

0) 
00 



5 



o 
o 



C9 



o 



2 



o 



0) 
A 

49 

p 
o 
d 



(D 



s 



+» 



O 

I 



CO 



5 & 



4> 



tlO 

a 

•H 

o 

S 

o a 



s 



3 s 



•0 



CO 



a 

I* 



1-4 
t 

9 

CB 
4> 

H 

8 



a 

(0 



a 



10 

s 

•H 

5 



o 



o 

SP 

& 

P 
P 

s 



1^ 

(0 

H 



4a 



08 



4» O 

P P 

^ s 

Q 43 

I « 



I 3 



i « 



CO 



I 

Pi 



• 

4» 



4 



s ^ 



4» 



a 



o 



4* 



B 
O 

43 



o 

s 

H 

S 

s 

u 
o 



I 

o 

P 

5 



4» 



(0 

o 

H 



8 '6 



5 



43 



5 

4» 

I 

H 
e 



u 

d 
o 



p 
o 
as 



3 

•»* is 
a 

CO 
4* 

<0 



•H O 



I 



o 



% 9 g 



,0 



(D 



0) 

9« 



a 



.0 
Id 

a 



i 



(0 



p 

g 



'8 



d 



0) 

M 

4» 



4» 
O 

d 

o 

CO 



0) 

CO 



4« 

CD 

§ 
8 

0} 

4* 



o 
d 

CO 



d o, 



d 

4* 



o 
d 

n 



o 

o 
a 



^1 
p 



H 
.0 



5 in 



I 

g 

> 

8 

s 

O 



I 

A 

P 

8Q 
O 

O 



d 

u 

Q) 
4a 



a 

d 
o 

o 





m 

8 

a 

V 

o 



8 



I 



r-4 C0 
O H 



0) 

g 

4* 



4* 
O 



p« • 

O A 

• «0 O 

♦» *H 3 

^ ii 

<D 

e 



5 

O 



« s 



a 



+» 



4» 

s 

O •H 

o 
a 

9 



f4 
o 

•4* 

3 



n3 
o 
o 



o 
p 



o 

Pi 



c 
o 

s 

4* 

o 



Bi 



4> 



9 

H 



O d 

43 ^ 



« P m 

•H -H ja 



p 

p 



•A 

1 



I 



i i 1 I 



4> 



-P 

s 

3 



4* -P 



O 

-P 



o 

§• a 
2 o 



§ 

•P 

3 

3 



I 

li 
I 




^ 22 - 

^ould be told to stop paying because the day will come 
when these poor employees that are now paying their con- 
tribution to the peasion ftind will not receive a cent 
of what they have deposited, -rhey will not be able to 
recover their contribution^ and this is the reason why 
it is impossible for the government to return the money. 
My idea is to let those officials of the government de- 
cide whether they want a pension system or not. If ti^y 
do, we have to adlnpt a pension system^ that is sure to 
meet its obligations. My objection wUl be different. 
Instead of establishing Aqpeasion system I would require 
all the eitgployees of the government to pay a cetain 
percentage of their salary to Ihe treasury and tie 
government to contribute an eq.ual amount, and a man who 
has been in the service for many years, and ia entitled 
to retire, is reimbursed for money he has contributed 
plus what the government has contributed, and no more. 
The 5 overnme nt is going to pay that money. Now, if an 
employee is separated from the s ervice, the money which 
he has contributed will be given back to him but the con- 
tribution of the eov.^mment no, because the contribution 
of the government is given only in case his services 
are satisfactory and is given to him in recognition 
of his service. Should he leave the service at his 
own reouest, before he has a right to leave the ser- 
vice, then he will have the money ifeich he has contributed, 
and the contribution of the ^vernment will depend on 
whether his services can be dispensed with or not. 



- 28 - 

If the 0OT«r«aant still need, his service, he Just get. 
his contribution, i think if i*,^ that, it will gi^e 
ej^loyeee of the goyeranent an assurance that they will 
get some thing when th^ finish wo&lng for the govenmeflb. 
Thst idll he the provision when we adopt the system. I 
will study the matter thoroughly before giving it ay 
approval. This provision that I have explained has been 
adopted by the Ifelveraity of the Philippines and the 
results have been satl sf actor y./i want to have tie sup 
•port of th e newspapers here in this^question of pensioi^ 
beoaus^ this is a very serious matter, and unless we 
take that step to remedy the situation, the goveriaent 
of the Philippines will be In a very serious trouble^ 
or these poor wiqployees of the spvemment will be left in 
the sir whea. the tine for thoir peaslon comes. There is 
a movanent on the part of teachers for the continuance 
of the systan. (j think) I waild not want to say poslWvely. 
but on the part of some who tare receiving pensions to get 
the teachers to protest agalnat any diange in the laws 
is wrong. Then I visited one of the Bunlclpal ities of 
noilo. a comnittee of thuee nice-looking girls each with 
a bouquet in her hands, came to me and presented their 
flowers and at the saaie tine handed me a resolution 
ad<^tsd by the teachers of the munidpellty protesting 
against my change in the pension. I consider the occa- 
sion so serious so I told them this, -I mnt you to know 
that I have amelled somethiw which in the lUture^wUl 



- 24 - 

^ againet you. I do not 

to Imur your disploa- 
-e^»nn« ^ .<^^.»^,,„„. ^^^^^ 

-"'""^^ It, Obligation to th»e 

that are nov T^ei^i^x^^^^ 

^«°«ivlne pension «d thoa. that my retlv. 

duri^ ^ adMniatratlon a« ,.at. thT^fore. a. Tar a. 
«r administration ia concerned, thla .ueatlon of panalon 
la iiot goine to be arfaoted, hat i knoa that if 
ooQtlnao paying your contribution and ir i «ntlnaa pay- 
in« t^heae pmsiona. the day *m coma whan every cant 
wUl be gone, i do not want to atouldar tha grave rea- 
jonaibility of oat haviag ^Id you tha situation for I 
do not want to foal that l Have bean instrumental in 
extracting that aoney froa you. now, it is for you to 
daoida«>— if you want to continue making that «Migq^1gn 
anong the aaabara of the National Assembly to pzaTcnt the 
•aaotmaat of a law that will save the sltiiation, that will 
to your respona lb ility. 1 am not going, however, to call 
the attention of tte Asaeafcly if the AmataliLy doea not 
act on this matter. If you ksep on ezeroiaing your In- 
fluaeea over tto A0MBbXy» it will not be my reaponaibUi- 

Taa» here la an organization that ia trying to 
influence those poor teachers ao that they may protaat 
against it and then oigoniaa a movement and a tart by 
citing a cartain section of the constitution that the 
ayataa of tiie government of tha comaonwealth 1^1 

the obligation of the ^vornment. I asked (^^^ 




- 25 - 

*° teaohers. and after I ha4 .x- 
plalnad^to then t 

A I was satisfied because those teacher.. 

tim minute they found out t>« ^-^ 4.v 

out the truth, agreed i was rl^t. 

But there is a tfrMi- ^ 

great mov«enb in the city against the 

suepensiou of the Pension sv«ti«. t . 4 . 

»«Bxua bystoni. I am going to ask 

thB superintendent of city schocSL. for a conf arm ce 
with the teachers of the city schools, and if they do 
not want to believe it, I « not going to fi^t every 
■smber of the Assembly. The school teaehBrs are sup- 
posedly intelligent people; if they stUl insist upon it 
and Ihey make campaign against it, as far as the phUip- 
pine government is concerned, when tlB^ day ecnea, and 
the government can no longer pay these teachers, i shall 
siiiply say: '♦Ladies and gentlemen, good-bye, we have no 
■ore money.** No government is going to wreck the country 
because of these pensions. 

Tott know the pension of the Philippine oovemment 
is appropriating so much money. O^e trouble Is this. 
I will tell you the truth. This Is not for publication. 
The Assembly has been cajoled to pass this pension bill 
on absolute mi srep res ait at Ion. I still ranember old Gen. 
Crame irtien, for the first tims, the Assembly found that 
there was not sufficient mon^. Now I realize that the 
amoimt of ?i50,000, or Oen. Crame at Isast thought , (Is) all 
wecH^to apiroprlate. jf ^^u^proprlate'^that nich, it 
(Ti)all right, the pensioni^IIpbe all right at that time, 
•Ither because there (Is) nobody *o knew anything about 
the pension or th^ did not care to take the trouble of 



^ 26 « 

doing the .l^u mathematical calculation. iJiv .l«pJy 
nee«pted those .tate»nt. and «o far what we have apjro- 
prlated for pension of the .^y i, «,t so big and the 
gorarnment can stand. Bat we can^not go on with this 
mtter because if and when the Army is increased, and 
will have a large tbrce. we hre going to meet tha saiM 
situation that we mi^t have in re^ird to the teacters. 
In the case of teachers, thiy have more mon^. In ftict 
they have still about 20 million pesos, but t to responsi- 
bility of the government is greater becauae there is a 
big amy of teachers. But, of course, in the case of tte 
Amy, there is this thing to bear in mind. I think that 
every government, even the TJnltedStates, does not pension 
anybody, not only the army, but evorybody iho has any 
claim of any sort, ttet is any one who has been for some 
time a member of the ATiqr. 

THE PRESS. DO they have to do something with the 
jresoQit lav? 

THE PRESIt'HNT. I am not in a position to answer your 
quBStion for this reason. In the first place, I caoajiot 
speak of a particular public servant because we have no4 
general pension system in the Philippines. In other words, 
officials and employees of the goiwmment in general have 
never had pmsions. There are three pensions and you 
might say, four; teaches, health officers, constabulary 
force, and Judges, in the form of a gratuity, so in th. 
first place, I ca^^ot commit a governmei* to a general 



- 27 - 

« xor ail public serTaats of the Phi- 
lippine gov crmont unt4i . 

™ untu the AasenbLy has appzoyed oaa. 

Bat If wa cculd deyl.a a gemral ayatem of pmalon for 
all iployeea of the Philippine govarimaat that gl^^ 
s$l?_lr)the epyernment^ i would rather haTe a aiu^ral p«i.ion 
for all ai^loyeea of the govarnaent. There is no reaaon 
wlqr tHere ahould be di scrimlnat ten, itoy certain employees 
will hare pension and the others will have none. Vhether 
we can adequately afford to give a paaaion ays ton for the 
•qployeea that will, of oourae, place a bttrd« upon the 

governaent of the Philippine lalaida, that the govern- 

■ant can not bear , is aomethii^ wUch I am not prepared 

to say. ait as for thoaa who hawe received their penalons— 
«y pxesent attitude toward thea— >-» since tl» penion sjps- 
tern that has been established for tiiese people, if you 
take into consideration the terms of Ihe law, that the 
pension law was passed upon the theory that the peraon 
who is to receive the pension will do two things: one is 
to rmder a satisfaotdvjr service, another to contribute 
to that p^sion fund for at least 80 yeara at the end 
of *ich he is entitled to wetire and to receive pension. 
Hense the governnent obliges itself to contribute an 
equal amount. Nt>w^I say this: Every man retires froa 
the government service and compllea with all the terms 
ot tlat pmsion system^ the government ought not to wash 
its hand^entirely, but on the contrary aee to it that 
something is done because there Is an acquired ri^t 
based upon the fulfiUient, on the part of the employeef 



Of all tfaft paaulreaents of tha law. But there are oasea 
where alliiough the law hae be« anoded auffleimtly to 
pMit ai^loyeea to retire and receive pension, there 
are oaaea. however, liiere these psople ifto hare heen 
peas io Bed have not coaplled «lth the requlrensnta of 
the law and, therefore, th^ are in the saae position 
as the other aaployeea of Hie government who have not 
ham peaaioned, and I take it that they ware not entitled to 
anything beoauae they have no real xooral right to that 
pension. For instance, a superintendent of schools w\t> 
retires after ( serving the flpvernaeiife for) two years upon 
the ground that he had served 18 years and had contrlhu- 
tad to the tend for two years, the portion of his salary 
tbat he waa expected to contribute in 7 years and the 
pension he receives for one year is more than irtiat he 
has contributed for two yeara. Now, we hare beai paying 
tint follow for nine years and during those nine years 
\B has received a taindred tinea, considering the little 
which he has contributed, is the government still moaally 
obligated to pay him? In this case, I will simply say 
that in the caae of thoae who have partly conplied with 
the lequiremmts of the law for a certain number of years 
and have not received what they have contributed, again 
in that caae, I am going to give the money, but to those 
who have complled^we can Just say "f lniah« because we 
have no money. The go«arnment ought to make its explana- 
tion and the ff>vernmant ia in a position in this parti- 



- 89 - 

oular «e to go on, but thoee who have received the 
pension froan the gOTernsent are looking f<r oatelde 
Johe. I think yon can say this for m that we are not 
going to pass a law that will piaoe tte ©>T«nmenfe In 
a position of hovlnR entirely ignored its obli gat ions 
toward the offiolals of tha goTemMsdi itto have ac- 
qpilred rights under the systea tiBt w:^ have est atLi shed, 
and thank you» g^tteaen. 



O O 0 o o 



10: 5& A. ii. 

MR. OniAS, Spoaker, aay i have the floor, vdth 
the conaoat of the President? 
m a-^.'L4K?jR. Si, senior, 

m. OGI;;s. I 4u3t wi3h to infom Mia Kjccellency that 
I «9 not pi-csont w}x>n tlio Trosolution vms approved, nor did 
I ttike ncrt in the disc\isRion, but tnorely hut-rd certnln oh- 
servutions froia o\ar rocogalaod Leader. a hiMl).ld rae!riber 
of the Jfctitiaal Asse^nbly, I should like to »ajr, knowing as X 
▼txy well do imovt of isy own collee^es, this Isolated clsq 
did not In any way reflect the views of the Asseably, either 
oollectiToIy or individual ly, ^»lth ro3T)ect to their ettltude 
to tho Chief Sxecutivo. I realise the oerilo'isnoss of the 
^«i3tioa aadjho^tf fundoEienttil it is, and that Is one rcuatDn Tsfiiy 
I should like to suy, to state in this juncture, beoause I 
myself isay have occasion to prop .se anendiconts that will 
affect certain offlo^s and public functionaries. But v,h»^t 
I should like to say before ray collerigues and before the 
President is thtit -.Then I do so, I do not do it with « view 
to present a chnlleiK^w tlie Sxecutive and I do not ei^B 
anybody else or uuy of the Asseisbly 

TSS PliESIDHIT. I should like the BiHcbers of the 
totional Asam^ly to understand that in this particular case, 
I consider that an attack txpon the nrerogatives of the Chief 



M» vu« propooofl !M»ndaf!nt yms to 8t5>pr©ss the 

appropriation tor Direot<.r of Poets, not based upon any 
theory, thiit the- position ^»a» ^oeasaxr. thnt the econo«y 
ecooapliahed^if thr. anondn«it is passed. Is to the intii«i»t 
of public service. It wns based upon a stateaent publicly made 
that tiie su.jprooalon of the appropriation rma in order to 
puniah an ozecutlvB officer of this go^rnaent for some alleged 
discourtoay to the jjsmbors of the Asaoably. so I just want to 
iay this to the Assejibajmsa wf Xjsl tfhion {if?, Oslao), or to any 
MHber of ttie Assembly, so that they will not have the idea 
that uny haendaiBnt, even the suppi-eeaion of the position, that 
I will conpi<ior as ac ta uiraiust the ])rorog:atives of -aie Chief 
SzBOUtive. 

BDx* OOI.'iS. I witnt to state that I an happy for no other 
reason than to hoar aaoh stfttoraent from the President, that I 
lould lika to continue in omt labors in the confident belief 
that *hen I go after a certain itora in the budget or after a 
certain person in this govermnent, it is not with the intention 
Of PC .dormlly or officlelly of f»ndin(? the Chief Executive, nor 
l8 it for the puri>ose of chnllen/rin^? the prerogatives ivlth which 
the President is constitutionally clothed. 1 rose because I 
heye clearly understood, that in both bitmches of the govern- 
■eat that whet any menrar or group of aeiubers of the national 
Aeswibly seek to discucc certain actions that may affect a 
»»i>er of the executivo branch of the govema«nt or even a mm. 
ber Of the executive fnnily of the Presi<^ent, that it is done 



- 5 - 



m the laterest of the whole, of vhlch the National Asaonbly 
Is 8 part. T think, ^fr. :?peok^r, every Afssemhlyimm feels a 
Joint reaponsihility with the PreaiJent in tho mioceyn of this 
joint enterprise. It ia q co-nTnon responsibility ami ocamon 
obligetion before the coimtry nnd ho fore tho laorM, but I do 
BOt like to haTB it unaeratoofl that the mnii'estatloiis of the 
President ween that txn executive offluial hei'oaf-ter 1ft going 
to wear a sort of plrcr.rd ttpon hln peraori, e oort of '*noll 
Xt temdere." I think the Prcs^^ent its entitled to call ths 
attention of any nrsndjer of the ABserchly to the spirit of ^^.rue 
coalition,— if he be in error— end I doubt thet tliat in the 
cese with our colleagues here who voted in favor of tho re- 
solution vfb^n they acted as they did. 

TSS. PR}?SII>»!fT. Ittiet do ycu neen trhcn you snid thet tho 
Miibers of the l7et?onel Asseably voted as they did, gentlotjen 

froa iM TTnipn? 

\ I seid "voted np? they did^ rSr. ?resii3oTit, 
because there im» not the slightest thought in the ^dle 
discussi. u, even in the highest heat of \tn discussion, •>hile 
I UBS there and while it was ngreed at a caucus that they were 
not ti^klnp a step thet was in eny W offensive to the Chief 
Executive, It is nrecisely of our confidence in him thet a 
«e«ft,er of the comr^ittee appointed thet t;vi« sentiment laay 
be brought to your attention. 

■am .Hi^»^m•^. speaker, if the g.ntl«»n from I* 

BnloB Will pe™lt (Mr. Oaias). the procedure Itself Is already 



• 4 - 

an attack on the p.erogativaa of the Chief Sicecutlve because 
while the Asaembly is authorised ,md any aeiaber of the .iaaenibly 
19 T^erfectly authorlr.od-undor the law and the Conotitutlon-to 
propasu aiaeiidiDents to the Appropriation Bill, to strike out 
asqr of tJiB G^>propriation when the reason for that is the 
desire of tlie /Issemhly to (iiiiuund from the Chief Executive 
that a curtain official of the eovermcent be reraovod from 
Office, the iVsaeably ia not o:xerclsing const itutionfil precau- 
tion and tiio aor« fact that the amendment created for the 
appointififint of a coEL-uitte-c to tell the Chief J-TLnoutiyre the 
wishes of the ^-jjaeiahly alieudy ^^roirsd the fallacy of the 
aaendstent, bocauoe it v«is an ar-isndiaent intended throu|?h an 
unconstitutional procedure to remove an official of the Ise- 
cutive Oepartotent of the governraent fron his office, becouse 
I wBS going to be anlred that Buia be removed or be punished. 
If the Assonbly has aorae coaplaint against a certain official 
of the .r^orerniaent, — I Juat winfc to say that every tiiae an 
a^aenilnent ia prosented to suppress a poaition or to reduce 
an appropriation, not from the point of view of economy but of 
punishing an official of the (.o^arnnwnt, or propoaine that hi. 
position be Abolished. I will consider that an unconstitutional 
nay of doing it. 

^AAan^ thti verv fact thot that action 
Mi;. OSliiS. Mr. --roaident, tnc vex/ i 

Bcaclon of the ;-3f>en:bly but it mus 
•68 not Uik^n in a foraai aeaE.iwu 

n * -Kv with the raMlljr circle, ia 
taken in e laanaer, let u» say, ^-a-w. 

^ v.«r.<« Qf the iiasenbly ware animated 

proof positive that the meiabera of tne 



Igr ao oXhm ttaaa by tbt spirit of eoopeiation aaa la thm 
•onsoloaaiess that tlvqr vem baariog with tli« chief Szecutlve. 

TBS PRISIDBIT. Mr mmtwr, Ur, ^mTtme, in thi« la, if 
that anaaaaant has not baa& pxaaaatad on tha lloor of tba 
hoaaa; if tha raaaoaa fbr ffaa ■mrtaiat vara not pabliiAiad 
aa asraad in a oaaoaa hald on tba floor of tba AaaambLy and 
a eoBHittaa aaa appointed to aaa ma, i vould have looked tbia 
Batter froM a different angle* And even if the a raen a — f i t aaa 
praaanted bafon in a aaueua, or if tha eRaodaant had bean 
vithAraan ao that tha qtiaatiott had bean bxoogfak to xb* either 
independently or aa the official aetion of tha AaaambLy, I 
aii^t have ▼iaaed it f roB another point of vlav* Bat bearing 
la alad the ■aaiilaaiif aaa praaanted for the aappreaaion of that 
ItiB aad before a tete aaa taken and ihila the aaandaaat aaa 
paadias» a raaolnt ion aaa adopted aaklng na to remove Director 
Itois, hov^ean I latezpret that rea>lutlon exoept that if I do 
aOt reaore Dizaetor Ruiz, the poaiti;>n would be abolished in 
tba afpropriation? tbat Ihvolwaa a threat; tbat ia the only 
my I interpret tbat. 

MB. 0S1A3. nr. speaker. If I aay be allowed to pro- 
aeed further, I think 3f the matter ia looked at frca one 
point of view and frca the different an«(Le of those in the 
iaaeiA>ly» aay it not be interpreted that tha atepa takai 
aaa aoavahat akin to tha Ihet that every tiae tbat tha prea- 
id ant or a anber of hie family aa permitted Iff the conati- 
tutioa oooLld ooae to the AaaaBl>ly or belbre a eauoua, i trust 



ttet it is tli« M9mm spirit that the deX««stloci frm tJw 
•Mblj sad Hi sir tmilr way b» reoslTsA. it happened so 
uddsaly— perhaps «« did not adopt the right procedure—, 
httt ttos fact that «• want isgssdiatciLy in executive session 
following the suspsasioa of a Itomal session of the Asseably 
1% in itself, self-evident ttotthe neabers thereof saw ths 
gTATllgr of the sitoatlon and, therefore, thejr preferred to 
talk tbm ■attar over aaMsg thSHSlves, not wh«i the Aasesblj 
was in session, but in caucus, when the Assoibly was not is 
a foraal session. 

Sdw, to conclude, nr. speaker, asj I ssy, althoui^ I 
hsve not been the object of dlsoonrtesy on aj part as a 
»Bber, but for ths sake of st&Lct poli^ of the goremaent, 
the tias has ooisi vh«a together we nust be doing 8»Mthing 
to uphold the dignity and the prestige of the monbers of 
ihm AsssiA)l7* Thess things eoas in siooeasion with Mutt the 
papers publlelzed, either wresgly or rightly, of the occur* 
moe ia Baguio*-all this if they are pemltted to oaDtinue, 
MajBOt but result in undexmlnlng the confidence of the 
people in the functionaries of the goveroaent and the ins- 
tltutioas of the governaent. I plead, lir. qpaakv, that 
the president do not interpret this act of ours as a ohal- 
Issgs to hla persooally or to his pr«rogatlvss as our otoaea 
Isader* and I plead further that he aake ooaBOS cause with 
ths asBbers of tls AsssabLy in thdr desire to see that in 
this unioaaeral systfs wMeh is in t e aatnrs cf es^erlam- 



tatiott In thU qountiy, merit the credit and the omfidenee 
cr the. pubUe beginning eith the meabers of the official 
fadlj of the President. 

MR. C0«FSBOR. Mr. Speaker, my I be aUowed to make 
•CMe ezplaaatlon on this mtter? 

THE SPSAKSR. The gentleman froa Hollo (icr. cson- 
feor) has the floor* 

MR. OOHFSSOR. Mr. Stpeaker, I would Just like to 
have the status of the caucus explained with the officials 
of the Asse«bL7 wh«a they held that caucus, that la. In 
relation with certain natters which affect the Individual 
■saber of the Assemhly and the chief Sxeu tive as the Leader 
of Hie perty. In other words, if we passed a resdlutlon In 
a caucus, what Is the status of that rettlution? could a 
eaucus, fcr ezesaple, pass any resDlution which is not fomal 
cf course, no official standing, it is not ctso Made a sat- 
t^r of reoora, could it l>e taken by the chief sxecutiwe as 
8ft Qffidal act of the .issembly italef so that in the fu- 
tore, ler. president, ve weald eilde our action as to yonr 
attitude towards the eaucus which the Bea9»er8 of the as- 
Mibiy «flQr hold froa time tb tine? 

THB PHKSIDroT. I« that your question? 
MR. CtMFKSOR* Yes, sir. 

mn PR^ir WT. GenU«wi, I am going Id answer 
4hi ibsaeaihlysan from nolle (Mr. confesor), but aftar i have 
/ answered that guest Ion, X aa iplag to take mj leawe beeause 
I have not caw here to enter into aay diseassion with any- 



ji 



- « • 

I oone plainly to inform you of ay stand on 

nils qitatlon and to tell yoa that ay stand la aaoli that, 
baarias la alnd all tha fatafttl eonaaqattioaa of a hraa«fe 
hatvaan th» Aaacnbly and tha Chief SzaoatiTa, I ahall not 
aove an inch from that stand. I have carefully oonaidarad 
•vorythins I hara »ald hara, I have studied this quest! ott 
tboraghly* I h«fa placed in my hands ay consoisBOS and the 
aath cT offiaa that I hare ta1c«i aad» nothing, nothing can 
■a Ids mm ehaas* the ataad that i hairs already expreaaad to 
you, Mos, I SB Sflls« to answer your question. 

I prefer not to dSaoass any further question becauss, 
gmtlcmt you are going to oonfusa the terms of the subject 
at issue, and itm the terns of the aubjeot at iasue are ooi- 
fusad, the diaoussioa la interalnable. "fhe heat answer that 
I could giwe is the at 11 tude you had taken *ith referace to 
that caucus— wh« you held your caucus about your pork bar- 
rel. Tha chftii»an oa public works came to see ms; I had not 
oonsidared that as an offense; I did not coeaidar thab as 
an attack upon ay pierogatiwaa to Initiate the budget. 
Anything that you might do h€Bna Is jtrfectly right and legal. 
flm action of the caucus was not official, of course, but in 
this particular casa, tha action of the caucus is intimately 
soanseted wi«i an act which has taken place upon the floor 
of the National Assembly, and I canjiot look upon the action 
sf tha sauaus axoapt as an sot of tha AssmbLy itself, it 
ia aat necessary to olarlfjr further irtiat I haTe said and as 



for the courtesies that are due the member of the 
Assembly, my, my goodness/ No one of you has taken 
as much at heart the credit, the reputation, and the 
good name of this nation more than I have done myself, 
vdien secretly or openly I have always upheld the dig- 
nity and integrity of this Assembly, 

As I have just told you a little while ago, in 
■y conference with the members of the cabinet, chiefs 
and assistant chiefs of bureaus, I instructed them to 
give the members of the Assembly due respect and con- 
sideration. I cited the case of Assemblyman Bama who 
received from me immediate attention when I got his te- 
legram coB^laining against a provincial treasurer for 
disobeying his order. I sent a telegram to said treasurer, 
asking him to explain why he did not ansv-er the call of 
Assemblyman Rama. The answer I received was satisfactory, 
which I trananitted ^ to Assemblyman Rama; but instead 
of thanking me^ Assemblyman Rama insulted me in his tele- 
gram. He said, "That is all right if you are satisfied 

with liars, I am not." l«y GodI that was stated in a tele- 

hJlI 

gran irtiich the (^^^ employees of the government of Cebu 
must have read— the kind of telegram addressed to the 
Presiddnt) That is terrible, because instead of thanking 
me for giving him my immediate attention, instead of 
recognizing and appreciating the immediate action that I 
had taken on the alleged discourtesy, for I was in 



- 10 - 

Iloilo irtien I received that telegram. I told Secretary 
Vargas to i«,ite to Assemblyman Rama explaining to him 
nhy the explanation of the provincial treasurer of Cebu 
M satisfactory. Of course, later on, he ^ ^ Mb» ) 
that ha made a mistake, i know Assemblyman Bama did not 
intend to insult me because that insult, he thought, 
is not intended for my office, but it is kept on re- 
cord Just the same in my office. 

Now, I have no objections to your coming to me If 
you (Slloas) have something to ask me. Tou can ask 
nbatever you want. I have suggested that you(can)come 
to me whenever you have some complaint to make, but I 
Just want to tell you that you have no right to act 
that way for the purpose of asking for the removal of 
any official of the golremment ; even in a caucus you 
oqght not to do it. If you find among yourselves that 
there is an official of the government who is not sa- 
tisfied with the majority of the members of the Assembly, 
and I am not speaking of the majority party, let the 
Speaker or the Floor Leader came to me. If the members 
of the Assembly are not satisfied with a certain official. 
Just bring the matter officially, and I will order the 
investigation. Of course, we will have to abide by the 
result of the investigation. I will not object to or- 
terlng an investigation of Ruiz, but don»t take action 
on Ihe floor of the Assembly and hold caucus for the 



- 11 . 

purpose Of removing from r.*.*4 

""^'^^^ ^ Official. I told 

De la ?az yesterday to tell 

Tio tell these nen to ooae to ma if they 

hare complaint against Rui.. Now lauilio ... 

MR. CONI^CR. I Should lilce to find out ... 

MB. DE LA PAZ. ihe first thing I did on arriving at 
the session was to tell the floor leader that there had been 
a conversation between Tour 35rcellency and myself, and the 
floor leader communicated this to the other Members. For 
Your Bxcellency»s information, the reason why that amendment 
ma neither passed nor rejected was that I, though I was 
then unworthjjly presiding at the session of the Assembly, 
believed that said amendment. If put to a vote, would be 
passed, and having received Your Sjccellency»s admonition, 
I found it necessary to suspend the session. 

THE PRRSTimWT. I do not believe there is any further 
need of my staying and I am ready to leave, because I mighty 
to a certain extent^ curtail the liberty of the lismbers of 
the Assembly, hence I believe it will be best if I leave. 

IIR. CONFSSOR. He would like to have Your Sxoellenoy 
enlighten us as to the best manner* •• 

THE PRESIDENT. I have already said all I have to say. 

liR. CONFESOR. As the Assembly had not the 3east In- 
tention of raising an issue with the President, vrby is the 
President leaving us now? 

THE PRESIDENT. In order that you nay discuss this 

natter. 

MR. CONIESOR. Being among ourselves here, let us 



11.8 gone to the trouble, ^loh is quit 
to come here, ^ enlighten 



- 12 

US deal with this aat-fcoi. « 

matter among ourselves. As the President 

e a condescension, 
us as to the best 
«nner of stralghteni^ out this matter without obstruct- 
^ the working of the goyernment? do not want him to 
Xeave here with this issue undecided. We know that the 
President has solved many more difficult problems. Why 
should he not solve this problem now? 

MR. HJEKABZ. We wouM like to take advantage of the 
prssenoe of the President. I believe the matter has come to 
ft stage where we must take some definite action. I want to 
say here, and repeat \«diat the colleagues have Just said, 
that there has not been any intention of attacking the 
President. Our intention was to take some action against 
the Director of Posts, Ruiz, and we never thought that 
that attack couSid possibly reflect upon our Executive, 

I did not attend yesterday's session; but I can say 
that I have, with many of our colleagues, been opposed to 
Mr. Ruiz, solely from esprit de corps . If I had been here 
nhent the movement against Director Ruiz was being hatched, 
I would have suggested the introduction of a resolution 
•gainst llr. Ruiz Instead of eliminating the salary of the 
Director of Posts. However, I believe that in view of the 
lack Of time, and as we were passing the Budget page by 
page, our colleagues had not time enough;6 to proceed in 
accordance with that proposition. 

Now^I say this: as our Intention in taking yesterday's 



- 18 . 

action was merely to obtain 

oDxam justice fop what we oonaldered 

unjust treatment by Director Ruiz, i vvould propose to 
colleagues here, in the presence of the President, the 
withdrawal of the amendment so far as it refers to the 
elimination of the salary of the Director of Posts, and 
if the president believes that the resolution, as drafted 
and adopted In the caucus yesterday, is not proper, we can 
also amend it. If the President is ready to hear and 
receive our complaints, if you believe that we must file 
a formal conqoiaint against Director Ruiz, let vA do it. 

OHJS PRiiSIDENT. If I ma^ i^ accept the statements of 
Members Confeaor and Hemaez as voicing the sense of all 
the members of the Assembly, that there has not been the 
slightest intention... (Several voices: nwverl) I want to 
tell you this: the worst of it is that you have placed me 
in an embarrassing sitiiation, becaiise people will think that 
anything that I may do now is camouflage and that I have 
compromised with you in the sense tiat the amendment will 
be withdrawn now and I shall remove Ruiz later. If Member 
Hema«z or any other, is ready to file an official com- 
plaint, I shall order an investigation. Ohat changes the 
aspect of the matter. What has Been dona was an act of 
thoughtlessness. If those who were complaining against 
Mr. Ruiz had come to speak to me, as I told fie la Paz. I 

^ ^ T»esl<mation without the need of 

would have demanded Ruiz' resigna*'-'- 

4« +ha case of a Director it is 
any investigation, because in the case oi 



^ot necessa 



- 14 - 

not necessary that there be chareee: ^ not Mgng satisfied 
idth him or having lost coafideiace in him is sufficient 
cause for me to demand his resignation. He is not a civil 
official vfeo cannot be removed without due investigation. 
In the case of a director, if i believe that he has ceased 
being useful to the Government and the entire Assembly is 
against him. his usefulness is gone. It is not a question 
of competency or incompetency, honesty or dishonesty. A 
director of a bureau vSio haa incurred the antagonism of 
the entire Assembly has ceased being useful to the Govern- 
nent, and I will not sacrifice the Government for any man. 
I nould have sent for Ruiz ^vithout making much noise about 
it and would have told him to tender his resignation. But 
as things are now, that can no longer be done. Tou will 
have to make the coniplalnt^ and I shall decide in accord- 
ance with the result of the investij^tion. I shall have 
to act as Judge^and you must not feel aggrieved if I judge 
the question on its merits. 

There would not have been any necessity for this if 
the ansndaant had not been introduced. I told De la Paz 
•o confidentially. I said to him: "I am glad of this, old 
fellow, because I am tired of Ruiz; he is a worthless 
fellow," and I also told him not to bring up the matter on 
the floor because I should then have to support Ruiz. As 
I had said I ^^as ready to ask Ruiz for his resignation, 
your insisting upon bringing the matter up on the floor 



- 15 « 

could De interpreted only one xvay: I had to fael offended 
and had to consider your attitude as an Apposition. 

KR. 7ERA. I did not arrive in time to hear the ex- 
planations. It seems that Hemaez and others have said 
that there was no intention of creating an issue with the 
President. As it was I who made the motion, I wish to 
reiterate vtiat my colleagues have said, that \« had not 
such intention. On the contrary, we made it appear clearly 
in last night ffj discussion that we did not \mnt to here any 
issue with the President ana that we merely desired to 
transmit to the President the^^ ^fflaSe^ f the Assembly, 

MR. HSRITAES* The matter having been explained, I make 
a motion in the sense that the amendment abolishing the 
salary of the Director of Posts be withdrawn and that the 
resolution adopted yesterday in the caucus meeting bo with- 
drawn; but that a resolution be adopted to the effect that 
the proper charges be preferred against I.Ir. Ruiz. 

lai. LAVIDSS. In the name of my colleaejies I shall say 
two or three words. I fully agree with what ISr, Hemaezj 
has said. I also want to make public the fact that I have 
no personal coinplaint against ICr. Ruiz. I have said so on 
the floor of the Assembly. When I ims chosen to state the 
reasons for the amendment, I stated them frankly. I said 
to my colleagues: "Tou have gotten me into this, and I am 

gAing to see it through.'* 

All that was done yesterday was really not against 



- 16 - 

tba Ixccutlve nor against the Executive Department. I 
merely wished to reflect the general sentiment of the 
■embers of the Assembly against Mr. Ruiz* official acts. 
Personally, Mr. Ruiz has been my friend for the last 25 
years; and when I acted yesterday, 1 did not act as Lavldes^ 
but as the colleague of the Members of the Assembly. 

I shall concur in all that may be decided heire. If my 
colleagues desire to proceed in one way or another, it is 
up to them to decide it. All I did was to state what they 
nanted me to state. 

MR. TARANON. Just a word, Mr. Speaker. I just want 
to say here that I did not have the least intention to make 
issues with the Chief Executive in including myself as one 
of the co-authors of that amendment. 

THE SPEAKER. Is there any objection to the adoption 
of the motion of Member Hemaez? ( Silence J/.^ OJie Chair 
does not hear any. Adopted. 

MR. REVILLES. Mr. Speaker, let me say this: I have 
not the least intention of offending the Chief Executive. 
In fact, I am one of the co-authors of the amendment to 
suppress the item for the Director of Posts. One of the 
principal reasons is that not because I have been informed 
that Director Ruiz is discourteous to the members of the 
National As«embly. but one of the important reasons is 
that according to the infomation we received, that His 



Iicellency has stated that Mr. Ruiz Is not doing the work 
of the Director of Posts, but it is the assistant direotor* 
It ws also o\ir belief. Mr. President, thut in loaking that 
amendffifint, we do not have the least intention of making 
issues with the Chinf Eiecutive. 

Tffiil PKESIDKSIT, laiat is not true. I do not even know 
the assistant director of Posts. (President continued his 
speech in Spanish*) 

THE PRUSIDEirj. In view of what Assemblyman Eevillea 
has Just said, I wish to state my opinion of Ruiz. I do not 
believe that iir. Euiz is not doing the work and that the 
assistant director is doing all the wrk for him, because 
if I had believed that I should have made him resign. If^ 
I had believed that Ruiz was not doing the work and that 



he was in cqmpeteuit, I sho uld have done my duty, removin g 
him from office. 

The reason why I told De la Paz that I tvas tired of 
Ruiz and that I was glad that a complaint had been made 
against him was that I had heard rumors to the effect that 
the people were not satisfied with him. But nobody has 
cosB. I ara tired of hearing that gossip and I was hoping 
that somebody would complain to me, especially in a country 
lAere there is more gossip than certainty. Here go ssip 
brands the r^^^t woman as being th^J mpuresjt, and thereJjL 



no means 



of convincing the people. Hence, when Do la Paz 



spoke to me about Ruiz, I 
vas tired of Ruiz, i do 
causes me annoyance. 
(The caucus meeting 



told him I vtBiS glad because I 
not care to ha"7e a bureau chief 

adjourned at IS m. ) 



i 

y PRBSS CONPERSNCS N0T5S 



OTPOBBR 2, 1936 

TBI PRRSIDbHT. Good afto'noon, geatleiMQ. Ploasa 
b« seated, ^fell, it sctons to me that the afternoon 
eonferences are less popular than those heldl In the 
■omlng. Now, is there anything you wish to know about? 
^?)PR]WESTIOK OF CRDrSLTT TO ANmLS 

THS PRESS. Vtc, President, may I know your attitude 
toward the hill now he fore ths Assent) ly amending certain 
piovisioas of Ibe law regarding prevention ot oruelty to 
aaiaals? 

THS PRBSIDSWT. I am far it. However, there Is 
•one thing in the present amendment which I do not ap- 
prove of, and I told Dr. BaenoaoSno this morning to ex- 
press his opinion on the bill now before the Assembly. 
I have not read the anendment and, really, I do not know 
what( will""be) my attitude^ — ^hut I know, that there is aoms- 
thii« in the present legislation itolch I do not approve 
of. I oonsioer it wrong fundamentally, and that l^the 
provision^ which pe rmil? the Society for the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals to ippoint agents who are given 
the power to arrest the aUeged breakers of the law 
against oruelty to animals, and who are paid out of the 
funds that are accumulated from the fines imposed. 

THE PRESS, understand, Mr. President, that one- 
half of the lUnds thus collected goes to ths Soo|^y 



- 2 - 

ana the other half stays in the Treasury. 
ji^/lllUlMjr^Bat they are paid from the tanis of the Society 
»o these people caiTnot he accepted as enlbrcing the 
laws in the flilfllmont of their duty, but there is only 
oae ground in order to get suffioieit money for the 
society to pay their ssi==py. if thsy need agents, tlese 
agents should he paid by the government. If the govera- 
»nt Is interested in enforcing the law, the govemment 
ought to pay these agents am the gpvernaei* ought tc 
appoint them. The minute that thqr have ihe powers to 
execute the law, they are agents of the g^varnment and, 
therefoi'e, ^ould be appointed by the government. I do 
not approve of the bill now before the Assembly; I do 
not know it works. Ve have ths case of the Public 
Servioe OOBsnission wt ich is similar to this. The prattioe 
allowed by the Public Service commission is to have the 
big corporations pay the salaries of the agents of these 
big coirporat ions, and they theaselves appoint these agents, 
tell* naturally, thqr were all anxious to see to it that 
these corporations coo^ply with the orders or regulations 
of the Public Service commission and they are hard 
against those who do not bdong to the ccrporat Ions. The 
0>Ternment wants to enfbrce its laws^so those agents 
should be appointed and paid by the epvernmerfc . i realize 
that in tlK IhiliPplJi®^ unlike some countries in Borope, 
we need a law that will protect the animals from cruelty. 



- 3 - 

It 1n nnly nwB m umjy i ^ to adopt theae law. ao aa to 
taaeh our paople to ffv»^ m,^ anlmala h . t.i.n. i ... .U Trm t . 
Ton will notice that in isoat adTanced countriea of the 
world/ they treat thair animala better. 

THB PRESS. Mr. Preaident, the bill providea two waya 
witii Which to enfbroe the law. The 11 rat ia that itilch 
iapoaes ^^uniahiaant on thoae reaponsfble for the viola- 
tion ot^\9M or fcr the prevention of cruelty to animala. 
At the preaent tijna, a proaecution may be brought, either 
against the driver of the vehicle or the owner. The aamd- 
mcnt til at ia being proposed will absolve the ovier froa 
any responsibility of being prosecuted. 

THE PRESIDENT. WKat is the other? 

THE PRESS. The other is by prohibiting the agents 
froB asking arrests. 

THB PRESIDENT. Well, I am|in favor of (not) letting 
the agents mica arrests. I think thsy are to be appointed 
by the Deiartment cf JUatice because if cruelty to animala 
Is a criminal act, the Department of Jt^Jtioe oufrjit to 
appoint the agents and ou0it to see to it that the laws 
are coi^liad with, but I do not believe in giving to any 
private society re^onslbillty for enforcing Ihe laws, 
ttnt is fund mn tally wrong. 

THB HIESS. Will your office, Mr. President, initiate 
for the puipose of appointing those agents? 

THE PRESIDHrr. If tl» ^^vkm^X to 



mf attention, l would hanre done that. I will discuss 
tUs matter with tha Saoretary of Justice toauirrow. I 
thinlc the movemant to practically do away wltti tha 
society haa bean startad by sons p«>ple who want 441 
kinds Of privi leges to be given to the oarromata ow- 
ners. I want to be very frank in this. I symphatiza 
with the owner of a oarromata ; I symphatiza with thi 
eoohero . The owner of a oarromata irt^o belongs to the 
middle class jBople, has no capital and tie olsohero, 
of course, is a man who needs that job, but I am dis- 
gusted with the way tha animals have been treated. And 
I want to do as mudbt as I can in order to protect tha 
oarromata owinrs in their livelihood end the cooheros. 



ihopd end the e pohero s, 
it -it lIUuL any lawJSr' 



too, but I ^^^ot going to permit^ ^t any law 

■'..fi !.ah will tolerate cruelty to animals. My po- 



sition there Is fixed. We can haye the^f^ct of tiie 
laws corrected at the session. Vhen you hsTe a law, a 
fundamental enactment, it is open to attack and those 
who are against the law will choose to take advantage 
of any occasion to attack it. I tiiink that is happen- 
ing now. 

THIS PRESS. It is possible, Mr. President, that soma 
politicos Bay gat into it if the JiunidpaL Board is the 
ane to appoint agents. 

THB PHHSIDENT. Tttiat do you mean? 

THB PRESS. That politicos, Mr. president, may have 
a hold in the appointmeat of agents. 



- - & - 

PRKSIDSNT. Tou don't suppose that I appoint 

« 

flBcals. (Sll«nc6.) They will either be appointed by 
the Mayor or by the Secrataiy of justice. I think th^y 
are appointed by tha Sacretary of justice. How is the 
Society being operated? 

THE PRESS. Tto-ough private contribution* and m«i- 
berships. 

TEF PfiESIDHNTT. Don»t publish this. The first tine 
that I knew of the exist en oe of this society is through 
ttra. She was very strong for Ml9 aiforcenent 

of ^is lav. Ky Godbl she never left until ehe got aooa- 
thing from m. I am not going to let those fellows des- 
troy that oreBnization* but I am going \o correct tha 
law. You know the law Iras been a political issue hare 
in »inila. 

One of tb» bills submitted is by AasambLyaan par- 
facto of S^ani3a, The other is ... 

That Is terrible. As a matter of fact, they axtfit 
to punish the oocheroa. 
^fiUJ The/puniah the obcl»roa» Mr. president, for any 
violence of Itoe law — for tying the horse in bad con- 
dition, they ara fined and if ihe cochcros oaryiot pay 
the fine, they are imprisoned. The carromata omer is 
not responsible if the cooheros oan^not pay the fine. 

As is the case now, if the horse happens to ba 
woindad in the street and the cochero still continues 
taking passonsara, I understand that ha Aould be ■ - 

n 



piiniAed, bat if the horae that not In a oondltlon 
to do the wrk, la «tuy.«it out by the owner, I think 
the only person responsible, when that horse Is oau^t 
in bad condition, i» the owner. He ought to be punished 
teemse of his cruelty. There is no ezeuse for that. Ibu 
mystill understand that aonie of these coohesros do not 
hcve aaoh education and, of course, they do not treat 
the aninals kindly, and the raoaent the horse refuses to 
obey, the coobero gives the aniaal a good whipping. 
That is terjlble, but l think it is the owner of the 
horse that should be poaiiiied, not only by fine but by 
in^risoiokent . 

THZ HI ESS. In Ihe nonth of septeaber 316 horses 
were caught by the agents of the Society, under the amend- 
■ent proposed, Mr. president, only tba driver w>uld be 
responsibile. 

THS PRBSIDBliT* Well, if we do not correct the law 
this year, it will be worse. 

JAPAMgSB SETTLSRS IN DAVAO 

THE PBESS. Mr» President , is there any truth as 
to some Japanese being allowed to settle in Davao? 

THE PRESIDENT. NO, there is only one case from 
the eoasuUte Gsneral of Japan. I do not know if it is 
to be puU ished by the consul of Japan. JUst say there 
is only one case of Japanase. 

THE PRESS. Mr. president, under the law, is there 
any provision prohibiting the Japanese to settle there? 



- 7 - 



PniSSIDlW. Iwlllt«ii 
This is not for pubUoatioti. we tn.. . 

eaee, upon the groiand that t,hii« 

^^^^ ^ »as an imerloan 
citizen, under the laira or t 

Of Japan he was atlll a Japa- 

B»B« subject, so W tT^nA * 

i« tried to prevent him from aettlii^ 
there, but to ^ aurprise a fellow ca.e here .ith a 
certificate of citizenship showin. that he ia no longer 

a Japanese subject, ±\^4. ^ 

^ J ci;. iTnea that cane «e sinply had to take 

him in. 

THE FRKSS. ^ill the Japanese Ooveminent agree M th 
him, Mr. President? (L&u^ter,) 

TSE PH?-3ID5NT. That is a very serious question 
because they can just piesent a certiClcate of *itizen- 
dilT). This is how the Japanese in Hawaii got hold of 
goH mines, fineries, etc. 

THS PRESS. Is there any great deal of Interest shorn 
by Japan in Philippine mines, Mr. President? 

THE PRESIDENT. I suppose there is. Wow, don't let ae 
have things appear in print. But if any one wants to write 
In his paper tomorrow, don't let it appear that we have 
disclosed it here to some extent. It is true that there 
is only one case, and as far as you have been Inlbmed, 
there are no other cases. 

THE IRKSS. imat are you going to do with Director 
Cruz m case his appointment is not acted upon b7 the 
CoBBiisslDn on Appointments, Kr. President? 

!» T have nothing against Director 



- a - 

Cruz; there are no charees pi^sentea to me against him. 
m case cru«;» ^pointment is not acted upon br the Com- 
Mission on .^polntaents, i have a conuoitt.e to in- 

Tsstlgate him. if i am satisfied that there is ground for 
BOt reappointing cruz, i will not appoint hi«» but if I a« 
not satisfied with the result of tto investigation, I 
will appoint him again. 

NATION ALIZATION OF TH E FOLIC 3 FORCE 

THB PR15SS. Mr. President, there seeos to(^have) some 
object Ion to the plan of nationalizing the police force, 
fhs Utmldpal Board has expressed against the idea of 
turning the iSunldpal Poliee to the govemaont. 

THB PRESIDSWr. I do not b el lave that la necessary. 

THB PRESS. Would you approve it in case it is passed 
by the NatHonal Assembly? 

THE PRESIDBNT. 1 won't oonaalt myself to that because 
I have not considered that as necessary. Bit ths police 
force of Manila is all right, unless the proposed natio- 
ullzation is absolutely necessary, in order to perfect 
thi organizattoni But if the Police of Manila will be In 
the same organization, I do not believe that is necessary 
because we have competent police and they are civil Servlos 

eligible s. Biey are good. 

QRQAWTZTWfl A BtT BM OF MINES 
THK PRKSS. Bow about organizing a Bureau of Mines, 
Mr. President? 



- 9 • 

THB PRSSIDffllT. I aa not peraonally very sire of 
ibat sliDuld be done there. The Depertment of Agriculture 
«•«■• to he the pioj?«r authority to create that office. 
I do not want to asaoBa the raeponsibility of recoBaending 
to the Legislature, but If tl» Legislature creates a 
Bareau^I will approve the law. i will not recommd it. 
I am not laita aure that the nork oaiTnat be handled as 
it is now— that another division be created in the Bureau 
of Science. 

THS PR^S. Ur. President, many of the engineers of 
the Bureau of Science are getting out to go to the mining 
corporations. 

THIS PRESiri?NT« ^ell, many of the eoployees of the 
government are getting out. I belicfve there will be a 
tlM whsn there will be only two persons in MalacaSan, 
tlB President and a aeasenger. ^adshten) 

THE PRF3S. Hbw do you look at the situation, «r. 

President? ^ 

T-B PRESIDENT. I like and I do not like it. 

I like it because I want to see the Filipinos taking 
their chances in business. I do not like it because as 
it happens now, we are losing a>me very good men. Bot let 
>• tell you that there is not one employee irtiose services 
canjnot be disp«sed ^th fore vary time an employee 

AK neover sooie young men in eome 
.leaves the service, we discover so. ^^^^^^^^^ 

Office are Just as <ood and who bave 

Chance if these fellows -t left. Ton know, gentlemm, 

.... . K... found with a ^reat deal of satisfaction, that 



- 10 - 

mm of the miAi eai^ioyee. of th« s>vmmmt «ra really 
C90d eaA tUv know thi work that they are doing. Mow, 
this 18 the Chance for theae f^loaa who are not known 
oatalte and the cprporatlona that a -e trying to get thilr 
•enrlcea, to show that thejr are going to give a good 
account of theaaelTea. nothing ia going to happen in thli • 
Bowewer, I do not want thoae fellowa *o leave the govem- 
■•Bt aervioe to think that they can coae back rnhm there 
is depression outside. Those that are out are out, that 
la. air thsre la to. Ul* j: aja- not-^Qlng ii,^ taka them back 
^onoe they leave the eovemnient aerviee. 

TBS Does yoor conffienoe in young men, nr. 

Fresident, indicate a policy? 

THE PRKSIl KMT. Absolutely. They are not bringing 
■an fraa outside. Those that are inside will get the poet 
left vacant by tha outgoing enployee. 9e will not take 
an outsider to jump over the head of the one that is 
inside. 

THB FRKSS. But that is not the policy being observed 
in the miippino National Bank, Mr. president. 

TH15 PRSSIDHIT. ^ ^^""^ Directors 

to recoBBend. If I rind somebody in the Bank Kho is ccKpe- 
tent, I would rather have hi« gat the post than an outsider. 
If th. diference between the one that is inths bank a. 
•<»pared with that of an outsider is I'ttle, I wo.ld ra- 
ther have the -an in-i^e becau.. it will have a whole- 
«>«e effect in the wl->la office, md that is an an«.er 
to this Charge that we are playing politics. 



- 11 • 

ot these 



'^o^les are under political pre- 
iure and ifcen som* 

with a certain ooi^ny... 

^^^^ril^ niffi nnr gnlno tn < »itituii.e lUu .w.^mij, mr t 
•»i»«?yae of tlid governnent has tl» rl^t 
to «y this because no employee of the sovernmertt should 
b. treated lite ^.t. There «ay hTat^C^^^t^l^^- 
the Officials Of th. eoveri«ont to treaty wl'to due respect 
tte >»b«r« Of the national ^.8«ttLy ^^^^^^^fO^, ,/ 
oth i Tt hr,>n.h>3s nf rv , in e.ne>al ^ 



the Officials Of this govemaent are not going to obey 
any mandate or listen to any request from any quarters 
contrary to the mles, regulations ani laws of the land 
and any enployee of the eovtirnfflsat wlw does his ^e^^well 
will be retained in his job, regardless of the rules 
against hia* 

^^B'vBY BORDS 
THE PRESS. How about the Vetorans* bonds, Mx, 
President? 

THS PRESIDENT* M^r last cable has hot been answered 
as yet. UBiy he they are paying then already, i hare called 
Washington aboht it* 

(^ jg^ JUS-T^TC": RgCTQ'S RESIGMA-TION 

THE PRESS. J/tr. President, hss Justice Recto's 
PsslffiatiDn been presmtod to you? 

THE PRESIDEST. Yes, only after he had discussed 
thi matter with ms. He did not present his resignation 



- 1£ - 

wilhout first discussine the natter with me. He was 
ready to continue if i felt he had to do it 9 but my 
Tlew on this q.ue8tion is sljaply this. There are oases 
when a citizen is in duty bound to render service to the 
government regardless of whether it is convenient to hiM 
or not. Those oases arise irtien a good citiz^^n ought to 
stay when the governnent needs him. But these are ex* 
ceptional cases and theiy are under the divoretion of 
the Supreme Court, I do not have the ri^t to keep Jus- 
tice Reoto there at this Juncture, I have not received *. 
his fomal resignation yet, but we have talked the \ 
mat tar over c I 
THE PBESS. Will there be an immediate appointment 

to fill the vacancy? 

THE Hi ESI DENT. Yes, the day following the acceptance 
of his resignation a new monber of Ihe Supreme Court will 
be appoint ed. 

THB PRESS. IS He going to engage In private jraotloe 
or l»e Hill Join a mining business? 

THE PRESIDENT. I * not Ynov. I have no right to ask 
him about that inasmob as he did not volunteer to te»l 

it. 

TOE PBESS. Mr. President, this giving ohmoes to 
young men ere already In «.e .ervloe. wa.ld that b. 
in line ,1th your deslr. that «ges gp up7 



- 13 * 

THE PRBSIDKOT. Do vou - i , 

call salaries wages? Tou taiow 

If I wre sure tt^t these gold days here «uld stay, that 
their high salaiies would he continued. I would follow 
•ait. But I am not going to Increase the salaries if I 
teTS to reduce them next year, i will wait and sees I 
feel optimistic even if i lose all the employees of the 
bank and the government. l will still run this govern- 
■antj»U^gJxte^1Sil8 is not for publioatlo*. I am~ 
afraid if some of these poor people from the provinces 
get wanght that thegr have to return to the oU system ct 
kee^ins their money in the bamboo holes. !mis bill «hich 
I have recoamended to the Legislature will stop this sort 
of gambling that's going on. in anjr event if a bill is 
passed, we are going to enforce it. 



THB PRESS, Mr. President, have you studied all the 
bills now before tto National Assembly? 

THX PRSSIDBNT. No, b*t I am going tomorrow and 
ooamsndng tomorrow, up to the day when the Asdembly 
adjourns, I am going to the Legislative building with 
all the secretaries of Departments and their technical 
Mn to study every important bill that is pmding so 
that as the Asseiitoly consfi ers these bills, there may 
be consultation betwe^i the leaders of the Assembly and 
the Exec*tl»e and thus avoiding the enactment of a 
isgislatlon Lt baa to be vetoed by the Chie^ Executive 



• 14 - 



after varda. Maay of thM* i— . 

J' A «n«att lawa ara reooociendad by 

■a» but I have zaooBM >^ 

^ooiBviaaad the ueaaures in genepal 

t«r«. I do not know how tha Aaa^thly finally firaflted 
theee aeasurea. so beginning to«^row I will apend my 
office houra, either in ti» moiaiine or in tie after- 
AOOB, in tbe Laigialative Building. 

»>w, ia there anything alee you want to aak? weU 
santleBMa, good-bye and thank you. 



OCTOBSR 16. 1938 



■m PHESID^in.. -.-ell. ^ntl^n. I » to .«»r 

your qiDBStiona. 




TO Awmra 



TfflK PfiESS. Pares taont, how about that amenda«iit to 
tho bill of having th» eovemment asauae the po«i©r and res- 
pOBiibility for selecting agoats of the Society for the 
Prerentlon of Cruelty to Anlmalst 

THK P UESIDaJT. Tea, but that ceiae too late. I pro- 
posed that thtty pass a bill amending the present law in 
the speoial sessi m. It war. too late to do anything there, 
and tha aMiSrers of the Assombly hnd no tiae to consider 
ttat, and I did not even Irnovr that they had passed the bill. 
I going to ask: the Asseitifbly to aisend the present law so 
«a to provide that the agents be appointoa by the goveroaent 
and the fines paid to tho goTemment. 

TS£ PKIKS. VTm President, do you contemplate giving 
all fines direct to tho Departraent of Justice? 

IHB PFiESIDErTT. ITo, wo are going to ttim the proceeds 
colleoted as fines to tho Treasury end a ssiirae^ responsi- 
bility of the poynent of agents, regardless Ca8j5;irtiether 
there is sufficient nonoy or not. 

PiasS. Mr. Pr«cl(iont, how about this question of 



- 2 - 

™ ^'^^^ - - «oin. to liquidate all 

th. pension Tunds. and the liquidation will be done as 
foU««: H. Will return the contributions paid by the ^ 
play— Of the goTernment who are not entitled to retire 
yet. m win return idiat they have paid plus an equal 
«mt which the govemnent asswd to pay into the pen- 
lion fund and 4 per cent compound interest on the contri- 
bution of the employees, Vf will return It in six years 
throu^ partial payoents. have not come to any definite 
©onolusion as to the case of those who are receiving the 
pensions. Probably those who have received many times the 
■Bount which they have contributed to the govemment and 
ito iODS other asans of livelihood are not going to receive 
iny pension^ if there is no money in the pension fund left 
efter the return to the enqplojees of funds into which they 
htve paid. In case of those that are destitute^ probably 
m will pay thos a pension equal to 60 per cent of the pen- 
ilea they are receiving, and those viho are receiving 1^15.00 
omy are going to get it. Wow» that is the way we are going 
to liquidate these pension funds. 

Then we are going to establish a new system of insuring 
the employees. There will be an amount for vtolch they wlU 
be Wed depending ^pon the salary that they get and the 

^MAM'f In an amount equal to nhieh 
ooatplbutlon of the govemment in an bh" 

thty are going to pay. 



3 



m FLOOn TV wm^ ^ ^Qjjj^ 

mm. as to the recent flood, I was In Hneva Beije 
jeatertay and went through the worse distriots affected 
SBd I have not seen any asyeet more heartbreaking. It is 
tMXibla. I can iaagin^^iAat a horrible night those people 
undergone. !iliey told xas that the currents cans up so 
soddenly that the people were sii^jly carried anay. JoA 
there has been loss of lives and of property. OSie Bid 
Cross, in this kind of flood, ou£^t not to naste Buoh tiM 
getting the aeeessary information as they determine whe- 
ther a given family is entitled to relief or not, on the 
theory that a smart fellow, vAio is not entitled to relief, 
night be the one beaftf Ited. The agencies that are distri- 
buting relief froa the government m>st( be done) quickly. I 
an going to ask the Assembly to appropriate !i^l,00O»00O and 
to give me ttie authority to disburse that money as, in my 
opinion, will best serve the purp se of giving relief to 
these strdobn areas. I am going to ask the Secretary of 
the Interior to get all the information ttiat is necessary 
10 that we may deteraia* In each case when the locality 
as a whole needs help, either in the form of public works 
or of reconstructing some schools that have been destroyd,^ 
or in the form of aid to those individual families who have 
lost everything they had. It is imj^ossible for us to determine 
4u8t how the relief should be given, and for that reason, 
I am going to ask tHe A.s«ib3y to authori» me to q>end that 



-Plnloa. win b„t h.lp ia«, p«,pi. 

• *° you, gantXram, that 

ftl- .o«n«^ ha. ^ ^ 

thr.. yaara. a. gorexninent has b-n to anxlou, to h.« 

cash in hand, and thev hava k««>^ 

ua«y aavo been saving noney that ahonld 

have been spent In the iBalBtenn«^A» 

aainxenance of these ln9)ortant dikes 

of the Agno River and the Pampanga and OMonell River. 
There should have been spent annually, as it had been done 
before, the neoessaxy money to keep these dikes in perfect 
condition, but with the idee of having a large surplus cask, 
they haTS not kept \q> the nointenonoe of these dikes, as a 
consequence of vftiich neglect the flood last year ^'^^^.^^M the 
people already over )»10, 000, 000, and this year the ^^truot- 
ion of these dikes is going to cause more datauige than has 
been actually destroyed in several places. How it will cost 
V8 over 2 1,000, 000^ when we should have kept them In fine 
conditions by Just spending from fifty to one hundred 
thousand pesos during 'ttiese last two years. Ihose are some 

of tr:~'o cases where they thought that perhaps there would be /[ 

c 

no typhoon that would be very bad and took the chants 
thsxe. It is like a »an who takes chances of leaving his re- 
volver at hone, and when he feels the necessity of using 
it, it is beyond his reach. 

mi PRBSS. HOW many false death reports have been pubii 
XiiM on acoouht of these false economy, Mr. President? 
T* is hard to tell now. I siQ>pose 

- too. know that two or three 

70« gcntleawn and the ladls«t *» 



UJ. ^ It ^^^^ 

Munos Agrioultural school 

^caool perished during this flood. But 
that is terrible. I ««« th-*. 

a A saw that news, a terrible news, 
I oould not get in touch 4.v 

xouoh with the itaaoa ii«ricultural School. 

^ut at the ti«e I could not e:rplaln where they got the 

report, that in Munoz ^ioultural School one hundred students 
had died, so I Just thought that the whole province of Hu^w. 
Xclja aust have perished in the flood which caused the death 
of one hundred students. 

m Cabenatuan. people are. la a way. to blame be- 
•ause they built houses right in the lowlands, along the 
rlfer banks, in the old river beds. Tou see. the river has 
tiianged its course these years, and they built houses there, 
fhe first thing the Mlaioipal Council did yesterday (Septes- 
ber 15. 1936) was to pass an ordinance prohibiting the build- 
ing of any house. Tou see they build houses on the old riser 
bed and the houses sere so imited that when the river rose 
tte houses sere sli^ly earried away. And alatost all the 
palay seeds were lost. But the little that xenain will be 
laved. 

so se are going to start building these dikes and I 
•hftU ask the Ifational Assembly to appropriate JrtJOO.ooo 
fop the eonstruotion of these dikes. We cannot spend 
that soney until the end of the year, and I wiU ask the 
i..eiibly to authorize ^ to spend that, ae Bureau of 

«*4Tiir *o build these dikes sore strongly 
Public ^ifkm is preparing eux-w* 

tbw they sere built before. 



tmS PRESS. Mr, Pra«<^*«* - 

tfjrthlng to do with flood controls 

rax PRBSID NT. •Riat i« -k^* — 

TOat la what nr. porter told ma this 

.fternoon. saa. wa naad to approprlata i^50.000 and it 

i. a, intention to racaniaaM to tha A..a*l,r th. appropria- 
tion Of that amount annually for the nart t«, year., i 
think that ona of tha moat important thing, that tha gOTem- 
Mat .hottld undertake i. the reforeetation. 

THB PRESS. la tha raforaatation in mzon. Mr. Pre.i- 
dtnt, possible? 

THE PmsJDWrP. Thay have not |r. yet .ueee.sfully 
•xperimented in Luzon, but In Bukldnon, ye., it ia better 
to spend this money to go ahead with the work. And we 
still need about 200,000 haotarea cf land, aeoording to tha 
Bureau of soienee and the Bureau of Forestxy. If we begin 
to plant right away» in 4 or 6 yeara wa .hall be producing 
all tha quinine for home eonsumption, and if we spend money, 
we ahall be able to export to tha united state, in .ix 

jrears* time. ^ 

THE IRBSS. Is it possible to do that, Mr. President? 
THE PRESIDENT. Oh, wa wiU. I am going to adt the 
A.«art>ly to appropriate that, -mat is one of the beet things 

♦V ^ . w 1. ji^r.* Tt is sufficient reason to erect 

^t Mr. Fisoher has dona, i* 

» ^MA^initlon of his sarTloes to the 
\ aDwaiant for him in racoffiition 

^ , - worked hard during these years, 

Wmnmmt. That fallow Ha* worwa u 



• 7 • 

and It l8 strange that hl« work is not recognised. Bat I 
do not believe that Mr* Fischer ever had the support of the 
OovemMot of the Philippines until the first National Assem- 
bly was created* It was only then that they begsn to get the 
appropriation from the Assenbly and it shows how sometlnes, 
personalities defeat the best ideas in a govexiaient. It so 

0 

happeatd that the )dld Secretary of the Interior who was a asn 
with strong emotion^ disliked Fischer and Major Ahem did not 
give his support to Fischer's work, and so not until we had 
created the first National Assembly when a member was con- 
vinced that the Bureau of Forestry ou^t to be given support. 
Only then that the Bureau of Forestry began to receive the 
attention from the government. Fischer was the successor of 
Najor Ahem. Fischer is going to get more y^port from the 
Asssstbly than from any previous legislative '< d . He is 
going ahead with fcls plan of reforestation, and we will put 
into effect as rapidly as we can. We are going to do that 
really in large scale. We are not going to waste time for 
theT« are places today like Cebu and some islands around 
Hegros occidental where we can plant thei^^^ng^^^ 
we start now reforesting those places, \U n — ^ 
floods^' the land, are going to lose their fertility . 
Jhat iC one of the co^- it-ents of my administration, to go 
ahesd with that work. 




8 • 

TBE PRESS. Tbm exDor^-*-* 
international qae.tlon^ ^,ecau.o that n«y 

THE president: We a«. goln, to pi^' 

^^^^^^^^liL!?;! ^^ publication. YOU too. the 
IMtch .tole OUT j^ere a«i the. planted hen^ i„ Sumatra. 

Yca imo. we have the monopoly of he«p i„ the Philippine.. 
80 tho.e fellow, got busy, and now with a truly Christian 
•pirit, we are soing to steal their quinine and .ugar. 
(Laughter) You can not get any infoxtaation aa to how they 
do the work* I have the auepicion that what those Japanese 
do in Mindanao is what is being done there, beoause I think 
•oae of those Japanese went to Sumatra and presented as Ja- 
panese to work in those plmtatioos. I ought not be surprised 
If sase of those fellows do i^t is being done in Sunatra. I 
I have no doubt that that is the ease, but we have not been 
able to find it out* However, it is the fault of theg govem- 
■Mtt iMpe because we tried to pass a law, prohibiting the 
•iportatlon of hemp seedlings » but the bill was not approved. 
Ptrbaps they had stolen some anywa> - but It would be acre 
dlffictat to go ahead with the work. I think they are aoing 
the work there well and very fast* 

Msto the International Harvesting Conpanar, well, nobody 
««n fool with that company* By goodness, those fellows are 
'•ally sinai>t. They Just beat the Mexican govemrot. And 
the Mexican planter, were terrible, but the Yucatan defy eco- 
a«ic law.. In the caee of the Philippine., they alway. pay 



- 9 - 



i*atever they want cav 

u H t^t we really 

had the Bonopoly^ they were abm 

^^"^ to P«y the price of our 



THE PF(ESS» I thlnV t» 

Uhlnk, Mr. President, the iroduetlon of 
h«q> In Sxanatra le declining. 

THE 1 RESIDENT. I v,a««. *. * 

'^i^. I hope that l8 true, but we were talking 

the other day v.lth Mr. Qj»fh « 

^ on nr. orth. He la ozie of the beat authorltlea 

an thl. ha^ b«*iae.. - and Ur. Orth .aid that for the next 
two year., we can still feel perfectly aecure, but he did not 
ea, how long after that we shall be aecure. I wggeated cer- 
ore. to be adopted by tLe^^^^^^s^ that in hi. 



opinion wo Id Improve the price of heiap here, and we asked 
hSm If hemp production in Staaatra would not increase to 
the extent of taking the place of the aioount of hemp that we 
were not producing here, in caee^ ^r. ■ .._» "well, I can .ay 
only for the next two yeare*** 

SU3AR 

TOE PRESS. What will be the effect of tlila re.trlction 
in ths case of migar, Mr. Pre.ldent? 

THE PRBSIDEHT. We were 4u.t wondering father we ahould 
•PPly that to .u^ar but he decided not to discus. It. You 
lao» that the limits of the qiiantity of manufactured cordage 
tJhat My b« «3Q>orted from the Philippines has been the main 
factor of Philippine independence. Tliis is not t o be published. 

Of the felloifs who wero interested tfiwe yei^. ago in pro-' 
^^ctlng the manufactured of cordage fait grateful to the Phi- 




- 10 • 

jippinefl because when they enw +.v.-* \ 

^ »e were working ao that 

«e might he given the PlUliDoinA t»^^ ^ 

".Aippine Independence, they voted for 

iit And they are the onlv fAn^- 

bellows who (^ot what they wanted be- 

cau.a even the eugar people did not get what they waited. Phi. 
llpplne e^ort .ce to ll^it future exportation to the United 
State, to the emount which waa exported at the time, but in the 
me of manufactured cordage, they reduced the amount to one- 
half of what they were allowed to ea^ort. 

BILLS PASSED BY THE KATIONAL ASflRWmT.v 

THE PRESS. Mr. Prealdent, we are Informed tha> out of 
the 150 bllla passed by the National Aeeembly, approximately 
2/3 of theeajergency measures were recacmended by the actolnis- 
tratlon. Would you pleass onll^iten us on this matter? 

THE PRESIDEIKT. That is a perfectly a fair question, and 
Z am willing to ansv/or tliat quostion for publication because 
that is a very ^iOOd quest* on. A'all, It so happened that those 
bills were bills recoiMiendod by the administration and which 
the Agfiembly did not report on tliDet ^elng bills that, in the 
opinion of the administration, were urgent and Important, I 
otnified to the iaanedlate necessity of their approval and I 
think it Just, for tbere is a provision inserted in the Cons- 
tltution that before the Asse^nbly could enact any law it must 
^ printed and copies have to distributed three day. before 
th* .djouxinont of the Assembly. Mow, these measure, on which 

fv* nr novernment have prepared certain 

Poapectlve departments oi sovo««u 

-.«-,,T»Afi are part of oiar legislatiwe 
••"Wat., aany of these measures are p«* 



- 11 - 

program as antlcli^ated m the piatf^,«n 

Piatfom tutBiltted to the 
peoplt* and you know the Aa.^nKi^ 

^•««ibly as usual does not work 
very much during the fli-.t ro a^^^ 

®^ days, and when they started 

to work to set the le2:l«inf 

legislative machinery m notion It was 

too late to pass on th^M^ 

p 8 on tnete measures- So I had slxnply to cer- 

tlfy to the necessity of ^nv-twrt- « << 

^ ^ so that this 

question In order that It ^&hti r»y./^r,^«-l« 

/ --I' At 4^ De ^perly answered^ should 

refer to special measures that I ^ recommended to the 
Aiaembly for imitediate approval if preflonted in the way that 
they should be presented. Thus, you see that out of 150 
bills passed about 100 bills had been certified for Immed- 
late enactment • Well, you see that is how 2/3 of the meas^'res 
were reooaimended by the administration and any reasonable per- 
•on would not think that vihen the Constitution provides some- 
thing as to the ordinary procedizro in the Aesembly and es- 
tablish exception to that ordinary rule that in the appllca* 
tlon of that rule, 2/5 of the bills will be on the exception 
to the measure. Well, I wish to say that you shoidd not ask 
that question because if pi-esented in that way, it seems 
that I have violated the Constitution, It is not the number 
of bills that the Assembly has passed that will determine 
the Immediate enaotmant, but it is the nature, the character 
Of the bills that havo been recommended by the admlnifltratlon 
•0 urnch so that if the Assembly bad not been able to pass 
those bills, I wo^old have called for a special session and 
unified for the immediate necessity for their enactment. 
I .till called the As embly into special session because no 



* IScJ • 

got on had been taken on the * 

''^^^y Important awaaurte, aueh 

' ^'^^^^^o the guaolina tax. And 
I want to tell you fHi-'*H-tA-»% 4^ 

I you I'u.ther in connection with tJda that I hope 

the pr— Of thla country will siva ita aupport to an Idea 
Wbloh I have in «lnd wLlcha tlOnk you will find perfectly 
reaaonable^ There la the belief m the Phllippinea-and i a» 
afraid that belief ezlsta alao In the United statea--that a 
member of the Assembly ehowa hla worth by the nianber of bllla 
Khlch be succeeds in getting erxacted into lair. And ao every 
MObar of the Leslalaturo preaenta measaras from 10 to 100 
every yea-r and he hopes to have at leaat five of those bllla 
passed by thatg body* I should lilro the press to tell the 
people and the mombora of the National Assembly that it la 
not the numao2> of the bills, not the amomt of bills ap« 
proved by the lej;i8latlve body that rieaauro the wisdom of 
that body, but it is the quality of the bills that they con- 
vert into law* Moreover?, the constant onactmont of known 
seasures and thd amendment to all the neasuros contribute 
to the Instability of the social fljad political inatitutlon 
of a country and^ therefore, unless it is absolutely neces- 
•ary, bills shpuXd not be enacted* What happens here is that 
tht Assembly approves thla year one law, another year it 
passes a law aiending certain parts of that law which they 
i^ppovc„ M year beforei and then another law should be 

^ 3 A.vs«4. mo we spend a lot of money to 

•■ended like tms end that, so we apouu. 

4-v,- administration of the Islands* 
codify the la*s, afiectm^; the aominisw ^ 

we appointed three best z^^^^n 
spent a lot of money when we appoxi 



15 ^ 

of the Judiciary to etudy and revise our i.. . . 

^ Administrative Code 

and no fooner hacl tliic code b*.^.^ 

'''''' «^ the Legislature 

started to aniend certain section, so n«w 

i-^ons so nobody now knovs the 

contents of the Administrative Code, Th« n«w . 

^jj^ newspapers ©re 

onsible for this* s=:t fcivr. 

c^hie Is eerious, and I should like 

the people of the Philippines not ^n «vr.*. 4- *. 

^ not to expect too nmdi from 

thslr Assemblymen. V.'hat I am coinA- i-r. t 

goina to say^ I hope, will not 

be misunderstood, especially by these ladle, here. I do not 
want to be imodcst ^t-hen I say that I had been a member of 
the first Philippine Assojnbly and the only President of the 
Philippine senate since 1916 and X wont yor. to know that 
thsrs is no sVifile bill tJiat lias not my naice. Really, it is 
very serious to clmn^e ovsry a cei'iain provision of a 

given code or law becai;se it ic expensive for the Govcrwnent 
to print the ehani^es made every year. 

An adoiirJ-stratlva o*ricit:i, in accordance with cer-» 
tain laws, oor;et±riei3 violatos the ia^ not knowing tliat he is 
violating it. I said I think w© have inh- rited tliat from 
the Unlked States. In Europe, Parliaments ore convened to 
•nact the appropriation law* Soi'setlmes they pass other laws 
the wain work of the Legislature is to appropriate funds 
n«eef«ary to carry the adir-lnlstratlve organization and these 
lawi Of a substantial character, substantive laws as they 
^ called, they are they are passed once and they 

^ left 15. the stafate law« until the political constitution 
the Coventry is so changed that they would have to be amended. 



• 14 ^ 

jTof, of course^ the days in whlf»>. « 

or xn ^^eh we live are daya of aoclal 
lervico, ©apedally ui tlie .ovei*««*v,4. . 

'^^'^©'Wttent of a coimtry like the 
I'iillippinea, where we imve iu«f ^ . 

«ve ;)U8t Bluited, This l» the reaaon I 
]itv« recoffimended so maiiy bill* <^-.^ ^ 

^ oilla to the Le^ialatiire, end I hope, 

^ J. iuive T;iie necesBRry le^lalation 

wtt-tten and wo shall have Daaaeri f>,«m 

paased them on to our statute booka, 

irobody can remember tl^ namo of ec^.e towna that ai^ changed 
mry year an. their reasoii f o.- making it is that the chanse 
is for soaie heroic jrorpoae. Oentlemen, there are many ati^eet. 
In Manila now that 1u.vg been changed which I cannot remembep 
because what I rsweaber are the old nemea. enzssm^vo ^ 
Boro questions to aolsil 

Hijii 3P0TS OF comewimTfl 

THS FIiBSS« Mr* Prosi ent« now that the first anniversary 
of the Conaonwealth la approaching, would you advance some high 
points that the government has aoliieved? 

THE PKESIDEHI* The Secretary of Agriculture and Conanerce 
hai written a report of «hat has been done in this government 
and It is aarvelous. (Lau^^hter) It is so marvelous tliat I 

"yielf marvel at it. 

Hm HiESS. But what about telling us your high spots. 

President? 

THE PRESIDENT. I will answer that on the 16th of 
"oveniber. We will then submit a aheet of its assets an. lia- 
^mtle. th«>ugh the eye. of the Secretary of Agriculture and 
'^erce. 



— 15 



^^eaident, la your comont on thlt 

IWiiblnt; spreo? 

* e±x, you will bG surprised that ^ssg^ 
aroppinc of bocibe did not hr.ve verj- much teproeslon on ne* 
It is 8tran£Q^l5iit It did not iteke rm imeaay* Why, I had Ju«t 
been from Santa vesa vAion the eacploslon took place* Really, 
It is very hard to doterwln© vfhat 1« tlie cause of that. Of 
eoupse. It has tvj.e offoct as far as I 6m concerned, I chonGed 
jBj Bind about r;rantin{5 aamosty to those Sakdallstas that are 
In prison^ not becftu»»« I really save Omportaaco to the bonias, 
tMt hocauae I do not Imow .vliat really happonod and the reason 
behind the movement, .for even in Manila, nobody can nay what 
if tha cans© of those bomblii^js • All that the people know is 
that there were borabs and the iDCjpiilar reaction of certain 
elfloents in the conriunlty Is that tli©:- aro fl^shtin- th© 
goverunent, and if I decree t!-o ainnesty the^ night have 
thought that the govemiaent had siven it up. I was goine to 
grant eianesty after the establishment of the Oomon^ealth and 
n^, I ^ not goms to iasue that. I «ay still grant pardon 
for individual cases, but,I do not want to grant arinesty 
There are people who use that either to start these lawless 
•Ws that th.y .ay :o on because they will not be kept 

^ . n'*fAii TOi? £0 ahead, anTway the 

long enou3h in Jail or se^t "^^^ll' ^ . 

, enforce the law* Here." ^hey are 

i^nTmant Is not ^oinz enioi-ce: 

p^. . that i. going on in Spain may 

stricken, tu — ^ ^"^^ 



•p 
m 

. 5 




9 
H 

4^ 



4> 
O 



4^ 



13 U 



o 



5 



1 5 ! ^ 

2 S S S 



Pi 
O 




t 

iq 



c! 

id 
o 

o 



0» 

I 

% 

o 

H 

-P 

H 
fi! 



01 



43 



o o 

4> 4: 



u 
o 

IS 



< 



3 

o 



H 

H 



o 

t 

o 
u 

H 

5 

I 

a 



o 
49 

O 

o 



4^ 

a 
& 

o 

44 

o 

O 4^ 

"0 



4) 



(4 
43 



o 

% 



% 


0 


>% 




43 


43 








« 




u 




U 








49 















I 



r 



^jP PRSas OONFffiElfCB NOTM 

*:50 P.M. 



OHI«A 

THK Pf'ESS. Tell us about china, 

THl PRBSIDBHT, I toio« Chiang Kai-ahdc rmrj well, i 
«as In Canton when ijie news of his capturs was repcrtsd. 
It vas after the banqjiet that the govftrnasnt of Kwantung 
gare in my honor. Hhey reoeivod the news and th«y were 
very such upset* 

fHB PRSSS* Did yon meet T. V. Soong? 

Pr^SIP^T* I saw hiu in Honglco9g. Tie had luncheon 
together at the house of General '/Tang and I had one of the 
best Chinese dishes that I had ever had in my life. It was 
hoae^cooked Chinese food. I vas very mueh pleased with what 
I saw there in canton, it .will Je ji, very unfortunate thing 
fwjhlna if Chiang K«d-8ek ia^ n ^J2S?£?*J^t 
i WTeaent fo r the unification of China undoubtedly was going 
Ott^pldly and^stron^jr. The province of Kvantong, aa you 
know, has been paying but lip aervice to the Nakng govem- 
•ent in the past, and they were very jealcue of their in- 
4.pendence there and distrustful of any outside authoHty. 
^. I found. *en I got to Canton, that the sentient for 

. . ^ . ^tnm mma tatr strong, ami ttie hlghsr 

• Halted gwerament In China n» tm^/ ^ 

mtoltl.. in canton - ..oth military and .ivlX-.r. Tar, 
J«ud Of th^r loyaltr » -a""""^ ff^em-ant. 



piogrese that tii« olt* « 

• oity Of Canton has 

m ^„ B,. am T.t s« «. .till Xiv^. 

I wai hlB guest there. At that ti*. ♦v 

*na^ time there were hardly 

■ore than one or two wide strM^a 

Bureete - they were aosUy old, 

narrow streets. This t Use, however, i did not see any 
narrow streets there, Their stBeets are as wide as our 
Taft ivfnue and our Rlaal Awenue. -m^y rewslwed ae with 
all honors. They ha« a batalllou at the railroad station 
and thay played the national anthea azki they also had the 
Philippine flag all oyer the streets, r was wondering where 
thajr got 80 amy flags In such a short tlm, and they had 
not only the police hut the gendarmes and the soldiers lined 
up at every fifty meters on every street where I was passing. 
Tbsrewas a soldier with a rifle, and i was escorted by more 
than one-half of a cooipany of soldiers carrying machine guns 
inthilr hsnds. By Godi md then when I went out to see the 
DaiTerslty - t^• Ifeiverslty oempus there is out of the city - 
•t trery fifty meters there were two sold lire with rifles on 
r%ht side of the road, facing the country, ihen i asked 
R«itle«Mi who was acoompsnying «• what that was for. he 
••Id; -That is for your protection." But what is really 
Important 1. this. lHa reason I « Teiy i«ich impie.-* 1. 
ti^t thay are real soldiers. Thay ar. no longer soldiers 
^rfbrtune or men paid hy a war^Xord. recognizing no other 
•^thoxlty hut that Of their «r master, l^ey were soldiers 



- 8 - 



of th« goY»r«»nt. whae i revi— «^ .-v 

'^^^ ^^^^^ 

in iront of them, they had a ra«l w.tt*^ 

« a raal military bearing and th«r 
looked straight at aa. not ona of i-v,^ 

ox one ctf them avar ahlfting aya». 

I ranaw our aoldlere hera. tha omoar. ^u. 
soldi ors ara doing military honora, facaa .a. Ha ia sup- 
poeed to look at ma. whan i look at tha officer, hoaarar, 
he begins looking aonawhara alaa. But thoaa Chinese - my 
goodness, avary aoldler lookad at you straight in the ayes. 

Tkm thay as)»d ma to visit the iiilit&iy Acadei^. It 
lea wonderful institution. They had 800 cadets there at(tha> 
least. I addressed than, and those paopla ware like statues. 

a BOTNI iriiila I was talking, thay looked at me straight, 
Mde no motion of any scrt. .'hen they wax* ordered a,t aaaa, 
trery time I mentioned the name ciiiang Kai-eak thay automa- 
tlcally stood at attontion. Ibose people are really dateiminad. 
fte aoral progress of thesa man, to me» la nothing short of 
■arvelous, 

THB PRESS. AS to whether tha method In the recona- 
truotlon of canton esn ha adopted In the Philippines. 

THR PR^SiriSNT. We ought to demolish avery< ^amad) house 
tl»t is in tha way of our widening our streets. Uie first 
»hiug we naad to do is to widen tli« Sacolta.^Hera is what tha 
Caatonaaa did. lhay first planned tha city and th« dastroyad 
•^erything that was in tha way of its raalization, but paid 
^or the buildii«» so razad. Ws nf th i r fln p1ni?>rs » o ftaft 

, ^ , , . . , II i ii ie r lnn n (TfnT r"r "^^^""^"''■^ 

^**HA n(r tr da this was n 



i 



if' 



- 4 - 




TBI P3BSS. crisis lith Japan, Genaral attitude of 

THK raKSIBBfT. I do not Ilka to hava thia printed... 
gut those fellows want to fight Japan. * Hi<y want to fight 
jgpan. You Imow what ii^rassad ibs. The7 do not talk in a 
^stfal way. They speeic with jarfaot aalf-oontrol ana thay 
itamre their words. But I gather this fr on what thay tall 
It: That if Japan foroas china into a situation, china is 
goiiC to fight thSs tins and they are prepared, they think, 
for tar. I also fatharad froa them that they have not givm 

Manohuria; tl»t *t is only a question of tine; when they 
fe«l strong enough they will fight to regain Manchuria. YOU 
ARil NOT GOIHG TO PUBLISH THIS, at leaat, as coming from me 
annty. I think the Chinasa have a grim detcrminat about 
Ifenohuria. I baLieve thay will be willing to Iflfc Wnchuria 

indapandcnt for itself under the influence of cJiina rather 
than andar the influence of Japan, and U»ak !• what Manchu- 
ria lants. But I do not think they are going to let Japan 
ka«p isanchuria forever. 

Be. th«B. her. 18 fflsr reaction to ttet. I «» •till 

■Making cortlditlellr >^<>* P<"> 1^"* 
to ttat i. thU: Wheth* China .Ul ffeM for J.p« 1. 
"tachuil. or not will »» Progr... that china may 

U ai>l« h.r«elf aua th. .it.nt to rtil* ean arm 



l^ilf. mat. la ay opinion, wni tak. tlmt. baforo 
g^ln, oaa »k« a war Of conauast . But japan idli not want 
^ glva ttp Manchuria for nothing, i think japan will put 
^ a fUHt to kaap ischuria, i think china hafl bean reaUy 
litdy to fight whan japan took lianchurla, th«i japan would 
lotbava inalstad on taking Manchuria, she would hava haan 
»tlifl«ft «ith having har rij^ts or what aha olaimed to ba 
\K rights, aapaoiaUj har aconomio onaa. ato, sha la now 
l»i&g to try to keep Man<iiuria and it is going to coat a lot 
of Ufa and aonay befora china can racovar it if aha aver 
doll. But thi affect la going to ba: that Japan will feel 
HBMsy about har situation in Manchuria, and aha will not 
bi lonsidering axtmding her territory soma more; so that i 
fill 7aiy safe, much safer now, than i did before I saw 
Canton. Cantin is very far frcn Manchuria. Xha situation of 
l^QBhuria does not af foot Canton at all* If there is no 
Nnia of oatnass aaongst ths Chinese in cantcn, that very 
A*ip fatliag about ^^ohurla and tba Manchurian gueatioa is the 
biit thii^ that has happaned to china, it i what ia aiicing 
<*iat what it is today. That is really a blessing in disguise. 

TBI PHBSS. HOW Russisa would stand in case. of China's 
•"'■lig strong? 

THE PRBSIDBNT. My answer to that, would be merely a 
1 ooald not say for sure* 

Japan's sj^ oi«l policy. We read that in Tanaka's do- 
"••Its, nd I think that is true. But if China is not 




)•«-) 



^aiid, if she goes on «he ie going now. there will be) 
Botioubl»» and Japan will be nicii met % tbaa aatiafied to 
Uold llwwlkUPia; and aha will find that she haa aaten store 
(bit tlii oan digest* 

TO PRESS. HOW about a Philippine coamonwealth alliance 
iltt China? 

ISM PHISSIDKNrr* Va are going to adopt the policy of 
kfhlQgton: alliance. 

yHJTRALI7.ATI0H 
TBS IB ass. The Tydings-iiaoDof fie Act aaaaa to be in- 



eo^tlble with itself^ naaiiyy the provisions fbr neutrali- 
ution, or attaapt to secure the neutralization of the 
Ptallilplaea - aid tba negotiation looking towards the ea- 
tabUthBent of aa iserioan naval base here - will theae 
pmlaions be proper from the standpoint cf Philippine 
Interests? 

THS PRBSIDBMT. ^« neutralization treaty, at least 
ftr the time being, has las t all attraoli on for me. To ma 
it Uaeaningleas, ami ualeaa during the next Ihree, four 
orfiTe years the attitude of the great powers toward inter- 
national agraaainta and accord* obange, I do not believe 
»l»at any tr aty of neutrality for the Philippines will mean 
•^ch. However. I would not object to the neutralization of the 
^^iUppines^ provided ttot the treaty maant simply this: That 
aUlppines wUl be considered a neutrA territory and 
not involve any guaranty of that neutrality on the part 



r 



• 7 • 

^j,poth» »«tlon.. 3„ othT i«P<l.. if, th. treaty wlU 

Bat that tli0 signatorlas of it doolar. and will 
,^14T and P^spMt th* Philippine, a. a neutral territcry. 
UrewUl be no objection to that, for that is good. iJ 

iMi$.^X^aranty among themselves because that will ^ 
gjM th« a», «»JU«« Kow a treaty of that s>rt 

loaidnot be inooiq^atlble, l think, lith any treaty that the 
PhUlppines Bay have with the United states whereby the united 
Sti tit lar retain sons naval stations in the islands, of 
mw, the part imareby the naval station Is established 
sold be outside that treaty. That would be the result of it, 
lnQpete* Whether any nation would want to recognize the 
Btttrality of the Philippines or to consider the Philippines 
ansitral territory, if there ware an iuaerioan naval station 
^tt, I do not know. Now, whether it wt 11 be to 1h e interest 
of the Philippines to have this naveUL station or not, that again 

d^e&d upon ths attitude which the united states oay teke 
*itli rafeiwnce to this naval station. If that were aade a part, 

if not. If it were consistent with the spefcial trade 
^•latlona between the Iftxited states and the Philippines - 
"Jileh would indicate a dtose association, ev«i if only 
•^*»lo. between this country aid the united States - it would 
••••to as that such a basis of relation Alp ilth the Uhited 
^^•h With her n^ Btatic^hmre, w) uld be Justified and in 

^* interest of the Philippl4«». «» "^^^ ^ ^* ^*«»* 
''*l»«Ohited states, because that would mean the ability of 



^eriw to protMt her trade routes. But If the Pnif * 
^^et>al£^^!^^^?y,..my^^on with the Phlllj^plue., 
er« of «Sijwonattle nature, i do not see really any jue- 
^^lon for such a naval etatiwi im IijLande, even 
frfl« *SJ!i®^^®^°* Jw^yioa. I am not in a position to 
ipiak, at this tlMe» of the attitude we lould take In 
yiffffaee to an ^erloan naval station h«re. That is a 
Btter that will have to be oonsidered when the njiestlon 
l8iea3.3.y up for serious consideration. 

POLITICAL INPgPigp^CB 
TH8 PRISSS* Regarding the political provisions of the 
Ifdlnge-lfaoDuffis Aot, has absolute political independence 
b«in decided upon, without any poesible chance of reconside- 



ration? 



THI PRSSIDSNT. I think that the mental attitude of our 
pwplt Is fixed. I think that they will want to have oomj^g^ 
Indtpenlence. It •Aways happens so, on matters of thls^:^^) 

It happens to efeiythit^ of the same nature, ^en you 
8lTa iWlvld»ls, rtose freedom of action has been limited, 
^•tter freedom to move, the more freedom you giv* t^«» 

freedoa they want to have. !»eU. after we started this 
^^^mm% Of the Co«onwealth as we found out that we are 

to run its affair, well, we now f-1 that we want to 

It more independently of other peopls. Itere is a du- 
'IJoatlon Of effort, the way thing, are run now; it u«is more, 

than 1. nece.«ry. Tor instance, under the Act certain 
^^^••i.t he approved by Washington. ;;'e approve an act 



9 



end then we hav to wait p«,«^^ ^^^^^ 
^. This is not a question of a«nti-ent, this Is a question 
^.praotlcal eovarmoeat. The quej^ion of tariff, for InBtance. 
Ji,. right to enact a tariff is^lj^sential power fcr mnj govern- 
that deelres to he eem.uf fisisn^t - hut we have no sneh 
power at all. on the question of tariff, on the ri^t to ini- 
tiate tariff legislation, the power of the President of the 
Ihited States to disapprove our tariff laws in the Philippines 
ii absolute, igaln, in tha disposal of our financial and 
sooaosio resources - this again in a way is subject to the 
lupsrfision and control of the president of the tJnited states. 
In otter words, in everything affeotiug the econony of the 
lalands, we are tied up; and that is a fact. Even if we know that 
thir« l8 entire good faith, equally on the pa rt of Ihe ihilip- 
pittu and on the pert of WMliington, regarding masures we are 
■aotlBg affecting the ecmomics of the ^elands, there nay be 
ilfferenoes of opinion, differences of views; and when there is 
*tat difference of views it is not oar view that will prevaU, 

law having given the presidmt of the tteited states the 
'^•f and responsibility to mke the final decision; he can 

consclflntiottsly sake any other decision but one consonant 
•^^h.his views and his opinion .there fore, the right one. Well, 

always think that oar decision is right, because we 
^*l«iys feel that we know better the conditions prevail- 

and naturally if and when these decisions occur in the 
'^tiPa, there wlU be^J little satisfaction. We have been 



r 

- 10 - 

in having, .e th, f taoncUx aan3.r ,or th, offlc, 
,tt.Hfeh CO-l..lon« an. ^ ^^^^^^ 

• "* *» '•'y ""Xrf Med enfl *o is veiy sen- 
gihle and irbo looks at every r^.. ^c.-^^^^ '^^./^^' W^ 

j^.s. ^ell. L^. Jonas has be«i a great help. He has b^en 
„o hindrance whatever to our plans^oa the contraryyhe has 
t„n of great help because his advice Is sound. He does not 
Uianca his views; he does not Interfere; but when, at any 
ttie, the CJoveifflient of the Coamon wealth desires to have his 
TleiBonany question, he is ready to give his advice, and 
doiB H in a very impartial, objective way. He gives you the 
facts, subaits to your consideration the laplicationa of every 
aottbat you may take, and then he lets you(Jo)deoide for 
yottreelf. He has really been very good, and to coBmissioner 
kf9^7 ^9 was also helpful in what we were doing in the ?hi» 
lippines. So f a^ he has been very helpful. But there is the 
POttibiUty of diaagreeosnt. 

THE TRADE CQ?IFg\ByCE 
TBI PRESS* HOW about the trade ocnferenoe in the 
States? 

^ PRESIDENT. I 4>ubt its efficacy because the proble« 
^•"Jaethiag that it oanliot remedy. I think that tie minute 
****»erica is wUling to glv« up the authorities that have 
^•^malned by the President by Act of congress, the minute 
^^•^elie up, the Philippines Is absolutely independent; aM 
"'^Qf the protection of ths United Sta^tes, as long as the 



• 11 - 

uaerioan flag Is hare, they must >.^«^ 

aey must have those powers^ rtmy 

oaa not have any less, i am reaaonnv.1 
^ • X am reasonable enough to admit 

tuat. They oaa have no less dowat.* 

«9a powers than what have heen 

rsM by congress in the United states President, as 
long as the A««lcan flag is flying ia the Philippines 
thty are golng^to be responsible for the Governmaot of 
th. Philippine .iste^ even fbr international relations. 
Otherwise, they wUl be holding the ^g. Rower. 5^ ca- 
nada. Australia or in New Zealand, in those governments 
Great Britain retains none of the powers that are re- 
tained by the Tjnlted states. The British flag fe there 
but these governments can do what they want to do in tha 
mtter of tariff or currenoy. or in anything, and the 
Governient of Great Britain has nothing to say. But that 
has been a develop*nent of mny. many years. These ^ootnKin- 
wealths have been gradually exercising these powers and no one 
baa been withholding these froA then. And there hare been 

Qo cases wherein these governments have done anything to 

a- 

Inrolve G]?eat Britain i-^^ conflict with any other nation; 
•0 that at least. they feel that Great Britain gas to sa- 
Penrlse them. t^'=' "^ il 1 tiaiTii»« are not only -sSsA 
different xassSSSDb from the Awerlcan people, onlike the peo- 

of Canada and Australia and Sngland. but we haw 
''^^■^flwrtalth jS^ newly established, and I think that A»- 
'ioa has no ground caaplalnt: we have certainly given 

no ground to conplain about oar loyalty and 



r - ^ 

- 12 . 

^^eter. nor hay w involved her m ai^ difficultia. with 
o ther nation 1 do not S^hink congress would consider this. 

TIB PRISS. At the end of this lo-year period a doainion 
,tatu8 for the Philippine. «i«jht be autuaUy expected. 

THK PBESSDiniT. It is Terjr hard to say. i do not think 
tm iaerioan people will consider any proposal of that kind. 
Ida not believe th^ will permit a situation whereby Am«>ica 
fill be reaponaiiae for the foreign relations of ths Phi- 
lippines and exercise no authority whatever over the government 
pf the islands. If she does not, ths Filipino people will in- 
sist that they have their independence, so that they may enjoy 
all those ^^^^ neeeseary for ths decision cf quest loms 
•lftotlng(@) national life. /^Ay 9rUf^C^ 

flUS HiESS. What relief measures have been done for 
tie flooded region? 

1H2 PRESIDHIT. I am going there. Ve are in perfect con- 
trol now of the situation; that is to say, we have all the 
Pwennel that is neeeessry and we are going as fast as we 
In repairing dawges that have been done and in affoi'dlng 
to tht sufferers frcan the flood. I myself am going there 
*« aoon as I have decided on the presaiag questions before the 
^«ai«nt, aad as soon as the road ia in better condition. 
* ceufnot do mar • thai 

m PRESS. A. to the calUng a special session of 

^'^•fctioaal Asseiibly. 



- 13 • 

m PHKIDIST. I aa not going to caU any apsoial 
^^ion. tbl. Is ^at I said . ,rou reporters misinterpreted 
^ ,t8t..«t;/ Uen^^s of the National Asseably will be 
jj^neit February. I take that for granted beoauae there l, 
g^iag to be held here a Euohsriatio Con^^ress. rh^ oome here 
jurlagjhe camiual every year so that i take it for granted 
tS^SW again - -7 be here. I am not going to call a 
ipiolal session. I have had enough for one year. My blood 
pressurs has gone up. The National AesemhLy has passed 
eooa^ lavs for the next «en years, it will take time to 
carry tkM out. 

POBCIIASg OF HAGI.^NDAS 
THS PRESS. Any truth, Mr. president, in the rumor that 
tli goraxBBent la considering the purohnse of large haciendas 
for distribution? 

THB PRESirSfT. The ability of the Secretary cf Agricul- 
turt and coameroa to speak is inooii5)arable. :;e have not got 
tte aoney appropriated for tJiat. We are going to exjroprlate 

portion of the landed estate* whidi is occupied by te- 
oaatB for their hoffles. fe are fiping to take those up imme- 
^ately, sxpropriate th«; that is all the money the govern- 
caa dispose of at present, because tha t is an that ms 
^0 appropriated. I w>uld advocate expropriation of all 
^Jfiw landed estates It i» Had the money to d^ it. But we 
m the money to do it. 
TIE PRS8S. How much money? 



peaos 
can not 
so- 



Billion pesos an^rvay, 

fHBPRIJSS. l^ore than thati 

TH5 PK-^S. How about thi.Tr, 4 

out tHe Haoiaada Esp8ran»a? 

m aBSlDE!^T. You iaolud. those th«t 

"aose that are owned prl- 
iittly? I thought you were only a ^ 

^7 ^ eaking Of tiie Xstates of 
Church. Uy goodness, i ^^^^ ^^^^^^ 

that, .^e waild wreck t>ia whole government,^ Yo« 
aplt. well, I tell you it Is worth coneidenng very 
rlaasly whether a great part of th* tax Aoold not be 
aied for that. As a aattep of f act^ i have been ^^T^ u 
'A^t:^ to use a part of thet money. 

mmESS. Jr. sotto, in behalf of the SociaH/at Party, 
let a petition to V/ashirrton aaJcing for the payment of those 
to (coconut oil tax) so as to buy the big haciendas . 

m PRSSIPBNT. Is he (Sotto) afraid thel 1 shall use the 
^7 to ahoot him and the rest of his gang? 

I tell you I m)uld recoBBneod it to the /issembly. . . 

^']J^^«<l«lres a little further stud^ bdt l have no obj Motion 



this: My idea was to reooimaend to the Asseably that 
*Pwt of this money be aarmorlced to pay our bonded indebted- 
• tljd puipose beinf^ that, if congress knows that we have 
taiaa many Billions more than is necessary for us to have, 
"We the payment of our bonded obligation, then it wUl 
*»l«er f or to get congress to do away with the export tax. 

Ml 

the e^ort tax. One of the reasons giwn In congress 
'^*bt export tax Is that w« nmy thereby hare money witto «hich 



- 15 - 

our bonded indebteaness. it is not in the law; tl^t W 
in th. speeches. ',e have never deviated from that. Every 
we have set a*ide the necessary amount for air bonded 
obligations. If we earmark, sqy zo million pesos, to b^ept 
la the Treasury for this bond, we shall be preparing the 
gyound for the aiaendmenj^f that part of tho Indopendonco 
liiW w iloh reqviires the payment of the taxes, 

THB PRKS. The TMited states is so sorupulous &bout 
this. Hift United States is rospossible for the financial 
stability of this sovornraent. 

THB PRESIDENT. That is one thing. The other i3 to 
appropriate this money for tho purchase of such landed es- 
tates as are occupied by tenants, with the purpose of re- 
sallinr, these to the^. Those are two purposes that should be, 
Inny opinion, good purposes, because you see there are no 
large landed estates in the coconut-growing provinces; not 
one. In the coconut-growing country the land is parceled 
asangst the small land ovmers. It is only in the rice-grow- 
i^ regioir^and in the sugar region that there are large 
taed ostates. In all other places there are no haoiendae 
•icept in Davao. 

^ 4^ ««i-irfilv eoui table for .this govom- 
TEB PRjSSS. Is it entirely 

w>^nr^t to redeem the bonds of the 
^at to use a tax on one product zo 

Sovornnant? 

— the TTnited States 



has 



our "^^^^ there boooun.* 

° proviaions of the law 

directly or indirectly affect it, 

uax at the present 

tjgg . the tax from the cooonut oil. 

^^^ahoma liKs to do tliat very lauoh. 
pot If wa did^that one indirect .ey. We passed a 

jgw here, I do not remember now which. 

m the last session we passed a Uw, I do not re- 
««.her It tl:is ninuto. It hod nothin,. to do with this oo- 
pra region. 

THB PHF5S. Copra Centrals? 

TO PFISSITMT. They cannot consider it that way 
because It wo Id be a repetition on the sugar centrals, 
I would never dare to do anything like that without the 
creTious Icnowledge and approval of the government of the 
Itolted States. Yes, I would present the case very plainly, 
to them. Otherwise, you would be taklng^ the risk of losing 
tliis money, w ioh is very big money for beggars like us hei* 

WS 7:'iS2SS. How about the valuation fund for 
^HtGdness? 

m ."n.cirji^NT. ^Vhen I in \feshington^ond we ware 
'^'gotlatiag this with the eovomrcent o.f the United Gtatas, 
'^^^ the Treasury IJepartr^i^nt tohere, I vms not wllline to 
^^'^^ one cent, not t. cent. I wanted every cent returned to 
^^^hUippines and I got the rresident to approve it. I 



- 17 - 

discovered ona day that they got singson, who was th« 
the secretary of Finance, to agree on ten million pesos. 
SlBg^n said: ^Ur. I>resident, we tetter take what we can 
gat now.* And Congress approved the law. But then you 

know what congress did when it cam. to the matter of 
^proprlation. "^at i moan to say is this: I wUl take one- 
tolf of that now and call it square. But really, from the 
itan^oint of moral obligation, the united States has a 
Tery plain, moral one there, and the President has recog- 
nized it and will pay to the Philippine Government. But i 
lant you^ gentlemen^ to know this: I am nob going to lose 
that nionoy. I may not get that in money, but I will get it 
icaahov. When they see the whole situation here much more 
iilpartially and with equanimity. I have no doubt that we 
•hall get something. We shall get the amount, if not in 
■oney actually appropriated, then in something that they will 
giro to the Islands* 7ou must remember this, that after the 
^ilippines becomes independent, there will be some accounts 
that have to be settled, and it is a &>o6. thing that we have 
tills money in the treasury of the United States and we can 
liavethea clarge these accounts to that. We will get that. 

AHMY BARRACKS 

THB PRESS. AS to the Trade school being used for 

barracks • 

THE PRESIDENT. It has long been referred tome that the 
^vincial government has pemitted that because the school 
'•^ly does not need all the space. We are not taking any- 



• 18 - 

frcn th. school. m«t ^3 actually being u.^ by th, 
johool will not be taken, 

THE PRESS. It was a military camp. 
THE PRSSIDEIIT. It does not belong to the school at 
^1. It is not true. The United states Arny can transfer 
to the Bureau of Education. That has beea transferred to 
the Government of the Philippines and t«iporarily it has 
been lent there and those buildings are provincial build- 
iflgi. Th€!sr are not buildings of the NaU onal Government, but 
f6 are not taking any building that is being used by the 
students. That is not true, i am sure of that. 

THE PRESS. What is your attitude, Mr. President, on 
tbi guestion of Japanese sub^l easing in Davao? 
THE PRESIDETfT. The law does not permit it. 
!IHS PRESS. Any move to cancel these leases that 
tuive baen granted? 

THE PRESIDENT. There seems to be no eivdence cf any 
lubltase. There is evidence that these Japanese that are 
wilclng there are working for the account of the Filipinos 
*« have l,a8«d th. land. ^ ^Aa^ 

I want to say something more on xhis Army business, 
l>«cau8e tMs is one important single thing that the govern- 
ment is doing, we have a crowd of people here that are 
^«lne influenced by these pacifist philosopher* and if the 
Elands become the field, a productive field for these 
J'»«ifi8t8, then we mi^t as walll say good-bye to all our 
^•*g and ambitions. Thi» is nonsensical talk that i» 



• 19 - 



golDg on about militarizing the Philippines. The maximum 
strength of our regular Army is not even Soln^J^ be two 
divisions, which is less than 2,000 mm. we *m'have the 
^est army in the world even among the anallest nations. 
pen Slam has neai»ly 100,000 man. For maximum^ we will have 
tfltieen 7,000 and 10,000 men. Now^we do not even have 
f,000 aen. Uiat is our regular army and in ttet number 4^ 
fl^Sn^^ lnoluded ))the Constabulary, which is doing police 

THE PRESS. Really, is this militarization of the 
Philippines? 

THE PRBSID3SNT* We ou^t to train every man and woman . 
Sf«ry ol tizttci in eyy y civilized community iftiere there is the 
spirit of duty ought to be trained to defend the country. 
That Is the paramount duty of every citizen, for we^anjiot 
defend our country with ou* tongue. But sot to talks much 
about Independence, maldng foolish speeches, and actually 
does nothing. That is lAat such fellows do when confronted 
by an eneiay. It would be murder to attempt to defend oneself 
imltts one has been prepared by, the governmmt. This talk 
Of allltarlzlng the Philippines is getting on my nerve.. 
And aft en have seen China, more than ever am I determined 
to carry out that policy. China would never have been a 
4l8organlzed nation if there had been military training 
there. We need that even in peace. TS^en if we have no war 
U4 . ♦ +4 ^-m« have/a) national discipline. 

*t is better that our citizens navo^^ 



* 20 - 



I d> not want ieople,^other countrl... who beli.7* 

^j^at living consists only in eating pi«ty and dancing and 
^olBg nothing. I do not want to haire such people in my own 
country. > 

THB PR3SS. HOW about your first plan that the cons- 
taDulary ahould consist of 10,000 men and the standing 
^ of 19,000? 

THB PRESIDKIIT. We hawe come to the conclusion that 
it fill not he necessary o There will always be one division 
eaaposed of those that are receiving the training and those 
tiiat aay be called; but the other, which we may term the 
regular army, will be 10,000, including the constabulary. 

THB PRBSS. How large is this Constabulary? 

THE PRESIDEHT. Three thousand. 

I am already having trouble listening to those fellows* 
ijiever, the rest will always be ready to support and ooope- 
rttfiith the Constabulary. The 3,000 const* ulary men that 
w now have, or that we shall have in one year, will be more 
effective t2i«n the 7,000 that we used to have. Because we 
*haH have airplanes, gas, tanks^and armored cars. The 3,000 
t«i ttaxs eauipped are worth more man the 7,000 that we used 
to have, who had only rifles. So 3,000 men will be sufficiei-.- 

THE PRESS. About twenty years a©, you said the Fill- 
Pino loved to wear the unifom. 



- 21 - 



W PH33ICBHT. I still belle,, th.* 

DOAieve that mmy Filipino 

a gun. ana If tomorrow i so^mTunl ^ anj 
50,000 ualfoims for everyone, m about half an hoar there 
,U1 not be any sun left, tou ,114 ,„ them ahootlng 
ireryoxie ibo opposes • 



f 



