±fgTl^Qg_TRAN SliITTAL TO THE HONORABLE iiANUEL L. QU EZON 

^B^^ML^LJM. C F T — Philippin es 



JOINT PREP ARAT ORY COI.I .TTTE E ON PHILIFP IIjE_AF_FAIR3 

Washington, D. 0. 

may 20, 1938 

The Honorable 

Ilanuel L. Quezon, 

The President of the Philippines, 
Man! la j ?. I. 

Mr. President: 

I have the honor to transmit herewith, for your con- 
sideration, one of the t wo s i ;;n e d o r i gin ■-? 1 s j f t n e Re do r-t 
of the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs 
constituted on April 14, 1937, by the President of the 
United States acting in accord with you. To this cony the 
signature of l$r. Joaquin M. Elizalde has been affixed on 
his "or ho If by the Honorable Q,u int in ? r- re de s ; ; . ; n d space is 
reserved for the signature which the Honorable Jose Yulo 
may desire to affix in person. 

I am transmitti n g to the Honorable Francis 3. S a yre , 
Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee on Fhilinnine 
Affairs , for consideration b y t hat Go mm Xtfcee an □ f o r t v ■ I - 
t ua 1 r e f e rence to the Pros i 5 e nt o f t h a Un i *j o d St at e s , t h • j 
o t h e r o ri gi nal coo y of the Re po nt , to which t he s i gna ture a 
of Secretary Yulo and ir. Elizalde have been affixed on 
their behalf by Commissioner Paredes. 

While availing myself of the kind offer of Commissioner 
Parades to take to you. the original of the Report, I am, for 
your earlier information, sending to you by air mail an un- 
signed corny. 

I enclose herewith, for your information, a cony of my 
letter of transmittal to Assistant Secretary Sayrc. 

Very truly yours, 

J. V. A. U: chombAY, 
C h a i rm an, Joint rr e p a r - 1 1 o ry C o m ;;i i 1 1 e- e 
o n ?h i 1 i p p i r e Af f a i r s . 

Enclosures : 

Report (one original, 

and copy No. & ) . 
Cony of letter to 

A s s i s t ant Secret ar y 

Saj rG * 



_yi^H__OF TRANSMITTAL TO THE HONORABLE F RANCIS 5, SAYR F 

h§§tI3MMLM!l^M^LJ>I^iSK ^ ch a ir:.^ of t hf ' 

I NTEHD EPART ! IENT AL CQhlhTTTSE ON PHILIPPINE AFFAIRS 



^IlIgL?RS?ARA10Rx 00;.i ;iT?a5 ON P KILIPPInZ AFFAIRS 

Washington , D. G. 

ray 20, 1938 

The Honorable 

Franc I a B . S avr e , Oh a ir man j 

Th e I n t e r de p a rtmental Co w aittee 
on Philippine Affairs, 
Washington. 

Sir: 

I have the honor to tr nsmit herewith, for considera- 
tion by your Coir.-; it too and. for eventual rt.-f e~va.c<..- t t' . 
President , one of the t-o signed originals of t'he Reoort 
of the Joint Preparatory Co-nrj.lt too on Phili] '. . Affairs 
con at 3. tut ed on April 14", 1937, by the President ?cting in 
accord with the President of the Philippines. To this 
cony, the signatures of the Honorable Jo si' Yulo fine of 
hr . Joaq u inh. Eliz is Id e have be e n af f i xe d or. the 1 r c e naif 
by the Honorable Quint in Parades, Resident* Commissioner 
of the Philippines. 

I am also enclosing ior your convenience an unsigned 
cony of the Report. 

I an: availing raysoir of the courteous oi'l cr of Com- 
missioner Paredes to tune to President Quezon the ot: -r 
origin \± cony of the Report, to which hr. Slizalde'8 sig- 
nature has been affixed by the Commissioner, tmd in which 
a Space is reserved for the Signature of Secret a ay 2TulO, 
in order that he nay sign the report himself "hen it shal] 
have been received in h'anila. At the sane tine I a:., seno- 
Im to President Quezon by air nail an unsigned copy of tne 
Rape rt . 

I enclose herewith, for your information, a copy of 
nv letter o^ transmittal to President Quezon. 



Very truly your 



j. v. A. hachTuRAY, 

Oaairuan, Joint Preparatory Com.nttee 
Ph 1 1 i PP i ne Affairs. 



Enc3 osures : 

Report (one original 

and co;o,y h n 1) • 
Copy of letter to 

President Quezon. 



MESSA GE FRQ? I PRS3IDEN T FRANKLIr ,_D^_ ROOSEVELT 
TO THE HON ORABL E MA NUEL L. QUEZON, PR ~E:3IPEMT 
OF THE PHILIPPINES 



lay 20, 1938. 



"I hasten to congratulate you uoon the unanimity 
with which agreement on its report has been reached 
by the Joint Preparatory Committee on Phil inn ine 
Affairs which was constituted by arrangement between 
us a year a^o. I am hopeful that the findings and 
recommendations of the Committee may provide a sound 
and adequate basis for notion supplementing the Inde- 
pendence Act in such a wry as to afford the Philippines 
o^portunitv to adjust their economy to the situation 
which e separate political stPtus will entail. Lot me 
heartily wish you and your ccpl-.? fll success in the 
achievement of that undertaking. 



"After I ha vp had an opportunity to study this 
report I shall desire to co n f e r w i th y o 1 1 abou t its 
T»piP P pe to the public, and later about the stens 
which should be taken here and in the Philippines 
to effectuate the Committee's recommendations. 



RADIOGT AI S SFNT TO Thy, HONORABLE I "AN^L L^..^U£ZOij^ 
» PRES~SENT OF THE COTi l.iQKffEALTK OF THE PHILIPPINES, 

BY f^~^ONORAELE FRAijCjSl 5^' jAYRE A ND THE HONOR ABLE 
J. V/ T71Ia^amAY, ON OCCASION OF THE SIGNING 
OF !E?HS PE PORT OF -IF 5 JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE ON 

— • ^ ■ Philippine affairs 



M ay SO, 1938 

Fi-on Kr. Sayre: 



11 1 feel hfi:p v th?t the work of the Jo in J; 
?:■ ilippine- American Commit tea initiated as a 
result of our discussions and common desires 
durliu; the winter of 1937 has come to harpy 
fruition in the signing of n unanimous report 
todav. : hope with ail my heart -hat the plans 
thus riven definite outline may result m sound 
and stable foundations for Philippine independ- 
ence and for the continuing "nd increasing welfare 
of the Philippine people. \\y very sincere ypoa 
'••ashes go out to them and to you." 



Fron: haehu rray : 



"The Joi.it Preparatory Committee on Philippine 
Affairs has today siynec". its reoort. 

mt Y- V a great satisfaction in participating 

.,.-*■>.. v - Liuino and American colleagues in vor.ar.: 
0 ; t wh "t I hooe will orove a helpful contribution 
to the solution of the economic pro clems of .ne 
Philippines. 

"Allow m to -de Diy warmest personal ?ood wishes. 



M ESSAGE TO .THE H ON ORABLE J. V. A. HacMURRAY 
F ROM THE HONORABLE " FRANCIS B. SAYRE, ON THE 
OCCASION OF THE SIGNING OF THE REPORT OF THE 
JOINT PREPARATORY ' 00111:1 TTEE ON PHILIPPINE 

AFFAIRS 

May 20, 1938 



"Assistant Secretary of State 
Washington 

May 18, 1938 

"My dear Mr. MacMurray: 

Will you, as Chairman of the Joint Preparatory 
Committee, please convey to the members of the Com- 
mittee my regret that an official speaking engage- 
ment will prevent my being present when the Com- 
mittee's report is signed. I feel that the occasion 
is a significant one in the history of the relations 
between the United States and the Philippines. A 
task mutually undertaken last year on behalf of me 
two countries has now been brought to a close by 
means of careful research, patient exploration and 
close cooperative effort. All of us and especially 
the members of the Committee may well feel mos £ 
gratified at this happy conclusion of so important 
a work. 

"Sincerely yours, 

"FRANCIS B. SAYRE 



"The Honorable 

John V. A. MacMurray, PAmm1ttpp 
Chairman, Joint Preparatory Committee 
on Philippine Affairs 

Department of State, 

Washington, D. C. 



DEPARTMENT OF STATE 

FOR THE PRESS "AY SO, 1938 

j MO. 237 




USED IN ANY WAY . 



The Joint Preparatory Committee on Pnilippine Affairs 
today signed its report and submitted it simultaneously to 
the Honorable Francis 3. Sayre , Assistant Secretary of 
State, as Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee on 
Philippine Affairs, for consideration and eventual refer- 
ence to the President of the United States, and to the 
President of the- Philippines. It is not contemplated that 
the report will be made oublic until agreement as to the 
time and manner of its release shall hav< b< en reached 
between President Roosevelt and President Q,uezon. 

In accordance with the termr of ""he Independence Ac 4 
of 1934, the Philippines will attain independence on July 4, 
1945, and preferential trade with the United States will be 
terminated on that date. The Joint Committee was constituted 
on April 14, 1937, by arrangement between the President of 
the United States and the Pre 3 i dent of the Philippines, for 
the purpose of study inr trace relations between the Philip- 
pines and the United States, and mak i n ? r ee ora ■ 3 at 1 o n z 
to the means of terminating the existing trade preferences 
at the earliest practicable' date consistent with affording 
the Philinpir.es a reasonable ooportunity to adjust 
national economy. The American members of the Commit':- 
were appointed by the President of the United States upon 
recommendation of the Interdepartmental Committee on Phil- 
ippine Affairs, and the Philippine members by the rr-jsident 
of the Philippines. The Honorable Francis B. Sayre, Assist- 
ant Secret nry of St a tc , act e d a a Cha 1 rm an o f th i s group 
until Jul:' 13, 1937, when the Honorable J, V. A. I/iacJfarray, 
Ambassador to Turkey, was detailed to act as Chairman of 
t h e Co m in 1 1 1 e e - 

The member ship of the Committee, as ,at present consti- 
tuted is as follows: The Honorable Jose Yulo, Secretary of 
Justice o-r' the Philloci.no Commonwealth, Vice Chairman of une_ 
Committee, and Chairman of the Philippine Group; Mr. Joseph S, 
Jacobs Chief of the Office of Philippine Affairs, Department 
of State Vice Chairman of the Committee, and Chairman ot tne 
American' Group; Mr. Louis fcomei-atzjcy, Chief of the Division 

of 



of Regional Information, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic 
Commerce, Department of Commerce: Dr. Ben D. Dorfnan, 
Chief Economic Analyst, Unite:, States Tariff Commission.; 
Mr. Joaquin L". Slizalde, Member of the Philippine National 
Economic Council J Colonel Donald C. McDonald, Assistant to 
the Chief, Bureau of Insular Affairs 4 War Department; The 
Honorable Quint in Parcdcs , Resident Commissioner for the 
Philippine??; fts Benito Eazon, Financial Adviser to thu 
President of the Philippines; Dr. Carl P. Bobbins, Head 
Agricultural Economist / Agricultural Adjusl .. nt Adminis- 
tration, Department of Agriculture; The Honorable Jos«' E. 
Romero, Flocr Leader, Majority Party in the Philippine 
National Assembly: The Honorable L'anuel Rox a , member of 
the Philippine National Assembly; and Dr. Frank A. Waring, 
Chief Economic Analyst, United States Tariff Commissi .. 

In connection with it? work, the Joint Committee con- 
ducted public hearings in -Vnehinmton (June 16, 17, 18. 22 
and 23, 1937), in San Francisco (July 21 and 22, 1937), 
and in Manila (September 15, 13, 17, %, 21 «nd^2P, 1937). 
Briefs were filed not only by those who appeared at the 
public hearings but also by other interested parties. 

The basic plan underlying the recommendations of the 
Committee is that, instead of assessing the full tariff 
duties on each other's products in 1945, the two countries 
will then assess 25 percent of their prevailing rates of 
duty, and thereafter annually Increase these rates by 
5 percent of the prevailing cutler, until the complete 
elimination of preferences is brought about at the close 
of the year 1950. 



CONFIDENTIAL 



REPORT 0? 
THE JOINT PREPARATORY COUMITTE 
Oil 

PHILIPPINE AFTAIHS 

'.Vashin^t -)Zi, D. C. 
May 20, 1938 



TABLE QP GOXT EiITS 



PA RT I - Il MilOBJCTIO S 

Pa^e 

1. Organisation and Purpose of the Committee — 1 

2. Political and Economic Relationship between 

the United States and the Philippines — — 5 

3- Objections to the Provisions of the Independence 

Act 1 9 

Steps taken to remove objections 11 

Organisation of the Interdepartmental 

Committee on Philippine Affairs — 12 

Steps taken in preparation for a trade 

conference — 12 

Report of United States Tariff Commission 13 

Philippine Technical Trade Committee's Heport * 14 

Organization of the Joint Preparatory Commit te 

on Philippine Affairs — — 14 

4* Committee 1 s Terms of Reference 16 

p ^rt ii - tpajz :^zla:iqhs 

1 # United States -Philippine Trade Relations — 

History of trade relations — — 1 

Trade provisions of the Independence Act — 6 

Anticipated effects of the Independence Act 

provisions on Philippine economy — ~- — 

Anticipated effects of the Independence Act 

provisions on United States economy 10 

2. Trend and Character of United States -Philippine 

Trade — — ~ 12 

Trade trend ■ — 12 

The United States market for Philippine products lb 

The Philippine market for United States products 18 

Economic aspects of duty-free tr^de — — 23 

3. Purpose and Character of Recornnendations 26 



■a- 



Fogg 

4. Philippine Exports to thp United States — 32 

SuGAH 

The sugar industry in Philippine economy 32 

Restrictions upon the movement of Phil- 
ippine su^ar to the United States — — 37 

"Recent United States legislation 

affecting sugar — ■ * — 37 

Restrictions imposed oy the Inde- 
pendence Act — 39 

Dutiable and duty-free sugar in the 

United States market — 41 

Philippine su^ar in the United States market 

during and after the 3or.:nor/:<valth period 43 

Character of recommendations 45 

COCONUT PRODUCES 

Coconut industry in Philippine eon* o~y 40 

Development of the Philippine 

coconut industry iD 

Organization of the Philippine 

coconut industry 47 

Investments in the coconut industry 48 

Principal coconut product-: 49 

Combined trade in copra and coconut oil 54 

Copra cake and meal ^6 

Desiccated coconut 53 

Combined exports of major coconut products— 60 

Minor coconut products ^ 2 

r.ecent legislation affecting the exportation 
of Philippine coconut products to the 

United States 

Independence Act 

United States revenue acts 

Character of recommendations 



63 
68 
72 



ABAC--. AND C053AGS 

75 



The abaca industry in Philippine economy 
Character of recommendations in regard 

to abaca 

The cordage industry in Philippine economy 

Restrictions on the shipment of Philippine 

cordage to the United States 

Character of recommendations 



85 



-3- 



Pa-:e 



T03ACG0 AND TC.3ACC0 PRODUCTS 



Tobacco culture and trade 86 

The cigar industry in Philippine economy 87 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 90 

Character of recommendations ■- 91 

The scrap and stripped filler tobacco industry 

in Philippine economy 92 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 94 

Character of recommendations 94 

TIMBER AITS LUM3B?. 

Timber and lumber in Phi li ovine economy 96 

Restrictions impose! by the Independence Act ICO 

Character of recommendations 101 

E.3R0ID55ISS 

The embroidery industry in Philippine economy 102 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act l.'-l 

Character of recommendations 106 

CAjjNED PlfSAPPL^S 

The canned pineapple industry in Philippine 

economy l^ 7 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 108 

Character of recommendations 109 

HATS 

The hat industry in Philippine economy 109 

Restrictions imposed by Independence Act 113 

Character of recommendations 112 

C T ;TCE 

The catch industry in Philippine economy 113 

Restrictions imposed by the lndepenier.ee Act 114 

Character of recommendations 115 

?7,A?,L 3UTT0:.S 



The pearl button industry in Philippine economy — 115 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act llo 

Character of recommendations ~ l 



5. United States S:rports to the Philippines 118 

Character of recommendations - 118 

COTTOK TZXTIL5 S 

Philippines as an export market for United 

States cotton textiles 119 

United States cotton textiles in Philippine 

market - — 121 

Factors ^ovprning imports into the Philippines 123 

Character of recoMmenaat ions ► 122 

CISAE3TTES 

The Philippines us en export mark, t for American 

cigarettes 123 

Factors governing imports into the Philippines 124 

Character of roco^mendati ons 12«1 

SVAPORATZI? MILK 

The Philippines as an export :nar!:et for United 

States evaporate z : -2- 

United States evaporated milk in Philippine 

market * — — — 12" 

Factors governing i:nports into the Philippines 127 

Character of recomnendations — - I 27 

CAiTliSD FISH PROmCTS 

The Philippines as an export market for United 

States canned fish products 128 

United States canned fish products in the 

Philippine market — — 13 0 

Factors' governing imports ir.to the Philippines — - 131 

Character of recommendations * " 131 



PART 111 - IlS.rlXZ 



l a Introduction — ■ ~ - 

2, Revenues and Expenditures — - 

Period prior to 1237 - 

Current period 

Remainder of the Commonwealth period 



-5- 



I'-yv 

Period after independence 

Special need for extraordinary revenues — 8 

Desirable restrictions on use of extra- 
ordinary revenues 

Future revenues and expenditures 11 

3. Bonded Indebtedness 13 



4. Currency 



The exchange standard 

Currency reserves 

Currency devaluation account 



5. Banking 



Introduction 



2. Economic Adjustment Projects 



Present public debt of the Philippines 13 

Maturity of the public debt of the Philippines — 13 

Classification of the Philippine debt 14 

Debt as of December 3.1 , 1936 ■ I 7 

Debt as of July 4, 1946 }J 

Liquidation of Philippine debt 

Character of recommendations for debt 

liquidation 



18 
19 

24 



24 
24 
26 

28 



L'eed for economic adjustment 

Objectives of economic adjustment ~~ 

Expenditures for economic adjustment 
Organization for economic adjustment 



1 



1 



V 



Improvement of technical training 

Improvement of transportation facilities - 

Conservation of natural resources — ~-- 

Improvement of agriculture 

Soil survey and mapping pi 

National agricultural experiment station 
national agricultural service stations ----- 

Agricultural credit 'Z~~~tZ~~~ " I- 

A?ricultural marketing and purchasing ^ 

Agricultural tenancy conditions ------- g 

Distribution of agricultural population — & 



IS 
20 
21 



24 
26 
29 



-6- 



Pa.ge 

Improvement of manufacturing 36 

Improvement of tariff schedules 37 

Improvement of public revenue systems 37 

Improvement of health conditions - 39 

PA RT V - RIGHTS AKP INTERESTS CP THE STAGES 
AIQ ITS CITIZENS II I T HE PHILIPPIN ES ANB 0? ' — 

P hilippines ann us citizens in the 

UNITED STATES 

1. Eights and Interests of Citizens of the Two 

Countries 1 

2. United States Government Property ir. the 

Philippines 

FART VI - 3EARINJ OF THE DATE C? IIT JZ?EN?SNCS 

the pro^un; cf economic ^rvrvsfNFNT 1 

P ART VII - RECQM 3N 1 A. IT? N 3 ANi; TN3IR EFF5CTU A TIC:: 

rlZ "J C M ' .^Ll * D Ai I C - ■ 5 

rpAig riii^_ i:;:: - i 

Gomrrionwealth Period - I'cven^er 15. 1935 to July 4, 1946 

General provisions — « — 1 

Quota provisions to govern shipments to the 

United States — — - — 1 

Quotas not subject to the export tax 1 

Quotas subject to the export tax — 

Special provisions — 3 

Period of Tariff Preferen ces a fter Independen ce - 
July 4, 1946, through Iiece::.i: er 61. I9oC 

General provisions * 4 

;,;;/;ta provisions ■ — — ■ 5 

Declining duty-free quotas < : 

Quotas subject to declining tariff 

preferences — — — ■ — — ^ 

Special provisions — ? 



I 



P ag e 

TOMCE 8 

Revenues and expenditures 8 

Bonded indebtedness 9 

Currency 11 

Banking 12 

ECONOMIC ADJUST-.13NT 12 

RIGHTS AND INTERESTS \Z 

EFFECTUATION OF 55DC;.::..ig:: AT I C ICS 1 . ' 

SIGNATURES 1L : 



appendices 

I - Text of Independence Act of March 24, 1034 

II - Letter dated :>iay 24, 1937, to the Honorable 

Millard 2. Tydings, from the Honorable 
Francis 3. Sayre 

III - Recommendations for Increases in Philippine Import 

Duties 

IV - Philippine Insular Revenues and Expenditures for 1927, 

1930, 1933 and 1935, Parts I and II 

V - Detailed Statement of all the Cut st ending Sends Issue:! 

by the Various Branches and Entities of the Philippine 
Government, Showing the History and the Present Status 
of Each as of December 31, 1936, Parts I and II 

VI - Detailed Statement of all the Outstanding Bor.ds Issued 

by the Various Branches and Entities of the Philippine 
Government, Showing the History and the Projected 
Status of Each as of July 4, 1946 

VII - Statement of the Total Amount of Bonds Outstanding, 

Estimated Sinking Fund and "et Ir.dectedness on 
December 31st of Each Year from 1936 to 1966, 
Inclusive 



-8- 



VIII - Liquidation of Philippine Indebtedness Incurred Prior 

to May 1, 1934 

IX - Tentative List of Proposed Treaties and Their Subject 

Matter 

X - Map Showing Itinerary of the Joint Preparatory 

Committee on Philippine Affairs 



supplemen t 

I - Briefs Piled and Transcript of Hearlu v in 

Washington on June 16, 17, 18, 22 and 23, 1937 

II - Briefs Piled and Transcript of Hearings Held in 

San Francisco or. July 21 and 22, 1937 

III - Briefs Filed and Transcript of Hearings Held in 

Manila on September 15, 16, 17, 20, 21 and 22, 1937 



v C ONFIDEN T I A L 

1 



REPORT or 



THE JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 



Oil 



PHILIPPINE AFPAIR3 



PART I 
INTRODUCTION 



PAH? I ^ lUTRQDUGTIOH 

lm QXE^i^ticn_3^J^^^ Q^e of the Cn™? u.pp 
The Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs was 
created on April 14, 1937, pursuant to an arrangement between 
the President of the United States and the President of the 
Philippines, The functions of the Committee were announced 
on March 18, 193?, in the following joint statement of Presi- 
dent Manuel L. Quezon and the Honorable Francis 3, Sayre, 
Assistant Secretary of State: 

^Arrangements arc bslng made for the appointment 
shortly of a joint preparatory committee of American 
and Philippine experts. The committee is to study 
trade relations bjtwern the United States and the 
Philippines and to recommend a program for the ad- 
justment of Philippine national economy. This an- 
nouncement followed conferences between President 
Quezon of the Philippine Commonwealth and the Inter- 
departmental Committee on Philippine Affairs, which 
is acting on hehalf of President Roosevelt in * 
preliminary discussions- Assistant Secretary of State, 
Francis 3. Sayre, is Chairman of this Committee. 

"Inasmuch as the Independence Act provides that 
complete political independence of the Philippines shall 
become effective on July 4, 1946, and inasmuch as Presi- 
dent Quezon has suggested that the date of independence 
might be advanced to 193£ or 1939 t it was agreed that 
the joint committee of experts would "be expected in 
making its recommendations to consider the bearing which 
an advancement in the date of independence ?/ould have on 
facilitating or retarding the execution of a program of 
economic adjustment in the Philippines. It was further 
agreed that preferential trade relations between the 
United States and the Philippines are to be terminated 
at the earliest praeticable date consistent with afford- 
ing the Philippines a reasonable opportunity to adjust 
their national economy. Thereafter, it is contemplated 
that trade relations between the two countries will te 
regulated in accordance *ith a, reciprocal trade a^r^emert 
on a non-preferential basis/ 11 -/ 



1/ Department of State Pre:;:: He lease dated March 18, 1937 



~2- 



The American members of the Joint Preparatory Committee on 
Philippine Affairs :rere appointed by the President of the United 
States and the Philippine members by the President of the Phil- 
ippines, The Honorable Francis 3 m Sayre, Assistant Secretary of 
State, acted as Chairman of the Committee until July 13, 1937, 
when the Honorable J. V. A, M;,c Murray, Ambassador to Turkey, 
vjas appointed Chairman. 

The membership of the Committee as originally constituted 
on April 14, 1937, rras as follows: 

The Honorable Jose Yulo, Vice Chairman of the Committor, 
Chairman of the Philippine Group, Secretary of 
Justice of the Philippine Commonwealth; 

Up. Joseph E. Jacobs, Vice Chairman of the Gottnittee., 

Chairman of the American Groups Chief of the Office 
of Philippine Affaire, Department of State; 

Dean Conrado Benitez, College of Business Administration, 
University of the Philippines; 

Mr, Louis "Domeratzky, Chief of the Division of Regional 

Information, bureau of Foreign ari Domestic Commerce, 
Department of Comrerco; 

Sr. Lynn E. Edminster, Chief Economic Analyst, Division 
of Trade Agreements, Department of State; 

Mr. Joaquin Elizalde, Member of the Philippine national 
■ Economic Council; 

Colonel Donald G. McDonald, Assist?:/ : the Ohinf , Bureau 
of Insular Affairs, Xar Department; 

The Honorable Quint in Farcies, Resident Commissioner for 
the Philippines; 

Dr. Carl 3. Sob - ins , Head Agricultural Economist , Agri- 
cultural Adjustment Administration, Department of 
Agriculture; 

The Honorable Jose E. Rouero, Floor Leader, Majority 
Party in the Philippine National Assembly; 

The Honorable Manuel Roxas , Eloor Leader, Minority Party 
in the Philippine National Assembly; and 

Dr. Frank A. taxing, Chief Economic Analyst, United 
States Tariff Commission , 



-3- 

Subsequently, two members of the Committee, Dr. Lynn R, 
Edrainster and Dean Conrado Benitez, because of the pressure of 
other duties, resigned. They were replaced by two new appointees 
who, prior to their appointment, had been advisers to the Com- 
mittee, namely: 

Dr. Ben D. Dorfman, Chief Economic Analyst, United States 

Tariff Commission, appointed alternate for Dr. Edminster 
on July 14, 1937, and a member on January 19, 1938; and 

Mr. Benito Razon, Financial Adviser to the President of the 
Philippines, appointed January 27, 1938, 

The Committee has been assisted in its work at riifferer.t 
times and for varying periods by a number of advisers and others, 
namely: Dr. 3en D. Dorfman and Mr. Benito Razor., who subsequently 
became members of the Committee, as mentioned above; Major Myron J. 
Conway, Infantry, United States Army; Mr. Owen L. Dawson, United 
States Agricultural Commissioner at Shanghai; . 7/illiam A. Lloyd, 
Senior Agriculturist, Deportment of Agriculture; Dr. George F. 
Luthringer, Assistant Professor in Economics, Princeton University; 
Dr. Julius Matz, Pathologist, 3ureau of Plant Industry, Department 
of Agriculture; Lieutenant Colonel Arsenic Natividad of the Phil- 
ippine Army; Dr. Lloyd ?. Rice, Professor of Economics, Dartmouth 
College; and Mr. Hilarion S. Silayan, Chief of the Philippine 
Bureau of Plant Industry. In addition, the Committee was assisted 
in various ways by numerous other individuals corrected with the 
administrative departments of the Government of the United States 
and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 



In connection with its work, the Committee conducted public 
hearings in Washington (June 16, 1?, 13, 22 and 23, 193?), in 
San Francisco (July 21 and 22, 1937), and in Manila (Septem- 
ber 15, 15, 17, 20, 21 and 22, 1937). iiriefs were filed not 
only by those who appeared at the public hearings but also by 
other interested parties. The transcript of the public hearings 
and texts of the briefs filed will be found in the Supplement to 
this report. During its thret months' stay in th< Philippines, 
the Committee spent r-b out a month visiting thirty-four of the 
fifty provinces and covered approximately 4C00 miles, by motor 
car, steamer and railway. 

The findings and conclusions of the Committee are discussed 
in Parts II, III, IV, V, and VI, and its principal recommendations 
are sc=t forth in Fart VII of the report. 



1/ "Philippines 11 (in the singular), has been used throughout 
this report instead of "Philippine Islands", as that is the 
name used in the Philippine Constitution. 



Political and Economic Ilol at ion ship between the United States 

and the Philippines— ' 

The United States acquired sovereignty over the Philippines 
under Article III of the Treaty of Peace between the United 
States and Spain, concluded at Paris on December 10, 1898, and 
proclaimed April 11, 1899. The United States be.^an the orgtmi na- 
tion of a civil government in the Philippines with the appoint- 
ment, on April 7, 1900, of the Second Philippine Commission, com- 
posed of five Americans. Civil government was fully established 

on July 4, 1901, when the Honorable William H m&rd Tpft was in- 

2 / 

augurated as the first Civil Governor- 7 of the Philippine Islands, 
and the Commission was reconstituted to consist of five Americans 
and three Filipinos. 

On October 15, 1907, when the first elective Philippine 
Assembly was convened, the legislative authority in the Islands 
was placed in the hands of the Philippine Legislature, which 
consisted of the Commission as the upper house and the Assembly 
as the lower house. The Commission was abolished by the Jones 
Act of August 39, 1216 r 1 which provided for a Philippine Senate 
as the upper house in the Legislature; thus placing legislative 
functions completely in the hands of the representatives of the 
Filipino people. The Governor General remained the chief execu- 

1/ For general ^eri^^i^ 

United States Tariff Commission, Report Ho. 118. seco..a 
?W entitled "United States -Philippic Trade 1 '. 

?/ krsulnt to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act of Feb- 

^ruary 6 Hsos! the title "Civil Governor" was changed to 
"Governor General". 

%l 39 Stat. 545. 



tive officer of the Insular Government. 

On November 15, 1S35, the Government of the Commonwealth 

of the Philippines, possessing almost complete autonomy in 

internal affairs, v;as inaugurated under authority of the Inde- 

1/ 

pendence Act of March 24, 19S4 (the Tydings-KcDuff ie Act).-' 
On the same date a Constitution, drafted and adopted by the 
Filipino people and approved by the President of the United 
States, crme into full effect. Under the provisions of the 
Constitution, the legislative authority s placed in the hands 
of a unicameral le.;islr ture, knom as tht National Assembly, 
and executive pc-ver rras vested in th: President of the Philip- 
pines. Under the Independence Act, the representative of the 
United States in the Philippines "as entitled -/no United States 
High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 

Since the earliest days of tne American occupation, there 
has been a progressive enlargement of the autonomy granted to 
the Philippines, ^ith complete political independence as the 
ultimate objective. In contrast to this development in the 
political sphere, the economic ties, based on trade preferences 
have steadily become stronger. 

-rem Au,u::t 1Z, IS'jc-, until .'arch 8, 1003, trade between 

the United States and the Philippines on a non-preferential 

2/ 

basis. Under the United States Revenue Act of March 8, 1902, 



1/ 48 Stat. 456. See Appendix I. 
2/ 32 Stat. 54. 



-7- 

Philippine products were accorded a reduction of 25% from rates 

specified in the United States tariffs, but no preferences were 

accorded American products entering the Philippines until after 

the passage of the United States Tariff Actr^ and the Fhilip- 

2/ 

pine Tariff Act, - both dated August 5, 1909. That legislation 
marked the beginning of free trade between the two countries, 
subject only to minor restrictions. Reciprocally preferential 
trade would not have been possible prior to that year because 
of a provision in the Treaty of Paris which guaranteed for a 
ten-yepx period (commencing April 11, 1899) to Spanish ships 
and merchandise entering the Philippines the same treatment 
accorded those of the United States. The United Statrs Tariff 
Act of October Z, 1913, removed the few remaining restrictions 
on free trade between the Philippines and the United States. 
Thereafter no important change occurred in the laws governing 
trade relationship until the passage of the Independence Act 
on March 24, 1934. 

The Independence Act, while imposing no restrictions upon 
United States products entering the Philippines , placed restric 
tions upon the quantities of Philippine sugar, coconut oil and 
cordage which could enter the United States free of duty; it 
required, in addition, the imposition by the Philippines, 



1/ 36 Stat. 11. 
2/ 36 Stat. 130. 



"beginning November 15, 1940, of export taxes upon Philippine 

products shipped to the United States; and provided that upon 

the attainment of independence, Philippine products should pay 

the full United States customs duties. The Act also provided 

for a trade conference to make recommendations concerning trade 

relations after "independence. Following the passage of the 

Independence Act, other restrictions in the form of excise taxes 

and quotas \iore placed on sugar and coconut products, "but the 

proceeds of these taxes have been and are being remitted to the 

1/ 

Philippine Government ■ ' The provision in the Independence Act 

with regard to cordage vras superseded by the Cordage Act of 
2/ 

June 14, 1935,-' which, although it increased the duty-free 
quota, made it an absolute quota. 



1/ The t^rm "Pfcilipnine Government ri has been used generally 
throughout this report to designate the government or govern- 
merits "to v/hich reference is made, without differentiation 
among the Insular Government, the Commonwealth aovernmont 
and the independent Government, ~hich have specifically 
mentioned only vrhero the text requires. 

2/ 49 Stat. 340. 



-9- 



5 e Objections to the Provisions, of the Independence Ac t 

Section 17 of the Independence Act provided that the Act was 
not to take effect until accepted by concurrent resolution of the 
Philippine Legislature. Although the Act did not authorize the 
Philippine Legislature to make its acceptance conditional upon 
reservations, that body, in its Resolution of May 1, 1934, ac- 
cepting the Independence Act, included the following passages: 

,r WHEREAS, although the Philippine Legislature believes 
that certain provisions of the said Act need further con- 
sideration, the said Legislature dee;,.s it its duty to ac- 
cept the proffer of independence thus made by the Govern- 
ment of the United, States; 

"(b) And because the President of the United State z 
in his message to Congress on March second, nineteen 
hundred thirty-four, recommending the enactment of the 
said la7? f stated 

ftI I do not believe that further provisions of 
the original law!./ need to be changed at this time. 
Where imperfections or inequalities exist, I am 
confident that both can be correct od after proper 
hearing and in fairness to both peoples- 1 ; 

a statement which gives the Filipino people reasonable 
assurances of further hearing and due consideration of 
their views : . . . ' — > 

Provisions in the earlier Har e-Hawes-C ut t i r.g Act, to which 
the Phi li opine Legislature had taken exception in rejecting that 
Act, and vrhich it had hoped to have changed in the Tydings- 
McPuffie Act, related to 11 immigration, military, and other 



1/ The Eere-Hawes-Cutting Act, 47 Stat. 751. 

2/ House Document No. 400, 74th Congress, 2d Session, page 1. 



-10- 



roaervatioua , powers of the high commissioner , and trade rela- 
tions between the islands and the United States". i/ 

with regard to the Independence Act, the Honorable Manuel L. 
Quezon, then President of the Philippine Senate and Chairman of 
the Philippine Independence B«le ; ;ati6a, in a letter, dated 
March 22, 193^ ( two days before the passage of the Act), to the 
Chairman of the United States Senate Committoe jn Territories and 
Insular Affairs, Senator ^llard S. 5^din t ;? , stated as follows: 

"There are, of course, ether provisions of the bill 
to which we object, but we arc willing to take it as it is 
now, and we have given up any attempt at this time to have 
it in any way amended, because we are relying upon the 
statement made by the President in hie message to Congress, 
March 2, 193U . . . 

"Furthers re, we have seen the attitude of the chair- 
men of both committees of Congress toward the Filipi.. 
people's freedom and welfare, and we hive no doubt that 
upon further investigation, when they shall have found 
that independence can be granted in a much shorter tine 
and that other provisions of the bill need improvement, 
they will so reco-aaend to the Congress. "-' 

Moreover, Vice President John H. Garner, in his speech at 

the Joint Session of the Philippine Legislature on November 12, 

1935 (three days before the inauguration of tho Commonwealth 

Gov eminent) , stated: 

"Our great President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, in send- 
ing the last independence bill to Congress, accompanied it 
with a recommendation that where there were inequalities 
in our trade relations, they should bo adjusted by a Com- 
mission representing both peoples who could arrive at an 
equitable decision which would prove advantageous ±o our 
120,000,000 people and to your 1^,000,000 people. ,u ' 



1/ Senate Document No. 57, Part 1, page 10, 7^th Congress, 1st Session. 
2/ Congressional Record, Volume 73, iferch 22, 153U, No. 6U, page 5237. 
3./ House Eooument No. UOO, page kk, ikth Congress, 2d Session. 



-11- 

The statements quoted evidence a recognition by responsible 
authorities in both countries that certain ,r imperfections or 
inequalities [t might be found in the Independence Act, and, if so, 
that they should be adjusted. 

Steps taken to remove objections 

In the light of these statements?, steps were taken, even 
before the inauguration of the Coirtmonvealth Government, to in- 
vestigate what, if any, 11 imperfect ions or inequalities 11 there 
might be in the provisions of the Independence Act. United 
States Senator Carl Haydon visited the Philippines and prepared 
a report of his findings in the form of a letter, dated August 6, 

1934, addressed to the Honorable Millard B. Tydings* Chairman of 

1/ 

the Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs. - Four 
others, United States Senators Tydin^s, McKellar , McMoo and 
Gibson, appointed on June 16, 1934, as a special committee to 
study the question of "irnperf actions or inequalities 11 of the 
Independence Act, also visited the Philippines for about three 
Y7eeks , beginning December 3, 1934; a:-; a result of which, Senator 
McEellar and Senator Gibson submitted reports to the United 
States Senate 



1/ Senate Document Ho. 130, 74th Congress, 1st Session. 
2/ Senate Document Ko. 57, Parts 1 and 2, 74th Congress, 



1st Session* 



Organiz a tion of the Interdepartmental Co lit, it tee on 
Philippine Affairs 

The Congressional Committee referred to in the preceding 
paragraph, ffhile in the Philippines, suggested to President 
Roosevelt, in a telegram dated December 31, 1934, that th 
Interdepartmental Committee on Philippine Affairs, which was 
then in the process of being org . uld study United 

States-Philippine trade. The Interdepartm ntal mmitl • has, 
since the close of the year 1934, directed studies of Philip- 
pine problems in an endeavor to coordinate the activities of 
the various administrative departments and agencies of the 
United States Government concerned rith Philippine affairs. 
The Committee is not an administrative organization of the 
Government, but representatives of the Departments of State, 
War, Haw, Treasury, Agriculture, and Commerce, and the Tariff 
Commission have participated in its deliberations. It was this 
Committee that recommended the setting up of the Joint Prepara- 
tory Committee on Philippine Affair: . 

Steps taken in preparation for a trade conf'-r^ce 

On April 4, 1935, at a meeting -.rhich pas attended by the 
Honorable Frank Murphy, then Governor General of the Philippines 
the Interdepartmental Committee decided to recommend to the 
President of the United States that he should make public his 
intention to call a Philippine-American trade conference as soon 
as practicable after the inauguration of the Commonwealth Govern 



-13- 



ment. Acting upon this recommendation, the President, on April 10, 

1935, made public the following letter: 

n My dear Governor General: 

ir As you know, consideration is being given by this 
Government to the question of future relations between the 
United States and the Philippines. These relations have 
been the subject of conferences r/hich you and I have had 
during youi visit in Washington. As a result of these 
discussions I contemplate calling the joint trade confer- 
ence provided for in Section 13 of the Ty&ings-MeDuff ie 
Act at as early a date as practicable t if tor the inaugura- 
tion of the Commonwealth government, in order that effec- 
tive measures for promoting mutual Tirade advantages between 
the two countries may be given early consideration. 

"To facilitate the work of the conference I have asked 
ovr Interdepartmental Committee to continue studies already 
begun so that the necessary basic material -rill be avail- 
able when the conference convenes, I trust you Trill also 
be able to inaugurate similar studies in the Philippine 
Islands which will provide pertinent data for considera- 
tion by the conference. 

!1 Sincerely yours, 

"PRAIiXLIN D, ROOSEVELT 11 

Report of the United States Tariff Commission 

In keeping frith the President 1 s announcement, the Inter- 
departmental Committee, on July 13, 1935, desi^ated three 
experts to prep axe material for the contemplated trade con- 
ference: Dr. Frame A. 7Jarin ; ; and Dr. Ben D. Dorf^an, Senior 
Economic Analysts of the United States Tariff Commission, and 
Mr. J. Bartlett Richards, United States Trade Commissioner in 
Manila. As a result of their studies, the United States Tariff 
Commission in January, 1937, published a report under the title 



"United States-Philippine Trade, with Special Reference to the 
Philippine Independence Act and Other Recent Legislation 11 .-^ 
This material has been freely drawn upon by the Joint Prepara- 
tory Committee for incorporation in the present report, 

Philippine Technical Trade Committee's R eport 

vThile studies were being conducted by officials of the 
United States Government, similar preparations wore also bein^ 
carried on in the Philippines. The Governor General of the Phil- 
ippines on July 9, 1935, appointed for this purrosa the Philippine 
Interdepartmental Economic Committee, and a Technical Trade Com- 
mi t tee under the chairmanship of Mr. ienito Has on. The Tech- 
nical Trade Committee created under this Executive Order sub- 
mitted to the President of the Commonwealth on February 17, 1936 t 
a report on Philippine-American trp.de* This report has also been 
used by the Joint Preparatory Committee. 

Organization of the Joint Pr o per at ory Co fitter, or. 
P hil iw i nc Af fairs 

in December, 1936, on the eve of relinauishing his post, 

High Commissioner Prank Murphy caiac to Washington to discuss 

with the President and other officials of the United States 

Government plans for a r consideration of United States-Philippine 

relations. Following these discussions, President Quezon arrived 



1/ United States Tariff Commission Report No. 116, second 
scries, 1937. 

2 1 Philippine Executive Order Ho. 780 of Jul;/ 9, 1935. 



-15- 

in Washington in February, 1937; and, at the request of the 
President of the United States, entered into discussions of 
United States-Philippine problems with the Honorable Francis B. 
Sayre, Assistant Secretary of State and Chairman of the Inter- 
departmental Committee on Philippine Affairs. These discussions 
led to an agreement between President Quezon and Assistant 
Secretary Sayre, which was later approved by President Roosevelt, 
that a committee, to be known as the Joint Preparatory Committee 
on Philippine Affairs, should be created to study trade relations 
between the United States and the Philippines and to recommend a 
program for the adjustment of the Philippine national economy. 
This Committee was constituted on April 14, 1937. Certain de- 
tails in regard to the setting up of the Committee and the nature 
of its duties will be found in an identic letter which Assistant 
Secretary of State Sayre a&dresse on May 24, 1937, to Senator 
Millard E. Tydings and Congressman Leo Kocialkowski."" 



lj See Appendix II. 



-16- 



4, Co'niidti op ' s -ermg \\c7: Vr>nn*— 1 



In its approach to the question of the trad* relations between 
the United States and the Philippines and the adjustment of Philip- 
pine economy, the Committee has followed certain principles, both 
of guidance and of circumscription, which wero laid down in the 
Independence Act of March 24, 1934, and in the agreement of 
March 18, 1937, bet-eon President Quezon and Assistant Secretary 
Sayre, quoted on the first page of this part of the report. 

From an early stage in the discussions with their Philippine 

colleagues, the American members had also in mind a suggestion of 

President Roosevelt that an orderly transition of Philippine 

economy might require a considerable period for a'* juntment — a 

suggestion which, in the course of discussion, was eventually 

e labor at ed i nt o the G o rasa i 1 1 e e 1 s r e c o mme nd at ion for a g r adual 

elimination of trade preferences by the end of the year I960, 

as approved in an exchange of telegrams between President 

2/ 

Roosevelt and President Ctuezor. in I.iarch, 1938.- 



1/ The Committee's terms of reference did not contemplate 

~" recommendations with respect to such questions as the postpone- 
ment of ir.r eoender.ee, the neutralization of the Philippines, and 
the retention or relinquishment of naval reservations. 

2/ The pertinent Daragraphs of a Department of State pre:;:; 

~ released iated April 5, 1938, in regard to this exchange of 
telegrams are as follows: 

"On March President Roosevelt telegraphed to Presi- 
dent Quezon an expression of his feeling that the work of the 
Committee should be pressed to an early and mutually satis- 
factory conclusion. The President recalled that he had already 
rade oublicly known his own readiness, with a view to af forcing 
the Philippines ample opportunity to adjust their economy to 



-17- 

Pundamental among those principles upon which the Committee 
has acted is an acceptance of the fact that the Independence 
Act is a definitive iaahd&te of the Congress providing for tho 
independence of the Philippines and outlining the terms under 
which such independence is to so attained. The provisions of 
that Act were under dircursicr. in the Congress for several years; 
and the Committee has studied and considered the voluminous 
hearings which led up to the enactment of that law. The Com- 
mittee has felt that it would not be Justified, either by its 
terms of reference or on tho ground if practical expediency, in 
recommending any changes in that Act except such as right be 
required to remove "imperfections or inequalities 11 in the cense 



the no n- preferential status of political independence, to ap- 
prove of a general plan by which tne elimination of trade pref- 
erences would proceed by uniform annual accretions of 5 percent, 
from 25 percent at the date of independence; but he indicated 
that, except for certain alleviations which he understood the 
Committee would be prepared to recommend, the export tax pro- 
visions of the Independence Act should remain substantially in- 
tact as constituting a nee cs scry part of the program, of Phil- 
ippine economic adjustment. The President furthermore sug- 
gested that President C^uezon join with him in making public 
their common desire to have the Committee proceed along these 
lines with a view to reaching an early agreement up^n recom- 
mendations which would have the whole-hearted support of both 
sides . 

"In a telegram dated LCarch 25, President Quezon replied 
that he was sending to the Filipino members of the Joint Pre- 
paratory Committee a radiogram to the effect that he had, 
after considering all the attending circumstances , come to 
the definite conclusion that the best interests of the Phil- 
ippines would be promoted by their concurring with the American 
members of the Committee in the plan outlined in the President's 
telegram. " 



-ie- 

in which President Roosevelt used that expression in his message 
to the Congress on March 2, 1934. 

The Committee has also been guided by the fact that its 
terns of reference definitely contemplate that the termination 
of the preferential trade relationship now existing between the 
United States and the Philippines should be brought about at the 
earliest practicable date, consistent with affording the Philip- 
pines a reasonable opportunity to adjust their econocy to a 
position independent of trade preferences in the United States, 

A further d :> mi nan t consider at i m i c h the C lamit t ei has 
had in mind is the imperative nee:' for stability and certainty 
as to the nature of the policies of the United States and the 
Philippines in regard to their future economic relationship, 
and as to the method of effectuating those policies. In the 
absence of a reasmable decree of certainty in this regard, 
various groups, both in the United States and in the Philip- 
pines, may be- expected to continue agitating for changes favor- 
able to themselves in the relationship between the two countries. 
Until the future economic relationship bet -e en the two countries 
is definitely determined, there -/ill be no satisfactory basis 
for the continued economic development of the Philip Lr. a, 
inasmuch as the Phi li poire authorities would find it difficult 
to undertake the task of planning and putting into operation a 
long-range program of economic adjustment which is so necessary 
for the future well-being of their country. 



The Committee recognizes the difficulties of foreseeing 
and evaluating the national and international economic develop- 
ments that will affect the United States and the Philippines 
during the period contemplated by this report, and of prescribing 
practical solutions for the problems involved in the development 
of an independent Philippine state. Jut the situation requires 
that, despite unpredictable factors, some lon^-range plan, how- 
ever broad and general in outline, should be definitely adopted. 
The Committee believes that the program r.-hich it recommends rould 
eliminate much of the existing uncertainty and afford the Phil- 
ippines a reasonable opportunity to make the necessary transition. 



CONFIDENTIAL 



REPORT OF 
THE JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 
ON 

PHILIPPINE AFFAIRS 



PART II 
TRADE RELATIONS 



I 



PART II. TRADE RELATIONS 

1. UNITED STATES-PHILIPPINE TRADE RELATIONS^ 
History of trade relations 

American occupation of the Philippines was not immediately accom- 
panied "by any tariff changes affecting United States-Philippine trade. 
From August 13, 1898, to March 8, 1902, products from the United States 
entering the Philippines, and products from the Philippines entering 

the United States, were treated in each case on the same terms as similar 

:®3[jMifj 2/ 
goods imported from foreign countries. 

The United States Revenue Act of March 8, 1902, granted to imports 

of dutiable goods grown or produced in the Philippines when entering the 

United States, a reduction of 25 percent from the rates specified in the 

United States tariff. Products of the United States entering the 

1/ This part of the Committee's report is bas^d on, and is in part a 
reproduction of, the United States Tariff Commission's report No. 118, 
second series, 1937, entitled "United States-Philippine Trade - With 
Special Reference to the Philippine Independence Act and other Recent 
Legislation." The statistical information, however, has been Drought up 
to a more recent date than that contained in the aforementioned report. 

Throughout this part of the Committee's report, the terms "imports 
and "exports" are used for convenience to designate shipments between the 
United States and the Philippines, although these terms are technical^ 
incorrect, inasmuch as the Philippines and the United States are not as 

7 VZX Torte use Cr of the United States Ar.y and Navy .nd the 
BBMt were admitted free of duty, irrespective of their 
origin* in the beginning of American occupation After Aug. 5 , 1909 the 
Philippine Government accorded exemptions on ^ supplies only if tney 

* * ji j> . , TTmi + oH States or its possessions* me unxt^u 
were imported from the State. P on thgir 

States Army and Navy paid Philippine duties ior * 

imports from countries other thar ^^^^> r ^ 2f 1929, 

a ruling by the Comptroller General oi ™ e J"^ hat dat the 

the United States Army ceased - k ^ C ™^ n ^S January 1923. 
United States Navy having ceased making s jc - * * right 
The Philippine Government, however ^contends 
to collect duties on the aforementioned imports. 



Philippines were not accorded preferential tariff treatment at that time. 17 
The Revenue Act of 1902 also postponed the application of the United 
States coastwise shipping laws to the Philippine trade, thus permitting 
vessels of any flag to carry goods betveen the United States and the 
Philippines. 

Reciprocal free trade, subject t? minor restrictions, was first 
instituted between the United States And the Philippines by the provisions 
of the Unitea States Tariff Act and the Philippine Tariff Act, both dated 
August "5, 1909. The former imposed rtstrictions upon tht annual quanti- 
ties of Philippine sugar end tobacco products which mighi enter the 
United States duty-free; and tt limited tht n. ximum content, of non- 
Philippine or non-United it' ta-; r. trials which night bo embodied in 
Philippine aanufneturtss if taey v.^re to be admissible duty free into the 

2/ 

United States, to T:C percent of their total value. Both the United 
States and the Philippine Tariff Acts specif ici lly exempted rice from 
duty-free treatment in either country; and they maae duty-free trade in 



1/ any concessions tu American gooas v<uld have had to be extended to 
Spanish goods, since the United btattS agreed in Article IV of the Treaty 
of Paris to "adn.it Spanish ships ana merchandise to the *** Islands on the 
sane terms as ships and merchandise of the United States" for a 10-year 
period uating* from April 11, 1399. 

2] The United States coastwise shipping lavs have never been applied to 
the Philippines. Under Section 21 iz the Merchant Marine net of June 5, 
1920, however, these laws can be extended to the Philippines by 

Executive action. . 

3/ This percentage of maximum omissible forc-ip content an au.y-Xree 
gooas was originally suggested by the Connecticut Tobacco cowers ' Asso- 
ciation to be applicable to tapper tobacco, for the purpose of preventing 
the use of other than American wrapper tobacco on cigars permitted duty- 
free entrance into tha United States. The ll« it .tion, hoyar, was 
enacted to be applicable to -11 classes of Philippine exports to the 
United States which were not admissible free of auty when anterea fr,rr, 
other countries. 



other commodities condition:.! upon their receiving no drawback of custom 
duty upon leaving the Philippines or the United States. The Philippine 
Tariff Act further provided that export duties would be abolished on 
shipments made to the United States. 

The United States Tariff Act of October 3, 1913, modified only 
slightly the reciprocal free-trade relations between the Philippines and 
the United States. The quantity limitations upon duty-fret sugar and 
tobacco products specified in the previous act were removed, inasmuch as 
they had never been even closely approximated . The provision that rice 
should not move free of duty between the Philippines and the United States 
was also eliminated; and all Philippine experts, irrespective of 
destination, were exempted from export duties. 

Until 1934-, trade relations between the United States und the 
Philippines continued on substantially the same tariff te:sis as they 
were when the United States Tariff Act of 1913 first became effective* 
The United, States Tariff Acts of September 21, 1922, and June 17, 1930, 
introduced no modifications of importance. The Philippine Tariff Act 
of 1909 has never been superseded, ana' has been modified only slightly by 
subsequent United States legislation and by several acts of the 
Philippine Legislature. With few exceptions, present Philippine tariff 
schedules and rates are the same as those which were in force in 1909. 
Inasmuch as many of the Philippine duties are specific, their ad valorem 
equivalents have changed considerably with the narked price shifts which 
have occurred since thkt year . 



Commencing in 1934, Congress passed several laws which have n.odified 
the trade relations between the United States and the Philippines and 
which, unless altered, will modify .then, much more narkedly in the future. 
The most important of these is the Philippine Independence Act, also 
known as the Tydings-McDuff ie Act (Public-No. 127-73d Congress), It v.as 
approved by the President on March 24, 1934 was accepted by the 
Philippine Legislature on Kay 1, 1934. and the traae provisions of the 
act became effective on Novenber 15, 1935. These latter will be dis- 
cussed in detail in subsequent paragraphs of this section. 

Shortly after the enactment of the Independence Act, but before it 

became effective, Congress passed the J ones-Co:; ti£an Act, the Revenue Act 

of 1934, and the Cordage Act of L935. The first of these laws, which 

was passed on May 9, 1934, authorised the imposition of "absolute" limits 

on the amounts of sugar vaich mipht be imported into the United States 

1/ 

from the Philippines. The Jones-Costigan Act remained in operation for 
3 years, ending May 9, 1937, but quota provisions of the act were con- 
tinued - first for the remainder of the calendar year 1937 by a law 

j t irt or,r. i.+nr- far 3 a ore years (ending v/ith 1940), 

approved June 19, 1936; anc later, loi z iwit; 

under the provisions :S the Sugar Act approved September 1, 1937. The 

> u in 1QV nrovidee oconr other things, 
Revenue Act of 1934, approved May 10, 1-J;<., pi t 



1/ I^orts ^ these »™~»tf^SZ&tt SS 

President of the United States P™^Jf* 0 ^ be reduced on June 8, 
sugar from foreieo countries other than Cud. . 

1934, fron. 2.5 eents to 1.875 «*P* 2 cents to 1.5 cents 
automatically reduced the ouoy , vU sug 3 ^ uton Trude cree- 
per pound. On Sept. 3, 1934, ihen tne una i ov , ere d to 0.9 
Kent became effective, the duty on Cuban 9t> applicable to other 
cent per pound, but no changes were mc-ac- in tne rate, p. 



foreign su^ir. 



for a processing tax of 3 cents per pound on coconut oil expressed from 
Philippine copra either in the Philippines or in the United States, and 
for the remittance of the proceeds of the tax to the Philippine Treasury. 
This revenue act was modified in soiLe particulars by the Revenue Acts of 
1935 and 1936. The Cordage Let of June 14, 1935, doubled the cordage 
quota provided for in the Independence Act, but changed it fron. a duty- 
free to an "absolute" quota. The Cordage Act, which would otherwise 
have expired on May 1, 1933, was extended for 3 years thereafter by 
Presidential proclamation dated January 26, 1938; upon expiration of that 
period, cordage exports will be governed by the provisions of the 

i/ 

Independence Act. 

With respect to internal revenue taxes, American goods entering the 
Philippines enjoy no preferential position over like gooes produced in 
the Philippines or imported fron, other countries; and Philippine gooas 
entering the United States, "1th the recent exception of copra and coco- 
nut ail, occupy a similar nonprcferential tax status in the United Status. 
Since the passage of the United States Tariff *ct of 1909, all United 
States internal revenue collected on Philippine products consumed in the 
United States has been remitted to the Philippine Treasury. The 
Philippines, however, makes no similar remittances to the United States. 

Congress has never taken any steps inlying tariff assimilation of 
the Philippines. Philippine tariff classifications, rates rf duty, and 
methods of determining dutiable values differ widely from those employed 
by the United States. Provisions for "flexible", antidumping, counter- 
vailing, or ontingent duties, such as are found in the United States 



1/ Secti m 6(c) and (e) . 



tariffs, have never been incorporated in Philippine tariffs. The 

Philippines, moreover, his always been permitted to retain all of its 

tariff revenue for its own use. Although the United States Congress has 

reserved the sole right to legislate respecting tariff relations between 

the Philippines and the United States, the Philippines s5.nce 1902 has had 

the authority to enact any other tariff legislation, subject to the final 

approval or veto by the President of the United Status. Control over 

Philippine tariff legislation, under the provisions of the Independence 

Act, will remain unaltered until July 4., 19-46, when full legal control 

will revert to the independent Philippine Government. 

Trade provisions of Independence Act 

It is convenient to consider the trade provisions of the Independence 

Act with respect to three time intervals: (1) the first 5 years of the 

Commonwealth period, dating from November 15, 1935, to November 15, 1940; 

(2) the second 5 years of the C ;mmonvealth period, dating from November 

15, 1940, to July L, 1946 j and (3) the period commencing with July 4, 

1/ 

1946, trie date on which the Philippines will become independent. 

During the first 5-year period, free trade between the United States 
and the Philippines is t\ continue on the same basis as heretofore, ex- 
cept that limitations are placed upon the maximum amounts of sugar, 
coconut oil, and coreagc which are permitted to enter the United States 
duty-free. Any shipments in excess of the quotas, according to the act, 
are to be assessed the full United States auties. The effects of this 
provision with respect to all three conaiodities, however, have been 



1/ The so-called second 5-year period is actually almost 8 months in 
excess of 5 years. 



variously modified by subsequent legislation. These mortifications, 
which were referred to in the preceding section, will be discussed in 
detail in subsequent sections dealing with each of the eoiurodities in 
question* 

During the second 5 years of the ConjLonneelth, the s&n.e duty-free 
quotas will continue to be applicable with respect to the sugar, coconut 
oil, and cordage shipped to the United States* But the Philippines will 
be obliged to assess progressively increasing export taxes gainst these 
■met dl otiier exports to the United States which are not admissible into 
the United States free of duty when imported froiL ather countries. These 
export taxes, the proceeds cf rhicll v ill v c to the Philippine Treasury, 
will amount to 5 percent of the prevailing United States duties during 
the sixth year of the Com onwealth period end v;ill be increased by an 
additional 5 percent each succeeding year, until in the tenth or last 
year they will -iiucunt to 25 nercent of the then existing United States 
duties. 

No provision is n.ade in the Independence Act for permitting or re- 
quiring the curtailment of imports of United States goods into the 
Philippines during the Co&itom/ealth perixl, and the Philippines has no 
legal power to restrict its imports of United States goods during this 
period by means of quotas or tariffs. 

After the Philippines obtains its complete independence >n July 4* 
1%6, it will no longer be required to levy export taxes upon shipments 
to the United States. At that time, on the basis of present legislation, 



1/ Actually the 23 percent duty will be applicable for acre than 1 year 
Nov. 15, 1944-, to July 4, 194-6. 



8 



the full United States duties will be collected on all Puilip^Ine goods 
arriving in the United States; £nd ^recun^bly the full Philippine duties 

1/ 

will, be collected on rail United States ^ooas arriving in the Philippines . 

Anticipated effects of the Inuc jendeace Act .a-ovi-sicna on Pailiouino 
economy 

It uoes not i^ppeciTjOn the basis of existing economic conditions in 
the world, that adequate provision has been made in the Inuependence Act 
to permit the realization of tee economic objectives for the Pnilippines 
sought in the act. On the b,.sis of the present provisions of the act, 
a number of important enterprises in the Philippines will be forced to 
liquidate much more rapidly than new enterprises can probably be 
developed to replace then,. C.',.rt,.in inuu«, trios exporting primarily to 
the United States will be obliged to discontinue or to curtail their 
operations, ana so likewise rill a number of others directly dependent 
upon then,. The Philippines may fine it difficult, if not impossible, to 
develop quickly new varieties of exports which it can market either _ 
the United States or elsewhere, without granting temporary subsidi^'to 
private producers or without obtaining tariff concessions from foreign 
countries. With the loss of preferential treatment for its products in 
the United States, the Philippines will be obliged to fashion an economy 
which will be much more self-sufficient than ^ c p^ent .one. 

. The important export industries in tne Philippines (on the basis of 
existing economic conditions in the world) will be variously affected by 
the progressive expert taxes. It appears likely that these taxes %iU ^ 

1/ No existing legislati on specifically provides that United States pro- 
y no exib-oing j..^ : ftM-ii r,ft P -r inaeoenaence. 



ducts will becon,e ^^M^^m^^flmnA .xJrt United 

It wjr be as su»ed, ^^h^t lll ?l iiloine Jooda become subject to 
States goods from 'Uty 11 «*t tn*t time r.^j-j. t 

United States duties. 



serve primarily to lessen the wo. • L.Meness, but not the volume, of the 
exports of sugar to the United States during the Commonwealth period. 
What the position of the Philippine sugar industry will be when the full 
United States duties become applicable in 194-6 is largely indeterminate, 
although, on the basis of present sugar prices, the future of the 
industry dots not appear promising. 

It is also reasonably certain that with the loss of preferential 
treatment in the United Status market after independence, the Philippines 
will be obliged either to curtail sharply, or to discontinue altogether, 
its exports of such commodities as coconut oil, cig f -rs and other tobacco 
products, embroideries, and pearl buttons. Evan before the Philippines 
becomes independent, it is prob'.blfc th.at, because of the export taxes, 
it will cease exporting to the United State s any substantial quantities 
of these products. 

A number of other export industries in the Philippines, although 
likely to be adversely affected by the provisions of the Independence Act, 
probably will not be forced out of existence, assuming the c .ntinuance 
.;f present economic conditions in the world. C range, desiccated coco- 
nut, straw hats, end cftnned pineapples may be able to enter the United 
States in substantial quantities even after the full auties become applic- 
able. Abaca (manila hemp), should it rem- in on the United States free 
list, will not be directly affected by the provisions of the act; and 
"Philippine mahogany", on the basis of present United States legislation, 
will become subject to very small export taxes during the second half of 
the Commonwealth period and to a small United States excise tax after 



10 



independence. The status of copra, as long as it remains on the United 
States free list and ; s long at. the present United States excise tux laws 
remain in force, vil' 1 not be adversely affected uuring the Comnonw t ;alth 
period; but it may be adversely affected nfti-r independence, should 
coconut oil derived from Philippine copra become subject to the present 
non-preferential United States excise tax rate. Le.\f tobacco will 
probably continue to find its chief markets outside the United States j 
and gold will probably continue to be acceptable without serious restric- 
tions either in the United States or elsewhere. The survival ability 
of those Philippine export industries which do not now depend on prefer- 
ential tariff trer.tn.ent from the United States nay, however, be seriously 
impaired as a consequence ;;f heavier t~xes which the new Philippine 
G- .vernment may find necessary. 

Anticipated effects of the Inaeccndence Act pro visions -.n United 
States economy 

The provisions of the Independence Act make it practically certain 
that the Philippines will decrees, in importance as a market for United 
States exports and that it will became less attractive as i field for 
investments by Unitea States citizens. 

Although Philippine tariffs cannot be applied against Unitea States 
products until after independence, exports from the Unitea States t, the 
Philippines will orobably decline as soon as Philippine export taxes come 
into operation. With a curtailment in exports, t* Philippines must 
perforce restrict its imports. When United States products lose their 
Preferential tariff position in the Philippines in 19.6, there is likely 
to be a further ,nc even more pronounced decline in Unitea States experts 



11 



to the Philippines. With a shrinkage in United States-Philippine 
trade, there will likewise be a lessened demand for services such as 
those now being rendered by American shipping agencies, banks and 
insurance companies. 

Certain immediate economic gains to the United States Treasury 
will probably accrue from the abandonment of duty-free trade between 
the United States and the Philippines. Duties will be collected on 
various goods - notably sugar - coming from the Philippines, or on 
similar goods if purchased from alternate foreign suppliers. In any 
event, the remittance of the proceeds of United States excise taxes on 
Philippine sugar, coconut oil and cigars, if such taxes then be in 
effect, will no doubt cease when the Philippines becomes independent. 
Private American interests, however, will be injured in varying degree 
with the reduction in United States exports to Philippines. 



12 



2* TREND AND CHARACTER OF UNITED STATES-PHILIFPTIvE TRADE 
Trade trend 

After the American occupation of the Philippines in 139^, Philippine 
trade developed rapidly, particularly with the United States. Of the 
total value of the combined inport and export tradi of the Phili ooi nes , 
the United States accounted for 11 percent in lyOO, 4! percent in 19 10, 

1/ 

65 percent in 1920, and 71 percent in 1937. 

The value of Philippine exports to the United States has generally 
been much in excess of thu value of Philippine in ports fron. the Unit- 
States, The Philippines had debit tr.-de U.lanncs (excesses of iT.pcrts 
over experts) with the United Stutcs for only a fcr y„- rs following the 
establishment of free trade in 1909, and for 2 yu:rj curing the period 
of the V.'oric V.v.r. Since than, Its credit tr- d. b-.l-.nceG (. : xcess-.,s of 
exports over inports) with United St-atus have increased substantially, 
the lance for 1937 having been tat highest en record. 

The status of the balance of trades between the- United States and the 
Philippines has frequently be^n regarded as ~n index of the arof it- bleness 
of tiie trade to the one Gentry or the ^ther. Th- country aaving the 
credit balance been considered the gainer, ana the other country the 
loser. This inference, hv.',ver, is net warranted. Thu usu .1 excess 
of imports over exports in the trade >f the United Stutea with the Philip- 
pines ha, merely been a phase in th , triangular (or polymgute) tn.de in 
which the United States has paid for this excess :f Up** largely by 
exporting goods to other countries In greater value then it bus Sported 



— TT^— T» U nim ti m of the United Status in v, ::r ; ,,rt traee of the 
y The ^.ti^ip^i n strictly comparable with 

United Stated Government sex vicj, - - /t m e 
imports since July 1, 1910. 



13 



from them. Those countries, in turn, have exported greater values of 
goods to the Philippines than they have imported from it. The status 
of the merchandise balance of trade between the Philippines and the 
United States, therefore, is of no significance per se in respect of the 
gains or losses arising to either country. Moreover, the trade balance 
of the Philippines with the United States not only affects, and is 
affected by, the trade balances which both countries have with all other 
countries, but it is influenced also by the extent to which gold ship- 
ments, service items, capital movements and other factors enter into the 
trade of the Philippines and the United States with each other and with 
ail other countries. 

During the decade ending with 1937, as shown in table 1, the Philip- 
pines shipped to the United States between 75 and 37 percent of its total 
annual exports, and obtained from the United States between 59 and 65 
percent of its total annual imports. During the past several years, the 
United States has declined in relative importance, bit has increased in 
absolute importance, both as a supplier of Philippine imports and, more 
especially, as a market for Philippine exports. 



Table l.~ Trade of the Philippines with all countries and with continental 

United States, 1928-37 

(General exports and imports, excluding gold and silver ore, 

bullion, and coin) 

♦ 

(In thousands of dollars) 



Year 



.To conti- 
To all ; nent al 
countries', Un ited 
. States 



1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 (Frel.) 



Philippine exports 



Philippine imports 



155,055 
164,447 
133,167 
103,972 

95,338 
105,771 

110,404 
94,246 

136,445 

153,278 



115,536 
124,465 
105,342 
83,422 
82,6^8 
91,313 
91,844 
74,936 
107,525 
122,755 



Ratio of : 
experts to : 
the United : 
States to ; 
total exports: 



| From all 
[countries 



Percent 

75 
76 
79 
80 

87 

86 

83 
80 

79 
80 



134,657 
147,160 
123,093 
99,179 

79,395 
67,361 
83,607 

35,524 
101,126 
109,026 



From con- 
t inental 
United 
States 



83,858 
92,593 
78,183 
62,140 
51,298 
43,5/,o 
54,376 
54,367 
61,497 
63,302 



Ratio of 
imports from 
the United 

States to 
total imports 



percent 



Excess of exports (+) , 
excess of imports (-) 



Trade 
with all 
countries 



62 : 


: +20,398 


63 : 


: +17,237 


64 : 


: +10,074 


63 : 


: +4,793 


65 : 


: +15,943 


65 1 


: +31,090 


65 


: +26,797 


64 : 


: +8,722 


61 ! 


: +35,319 


59 : 


: +44,252 



Trade with 
continental 

United 

States 



+31,728 

+31,872 

+27,159 

+21,282 

+31,350 

+47,773 
+37,463 

+20,569 

+46,028 

+59,453 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Castes. Peso values have been converted into dollar 
values at the ratio - 1 peso = $0.50. 



15 

The united States market for Philippine products 

Philippine exports to the United States in 1937, as shown in table 2, 
were valued at $122,755,000. This constituted over SO percent of the 
value of the aggregate Philippine exports to all countries. In the pre- 
ceding yea]j Philippine exports to the United Status amounted to 
$107,534,000 or 79 percent of the total to all countries. 

Sugar lias been for a number of years by € r the i«08t irjpprt*nt txport 
to thu United States. Of the total value of all exports from the Philip- 
pines to the United States, sugar accounted for $57,611,000, or 47 percent, 
in 1937, and for ^61,927,000, or $3 percent, in 1936. Practically ail 
Philippine exports of sugar products, with the exception of small quanti- 
ties of molasses, sirup, and alcohol, go to the United Stat' . . 

The United Stages provides both absolutely and relatively a somewhat, 
smaller market for Philippine coconut produces than for sugar products. 
Practically all of the coconut oil and desiccated coconut, and about two- 
thirds of the xportud from the Philippines generally go to the 
United States. The proportion of copra bold in the- United States in 
1937 was exceptionally high, amounting to 90 percent of the total. About 
one-half of the total exports of copra cake and meal have been sold in 
the United States in the last few years, principally because of the short- 
age of foodstuffs in that market; in earlier years, the bulk of the cake 
and meal was exported to Europe. Philippine exports of vegetable butter 
(margarine) and vegetable lard to the United States have also increased 
in recent years, although the shipments of the latter were less in 1937 
than in 1936; and the proportions which these shipments constituted of 
the total exports of the two products to all countries were less in 1937 
than in 1936, being 22 percent for vegetable butter and 27 percent for 
vegetable lard in tia. former year. 



16 

The Philippines has exported to the United States in recent years 
a relatively constant share of its total exports of abaca, and a declining 
share of its total exports of cordage. In 1937, it shipped to that 
market 32 percent of the value of its abaca exports, and 35 percent of 
the value of its cordage exports, as compared with 59 percent for the 
latter in 1934- Practically all exports of Philippine embroideries have 
always gone to the United States. Exports of tobacco products to the 
United States in recent years have varied from about one-half to two- 
thirds of the "Dotal value of such exports, the share being 66 percent in 
1937. 

Other Philippine experts for which the United States provides a rela- 
tively large market are canned pineapples, timb_r ond lumber, chrome ore, 
hats, cutch, pearl buttons, :ind gums :nd resins. All, or practically all, 
of the exports of canned pineapples, cutch, and pearl buttons regularly 
go to the United States. In 193 7 , 32 percent of the total value of 
lumber and timber exported, 32 percent of the hats, and 61 percent of 
the gums and resins went to the United States, Iron ore, maguey, hides 
and skins, buntal fiber, ~nd molasses and sirup ere the only Philippine 
exports of any considerable importance for which the entire, or practically 
the entire, foreign market is outside the United States. 

The above mentioned products accounted, in 1937, for 96 percent of 
the total value of Philippine exports to all countries, and for 99 percent 
of the total value of the exports to the United States, the remaining ex- 
ports consisting of a wide variety of miscellaneous products. The corres- 
ponding figures for 1936, are, respectively, 95 percent and 96 percent. 

Table 2 shows the principal exports from the Philippines to all 
countries and to the United States in 1936 and 1937. 



17 



Table 2.- Values of principal Philippine exports to the world, and 
values and proportions of totals exported to the United 
States, 1936 and 1937* (Preliminary) 1/ 



Commod ity 



Sugar ■ 

Abaca 

Coconut oil 

Copra 

les located coconut - 
Tobacco and products 
Timber and lumber — 

Lubroiderios 

Copra cake and tneal- 

Canned pineapples 

Cordage 

Iron ore 

Maguey 

Chrome ore 

Vegetable butter 

(margarine) 

Hats 

Gums and resins 

Cutch 

Hides and skins 

Buntal fiber 

Molasses and sirup - 

Pearl buttons 

Vegetable lard 

All other 

Total 



(In thousands of dollars) 



1936 



Total 



61,937 
17,089 
13,789 
15,000 
4,397 
5,245 
3,100 
4,192 
1,830 
502 
1,199 
1,432 
1,058 
154 
336 

538 
337 
323 
145 
341 
252 

219 
450 
6,271 



136,445 



To the 
United 
States 



61,927 
5,337 

13,137 
9,772 

4,353 
2,562 
1,190 

4,18/:. 

1,034 
501 
450 

148 
118 
103 

480 
230 
323 



110 
219 
340 
A, 328 



107,525 



Ratio of (jcports 
to the U.S. to: 
total exports! 



Percent 
100 

31 

95 

65 

99 

49 

38 
100 

57 
100 

33 

u 

77 
31 

82 
68 
100 
2 

43 
100 
76 
77 

79 



1937 



Total 



57,706 
21,640 
20,526 
15,985 
6,347 
4,983 
3,943 
3,700 
2,900 
1,673 
1,06 
1,326 
1,087 
771 
513 

467 
375 
343 

319 
301 
276 
275 
248 
6.133 



153,278 



To the 
United 
States 



57,611 
6,851 
20,174 
14,425 
6,304 
3,290 
1,263 
3,631 
1,419 
1,673 
496 
8 
39 
703 
113 

383 
231 
343 
9 

43 
274 
66 
^340 



122,755 



Ratio of exports 
to the U.S*.to 
total export s 



1/ The exports are exclusive of gold bullion and ore. 
Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



Percent 

32 
OS 

r O 
99 

(-6 

99 
49 
100 
35 

1 

4 

91 
22 

82 
61 
100 
3 

16 
100 
27 
22 



80 



1 

1 



18 

* 

The United States purchased from the Philippines in 1936 goods valued 

* 1 
at #101,715,365, or 4.2 percent of the United States total imports. In 

that year-, the Philippines ranked seventh in importance among United 
States suppliers. Of the United States total imports of the following 
specified commodities fron, all countries in 1936, the Philippines supplied, 
on the basis of value, 99 percent of the major coconut proaucts, 80 per- 
cent of the tobacco manufactures, 33 percent of the sugar, 87 percent of 
the sawed cabinet woods (partly dressed and other than mahogany), and 98 
percent of the embroidered cotton wearing apparel, 
The Philippine market for United States products 

Imports into the Philippines from the United States :n 1937, as shown 
in tabic 3, amounted to $63,302,000 or 53 percent of the total value if 
imports from all countries. The principal import from the United States 
consisted of iron and steel products, valued at $14,071,000, or 22 percent 
of the total value it all imports fron. the United States. These in ports 
also represented about 73 percent of Philippine imports sf such pro- 
ducts from all countries. The second largest import fron the United 
States consisted of cotton goods, amounting to $7,653,000 and insti- 
tuting U percent of tne value of all imports of cotton goods. Win- 
era! oil ranked third in instance, and the United States supplied 75 
Percent of the total imported from all countries; automobiles and 
.arts (exclusive of rubber tires) ranked fourth, with the United States 



P 



the United State3. inj.t> + c4.~4.~a in^much as this latter 

\ ■ p n y pm limine exports to the United States, in^smic.i j * „ 
above for Philippic ^xpox U ited stute8 impoT t aata for 

was obtained from Philippine statistics . 
1937 are not yet a va liable. 



19 



supplying 99 percent of the total imported from all countries. Tobacco 
products were next, the imports from the United States accounting for 99 
percent of the total from all countries. Electrical machinery, rubber 
and manufactures, imprinted paper, chemicals and drugs, and wheat flour 
ranked next in importance among imports from the United States. Other 
important Philippine imports of which the United States was a major sup- 
plier in 1937 were leather and manufactures, silk and rayon and manu- 
factures thereof, dairy products, fruits, end nuts, vegetables, ferti- 
lizers, meat products, fish products, and glass and glassware. Vegetable 
fibers (other than cotton) and mrnufactures thereof constituted the only 
important import of which the United States was not a mr jor supplier. 

The above-mentioned articles accounted in 1937 for 79 percent of the 
total value of Philippine imports from all countries and for 32 percent 
of the total value cf the imports from the United States. The corres- 
ponding figures for 1936 are, respectively, 79 percent and 83 percent. 
Table 3 shows the principal imports into the Philippines from all coun- 
tries and from the United States in 1936 and 1937. 



■JO 



Tabls 3. 



- Values of principal Philippine imports from all countries, 
and values and proportions of totals imported from the 
United States, 1936 and 1937 (Preliminary) 



ft 



(In thousands of dollars) 



Commodity 



1936 



1937 



Total ; 


.Prom the ! 
' United j 
J States j 


Ratio of: 
imports: 
from the: 
U.S. to : 
total : 
imports: 


+ 

Total [ 


.From the! 
, United ', 
States '. 


Ratio of 
imports 
•from the 
•U.S. to 
total 
imports 






Percent: 






Percent 


16,016 . 
15,268 
7,163 


: 12,291 i 
: 6,782 : 
: 6,093 : 


: 77 : 
! 44 : 
: 85 : 


19,340 : 
17,454 : 
6,502 : 


14,071 : 
7,658 : 
4,859 : 


73 
44 

75 


4, 272 
3,950 
4,069 
3,565 


: 4,255 
: 1,547 
: 1,222 
: 3,516 


: 100 : 
: 39 ; 
: 30 : 
: 99 i 


■4,610 : 
: 4,102 : 
: 3,719 i 
: 3,670 . 


4,566 : 
: 1,574 : 
! 959 : 
; 3,626 : 


99 
38 
26 
. 99 


2,915 
2,882 
2,266 


: 2,520 
: 842 
: 1,475 


! 86 
: 29 
: 65 


: 3,427 : 
i 3,098 : 
: 2,870 


: 2,908 : 
: 1,124 : 
: 1,891 ! 


! 85 
: 36 
: 66 


9 IRQ 

2,235 


: 1,996 


00 

: 89 


: 2,271 


1 £77 
: 1,957 


■ 66 

: 86 


1,941 
1,529 
2,136 
1,691 
1,259 
1,443 
1,417 
753 
21,567 


: 52 
: 784 
: 1,304 
: 834 ' 
: 1,173 
: 892 : 
: 1,074 
: 319 
: 10,673 


! 3 

: 51 
: 61 

: A3 

: ^3 
: 62 
: 76 
: 42 
: 


: 2,072 
: 1,780 
: 1,752 
: 1,751 
: 1,493 
: 1,321 
: 1,196 
: 1,025 
: 22,719 


: 62 
: 536 
: 703 
: 742 
: 1,359 
: 631 
: 762 
: 314 
: 11,124 


i 3 
: 30 
: 40 
: 42 
: 91 
: 48 
: 64 
: 31 
: 49 


101,126 


: 61,497 : 


: 1 


: 109, 026 


: 63,302 


: 58 



Iron &nd st^el manufactures — 

Cotton goods — 

Mineral oil . 

Automobiles and parts (exclu- 
sive of rubber tires) — 

.Vheat flour 

Dairy products 

Tobacco products — — 

Electrical machinery, appara- 
tus and appliances 

Silk j rayon and manufacturer - 

Paper 3 unprinted — — — - — - 

Chemicals, drugs, dyes and 

medicines — — 

India rubber and. manufactures 
Vegetable fibers and manufac- 
tures (other th: n cotton) 

Fish and fish products 

Fertilizers ~ 

Vegetables ■ ■ 

leather and manufactures 

feat products 

Fruits and nuts 

Glass and glassware — 

AH other - 

Total — 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs* 



21 

The Philippines ranked ninth among the principal export markets for 
United States products in 1936, exports to the Philippines in that year 
having been valued at $60,243,754 or 2.5 percent of the total exported to 
all countries. On the basis of the United States Foreign Commerce and 
Navigation's group classifications of commodities, the Philippines ranked 
as follows among the world customers of the United States in 1936:^ It 
occupied fifth place as a buyer of animal and vegetable products, except 
fibers and wood (groups 00, 0, 1, and 2 combined), of which it purchased 
$14,369,799 fur the year. These goods are composed largely of manufac- 
tured or processed farm products. As a buyer of all types of textiles 
(group 3), of which it purchased $7,950,872, it ranked tenth. It was the 
fourteenth most important buyer of wood and paper products (group 4) , of 
which it purchased $1,754,685; the fourteenth, of nonmetallic minerals 
(group 5), $6,155,527; the ninth, of metals and manufactures, except 
machinery and vehicles (group 6), $7,761,678; the fourteenth, of machinery 
and vehicles (group 7), $11,928,165; the fourth, of chemicals and related 
products (group 8), $5,741,371; and fourth, of miscellaneous products 
(group 9), $4,081,657. 

In 1936, the Philippines ranked first or second among the export 

markets of the United States for the following articles or groups of 

articles, exports of which to the Philippines were valued at $100,000 or 

2/ 

more for the year. 

1/ Source: Foreign Commerce and Navigation of the United States, 1936. 
2/ The Philippines also ranked first or second among the export markets of 
the United States for a large number of other products, the value of which 
r-anged between $50,000 and $100,000 in 1936; these products were: Boots 
andshoes, cut outer soles; pickles; ketchup and other tomato sauces; 
chccolate roasted coffee; confectionary other than chocolate; paper boxes 
and cartons; sanitary closet bowls; plaster of paris manufactures; iron or 
steel sashes and frames; cast iron screwed pipe fittings; cast iron soil 
pipe and fittings; woven wire fencing; v/oven vare^ screen cloth;^teel cast- 
ings: 
spade: 
etc, 

pianos, & pracils7otter' ttan meChanicSl/ shot shells; and toothbrushes. 




22 



Table 4, - United States exports to Philippines of selected domestic 
commodities for which the Philippines ranked first or second 
among United &tates exports markets, I936 



Commodity 



Cotton manufactures, total 

Cigarettes 

Rubber and manufactures 

Steel sheets, galvanized 

Wheat flour, wholly of United States wheat 

Dairy products 

Nitrogenous fertilizer materials 



Explosives, fuses and blasting caps — 

Sewing machines for domestic use 

Toilet preparations 

Educational text books, bound 

Soaps 

Canned sardines 



Ready mixed paints, stains and enr.mels 

Cornstarch and corn flour 

Chewing tobacco, plug and other 

Coffee, green 

Malt liquors (beer, ale, stout, etc.) 

Steel bars other than iron bars, and concrete re- 
inforcement bars 

Internal combustion engines, diesel and semi- 

diesel 

Beef and veal, fresh or frozen 

7/ire rope and wire strand 

Upper leather (except patent), cattle side, 

grain, other than black 

Sugar mill machinery other than c^ne mills 

Glucose (corn sirup) 

Confectionary, chocolate ~ 

Welded galvanized pipe, steel 

Canned pork 

Cocoa, pov/dered 

Canned sausage 7 

Household refrigerators, except electric 
Salves and ointments for coughs, colds, 



etc. 



Value 



16,481,731 
3,651,557 
2,057,729 
1,896,706 
1,573,210 
1,164,713 
1,112,093 
946,333 
927,183 
673,856 
' 439,145 
476,981 
410,376 
334,366 
291,789 
287,564 
264,288 

255,929 
236,556 

225,279 

200,610 
193,818 
138,739 

176,405 
169,911 
142,274 
133,013 
125,869 
122,670 
121,086 
120,163 
113,239 
112,524 



Rr nk ?l' 



-P-i 



1L 



2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 

1 



1 

2 
2 

2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
I 
1 
2 
2 



1/ Based on value. 
Source: Foreign Commerce and Navigation of the United States. 



23 

Economic aspects of duty-free trade 

The existing structure of the economy in the Philippines is in con- 
siderable degree the result of the free- -trade relations which have existed 
between the two areas for the past quarter of a century. This relation- 
ship has created opportunities for the Philippines to sell in the United 
States, free of duty, much larger quantities of such products as sugar, 
coconut oil, tobacco products, cordage, embroideries, and pearl buttons 
than it would have bden able to .sell in the ibsence of preferential 
trade relations „i/ In consequence, the- tendency has been for the Philip- 
pines to develop those industries i.v.ich produce commodities for sale in 
the United States market at prices which in most instances have been kept 
above world levels by the United Stat s tariff .and more recently, in the 
case of sugar, by quota restrictions. The resulting increase in t he- 
production of export commodities thus protected in the United States 
market has operated to discourage the production Loth of export commodities 
not so protected and of commodities intended for Philippine consumption. 
On the other hand, the increased sale of goods in the preferential United 
States market has enabled the Philippines to buy more goods from the 
United States and from e trier countries than it Would otherwise have been 
able- to buy. 

It should not be inferred, however, that the existing economy of 
the Philippines rests wholly on preferential trade relations with the 
United States. For example, much the larger part of the land under 
cultivation in the Philippines is devoted to crops, such as rice, corn, 



1/ fill of these products are subject to United States duties when im- 
ported into the United States from foreign countries. 



ex- 
are 



24 

and sweet potatoes, which are consumed within the archipelago, or to 
port products, such as copra, abaca, leaf tobacco, timber, which a 
sold, either in the United States or elsewhere, on the basis of world 
prices. 

In contrast to the Philippines, the preferential free-trade arrange- 
ment has not modified to any appreciable extent the economy of the United 
States. The discontinuance of this trade arrangement, therefore, may 
not be expected substantially to affect that economy. This is due largely 
to the difference in the magnitude of the markets of the two countries. 
As a result of the preferential free-trade arrangement, however, exporters 
of* certain United States products hav<_. obtainua increased markets in the 
Philippines, not only in consequence of the protection afforded United 
States products by Philippine duties against imports from other countries 
but also in consequence of the increased volume of Philippine exports to 
the United States resulting from the similar protection accorded Philip- 
pine products in the United States market. The increased trade in both 
directions has also benefited United States shipping interests, ana it 
has given rise to profitable American investments in the Philippines, 
although the aggregate of these 1 ttcr i'. not Urge in conp-.ri'.on 'ith the 
total of American investments abroad. 

There arc no satisfactory indexes for measuring the economic g« ins 
and losses which have accrued to the Philippines and to the United States, 
respectively, by virtue of their trade relations with eech other. The 

" 1/ J»ll of the above mentioned export products except leaf tobacco are on 
United States free list, i.e., they may be imported into the United States 
free of duty from any country. 



25 

annual amounts of duty each country nominally waives by permitting the 
other to send in goods duty-free are sometimes used for tnis purpose; 
but the theoretically waived duties ne it her reflect accurately the addi- 
tional revenue which the respective governments could actually collect on 
the basis of present tariffs, nor indicate in v;hat measure such additional 
revenue would be collected at the expense of the domestic consumers of the 
imported goods. The tariff revenues which each country nominally for- 
feits, moreover, may not be regarded as measuring the benefits accruing 
to the export interests of the other country. In seems ci^ar, however, 
that the duties which the United States waives on imports from the Philip- 
pines represent both fiscal losses for the United States and price gains 
for Philippine producers to a considerably greater degree than is corres- 
pondingly the case in respect of che duties which the Philippines waive 
on imports from the United States, This is due largely to the importance 
of sugar among the exports from the Philippines to the United States. (See 

section on sug .r .) 

Although the tariff revenue which the United States Treasury foregoes 
on imports of Philippine products is in some degree offset by corresponding 
waivers on the part of the Philippine Treasury, the ■.xcisc tax revenue 
which the United States Treasury foregoes, because of the remittances to 
the Philippines of the proceeds of c*OBe taxes on Philippine sugar, 
coconut oil and cigars, is not offset in any degree by corresponding 
waivers on the part of the Philippine Treasury. The Philippine Common- 
wealth imposes excise taxes on a number of United States products, such 
as cigarettes, liquors, and kerosene, but it retains the proceeds of all 
such taxes for its own use. 



26 

3. PURPOSE AND CHARACTER OF RECOMMENDATIONS!/ 

The Independence Act provides for the termination of Philippine 
trade preferences in the United States at the end of the Commonwealth 
period, which period began November 15, 1935 and will extend to July 4, 
194.6, In accordance with that law, Philippine products shipped to the 
United States from November 15, 1940, to July 4, 1946, will be subject 
to progressive Philippine export taxes reaching a maximum of 25 percent 
of the then existing United States duties in 1944 j thereafter, it will 
no longer be required that these products be subjected to export taxes 
but they will become subject to full United States duties. This abrupt 
change in trade relations will be certain to affect adversely a number 
of Philippine export industries, as well as others directly dependent 
upon them. Many firms will be forced to liquidate cn or before the 
date of independence; and the consequent decline in the volume of 
business, coupled with increased unemployment, would have serious reper- 
cussions on the Philippine economy. American export trade would also 
be impaired by the sudden imposition of Philippine duties upon United 
States products. 

With a view to affording both American and Philippine interests a 
reasonable opportunity to adjust themselves to the changed relationship, 
the Committee recommends that trade preferences should not be terminated 
on July 4, 1946, but should, by a process of gradual elimination, be 



1/ See Part VII for detailed recommendations, 



27 

terminated at the end of the year I960. A/ The Committee believes that 
the period recommended would afford a reasonable opportunity not only for 
the orderly liquidation of existing Philippine industries but also for 
the establishment of new industries which could provide additional 
products for domestic consumption or for export. The gradual elimination 
of preferences would also benefit American interests engaged in United 
States-Philippine trade. 

In conformity with the general plan adopted by Congress in the 
Independence Act, the Committee recommends that commerce between the 
United States and the Philippines be continued on a duty-free basis during 
the Commonwealth period but that Philippine products shipped to the United 
States (with certain exceptions) be subject to graduated export taxes 
imposed by the Commonwealth Government. The export taxes proposed by 
the Committee are to begin with the equivalent of 5 percent of the pre- 
vailing United States duties and are to be increased annually by an 
additional 5 percent, as required by the Independence Act. The Committee 
recommends that this tax first be assessed on January 1, 19U, and that 
the annual increases be imposed on each subsequent January 1, until 
January 1, 1945, when the export tax would be equal to 25 percent of 



1/ In reaching the se"on elusions, the Committee has been guided by: 
fit lis terSHf reference requiring it, "to recommend a program for the 
ad ustoent o? Philippine national economy in preparation for the «»- 
tuTTf preferential trade relations between the United States and the 
Phmppines . . at the earliest practicable date consistent with afford- 
ing Se Phulppines reasonable opportunity to adjust their national 
mg the miiippxn declaration of the executive brancnes of the 

fixed by the Independence Act. 



28 



prevailing United States duties. 1/ The proceeds of these taxes are to 
be deposited in the Treasury of the United States for the retirement of 
the Philippine bonded debt. The export taxes, therefore, have a two- 
fold purpose: (l) To assist in bringing about the necessary adjustment 
of Philippine economy; and (2) to provide additional revenue for the 
retirement of the debt of the Philippine Government. 

The Committee recommends that, after the Philippines becomes inde- 
pendent on July L, 194-6, graduated impert duties be assessed against 
United States proaucts entering ohe Philippines and against Philippine 
products entering the United States. Commencing with 25 percent of 
prevailing rates, these duties Would b^ raised to 30 percent on January 1, 
1947, ana would be increased by an additional 5 percent on each January 1 
thereafter, until January 1, 1961, when full duties would be assessed. 
This program adopts the same rate of progression as provided in the 
Independence Act, but continues it for a longer period. During this 
period there would be accorded to American ana Philippine interests 
an additional opportunity to make whatever adjustments may be required 
by the change in trade relations between the Unit.od States ana the 
Philippines to a position independent of ..references. 

-, : ■: m ",r. tho '"irst siti .n of export taxes, as re- 

1/ The effects date . ,r , ^ ^ ^ 

commended by one Committee (Ja nuary that , IDurine the sixth 
fixed in the Independence Act, <- lC - rttment >. rt tax sh all be 



uaminis zruu±uu o 

oarable statistics » J"^j™J* £ ^texTs MMW with the calendar 
simplified by making the graduated .x^rt t :)n 
year. The recommendations of the « t - t , f United 

Ln„ / iq/,6. the graduated import duties oegxn t maximum 



year . 

July 4, 1946, the grad 



29 



The graduated Philippine export taxes and the graduated United 
States and Philippine import duties will not affect in the same degree 
all industries, the products of which enter into United States-Philippine 
trade. Several commodities are permitted duty-free entry from all 
countries under the tariff acts of both the United States and the 
Philippines, and therefore will not be directly affected by the changed 
relationship. Moreover, many industries producing dutiable products 
will doubtless be able to continue exportation s despite the imposition 
of export taxes and graduated import duties. In the opinion of thu 
Committee, however, certain Philippine industries will be forced to cur- 
tail drastically or to discontinue shipments to the United States upon 
the imposition of export taxes, and certain United States industries will 
likewise be forced to discontinue shipments bo the Philippines upon the 
imposition of graduated Philippine import duties. This situation will 
arise principally because of the- extreme height of the duties applicable 
to certain products which now are shipped only because of the free entry 
privilege accorded to them. 

The Committee does not believe th^t Congress intended, when it 
adopted the export tax formula, to force the abrupt liquidation of 
certain Philippine industries; and the Committee does not believe that 
the exportation to the Philippines of certain United States commodities 
should be terminated abruptly on July A, 1946 with the imposition of 
Philippine duties. In these instances, therefore, in which the applica- 
tion of taxes or duties appears likely to force a sharp recession in 
trade, the Committee recommends a different type of restriction, namely, 



30 

declining quotas which would be graduated so as to provide for their com- 
plete elimination by January 1, 1961. Shipments within the quota limita- 
tions would be exempt from export taxes and import duties. This type 
of restriction would provide for the gradual elimination of preferential 
trade and yet would permit either an orderly liquidation of these par- 
ticular export industries or an orderly adjustment to their new status. 
Commodities which the Committee recommends be made subject to declining 
quotas are cigars, scrap and filler tobacco, cigarettes, coconut oil, and 
pearl buttons. In selecting these commodities for special treatment, 
the Committee has been guided by its study of the probable effect of the 
imposition of export taxes and import duties upon each of the various 
commodities entering into United States-Philippine trade, and by a recog- 
nition of the importance of th-~ trade in the selected commodities both 
to the United States and to the Philippines. Although the Committee 
recommends no other exceptions to the general imposition of export taxes 
and import duties, it makes recommendations regarding tariff rates or 
excise tax rates for abaca, copra, embroideries, cotton textiles, 
evaporated milk, and canned fish. 

A detailed analysis of the special problems affecting the trade 
between the two countries in the more important commodities is presented 
on subsequent pages. 



CHART I 



- PHILIPPINE EXPORT TAXES AND UNITED STATES IMPORT DUTIES AS PROVIDED IN THE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE ACT, WITH CHANGES 
AND ADDITIONS RECOMMENDED BY THE JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE ON PHILIPPINE AFFAIRS ^ 



PERCENT 
100 

90 

80 



60 



50 



40 



30 



CO 



10 



COMMONWEALTH PERIOD 



Philippine Export Taxes, in Terms 
of Percentages of United States 
Duties, Applicable to Philippine 
Exports to the United States. 



No Corresponding Taxes on United 
States Exports to the Philippines. 



PERIOD AFTER INDEPENDENCE 



Percentages of Philippine Duties Applicable to 
Imports of United States Products and Percent- 
ages of United States Duties Applicable to Im- 
ports of Philippine Products. 



_ J 



i 



i 



_i 



i 



— i 




i 



July 4. 1946 



I -■ .f.i.N I> 

Provisions of Independence Act 
Recommendations by Committee 



PERCENT 

H 100 



194ottl941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 19-17 1948 1949 1950 1951 W62 1960 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 

I*— January i, 1941 
* — November 15, 1940 

1/ The Committee assumes, although no existing legislation so provides, that United States products would become subject to 
" Philippine duties after Independence if Philippine products should then become subject to United Stages duties. 



1961 




32 



4- PHILIPPINE EXPORTS TO THE UNITED STATES 

SUGAR 

The Sugar Industry in Philippine Economy 



The culture of sugar cane was known in the Philippines long before 
Magellan discovered the Islands in. 1521. Improved methods of culti- 
vating and milling j however, were slow in developing; it was not until 
1910 that the first modern sugar central was established on the island 
of Mindoro. During the period 1920-34, the production of sugar in- 
creased steadily, rising from 465,000 to 1,650,000 short tons, raw value. 
This increase was the result of the profitability of producing sugar in 
the Philippines for the United States market coupled with the encourage- 
ment given to the industry by American Governors General and other 
American and Philippine officials. The area devoted to sugar cane 
culture was increased also, but the rise in production occurred principally 
because of the use of better varieties of cane, improved methods of culti- 
vation, and the general installation of modern centrifugal mills. In 
recent years, the production of sugar in the Philippines has been appre- 
ciably below that Of 1934 because of quota restrictions placed upon exports 

to the United States. 

The two principal elements in the Philippine sugar industry are the 
individual planters who produce the cane and the centrals which mill it. 
The individual planters operate under a milling contract with the central. 
Contracts are usually drawn for a period of 30 years and usually provide 
for an ecual division of the sugar between planters and central, or a 



33 

55-45 or a 60-40 division, with the larger shares going to the planter. 
Under the contract the planters are obligated to have their cane milled 
by the contracting central, and the central is obligated to furnish 
transportation for the cane and to convert it into sugar. The share of 
the planter is frequently further divided between tenant and land owner, 
the latter receiving from 10 to 20 percent of the total crop as rent. 

The Philippine sugar industry is located in three principal producing 
regions: (1) The islands of Negro s and Panay, (2) the Provinces of Pam- 
panga, Bataan, and Tarlac, in the central plain of Luzon, north of Manila; 
ana (3) the Provinces of Batangas and Laguna, south* of Manila. These 
districts regularly produce over 90 percent of the total sugar crop. The 
Province of Occidental Negro s alone accounts for approximately 50 percent 
of the total production. 

On the basis of information supplied by the Philippine Sugar Asso- 
ciation, it would appear that approximately 10 percent of the total 
Philippine population is entirely or substantially dependent upon the sugar 
industry. The government-owned Manila Railroad, v/hich traverses the sugar 
gions in Luzon, receives about 40 percent of its freight revenue from 
igar, and the Philippine Railway in Panay and Cobu, about / + 5 percent. 
The provincial governments in five of the leading provinces are supported 
principally by the taxes collected from the sugar industry, which also 
makes substantial contributions in the form of taxes to the central govern- 

tnent . 

The island- of Negros probably depends more on the production of sugar 
than does any other corresponding area in the Philippines. The sugar in- 
dustry is the only important industry on the island, except lumber in g^frich is 



re 
su 



34 



confined principally to a small district. Sugar producers on the- island 
of Negros have lo 1 er costs of production than those in other regions , 
principally because of favorable soil and climatic conditions. They also 
enjoy comparatively low transportation costs through their ability to ship 
directly by water, avoiding the rail, lighterage, and terminal storage 
charges which are paid by producers in Luzon. 

In 1937, there were nearly 20,000 sugar planters in the Philippines; 
sugar centrals numbered 46 and had an annual milling capacity of about 
12,000,000 tons of cane or 1,500,000 tons of sugar, .based on a normal 
grinding season of 150 days. In addition to the centrals rhich produce 
rcc c;ug:-r, four sugar refineries art' in operation in the Philippines. 

Three of these are located on the island of Luzon and one on the island 
of Negros. These refineries, however, absorb only a small part of the 
Philippine production of raw sugar. They manufacture primarily for 
export to the United States, but supply a part of local sugar consumption. 

Investments in sugar centrals were valued in 1935 at $84,000,000 and 
investments in land and improvements, £131,000,000.1/ Of the total 
capital invested in centrals, approximately 4 5 percent was owned by 
Filipinos, 30 percent by Americans, and 25 percent by Spaniards, Most of 
the investments in cane lands and in improvements have been made by 
Filipinos; the remainder has been provided principally by Americans and 
Spaniards . 

It has been e stimated that the sugar planters and centrals provide 
full or part time employment for over 300,000 persons whose aggregate 
annual wages amount to Jl2,000,000^ Employees in many centrals are 

1/ Philippine Statistical Heview, p. 310, vol. 2, 1935. Estimates by ' 
the Philippine Sugar Assn. place the investments in centrals at ,93,250,000 
and investments in land and improvements at ,105,000,000. 

2/ Estimates made by the Philippine Sugar Association. 



35 



provided with houses, water, fuel, -garden space, and, in many cases, 
light, as part of their remuneration. Plantation laborers also are 
usually provided with housing facilities in addition to money wages. 
Efforts have recently been made to establish throughout the industry an 
3-hour day v/ith a minimum wage of 50 cents (l peso) . Inasmuch as sugar 
culture is seasonal in character, many of the laborers are employed only 
during the planting and harvesting periods. 

Since 1923, the value of Philippine exports of sugar has been greater 
than that of the exports of any other Philippine product. In 1932 ex- 
ports of sugar exceeded 1,000,000 short tons for the first time in Philip- 
pine history. Exports rose in !//?.' t: peak of 1,275,000 short tons 
valued at $65,4-50,000. In the 3 years, 1932, 1933, 1934, sugar accounted 
for 63, 61, and 59 percent, respectively, of total Philippine exports. 
Philippine shipments in 1934 exceeded United States marketing quotas (the 
excess being stored in bonded warehouses during that year) ; and conse- 
quently, Philippine exports declined in 1935 to 573,500 short tons, valued 
at 132,990,000, and equaled only 35 percent of total exports. In 1936 
and 1937, Philippine exports were larger than those in 1935, inasmuch as 
quotas governing imports of Philippine sugar into the United States for 
the 2 former years were not curtailed by previous excess shipments; in 
1937, exports amounted to about ?60,000 short tons valued at 557,700,000 
and accounted for 33 percent of total Philippine exports. 

Practically all of the sugar exported from the Philippines in recent 
years has been destined for the United States market. The proportion has 
been over 99 percent since 1930 (see table 5). 



( 1 



Table 5. - Sugar: Quantities and values exported from the Philippines t 

countries and to the United States, 1928-37 

. 





Total exports • 


Ratio of : 
total value of : 
exports of sugar : 


Exports to the 
United States 


: Ratio of quantity 
:of exports of 

• on (T' i v* "f" r\ 4" In (it 

• bUgclI uu out; 




Quantity * 


Value 


to total value : 
of all : 
Philippine : 
exports : 


Quantity [ 


; Value 


: United States to 
: total quantity of 
:such exports to 
'all countries 




Short tons : 




Percent : 


Short tons : 




: Percent 




raw value : 






raw value 


: $45,699,006 
: 52,161,316 : 
: 52,039,890 : 
: 49,950,417 i 
: 59,796,369 : 
: 64,332,902 : 
: 65,453,621 : 
: 32,961,593 : 
: 61,927,184 : 
: 57,610,521 : 


: 93.75 

: 96.43 
99.09 
99.92 
99.98 
99.99 
99.99 
99 86 
99.97 
99.65 


1928 : 

1929 : 

1930 s 

1931 ' 
1932 
1933 
1934 
1935 
1936 
1937 


628,863 : 
767,596 : 
822,201 : 
: 833,080 : 
: 1,124,971 
: 1,193,260 
: 1,275,313 
: 573,510 
: 991,892 
: 960,153 


$47,542,940 : 
53,244,149 : 
: 52,240,226 

: 49,963,105 
: 59,801,884 
: 64,333,426 
: 65,454,580 
: 32,990,680 
: 61,937,322 
: 57,706,194 


30.7 : 
32.4 : 

: 39.2 : 

: 48.1 : 

: 62.7 

: 60.3 

: 59.3 

• 35 .0 

: 41.9 

: 37.7 


539,565 : 
740,206 : 
814,736 : 
: 832,430 : 
: 1,124,691 : 
: 1,193,244 : 
: 1,275,250 : 

: 572,724 
: 991,646 

: 956,805 



Sources: /nnual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs 



37 

Restrictions upon the Movement of Philippine Sugar to 

the United * 



: sugar 



the United States 
Recent United States l^ Q i„ +1n n affefiti1m 

The Tariff Act of 1 9 22 fixed the rate on full-duty 96° sugar 
entering the United States at 2.206 cents per pound; this rate was 
increased by the Tariff Act of 1930 to 2.5 cents per pound. On May 
9, 1934, the President issued a proclamation lowering the duty on sugar 
to 1.875 cents per pound, effective June 8, 1934. In each of the above 
instances, the rate on Cuban sugar was 20 percent lower than the full duty 
because of the convention of commercial reciprocity signed by Cuba and 
the United States in 1902 M By the terms of the trade agreement between 
the United States and Cuba, proclaimed August 24, 1934, the United States 
granted a reduction in duty on Cuban raw sugar (96°) from 1.5 cents to 
0.9 cent per pound, effective September 3, 1934. The agreement provides, 
however, that the reduced duty is to remain in effect only as long as the 
quota provisions of the Jones-Cos tigan Act or their equivalent are opera- 
tive. Upon the declaration by the Secretary of Agriculture that these 
provisions have lapsed, the duty on Cuban sugar will revert to a rate 
which will be 20 percent less than the full duty in effect at the time. 
On the basis of the present duty on sugar, this rate would be 1.5 cents 
per pound. 

The Jones-Costigan Act, signed by the President on Slay 9, 1934, made 
possible the application of quote limitations on the marketing of all 

i II \+~a o tntP o The act continued in operation for 
sugar in continental United States. xne 

- The- cmota system was extended for 

3 years from the date of approval. inc quoi, j 



■ U The rate on '^ ^^^^f^t^T^Tl.i 
Tariff Act of 1922, 2 cents per pound «£«j££n effective June 8, 1934. 
cents per pound after *he Presidential procl ^ ^ ^ 

This last named rate remained in torcc 
trade agreement became effective. 



38 

the calendar year 1937 by a la, approved June 1% 1936j and for 3 addi . 
tional years, 1938-40, by the Sugar Act approved September 1, 1937. The 
Sugar Act of 1937 provides for a percentage distribution of United States 
consumption requirements, as estimated by the Secretary of Agriculture, 
among domestic and other producing areas. Domestic sugar-producing areas 
are allotted 55.59 percent of estimated United States consumption, but not 

less than 3,715,000 short tons: the m a -1 ■ • ■ 

3 ' ' u " e Philippine;:, ana 

foreign countries are allotted 44.41 percent, provided estimated consump- 
tion is not less than 6,682,670 short tons. The Philippine quota is 
fixed at 34-. 70 percent of the share reserved for other than domestic areas, 
but may not be less than the duty-free quota established by the Independence 
Act. The Sugar Act also provides for a tax of 0.5 cent per pound, raw 
value, on the processing of sugar. A further provision of the act ■ 
stipulates that the proceeds of this tax collected on Philippine sugar sold 
in the United States shall be remitted to the Commonwealth Government, 
subject to certain restrictions as tu their use. 

On December l f) 1934, the Governor-General of the Philippines approved 
a sugar limitation bill which was designed to bring Philippine production 
into correspondence with the United States quota. The Governor-General 
was empowered to determine and to allocate production quota, based on the 
amount of shipments to the United States, plus allowances for Philippine 
consumption and for an emergency reserve. After the inauguration of the 
Commonwealth Government, , change occurred in the local sugar administra- 
tion. On Wry 21, 1936, a Philippine sugar administration was created 

t * + - .n^^cp th- Sugar Limitation Act. This 

by the Commonwealth Government to enlorce £ 

body agisters the allocation of domestic cuotas and of cuotas £ ovcrnln L 
shipments to the United States. 



39 

United States quotas allotted to Philippine sugar producers under 
the various sugar acts are listed below: 

Year Original quota Final quota 

Short tons, raw value 

1934 1,015,186 1,005,602 

1935 991,308 981,958 

1936 998,110 1,000,829 

1937 1,035,74-2 991,020 

1938 1,057,416 1/ 

In 1934, the Philippine crop, the largest ever produced in the 
archipelago, had already been cut and milled when quotas were announced. 
The resulting over shipments in that year were charged against the 1935 
quota so that actual exports to the United States in 1935 amounted to 
only 569,000 tons. Philippine planters, however, received benefit pay- 
ments for their crop reductions (as did planters in the Unite! States). 
These payments, aggregating approximately $15,000,000, partially reim- 
bursed them for the cost of planting cane which was later destroyed, and 
for the sharp restriction in production. 

•• Since the inauguration of the Commonwealth Government on November 15, 
1935, the amount of Philippine sugar permitted to enter the United States 
duty-free has been limited by the Independence Act to the equivalent of 
approximately 970,000 short tons of sugar, raw value. Imports in -cess 
of the quota provided in the Independence Act are subject to the full 
United States duty. No such imports, however, have been made. 

Hp H t.^tions iinr-^ *T +he lndependence_Agt 

■ • , n f tw. Independence Act have placed certain 
The economic provisions of the inaepenaect, 

restrictions on the shipment of Philippine sugar to the United States. 
These restrictions may be considered with respect to 



1/ Ho adjustment has yet been made m s 
1938) . 



ie in sugar quotas for 19^8 (May 1, 



40 

(1) During the first 5 years of the Commonwealth Governme nt, the 
annual quantity of sugar which may be admitted into the United States 
free of duty is limited to 50,000 long tons of refined sugar, and 800,000 
tons of unrefined sugar. These two amounts correspond to a total of 
approximately 970,000 short tons of raw value. Any Philippine sugar 
which might enter the United States in excess of the quota limitation 
fixed by the Independence Act would be subject to the full United States 
duty. 

(2) From the sixth through the tenth year of th e Commonwealth 
G overnment , the quota provided in the act will remain the same, but 
progressive export taxes will be assessed against such quota sugar 
exported to the United States. These taxes Will amount to 5 percent of 
the prevailing United States duty during the sixth year of the Common- 
wealth period, and will be increased by an additional 5 percent each 
succeeding year until, in the tenth or last year, they will amount to 

25 percent of the United States duty. Based on the -.resent duty of 
1.875 cents per pound, rav, value, these export taxes will equal 0.09375 
cent per pound in the sixth year of the Commonwealth, md 0.4*75 cent 
per pound in the tenth year. 

(3 ) M^erJ^eJ^^ 

, , +o limitation -yovided for by the Indepen- 

the export taxes and the quota limitation provxc 

+ ^ licahlp. After that time all Philir-dne 
dence Act will cease U be * lV lica.a,. 

• tvr United States will be subject to the full United 
sugar arriving in the Unit^ --u 

States duty. 



LI 



Dutiable and Duty-Free Sugar in the United States Market 

For over 39 years prior to the inauguration of the quota system in 
1934, sugar prices in the United States approximated world orices ?lus 
the preferential United States duty on Cuban sugar. Producers of duty- 
free sugar received the full United States price whether they were 
located in continental United States or in insular areas. In the case 
of sugar imported from Cuba, nearly all of the differential between the 
United States and the world price, of sugar went to the United States 
Treasury; but, in the case of sugar produced in the United States and its 
insular areas, it went to the private producers. 

Since the establishment of the quota system, the price of sugar in 
the United States has ceased to be linked directly to the world price. 1/ 
Instead, it has been the resultant of current aornestic demand and the 
volume of permitted sales fixed in accordance with the provisions of the 
Sugar Act. Up to the present time this price has exceeded the world 
price, not only by much more than the United States duty on Cuban sugar, 
but also by more than the full duty. The average differential between 
the United States ar.c world prices in 1937 was as follows: 

tj. .., ~ 11£r . -r _ Qfo Average or ico. 1937 2/ 

- ~ u ' — (Cents per pound) 

United States price at Hew York 3-U3 

World price at New York Aai^ 

Differential between 
United States and world 
prices 



rr-^l r-q hy-evor. could not long reaain below 

1/ The orice in the Unitea States, h ™™*> Cuban faP if such 

the world Price plus t he Un ited utat - ^ ^J*^ bc curtai led 

a decline should occur, the s %;iy i o market. 

by the refusal of Cuban Producers to sell in th at Mew 

2/ In 1936, the spread between the average ju ^ ^ in 

York and the average worla pr*et at^ cents per pound. 

the first quarter ot 193<5 ^ nfc 5 P- 



42 



Under the terms of the Independence Act, the Philippines, during 

the Commonwealth period., are permitted to sell the approximate equivalent 

of 970,000 short tons of ?&° sugar duty-free in the United States market.^ 

Because of this privilege Philippine producers received about 141,000,000 

in 1937 (on the basis of average prices in that year) more than they would 

have obtained if they had sold an equivalent amount of sugar at the world 

price; only part of this amount, however, represented net profits to 

Philippines producers. This sun may also be regarded as the premium 

which the United States paid in 1937 for Philippine sugar on the present 

duty-free quota basis, as compared with what the cost to the United States 

would have been if it had purchased an equivalent amount of sugar at world 
2 / 

prices A> 

On the basis of LXistiug United St< tes duties, the tontirl loss in 
revenue to the United States Treasury resulting from the duty-free ad- 
mission of Philippine sugar may be calculated to range from $36,375,000 
to 117,460,000, If the United States should purchase sugar from any 
foreign supplier ctner than Cuba, the United States Treasury would collect 
a duty of 1.375 cents per pound. Bcsed on the Philippine duty-free quota 
of approximately 970,000 tons, the revenue foregone by the United States 
Treasury amounts to £36,375,000. If the same amount of sugar were purchased 



pounds which, when w&«™=bu »j <~> ,„ uld have produced the 

It is doubtful, however wheth ? been accorded duty-free 

quantity of sugar exported in 19,7 U x* na that consumers i'n 

entry into the United States. It may isooeo domestic/ 
the United States pay similar pren ^£Jg£ffi^ Cuba, 
suppliers- and, to a lesser degree, m purcmsme 



i 



43 



from Cuba, the duty would be 0.9 cent per pound or $17,4.60,000. In 
neither of the above cases would the increase in Treasury revenue operate 
to influence the price of sugar in the American market. 

In addition to the tariff revenue which it foregoes, the United 
States Treasury will forego all the revenue it collects on the processing 
of Philippine sugar marketed in the United States after September 1, 1937, 
inasmuch as the proceeds of this tax, amounting to 0.5 cent per pound on 
96° sugar are by Lav.' to be remitted to the Philippine Government. Based 
on the Philippine duty-free quota of approximately 97-ip00 short tons, 
these remittances will amount to $9» 700, 000 annually. 

Philippine Sugar in the United Status Market during 
"and after the Commonwealth Period 

During the Cc~; -l~h period, Philippine producers will no doubt 

be able to sell in the United States market the quantity of preference 

sugar fixed by the Independence Act. Assuming that the existing level of 

sugar prices in the United States is maintained with minimum fluctuations, 

and that control will also be exercised over th: quantity of sugar coming 

from off-shore areas, Philippine sugfir producers will continue to benefit 

from the tariff preferences accorded them in the Onitec States market. The 

export taxes to be applied to sugar subject to quotas during the second 

, „ -t+u „ UT .4nri however, '.'/ill reduce the advantage of 

5 years of the Commonwealth perioci, nowewi , 

, . uu D ., ■liwin^ sut-ar producers «* enjoy. 1/ 
duty-free entry which the Philippine sugar -j- 

, ~rrz ■ + . + lovr -.-rade surnr were produced in the 

1/ Although appreciable *"^**^^f the modernization and increased 
Philippines prior to the f^g^g^r Philippine sugar was accorded 
production of the industry ^ ^ ^ Because uf the pfrotee- 

^nrestricted duty-free » entry into the ™f mrM it bfcCaflie profitable 

tion afforded that product in zns methods of aroduction which 

for the Philippine industry to ^^^^^^^7 been obliged 
it would not nave founa prof J^bleto ^ \ voduCQTS in the wor i d aarket. 
to sell its sugar in competition Ait h ^ f costg ^ & 

Relatively high costs of £ouuc J 1 ™ J£ ^jStwmt problem of the Philippine 
certain other areas constitute a major d-j 
sugar industry. 



44 

Should the quota system be abolished during the Commonwealth period, 
the various off -shore areas would be free from quantitative limitation, 
and sugar prices in the united States would again resume a more definite 
relationship to world prices. Assuming no changes in the United States 
duty, Philippine sugar would, in the absence of a quota system, have a 
tariff advantage over Cuban sugar in entering the United States during the 
entire Commonwealth period. Even in the tenth year, the export tax on 
the Philippine product would amount to only 0.46375 cent per pound, where- 
as the duty on Cuban sugar would equal 1.5 cents per pound, a difference 
in favor of the Philippines of 1.03125 cents per pound. 

Immediately after independence, according to the present provisions 
of the Independence Act, Philippine sugar will be subject to the full 
United States duty. Cuba will then have tht advantage of a rate at least 
20 percent lower than the full duty under the terms of existing treaties 
and agreements. Cuba will probably have, in ad/iition, the continued ad- 
vantage of lov.rer transportation c^sts. Should the United States, at that 
time, not be operating under a quota ffystcm, Philippine prooucors will be 
obliged to have a cost of production lev; enough to enable thora to sell at 
world prices if they are to continue producing sugar for export. If, on 
the other hand, a quota system is still in force and if some allotment is 
made for Philippine sugar, then the prevailing price for sugar in the 
United Status will the principal factor influencing shipments of 
Philippine sugar to that market. It appears doubtful, however, on the 
basis of present prices, that any appreciable number of Philippine sugar 
producers could reduce their costs of production sufficiently to permit 
them to pay the full United States duty in 1946. 



45 



nhrvrc.ct.tr of recommendations 

The Committee recommends that no change be made with respect to the 
provisions of the Independence Act affecting exports of sugar from the 
Philippines to the United States during the Commonwealth period. But the 
Committee recommends that after the Philippines becomes independent, the 
quota on sugar established in the Independence Act be continued, subject, 
however, to graduated import duties beginning with 25 percent of the United 
States duty in force on July 4, 19^.6, and increasing by 5 percent of the 
duty on each subsequent January 1, until all preferences are terminated 
on January 1, 1961. Shipments in excess of the cucta should be subject 
to whatever United States duty may be in force at the time. This arrange- 
ment would bring about the gradual imposition of United States duties on 
a restricted quantity of Philippine sugar instead of subjecting the whole 
quantity of that product lo the assessment of full auties in IQ46. Such 
a modification of the Independence Act woulri afford the Philippine sugar 
industry an adequate period in vhich to make required adjustments. 

Should the United States discontinue the quota system during the 
post-independence perio,, Philippine sugar, though subject to limitation, 
would still be accorded a tariff advantage over Cuban sugar in the United 

rnha runtimes to be the bene- 
States market until 1957, assuming that Cuba continues 

„ „, Tf h.^^ver , the United States 
ficiary of a 20 percent tariff preference. If, h* *ver, 

+ v- r>r wuld be no effective competition 
should retain the quota system, there v/ouia nc no 

w tbo -bility of Philippine producers 
among the various producing areas; and the aoi-i^y 

to market sugar in the United States at the prices then prevailing would 
depend upon whether Philippine costs * production could be reduced 
sufficiently to permit the payment of the require, import duties. 



46 

COCONUT PRODUCTS 
Coconut Industry in Philippine Economy 

Development of the Philippine coconut industry 

The coconut industry is one of the oldest and most important in the 
Philippines. When Magellan first arrived in Philippine waters, Siamese 
junks were already engaged in the copra trade. Throughout all but the 
last 60 years of the Spanish regime, however, exports of coconut products 
(as well as other products) were strictly limited. 

The demand for copra and coconut oil was greatly stimulated during 
the World War period. The" prices of all oils and fats rose to extremely 
high levels, but the price of coconut oil rose somewhat more than the 
prices of most others. {Coconut oil has a high glycerin content and is 
therefore in demand for the production of explosives.) The Philippines 
at that time not only expanded the acreage devoted to coconut palms, but 
also began to develop a coconut-oil export industry. By the termination 
of the war there were over UO crushing mills in operation in the Philip- 
pines . 

The cessation of hostilities was followed shortly by a world-wide 
depression, in consequence of which the demand for both oil and its 

*«/.n««1 -harolv. Most of the oil mills had been 
byproduct, copra cake, declined snarpxy 

, . _ . , w ,- of the high prices of oil, and the high costs of 
capitalized on the baois ji t-n ms- i 

equipment, which prevailed during the war. By 1920, every coconut oil 
.ill in tte Philippines, with one exception, was forced into liquidation. 



47 



Most of the mills closed down, and the remainder modernized their 
equipment. At present there are 7 major firms (operating 8 plants) 
engaged in the production of coconut cil for export. There are 
also 10 small mills which crush oil fcr local consumption. The survival 
of the copra-crushing industry in the Philippines on an export basis was 
made possible largely because of the protection afforded by the United 
States Tariff Act of 1922, which imposed a duty of 2 cents per pound on 
coconut oil. This duty has served practically to exclude imports into 
the United States from sources other than the Philippines. 
Organization of the Philippine Coconut Industry 

The coconut- growing industry in the Philippines consists for the 
most part of small enterprises. The groves cn which most of the coconuts 
are grown consist of plots of less than 10 acres, large plantations 
being comparatively few and confined chiefly to the more recently 
developed sections in the islands cf Negros and Mindanao. Plantations 
in excess of 1,000 acres acccunt in the aggregate for less than 1 percent 
of the total acreage devoted to coccnuts. 

In point of area under cultivation, coconut production ranks second 
in importance in the Philippines, being exceeded only by rice; it 
generally ranks third in value, being exceeded only by sugar and rice. 
There are no accurate data available concerning the number of people 
engaged in the production of coconuts. The Philippine Department of 
Agriculture and Commerce, however, estimates that about 4,000,000 people, 
or over 30 percent of the total population, are directly dependent on 
the industry for a part or the whole of their livelihood. 



Coconuts are grown in every province in the Philippines, but the 
provinces on the island of Luzon account for approximately one-half of 
the total acreage under cultivation to this crop, and a single province 
(Tayabas) on Luzon accounts for almost one-half of the coconut acreage 
on this island. The island of Mindanao is second in importance in the 
production of coconuts, accounting for about one -sixth of the total 
acreage. None of the remaining islands accounts for as much as one- 
twentieth of the total coconut acreage in the Philippines. About 
1,500,000 acres, or nearly one-fifth of the total area planted to all 
crops in the Philippines, are devoted to the cultivation of coconuts. 

A number of the provinces in the Philippines depend predominantly 
or largely upon the coconut industry for their tax receipts. Tayabas 
obtains over 75 percent of its income from this industry; 6 other 
provinces obtain between 50 and 75 percent of their total from it; and 
at least 10 others obtain 25 to 50 percent from it. 
Investments in coconut industry 

Reliable data are not available concerning the value and ownership 
of either the lands devoted to the cultivation of coconuts or the mills 
and refineries engaged in the preparation of Ccconut products. Most 
of the estimates of land-value are based on the assessed valuations of 
the properties involved, and these do not reflect accurately either 
costs or market values. Estimates relating to the values and ownership 
of mills and. refineries are not satisfactory because of the large number 
of extremely small establishments concerning which little information is 
available . 



49 

According to an unofficial Philippine estimate, the coconut in- 
dustry in the Philippines represented a toted investment value of 
$221,215,000 on July 31, 193 5. Ownership of Ir-in end mills was 
distributed among various nationalities as follows:^/ 

Table 6. - Investments in Philippine coconut industry 





Land and : 
iraorovements : 


: Mills, refin- : 
cries , etc. 


Total invest- 
ments 


Philippine : 

American : 

Spanish ' 

British • 

All others ! 

Total : 


• $194,665,000 : 
: 8,375,000 : 
: 4,185,000 : 

1 2.095,000 • 


; §905,000 : 
: 1/ 5,545,000 : 
: 525,000 : 
: 3,495,000 : 
: 1,425,000 


j £195, 570,000 
i 13,920,000 
i 4,710,000 
! 3,495,000 
: 3.520,000 


: 209,320,000 


i 11,895,000 ; 


: 221,215,000 



that the 6 American companies engaged in producing coconut products 
represented investments in land and buildings amounting to $1,112,500, 
and in machinery and equipment amounting to $1,200,000. These firms 
employed 45 Americans whose aggregate annual salaries amounted to $233,000, 

Principal coccnut .,r Mucts 

According to recent estimates, approximately 93 percent of the coco- 
nuts harvested are first converted into a- pra, 6 percent into desiccated 
coconut, and the remaining 1 percent enter directly into loci edible 
consumption* About 0.75 percent of the bearing coconut trees are 
devoted to the production of tuba, a native beverage made from the sap of 
the coconut palm. Huts are not harvested from the trees tapped for this 



latter purpose. 



7 — =: T^rrr-. . c + ,+.ieMc*l Review, vol. 2, no. 4, Manila, 1936, 

1/ The Philippine otaxisTacax ^u-vj-u.., v , 

p. 310. 



50 

Wo official quantitative data are available concerning the Philip- 
pine consumption of coconut products, but various estimates place it at 
from 10 to 20 percent of the annual production. The remainder is ex- 
ported in a variety of forms, but primarily as copra, coconut oil, 
desiccated coconut, and meal and cake. These constitute the principal 
coconut products of the Philippines. 

Copra. - Philippine copra usually commands a price in world markets 
which is much below that offered for the best qualities, and one 
which is only slightly above that offered for the very poorest quali- 
ties. 

The quantity and value of Philippine exports of copra to all countries 
and to the United States for each year during the period 1928-37 are shown 
in table 7. It will be noted that unit prices declined sharply from 
the beginning of the period under review until 1934, the year during which 
the processing tax of 3 cents per pound on coconut oil became effective. 
In that year, the Philippines shipped to the United States a smaller per- 
centage of the quantity and value of its total exports of copra than in 
any preceding year in the period, a situation which Philippine producers 
attributed to the imposition of the aforementioned excise tax. In terms 
of absolute quantities, however, the exports of copra from the Philippines 
to the United States in 193/, were exceeded in only 2 earlier years in the 
period. Moreover, the quantities shipped to the United States in the 
year immediately preceding and the year immediately following 1934 were 
the highest in the decade. 



51 



Unit prices of copra rose sharply after 1934, and by 1937 the unit 
price reached its highest annual level since the year 1930.^ The total 
quantity of copra exported in 1937 was lower than in any preceding year 
since 1932, but the quantity shipped tc the United States in 1937 was 
close to the highest in the decade. Of particular significance? is the 
fact that the exports to the United States in that year constituted 
almost 88 percent of the exports to all countries, the highest percentage 
for any year in the period under review. 



1938 was much below 

that for the year 1937. 



■ 



Table 7. - Copra: Quantities and values exported from Philippines to ail countries, 

and to the United States, 1928-37 





Exports of copra to all : 
countries : 


Ratio of : 
value of : 


Exports of copra to 
the United States 


: Ratio of 
: quantity of 


Year : 


Quantity . 


• 

Value 


Value : 
per ton : 


— \ -\r y~\ "4* P AT * 

sxporob 01 • 
copra to : 
.total value : 
of all Phil-: 
ippine ex- : 
ports : 


Quantity 


Value 


: copra ex— 
: ported to the 
: United States 
: to total quantity 
: of copra exported 
; to all countries 




: Short tons : 






Percent : 


Short tons : 




: Percent 


1928 
1929 
1930 
1931 
1932 

1933 
1934 
1935 
1936 
1937 


: 258,400 : 
: 191,331 
: 192,133 
: 192,066 
: 151,282 
: 340,342 
: 377,768 
: 278,774 
: 320,864 
: 260,742 


. $22,542,341 
: 15,565,820 
: 13,433,438 
: 9,150,404 
: 5,133,227 
: 8,956,028 
8,605,124 
: 10,987,330 
: 14,999,784 
: 15,984,700 


: $87.24 : 
: 81.36 : 
: 69.92 : 
: 47.64 
: 33.93 
: 26.31 
: 22.78 
: 39.41 
: 46.75 
: 61.30 


14.5 : 
9.5 : 
: 10.1 : 
: 8.8 : 
: 5.4 : 

: 7.8 
: 11.7 
: 10,2 
10.4 


201,265 : 
142,878 : 
155,603 : 

: 133,251 : 

: 91,522 : 

: 229,279 ! 

: 169,186 

: 229,382 

: 201,193 

: 228,695 


$17,603,832 : 
11,440,898 : 
10,654,348 : 
: 6,052,328 : 
3,056,066 : 
; 5,951,226 ! 
: 3,900,060 : 
: 9,106,010 : 
: 9,772,482 : 
: 14,424,980 : 


77.9 
74.7 
81.0 

69.4 

60.5 ' 

67.4 

44.8 

82.3 

62.7 

87.7 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



53 

Coconut oil 

The coconut oil business in the Philippines is primarily an export 
industry which sells in a single market, the United States. It is esti- 
mated that the Philippines export over 90 percent cf the ceconut ;il |$ 
produces. The remainder is consumed in the Philippines, >r is exported 
in the form cf margarine, cooking fats, soap, or ether manufactured 
products . 

There are eight large coconut oil plants in the Philippines supply- 
ing principally the export trade, end ten small plants supplying solely 
the domestic trade. Six of the larger slants are in Manila and 2 in 
Cebu. The 10 smaller slants are in 7 different cities in various parts 
of the Philippines. Two nf the B larger plants are owned by Americans, 
2 by Englishmen, 2 by Spaniards, 1 by Chinese, and 1 by Filipinos, 
ftone of the smaller *>lants is American owned; Chinese >wn 5 of them, 
Filipinos 4, and Swiss 1. 

The quantity and value ~f coconut oil exported from the Philippines 
to all countries and to the United States for each year in the decade 
1928-37 are shown in table 8. It will be observed that, as in the case 
of copra, the unit price of coconut oil declined sharply from the begin- 
ning of the period under review until 1934, and then rose sharply in the 
following years. The unit price of coconut oil in 1937 was above that 
for any preceding year subsequent to 1929. 

Practically all Philippine shipments of coconut oil have been to the 
United States. Both the quantity and the value of those shipments 
reached their lowest levels, in the decade under review, in 193/,. The 



54 

quantities shipped in 1933 and 1935, however, were exceeded only once in 
any proceeding year in the period (1929). In 1937, the quantity, as 
well as the value, of coconut oil shipped to the United States was the 
third largest in the decade. 



Table 8. - Coconut oil: Quantities and valued exported iron, the 
Philippines to -11 countries and to the United States, 1923-37 



923 
929 
930 
931 
932 
933 
934 
935 
936 
937 



Exports of coconut oil to 
all countries 



Quantity 



Short 
t^ns 

156,796 
210,011 
162,442 
181,848 
126,405 
175,951 
159,654 
182,095 
175,951 
130,002 



Value 



$23,439,172 
29,184,942 
19,155,332 
15,035,322 

7,651, 
9,169,823 
6,794,871 
12,254,581 
13,871,759 
20,525,537 



Value 
cor ton 



Ratio of 
value of 
exports of 
coconut oil 
•bo total 
value of 
all Philip- 
pine exports 



Exports of cocnut oil 
t.n t.he United Status 



Percent 



£149-31 


: 15J. 


133.97 


: 17. V 


117.92 


: 4 • U 


82.63 


: U.5 


60.53 


: 8.0 


52.12 


: 8.7 


42.56 


; 6.2 


67.30 


: 13-0 


78.84 


: 9-4 


114.03 


: 13.4 



Quantity 



Sh <rt 
tons 

155,241 
207,990 

161,051 
163,948 
121,539 
173,622 
149,343 
173,731 

166,365 
176,706 



Value 



£23*239,520 
23,900,587 
13,961,826 

13,535,634 
7,335,830 
9,025,075 
6,396,557 
12,005,098 
13,137,171 
20,173,703 



Ratio of 
quantity of 
coconut jil 
exported to 
the United 
States to 
total quan- 
tity of coco- 
nut oil ox- 
pert-- to '-li 
countries 



Percent 



99.0 
99.0 

99-1 
90.2 
96.2 
98.7 
93.9 
93.2 

94-6 
93.2 



Source: Annual Repur ^T^sular Collector of Custom 
CoiLbin^^ 

i sh„n in tahle 9, the coined exports of cpr, and —nut -1 
fro. the Philippines - -r,s of quantities of *l) ^uctu- 

, f1 .. v/ v,-.le and to the United States, 
atud erratically, both to the rorle. as . wh.lc 

4od 1928-37. The annual proportions shipped bo the 
during uhc period J->-o J" 



55 



United States generally ranged between 80 and 90 percent of the total 
exported to all countries, but in 1934 the proportion declined to less 
than 65 percent. The absolute amount shipped to the United States in 
that yerr, however, was only slightly below the annual average for the 
10-year period. The quantity shipped to the United States in 1937 was 
higher than in any preceding yerr in the decade except 1935, and the pro- 
portion shipped to the United States in 1937 was the highest in the decade, 

Table 9.- Copra and coconut oil combined: Quantities (expressed in 

terms of coconut oil) exportod from Philippines to nil countries 
with percentages thereof exported to the United States, 1923-37 1/ 



Year 



Total 
quantity." 
exoorted . 









Short tons: 


1923 : 


31^,588 : 


1929 ! 


: 330,550 : 
t 233,485 : 


1930 


1931 


: 302,350 : 


1932 


: 221,712 : 
: 390,367 : 


1933 


1934 


: 397,648 : 


1935 


: 357,723 : 


1936 


: 373,095 : 


1937 


: 344,269 : 



Share 
of total ex- 
ported in 
form of 
coconut oil 



Percent 

49.1 
63.5 
57.3 
60.0 
57.0 

45.1 
40.1 
50.9 
46.5 
52.3 



Total quantity 

exported to 
United States 



Short tons 

232,040 
290,006 
259,083 
247,899 
179,199 
318,071 
256,433 
323,294 
293,117 
320,784 





Ratio of 




quantity of 




copra and 


Share : 


coconut oil 


of exports to: 


exported to 


United States: 


United States 


in form of : 


to total quan- 


coconut oil : 


tity exported 




: to Etll 




: countries 


Percent 


; Percent 


55.0 


: 88.3 


71.7 


: 90.2 


62.2 


: 91.4 


66.1 


81.9 


67.8 


: 30.8 


54.6 


: 81.5 


53.4 


: 64.5 


55.3 


: 90.4 


56.3 


: 77.5 


55.1 


: 93.2 



-T/h^ is converted E tolti equivalent in coconut oil on Um basis 
° f t^^Z^Tir^ Collector o f Custom 



56 

Copra cake and meal 

The residue remaining after the coconut oil Is expressed from the 
copra is either marketed as cake, or it is ground and marketed in the 
form of meal. Since the chief use for these products is for cattle feed, 
and since the Philippine requirements for this purpose are small, prac- 
tically the entire production of cake and meal is exported. Copra cake 
is also used as a fertilizer material, but the price which it commands in 
such us^ is not attractive except under emergency conditions. Copra cake 
does not possess the chemical properties which would permit it to be sub- 
stituted in any appreciable degrer for the fertilizer materials which the 
Philippines now imports primarily for use in the cultivation of sugar cane. 
The only important markets for Philippine copra cake, as such, have been 
in north Europe, whereas the only important market for th. meal has been 
in the United States. 

During the period 1923-33, as shown in table 10, the Philippines ex- 
ported 35 percent or more of its combined cake and meal shipments to 
countries other than the United States. Since 1934, largely because of 
the feed shortage in the United States, the proportion sold in ""t market 
has increased very appreciably. Over 4 0 percent of the total exports went 
to the United States in 1937. Unit prices reached extremely low levels 
during 1933 and 1934, but in the following years they advanced sharply, 
reaching in 1937 the highest .U/*l "ince 1929. 



57 

Table 10.- Copra meal and cake: Quantities and values exported from the 
milippmes to ail countries and to the United States, 1928-37 



Exports of copra cake 

and meal to 
all c our t r i e s 



Quantity 



Value 



Value 
per 
ton 



Ratio of 
value of 
exports of 
copra cake 
and meal to 
total value 
of ail 
Philippine 
exports 



Exports of copra cake 
and meal to the 
United States 



Quantity l/ 



Value 1/ 



Ratio of 
quantity of 
copra cake 
and meal ex- 
ports to the 
United States 
to totn.l quan- 
tity of copra 

cake and 
meal exported 
to all coun- 
tries 



Short tons 



90,006 
125,434 

99,102 
108,716 

83,608 
110,139 
109,347 
112,286 
119', 343 
121,836 



£2, 836, 137 
3,792,786 
1,89?, 224 
1,520,302 
1,053,666 

1,057,554 
1,051,120 

1,639,424 
1,829,539 
2,900,179 



332.07 
30.24 
19.09 
14.99 
12.60 
9.60 
9.57 
14.60 
15.33 
23.80 



Percent 
1.9 

■ J 

1.4 
1.5 
1.1 
1.0 
1.0 
1.7 
1.2 
1.3 



Short tons 



10, 541 
11,676 

14,953 
6,328 
3,340 
11,874 
36,381 
35,359 
57,046 
51,034 



$358,854 
407,170 

327,934 
97,643 
55,7a 
129,154 
447,410 
61^,680 
1,03/,, 247 
1,418, 301 



Percent 

11.7 
9.3 
15.1 
5.8 
4.6 
10.3 
33.1 
31.5 
47.8 
41-9 



y Small amounts of coprs cake and meal exported to the Hawaiian Islands are 



not included. 

Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



j 

J 



58 

Desiccated coconut, 

Desiccated coconut first appeared among the Philippine exports in : 
1922, when the United States placed a duty of 3§ cents per pound on this 
product and a duty of one-half cent each on raw coconuts.^/ Since then 
Philippine exports of desiccated coconut products have beea hlr.oat ex- 
clusively to the United States, all of the other markets combined never 
having taken much ±n excess of on*; oercont of tatr.l nxnnrt.r;. 

There were 12 desiccated coconut factories in the Philippines on 
September 1, 1937, 10 of which were in operation and 2 of which were 
temporarily closed. The plants owned by American investors account 
for approximately 80 percent of the output of the Philippines. 

The unit price of desiccated coconut hrs tended to follow the general 
price movements of other coconut products, such as copra pnd coconut oil, 
but the fluctuations have been much more moderate. Thu exportation of 
desiccated coconut to the United States, as shown in table 11, has in- 
creased very rapidly during the past several years, both the volume and 
value in 1937 being much higher than in any preceding year. 



1/ The term "desiccated coconut" as here employed refers to all 

varieties of dried coconut moat - "grated", 

"ribboned" - intended for use in the preparation ^^^^^^ 
bakery goods. Such products, unliKe coprri, are handled and .rtilici.li/ 
dried under sanitary conditions. 



Table 11. - Desiccated and shredded coconut: Quantities and values exported 
from Philippines to all countries, with percentages thereof 
exported to the United States, 1923-37 l/ 



Year 



Exports of desiccated and 
shredded coconut to 
all countries 



Quantity 

u 



1923 
1929 
1930 
1931 
1932 
1933 
1934 
1935 
1936 
1937 



: Short 
: tons 

a 

: 22, US 
: 24,566 
21,972 
18,543 
17,717 
19,761 
25, 9U 

37,U3 
37,161 

44,913 



Value 



Value 

p 'j r 



ton 



3/ 



$3,723,586 

3,540,124 

2,962, 8U 
1,822,128 

1,616,701 
1,682,304 
2,254,540 
3,962,315 
4,397,063 
6,346,632 



$197.47 
171,36 
160.53 
116.98 
108 . 63 
101.38 
103.45 
125.98 
140,86 
168.23 



Ratio of 
exports of 
desiccated 
and shred- 
ded coco- 
nut to 
total value 

of all 
Philippine 
exports 



Percent 



2.4 
2.2 
2.2 
1.8 
1.7 
1.6 
2.0 
4.2 
3.0 
4.1 



Exports of 
o sicca ted shredded 
coconut to the 
United States 





:c 

*s 

:l 


| Quantity* 


Value * C 

« r 


; Short ! 




: tons i 




: 22,419 
: 24,547 
: 21,943 
: 18,522 

: 17,704 
: 19,733 
s 25,931 
: 37,275 
: 36,694 
: 44,573 

nmnnts not 


43,718,268: 
: 3,537,004: 
; 2,958,710: 
: 1,819,691: 
: 1,615,446: 
: 1,679,997: 
: 2,253,236: 
: 3,941,933: 
: A, 353,138: 
: 6,304,296: 

credited tc 



Ratio of 
quantity of 
desiccated 
and shredded 



to total 
uantity of 
desiccated 
,nd shredded 
coconut ex- 
lorted to al^ 

countries 



Percent 



99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
100,0 

99.6 

98.7 
99.2 



if The major portion 01 wi« • T „ 1srlds 

States in this table are shipped to the Hawaiian IsUnds. 

2/ Includes weight of containers . deducted from the gross weight 

y In computing unit values, 16 P^cent »»» 
ebMQ in order to alley: .for the weight of containers. 

Source: Annual Report,, Insular Collector of Customs. 



'6'0 

Combined exports of major coconut products 

On the basis of value, the aggregate exports from the Philippines of 
the four principal coconut products fell in 1932, as shown in table 12, 
to the lowest level reached in the 10-year period, 1928-37. The trade 
in that year was the smallest both in absolute value and in relation to 
the total value of all Philippine exports to all countries. Philippine 
trade in these products with the United States followed an almost identical 
course . 

Commencing with 1934, the aggregate value of the aforementioned coco- 
nut exports both to the world as a v. hole and to the United States increased 
steadily. The value of these exports to all couh tries in 1937 vms higher 
than in any earlier year since 1929, and it constituted a larger proportion 
of the value of the total exports of all commodities than in any year 
since 1929 with the exception of 1935. The same was true of the corres- 
ponding trade with the United States. In 1937, however, the value of the 
exports of the aforementioned coconut products to the United States consti- 
tuted a greater proportion of the total ™iue of such exports to all mar- 
kets than in any other year in the period under review. 



i 



61 



Table 12. - 



Principal coconut products: Values of total exports from the 
Philippines to all countries and to 
the United States, 1928-37 1/ 











Ratio of value 




i Value of : 


: Ratio of j 




1 Ul t; A <J vJ 1 Lo \J 1 




( value of j 


; Value of j 


! principal cocor- 




: principal 


: exports of : 


: principal : 


nut products 




: coconut ; 


: principal i 


: coconut < 


1 +0 the 


Year 


: products 


coconut ; 


nroduots ; 


United St^te? 




: exported 


: products to ; 




• to the* vpIup 




: to all 


: total value : 


to the 


i o T ^ GXDorts 




: countries : 


! of all ; 


; United j 


: of princiual 






! Philippine 


States i 


; coconut 






: produc ts i 




: uxports to ail 










countries 






: Percent 




Percent 


1928 : 


: $52,641,236 


: 34.0 : 


: $44,920,474 


: 85.1 


1929 ! 


: 52,033,672 


: 31 . 7 i 


: 44,285,658 


: 85.0 


1930 ! 


: 37,443,888 


: 28.1 


: 32,902,818 


: 87.9 


1931 


: 27,528,657 


: 26.5 


: 21,555,351 


: 78.3 


1932 ! 


: 15,454,738 


: 16.2 


: 12,063,082 


: 73.1 


1933 


: 20,866,209 


: 19.7 


: lo, 785,452 


: 80.4 


1934- 


: 13,705,656 


: 16.9 


: 12,997,262 


: 69.5 


1935 


: 28,843,050 


: 30.6 : 


: 25,670,726 


: 89.0 


1936 


: 35,098,145 


: 23.8 : 


: 28,297,038 


: 80.6 


1937 


: 45,757,048 


: 29.8 ; 


: 41,321,780 


: 90.3 



1/ The coconut products included are copra, coconut oil, copra cake and meal, 
and desiccated coconut. 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Cur tons. 



62 

Miner coconut products 

Philippine production of coconut products of minor importance has 
increased appreciably in recent years. Among the more important of 
these are soap, margarine, cooking oils and fats, fatty acids, glycerin, 
charcoal, and coir (fiber made from coconut husk). None of these has 
as yet attained great importance in the export field, although several 
show considerable promise. 

Recent Legislation Affecting the Exportation of 
Philippine Coconut Products to the 
United States 

Among the factors which have recently assumed major significance 
with respect to Philippine exports of coconut products to the United 
States are the following: The United States agricultural program, the 
droughts of 1934 and 1936 in the United States, the Philippine Inde- 
pendence Act, and the United States Revenue Acts of 1934, 1935, and 1936. 
The operation of some of these factors has tended to obscure the force 
of some of the others, and the operation of at least one of them, the 
Independent Act, has not as yet been significant. The purpose of 
the following discussion is to consider the present and probable future 
effects on Philippine interests which may properly be assigned to the 
provisions of (1) the Independence Act and <2) the Unit,, States Revenue 
Acts of 1934, 1935, and 1936, insofar as they affect, or are likely to 
affect, the exportation of coconut products to the United States. 
The effects of this legislation cannot be fully isolated from the 
effects of other factors, and any estimate for the future is particularly 

, „ cr f . f the unforeseen technological and economic 
subject to error because o£ tnc an^oiu 

changes which may develop. 



io move- 



63 

Inde pendenc g Ac t 

The Independence Act provides for certain restrictions on the 
roent of Philippine coconut products to the United States. The major 
products — copra, coconut oil, copra cake and meal, and desiccated coco- 
nut — are tc be affected as follows: 

(!) During the first 5 years of the Commomvo-lth Government , the 
maximum quantity of coconut oil which may be admitted into the United 
States free of duty in any calendar year is 200,000 long tons (22^,000 
short tons). Any excess is subject tc the full United States duty. 
No restrictions of any kind are placed on the movement of the other major 
coconut products from thu Philippines to the United States. 

(2) Prom the sixth thivugh the tenth year of the C ■ jmnr-n.vealth 
Government , the duty-free quo to cm coconut cil will remain unchanged, but 
irill become subject to the progressive Philippine export taxes to be ap- 
.died apainst all Philippine experts to the United States which ooulu be 
subject to duty if entered from a foreign country. Exports of coconut 
oil to the United States in excess of the duty-free quota will not bo 
subject to Philippine export taxes, but they «ill be subject to the 
United States duty. The ex,ort taxes .ill also apply tc desiccated 
coconut and to cake and meal, but not to copra, assuming the continuance 
of the present United States tariff rates ana classifications. 

( 3 ) after the Phil* j giBSi attains.- -itB inieoendonce en July L, 1^6 , 
Philippine coconut oil will no longer be subject to the quota restrictions 
previously imposed by the Independence Act, nor ,ill it be subject to the 

• q , e in the a^t. At that time, all Philippine 
export taxes provided for xn tne ac*. 

. tt x*o* states will be dutiable at the tariff rates 
products entering the United States m.xx 

. ., 4 „ from other countries, 

applicable to similar innortS ir^m 



64 



* 



The following table shews the exnor-t +n™ h k- -u *» 

1L ^pom laxos be which the major 

coconut products will be rmMaa* ,i,,„.s 

u - a °J e ct, during the period of the Commonwealth 

Government, and the United States duties to which they will become 
subject thereafter. All computations are based on the United States 
tariffs now in effect; they do not take into account the excise taxes 
imposed by United States revenue acts, which will be considered later. 



Table 13 . - Philippine export taxes and United States dutie: 
applicable to the principal Philippine coconut 
products marketed in the United States 



(Cents per pound) 



Period 1/ 



First 5 years <-f Crmnonwoalth period 

Sixth year-export tax = 5 percent United 

States duty 

Seventh year-export t&x - 10 percent United 

States duty 

Eighth year-export tax =15 percent United 

States duty 

Ninth year-export tax - 20 percent United 

States duty 

Tenth year-export tax =25 Percent United 

States duty ""7a" 

After independence, beginning July 4, 194o, 
full United States duty 



Copra i 


'Coconut - 

; oil 2/; 


Copra : 
icake and: 
meal j 


Desic- 
:cated 
coconut 


Free : 


: Free ; 


: Free : 


Free 


Free ; 


: 0.1 ! 


; 0.015 ! 


1 0.175 


?red ; 


: .2 : 


.030 : 

* ■ 


: .350 


Free ; 


: .3 : 


■ .045 : 


: .525 


Free : 


: -4 : 


: .060 , 


: .700 


Free : 


e .5 : 


.075 : 


: .875 


Free : 


2.0 : 


; .300 : 


■ 3.500 



1/ The sixth year of the OWonv.-o-a.lth will begin Nov. 15, l'XO; the 
Commonwealth period will end July 3, 

2/ Coconut oil in excess of 200,000 long tons (22 ^ trn. n f r 
calendar year during the Coirononw^altU ^ is exempt from Philippine 
export ties, but is subject to the full United States duty. 



65 

It does not appear that during the first 5 years of the Commonwealth 
period, the exports of the principal coconut products will be curtailed 
in consequence of the provisions of the Independence Act. Coconut oil 
is the only coconut product whose export to the United States is subject 
to any restrictions. The duty-free limitation in this case, however, 
amounts to 200,000 long tons per year. 

During the second 5 years of the Commonwealth period, the exports 
of coconut products in the aggregate are not likely to be affected t 
appreciably in consequence of any provisions of the Independence Act. 
But the composition of the major coconut exports is likely to undergo 
some important changes, since the export taxes will constitute a pro- 
gressively increasing disadvantage for the Philippine producers of coco- 
nut oil in their competition with crushers located in the United States. 

Philippine producers maintain that their costs cf converting copra 
into coconut oil are substantially the same as those- of producers in the 
United States. The advantage of the lower wage scales in the Philip- 
pines, they contend, is offset by the lower efficiency of the labor and 
by the greater costs for power, machinery, and replacement parts. My 
possible advantage which crushers in the Philippines may actually have 
at present overproduced in the United States must be confined principally 
to some fraction of the relatively small cost of converting copra into 
oil, since mills in the United States and in the Philippines buy copra on 

t+ iq hifrhlv improbable, therefore, that 
substantially similar terms. It is higniy i 

• +u PMiir nines will be able to compete with mainland 
the oil producers in the Philippines wx 

Va1o _f t he commonwealth period. In the last 
producers even for the whole ot the uo..w 

• , mart tax on coconut oil will, on the basis of 

year of that period, the export xax 



66 

present United States duties, amount to one-half cent per pound. Such a 
tax exceeds the entire present cost cf converting copra into coconut oil 
either in the Philippines or in the United States. 

To the extent that the Philippines will be obliged to curtail its 
exports of coconut oil to the United States during the second 5 years of 
the Commonwealth period, it should be able to increase its exports of 
copra. Consumption of coconut oil in the United States presumably will 
not be affected by Philippine export taxes so long as these are not 
applicable to copra. The export taxes, therefore, will operate to trans- 
fer the crushing industry from the Philippines to the United States. 
Should the transfer in fact occur, the Philippines would necessarily 
cease exporting copra cake and meal. The loss of the crushing industry 
would entail a small decline in employment in the Philippines, a shrink- 
age in Government revenues, and a loss of some capital (chiefly American 
and British) invested in the crushing mills. The export of desiccated 
coconut is not likely to be very seriously affected by the export taxes, 
since even in the last year of the Commonwealth period (on the basis of 
present United States duty) Philippine producers will still have a tariff 
preference in the United States market of over 2.6 cents per pound over 

other foreign suppliers. 

After the Philippines attains its complete independence, any further 
important changes likely to affect the coconut industry in consequence of 



the ::rovis 



ions of the Independence Act will depend primarily on (l) 



n a+ 0 a Q+a+flo excise taxes on oils and fats will then 
whether the present United St- tea excise «*x 

be in effect, and, if so, (2) whether coconut oil derived from Philippine 
copra will continue to enjoy its present preferential excise-tax status 
in the United States market. The existing United States revenue acts are 
not clear on this latter point. 



67 

If the present United States tariff and the present excise tax legis- 
lation remain in effect after July 3 , 1946, and if Philippine-derived 
coconut oil remains in its present preferential excise-tax status, the 
only further change likely to affect the coconut industry in consequence 
of the provisions of the Independence Act will be a reduction of the 
output and profitableness of the desiccated coconut industry. The 
exports of coconut oil to the United States presumably will have been 
discontinued and replaced by copra in the second half of the Commonwealth 
period. But if this should not have taken place then, it appears prac- 
tically certain that, on the basis of present tariff rates, coconut oil 
would no longer be exported to the United States after becoming subject 
to the full United States duty, inasmuch as it could not then compete in 
the American market with coconut oil crushed in the United States from 
imported, duty-free Philippine copra. Once the Philippines ceases 
exporting coconut oil it would, as was previously observed, cease export- 
ing copra cake and meal. 

The ability of producers in the Philippines to continue exporting 
desiccated coconut will depend principally on the degree to which they 
will be able to compete in the United States or in other world markets 
with Ceylon producers. Under competitive conditions which have existed 
during recent years, Philippine desiccators have been able to operate very 
profitably and on an increasing scale while selling their product in the 
United States at a price not greatly above that of the Ceylon product, 
duty unpaid. By the time Philippine independence is achieved, it is to 
be expected that Philippine production costs and profit margins will be 
reduced somewhat. It may well be, therefore, that the Philippines will 
be able to retain a substantial fraction of its market in the United 



68 

States for desiccated coconut even aft»* +k * 

"- Vt - n a *ter that product becomes subject to 

the full United States duty. Some cart >f > + 

ume >- irt ot its market, however, the 

Philippines will doubtless lose to United States manufacturers and to 
Ceylon producers, chiefly the latter. A partial liquidation of the 
manufacture of Philippine desiccated coconut would not greatly affect 
the coconut industry as a whole in the Philippines. It would, however, 
result in a somewhat lessened demand for coconuts, in some curtailments 
in employment and government revenue, and in a loss of private capital, 
almost all of v.hich is American. 

Considering the effects of the provisions of the Independence Act 
for the whole period of the Commonwealth Government and for the period 
after independence, it does not appear that they will of themselves 
operate to restrict greatly the aggregate value or volume of exports of 
the major coconut products, except insofar as reduced shipments of 
desiccated coconut will be a factor, provided that, if the present excise 
taxes remain in effect after July 3, 194-6, coconut oil derived from 
Philippine copra will continue to be taxed at the present rate. 
Throughout the Commonwealth period and thereafter, however, the United 
States excise taxes, independently of the provisions of the Independence 
Act, will continue to have an important effect on the Philippine coconut 
industry . 

United States revenue acts 

, ... T>^„„„ a Art of 1934 placed excise taxes on the 
The United States Revenue Act. oi xyj** i 

. . fic;h .. n d marine -animal oils and on the first 
importation of certain iisn 'inu ^• LJIC 

, - ™tain vegetable oils, among which Philippine 

domestic processing of certain vet**"*- 

-n , 4„/»ii«ted The tax amounted to 3 cents 
coconut oil was specifically included. i 

— — , — - — — Mq „ m as to processing taxes, and 

1/ The act became effective May 10, 1^4, i 

May 11, 1934., as to import taxes. 



e Philippines or in the 



69 

per pound on the oil extracted (either in th 

United States) from copra of Phi n**^ 

Pi- ot PhiUpp lne origin, as compared with 5 cents 

per pound on oil extracted from corn «p * . 1/ 

irom copra oi foreign origin.^/ The tax on 

the principal foreign coinnpti + nvc „ 

competitive oils was 3 cents per pound. Section 

6024 of the act also provided that the excise taxes which the United 
States should collect on coconut oil produced either in the Philippine 
or in the United States from Philippine copra would be paid to the 
Treasury of the Philippine Commonwealth. The remittance of this money 
was made conditional on the Philippine Government not payingany subsidies 
to producers of copra, coconut oil, or allied products. 

The Revenue Act of 1935 amended that of 1934 so as to place a com- 
pensatory tax on imported ar tic its manufactured or produced in chief 
value from taxable ails. The rates were substantially the equivalent 

of the excise taxes which would have boen collected had the oil in- 

2/ 

gredients been imported into the United States in the form of oil. 
Tne principal effect of this law on the Philippines was to subject 
Philippine -^ade fatty acids, vegetable lard, soap, and other products 
made from coconut oil to the equivalent of the excise tax imposed on 
coconut oil. 

3/ 

The Revenue Act of 1936 amended both of the preceding revenue acts. 

The most important changes, from the standpoint of the Philippines, were 

the extension of the list of taxable oils and the increases in rates on 

some of the oils already taxed. The rate on coconut oil was not changed. 

" 1/ Coconut oil imported as s uch from countries other than the ?^P^ S 
and Cuba is ulso subject to an import duty of 2 cents per pound. Coconut 
oil from Cuba, if any were imported, would be subject to an import duty of 

L |/ C Thla change went into effect Sept. 30, 1935, or 30 days after the 1935 
"•ra^s^proved June 22, 1936, and the new rates became effec- 
tibe Aug. 21, 1936. 



Excise taxes on coconut oil are collected by the United States 
Bureau of Internal Revenue on the first domestic processing The 
receipts from coconut oil produced in the Philippines, or in the United 
States from Philippine materials, arc credited to a special fund for 
remittance to the Philippine Treasury. 

The net effect of the recent revenue acts, even as amended to date, 
has been to alter adversely the competitive position in the American 
market of Philippine -derived coconut oil as compared with oils and fats 
produced wholly in the United States, inasmuch as the excise taxes have 
been applied only against oils and fats of foreign and of Philippine origin 
This legislation has also altered adversely the competitive position of 
Philippine coconut oil in comparison with several foreign oils, of more 
or less minor importance at present, which are exempt from the excise 
taxes and, in a few instances, exempt from import duties as well. 

The preferential tax positian accorded coconut oil of Philippine 
derivation has given the Philippines a larger share of the united States 
copra market than it previously had, but in view of the fact that it is 
still obliged to sell in the world market, there is considerable doubt 
that this has redounded as much to its advantage as might appear to be 
the case. The Philippines sells its copra in the United States generally 
at no price advantage over its sales in the world market, and foreign 
copra which formerly entered the United States now supplants substantially 

- i , f pm h wine coora in other markets. The preference, 

equivalent amounts of Philippine ^^ tt 

t - r+a Ai*r hP^n )f some actual benefit, anu A' oven more 
however, has admittedly oet.n >- 

potential benefit to the Philippines. 



71 



To the extent that the use of coconut oil in the United States has 
been lessened or the price (exclusive of the tax) depressed in con- 
sequence of the excise-tax legislation, the Philippine copra and coconut 
oil interests have been affected adversely. What effect this legislation 
may be expected to have after independence, even should it continue in 
force unaltered, is a matter for speculation. The revenue acts provide 
that the preferential rate shall be accorded to coconut oil crushed from 
copra originating in "the Philippine Islands or any other possession of 
the United States." Although the Philippines will no longer bo a 
possession of the United States commencing July U, 194.6, coconut oil 
derived from Philippine copra may possibly be held to be entitled to 
preferential treatment in the United States on the basis of the wording 
of the existing laws. The present preferential rate on Philippine coco- 
nut oil (3 cents per pound) is the same as the rate applicable to a 
number of other imported oils which are competitive with coconut oil in 
varying degree. The imposition of the nonpreferential rate (5 cents per 
pound) on Philippine coconut oil, therefore, would result in adversely 
affecting the competitive position of this product in the United States 
market in respect of other foreign oils ana fats, and would seriously 
injure the whole coconut industry in the Philippines. 

The remittance of the proceeds of United States excise taxes on 

x • -i +hP Philippine Treasury represents gains for 
Philippine coconut oil to tne inxj.ippxnc j 

the Commonwealth .ovornment which very likely exceed any ,»onetary losses 
which the Philippine coconut industry has suffered in consequence of the 
United States excise tax legislation. The processing tax has been high 
in relation to the oil - about 100 percent v,hen the law ,as introduced; 



72 

tut it appears that a larre hut *™* a +«v , 

r«e out indeterminate portion of the tax has 

not been shifted back to Phi H •, 

milippme producers. B y the end of March 

1938, the United States Treisurv w«h n,n , , m . 

1 ieasur y bad collected $61,115,123 for remittance 

to the Philippine Government, as shown in the following table: 

Table 14.- United States Treasury receipts from process- 
ing taxes on coconut oil derived from Philippine copra 1/ 



Period 



1934 (May 10-Dec. 31) - 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1933 (Jan.l-March 31) - 

Total May 10, 2 934- 
March 31, 1938 



Quantity 



Tax 



Pounds 

254,679,382 
596,296,765 
580,370,062 
511,275,202 
94,549,352 



£7,640,381 
17,888,903 
17,411,102 
15,338,256 
2,836,481 



2,037,170,763 : 61,115,123 



1/ As provided for under Sec. 602§ of the Revenue Act 
of 1934, effective lay 10, 1934- 

Source: U. S. Bureau of Internal Revenue. 



Character r>T rucoinm f ndations 

Under existing legislation, Philippine coconut products shipped to 
the United States during the Commonwealth period will be subject to 
Philippine export taxes and, in the case of coconut oil, to United States 
quota limitations as well; bat after the Philippines becomes independent 
on July 4, 1946, such products will no longer be subject to the afore- 

* -limitations. At that time, they will become 
mentioned taxes or quota lunxtat-xons. 

• -tpc pvHse taxes applicable to similar 
subject to the United States tariffs and excise taxes n 

^4„i n<! exceot that coconut oil made from 
products of other foreign origins, excepx, 

, , i i ±„ Vi« t-ra v le at a -referential excise tax 
Philippine copra may be held to be taxai le 

,. fflirliq rrovisions in the United States Revenue- 
rate, by virtue of certain ambiguous proviexu 

Act of 1934. 



73 

The Committee recommends +u * ,, 

nets tnat the Allowing changes should be made 

ft the treatment to be accorded Phi lippine Coconut products ^ ^ 
the united States during the Cc^onwealth period: Coconut oil should be 

exempt from Philippine export tav«= w • • 

xporx tdAes but, m Ueu thereof, should be sub- 
ject to annually declining- rintv f« oa ,.„, 

xnj - n ^> duty-free quotas commencing with 200,000 long 

tons (of United States inr-iorf <^ f-^ +u Q „„n , 

sports; lor the calendar year 1940, This amount 

should be reduced by 5 percent fn-r P ^i, c,,o a^^s -> , .... 

^ ^ ; - l - r1 ^ Ior eacn succeeding calendar year until it 

equals 150,000 long tons for the calendar year 1945. For the period 
January 1, 194-6, through July 3, 1946, the quota should be one-half of 
the quota for the preceding year, or 75,000 long tons. Shipments in 
excess of the aforementioned quotas should be subject to whatever United 
States duty may be in force at the time. 

The Committee also recommends that the imposition of full United 
States duties should be postponed from July 4, 1946, to January 1, 1961, 
during which interim United States imports of coconut products, except 
coconut oil, should be subject to preferential tariff rates, commencing 
with 25 percent of the United States tariff rates in force on July 4, 
1946, and increasing on each subsequent January 1, by 5 percent of the 
then existing rates. Coconut oil should be subject to the above duties 
only on those amounts in excess of declining, duty-free quotas, fixed as 
follows: For the period July 4, 1946, through December 31, 1946, the 
quota should be 75,000 long tons; for the following calendar year, it 
should be 140,000 long tons; and thereafter it should be reduced annually 
by 10,000 long tons (5 percent of 200,000 tons) until 1961. 



74 

The Committee further recommends that the United States excise tax 
rate applicable to all foreign coconut oil, if excise taxes on oils be 
in existence after the Philippines becomes independent on July 4, 1946, 
thenceforth be no higher than the rate applicable to palm oil (except 
for making tin plate) or to palm kernel ollM 

The Committee believes that if the above recommendations were 
adopted, the Philippine coconut industry v/ould have an adequate opportun- 
ity to adjust itself to a position independent of preferential tariff and 
excise tax treatment in the United States market. 



palm oil (except i'or 

1/ The excis TlSir^ThmpPj-ne coc ^ ^ existing 

making tin plate) and palra kerneJ- ai . 

law. 



75 

ABACA AND CORDAGE 
ABACA 

The eboGC industry in Philippine economy 

Abaca, popularly known as manila or manila hemp, is used in the 
nanufacture of cordage. During the last 20 years the total acrage devoted 
to abaca culture (now amounting to about 10 percent of the cultivated area 
in the Philippines) has remained relatively constant at approximately 
1,100,000 acres, although the area actually harvested, and therefore the 
production of the; fiber, have varied from year to year. Production 
amounted to 221,300 tons in 1929 and to 121,500 tons in 1932. In the 
period 1934-37 the annual production has approximated 200,000 tons. 

The principal region:; in which abaca is produced, are in the island 
of Mindanao, in southern part of the island of Luzon, and in the islands 
of Leyte, Samar, and Masbate. Methods of cultivation and fiber extrac- 
tion are not advanced, except in the Province of Davao, Mindanao, where 
American and Japanese producers have employed scientific methods of culti- 
vation and have introduced a more extensive use of machinery for extract- 
ing the fiber. As a result of these improvements, production in the 

• „ t . j flri d that in other sections has either 

Province of Davao has increased etna wia* 

i ~-m™t1 This province, which has the largest 
remained stationary or declined. mis > 

abaca acreage under cultivation in the Philippe, now raises about 35 
percent of the total .abaca fiber produced and about 75 percent of the 

• -^i aWe^ used by rope manufacturers in the 
total quantify of the principal grade, use j 

United States.^ 



1/ These grades are 



"classified as j1, 0, and I. 



The investment in land, improvements, and machinery in the abaca 
industry is reported at $185,000,000; of this amount, 90 percent i„ 
owned by Filipinos and the remainder principally by Americans and 
Japanese.^/ It is estimated that approximately 500,000 people are 
directly engaged in growing and in stripping manila hemp. 

Manila fiber was the largest Philippine export crop in the nine- 
teenth century. As late as 1903, it comprised 68 percent of the total 
value of all Philippine exports , but thereafter it declined in relative 
value. In 1937 exports of abaca amounted to 14.1 percent of the total 
value of all Philippine exports. Most of the abaca produced in the 
Philippines is exported as fiber, the consumption of local cordage 
factories being relatively small. The principal export markets arc- 
the United States, th- United Kin-aom, and Japan. Exports to Japan 
are usually the largest in quantity while those to the United States 
are the highest in value. In 1937 shipments' to the United States 
amounted to 31.7 perccmt of the total value of Philippine exports of 
abaca and to 2/,. 6 percent of the total quantity of such exports (see 
table 15 ) • 



1/ 



Philip?^ Statistical Review, vol. 2, no, U, 1935, p. 310. 



Table 15.- Abaca: 



Quantities and -values exported from the Philippines to 
all countries and to the United States ^ 1923-37 









Katio o-l total 






: Ratio 01 ex oorts of 








VaJ.Uc U.l. C;J* UOl US 


: ExportvS 


: abaca to 


the United 


Year j 


Total 


PXOOPt.S 


O F P 1 ;-l ( T t n 


LO 




States to total ex~ 








total value of 


1 Uii 1 06 CI 




: oorts of abaca to all 








a L 1 Phi li"o 01 no 






countries 




Quantity : 


Value 


sy. ports : 


1 C Mr 1 D t" 1 t V 


V _L J. Llti 


: Quantity 


: Value 




Short tons : 




Percent 


• Mil or 1 ton 




• Percent 




1928 


192,677 : 


$26,593,606 : 






• #q ^27 0/ c . 


29.2 


: 35.3 


1 ooc 

-»- / / • 


203,802 : 


23,240,550 : 








: 35.3 


: 43.5 


1-1.30 


136,610 : 


18. 426.676 : 


13 • S i 


C4 , rip 




j>i. . / 


41.5 


1931 : 


145,629 : 


8,9^2,906 : 




30,756 


: 2,511,733 : 


21.1 


: 28.1 


I Ci 32 


n l6 607 • 




» 1 • j « 


27,700 : 


1,4^1,576 : 


23.8 


: 29.5' 


1933 


: 167,622 


: 6,873,859 


: 6.5 : 


39,3°1 : 


2,012,934 : 


23.8 : 


29.3 


1934 


: 192,352 


: 8,661,568 


7 . 6* : 


46,386 : 




24.1 : 


31.1 






11, 4 fj , -oc 


• 190 , 


49,024 : 


3,811,009 : 


23.6 : 


j j . < 


1936 


: 184,221 


: 17,088,598 


: 11.6 : 


41,713 : 


5,336; 710 : 


22.6 : 


31.2 


W7 


: 181,873 


: 21,639,687 


: H.l 


44,742 : 


6,351,0/13 : 


24.6 


31.7 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



78 



inasmuch as the Philippic, has a ^ ctio n 

practical monopoly in the 

production oi abaca, other n--H ,*,= 

° Dlietd to make most of their 
purchases there. Tnc share af +v Tt . , _ , 

^ lmlted St ^s ^ the export trade 
of abaca is consequently lower than i n that * 

in tha ° 01 m any other Philippine" 

AbaCS fr ° m «" - entered the „ nlte<J states ' f ^ 
of duty since 1890. Kanila hemp does ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

raised in the United States. As long as ^ ^ on ^ ^ 
Stotes free list, it will not bc dlractly bj ^ ^ ^ 

visions of the Independence Act. 
Ck-.rc.ctur of r e c oram enda tiong 

The Committee recommends that abaca be bound free of United 
States duty for the remainder of Commonwealth period (i.e., until 
July 4, 1946) . 



79 
CORDAGE 

ge cordcigfc industry in PMH rr i n c uconnT . v 

Four cordage factories we™ nr««».,.n . », 

were operating m Manila during 1937. 

Three of the factories produce nep-rlv nil r>p + v 

i e nearly all of the cordage manufactured 

in the Philippines. In 1935, African capital controlled 53 percent 
of the spindle opacity of the Philippine, Filipino capital controlled 
a percent, and Chinese 6 percent. Total investments in the industry 
are estimated at approximately $3,000,000. The cordage mills in the 
Philippines are reported to employ about 1,000 persons whose salaries 
and wages approximate $300,000 per annum. 

Exports of cordage from the Philippines totaled 15,667,000 pounds 
in 1929; declined to 3,451,000 pounds in 1932, -md amounted to 
16,450,000 pounds in 1937. The value jf exports was #1,904,000 in 
1929, 1659,000 in 1932, and $1,436,000 in 1937. 

In recent years, countries other than the United States have taken 
nore than 50 percent 3 f the quantity of cordage exported from the 
Philippines. From 1930 to 1935, shipments to tne United States 
accounted for more than 50 percent of the value rf the exports of 
cordage. Sine, 1935, shipments from tne Philippines to the United 

c + , tflC , . . . , h-.rjjus^ of the quota limitation imposed by 

states nave been restricted D^cau^e jj- *j 

j ,i „ w iei. mview. the unit values of 
the Cordage Act. During the decade under review, 

„ „ T ., ., + .-.. r than the unit values of 
Shipments to the United States wore greater wian 

-ports to other countries. This condition may be attributed to the 
^lity ,f individual Philippine producers, operating through 

....... sell various types of rope in the 

-elusive distributing agencies, to sexx 



80 



protected market of the United States at higher prices than could he 
obtained in foreign markets. 

The increase in the exports of Philippine cordage in recent 
years has been marked, but exports of cordage constituted less than 
1 percent of the value of total exports from the Philippines in 
1937, (See table 16.) 



Table 16.- Cordage: Quantities and values exported from the Philippines to 

all countries and to the United States, 1928-37 



Year 


Total exports : 


f i n nf "hot ft 1 I 

value of exports: 
of cordage to : 
total value : 
of all Phili^nins 


Exports to the 
United States 


: Ratio of quantity of 
: exports of cordage 
: to the United States 
: to total quantity of 

such exports to 
: all countries 


Quantity • 


Value : 


Quantity : 


Value 


1928 : 

1929 : 

1930 ' 

1931 ' 
1932 

1934 
1935 
1936 
1937 


Pounds : 

H, 494, 705 : 
15,667,016 : 

13,858,457 : 
: 10,224,805 : 
: 8,451,224 
: 12,907,781 
: 18,339,701 
: 17,651,445 
: 14,561,103 
: 16,449,336 


$1,775,436 : 
1,904,272 : 
1,553,2^7 : 

887,408 
: 359,047 

906,763 
: 1,334,110 
: 1,161,815 
: .1,198,870 
: 1,436,461 


Pore ~t 

L.l : 
j 4 x « 
1.2 : 

: .9 

: .7 
.9 

: 1.2 
: 1.2 
.8 

.9 


Pounds : 

5,393,029 : 
6,850,770 : 

: 4,599,113 : 
: 4,U7,832 : 
: 6,876,227 
: 8,943,167 : 
: 8,053,278 
: 3,918,022 
: 4,660,333 


: $721,121 
: 932,731 : 

8/1 565 
: 46u,001 : 
: 411,207 : 

567,340 
: 785,053 : 
: 623,959 : 
: 449,692 : 
: 4°5,967 : 


: Percent 

: 43.7 
48.3 
45.0 

52.6 00 

53.3 H 

43.8 

45.6 

26.9 

28.3 

1 



uourcc: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



82 



Re strictions on the ship ment of P hi1 i ppin e cordage to the United States 

Cordage is one of the three Philippine export commodities for which 
duty-free entry into the United States is subject to limitation under the 
Independence Act. For the first 5 years of the Commonwealth period, the 
Independence Act fixes a duty-free quota of 3,000,000 pounds, any excess 
being subject to the full United States duty. The duty-free quota pro- 
vided in the act is only about one-half of the average annual shipments 
from the Philippines to the United States during the period 1926-35, which 
average amounted to 6,012,000 pounds. The quota provisions in the Inde- 
pendence Act were, at the time of their adoption, far more restrictive of 
shipments of cordage than of either sugar or coconut oil. Quotas for the 
two latter were fixed at approximately the maximum annual shipments made 
prior to 1932, the year in which the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act was drafted. 
If the quota for cordage had been determined on the same basis, it would 
have amounted to approximately 6,850,000 pounds rather than 3,000,000 pounds 
as now provided. 

During the second 5 years of the Commonwealth period, according to the 
Independence Act, the duty-free limitation on shipments of Philippine cord- 
age is to be continued but the quota is then to become subject to the 
progressive Philippine export taxes. These taxes are to begin at 5 per- 
cent of the United States duty on cordage in the sixth year of the Common- 

, it a . . 0 c npr cent in the tenth year. After independence, 

wealth and increase to 25 percenx in 

•n longer be required by the United States, but 
Philippine export taxes will no longer dc re H 

in +v-on be aoolied to all Philippine cordage 
the full United States duty will then be appj-i 

«x * n The ore sent United States duty on cordage 
imported into the United States. The presen 

p m «*vll« ***» is 2 cents per pound, and, for rope 
"wholly or in chief value of manila 

iU - ! inch in diameter an additional 15 percent 
smaller than three-fourths of 1 men m ux 

ad valorem. 



S3 

The cordage provisions of the Independence Act were superseded by an 
Act of Congress approved June U , 1935. Under the latter act, CD the 
duty-free limitation of "all yarns, twines, cords, cordage, rope, and 
cable, tarred or untarred, wholly or in chief value of manila (abaca) or 
other hard fiber" was raised from 3,000,000 tc 6,000,000 pounds annually; 
(2) the increased quota is an absolute one, i.e., no Philippine cordage in 
excess of 6,000,000 [jounds annually is to be admitted into the United 
States. The Cordage Act, which was subject to termination on May 1, 1938, 
was extended in 1938 by proclamation of the President of the United States 

y 

with the concurrence of the President of the Philippines until :tfay 1, 1941. 
7fhen the act expires exports of cordage will be governed by the provisions 
of the Independence Act. 

The restrictions in the Cordage Act differ fundamentally from those 
imposed by the Independence Act. Whereas, that act permitted goods sub- 
ject to quotas to enter the United States in excess of such quotas by pay- 
ing full duty, the Cordage Act fixed a maximum which may not be exceeded. 
The quota fixed in the Cordage Act also included binder twine, which is on 
the United States free list. All United States imports of Philippine 
binder twine, therefore, must be included in the cordage quota although 

■ t-^ ' ~ . ran + " wa s made by the White House when the Pre si- 

1/ The folding announcement ^ mad y am&unced that his action in 

dent signed the ^Xaoatoon- ^ovisions of the Cordage Act of June 

extending today by Pro c lama txon t nepr d of exttmsion p errais ._ 

14, 1935, for another three years (tn ^ mM&u$ 

sible under the Act) was ^tended mer^ ^ ^ lmpo rtation of 

Without prejudice, -che s_^H^-— States until he may have occasion to 
Philippine cordage into tno un^ states-Philippine tr'ide as he may find 
make such recozoraendations on un. r ^. DO rt to be rendered by the Joint 

appropriate after consideration of ^ J „ 
Preparatory Committee on Phxlxpyxn- 



S4 

foreign countries may ship to the United States unlimited quantities of 
this product free of duty. Only negligible quantities of binder twine 
have at any time been imported from the Philippines. The Cordage Act, 
moreover , limited shipments of cordage as of May 1, 1935, whereas the 
restrictions fixed by the Independence Act would not have become appli- 
cable until November 15, 1935, when the Commonwealth Government was 
inaugurated M 

Another factor affecting the shipment of Philippine cordage to the 
United States is the spread in the freight rates on baled abaca and on 
finished rope. Inasmuch as about 1 pound of abaca is required to pro- 
duce 1 pound of rope, the current freight differential, corresponding 
to approximately 1 cent per pound, favors the movement of abaca rather 
2/ 

than of rope.-^ 

According to existing law, the entry of Philippine cordage into the 
United States during the Commonwealth period will be restricted by the 
absolute quota of the Cordage Act until Hay 1, 1941, and thereafter by 
the duty-free quota of the Independence Act. During the second 5 years 
of the Commonwealth, the Philippine export taxes will, moreover, reduce 

i v,r Ph-ii-in-nire cordase manufacturers in the 
the advantage now enjoyed by Philippine cor j 3 

, , . nripir however, that the export taxes will 

United States. It aoes not appear, nowe/cx, 

4. soi Unction in the quantity of Philippine 
of themselves cause any material reduction in u 4 

X1 _ rT ... a+ates. Immediately after the Philippines 
cordage exported to the United States. 

^ Q .rli cation of the United States duties will 
become independent, the application ° 

. , t^.^o -i / 1935. but became effe c tive 

1/ The Cordage Act was approved June H, 

retroactively May 1, 1935. .^n^ -rates* 

2/ Trans-Pacific Conference contract .» ' to Atlanti c and 

(1) Rope, effective April 1, 1938, ra* PI 

Gulf ports - U& P er 20 cwt * , i -.qog Philippines to Atlantic and 

(?\ Ahaca effective ret), l, -wr* 
Gulf ports ll'ver bale (278.3 pounds) . 



85 

operate to reduce the quantity of Ph-rn 

r " 1 - L1 PPl3ae exports of cordage, as well as 

the profits derived therefron Hi+ * + 

' G lt seems unlikely that the duties will 

be prohibitive of all imports. Th* 

inti charges for transportation to the 

United States for this product con S -Mt 11+ , ^ - j * ■ 

-un^uitute a third factor which may become 

as important in its effect upon Philippine shipments to the United States 
as either the Philippine export taxes or the United States duty. 
Character of recommendations 

The Committee recommends that, upon the expiration of the Cordage Act 
on May 1, 1%1> an annual quota of 6,000,000 pounds, exclusive of binder 
twine, be imposed ,m imports cf Philippine cordage into the United States. 
The Committee also recommends that sh iuments of Philippine cordage within 
that quota limitation be subject to Philippine export taxes, and that ship- 
ments in excess of that quota be .. ermitted -to enter the United States on 
payment of the full United States -duty. Such an arrangement would extend 
to the Muiippines, after the expiration of the present lav;, the same 
privilege accorded to foreign countries, i.e., the privilege of making un- 
restricted shipments of cordage to the United States upon the payment of 
the United States duty; moreover, it would bring the quota provisions for 
cordage into conformity with those which Congress has already established 

. . ^ v^lieves that tinder twine 
*or sugar and for coconut oil. Tne Committee t^ liey ^ 

^ r .iirh as binder twine is per- 
should be excluded from the cordage quota, inasoiucn a. 

, - „+ rA -nd free of duty from all 
fitted to enter the United States unrestricted a*« 

other sources. 

, 4., 4. ^f+^r the Philippines becomes 
The Committee further recommends that, axx^ 

1 r £ nnn 000 pounds be retained and 
^dependent on July 4, 1946, the quota of. *>,uu^ 

^rAect to the graduated import 
th at the cordese entering under that quota oe p • 

s-^s-= of the quota should be 
duties previously referred to. Shipments m ex- ~ 

fisting. This arrangement 

Sub Ject to the full United States duties then 

adequate period m which to 

*Wd afford the Philippine cordage industry an 

+ t option of its production 
required adjustments with respect to x 

is marketed in the United States. 



86 

TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

pscocultHg and trade 
( Approximately 137,000 acres, or 1.4 percent of the cultivated land 

■ n ^ e Philippines , are devoted to the culture of tobacco, which is large- 
ly concentrated in three regions. The first and most important district 
is the Cagayan Valley in northeastern Luzon, the second is situated along 
the northwestern coast of Luzon, and the third is in the islands of Cebu, 
liegros, and Panay. Tobacco is the principal crop in the Cagayan Valley; 
it is one of the major crops along the northwestern coast of Luzon, but 
|sle S s important in the three Visayan Islands. Isabela Province, lo- 
cated in the Cagayan Valley, Is the largest producer of leaf tobacco in 
the Philippines . 

WMi nilTnbe r o^ small farms and on a few large 
Tobacco is grown on a great numbei o* s .uxx 

, , -„ tnhrcco lands and improvements 
plantations. The capital invested in tob.cco 

a • ♦ * 51 000 000 ±1 FiliDine landowners cultivate most of the 
appr oxiaa t e s % 21 » 00 0 , u u u . 

, nfmlq o few of the large plant a- 
tobacco land, although Spanish capital controls 

■ ■ tobacco culture have been estimated to number 
tions. Persons engaged m tobacc. cui 

1 a either in the fields, or in the 
100.000. The laborers are employed eiwi 

d baled. Large manufacturers of 

warehouses where the crop is grade an 

. ., - nd maintain warehouses in the 
tobacco products have representative^ - 

P^ipal product regions- - ^pped to 

either exporxsu 
is sorted and baled, and then is e • 

- „ where it is prepared for u.e 
g ^Philippine factory of the buyer, wn 

■aaufacture of various tobacco protects 
1/ Philippine Stat 




The principal export markets for Philip rfvi + , 

* - -Lippino tobacco are Spain end the 

United States, Exports to Spain have ramlm*, i 

^gularly been in the form of leaf 

tobaC co, while exports to the United States have been in the for,s of 
cigars and, to a lesser extent, scrap and filler tobacco. ^ 0 rts of 
Philippine leaf tobacco to Spain declined sharply in 1937 and, as a result 
exports of Philippine filler tobacco to the United States increased. 

CIGARS 

The cigar industry in Philippine economy 

Approximately 90 companies, 25 of which were located in cr near 
Manila, were engaged in the manufacture of cigars during 1937; four of 
the latter accounted for the major part of production in the Philippines, 
Including warehouses, factories, and equipment, the total investment in 
the industry is estimated at about 39,G00,0uG. Spanish companies have 
the largest investment, rb .-ut 60 erecnt of the total; American^ Swiss-* 
Chinese, and Filipino investors control the remaining L0 percent. 

Over 15,000 factory laborers are employed in the manufacture of 
<%rs. Much of the labor is .-aid on a piece rate basis on terms which 
vary in accordance with the quality of the cigar p reduce. Machinery 
is used in the manufacture of cigarettes end also in th* wrapping of 
ters with cellophane and in the bonding of them; it is not used in 
the actual manufacture of cigars* 

Of the total quantity of cigars produced in the Philippine,, about 
35 Percent is consul there and 65 percent is exported - 60 percent to 
fa United States and 5 percent to other countries. Exports of cigars 
'e usually constituted over 50 percc 



+ of the total value of exports of 
We n R1M ,n„ nver 50 percent of the lot, 



33 



tobacco and tobacco products; the .erc t >nt-^ , - 

.^rct.nt.ige was 66 in 1937. in that 

year , total exerts of cigars amounted to 20^,602,000 valued at 
|3,072,OOO, of which shipments to the United States totaled 181,380,000 
cigars valued at $2,668, 000 . (sec table 17 . ) 



Table 17.— Cigars: Quantities and values exported i'rom the Philippines "to all 

countries and to the United States 
Calendar years 1923-37 



j Tote' 1 exports ] 
• • 


Ratio of total value : 
of exports of cigars : 
to total value of all: 
Philippine exports : 


Exports to the 
United States 


: Ratio of quantity of exports 
: of cigars to the U.S. to 
: total quantity of such ex- 
: ports to all countries 


Year. 

• Quantity 

• • 

• • 


Value 


Quantity : 


: Value 


: Number • 

• • 

• • 

1928 : 220,884,01 i 
1929: 188,333,006 i 
1930: 178, 560, 7U : 
1931: 183,873,661 : 
1932: 132,57^,853 i 
1933: 196,141,404 
1934: 222,820,14a 
1935: 223,117,286 
1936: 178,334,078 
1937: 204,619/993 

• 


$4,765, UO : 
3,824,649 : 
3,545,223 : 
3,395,337 : 
: 3,231,218 • 

: 3,157,933 
: 3,605,510 
: 3,399,330 
: 2,746,327 
: 3,072,360 


Percent : 
3.1 • 

2.7 i 
3.3 i 

! 3.4 : 

. 3.0 

: - ; • ? 
: 3.6 

: U9 
: 2.0 


Number : 

179,569,767 1 
150,945,425 
144,767,520 
: 158,520,284 
: Io4,ol5,72o 
i 130,714,153 
: 203,895,312 
: 204,013,225 
: 153,977,240 
: 181,378,340 


\ 13,885,672 
: 3,013,355 
2,310,279 
2,335,366 
2,005,5-^4 : 
2,323,117 : 
: 3,231,772 : 
: 3,030,218 : 
: 2,372,131 : 
: 2,667,606 : 


! Percent 

: 81.; 
: 30.1 
: 81.1 
: 86.2 
: 90.2 
: 92.1 M 

91.5 ° 

91.4 

89.1 



Source: Annual Report of the Insular Collector of Customs, 



90 



ptrietiong imposed by Sio^Bgnagiice^Act 

For the first 5 years of the Commomvenltv, . 

lwe • ith > according bo the provisions 

... f the Independence Act, Philippine ciors -in . 

cxg: i s vail have unlimited free entry 

int c the United States. During the see >nd 5 ye ars, .regressive export 
taxes vdll be assessed against Phili,p iny cigars shipped to the United 
States. Like the export taxes on other dutiable commodities, those cn 
Cigars will begin at 5 percent of the United States duty and rise, to 
25 percent in the tenth year of the Commonwealth. Commencing July 4, 
1946, the Philippine product will be subject t- the full United States 
duty. The /.resent duty :n clears is .-4. 50 per o-und plus 25 percent 
ad valorem. 1/ 

In 1?37, 189,900,000 Phili ine cirjars were sold in the United States; 
of this number over 79 percent wort class A cigars, most of which were 
retailed at 2 for 5 cent:- . i/ Because f the low rice, the export taxes 
provided for in thu Independence Act will become a particularly heavy 
burden. Manufacturers of cigars in the Philippines cannot raise the 
retrdl price of their pr. "diet without losing a substantial fraction of 
their United States market. The more expensive Philippine cigars have 
been unable to compete with cirars produced in the United States retril- 

at more than 5 cents each, ana the ohe- per cirars have encountered 
severe competition from United States machine-made cigars, especially in 

£&Ll«irJL: Fi u Statf^ the effective rates 

1/On most tobacco imports into the uni^u - > iff . inasmuch 
20 percent less than the rates appearing in - • 




more than 5 cents each 



The average price paid for Philippine cigars in the United states 
market in 1936 was $15. H per 1,000 cigars. ^ This price included the 
United States internal revenue tax of $2. & The Philippine manufacturer, 
therefore, received $13. H per 1,000 cigars from which he had to deduct 
the cost of raw material, labor, overhead, packing, and shipping before 
arriving at a net profit. On the basis of the present United States 
duty and present wholesale prices, the export tax in the sixth year of 
the Commonwealth period will amount to $4.20 per 1,000 cigars, leaving 
$8.94 to cover the cost of manufacture; in the eighth year of the 
Commonwealth, the export tax will be $12.59, leaving the manufacturer 
only 55 cents for 1,000 cigars; in subsequent years the tax v.ould be 
greater than the selling price. It is obvious that shipments of Philip- 
pine cigars to the United States would, in the above circumstances, be 
abruptly curtailed by the imposition of the export taxes. 
Character of recommendations 

The Committee recommends that anannually declining, auty-free quota, 
which should also be free of export taxes, be established on shipments of 
Philippine cigars to the United States commencing with 200,000,000 cigars 
for the calendar year 1940, and that this amount be reduced by 5 percent 
for the calendar year 1941 and by an additional 5 percent for each calen- 
dar year thereafter until for the calendar year 1945, it would amount to 
75 percent of the original total, or 150,000,000 cigars. The Committee 

i nft <r the Philippines becomes independent, the quota of 

recommends that, ait>er T,ne m-i-^yi 

— ~ r~~7~~ f In ternal Revenue, Philippine Common- 

changed appreciably since that Qn p hili ppine cigars sold in the 

2/ The internal revenue ^^°^Z LoB Treasury by the United States 
t£££T £ — framed during recent years have approximated 

$500,000 annually. Philiooine cigars would affect adversely 

3/ Any decline in the sal e of Ph £ippine ^ ^ ^ manufacture of such 

the sale of several United States pr bandi and v/rappin g ma- 
cigars; these Products incluue wrapper , ^ cellophane 
chinery, lithograph ferial f or bana * c ^ shipped to the 
for wrapping. Over SO percent ^ e ^ a ^ a ? P to bacco. 
United States are wrapped with Amerxe 



150,000,000 cigars be continued free of import duties but subject to an 
annual reduction of 10,000,000 clears beginning with the calendar year 
1947, any excess above the quotas being subject to the full United States 
duty. Imports of duty-free Philippine cigars into the United States 
would thus be reduced gradually until they were eliminated at the close 
of I960. Such an arrangement would afford Philippine cigar manufactur- 
ers an opportunity to liquidate gradually that portion of their business 
which is now dependent upon shipments made to the United States market 
and would permit the large number of laborers now employed by the cigar 
factories gradually tc become adjusted to the altered status of the in- 
dustry. 

SCRAP AND STRIPPED FILLER TOBACCO 
The scrap and stripped filler t obacco industry in Philippine economy 

Scrap tobacco is a byproduct of the cigar and cigarette inuustries; 
while stripped filler tobacco is specially prepared by removing the stem 
from the tobacco leaf. The former is used principally in the production 
of low-priced machine-made cigars, and the latter is used in the produc- 
tion of various types ana grades of "long -filler" cigars. The principal 
exporters of these products in the Philippines are cigar manufacturers 

, v c + -f their cigars to the United States. Total exports of 
v/ho ship most 01 tnexr [+±%a.±a 

■ , «n«r tobacco in 1928 amounted tc 4,799,000 pounds 
scrap and stripped filler toDacco m 

• A - r Ur\»(\ to 1,797,000 pounds valued at 
valued at §539,000; exports declined ±, , - 

, + M to 7 2?5,000 pounds valued at $637,000 in 1937. 
|143,000 in 1933, but rose to 1 

• tfributable principally to the decline in exports 
This marked increase is attributable, p 

* ,^in in 1937. Except for 1934, shipments 
of Philippine leaf tobacco to Spain m 19./- 

r^ularlv accounted for over 90 percent of 
to the United states have regularly a 

„^hm+.q (See table 18.) 
total exports of these products. I 



^ „ llpT , nnd cif rar ends: Quantities and values exported 
T abl e IB. - WS^giffljf tTSTSoS^I «d to the **- S«e 5 

Calendar years 1928-3 7 



' : ~" :Ratio of total value : 

Total exports :of exports of cigars :. 

V ^Q-r V 1 '■ — — » 4-^+«1 Trolnp nf Pi 11 1 


Exports to the : 
United States : 


Ratio of quantity of exports 
of cigars to the U.S. to 
total quantity of such ex- 


Quantity j Value ; 
Pounds : : 


| Quantity " 

• _ 


Value ? Philippine exports : 


p^ r t° g22 countries 
Percent 


Pounds : 
• • 

1923: 4,799,322 : 
1929 ::4, 032, 524 • 
1930: 4,487,939 : 
1931: 3,750,097 : 
1932: 2,356,227 
1933: 1,796,899 
1934: 2,105,201 
1935: 3,267,599 
1936: 2,355,161 
1937: 7,224,794 

• 
• 


! Percent 

• • 
• 

$538,922 : °-3 : 
412,066 : -3 : 

491,674 : : 
; 474,648 : -5 
: 309,890 : -3 
: 143,462 : -1 

: 157,311 : - 1 
: 270,124 : -3 
: 202,403- s -1 
: 637,243 : *'» 


4,377,092 : $504,143 : 
3,679,592 : 382,648 : 
4,368,530 : 482,932 
: % 728, 223 : 472,721 
: 2,348,753 : 309,310 
: 1,750,362 : 139,966 
: 1,616,089 : 122,324 
: 3,022,165 : 252,003 
: 2,159,593 : 186,644 
: 7,011,790 : 613,382 


91.2 
91.2 

' 97.3 
99.4 
99.7 

97.4 & 

76.3 

i 92.5 
91.7 
97.0 



Source: 



Annual Report of the Insular Collector of Customs. 



94 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 

According to the terms cf the Independence Act, scrap and stripped, 
filler tobacco are not subject to quota limitation but will be subject 
to the export taxes beginning at 5 percent of United States duties in the 
sixth year of the Commonwealth, and rising to 25 percent in the tenth. 
After the Philippines becomes independent, full United States duties will 
be imposed. On the basis of the average unit value of Philippine exports 
of these products to the United State sin 1937 (which was less than 9 
cents per pound), the export tax in the tenth year would, on the basis of 
the present United States duty, be the equivalent of a tax of approxi- 
mately 100 percent ad valorem. The present United States duty is 35 
cents per pound on scrap tobacco and 50 cents per pound on filler tobacco, 
if stemmed and "not specially provided for." Such a tax would either 
drastically curtail or prohibit altogether shipments of these products 
to the United States. 
Character of recommendations 

The Committee recommends that an annually declining duty-free quota 
which should also be free of export taxes be established on shipments to 
the Unitea States of Philippine scrap anc stripped filler tobacco commenc- 
ing Wit* 4,500,000 pounds for the calendar year W<0, and that this amount 
be reduced by 5 percent for the calendar year 19U, and by an additional 5 
percent for each calendar year thereafter until, for the calendar .ear , 

* +n 7*5 percent of the original quota, or 3,375,000 
194.5, it would amount to Ij percent, 

i + ^,+ ifter the Philippines becomes 
pounds. The Committee recommends that, after 



95 

independent, the quota of 3,375,000 pounds be continued free of import 
duties but subject to an annuall reduction of 225,000 pounds, beginning 
with the calendar year 1947, any excess above the quotas being subject 
to the full United States duty. Imports of duty-free Philippine scrap 
and stripped filler tobacco into the United States would thus be reduced 
gradually until eliminated completely at the close of I960. This 
arrangement would permit Philippine manufacturers to make gradual re- 
ductions in their exports to the United States of scrap :ind filler 
tobacco while making similar adjustments in their exports of cigars. 



^96 



TIMBER AND LUMBER 
Timber and lumber in PMn^. . ,. , 

Forest lands In the Philippics cover 41,886,000 acres or 57 percent 
of the total land area; forests considered to be profitable for commer- 
cial operations comprise 81 percent of the total forest area. Stands 
are well distributed through the archipelago, the island of Mindanao 
containing a larger area of commercial forest than any other island in 
the group. A wide variety of hardwoods is found in the Philippines, al- 
though over 75 percent of the standing timber is of the lauan family, the 
principal species of which are commonly referred to in the United States 
as "Philippine mahogany." Such fancy cabinet woods as true mahogany, 
walnut, and ebony either are not found in the Philippines or are relative- 
ly scarce. 

The Philippine Government, which owns most of the forests in the 
Philippines, administers them through the Bureau of Forestry as part of 
the public domain. It maintains national parks and forest reserves, 
creates zones for commercial and community uses, and engages in reforesta- 
tion, conservation work, and the prevention of the illegal destruction of 
timber. The Government, through the Bureau of Forestry, leases forest 
lands to lumbering and logging companies for periods ranging from 1 to 

■ « , rf supervised by the Bureau and pay for the 
20 years. These companies are ^uperv^eu j 

•+•„ +hP tvDe and quantity of the timber cut, 
concession in accordance with the type ana 4 

■ «m* r-ceived by the Philippine Government from 
In recent years , the net income r-,c«ivLu j 

+ r . u* q prceeded $500,000 annually, 
its administration of the forests ha, exceeae 



97 

The sawmill industry has developed mTvfrfi v e ?« A . 

iU ^ u rapidly since the American occupa- 
tion of the Philippines. In 1903 there were U sawmills, with a daily 
capacity of 30,000 board feet, producing lumber in the Philippines; by 

1936, there were in operation 112 mills, with a daily capacity of 

1/ 

1,400,000 board feet. Many of the companies operating sawmills are also 
engaged in logging. In addition, numerous operators, not associated with 
sawmills are engaged, at least part time, in logging operations only; 
their production, however, is relatively small. The total annual produc- 
tion of logs and lumber in recent years is estimated at about 1,000,000,000 
board feet. 

The lumber and timber industry was reported to represent an invest- 
nt of about $15,000,000 in 1937. The capital invested in sawmills was 
estimated to be in excess of £13,500,000; the remainder consisted of the 
investments of small logging operators. American capital, invested 

. j 4. TP-norted to approximate $6,000,000; 

primarily in the sawmill industry, rcpor^eu ™ yy 

■ ,w 0 H assets alone totaled $2,307,000. Other 
the American investment in fixed asset, axon 

+ „ in the Philippine log and lumber industry are 
nationals with investments in tne rm w 

^li.hmor,- and Spaniards. In 1937, the 
Filipinos, Chinese, Japanese, ^n&±- 

■ . t „ lts baches orovided employment for about 55,000 people 

industry in all its brancneb p iVJ 

in the archipelago . 

, d lumber indu&try is favored by a large and 

The Philippine log and X— ^ ^ ^ 

u utilized locally- ^-^ 
of the annual production b.^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

outlet for low-priced lumber not sta. 

„ -nito fluctuations in foreagn sales, 
maintenance of production ae^px 

-r~7^7T7^9377^P^ 60 - 36 " 

— ■ — r^Hew, vol. 4, 

Philippine IStlitical Review, 



.98 



Exports of high-grade lumber, however, have been responsible for the 
major portion of the profit of many mills . Because of the development 
of the lumber industry, Philippine imports of lumber have steadily de- 
clined, until they now amount to less than 1 percent of Philippine produc- 
tion. 

The United States and Japan are the most important export markets 
for Philippine hardwood. Shipments to the United States are made in the 
form of sawed cabinet woods of good quality and relatively high value. 
In 1937 these shipments equaled 13.7 percent of the volume and 32 percent 
of the value of total exports of logs and lumber from the Philippines. 
In earlier years, exports to Japan were composed principally of lumber, 
but more recently these shipment;, have consisted almost entirely of logs. 
The major portion (in terms of quantity) of total Philippine exports of 
logs and lumber are marketed in Japan. Other markets for Philippine 
lumber are the United Kingdom, China, Australia, and South Africa. 

Exports of Philippine logs and lumber in recent years have been 
about 20 percent of total production. During the decade 1928-37 they 
never exceeded 3 percent of the value of total Philippine exports; in 
1937, the figure was 2.6 percent. Experts of logs and lumber amounted 
to f.3,600,000 in 1929, but decided to $835,000 in 1932; since that 

,.i • reaching a value of &3, 943, 000 an 

time they have steadily increased, reaching 

1937 (see table 19). 



Lear 



1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 



lable 19.- Logs and lumber 



Total exports 



Qu&nti 



ity 1/ 



1 ,000 board 



feet 

85,830 
104,712 
82,423 

71,334 
50,623 

30,234 
121,992 
143,169 
196,0-37 
251,695 



Value 



$3,126,500 
3,618,959 
2,743,392 
1,840,602 
834,725 
1,268,607 
2,171,395 
2,511,760 
3,099,620 
3,943,^2 



Philippine exports to all countries and to the 
United States, 1928-37 



Ratio of total value 
of exports of logs 
.\nd lumber to 
t.'tal value of, 
••.11 Philiiooine 



exports 
Percent 

2.C 

2.2 

2.1 

1.8 

1.0 

1.2 

2.0 

2.7 

2.1 

2.6 



Exports 
to the 
United .States 



Quantity l/ 



1 T 000 board 



feet 
41,632 
44,924 
31,956 
20,313 
5,316 
] 6,439 
20,743 

28,253 
33,809 

3^,473 



Value 



$1,637,691 
1,739,129 
1,347,601 
795,362 
173,138 
525,452 
774,241 
972,487 
1,190,260 
1,262,620 



L ■ ■ 1 — , fl , + IX ,0/ board feet oer cubic meter. 

p uonveited from cubic meters to board feet at 424 boar a 

Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



Ratio of quantity of 
exports of logs and 
lumber to the United 
States to total quantity 
of exports of such pro- 
ducts' to all countries 



percent 

43.5 
42.9 
33.3 

28.5 
10.5 
20.6 
17.0 
19.7 
17.2 
13.7 



100 



citr ic tions Imposed by the Independence Act 

The Independence Act contains no special provision concerning 
lumber, but the Revenue Act of 1932 provides that the excise taxes 
thereby imposed "fehall be treated for the purposes of all provisions of 
law relating to the customs revenue as a duty imposed by such act 
(i.e., the Tariff Act of 1930)." It is probable that this language, 
and the language of the Independence Act, will be so interpreted that, 
during the second half of the Commonwealth period, the Philippine Govern- 
ment will be required to impose export duties corresponding to specified 
percentages of the United States revenue tax on sawn hardwoods, there 
teing no United States duty on Philippine mahogany.^ After the Philip- 
pines becomesindependent, if an import excise tax on lumber such as the ex- 

~* * a + . + **iflfl Philippine lumber would be 
isting one should be in eLfect at that tim,., mi ._ 

, , . . . + Th . Dreqent t-,x, however, is not high in proportion to the 
subject to it. me present 

rr which is valued at aboUT. *40 per thousano 
value of the Philippine mahogany, which is 

i -v.lv therefore, that even if expert taxes were 
board feet. It seems likely, Etfiereior , 

m , they would not operate to export, - <** 

even the full tax after i^enoe woaia 

-Brrr?rt:*oFi930 imposes an, ad valorem 

y Although^thTUnitiQ^tes Tariii " . ^ under ? ar . W , 

duty of 15 percent on certain so-called cab ™ lly ^ ided for tnerem 
Philippine mahogany is not one of the *a j q lif ,num-vitae, 
(The paragraph specifically &^*£^ t rosewood, satinwood, Japanese 
lancewood, ebony, box, ^anadill.^ mahog- Z,^^ ^ ^ duty-free 
white oak, and Japanese maple . ) I ^ d anJ so ftwood, is subject 

u iiino all lumber, both nar J " w . . , PX cise tax imposea cy 
paragraph 1803. A !V?T^ forei/tn countries, to an excise . 
however, when imported from lo ^^ in that act was £p f r + ™° +h7 
the Revenue Act of 1932. The tax fixed ^ board feet by the 

board feet, but it was reduced to d which went into 

trade agreement between the ted States ^ ^ W as to have 

effect on Jan. 1, 1936. ^f^^iration date has been extended on 
expired on June 30 , 1934, ** ^ gUort to expire on June 30, 1939. 
three occasions. The tax is now 



100 



Re s t r i c t i o n s ia posed fa' the t Indep e nd e nee Ac t 

The Independence Act contains no special provision concerning 
lumber, but the Revenue Act of 1932 provides that the excise taxes 
thereby imposed "tehall be treated for the purposes of all provisions of 
law relating to the customs revenxie as a duty imposed by such act 
(i.e., the Tariff Act of 1930). » It is probable that this language, 
and the language of the Independence Act, will be so interpreted that, 
during the second half of the Cojiimonwealth period, the Philippine Govern- 
ment will be required to impose export duties corresponding to specified 
percentages of the United States revenue tax on sawn hardwoods, there 
being no United States duty on Philippine mahogany.-^ After the Philip- 
pines be comes independent, if an import excise tax on lumber such as the ex- 
isting one should fc» in effect at that timo, Philippine lumber would be 
subject to it. The present tax, however, is not high in proportion to the 
value of th^ Philippine mahogany, which is valued at about $A0 per thousand 
board feet. It seems likely, therefore, that oven if export taxes were 
imposed, they would not operate to reduce exports materially, and that 
even the full tax after independence would not reduce them greatly, 

1/ Although the United States" Tariff Act of 1930 imposes an ad valorem 
duty of 15 percent on certain so-called cabinet woods under par. 404, 
Philippine mahogany is not one of the woods specially provided for therein* 
(The paragraph specifically provides for Spanish cedar, lignuin-vitae, 
lancewood, ebony, box, granadilla, mahogany, rosewood, satinwood, Japanese 
white oak, and Japanese maple.) It falls instead under the duty-free 
paragraph 1S03- All lumber, both hardwood and softwood, is subject, 
however, when imported from foreign countries, to an excise tax imposed by 
the Revenue Act of 1932. The tax fixed in that act was $3 per thousand 
board feet, but it was reduced to $1.50 per thousand boatfd feet by the 
trade agreement between the United States and Canada, which went into 
effect on Jan. 1, 1936- This import revenue tax provision was to have 
expired on June 30, 1934* but the expiration date has been extended on 
three occasions. The tax is now scheduled to expire on June 30, 1939 ♦ 



ft 



*01 

The Committee makes no recommendations v.-it if respect to exports of 

f 

Philippine lumber to the United States during the Commonwealth period, 
but recommends that, after the Philippines becomes independent, such 
exports be made subject to graduated import duties, beginning with 25 
percent of the then existing United States duties and increasing by 
5 percent of such duties on each subsequent January 1, until all 
preferences are terminated on January 1, 1961. 



T 



c 



LOT 



EMBROIDERIES 



The embroidery industry in Philippine ooonomy 

Embroidering is predominantly a household industry which provides a 
large number of families in the Philippines with supplementary incomes - 
The principal embroidery establishments are located in Manila. Iu 
these plants, which .are largely distributing centers, the imported cloth 
is cut and stamped and then delivered to the workers in neighboring 
provinces through contractors or sub -contractors . Yftien the work xs 
completed, the embroidered articles are returned by the contractor to 
the -lants where they are inspected, trimmed, assembled, laundered, an^ 
packed for export. Most of the actual embroidering is done in the 
homes of workers who live in provinces surrounding Manila, but some xs 
also done in more distant provinces. 

The various types of needlework are usually done by different 
workers. One embroiders scallops, another does the hemstitching, whxle 
a third makes the buttonholes or does the drawn work. This axvxsxon o 
labor necessitates an elaborate system for the distribution of materials 
among the workers. It is the task of contractors and sub-contractors 
to handle this distribution and to expedite the work. The completion 
of a garment usually requires 3 to 6 months and occasionally 9 to 12 
months. Because of the time required for the imported cloth to reach . 
the Philippines and for the finished product to be returned, approxx- 
mately 1 year elapses before an order can finally be delivered in New 
York. Owing to the time factor, producers in the Philippines manufac- 
ture principally staples rather than style goods, which are subject to 
sudden and unpredictable changes. The Philippine embroidery industry 
produces primarily infants' wear, and women's underwear, slips, and 
nightgowns. 



t 



103 



Practically all of the cloth used by the industry is cotton, whxch 
is imported from the United States in order that the finished embroidery 
may be permitted to enter the United States free of dvt&M The firms 
engaged in the embroidery business are either (1) branches of companies 
with head offices in the United States, or (2) independent concerns 
which sell to importers in the United States. 

Approximately 30 firms were operating in the embroidery business in 
1937; most of these were engaged in both production and export. The 
industry as a whole is reported to represent an investment of about 
$4,000,000, a substantial part uf which consists of goods in process and 
in transit. The investment in plant and equipment is relatively small. 
It is estimated that investments by United States citizens total approxi- 
mately ^3,000,000, most of the remainder being owned by Filipinos. 

Between 30,000 and 50,000 people are employed in the industry, 
primarily on a part-time basis. The number varies with the quantity of 
orders on hand and with the seasonal availability of alternate forms of 
employment for the workers. The wages, paid almost entirely on a 
Piece-rate basis, are relatively low despite high-grade workmanship. 
The cost of raw material constitutes about one -half of the cost of the 
finished product, the remainder being accounted for largely V labor 

- 

costs and profits . 



The United States tariff law provides that Philippine products; to 
be admitted free of duty, shall not contain in value more than 20 percent 
of foreign materials . 



■ 



104 

The Philippine exports of embroidery to the United States represent 
actual Philippine exports only to the extent of about one-half their 
value, inasmuch as the other one-half represents a re-export of American 
cotton cloth. During the period 1923-37, exports of embroidery were 
highest in 1929, being valued at $5,764,000; they declined to $1,825,000 
in 1933, and amounted to £3,5*0,000 in 1937. During the same period, over 
98 percent of total Philippine exports of cotton embroideries were shipped 
to the United States (see table 20). 



Table 20.- Cotton embroideries: Philippine exports to 
all countries and to the United States, 
1928-37 







• 
• 


Ratio of the value of exports 


Year 


Total : 


Exports to the: 


of embroidery to the United 


exports : 


United States : States to total value of such 






► « 

► « 


•exports to all countries 








: Percent 


: 


: : 


1928 : 


$4,396,237 : 


i $4,356,599 i 


: 99.1 


1929 : 


: 5,764,346 i 


: 5,716,504 I 


: 99.2 


1930 : 


: 3,412,667 - 


: 3,366,088 : 


: 98.6 


1931 


: 2,520,447 ! 
: 3,267,044 
: 1,830,669 


: 2,488,925 I 


: 98.6 


1932 


s 3,251,759 i 


: 99.5 


1933 


: 1,825,199 ! 


: 99.7 


1934- 


: 2,561,246 


: 2,553,950 : 
: 4,989,318 : 


: 99.7 


1935 


: 4,996,280 


t 99.9 


1936 


: 4,192,221 
: 3,579,776 


: 4,184,261 : 


: 99.8 


1937 


: 3,561,425 ■ 


: 99.5 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 



Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 

No limitations are placed by the Independence Act upon the quantity 
of embroideries which may enter the United States from the Philippines 
free of duty. During the second 5 years of the Commonwealth, however, 
progressive export taxes will be assessed against Philippine embroideries 



105 

which are shipped to the United States. As in the case of other duti- 
able commodities, the export taxes will correspond to 5 percent of the 
United States Juty in the sixth year of the Commonwealth and will rise to 
25 percent in the tenth year. After July 4, 1946, the full United 
Statejs duty will be collected on this Philippine product. The United 
States duty on embroidered cotton (and silk) wearing apparel, fixed at 
90 percent ad valorem by the Tariff Act of 1930, is now 75 percent ad 
valorem as a result of the trade agreement with France, which became 
effective June 15, 1936.^ 

Since Philippine embroideries at present encounter competition in 
the United States market, and since most of the Philippine embroideries 
are sold in retail markets where the demand is for low-priced goods, it 
does not appear probable that their prices can be increased sufficiently 
to absorb the export taxes without losing a substantial part of the 
United States market. The cost of raw materials, moreover, is not 
subject to the control of embroidery producers. The export taxes, as 
has been pointed out, will be assessed against the whole value of the 
finished product and not merely against the value added in the Philippines. 
The laborers now engaged in the production of Philippine embroidery will 
not readily find alternate employment when the export taxes begin to 
apply, consequently it is likely that the effect of the taxes will be to 
force progressively lower wages. Whether the export industry will be 
able to survive on the present scale for the whole of the Commonwealth 
period is problematical; that it will survive on an appreciable scale 
thereafter appears improbable. 

1/ Nearly all of the imports of Philippine embroideries into the United 
States would fall under this classification if they were entered from a 
foreign country. 



I 



106 

Chrr-.c-t-.r :i" recommendation 

The Committee recommends that, during the Commonwealth period, the 
export taxes on shipments to the United States of Philippine embroideries 
raade of cloth which is the product of the United States be assessed on 
the basis of the dutiable value as now provided by United States law, 
less the value (c.i.f. the Philippines) of the cloth embodied in such 
embroideries. The Committee recommends further that, after the Philip- 
pines be comes independent, a similar provision with respect to the assess- 
ment of graduated import duties be retained in force until January 1, 
1961. Such a provision would exempt from graduated export taxes and 
graduated import duties cloth of United States origin, and would materially 
reduce the amount :>f taxes and duties to be assessed on Philippine 
embroideries during the adjustment period. It would afford the large 
number of Philippine workers now employed by the industry, and the pro- 
ducers in the Philippines, opportunities to make required adjustments. 



107 



CANNED PINEAPPLES 

The canned pineapple industry in Philippine economy 

The commercial production and canning of pineapples is confined 
principally to the operations of a single company. Its cannery is on 
the seacoast of northern Mindanao, near the town of Cagayan, and its 
plant ati on lies about 15 miles to the south on the Bukidnon Plateau. 
The planting of pineapples was begun in 1928; by 1935, approximate ly 
2,000 acres were under cultivation. Since then the area has been 
expanded and will probably be expanded further during the next few years . 
Both the plantation nnd the cannery, which has a capacity of about 350,000 
cases per year, are owned and operated by a subsidiary of a large United 
States packing corporation nlso engaged in the production and canning of 
pineapples in the Territory of Hawaii. The investment in the industry 
is estimated at $1,000,000. 

Exports of canned pineapples from the Philippines were made first 
in 1930. They increased in quantity and value until 1933, when produc- 
tion was reduced in conjunction with a reduction program adopted by 
producers in the Territory of Hawaii. Exports in 1934 were resumed on a 
less restricted basis; in 1937, exports were the largest on record, 
amounting to over 24,000,000 pounds valued at $1,673,000 (see table 21). 
In the latter year exports of canned pineapples, for the first time, 
amounted to more than 1 percent of the value of total Philippine exports. 
All exports of canned pineapples from the Philippines are sold in the 
United States. 



I 



108 



Table 21,- Canned pineapples: Exports from the Philip- 
pines, 1930-37 1/ 









Value : 






* Valus 


Year : 


: Quantity : 


Value : 


per : 


: Year : 


Quantity ; 


Value ; per 








pound : 






: ; pound 




Pounds 




: Cents : 




Founds 


: Cents 


1930 


; 1,074 ,822 


: $96,044: 


I 8.9 *: 


*: 1934 


s 6,739,434 


► * 

! $409,244: 6.1 


1931 


: 3,533,482 


: 150,041. 


: 4.2 : 


: 1935 


: 2,639,056 


t 157,398: 6.0 


1932 


: 5,742,804 


: 298,485 


r 5.2 : 


; 1936 


: 8,371,991 


: 501,523: 6.0 


1933 


: 3,031,650 


: 133,986 


: 4.4 : 


: 1937 


: 24,159,389 


: 1,672,349: 6.9 

• • 



1/ Export statistics for the years 1930 and 1931 aro for canned 
fruit and canned fruit products; these consisted chiefly of canned 
pineapples. Canned pineapples were not reported separately until 
1932. 



Source: Annual reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 
Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 

The Independence Act places no restriction upon the shipments to 
the United States of canned pineapples from the Philippines during the 
first 5 years of the Commonwealth period. During the second 5 years, 
the progressive export taxes will be applicable to such shipments. 
After independence is attained, canned pineapples will become subject 
to the then existing United States duty; based on the average unit values 
of exports in 1937, and . the present United States duty of 2 cents per 
pound, the ad valorem equivalent would then approximate 30 percent. 

Because of comparatively low production costs, Philippine exports of 
canned pineapples will probably not decline as a result of the application 
of export taxes. The effect of the United States duty, after Philippine 
independence is realized, is largely indeterminate; it will depend on 
future costs of production in the Philippines, future tariff rates in 
the United States, agreements and understandings with Hawaiian pineapple 
packers, and the prices of pineapples and competing canned fruits in the 
United States. 



i 



109 

Ch- r ctor ^f recommendations 

The Committee makes no recommendations with respect to exports of 
canned i-ineapples from the Philippines to the United States during the 
Commonwealth period, but recommends that, after the Philippines becomes 
independent, such exports te subject to graduated import duties begin- 
ning with 25 percent of the then existing United States duty and in- 
creasing by 5 J ercent of the duty on each subsequent January 1, until 
all preferences are terminated on January 1, 1961. 

HATS 

The hat industry in Philip-,;inu economy 

The Philippine fiber-hat industry is centered in two towns, Baliuag 
and Lucban, on the island of Luzon. The weaving of hats, which is done 
chiefly by hand, is a household industry. Some weaving is done m 
factories where hats are manufactured by machine from coarse fiber. 
The machine-made product is composed chiefly of bamboo, straw, or abaca 
fiber, while the hand-made hats are woven with buntal fiber obtained from 
the leaf of the buri palm. Buntal hats or bali-buntal hats (the latter 
having a somewhat different and finer weave) are the principal types 
exported; the others are manufactured primarily for the Philippine market. 

The hand-woven hats are purchased from the weavers by agents of 
wholesale dealers or exporters. They are finished and packed for export 
in Manila. The finishing process involves weaving an edge on the brim, 
after which the hats are washed and ironed. When finally packed for 
export, they are usually not blocked or trimmed and not bleached, dyed, 
or colored. 



UO 

In 1935, 16 plants were engaged in finishing hats and in preparing 
them for export. The capital invested in the industry in that year 
was estimated at $2,000,000, of which $1,750,000 represented working 
capital used chiefly in making advances to the weavers, and the remain- 
der, investment in vlant and equipment. Twenty-nine firms, including 
the 16 already referred to, ire exporters of hats, and 17 firms are 
exporters of buntal fiber. China is the principal market for the 
latter product. It is estimated that the hat-making industry employs 
from 4.0,000 to 60,000 weavers. 

During the decade 192ii-37, the largest exports occurred in 1928, 
when 1,4.26,200 hats valued at $3,359,000 '.vere shipped from the Philip- 
pines. Exports in 1937 were the lowest in value, totaling 565,394 hats 
valued at $466,545. From 192S to 1933, the unit value of exports 
declined steadily from $2.35 to 77 cents; in 1937, it amounted to S3 
cents. The United States has regularly been the principal market for 
Philippine hats, having taken over 75 percent of the quantity of total 
exports in 1936 and 1937; other important markets have been the United 
Kingdom, France, and Italy. The average unit value of hats shipped to 
the United States has generally been higher than the unit value of those 
shipped elsev.'here (see table 22). 



Table 22.- Hats: 



Exports from the Philippines to all countries and to the United States, 

192*3-37 1/ 



Exports to all countries 



Quantity 



Numb 



er 



1,426,202 
950,741 
869,011 
.539,224 

7k, 536 

988,490 
1,227,989 
538,381 
728,032 
565,394 



Value 



Unit 
value 



: Ratio of total 
: value of ex- 
ports of hats 
:to total value 
:of all Philip- 
••prne exports 
: Percent 



3,358,963 : 


■ 12.35 : 


2*2 


2,048,729 : 


: 2.15 : 


1.3 


1,271,607 : 


: 1.46 : 


1.0 


555,030 


: 1.03 : 


.5 


593,590 


: .80 : 


.6 


766,056 


: .77 : 


. i 


1,141,375 


: .93 : 


1,0 


474,321 


: .38 : 


.5 


538,289 


: .81 : 


.4 


466,595 


: .83 : 


.3 



1/ Includes all types of hats, i.e. bamboo, tunta 1 , 
largest individual types, averaging in value over 90 



Alports to the United States 



Quantity 



Number 



842,021 
651,820 
669,060 
293,273 
535,390 
700,465 
712,317 
251,708 
571,048 
437,401 



Value 



$2,277,125 
1,547,424 
931,721 
341,538 
436,757 
554,394 

697,534 
240,125 

479 377 

'383,440 



: Ratio of number of 
:hats exported to 
Unit :the United States^ 
value : to "total number of 
:hata exported to 
:all countries 



1 
1 


Percent 


• 

£2.70 : 


59.0 


2.37 : 


68.6 


1.47 : 


72.0 


1.16 : 


54.4 


.82 : 


72.0 


.79 : 


70.9 


.98 : 


58.0 


.95 


: 46.8 


.34 


i 73.4 


.88 


: 77. 4 



"burl, and straw, Bunbal hats constitute the 
percent of total exports of hats. 



Source: Annual reports, Insular Collector of Customs 



I 



112 



Restrictions inrosed by the Independence Act 

Under the Independence Act, no restrictions pre imposed upon the 
shipment of Philippine hats to the United States during the first 5 
years of the Commonwealth. During the second 5 years, export taxes 
v.ill be collected n hats shipped to the United States. After the 
Philippines become independent, imports of Philippine hats into the 
United Stater, will be subject to the full United Stages duty, which is 
at present 25 percent ad valorem on hats which are not blenched, dyed, 
colored, or stained. 

Bunt; 1 hate are designed principally for women, consequently, the 
fluctuations in thu- qurntity and value of exports from the Philippines 
may be explained in part by changes in fashions. It is possible that 
changes in styles, os well as the competition from hats imported from 
foreign countries, will prove more important factors governing the 
future of the market for Philippine hats in the United States than 
either the export taxes or the United States duty. 

Ch aracter of recommendations 

The Committee makes no recommendations with respect to exports of 
Philippine hats to the United States during the Commonwealth period, 
but recommends that, after the Philippines becomes independent , such 
exports be subject to graduated import duties beginning with 25 
percent of the then existing United States duty and increasing by 5 
percent of the duty on each subsequent January 1, until all preferences 
are terminated on January 1, 1961. 



I 

1 



113 



CUTCH 

The ' butch Indus i ry in Phi lipp ine ' econom y 

Cutch is an extract containing tannin and is used in ayesng 
tanning. It is >btained in the Philippines from the bark of mangrove 
trees, forests of which are found on the islands of Mindanao and Palaw^, 
in the Sulu Archipelago, and on the east coast of Luzon. Other stands 
of mangrove trees are scattered throughout the Philippines but are net 
sufficiently large to be of commercial importance. 

One company, located in Zamboanga, Mindanao, manufactures most 0 
the cutch extract produced in the Philippines. It was organise in 
1927 and began exporting in 1928. The company has a license agreement 
with the Philippine Government, effective until January 1, 194-2, to cut, 
collect, and remove mangrove bark in Provinces in the southern par 
the Philippines. The plant and equipment at Zamboanga have an estimated 
value of $250,000 and a production capacity ,f 6,000 tons of cutch ex- 
tract per year. Export statistics (see table 23) indicate that the 
plant has been operating at near capacity since 1930, except for 1932. 
Approximately 150 men are employed in the factory, and 1,250 men are 
employed in gathering and transporting the bark and in removing from the 
forest, as required by Philippine forestry regulations, the wood from 

which the bark is stripped. 

Annual exports during the decade 1928-37, averaged 11,750,000 pounds, 
valued at $265,000. Owing to depressed economic conditions in 1932, 
shipments declined to 9,400,000 pounds valued at $200,000, but by 1935 
they increased to 13,368,700 pounds, valued at $267,000. In 1937, 
they amounted to 12,315,000 pounds valued at $348,000 (see table 23). 
Since 1932. all exports from the Philippines have gone to the United State 



1 1 




114 



These shipments have not been an important factor in Philippine lorexgn 
trade; they have never amounted to as much as 0.5 percent of total 
Philippine exports. 

Table 23- - Cutch extract: Exports from the Philippines, 

1928-37 



* * 

: Quantity : 
• 


: Value : 
Value : per : 
: pound : 


: Year : 


Quantity : 


: Value 
Value : per 
: ,?ound 


: Pounds : 
1923: 4,236,754 ! 
1929: 8,427,909 : 
1930: 11,426,478 i 
1931: 11,331,447 
1932: 9,446,712 


: Cents : 
: $101,726 : 2.4 : 
; 191,189 : 2.3 : 
; 257,152 : 2.3 : 
: 247,370 : 2.2 : 
: 200,414 : 2.1 : 

■ * * 


1 1933 : 
: 1934 ■ 
: 1935 
: 1936 
: 1937 


Pounds : 
11,614,527: 

; 12,634,^28: 
. 13,368,741* 
. 12,003,957 
: 12,31^,827 


:Cents 
t$232,198: 2.0 
: 252,841: 2.0 
: 267,375: 2.0 
: 323,036: 2.7 
: 347,889: 2.8 



Source; Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 
Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 

The only restrictions placed by the Independence Act en the ship- 
ment of cutch extract from the Philippines to the United States are the 
export taxes to be imposed during the second 5 years of the Commonwealth 
period, and the United States duty which is to be imposed after indepen- 
dence is attained. On the bases of the unit value of imports in 1937, 
amounting to $56 per short ton, and the present United States duty 
of 15 percent ad valorem the specific equivalent would then amount to 
$8.40 per short ton. Current prices for cutch extract indicate that 
exports from the Philippines are not likely to be affected materially 
by the application of either the Philippine export taxes during the 
Commonwealth period or the United States duty after Philippine indepen- 
dence is attained.-^ 



1/ The price of Philippine cutch extract in the United States market 
in March, 1938, was quoted at 6.5 cents per pound or $130 per short ton. 



."5 



115 

Character of recommendations 

The Committee makes no recommendations with respect to exports of 
cutch extract from the Philippines to the United States during the 
Commonwealth period, but recommends that, after the Philippines becomes 
independent, such exports be subject to graduated import duties beginning 
with 25 percent of the then existing United States duty and increasing by 
5 percent of the duty on each subsequent January 1, until all preferences 
arc terminated on January 1, 1961. 

PEARL BUTTONS 
ThLt oearl button industry in Philippine economy 

Philippine ocean pearl buttons are manufactured in Manila from 
mother-of-pearl, trochus, and snail shells gathered in waters surrounding 
the Visayan Islands. Although 3 plants have produced pearl buttons, 
only 1, which manufactures approximately two-thirds of the quantity 
exported, has been able to operate continuously during the period 
1928-37. In its manufacturing processes the industry employs about 600 
people. Salaries and wages are estimated at $125,000 a year. The 
total investment in machinery, tools, and equipment is approximately 
$100,000, nearly all of which is American capital. 

Exports of pearl buttons constitute 75 percent of total production, 
the remainder being consumed within the Pnilippines or applied to gar- 
ments which are exported. For the decade 1928-37, exports were highest 
in 1930, when they totaled 850,000 gross, valued at $380,000; they 
declined to their lowest level in 1935, aggregating 694,000 gross, valued 
at |237,400, Exports in 1937 amounted to 776,000 gross valued at 
$274,500 (see table 24). The highest average value per gross i ri t hi E 
period was 51 cents in 1929 s the lowest was 32 cents in 1936. 



116 



Practically all of the buttons exported are sold in the Umtea States. 
During the period 1928-37, exports of buttons totaled less than 0.5 
percent of total Philippine exports. 

Table 24. - Pearl buttons: Exports from the Philippic© 8 * 1928-37 



• 
• 

Year: Quantity: 
• 


Value : 


Value : 
per : 
t ;ross : 


: Year : 


Quantity: 


Value J 


Value 

per 
>?ross 


: Gross 
• 

1928*: 843,231 J 
1929: 750,098 i 
1930: 850,074 
1931: 841,982 
1932: 739,821 

• 
• 


! $385,857 : 
: 382,898 : 
: 380,140 ! 
: 366,783 
: 243,667 


Cents : 

! 45.8 : 
: 51.0 : 
: A4.7 : 
: 43.6 : 
: 32.9 : 


: 1933 ! 
: 1934 ! 
: 1935 i 
: 1936 i 
: 1937 


Gross i 

! 836,237 : 
: 713,886 : 
: 694,161 ' 
: 680,829 i 
: 776,024 ' 


! $270,753 ! 
■ 242,838 ! 
i 237,397 ! 
: 218,516 ! 
, 27A,510 


■ Cents 

: 32.4 
: 34.0 
: 34.2 
: 32.1 
: 35.4 



Source: Annual Reports, Insular Collector of Customs. 

Restrictions imposed by the Independence Act 

No limitation or restriction is placed by the Independence Act upon 
the shipment of buttons to the United States during the f xrst 5 years of 

c ,,«r,^c? Philippine export 
the Commonwealth period but during the second 5 years, i , 

taxes will be collected on shipments to the United States. 

Philippines becomes independent, the full United States duty w be 

assessed on pearl buttons entering the United States from the Philippines; 

based on the present United States duty of 1-3/4 cents per line per gross 

plus 25 percent ad valorem^ and on current unit values of Philippine 

exports, the ad valorem equivalent Would then approximate ' 100 percent. 



1/ The term "line" refers to the line buttclTmeasure of one-fortieth 
of 1 inch. 



117 



The range in wholesale roiling prices in New York of competi 

Conse— 

pearl buttons, whether imported or domestic, is very narrow. 

4-^3 0Xpert 

quently, when Philippine pearl buttons become subject to 

m rw it increasing- 
taxes provided f« r in the Independence Act, they wii* x--* 1 

^ t t a ct.tps The appli ca " 
ly difficult to retain their market in the United b^ace*- 

, + +hP nresent levels 
tion of the full United States duty, if maintained at tnc P 

+■ the United States, 
would probably be prohibitive of Philippine exports to 

Character of recommendations 

The Committee recommends that annually declining * 

^ iimn imports of 
which should also be free of export taxes , be imposed upu* 

^ncine with 850,000 
Philippine pearl buttons into the United States, comment & 

• fl *Aimt be reduced by 5 
gross for the calendar year 19 AO, and that this amowiu 

4-41 nt shall equal 637,500 
percent for each succeeding nanr year until j-^ 

recommends further 
gross for the calendar year 1945- The Committee r« 

, ^inilar quotas be con- 
that, after the Philippines becomes independent, ^ 1 

i** rnn oross beginning with the 
tinued subject to an annual reduction of A^>? uu & 

vrip ,, of the quotas, either 
calend:ir year 1947. Any shipments made an exce^ 

r+*-r should be subject to the 
during the Commonwealth period or thereat t,er, ^ 

- nearl buttons from the 
full United States duty. Imports of duty-ire^ y 

n , ,m+U they were eliminated 
Philippines would thus bo reduced gradually 

rt . r n .^^nnpzement would afford 

completely at the close of I960. Such an ai range* 

. rl in which either to liquidate 
Philippine manufacturers an adequate period m 

the United States market 

that portion of their business dependent upon 
or to develop new outlets. 



117 



The range in wholesale selling prices in New York of competitive 
pearl buttons, whether imported or domestic, is very narrow. Conse- 
quently, when Philippine pearl buttons become subject to the export 
taxes provided for in the Independence Act, they will find it increasing- 
ly difficult to retain their market in the United States. The applica- 
tion of the full United States duty, if maintained at the present level, 
would probably be prohibitive of Philippine exports to the United States. 
P.Kiracter of recommendations 

The Committee recommends that annually declining, duty-free quotas 
Which should also be free of export taxes, be imposed upon imports of 
Philippine pearl buttons into the United States, commencing with 850,000 

ir . , n ny ,j tVT-.t thi^ amount be reduced by 5 
gross for the calendar year 19^0, and tn-.t tm. a 

> „«*M M calendar year until it shall equal 637,500 
percent for each succeeding cait-na^ j 

E r„ 5S for the calendar year L945- The Co^ittee reco»ends further 
tha t, after the Philippines heco.es independent, similar quotas he con- 

, , . „ nf 12 500 gross beginning with the 
tinned subject to an annual reduction of i2,500 

, , ~rl9i7 Any shipnsnts »ade in excess of the quotas, either 
calendar year HI v * 

-,1th period or thereafter, should be subject to the 
during the Commonwealth p^rica 

lfv Impor ts of duty-free pearl buttons from the 
full United States duty . l^p.r 

a »a ^raduiily until they v/ere eliminated 
oh thin bo reducea graau j.-^ 
Philippines would thus °c 

f 1060 Such an arrangement w.uld afford 
completely at the close of I960. liauidate 

Muate period in which either to liquidate 
PhiliDDine manufacturers an adequate p 

. dependent upon the United States market 

* ♦ _ thexr bus m-^vv ^ t 
that portion oi 



or 



to develop nevf outlets. 



118 

5. UNITED STATES EXPORTS TO THE PHILIPPINES 
CHARACTER OF GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 

According to the terms of the Independence Act, United States 
products will be accorded unrestricted duty-free entry into the 
Philippine market until the Philippines becomes independent j there- 
after, they will presumably become subject to the full Philippine 
tarifi» The Committee feels that the sudden transition from a duty- 
free to a non-preferential position will not afford United States 
interests an adequate opportunity to make the required adjustments. 
The Corcirdttee believes, therefore, that United States products should 
be accorded in the Philippine market the sane tariff preferences which 
have been proposed for Philippine products in the United States market. 
Specifically the Committee recommends that on and after July U, 1946, 
the Philippine Government should lovy and collect on all United States 
pr.xiu.cts imported into the Philippines (except those products for Which 
special provisions have been made) 25 percent of the then existing 
Philippine duties. This rate should be increased by 5 percent <m 

+ •1 Tnrmar- 1, 1961, when the full Philippine 
each succeeding January 1, until Januar„ x, n , 

. , t „n rvrpferences terminated, 
duties Should be collected and all preiercnu 

» qtates products would have unrestricted 

Under this plan, united btates px 

4^1 Tulv L 1946, as nov: provided 
5%-free entry into the Philippines untxl July 4, 

a W nuld not became subject to full Philippine 
mthe Independence Act, and would 

,«*n United States manufacturers and exporters 
duties until January 1, 1961. United d ^ 

. + , rti .i period in which either to adjust 
would thus be afforded a substantia I 

• , +Q a position independent of preference 
their business in the Philippics to a p 

• Me to provide for its orderly liquidation. 
or , should that prove impossible, to r 



119 



Line in 
may 



On many products Philippine duties are relatively low, and are 
therefore not likely to be the cause of such appreciable increases in 
the prices of United States goods as to bring about a sharp decl: 
PhiUPP^- 116 consumption of them, Foreign competition, however, i 
force American firms either to forego a substantial part of the price 
oremium now obtained or to suffer a reduction in sales. Although most 
United States products sold in the Philippines are (O-so sold in foreign 
markets without benefit of preferences, Philippine imports from foreign 
countries in a few instances have recently reduced the participation of 
United States products in .hat market. The Committee believes that 
special provisions should be made for such commodities in order that the 

,, m .„ flHnr1 0 f pii L rade preferences should not 
plan it recommends for the elimination oi an lf 

' 0Ferat e in such a ^ner as to he »or. relative of — exports 
* the Philippines than of Philippine e^ts to the Unite, States. The 

. „ i . rov ision -should be made for imports 
Coradttee also feels that special ^ro/ision 

»ftpr the Philippines become 
Mo the Philippines of American cigarettes after 

u Philippine tariff rate on tobacco products 

independent, inasmuch as the Fmli^m 

' • - cally to preclude the possibility of their import*- 
are so high as practically to pi 

■ ef th , s . special reco-endations is presented 
tion. A discussion of tne-e sp 

subsequent pages. 

COTTON TEXTILES 
1 kpt rorJJniteA^^^^ 

P ^ m22 ^^ market for 

United States cotton textiles, ^ Philippines 

la in the Philippines- ^ 
Supplier of these goods m cotton utiles 

a market for Uni^eu 
has occupied second place as - Philippine 

* the second supplier m ^ 

and the United States has ww 



120 



market. The growth of United States trade with Cuba, and the increased 
competition of Japanese cotton fabrics in the Philippines, have combined 
to reduce the relative importance of the Philippines as an outlet for 
cotton goods from the United States. 

United States exports of cotton textiles to the Philippines 
totaled 41,452,000 square yards valued at $4,843,600 in 1936. In that 
year, shipments to the Philippines amounted to 20.7 percent of the 
quantity of cotton textiles exported by the United States to all 
countries. Shipments to the Philippines in 1936 declined appreciably, 
both absolutely and relatively, from exports in 1932, which totaled 
116,665,000 square yards valued at $8,438,000. (See table 25.) Cotton 
textiles from the United States, however, were specially favored in 1932 
because of the boycott of Japanese E oods by Chinese merchants operating 
in the Philippines. Although the trend of United States exports to the 
Philippines was a declining one during the period 1*32-36, preliminary 
reports indicate that United States p,rticip . ti , Leased appreciably 

^ +hq of 1938. This change may be explained 
during 1937 and the early months 01 1^. 

• i« orices of Japanese textiles and the inability of 
in part by the rise in prices oj. j y 

t * « enter into forward contracts, and in part by 
Japanese manufacturers to ewer 

• o -,f United States textiles, 
the decline in prices ol unn>ea 



121 



Table 25.- Cotton textile ss— ' Quantities and values exported from the 
United States to all countries and to the Phil iooine s, 

1927-36 




Year 



1927 
1928 
1929 
1930 

1931 
1932 
1933 
1934 
1935 
1936 



■ 

Quantity ! Value 



565,020,728 

564,447,306: 
416,285,047: 
366,958,314: 
375,446,543: 
302,041,971: 
226,305,977: 
185,564,517: 
200,500,610: 



$76,755,711 
72,298,554 
79,412,946 
51,384,739 
35,782,912 
27,356,836 
23,511,176 
24,656,063 
20,035,363 
21,873,394 



Exports to the 
Philippines 



Quantity *. Value 



: Ratio of quantity 
:of exports of cot- 
:ton textiles to 
: the Philippines 
sto total quantity 
: of exports of cot- 
ton textiles to 
: all countries 



Square yards : 



88,016,312: 
93,775,374: 
81,341,833: 
48,571,701: 
61,599,362: 
116,665,261: 
33-, 036, 983: 
47,375,516: 

47,121,603: 
41,451,900: 



$11,345,805: 
12,198,883: 
10,505,616: 
5,640,796: 
5,739,741: 
3, 437,334: 
7,110,736: 
5,257,782: 
5,299,516: 
4,843,595: 



Percent 

15.6 
17.1 
14.4 
11.7 
16.3 
31.1 
29.2 
21.2 
25.4 
20.7 



1 / Includes cotto n cloth, ,iuck, and tire fabric. 

- * frnm official statistics of the United States 
Source: Compiled irom oinciax 
Department of Commerce. 

. . _ A* PhilX PBigJ mark et 

Tn 1932 the United States supped 7. pe: 

„ r textiles; the ratio declined to 33 per- 
of Philippine imports oX cottor 

< in 1937. In th - ' K 

- in 1935 and to 29 ^ ^ - — 

became the principal suppxx ^ 

Durins the first carter o ^ ^ both and 

cotton textiles in the Philip?*^ b. - 

. .,„- 0 roducts from Jap™, 
value, arrivals of simile A 



122 



ff^tors governing imports into the p r1lippi nefl _ 

The Philippine tariff nrcnrlrteo «. . 

provides lor specific duties based on 

v ,. e ight and yarn counts on cotton textiles imported from foreign 
countries. To the extent that the duty is based on weight, it 
results in taxing low-grade goods more heavily than high-grade goods. 
The computed ad valorem equivalent of Philippine duties collected on 
imports of dutiable cotton textiles amounted to 30 percent in 1936. 

In an effort to stabilize conditions in the Philippine cotton 
textile market, the Japanese Government agreed to limit for 2 years, 
beginning August 1, 1935, imports of Japanese cotton cloth into the 
Philippines. This agreement, commonly referred to as the "gentlemen's 
agreement", was renewed for a 1-year period ending August 1, 1938. As 
a result of the restriction, prices of Japanese textiles in the 
Philippine market have been increased, the effect of which has been to 
tax Philippine consumers for the direct benefit of Japanese producers 
and for the indirect benefit of American producers. 

Character of recommendations 

" w ., a +hfl + it would be Dossible to capture for 

The Committee believes that at -ouj-i 

r thr orice premiums now being paid by Philippine 
the Philippine Treasury the pried pi- 

r,f +hp "gentlemen' s agreement." The 
consumers in consequence of the genu 

+hat the Philippine tariff on cotton 
Committee, therefore, recommends that 

a «A S -he adoption of the schedules 

textiles be increasea. ^ 1 ~° 

w.i T of the Appendix, which schedules, if made 
presented in Schedule I oi t,ne ph 

■ of the "gentlemen's agree- 

•4' +kp termination oi oi-u b 
effective simultaneously with tne - 

, tfrriB lly the prices paid by Philippine 
ment", should not increase materially 

consumers . 1/ 

wTby" the Committee are lower 

TT^Ti^a^eT^ cl ,ths of high yarn count 

for cloths of fcm yarn count than to^ ^ hence more Wldely 

' the former being ^ ss /°^g income, 
consumed by persons sro 



123 



CIGARETTES 



^Philippines as an export market for American cigarettes 

In recent years the Philippines has ranked first as an export 
market for American cigarettes. Since 1928 the percentage of total 
exports of cigarettes from the United States shipped to the Philippines 
has increased steadily until both in 1935 and 1936 it amounted to 53 
percent. The quantity exported lias risen from 1,081,000,000 in 1933 to 
3,025,000,000 in 1937. In the latter year, exports to the Philippines 
v;ere valued at $4,695,000 (see table 26.). Hearly 100 percent of the 
ci£ arettes imported into the Philippines regularly enter fro, the United 
States; in 1936 and 1937, imports supplied about one-half of total 
Philippine consumption. 

n^mti+ies and values exported from the 
Iable o r4r| ^ntx r md to the 

Philippines, 1927-JO 



Year 



1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 



Total exports 



Exports to the 
Philippine 3 1/ 



Quantity Value 



Thousands : 

11 706,110: 22,059,U9 
ft 1*5 851: 16,706,^1 
223: 10,136,970 

2,968,499: 6 ' 7 ^'™ 
% []6 739: 5,328,629 

3,900,313: l>f e i'tl 5 

4,628,750: 8,658,3 /> 



Quantity 



Value 



308 630: 1,772,382 
1/122,321: 2,291,932 
1 129 Oil: 2,056,8^/ 
l'075 384: 1,861,730 
^^lioi: 1,671,759 
JLfe. 1.76C 1.406 

1 692,531: 2,555,850 

2 030,168: 3,086,271 
2 /67 206: 3,651,557 



Ratio of quantity 
of exports of ciga- 
rettes to the Phil- 
ippines to total 
quantity of exports 
of cigarettes to 
<,n countries. 

Percent, 



7.5 
6.9 
13.3 
22.9 
36.2 
40.2 
43*3 
51.3 
53.3 
53-3 



jS -IT. 



1/ Lport TbT^rphli^^ 0 

at $4,695,6^6. 

Source: Compiled from tffici* 
Department of Commerce. 



X statistics of the United States 



124 

gggtors governing imports ^+. 0 the Phn . pn .^ 

The Philippine tariff imposes a duty of per pound plus 25 

percent ad valorem on cigarettes imported from, foreign countries. 
Based on the average value per pound of shipments of United States 
cigarettes to the Philippines in 1937, the ad valorem equivalent of 
this duty, had it been assessed against United States shipments, would 
have approximated 750 percent. It appears certain that American 
cigarettes, if subjected to such a duty, would not be able to retain 
any appreciable market in the Philippines. 

■ 

Char&oter n£ r. commendations 

The Committee recommends that, for the period July 4, 1946, 
through December 31, 1946, a duty-free quota of 1,125,000,000 cigarettes 
be imposed upor. imports of American cigarettes into the Philippines, and 
that for the calendar year 1947, a duty-free quota of 2,100,000,000 
cigarettes (70 percent of 3,000,000,000 cigarettes) be similarly imposed, 
Which auota should be reduced by 150,000,000 cigarettes (5 percent of 
3,000,000,000 cigarettes) for each succeeding calendar year until 1961. 

J r 1^ th * + any shipments in excess of the 
The Committee recommends further oh., my ±> 

, + „ ,„,. v Ye in force at the ti;nc. 
quota be subject to whatever Philippe auty m.y 

p + mata the Committee selected the shipments 
As the basis for the quota tne 

th- largest on record, amounting to approximately 
made in 1937, which were the 1-rgcs* 

. 4.4^0 of the Cornnittee would 
Lx a The recommendations oi T,na 

3,000,000,000 curettes. ■ • ^ M 

4.*.,o the same o^or™ 1 "' 
accord American ci C aretti,s tne 0 „ h1 „ ct to de- 

„ b, accorded those Philippine prooucts subject 
** it recoil be accord to ^ 

.„ +he United btati.5 
dining duty-free quotas xn tne 



125 



r ecommendations, all declining duty-free quotas would bu reduced at the 
£ate of independence, by 25 percent of their original amount, and there- 
by would be reduced by an additional 5 percent for each calendar 

until 1961. If adopted, this plan would afford United States 
cigarette manufacturers an adequate period in which to adjust their 
business in the Philippines after that country becomes independent. 
Without an arrangement of this type, imports of American cigarettes 
into the Philippines would cease on July 4, 1946, inasmuch as they 
loulfi then become subject to the Philippine duty. 



r 



1J6 



EVAPORATED MILK 



^jHlippines as an export mar ket for United States evaporated milk 

in recent years, the Philippines has,., been the leading export market 
for United States evaporated milk. Since 1934, however, exports have 
declined. In that year, they amounted to 19,906,000 pounds, valued at 
$1,236,000, and constituted 52 percent of total United States exports of 
that product; in 1936, they amounted to 10,963,000 pounds, valued at 
$794,000, and constituted 46,5 percent (see table 27). Preliminary re- 
ports indicate that the decline continued in 1937. The reduction in the 
volume of United States exports is especially significant because, during 
this period, Philippine consumption of evaporated milk increased. 

Table 27*- Evaporated milk (unsweetened) : Quantities and 
values exported from the United States to all coun- 
tries and to the Philippines, 19^7-36 



Year 



Total exports 



1927 
1928 
1929 
1930 
1931 
1932 
1933 
1934 
1935 
1936 



Quantity 



pounds 

68,047,U1 
76,788,833 
68,942,613 
60,810,993 
55,761,388 
39,305,309 
32,365,212 

37,963,415 
32,227,125 
23,560,959 



Value 



$7,182,446 

7,904,541 
6,344,208 
5,612,272 
4,609,251 
2,525,991 
1,939,959 
2,385,351 
2,139,283 
1,743,757 



Exports to the 
Philippines 



Quantity 



Pounds, 

13,230,906 

15,649,075 
17,157,300 

13,010,910 
13,036,359 
17,692,601 
13,663,376 
19,905,633 
15,374,961 
10,962,919 



Value 



$1,341,2H 
1,575,317 
1,727,639 
1,651,930 
1,479,237 
1,066,072 
1,101,667 
1,235,392 

x ,023,11s 

794,279 



Ratio of quantity 
of exports of 
evaporated milk to 
the Philippines to 
total quantity of 
exports of evapor- 
ated milk to all 

countries 

Percent 

19.4 
20.4 
24.9 
29.6 
32.3 
45-0 
57.7 
52.4 
47.7 
46. 5 



f-— r^ucTirth^^ 

Source: Compiled from oiiiciax * 
°f Commerce . 



127 



gteg jtateg evaporated milk in Philippine market 

In 1930 the United States supplied 99.8 percent of the total quantity 
0 f phiUPP ine imports of evaporated milk; this ratio declined to 3^.5 per- 
cent in 1935? to 50.5 percent in 1936, and to 33 percent in 1937. The 
Netherlands has become the other principal supplier. Most of the ship- 
ments from that country are made by large firms which have plants located 
la many countries, including the United States. The selection of the 
-rticular plants to supply the Philippine market at any given time is de- 
pendent upon the degree cf profitability which such a selection appears to 

afford. 

factors governing imports into the Philippines 

The Philippine tariff imposes a duty of 10 percent upon imports of 
evaporated milk from foreign countries. The computed ad valorem duty on 
dairy products entering the Philippines from foreign countries ,as 8.2 per- 
cent in 1936. The fact that the effective rate is lower than the statutory 
rt. U due to the Philippine Parity Act which, for duty assessment purposes, 
lvalues the Netherlands- currency in resp.ct of its current exchange value. 

Sharaetsr of r.e commendations 

~ thpt th e Philippine tariff on evaporated noLc 
The Committee recommends th.-t tnd r 

. o<; nprrent ad valorem. The 
h raised from 10 percent ad valorem to ^5 percent 

v, ■ rhan*e would operate to increase American 
Committee believes that such a change w° 

and that such a transfer in the 
participation in the Philippine market, and 

, f reS ult in raising prices by the full amount of 
source of supply would not result m 

,, Hon bG tweon American firms would 
the teease in duty, inasmuch as compete 

operate to prevent such an eventuality. 



128 

CANNED FISH PRODUCTS 



^^Phili ppines as an export market for United States canned fish products 

The Philippines ranked first as an export market for United States 
canned sardines in 1936. Exports to the Philippines reached a peak in 
1929, when they amounted to 19,339,000 pounds valued at $1,4.69,000. In 
1936, exports to that market totaled 8,903,500 pounds valued at $410,000, 
and amounted to 20.9 percent of the total quantity exported from the 
United States in that year. Preliminary statistics indicate that exports 
to the Philippines declined further in 1937, despite an appreciable in- 
crease in total Philippine imports of this product (see table 28). 

The Philippines ranked second as an export market for United States 
canned salmcn in 1936, the United Kingdom being the principal market, 
^ing the decade 1927-36, shipments to the Philippines have fluctuated 
ranging from ,,7,2,000 pounds valued at |499,500 in 1927, to 

n ^ + W COO in 1928. Shipments in 1936 were 1,429,000 
258,000 pounds valuea at $33, COO in 1^°. 

+ 1 +~ q 7 oercent of the total quantity 
pounds valued at $96,000, and amounted to 3.7 perc. 

• thnt vr-ar. Preliminary statistics 
exported from the United States in that year. 

f tta Philippines in 1937 increased somewhat as 
indicate that exports to the PBiliPP 

opred with exports in 193& (see table 29) . 

. vr . the lending market for United States exports 
The Philippines « ^ ^ 

i T, r i from 1930 through 1935- w 
canned naCcerel from 193 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

Exports reached a peax of 2, , Preliminary statis- 

declined to 160,000 pound, van 

in 1937 |ee table 30). 
tics indicate a further decline in 19, 



129 



Table 28 Canned sardines: Quantities and values exported 
from the United States to all countries and to the 

Philippines, 1927-36 



#1 

0 
3)0 

331 
1932 

m 

1534 
'.535 
336 



Total 
exports 



Quantity 



79,439,503: 
80,253,474: 
123,920,062: 

103,226,315: 
53,246,893: 
26,644,525: 
25,641,265: 
33,145,553: 
45 ,454,334: 
42,688,741: 



Value 



$6,817,662 
6,522,711 
9,418,511 
7,133,594 
3,445,770 
1,542,399 
1,336,680 

1,937,431 
2,724,210 
2,530,867 



Exports to the 
Philippine s 



Quantity : Value 



Pounds 



: Ratio of quantity of ex- 
sports of canned sardines 
': to the Philippines to 

: total quantity of such 

: exports to .all countries 

: Percent 



12,688,711: $1,165,552: 
11,052 
19,338 
16, 068 
8,199 
7,121 
7,651 
9,315 
10,930 
3,903 



1,165 
i,692: ' 
;,821: 
>,615: 
- , 404 : 
.,141: 
i,£75: 
\7j8: 

, 524 : 



888,114: 
1,469,070: 
1,066,710: 
510,853: 
366,797: 
370,377:. 
437,137: 
521,350: 
410,376: 



16.0 
13.8 
15.6 
15-6 
15.4 
26.7 
29.8 
28.1 
24.2 
.9 



20 



■ « — » — 11 1 ■ * 

1 .4.. , nP +■«-, it 5. Department of Commerce. 

M Compiled from official stntwtaw of tne U.S. Dep 

titles and values exported 
Tabled Ojmnjd t f£^ t £ 08 a nd to the 



lear 



Total 
_c3XPort s_ 



Exports to the 



.Quantity : Value 



1927 

1929 
*5;0 
1931 
1932 
1933 
% 
1935 
1936 



Pounds : 

* 

38,247,932': ^6,023,960 

40,952,705: 7,661,73^ 

40,967,378 : 7,405,941 

27,237,729: 5,342,08U 

24,221,633 : 4,039,993 

32,610,017: 3,584,886 

26,539,379: 3,289,924 

49,065,899: |,676,178 

45,312,277: 6,917,9-0 

38,892,896: 6,404,3?-' 




Value 



Ratio of quantity of ex- 
ports of canned salmon 
to the Philippines to > 
total quantity of sucn 
~ r r.+.« to al l rvmntriea 
P'ircait 



4,742,208: 
253,357: 
550,242: 
340,153: 
1,882,796: 
803,308: 
1,031,601: 
1,575,464: 
1 195,317: 



,,526 
J3,046 
71,772 
92,346 
339,759 
52,743 
63 ,633 
130,476 

ii7,952 
96,053 



12.4 
.6 
1.3 

3.1 
7.3 

2.5 
4.1 
3.2 
2.6 
3.7 



^ Ce : Compiled from 



■ - L Z ti q Department of Commerce. 

j.-<*Maa of the U.u. ^ e t^ 
official statistics 



130 



)le 30 m- Canned mackerel: Quantities and values exported 
from the United States to all countries and to the 
Phn 1 inoines . 19^0-16 l/ 



Year 



1930 
1931 
1932 
1933 
193A 
1935 
1936 



Total exports 



Quantity ; Value 
pounds 



2,595,845 
1,550,-161 
1,409,163 
1,968,932 
4,703,566 
2,25S, 067 
803,754 



$190,759 
111,218 

79,391 
93,071 
218,894 
113,439 
45,648 



: Ratio of quantity 
Exports to the ;of expor ts of 

Philip pines ; canned mackerel to 

; the Philippines to 



Quantity 



Pounds 

1,446,568 
789,799 
631,590 
1,086,225 
2,170,325 
942,890 
160,052 



Value ESfiti)* 
:such exports to 

■all countries 



^99,389 : 
61,652 : 
34,269 : 
50,621 : 
92,245 : 
43,604 : 
7,025 : 



Percent 

55.7 
50.9 
44.8 
55.2 
46.1 
41.8 
19.9 



-wu • * - . : s ■— 

: ' 5 * — ; " 1 -?-\ ^rior to 19.; C ■ 

-17-Canred mackerel was not .^.^ cla^ua-a ,r 

J p . , i+atist ics of the U.S. Department of Commerce. 

Source: Compiled from official statistics 

^^^^ 

~ ^T^T^lippine imports of canned sarumes 

The proportion of tow 

- - -a from 97 percent in 1929, to 
_ .., A Q+ofes declined irom ji 
supplied hy the United Statco a 

«+ i* 1935, to 18 percent ]fl 193?. 
-10-59 tn 45 percent m -w^j 
percent m 1932, to ^ i in the Philippine 

- lin ^iior of canned sarame. m 
Japan is now the principal SuppH p hil i P pine 

Oied 87 percent of total Philippe 
market. The United States supr ^ ^ 

1929 56 percent m 193- , ^ 
imports of canned salmon 1 - > principal 

jo ~nd Japan have b^en w 
,00-7 Canada ana u«i 
and 56 percent m 193. • Sports of canned 

w , in the PhiliPP^ 
suppliers of this produc ^ rf ^ totaI 

« ct*«fes accounted ior 77 t 
mackerel from the United B«a , ^ ^ im and on i : 

* into the PhiiipP^ 5 *» i932 ' * - 
of such imports mto - ^ 

2 percent in 1937. J a P an lkJ 



131 



^gto rg governing imports into the Philippines 

Fish, in cans, glass, or jars, when imported . from foreign countries, 
is subject to Philippine duties which range from 15 to 25 percent in 
accordance with specific classifications in the tariff schedule. Canned 
sardines, salmon, and. mackerel, of foreign origin are dutiable at 15 
percent. The computed ad valor am equivalent of Philippine duties on all 
dutiable fish products in 1936 was 24.2 percent. The major portion of 
dutiable Philippine imports of fish products are entered at 15 percent 
ad valorem. The high ad valorem equivalent is ^he result of the operation 
of the Parity Law which, for purposes of duty assessment, overvalues 
Japanese currency as compared with current exchange rates. Japanese 
products subject to ad valorem duties, therefore, pay effective dutbs 
which are approximately 70 percent in excess of what they would be if 
invoice values in yen were computed at current exchange rates. 

Charnctrr n| recom mendations 

~~ a f^t Philippine duties on "fish, in cans, 

The Committee recommends that Philippine 

w - 9^ nprrent ad valorem for all classi- 

glass, or jars" ,3/ be increased to 25 percent 

fixations. 



"1/ ParagrapT^lXP^iiPP 1116 



_____ — ---r" f iQOQ. as amended . 
r^aTiffAct of 1VU*, 



REPORT CF 
01 NT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 
ON 

PHILIPPINE API-AIRS 



PART III 



PART III - ri ttttffOB 

1 introducti on 

I]] considering the financial problems of the Philippines, 
the Committee has been guided not only by the basic postulates 
set forth in the Independence Act and to ho inferred from the 
major economic and political objectives contemplated by that 
Act, but also by certain ether principles implicit in the Com- 
mittee' s recommendations as to the economic adjustments which 
the Philippines must undertake in order to -ore pare for the 
assumption and r.iaintenance of an independent status. The 
general objective has beer, that the independent government 
to be inaugurated on July 4, 1946, may occupy a strong and 
s ound f inane ial position, 

The treatment of this subject is presented in four 
sections, as follows: (l) Revenues and Expenditures; 
(2) Bonded Indebtedness; (3) Currency; and (4) Nankin?. 
The Committee's specific recommendations with respect to 
finance will be found in Part 711 of this report. 



-2- 



SSS9£SKa.jan4-£spei>dltur8. 



In It, treats of the Tmmes ^ rf ^ 

Philippine Went, the Co ra ,ntee has considered only the 

revenues and expenditures of the notion^ di • t „ 

ne nat ional Philipuine Government; 

it has made no allowance for the annual revenues and expendi- 
tures of the provinces, .municipalities and chartered cities of 
the Philippines, about one-third of whoso rovonuo. in the aggre- 
gate, is derived from grants by the national Government. The 
reports of the Auditors of the Philippines do not contain the 
information which would enable the Committee to prepare 
comparable data snowing the amounts contributed by the national 
Government for the support of these political subdivisions. 

Period prior to 1937 
During the decadt-: froii 1927 to 1936, the annual net reve- 
nues available for meeting the ordinary expenditures of th* ; 
Philippine uovernmemt exceeded expenditures chargeable against 
ordinary revenues, except in the four years 1930 to 1933, in- 
clusive; during the same ten- year period, the total annual 
income exceeded total expenditures except in the years 1927 
and 1930 to 1932, inclusive; and the deficits incur rr-d, which 
were relatively small, were rset by drawing on the surplus 
accumulated in previous years. At no time during this decade 
*as the Philippine Government compelled to borrow to meet 
budge t ary deficits. 



The following table is a summary statement of avenues and 
expenditures for the years 1927 to 1936, inclusive:--' 
Revenues and Expenditure § _of _the_Phil iuuiuc Kationa] Government 

1927-193 6-/ 
(In millions of dollars) 





: ]\iet Reve- 


: H e t Expe ndi- 


* Etc f! q q ( i~ \ 




io tax 


Jj XC ESS V t 


fis- 


nues Avail- 


: tures 


! or Deficit 








cal 


able for 


: Chargeable 


! ( -) of Ordi- 


and : 


p end i — 


(-) of 


and 


: Meeting 


: Against 


: nary Reve- 


Trans- : 


tures ! 


?otal 


Cal- 


: Ordinary 


: Ordinary 


nues over 


' fers : 




Receipts 


endar 


Expendi- 


:£.e venues 


Ordinary 






over Ex- 


Year 


tures 




Sxoendi tures 






penditures 


1927 : 


33.7 


31.9 


4- 1.8 


41.7 


42. 1 


.4 


1928 : 


36.4 


: 32.5 


: +- 3.8 : 


47.9 


45.1 


: *- 2.8 


1929 : 


38.9 


! 34.7 


: <- 4.2 


: 47.0 


41.8 


* 5.2 


1930 : 


35.3 : 


39.8 


: - 4.5 


47 . 5 ' 


50.6 


. - 3.1 


1931 : 


34.5 


41.4 


- 6.9 


: 41 . 3 


45.7 


i A A 
— . 


1932 : 


33.3 : 


36 . 4 


- 3.1 


: 37 . 3 


3-9 . 8 


: - 2.5 


1933 : 


30.4 : 


31. 7 


: - 1.3 


35.0 


34.7 


: v .3 


1934 : 


33.4 : 


OS m O 


: * .9 


: 39 . 3 


: 35.3 


: *■ 4.0 


1935 : 


35.2 : 


35.1 : 


i- .1 : 


■ 41.4 • 


37.9 


: t- 3.5 


1936 : 


42.2 : 


37.5 


: j- 4.7 


: 51.7 


46 . 2 


: j- 5.5 


Total : 


353 . 3 : 


353.6 


- .3 


430.1 


419.2 


: 4-10.9 




KK 33 : 


35.36 


- .03 


43.01 


: 41 . 92 


: *- 1.09 


Based on Report s of the Auditor 


General of the Philippine Islands. 



1/ Detailed statistics of Government revenueTand f^J*^^ *g 
selected war, 1*27 1930, 1933 and 1936, sill be found in Appendix IV, 
Z y ar 55 w». the last year for .hie* detailed fibres .ore avail- 
able at the time of the preparation of the 

|/ As indicated in the introductory W£*£ B ^^w*?** 
annual revenues and expenditures of the p.ov . ^ 

chartered cities of the »" l W^Vf "seems to have been about 

The revenue figures for lJ3o, no- _ ; ' reTdnue $3^,926,244; con- 
an average year, are as folio s. g ^ revenue, $25,920,584. 

tributed by national Government, *^* and ' expenditures would have 
A complete study of Philippine ^^f 1 ^^' in addition to an anrual 
to include consideration of th ® * a Q Q 000 't o the national Government, 
contribution of approximately contributing approximately 

the taxpayers in the Philippines are governments of the 

$25, 000", 000 annually for the maintenance 
provinces, municipalities 
approximate $68 , 000 , 000 . 



and chartered citic. 



-4- 

Current -period 

The present condition of Philippine governmental finances 
is indicated in the following table of the consolidated general 
fund for the years 1936, 193?, and 1938: 

Comparative Financial Statement of the Co nBoliAa.t. pd General Fund 
of the Philippine government 1936-1938 (in mil lio ns of dollars) 



1936 
Ac tual 



1937 
Estimated 



1938 
Estimated 



29.0 
13.4 



8.7 



42 .4 



45.9 



24,2 
4.9 



29.1 



13.3 
19.7 



33.0 



97 Q 



23. 9 
22. 1 
1.8 



28.5 

4.9 



10.5 
23.9 



i^co,:s 

SECULAR: 
Revenue from taxation 
Other 

Total income 

EXPENDITURES 

ORDINARY : 
General 
Fixed 
Total 

EXCESS OP TOTAL ESTIMATED REGULAR 
IHCOME OVER TOTAL ESTIMATED ORDINARY 
EXPENDITURES 

Add— Accumulated Surplus, January 1 
Total 

EXTRAORDI NARY EX?S:: D I TURE S 

SURPLUS . ~-.EGSI.3ER 81 

Surplus after deducting extra- 
ordinary expenditures 

Add-Araount transferred from proceeds 
of coconut oil processing tax 

TOTAL SURPLUS OEUiSRAL FiJHD PROPER 
Less— Allocations of surplus 
UNALLOCATED SURPLUS GENERAL FUUD PROPER 

Md-Unallocated surplus coconut oil 

processing tax proceeds 
TOTAL UHMGUMBERED SURPLUS 01 , t°_^j^ • | : 

CO IT SQL I DATE D G-EMERAL FUi:D_ . f~the Philippines for 

&ed on the Budget of theCo^or^.altn 



33. 0 

11.4 
13.4 



24. 8 
13.0 
11.8 



44.7 



31.6 
8.6 



40.2 



33.2 
4.9 



38.1 



2.1 



24 . 8 



26.9 



1.3 



25.6 
.6 



26.2 
14,1 
12.1 

44.1 



56.2 



1938 



The foregoing sunny does not include the receipts and ex- 
penditures of the special and bond funds, and hence the totals 
for 1936 do not correspond exactly with the amounts of total 
income and expenditures for that year as shown in the table; hut 
the statement of the consolidated genrra.1 fund presents a reason- 
ably complete picture of governmental finances, since it reflects 
more than 80-o of the government's financial operations. 

The estimated unallocated surplus at the end of 1938 exceeds 
appreciably the regular annual income of the Philippine Govern- 
ment; and^ unless extraordinary expenditures should be far in excess 
of present budgetary estimates, the unallocated surplus at the end 
of 1938 should be even greater, inasmuch as the foregoing state- 
ment does not include any allowance for receipts in 1938 from the 
proceeds of the excise taxes on coconut oil and sugar, which may 
be expected to approximate $35,000,900.-' Regardless of addi- 
tional revenues from these sources, however, it is apparent that 
the Philippine Government is at present in an exceptionally 
strong financial position. 

ap.-rwinrtfiT of the Co-nmonTTeolth period 

i i4„» s <i tint the gradual reduction in trade 
The Committee believes tiwc ww =,* 

x^a this reoort would not bring about 
preferences recommended in tms repo* 

tt 54-^ states-Philippic trade as to cause 
such a decrease in United btates nu yt 



* , T in 193* (48 Stat. 763) as amended 
1/ Coconut oil-Act of ^ * m2) . aRd sugar -Act of 

by the Act of June 22, LVf* * , 
September 1, 1937 (50 Stat. 90.). 



a serious reduction of the ordinary revenues during the Commonwealth 
period. Moreover, as Ion,- as the present United States excise taxes 
on coconut oil and sugar remain in effect, and the proceeds of such 
taxes collected on products of Philippine origin sold in the United 
States continue to be remitted to the Philippine Government, it 
will receive large extraordinary revenues. The present annual 
yield to the Philippine Government of the excise tax on coconut 
oil has averaged about $17 , 000, COO; and the astimeted annual yield 
of the excise tax on eugar is approximately $9,750,000* 

In addition to the* extro.or dinar;, ir.cone fro;.] excise taxes, 
the export taxes provided for in tho Independence Act, after 
allowing for the change a recommended by thi Committee, should 
yield for debt retirement ournoses a totr..l of approximately 
$35,325,000 during the period 1941-1946 in which they would be 
in effect.^/ 

Although expenditures ha»« not yet inoreseed In proportion 

to the total revenues receded by the Philippine Government, 

there may be a tendency in that direction during the render 

of tee Co^on-ealth period. Expenditures -ill increase materially 

n - * rot nrosrom is carried out and as the 
as the economic adjustment program 

* snares to assume in 1946 th< full obli- 
Philippine Government prepares 

2/ 

?atior. of national defense. 



; — TfThe orocei ds of the ezport taxes, 

1/ The Committee's estimate ox * 194 l --$3,019, 000; 1942- 

distrihuted by years, if bm ; i >* ' 1 $8 074 ,000; 1945— $10 , 093, 000 

$4 , 037 , 000 ; 1943-S6 , 05o , 000 . ^ 

and 1946 (January to W) J'^utu-es for the Philippine Army 
2/ It may he noted tho.t exy.ndi ^ $5,344,000 in 1936 and 

" (including the Constabulary; amoun^ ^ ^ $8|277 ,000. 

that the estimated expentti 



-7- 

P eriod after inj|ej )ejideng e 

After independence, the Philippine Government will no longer 
receive income from United States excise taxes levied on the im- 
portation or on the processing of Philippine products sold in 
the United States, or from the export taxes levied by the Com- 
monwealth Government as provided by the Independence Act. The 
Philippine Government, however, will have a new source of reve- 
nue in the form of tariff duties on imports from the United 
States, and it may possibly have increased revenues derived 
from imports from other countries. Although the amount of reve- 
nue that may be derived from such sources cannot be estimated 
satisfactorily, it will doubtless be very much less then the 
revenue derived fro:; the excise and export taxes. 

?lhile revenues fill probably decline in the yrars imme- 
diately following independence, there is Little reason to expect 
that expenditures can be correspondingly reduced. The problem 
of economic adjustment will become more acute as trade prefer- 
ences decline. The Philippine Government, moreover, must assume 
all of the expenses of national defense, and also must incur 
certain expenditures for the maintenance of diplomatic, consular 
and commercial services. But the Philippine Government would, 
if the recommendations of the Commit tee are followed, be prac- 
tically free of debt, so that the revenues previously devoted 

ia rfipas-^d for other purooses. It is 
to debt service would oe reieas-a 

. fV ie Philiooine Government will encounter 
believed, however, that the rtmxpp*" 



-fe- 
lts most difficult financial problems during the early years of 
the independence period, especially if adequate preparation will 
not have been made during the Commonwealth period. 

Special need for extraordinary revenues 
The Philippine Government will probably need to devote, 
virtually all of its revenues from ordinary sources to meet 
the cost of carrying on ordinary government functions during 
both the Commonwealth period and the years following independ- 
ence. Any increase in revenues from present ordinary sources 
nrold no doubt be absorbed by ordinary expenditures for social 
services, such as education and public health, or for national 
defense. The Committee considers that a distinction between 
the ordinary budget and the budget for economic adjustment 
should be scrupulously maintained. Hone of the remitted pro- 
ceeds of the United States taxes on sugar and coconut oil 
should be used to meet all or any portion of such charges as 
have normally been carried in the regular budget. 

±> ^,4- fv>o r^nrtinuance of the extra- 
The Committee believes that the continu 

T , .4-^ cfntps excise taxes on Philip- 
ordinary revenues from United States exci 

..-n-v -n-.T-iod will be necessary 
pine products during the Commonwealth, period 

• fcistment is to be financed with- 
if the program of economic adjustment 

. - , . t - rY difficulties and hardships to the Phil- 
out serious budgetary oxj.±* 

t • • of the fact that the Independence Act 
ippine people. In vie- of tne 

, • ■ Hits o*riod free access to 
during tms p 
accorded Philippine product, aur 



-9- 



the American market (except for the imposition of certain quota 
restrictions and the requirement of export taxes during the 
latter part of that period) , and considering that it has been 
the policy of the United States Government since the Act of 
March 8, 1902, — ' to remit to the Philippine Government the 
proceeds of United States taxes levied on products of Philip- 
pine origin, the Committee assumes that uuch policy -all be 
continued during the Commonwealth period, and so recommends. 

Desirable re strict ions on ase of e xtraordinary revenue 
However desirable additional social services and institu- 
tions may be, the Philippine Government should not use extra- 
ordinary and non-recurring revenue, for the expansion of ordi- 
nary services which couW not be maintained rith ordinary reve- 
nues. The Philippine Government, as would any government under 

.. n it extremely difficult to avoid 

similar circumstances, will find it extreme^ 

rt1n flfl the ree a for the expansion of social 
this danger, masmucn as the neeu 

q there is expected to be an appre- 

services is great, and sine- there 

rr t>e period of the receipt of extraordi- 
ciable time-lag between the penou 

mfl the period when the decrease of trade prefer- 
nary revenues ana tft«* p^* ±K -> 

r to De felt seriously- The Committee 
ences will have co ,e to -f 

fchat it is necessary that the Philippine 
believes, there! ore, tna* 

- thc „, flS derived fro, W cl.e t«e or. su S ar 
Government reserve the iwwa 



If 32 Stat. 54. 



-10- 

and coconut products of Philippine origin, primarily for the pur- 
poses of economic adjustment, as set forth in Part IV of this 
report, and for other vital needs of the Philippines. Such use 
has already heen contemplated with respect to sugar in Sec- 
tion 503 of the Sugar Act of September 1, 1937,— ^ and, with 

respect to coconut oil, in a press statement issued on "behalf 

2 / 

of the President of the Philippines. 

The Philippine Government had, as of January 1, 1938, a 
large unappropriated surplus (approximately $45,000,COO) in the 
coconut oil excise tax fund, and revenues from extraordinary 
sources are expected to accrue in large amounts early in the 
period of adjustment. As pointed out, ho -ever, in Part IV of 
this report, considerable sums '■■■ill be required for economic 
adjustment and some expenditures for that purpose Will need to 
be met after independence, hong-range planning is, therefore, 
clearly necessary in order to provide funds to finance not only 
that part of the economic adjustment program which rill take 



1/ 50 Stat. 903. "There is authorized ^1^^^ 
''amount equal to the amount of the axes co cted ac r ued 

under title IV on sugary ^ «S*X Manufactured 
Commonwealth of the Phil xppin ^ ^ ^ ^ 

in or Drought into ^JJ"*£ ectir? such taxes and the esti- 
1941, minus the costs of J* 1 ™™*^ tQ ^ made rith resp ect 
mates of amounts of reiunas * Q Governme nt of the Common- 
to such taxes, for transi roose 0 f financing a pro- 

wealth of the Philippines for ^/ p ^ ]lppines , the transfer 
gram of economic adjure. con ditions as the President of 

to be made under such term, ana c ^ ^ That no part of the 
the United States may pre sen . s ^p^" pai d directly or in- 
appropriations herein processing of sugarcane in the 

directly for the production or p 

Philippine Islands." rplpase 0 f June 23, 1937. 

2/ Department of State press relrase 



-11- 



place during the Coonowe^f, 

" h PeP10d 1~ that part which *. 

S " mS aSalnSt ^ - -oorlirate, „ ltmes should 

of the Philippic econo.ia systerl by ^ ^ ^ 

would, lead to a marked ri« ft, w 

ri ° e ln P rices *ages for a few years, 

only to be followed by a spvtp rinfi^- 

y a severe deflation -hen expenditures had 

-en greatly reduced. In vie^ of the fact that the economic 
adjustment program .ill reouire large extraordinary expenditure,, 
there exists the possibility of an inflation of objectionable 
proportions , 



F ^ire revenues ax.d expend i tur e s 



In anticipation of the future financial requirements, not 
only of the Commonwealth Government but also of the independent 
government to he inaugurated on July 4, 1946 , there is need for 
a comprehensive survey of the existing Philippine tax system. 
This survey should be undertaken with a view to providing addi- 
tional revenues to meet the increases in ordinary expenditures 
thrrt may be anticipated as a result of independence and to finance 
the economic adjustment program- The Committee does not undertake 
to specify those sources of revenue rhich should be studied; but, 
in planning the revision of the existing tariff, the discontinu- 
ance of old taxes, and the adoption of new taxes, careful con- 
sideration should be given to an equitable distribution of the 



-12- 



tax burden as well t-o + ™ 

° t0 tne fisccj. - nd economic effects *hich 

the proposed changes would entail.-' 7 



1/ A further discussion of certain phases of this question is 
~ given in Part IV of this report. 



-13- 



* - 

3. aaaded_Indeb tad y » 

; Present 122m S-m&Jl£j&^^ 

OnDeceafcer 31, 1936, the outstanding public debt of the 

Philippine Government and its political subdivisions totalled 

$76,363,000; and sinking funds maintained against this debt 

amounted to $3,1.328,000, leaving a net indebtedness of 
2/ 

$^.530,000. The sinking funds consist almost entirely of 
bonds issued by the Philippine Government. Nearly all of the 
public debt is payable in dollars, and about 33jo of the bonds 
outstanding in the hands of the public are hold by American 
investors. 

The public debt of the Philippines is comparatively snail. 
Annual interest and sinking fund charges amount to approxi- 
mately $5,000,000 and require the expenditure cf only Bfo of 
the ordinary revenues of the Philippine Government and its 
political subdivisions. 

1/ 

It is calculated that on July 4, 1$US, the imblic debt of 
the Philippine Government and its political s ubdivisions, as of 

71 7 ; j IT Iv, P nntq tiding public debt will be 

1/ Details in regard m ohe ouusw-^-'S t , 

-p , A v The debt as of Decemoer 31, 193 b . haS 

found m Appendix. V. Tnc because 193^ was the last com- 

been used here and ^f^J^^Zl to obtain figures. 

Plete year for wbic h the ^ttee "J**^, of the Ma 
2/ These figures do not iricluc^ ^ 

Railroad Company, 
1/ Eetai: 

with es 

in Append: 

isated sinking 

1966, are to be found in Appendix VII, 




-n,- 

reoenter 31, 1036, will bo $6? 1M7 nnn 

*<*.>93.000, and, according to esti- 

mt08 PrePOTel * y * hK Ph «iPPi- Govom,ont, sinking funds , 
Elusive of e X p Jr t to* proceed, Blu „ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

$^1,313,000, l^iag a net indebtedness of $ a .aso.ooo. 17 The 

latest maturity date of aav br— ^ - 

«ny Dona outstanding on December 31, 

1936, is May 16, 1966. 

Classification ,-,f ti 1P Pb-j lipoid ri,^ + 
In Section 2 (b) (3) and (5) of the Independence Act, 
the Congress distinguished between those debts and liabilities 
of the Philippine Government and its political subdivisions 
which were covered by bonds issoied under authority of Acts of 

Congress and those debts and liabilities not incurred under 
2/ 

such authority. This distinction placed in one category all 
debts and liabilities incurred by the Philippine Government 
and its political subdivisions, which are covered by 



l/ This does not include the indebtedness of the Llanila 
Railroad Company hereinafter referred to, nor the indebtedness 
incurred subsequently to December 31» 193°- 

2/ Section 2 (b) (3) of the Independence Act provides: "That 
the debts and liabilities of the Philippine Islands, its Prov- 
inces, cities, municipalities, and instrumentalities , which 
shall be valid and subsisting at the time of the final and 
complete withdrawal .f the sovereignty of the United States, 
shall be assumed by the free and independent government of the 
Philippine Islands; and that where bonds have been issued under 
authority of an Act of Congress of the United States by the 
Philippine Islands, or any Province, city, or oonicipality 
therein, the Philippine government will Bake adequate provi- 
sion for the necessary funds for the payment of interest ana 
Principal, and such obligations shall be a first lien on the 
taxes collected in the Philippine Islands 

Sccti. - 2 (b) (5) of the Independence Act provides: "That 
byway of "further assurance the government of the Philippine 
Islands will embody the foregoing provisions ...in a treaty 
with the United States." 



-15- 



tonds issued under authority of Acts of Con»resjy and in another 
category all other debts caic" liabilities of the Philippine Gov- 
ernment and its political subdivisions, as well as all debts and 
liabilities of its instrumentalities. With regard to obligations 
in the first category, the Congress provide." (a) that the inde- 
pendent government shall assume that portion of this indebted- 
ness outstanding on July 4, 1946; (b) that the Philippine Gov- 
ernment shall make adequate provision for payment of interest 
and principal thereon; (c) that such indebtedness shall con- 
stitute a first lien on the taxes collected in the Philippines; 
and (d) that these provisions shall be embodied in a treaty 
between the United States and the Philippines. With regard 
to obligations ir th* second category, the Congress, in Sec- 
tion 2 (b) (3) and (15). merely provided that the independent 
government shall assume th,„e oblivions and that a provision 
to that .ffect shall be embodied in the .aid treaty. 

. _ ^.^e-a-ories of Philippine 
Another differentiation between categoric 

. . . c „+i nn q o-f the Independence 
indebtedness was established m Section 9 

• ■ C n ^icalU provided that there was no 
Act, wherein it is sp«ciacaiv v 

tt -4.-^ ci*.«teq to meet interest 
obligation on the part oi the n 

t hrmds or other obligations of the 
and principal payments oi oona- 

• • * t dands or of the Provincial 
"government of the Philippine islands 

hereof hereafter issued", i.e., 
and municipal governments tner 



-16- 

after the effective date of the Act, May 1, mh lf This provi . 
sion roight be construed to infer that the Congress recognized 
some obligation on the part of the United States to meet the 
interest and principal of the bonds of the Philippines and its 
political subdivisions incurred prior to May 1, 193U, under 
authority of Acts of Congress. 

The total of Philippine Government indebtedness included 
in the second category mentioned above cannot be determined 
definitively at this time because there is a question whether 
the Manila Railroad Company is an 11 instrumentality 11 of the 
Philippine Government -.vithin the meaning of the Independence 
Act— a question which is not v/ithin the competence of the 
Committee. This railroad was originally a private company, 
but, prior to May 1, 193^, the entire capital stock of the 
railroad was acquired by the Philippine Government. The out- 
standing portion of the Manila Railroad bonded debt which 
matures prior to July U, I9U6, will be retired in 1939- The 
remaining portion which matures subsequently to July k, ISho, 
consists of an issue of $13, 2 3 b,0C0 of Refunding Mortgage % 

Gold Bonds duo July 1, «* « **** ° f $1 '° 7 °' 000 °' 

, , 1 iQtsq, the interest 

lirst Mortgage ty£ Gold Bonos, due May 1, 

1 by the Philippine Government. The 



or. which is guaranteed °3 



. — ; — _ lW T , r)V ides: "There shall 

1/ Section 9 of the Independence Ac t Pro^ ^ ^ ^ 

be no obligation on the ?aj q ^ ^ Uj , at ions of the 

interest or principal 01 ---- flg ^ of the Provincial and 

government of the isSued duri ng the 

amicipal governments the root , ir/nty in the Philippine 

continuance of United States so - ^ obligations hereafter 

Islands: Provided , That such i the Uni ted States 
issued shall not oe exempt * jo- 
or by authority of the United Stat, 



-17- 

first issue nay be redeemed on any interest date, as a whole 
only, at par plus 10* plus accrued interest. There are no 
sinking fund provisions for this issue. The estimated sinking 
fund for the second issue, as of July k t 191*6, is $31*3,380. 

1/ 

' Debt as of December 7~| , tQ 7ft 

The outstanding Philippine public debt on December 31, 

1936, classified with reference to the distinction made in 

2/ 

Section 9 of the Independence Act, was as follows: 



, Indebtedness 


: G-ro s s 


: Sinking lands 


: Est 


General 








Incurred prior 








to May 1, 193I+ 


: $ 75.6S2.350 s 


$ 31 ( 37U,136 


$ UU,30S,2lU 


Incurred sub- 








sequently to 








May 1, 19 3 U : 


1, 2S6,150 : 


: 1^,339 


1,271,811 


Total : 


$ 76,063,500 : 


31,3SS,h75 : 


45.5SO.025 



Debt as of July k. l°MG 
It has been estimated that the status of the Philippine 

public debt set forth in the foregoing table will on July U, 

3./ 

19^o, he as follows: 



1/ This does not include Manila Railroad Company. 

il For details in regard to the outstanding debt on Decemoer 31, 

1936. see Appendix V fibres supplied by the Office 

v This r^timpte was based on ii£U±^ ^ 1 47 
of Z Auditor" IZea of the Philippines given in Appendix 

VI and VII. 



• 



-18- 



Indebtedness 




■ Sinking Funds 




General 

Incurred prior 
to May 1, 1934 

Incurred sub- 
sequently to : 
May 1, 1934 : 


: $ 61,057,350 

1,536,150 ; 


' S 40,959,552 

253,551 : 


: Bet 

$ 20,097,798 
1,182,599 


Total 


£ 62,593,500 \ 


$ 41,313,103 J 


$ 21,280,397 



Liquidation of Philip-pine debt 

In addition to the sinking fund requirements provided by 
law for each specific issue of Philippine bonds, Section 6 (e) (5) 
of the Independence Act provides a further source of funds for 

debt liquidation by reserving for that purpose the proceeds of 

1/ 

the export taxes.—' Although this provision makes no distinc- 
tion in the distribution of these proceeds among the various 
classes of the debt mentioned aoove, it could be reasonably 
assumed that preference in this respect should be given 
to Philippine bonded indebtedness incurred prior to May 1, 
1934, under authority of Acts of Congress. The Committee 



1/ The relevant paragraph of Section 6 (e) provides: The 
government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine _ Islands shall 
place all funds received from such export taxes in a sinking 
fund, and such funds shall, in addition to other moneys avail- 
able for that purpose, be applied solely to the payment of the 
principal ard interest on the bonded indebtedness oi the Phil- 
principai ana inter nunicioalities , and instru- 

lppme Islands, its Province.*, &iuu ^ lin „ ^^h-.r^H » 

mentalities, until such indebtedness has been fully discharged. 



-19- 

Slaves that this t . leslratJl8 fr , n ^ ^ ^ ^ 

ests both of the United states and of the Philippines. 

fro* the standpoint of the United States, such action 

would assure the liouidati rsn *t*„* 

xquia^tion of that portion of the Philippine 

bonded indebtedness which might be inferred to carry some 
obligation on the part of the United States. Insofar as such 
an arrangement would reduce the total public debt, it nould also 
be advantageous from the standpoint of the Philippines. It uould 
permit the nev; government to begin its existence in a strong 
financial position, practically free of debt, and it '7ould enable 
that government to use the portion of the revenues previously 
devoted to debt service to nert the additional expenditures that 
must be incurred as a result of independence. Moreover, the 
early retirement of this debt ".?ould result in considerable 
savings, since the Co-imcnwealth Government could not expect to 
earn on its sinking funds an interest return as high as the 
interest rate it is paying on its bonded indebtedness. 

Ch aracter of recommendation s for debt liouidatior. 

The Philippine Government should continue to set aside 
fro* its General Fund the interest and sinking fund charges 
no* required by law in respect of that portion of the out- 

„ , , „ nf th .-, Philiuoines , its provinces, 
standing bonded indebtedness of th. rninp.^ 

. - incurred prior to May 1, 1934, 

cities, and municipalities, mcurx^ y 

„ - -f ron^reso as is already provided 

under authority of Acts of Congress, 



-20- 



in Section 2 (b) (3) of the Independence Act. In addition, 
in order to create a supplementary sinking fund for the liqui- 
dation of this portion of the public debt, the proceeds of the 
export taxes required by Section 6 (e) of the Independence Act 
should be deposited in a special account in the Treasury of the 
United States, to bear interest in accordance witb the provi- 
sions of the Act of Congress approved June 11, 1934: Provided , 
That in accordance with the procedure now applicable to the 
handling of sinking funds of the Philippine Government in the 
United States, this supple kg ntary sinking fund way be used to 
purchase Philippine bonds which were issued prior to May 1, 
I33I+, under authority of Acts of Congress. 

Baring the three ninths preceding July 4, I9U6, the Phil- 

• n * thP Treasury of the United States should 

ippine Government and tne rroas~u.y 

i.- ^-e fun Philippine bonded in- 
confer to ascertain that portion ox tne PhiUPP 

* „a to i- the preceding paragraph, which would 
debtedness, referred to 1- tne 

T .,!„ 1+ 1QU6; and, for that purpose, the 
he outstanding alter MJ *i ^ n • 

1 ia him over to the Treasury of the 
Philippine Government should turn ovor 

. » v wn ding ultimate destruction, all 
United States, for custody pending 

- ff ,. v 1 193*, under authority 
Philippic bonds issued prior .0 ~3 

of Acts of Cougrcsb , ^ 

. +v lds After such outstanding portion of 
in any of its sinking ±unc.s. 

• * nnd bufore July 4, 1940. 
, fl thus determined, an- d©i 
this indebtedness is thus 

f have been mode with the 

unless some other arra~g^ 



1/ US Stat. 929- 



-21- 

Govern,* of the United states i„ rogara t0 u , 
there should to set up in the Treasury of the United states, 
in the name of the independent government of the Philippines, 
from the sinking funds mentioned in the preeeding paragraph, 

a special trust fund in an amo-eni- o n ,ff ■•, ~i ,.,4. 4. 

c cm* ciuj-u.io suiij.cior.t to meet interest 

payments and to retire this outstanding portion of the Phil- 
ippine debt at maturity (or earlier by the purchase of out- 
standing bonds upon request of the said independent govern- 
ment): Provided . That this outstanding portion of tho Phil- 
ippine debt should also be asoumod by the said government as 
and in the manner provided in Section 2 (>) (J) and (5) of the 
Ind epe nd e nc e Act. 

The Philippine Government should continue to set aside 
fron its General Fund the interest and sinking fund charges 
now required by lav/ in respect of all other debts and liabili- 
ties of the Philippines, its provinces, cities, and municipali- 
ties, not provided for in the tvo preceding paragraphs, as well 
as all debts and liabilities of its instrumentalities. All such 
debts and obligations outstanding on July k t 1 5 ^, should be as- 
sured by the independent government sf the Philippines as and in 
the kier provided in Section 2 (b) (3) «* (5) * the Independ- 
ence Act: Provided, That ,henevor prior to July k, 19*6. it be- 

•m ho n so-Plus in the export tax pro- 
cones certain that there Will be a ^ 

• ^ for liquidating that portion of 
ceeds over the amount require,- lor a h 

„ AAa A f ar in the two preceding 
Philippine bonded indebtedness provide* 1- 



paragraphs, the Treasure of th* n^** a 

the United State, may, upon the re- 
quest of the Philippine Government 

nment, use this surplus to purchase, 

for deposit in a special sinlcin- fund tn h *, , 

S Itma t0 b ^ handed over to the 

independent government of the Phii™, 

6 Fhlll PPi^es on July U, icl{6, any 

Philippine honds that fall within k„„ 

ail Within toe category described in the 

first sentence of this mr-nr,,,-, , _ 

par,-„grapn, and Proyid cd_j^ther , That any 

balance that may remain in the Treasury of the United States on 
July If, loUS, from the proceods Qf thc oxport tayQs an 

actual or estimated claims upon these proceeds (as set forth in 
the two preceding paragraphs and in the first proviso of this 
paragraph) have been provided for, should be turned over to the 
Treasury of the independent government of the Philippines to be 
placed in a sinking fund to be used exclusively for the purpose 
of retiring the debts and liabilities referred to in this paragraph. 

In estimating the adequacy of the funds available to liqui- 
date Philippine bonded indebtedness incurred prior to May 1, 
I93^i under authority of Acts of Congress, the Committee has 
had certain calculations prepared which are set forth ir. detail 
in Appendix VIII. These calculations are based primarily on the 
assumption that the annual payments intc sir -* in £ funds " OT/ r£J - 
quired by law for this category of indebtedness will continue 
™til July U, 1946, and that the yiold of the export taxes 

, , . t *i A7 r r\m nrif) One set of these calcu- 

li! total approximately $35,O0O,UUU. une 

"Un - + +-u e -funds available would earn 2> as 

Nations presupposes that the xunas 

s , n + ^p^nTioosGS that such funds 

c &sh deposits, and the other sot presuppose* 



would be invested in Philippine bonds on the basis of a yield 
of 3-l/2/t>. under the first arrangement, it is estimated that 
the surplus over requirements would be about $13,000,000, and 
under the other arrangement about $16,000,000. It would seem 
therefore that, if the Philippine Government continues to set 
aside the annual sinking fund payments now required by lav/ and 
if the export taxes actually yield about $35,000,000, the funds 
thus made available for debt retirement would be sufficient not 
only to liquidate that portion of the Philippine bonded indebted- 
ness incurred prior to May 1, 1934, under authority of Acts of 
Congress, but also to liquidate a substantial part of other 
Philippine indebtedness. 



-24- 



4. Currenc 



cy 



There are three matters concerning the Philippine currency 
system to which the Committee has give* consideration, as follows: 
the exchange standard, currency reserves, rnd the currency de- 



valuation fund. 



The exchange stands ra 



The Act of March 2, 1903,-' estj.blished the Philippine 

monetary system or. a gold exchange standard with a legal ratio 

of two Philippine pesos to one United States dollar. The 

Changes in the United States monetary system in 1934, made it 

necessary for the Philippines, without changing the aforesaid 

2/ 

ratio, to adopt the dollar exchange standard. - Inasmuch as 
the trade of the Philippines is predominantly with the United 
States and nearly all of the Philippine debt is payable in 
dollars, it seems resirahle that, during the Commonwealth 
period, the Philippine Government should continue without 
fundamental change the policy of maintaining the existing 
dollar exchange standard, at the present legal ratio of two 
pesos to the dollar. 

Currency reserves 

r ,„^r„ f nt as of December 31, 1937, main- 
The Philippine Government j-s uj. 

... P190 500,000 against P167, 000,000 
tained currency reserves ox > 



% gt^NmV the PhiUPPi« Legislature. 



of money of the Government in circulating j v , ^ 

^ncuiatlon, and available for 

circulation. These reserves consisted of $84,000,000 (equiva- 
lent to Pl6g,000,000) deposited in the United States Treasury 
and commercial banks in the United States, $1,850,000 (equiva- 
lent to 53,700,000) of United States currency held in the Phil- 
ippines, and P1S^S00,000 of silver coin issued by the Philip- 
pine Government. The ratio of total reserves to the total 
money in circulation, and available fjr circulation, was lll$, 
and the ratio of dollar reserves to the total r.-^ney in circula- 
tion, and available for circulation, was 103^. Reserves of 
these proportions are substantially in excess uf those suffi- 
cient to assure the maintenance of the peso at its legal ratio 
to the United States dollar. 

The existence of such large currency reserves is primarily 
the result of the duplication of legal reserve requirements 

under the monetary legislation which lias been in effect since 
£/ 

January 2, 19 23. That legislation required the establishment 
Of two ronetary reserve funds: a Treasury Certificate Fund 
and a Gold Standard Fund (now called the Exchange Standard 
Fund). A reserve of not less than 100* of the arount of 
Treasury Certificates in circulation and available therefor 
tmt be held in the Treasury Certificate Fund. This reserve 
my consist of silver coin issued by the Philippine Governnent, 



„ 4. n ffrc President of the Phil- 
1/ Report of Insular *»>^J?j%£ 10, 100. 

ippines for December 1937. *ateo 0 
2/ Philippine Act No. ^ . ^ 13 ' 



-26- 

United States currency, and t»n1in». i 1/ 

if, wiu Loilar deposits in the United States."' 

The principal function of the Exchange Standard Fund is to main- 
tain the parity of the peso with the dollar. It must he main- 
tained in a sum of not less than 15$6 of the money of the Govern- 
ment of the Philippines in circulation and available for circula- 
tion, which, it will he noted, includes both coin and Treasury 
2/ 

Certificates. The result of these provisions is that Treasury 

Certificates secured by a. 100% reserve, which in practice are 

maintained principally in the form of dollar deposits in the 

Treasury Certificate Fund, must have an additional reserve of 

3/ 

at least 15fc in the Exchange Standard Fund.—' 

Currency devaluation account 

After the reduction of the weight of the United States 
gold dollar by Presidential Proclamation on January 31, 1934, 
the Congress, upon the recommendation of the Preeident of the 
United States, in an Act approved June 19, 1934, authorized, 



1/ Section 1625 of Philippine Act No. 4199, the monetary la. 

now in effect. A1 qq 

2/ Section 1MB of gJUWjJ^J gritf&t* fully covered 
3/ On December 31, 1937. ^^%±^ iw6X1 if 9<# of total 
by dollar reserves w»««tc- t^.. available therefor, 

Treasury Certificates in cxrcula* circulation 

and to fPP^^gJf (^.port of Insular Treasurer, 
and available tnerci Ji. 

Ibid .) 



when the funds therefor are made available, a credit in favor 
of the Treasury of the Philippines of $23,862,750.78, repre- 
senting: 

"... an amount equal to the increase in value 
(resulting from the reduction of the weight of the 
gold dollar) of the gold equivalent at the opening 
of business on January 31, 1934, of the balances 
maintained at that time in banks in the continental 
Unit ed States by the G-overnment of the Philippine 
Islands for its gold standard fund and its Treasury 
Certificate fund less the interest received by it or 
such balances . • 

The Congress has not thus far appropriated funds to make 
the payment contemplated in the Act, and a bill seeking to 
repeal the authorisation has been pending before the Congress 
for some time. In vie'.? of the fact that tnis matter involves 
questions which are not within the competence of the Committee, 
the only recommendation of the Committee on the subject is that 
the funds to be appropriated under the Act of June 19, 1934, 
referred to above, remain on deposit in the United States 
Treasury during the Commonwealth period as a credit to the 
Philippine Government. When the political relationship between 

j 4.„^ wv.il 4-nnine'i is s • vcreO , this fund 
the United States and the Philippine... 

should be turned over to the Independent government Ir. oonneo- 
tion -nth the final settlement to he made regarding Philippine 

■. pv ,< 1 inoine monetary reserves held ir the 
bonded indebtedness ana PhiLippm- 

otren^then the financial position 
United States This sum rould ..Uen to ™ 

, . Ph. limine Government and tfould be of material 
of the independent PniH.P J .-'i n - 

•tc- -nrnrram of economic adjustment, 
assistance in carrying on its ?ro 0 ra. 



1/ 48 Stat. 1115. 



-38- 



&i .-Ranking 

Oo-eroia! banking facilities la the Philippines are pro- 
vide,, by seven Philippine banks, four branches of foreign banks, 

and one branch of an kmerir»fl« v, nv.tr n , 

merican b «nK. On June 30, 1937, the total 

resources of these institutions aggregated $137,700,000 of which 

$81,700,000 belonged to the Philippine National Bonk, $49,400,000 

to other Philippine banks, and £56,600,000 to the branches of 

foreign banks and to the branch of a national bank of the United 
1/ 

States.-' The Philippine National 3ank of Manila, all of the 
stock of vrhich is ovr.ed by the- Philippine Government, has ten 
branches and forty-sir provincial agencies throughout the Phil- 
ippines. The other institutions operate eleven orovincial 
branches. 

Commercial banking facilities appear to be adequate in 
Manila and in the larger cities. The Philippine Government , 
through the establishment of provincial agencies of the Phil- 
ippine National Ban-:, has attempted to facilitate the granting 
of loans to borrowers in rural regions.-' There is no reason 
to believe, however, that commercial banks, even in cooperation 
With the Government, can solve the credit problems of the small 

agricultural borrowers . 

. * *4«n nf the Philippine National Bank is 
The principal function oi ton jtlxj. i. 



i nofa or Banks and 3anking Institutions 
1/ Based on "Statistical Data or i M Coramissio ner, Manila, 

in the Philippines" compiled oj we 

August 31, 1937. 14 .„--i credit is discussed in Part IV 

2/ The subject of agriculture! cr,u 



of this report 



to furnish banking services directly to the public. In addition, 
it has acted as the official depository of the funds of the Phil- 
ippine Government and, in biraes of stress, has occasionally ex- 
tended aid to other banks in the Philippines. This bank is 
accorded the note issue pr i vi lege , pr o v i cu - ; t ■ v ■ t i : o t e s ov t s t ar. fl- 
ing do not exceed the amount of its capital and surnlus and that 
a 25^ cash reserve has been deposited rrith the Philippine Gov- 
ernment. Under certain restrictions , the bank is permitted, in 
tin : es of financial stringency, to exceed temporarily the legal 
aaxiauis of its note issue; such notes, however, inust bo secured 
lOCfb by commercial paper, and Z0> by a ctsh reserve on deposit 
*ith the Philippine Government r 1 Although the Philippine 
National Bank has exercised from time to tine some of the func- 
tions which usually characterize a central bank, it is not 
primarily a bank of rediscount or a banker's bank; moreover, 

♦ f if note issue c^nstitutea less than 10* of the 
the amount if its note i^&u^ 

currency in circulation in the Philippics. 

■ fl1 baEk ing business in the Philippines 
kuch of the commercial 

-t ■ s„„ a i Rank and by branches of 
, - • i ^ Bv,ninnine Rational sanis u z 
is conducted by the PhilipP 11 * 3 

, - ^ fi ~ es in the United States or in foreign 
large banks *ith heac oifi-*« 

■ titvtiors rould probably have no occasion 
countries. These institutions 

, tV , ^er.trrl bank m the 

. vv .,,j y. eom-neroisl P-V ei 
to rediscount their ou- 



Se=U, n 14 of PhlUPPi" iot Ho. »» 



-30- 



Philippires. Should other Philippine barks 
borro?;, they would probably be able to obta 




in funds either from 



the Philippine tf-xtioncl Sank or from their foreign correspondents. 



In vier of the present structure of the Philippine banking 
and currency systoms, there appears to be no necessity at the 
present tine for the establishment of a bank in the Philippines 
*hose functions would bo primarily those of a central benk. Com- 
mercial end financial requirements in the Philippines, however, 
may be altered in the future, especially as a result of the 
changes incident to Philippine independence. The Committee 
reconvenes , therefore, that the studies which it has proposed 
for other fields of Philippine finance be extended to include 
the banking system of the Philippines. 



c_o_-; ?IDU r i? I A L 



REPORT OF 
THE JOOT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 
ON 

PHILIPPINE AFFAIRS 



PART IV 
ECONOMI C ADJU STMT 



ST 



1 -_Iiit rodt^tion 
The elimination of preferential treatment of Philippine 
products in the United States will make necessary a fundamental 
and difficult adjustment of Philippine economy. The Committee 
Relieves, however, after having reviewed the problems of adjust- 
ment, that the trade program recommended in this report should 
afford the Philippines a reasonable opportunity to adjust its 
economy to a non-preferential basis. Given the necessary 
natural resources, time, and funds, the problem of effectuating 
the adjustment— except for unforeseen najor contingencies— vrould 
become a matter primarily of proper planning and administrative 
efficiency. 

leei for econorr nn ad justment 

The gradual elimination of the existing trade preferences 
nill make it necessary for the Philippines to find not only re- 
placements for a certain amount of the present agricultural and 
manufacturing production out also some means for maintaining 

- o^ri twrrchasing power for imported articles, 
adequate public revenue and purcnasing ± 

4-- nf Philippine agricultural production now believed 
The portion 01 Fniupp 1 - 0 => 

, pi ,„ Hal degree on a preferential market 
to be dependent to a substantial aegr« 

oA«ciciprshle value but not a 
in the United States represents a considerate 

0 it is confined almost exclusively to sugar- 
great acreage, because it is com 

Kich are crops that yield unusually large gross 
cane and tobacco, whicn are ^ i 

Hne in the Philippines there 
4+ tbe present »ime 
incomes per acre. 6 * ie * 



ere approximately 635,000 acres (,?57,000 hectares) of sugarcane 
and 183,000 acres (74,000 hectares) of tobacco. The land de- 
voted to these two crops is equal to approximately 7-l/2# of 
the total area under cultivation. Statistical data on the value 
of Philippine sugar and tobacco products are given in Part II of 
this report. On account of the unpredictable variables involved, 
it is not possible to make satisfactory estimates of the extent 
to which the acreages of these crops will have to be reduced in 
consequence of the elimination of existing trade preferences; 
but there is reason to believe that unless conditions greatly 
different from the present should prevail it Will be necessary 
for the Philippines to decrease substantially the present sugar- 
cane and tobacco production. 

Likewise, the elimination of trade preferences may be ex- 

in tb° present level of manu- 
pected to require major decreases in tn- p 

. -, n , r ™ ,, r cirars, coconut oil, 
facture of certain products, notaol> sugar, cigar 

and pearl buttons. 

„ v ,wn*nt of borrowing, the only 
Except for the temporary expedient 

r. ^ 4 -vrtrtrte is to t>e found 
* . ,m,ntw»» purchasing power for import., 
source of a countrj b p"* 

mtries of commodities (including gold) 
in its sales to other countries 

* time it is estimated thst one- 
a «+■ fVip oresent ti..:e i ^ 
and services; and at the pr 

v ., slr . power of the Philippines fos 
half or more of the P urcnasm. P 

. «ervices is obtained 

products rna ^^ Vilj 

through the export of ^ - ^ , the 

in l« S e part on the existence of a p 



-3- 

United States. Consequently, the elimination of African trade 
preferences on Philippine exports .nay he expected to give rise 
to a serious problem of maintaining the purchasing po*er of the 
Philippines for its necessary imports. The solutions for this 
problem will be sought necessarily through, the creation, during 
the contemplated twenty-year transition period, of nev; or addi- 
tional production for (a) export, to substitute in providing the 
foreign exchange now derived from t;-,e export of products dependent 
on trade preferences in the United States market, and (b) domestic 
consumption, to substitute for a portion of the present importa- 
tions. Some action will need to be taken in each dirnction; but 
it should be recognized that the second course, which represents 
a direction of less resistance, is susceptible to economic abuse 
and, unless employed with the greatest care, is likely to result 
in the creation of industries so ill-adapted to Philippine con- 
ditions as to be permanently inefficient and burdensome on the 

welfare of the people. 

On account of the fact that a substantial amount of the 

- the Philippines is currently derived from that 
public revenue ox the .niii^-"' 

a ,tior dependent on trade preferences in 
portion of domestic production aepenaei 

i D f the Philippine Government will find it 
the United States market, the rnxxip, 

• mt,~ oreferencea are gradually eliminated, 
necessary, as the existing preierta 

e ftf revenue from either (a) the new or 
to replace this source of reven^ 

*+aA or <o) the existing poten- 
additional production to be create., 

tial sources of public revenue. 



A substantial part n-° ts a 

necessary economic adjustment 
Tjill have to take the fern n-f -? „ 

torn, of lavements in the efficiency not 

only of that portion of the present ■ 

present Fhilipp ine production which 

is dependent on trade preferences but also of that portion which 
is not so dependent. For instance, the Philippines could not 
expect to find a replacement crop for sugar which would yield on 
the same acreage an income approximating that derived as a result 
of the price premiums paid by the United States at the present 
time on Philippine sugar . 

In order to effectuate the- necessary improvements in the 
efficiency of established Philippine industries , as well as to 
create new efficient industries, it will be essential for the 
Philippine Government not only to aid the introduction of new 
agricultural or manufacturing industries but also to take sub- 
stantial strides in the further reduction of illiteracy, in the 
improvement of communication and transportation facilities through- 
out the islands, in the improvement of health conditions, and in 
the further provision of those other basic public services that 
are requisite to the efficiency and well-being of a people. If, 

u 4.- i of additional revenue were tapped, 

however, the potential soul ces ox csu.u.j.«> 

. a.* -f funds derived from United States 

and if the present remittances A Annas 

, rt+Q wpre continued during the Common- 
taxes on Philippine products -ere oonw 

ia em gdeauate public revenue to 
wealth period, there should he an aaeqw , 

- , D «+ nro^ram of the extent that will 
finance an economic adjustment program 

a vipii!S -hich the people of the Philip- 
be required to meet the problems wnic 

* * -thieve complete independence, 
pines face in their effort to achieve 



-5- 

nb.iectives of ecnnai^ _ad.1ustr.m J n4 I 

The immediate and necessary o^eati™ n + 

00 ^ e " ti ve of a program of economic 

adjustment is, of course, to nff Hft + <„ * 

. nt set insofar as possible the ad- 
verse effects of the discontinuance of * 

Ud -' ce °- 1 trade preferences in the 

United States market. In order that the rcaxim^ advantage may be 
fcfifcen of this opportunity, it is believed that the pro-am should 
be such as will tend to increase rot only the productivity, and 
thus the standard of living, of the people of the Philippines 
above the levels that -ould otherwise prevail, but al30 the health 
of the people and their ability to participate in the problems 
and processes of democratic go ve rnaent . It i s also belie ve d that 
an objective of the adjustment program should be to distribute 
the import and erport trade among r.iany countries in order that 
the Philippines mop not become economically dependent on its 
trade with a small ficroup of nations. 

There is another objective which, although negative in nature, 
is of such importance that it should be given careful attention in 
the development of an economic adjustment program. Reference is 

. tv, 0 serious sacrifices in the 
nade to the necessity 01 avo^ 1-g ^- itIJ " 

-i a nr involved in an excessive pursuit 
standard of living that -ould oe invoice. u 

enff i-ie-cy. Undoubtedly there will 
of a policy -if economic seh-Baliiwis.tt'J! 

7 he found advantageous for the Pfail- 



to prorate public subventions in 
Ippine Government to resort to ...o-t 



be instances in which it ma: 

ti 

, T bounties, to encourage the ostab- 
the for-, of tariffs, guotf-s. ooui 

■ -hich although they voul" be rela- 
Hshnent of some industries '.men, 



tively inefficient at the time of **** - 

01 their introduction, give promise 
of so improving efficie~icv , • , , . 

Bieaoy within a brief period as to be able to 

carry on operations witl on* tn 0 „„ 

u " wntinoflittse of the subsidy, m 

practice, however, snrh iYv*/vm4** A 

p ;r, such promise xs Bfldom f^mied. Ther , ; may 

also be instances in which mi'.in n -.i 

ucn P UJ lic subventions could be justified 

in order to induce the production of a certain amount of a com- 
modity which might be considered absolutely essential for national 
defense. But the Government of the Philippines will find it nec- 
essary to guard against including in its economic adjustment pro- 
gram a structure of trade barriers which, while purporting to 
find justification in the very limited "young industry" and 
"national defense" need;, for protection, would constitute an 
unnecessary and permanent impairment of the standard of living 
of the people of the Philippines. 

Bitp end i tur c- s for e c o no m i c a d .j ust me n t 

If the present sales of Philippino coconut, sugar, and 
tobacco products in the United States, the existing United States 
taxes on such products, and the current remittances of the pro- 
ceeds of such taxes, should continue until July 4, 1946, the 
Government of the Philippines will have received during the 

«, -i i-i ■ i Qn ,r-t"iti"l fund which should prove reason- 

Commonwealth period a suOot<mT,i.-L 

b m . + -Finance a comprehensive program of economic 

ao ly sufficient to i mar ce a 

„. -v.nre is no guarantee that the Con- 
adjustment. Since, however, d;cie i- -w s 

!4 .^ OT , the levy of these taxes, or the re- 
gress will continue either tne x^j 

a- recommended by the Committee, and 
Pittance of the proceed^ a- rc-j 



-7- 



since a decrease could concfllmM™ 4. , 

conc «i™iy take piece in the sales of 

these products in the Unit^a <;+^4.^„ . x 

united States, it -.vould appear to be nec- 
essary to plan the urogram n-r o,-.~v,~ • ■> . 

program of economic adjustment in such manner 

that it could he adapted rpadiiv +^ ~ 4. 

^ptea rcaaily to a total supply of funds much 

less than might be estimated on fchp h^u. , . ,. . 

xmdoeu on x,ne Dasis of current conditions. 

The Committee also recommends that the remittances of all 
proceeds of United States taxes on Philippine products during 
the Commonwealth period should be reserved by the Government of 
the Philippines orimarily for expenditure on a program of economic 
adjustment, and that none of these- funds should be used either 
directly or indirectly to replace any portion of the present 
total ordinary revenue. 

In order that the program may be correlated in point of 
time with the needs that will arise for economic adjustment, 
and in order that the Philippines may avoid the violent fluctua- 
tions in the wage and price levels that vould result from con- 
centrating extraordinarily large expenditures of public funds 
into the brief period during which the remittances will be re- 
ceived, it is believed that the expenditures not only should be 
related to the decreases in employment to be expected in some 
industries but also should be budgeted over practically the 
entire transitional period that is contemplated for the elimina- 
tion of trade preferences in the United States. 

Practically all economic .adjustment projects require, in 
addition to the original capital outlays, some recurring expenses 



for maintenance and operation. There are, however / considerable 
differences among .alternative economic adjustment projects in 
this respect, and it is believed that in devising the adjustment 
program a preference should he shown for projects that require 
primarily capital outlays as distinguished from continuing ex- 
penses, which eventually might become burdensome on the regular 
"budget of the National Government. As examples of projects 
having a relatively low ratio of maintenance and operating ex- 
penses to capital outlays, there may be mentioned: a resettle- 
ment project, which instead of requiring indefinite maintenance 
expense should begin rftcr a few years to return the capital 
outlay ma.de by the government, so that the original expenditure 
could be made into a revolving fund for a series of such projects; 
roads, the use of which, under a system of taxation on gasoline, 
ordinarily results in some increased revenue that becomes avail- 
able for road maintenance; reforestation; the construction of 
school and hospital buildings, the maintenance of which is to be 

-i «..,Vi>n<eH di ana* the purchase of land, 
assumed by the local political subdivisions, w P 

* and ^toc* ^or national agricultural stations, 
buildings, equipment, and stoc* 

, - «4 Gained at small expense; public 
which thereafter could ne maintained a 

v,-^ the capital outlay rather than the 
*ater supolies, for which the capi 

, ifcute s the most significant cost; a soil survey 
maintenance constitutes 

r- h do not require 
r ^search projects, which do no 
and other necessary re-ea-cu y 

* nv the government of adapted and 
repetition; the establishment by % 

n a n ,rufacturing industries which although 
desirable agricultural and inanuia 



-9- 



aot sufficiently attractive to ™h * 

e 10 private cpnitii ->+ «. 

• pital at the present time, 

could well be expected to be w u 

5Slf -^PPorting or, within a brief 
time, even revenue-prodnri - ^ 

Clnfa ' the technical training of an 

increased staff of Filipinos , 

PlllOS f0r g^ernnental and educational 

service* 

It is also evid ent i v^t a « +v 

icei.t ohat m the selection of projects for an 

economic adjustment program, preference should be given to those 
undertakings that are most likely to benefit large, rather than 
small, groups of the population; that are most likely to consti- 
tute a continuing rather than a temporary benefit to the popula- 
tion; that will not confer unnecessary benefits on one group of 
the population at great expense to the general public; and that 
will tend to prevent the seasonal development of acute conditions 
of unemployment in individual production districts. These ob- 
viously desirable criteria would indicate, for instance, that a 
new system of roads to serve large areas would be preferable to 
a reclamation project for the benefit of a small group; that the 
importation of improved animal and plant breeding stock, the bene- 
fit of which would continue to expand for many years, would be 
preferable to expenditures for projects to yield temporary benefits; 
that it would be undesirable to use governmental funds, or resort 
to trade barriers, to create a poorly adapted new industry at great 

~ a. „, e ,-. r inordinate orices to all 
public expense in the form oi ta^os or ir.oru.xu* 

„ a -Trr-o-re should be accorded projects 
consumers; and that some preference snouxu 

j n f ^versification of the produc- 

rtiich would increase the degree of civorsix 



-lo- 
tion in highly specialized districts. 

Organization fyU Maattio ad w.^ 

It is important th^t 

that the contemplated economic adjustment 

program for the Philippine should be ^esi^ 

ue ^signed as an entirety 

rather than allowed to accumulate 

accumulate as a heterogeneous and unco- 
ordinated nass of individual projects which mi*t be urged effec- 
tively upon the National Assembly and the Administration from 
time to time in a more or less random fashion by various inter- 
ested minority groups. The Committee recommends that the pro- 
gram be formulated by a single organization of competent tech- 
nicians, which would have simultaneously under its review all 
the principal needs and alternatives, in order that abetter 
selection of projects may be made, that the individual projects 
nay be correlated better with respect to both their natures and 
their times of execution, and that o great deal of waste and in- 
efficiency may be avoided. The necessity for coordination is 
clear; a resettlement project, for example, might be fitted best 
into a general program of economic adjustment by choosing a site 
for the project which would be well adapted to the production 
of a group of commodities for which a market survey had indi- 
cated the existence of an adequate foreign or domestic demand, 
and by drawing the population for the resettlement project ex- 

, . «A.4,*in if is imperative to relieve an 

clusively from an area m wnicn it is un^x 

j ±* nut a reforestation plan "by 

overcrowded condition and to carry out <* * ^ * 

* , □ ^4*1 ^ppnlv sloping lands hot? being 

Ringing into the public domain s.eepiy biv , 



-1 °- 



fields. Obviously a . xect nummt oh> , i. 

u11 ^O^nt oi waste, duplication of effort, 

and sacrifice of technical competence would be involved if, for 
instance, a single organization in the form of an economic adjust- 
ment administration were set up to administer a program wnich in- 
cluded reforestation, road building, and plant and animal develop- 
ment, when regular governmental bureaus already exist for forestry, 
public works, plant industry, and animal industry. It might he 
desirable, however, to have the technical non-administrative 
organization, which formulates the economic adjustment program, 
make periodic checks on the work of the various ad.nini strati ve 
agencies charged with responsibility for carrying out the program 
and, on the basis of such reviews, rendrr progress reports to the 
President of the Philippines in order that control may be exer- 
cised to prevent each administrative unit from either deviating 
from the original purpose of its portion of the program or failing 
to coordinate its work with that of the other administrative 



agencies. 



-13- 



The following suggestion „ 8 lntend3d to u w 

outlino the »t»r. of k» of tho possible adjusts projects 

which the Co mi t tee believes fh-mi -i 

uS "^uld receive careful consideration 

*y a technical organization in desiring a comprehensive and well- 
integrated program for economic adjustment. 

Improvement of technical training 

As a natter of permanent policy, as well as with respect to 
their immediate needs arising out of the transition from a do- 
pendency to a republic, it is obvious that the people of tho Phil- 
ippines should avail themselves of the experiences and accumulated 
knowledge cf the principal countries of the world. The great eco- 
nomic advancements made by some countries in recent years are in 
no small degree attributable to a policy of utilizing the techni- 
cal knowledge that had been gained slowly and painfully by other 
nations. In order to acquire an adequate supply of highly 
skilled technical services, it is probably necessary for the 
Philippines to resort to the hiring of a few outstanding foreign 
technicians, at least as a temporary expedient for thoir imme- 
diate pressing needs; but with respect to the permanent require- 
ments, it is believed that the government should adopt a policy 
of providing technical training for its own citizens. Conse- 
quently, it may be advisable to give consideration to the possi- 
bility of including in the adjustment program a plan composed of 
various projects for the improvement of educational facilities. 



-lU- 

In order that a well-tro.irme' ™ 

■ Xn ^ bo developed for 

public service, including the vnrv -^4, * 

work of instructing in the educa- 
tional institutions, it ni^ht pr-vo de^^i 

11 Nairobi© to establish schol- 
arships to defray the necessary costs -P™ * 

J L0Sts lL ' r a years of graduate 

training in the hest foreign universities fo-e » *mw 4- • 1 

uxos ior a substantial &roup 

of the aost promising university graduates. Another opportunity 
for aaJdng an important contribute to the training of an ade- 
quate personnel for public service is to be found in the possi- 
bility of providing for temporary teaching in trie Philippines by 
distinguished foreign professors. In addition, it might prove 
advisable for the governisent to subsidize an arrangement for 
Sabbatical leaves of Philippine university faculty ir.or.bers in 
order that they tniajht be afforded an opportunity to pursue ad- 
vanced training in the best foreign institutions. Likewise, it 
my be true that so no cf the present technicians in the service 
of the government night find it possible to increase the effi- 
ciency of public service if they were afforded en occasional 
opportunity to examine closely the work of other governments and 
secure additional advanced training abroad. 

, t+^v, -f the neec in the Philippines 

Apparently in recognition 01 tA« nsw 

h„* t , , *• i facilities the Independence Act requires 

ior inproved educational lacnxuto 

- ^ -f-,-. n^t^blis'inent and mainten- 
that "provision shall be made for the eswxwa» 

-ftublic schools, primarily conducted 
ance cf an adequate system of p^Jl^ 

A t , „ With the funds now being made avail- 

in the Engl i sh 1 anguage " . * 1 tn z no 

... _ - f tne proceeds of United States 
<^Le through the remittance oJ w» 

^ ... it is possible for the Connonwealth 
taxes on Phi 1 i pp i ne pro due t s , x 



of the Philippines to effectuate this intent ef the Independence 
Act; the Goosittee, therefore, veaoaautim the adoption of an ade- 
quate pro-ran for the construction of needed additional school 
buildings in those cr.ses in which the cost of operation could ho 
supported with ordinary revenues. 

There is little prospect at the present tine that no re than 
a very few of those who receive a primary education will he able 
to attend secondary schools or colleges. Lforeovcr, the economic 
position of the vast majority of primary school graduates renders 
it impossible for them to purchase the reading materials that 
would ho necessary for continued education. In order to afford 
these people some opportunity for additional learning and self- 
advancement, it might bo well for the Government of the Phil- 
ippines to consider a project for expanding the very limited col- 
lections of hooks in the local schools into small uniform public 
libraries. 

need in the Philippines for 
There is also an outstanding neea 

•«i-w agriculture, the largest in- 
trade school training especially in agricux 

• , a, rpHfi so-called Mono* W Q of agricultural 
dustry of the islands. Wie so 

„f-f native method of disseminating a corn- 
school would provide an effective m 

j „v.«^Hf^l experience in agri- 
Mnaticn of academic training and practical exi 

. ^ is -reat ne*d in all parts of the archi- 
culture for which there is grca^ 

^•„ r ^l such schools to serve the special needs 
pelage. A few additional su~i 

, agricultural regions of the Philippines 

of each of the principal agricui 

«.«,,-,- to the public welfare 
. - , ^ a ^ make contributions xo w 1 

might be expected to mase ^ 

„„ j-T„if>s the cost, 
equal in value to many times 



-Is- 

jj n provapiGnt of ^-" aEaJted&gi^a^^ 

One of the most iTno»ii-,+ n ^, f 

niportaat advances that ca:, ba made in Phil- 

ippine economy is through the extensi™ ^ 4- 

tension of transportation facili- 
ties to the large areas of rich ^>„n, n n 

ncn agricultural lands which are now 

inaccessible. Adequate transportation facilities are required in 
order to poroit many small comities to narket their products 
econonically and purchase the products of other coraraoaities, to 
carry out plans for military defense , to extend corrxmi cation 
and educational facilities to the now remote areas, to extend to 
all the population the numerous health and agricultural services 
off ered "by the government , and to "bring the populations of indi- 
vidual districts more closely together into one nation with con- 
non ideals and understanding. lur therm r o , the consummation of 
the principal benefits of the other most desirable economic ad~ 
justnent and improvement projects will be contingent to a con- 
siderable extent on the construction of adequate transportation 
facilities. 

Although there is obviously great need for additional pub- 
lic roads and improved inter-island transportation facilities, 
it appears doubtful upon preliminary review of the transporta- 
tion problems in the Philippics that the expenditure of addi- 

-. * vmul- yield as much utility 

tional funds on railroad facilities woui. yi 

ja , iA *hn expenditure for roads and 

to the people as would tnu sai..^ 

„ +r rtrntt the advisability of 
bridges. There is also reason to douot uie 

n-inn of an:/ obviously needed public 
Withholding the construction cx cw 

* -nrii recti- subsidizing an established 
roads for the purpose of indirect!, 

■+ „ -^EDT»ly of the principal trans- 
railroad— bv securing to it a OOUOpOiy 



-17- 



portation facilities for a district B i, ftBa 

i 1SW1C ^- whose services cannot be 
Wio available for of the transportation needs of the 

lowest income groups. To dev? those people the public roads 
moh eve necessary to improve their economic welfare is not to 
solve the transportation problem for a district but merely to 
burden the people with the needless cost of perpetuating an ex- 
pensive and inadequate form of transportation. One of the nest 
seriously needed transportation facilities in the Philippines 
is an adequate system of so-called farm-to-market roads to con- 
nect the more or less isolated small communities with the main 
roads between the principal market and distribution centers. 

The Philippine Islands have a long irregular coast line 
.T7hich is approximately equivalent to twice that of the United 
States, yet for the guidance of mariners it is marked with only 
227 lights, which are sparsely distributed among more than 7,000 
islands; and channel buoys are lacking in most areas. The result 
of these deficiencies in ordinary safeguards for water transpor- 

_ mrtni^ economic developments which 

tat ion apparently means that certain bw^u 

„ rt v o1 j a Tl ftfcevance, that some transporta- 
would otherwise occur are neld in aoeyauvwi 

m u a i B r. a v.ppdlessly slow and expensive on account of the 
tion schedules are neeuic^bi^ ->-^ 

a B ... * n , Vn + under present conditions, and that, as 
hazard of sailing at mgnt unuoi ?± 

■ ~ are charged for marine insurance, 

a. consequence, high premium ra.es arc cnarg 

«*<HaAble after careful investigation 
Although it might prove advisable ai 

■ , 4-^ in-nrove inter-island shipping 
for the Government to undertake to iciprovc 

■ - - increase the facilities, and to lower the 

services in order to increase 

fc A rd the economic developnent of such areas 
present rates which retard tne wo 



-13- 



iliere 



as Mindanao, it *duld soon that for a long period at least th 
will bo mm needs for the expenditure of public funds which would 
bring greater advantages to the people of the Philippines than the 
benefits that could he gained through equivalent outlays for an 
international merchant marine, 

Conservation of natural resources 

There is usually a close relationship among the problems of 
conserving forest, water, and soil resources. In most instances 
the three resources are destroyed simultaneously 7/he never the 
growth on a natural forested watershed is cut without proper re- 
planting. The ordinary depletion processes are well recognized: 
reroval of the forest leaves a barren slope with only a part of 
its former water-retention power; consequently the moisture supply 
flows off the watershed as soon as deposited and converts a steady 
flowing drainage stream into one which alternately becomes flooded 
and dry, and the increased velocity of water-flow produces the 

phenomenon of soil erosion. 

In some districts in the Philippines, for instance on the 
Island of Ceou, the destruction of forest resources is Beginning 
to inpair the Water supply to a Serious extent and the soil is 
oeing hadlg eroded. It seens clear that the people of the Phil- 

*■ o-h-nr d^rce of total natural resources 
ippines, despite the present abundance 01 

. Hrn should establish a policy of con- 
relative to the population, snouxu 

^finable improving, the forest, water, 
serving, and wherever practicaoie iwy 

i < -h mist serve as the bases for the permanent 
and soil resources which nus 6 serve 

, a fiiqt ri c t Both reforestation and 
economy of each inhabited district. 



-19- 

affcrestation suggest thenscivoa aa „ 

. _ 3 ^ " 0rtt * •»W*o improvement 

projects. It would probablv h<* . 

i u^at.j.y JG sound tjoiif»w +, j 

poxicj to undertake to brine 

into and retain in the m^i -?„ ^ 

u«b piiDiic domain all 

n ali tae essential natural 

watershed areas in the island- c 

Elands. g ome portions of the public do- 
main which are open for homesteadins at th« „ 

eaaing at the present time are nat- 

ural watersheds and lands with such steep slopes that the problem 
of preventing soil erosion makes the, very poorly adapted to per- 
manent and efficient agricultural operations. It is also possible 
that a significant contribution to the conservation of soil and 
water resources could be n^ade in the Philippines, as has been ac- 
complished in some other countries, through educating farmers to 
an appreciation of the gains that they may make for themselves by 
following soil conserving practices, such as contour cultivation, 
strip-cropping, terracing, and the use of cover crops, in their 
ordinary farming operations. 

Mention may be made in this connection that among the various 
possible reforestation projects the establishment of additional 
cinchona plantations not only would serve the purposes of conser- 
vation but also would increase the production of an essential com- 
modity (quinine for malaria) for which there exists both a serious 
need in the Philippines and a large foreign market . It nay also 
te noted that there is need for the legislature to make available 
the very small fund that would be required to enforce the con- 
tractual obligation of lumbering concessionaires to replant prop- 
erly the areas now being cut. 

Fish is an item of primary importance in the Philippine diet. 



-20- 

It serves to balance the lar^e C urw™ti,- - - 

J ot consumption of rice and corn; and 

the fishing industry provides a livp-nw^ -p 

c n/eiinood for a large number of 

people. The methods of fishing, however, which have devoloped in 
the absence of public control, not only constitute a great waste 
of labor but also threaten to deplete this natural food supply. 
A large amount of small fish are taken; many nature fish are 
caught just prior to their spawning seasons; and some fishermen 
resort occasionally to poisoning and dynamiting, which involve the 
wasteful destruction of many fish. Consequently there seems to be 
reason to believe that the Government could increase and conserve 
the fishery resources of the islands by studying the life cycles 
of the various food fish, by operating hatcheries and protecting 
spawning grounds, and by providing an adequate patrol service to 
enforce the necessary fishing regulations. 

Improvement of n.rri culture 

Philippine economy is at present, and probably for several 

i r >,„ "hnoirallv agricultural. The 
generations will continue to be, Dasicaixj «*s* 

. •, -. i ^--nt-nral -products and the standard 

principal exports will be agricultural prov a 

__.4.4 rtT i -f manuf actured imports — 
of living—including the consumption ol manuia 

*.i-> a ,,r/nnt of the agricultural pro- 
will necessarily depend upon the amount 01 

-Eha relatively low yields of most Philip- 
ductivity per person. 1^ rLXdJ d 

i+ , ond per hectare, in the presence of an ex- 
pine crops per capita ana pex 

. n , flnce 0 f rich soils, are indicative of 
cellent climate and an abundance oi r 

, ir ,rrnse the agricultural produc- 
tive opportunity that exists to increase 

, A rf living, of many of the Philippine 
tivity, and thus the standard oi living. 

• view it is believed that the fol- 
Peoule. With that objective xn view 



-al- 
lowing possible projects should be given oarofai ™ m 

b " carutul consideration 

"by a technical plannin.r oreani**rH,v* 

- w ""tracting a program 

of economic adjustment: 

Soil survey and mapping 

Since the proper use of land is an essential basis for a 
sound program of Philippine economy, a census of the soil nay be 
considered to be the rxst appropriate first step in planning agri- 
cultural improvement. The data collected through a soil survey 
would serve to indicate the areas best adapted to various crops, 
to ;.ake it possible to advise farmers as to the appropriate kinds 
and arxtunts of fertilizers, to furnish the necessary data for the 
selection and subdivision of resettlement sites and for the clas- 
sification of lands which is required in the work of the Bureau of 
Forestry, and also to indicate the variations in the soil conserva- 
tion practices required in the different localities. 
National agricultural experimen t station 

In planning a program of agricultural improvement, especially 
one in which new replacement crops are intended to be introduced 
on a commercial scale, it is essential that adequate facilities 
be provided for the necessary experimental research and develop- 
ment. The plant varieties and the cultivation methods of other 
countries, where the desired new crops are already in commercial 
production, would have to be tested and developed under the var- 

™.,. . ti m A Miotic conditions. In order to carry 

icus Philippine soil and climatic uu..w» 

™-tl ttir a! experiment station would be 
out this work a central agricultural v^y 

- 4.„**«r, i« each of the distinct agricultural 
required with a suds tat ion *n eac. qj. 



2- 



regions of the islands. 

It is believed that the work of <Wv, - 

01 dev eloping well-adapted, 

prolific, and disease-resistant varieties r*i * 

LUes 0± Plants and animals 

to the point at which thev mni ^ k« j 

W1C - to ma De made av^ii iiiio * - 

d\ aiiaoie to farriers ior 

coonercial production, would be accomplished with the least dupli- 
cation of effort and with a maxiaun, of good results if the task 
were divided into three general stages as follows: 

JSMUjevelownant of ^ *,„.„■, ^ inirr . including the 

enlargement of the principles and technique 0 f experiment and 
testing, which is the -natural and basic field of work for an ad- 
vanced agricultural college. The College of Agriculture at Los 
3af.o s is the only institution in the Philippines properly quali- 
fied to pursue this field of fundamental work, upon which all 
subsequent developments depend; and the faculty of the College 
should not neglect this basic work in order to devote a groat 
aroount of its tine to the second stage of development work which 
involves only more or less routine scientific experimenting and 
testing. 

S&g. dgmjaemzti o£ jfflEr&Xafl strains of slants and ani - 
mals, and improved farming pracUces, which it is believed could 
best be accomplished through the medium of a central experiment 
station system under the direction of the Department of Agricul- 

ture and Conraerco. Such an exporimouo ' 

-u i * a r , in of the distinct soil 

central station with a stibst^ioii in eac.- o^ 

^ Li Dvui^ir.ps i?ould appear to "be nec- 
and elliptic regions of the Philippines, joax 

^4.^ n nfi nniTal3 bast adapted to the 
essary in order to develop plants and ,.,ru..m 



•23- 



various local Philippine conditions, with respect to viability, 
productivity, disease resistance, and marketability. 

EaUBfta a ti pq a .Qd_dJ^trj,bat,ioji_af ..improved sn* ds. plants , 
apd animal 3, to farmers in the local agricultural districts. 
There are practically no private distributors of improved seeds 
and plants in the Philippines. It is believed that this function 
could best be performed by national agricultural service stations 
(described below) which would also function as the governmental 
agency to contact the individual farmers and render them certain 
other essential services. 

There would appear to be many possible opportunities for the 
Philippines to enlarge and diversify its consumption and export of 
agricultural crops. The great variation of tropical soil and cli- 
matic conditions in the archipelago indicates the possibility of 
developing the successful commercial production of a largo por 
centum of the numerous tropical farm products which are imported 
in significant quantities by many temperate zone countries. 

4- *.4ma fhe Philippines is importing many 
Moreover, at the present Urne tne 

i - %. be produced efficiently with the 

agricultural products wmch ntts^ DC P r " au 

development work and some governmental 
'aid of some experimental develops" 

7r som instances the Government might also 
educational guidance. In some msva 

™,^vptins and financial assistance to 
find it desirable to render marketing ana 

prospective producers of new crops. 

■ ~ -ho+rrr livestock: in the Phil- 
The great need for developing better 

+ . the dairv cattle produce on the 
ipnines is readily apparent. we 

Tl faction of the quantity of milk that oould 
average only a small ir^ 1 " 1 ^ 



"be obtained from well -b rod horrid Tn>™^ . , 

^ras. Likewise, the goats do not pro- 
duce more than a small fraction of the quantity of milk given by 
the best strains of milk goats adapted to Philippine conditions; 
and this is particularly unfortunate because the goat is espec- 
ially well adapted for the production, under Philippine climatic 
conditions, of an economical supply of dairy products which is 
greatly needed by most families. The swine are snail, slow- 
growing, and poorly shaped moat animals . The chickens are notably 
deficient with respect to both meat and egg production. 

A ctional agricultural service stations 

The improvement of agriculture in the Philippines will depend, 
as elsewhere, not only on having a well-equipped College of Agri- 
culture and a properly qualified national experiment station sys- 
tem to determine and develop agricultural products and practices 
best adapted to the conditions in each district, but also on having 
an efficient means of propagating and disseminating improved 

« orw i information on improved agricul- 

s trains of plants and aniroals and inior^ion u 

n-ict-Hrt A svstem of na- 
tural practices to the farmers m each district, a h 

. „ emotions would probably be required 
tional agricultural service stations woui j. 

+ ,r +K« farmers effectively and encourage the 
in order to contact tne i ara.w ^ 

• ■» entices and improved strains of 
adoption of improved farming practice, 

, • i qi^ce the effectiveness of such agricul- 
plants and animals. Since wie 

+- 1 exeat extent on the conven- 
tual service stations depends tu a grea 

- - r visiting farmers, it would probably 
ience of their location for Visions 

fwilv equipped station in each 
be necessary to establish one fall/ equ W 

« vpauired in certain provinces, 
province, with substations as requ 



-eg- 

Dae effectiveness of a sgutm of agricultural service stations in 
improving farming practices v/ould also depend on whether the indi- 
vidual stations were adequate in size, say not less than SO acres 
(20 hectares), were supervised by properly trained and coiapetent 
managers, and were well supplied with equipment, materials, and 
labor. A properly managed and equipped system of agricultural 
service stations cculd he expected to become a channel of close 
contact betv/een the central government and practically all far- 
mers in the country. 

The nature of the services which a system of national a^i- 
cultural service stations should be expected to render may be 
sunroarized as follows: 

P^p^ntinn anrj Ai s tr ilm tia^J f irprrW H^ins of. 
r1 ^t. fl Q nfl nnimlB devalOJOildbr %h& nn+innnl Rxpari^nt st&liaa, 

. UlP f TP , or i 0 Y7 cost distribution of ttt- 

with special enphasis on the ±rec or 10. 

proved seeds, plants, and animl sreedxn S services, and represent- 
ing not only products «t«D.tT«ly grown In the local districts but 

*>, nnt widely prjduced locally, could 
also products which, altnougn no, wiceiy 

n 4-« the -rea— especially coraxdities now 
be grown advantageously m tne area ^ * 

imported and new products to he exported. 

i -^hcps with respect to: physical haa** 

+ . f S oiis' soil building, Plant fertilization, 
Ung and protection of soxxs, 

control ard use of the water supply; 
and aniral feeding practices; control an 

* a r^ml diseases and insect pests; and m- 
control of plant and aui.nai 

creased diversification of products. 



-26- 

The great needs for the^n 

these improvements in Philippic agri- 

culture are so obvious that fr.r. 

™at for the present purpose mere refer- 
ences to the, should suff ice . to-pt for the mechanical handling 
of soils in sugarcane production, most of the advantages of deep 
plowing and the turning under of vegetation are lost, because 
neither the draft animal nor the equipment is capable of per- 
forming the best work. Other than with respect to rice cultiva- 
tion, very little effort is made through either terracing, con- 
touring, diversion ditching, or the planting of special cover 
crops, to protect the soils against water erosion. In many in- 
stances no action is taken to maintain or improve soil fertility; 
numerous farmers depend for the replacement of plant foods in 
their soil on an erosion process by which the farm is overflowed 
and a soil deposit made by water that has eroded lands at a 
higher level. Philippine agriculture is dependent to a large 
extent, especially on account of the large acreage devoted to 
rice, on irrigation; but many of the systems, constructed by 
snail groups of farmers, are inadequate and there is a very lim- 
ited knowledge among many farmers of the best practices to be 
followed in using irrigation water. 

There is need throughout the Philippines for the work that 
could be rendered by a system of national agricultural stations 
in controlling insect pests and plant and animal diseases. The 

, - r.-e thp most serious insect 

locust, for instance, which is one of the no-* 

r> a n TPPdilv be controlled, provided 
pests at the present time, car. reaany 

• i - ,nr labor are made available, 
the necessary funds for materials and laoor 



The savings mde through the control of plant and animal insect 
pests and diseases are usually man? tir,es greater than the funds 
required for the purpose; and under tropical conditions, particu- 
larly, such control measures are required in order to protect and 
insure the success of a program involving the introduction of new 
crops. The lack of extreme temperature variation in the tropics, 
and the usual absence of extended periods without precipitation, 
rake possible continuous life cycles for many pests, and this un- 
interrupted multiplication frequently "becomes, in the absence of 
artificial control measures, a major factor in agricultural pro- 
duction. 

The lack of diversification of products is a primary char- 
acteristic of Philippine agriculture which deserves governmental 
attention. The gains that could be expected from increased di- 
versification of products would include: increased productivity 
of the land from crop rotation and animal husbandry; increased 
opportunities to make greater use of labor, land, and equi P ,ent 
through the production of more products during more seasons; and 
decreases in the credit requirements of farmers as a result of 

■f vlska among products, the increased 
the greater distribution of risfcS &ed*& y 

i cHatence derived from the farn, and the in- 
amunt of family subsistence a.u 

creased number of marketing seasons. 

. , ^ci^i^hn^ including 

t , nja1vseS to determine the selec- 
-. . _ r -p qnil a:iax/ SUi3 
such work as the making ol son 

nnd also the fertilization practices, 
tionand rotation of crops, art also 



-28- 

*»t adapted to the various temperature, soil, contour, and 
water supply conditions on individual farms. 

Perforce of _educ^ional work, i^y .- ^ 
^. r af,irm. on irjorpv events in t,^ -F^l* »f economics , in- 

cluding the inprovenent of health through sanitation, and the 
more efficient use of available labor and materials in making 
clothing i preparing and preserving food stuffs, and constructing 
buildings and equipment . 

Performance of administrative .yrcrk fori ^pd in co opera- 
tinnwitb, other rQver --^R"t. fi] flrenci rf, and projects , such as 
agricultural census talcing and crop reporting; the Baking of 
soil, plant, and aninal surveys; the maintaining of plant and 
animal quarantine services; and the carrying out of programs 
that may be adopted in the future for the control of the produc- 
tion of individual crops, for the marketing of agricultural prod- 
ucts, for making better agricultural equipment and supplies avail- 

or for decreasing the expense of 
able to farmers at lower cost, or xor u 

agricultural credit. 
Aericult "^ credit 

• fnral credit that prevails in 
The exorbitant cost of agricultural 

„* time constitutes a major public 
the Philippines at the present time 

. a ro , inp ie solution. A technical 
problem for which there is ™' 

f . on , h0 uld have an opportunity to study 
nonic planning organization 



i nn t^e light of its 
a -fir it ions and, m A & 
ft. proUen in all it. ^ 

•„ rfnev countries o~ 

it program under widelS 



findings and trie r 
tural credi 



-29- 



reconnendations embodying a plan which warn * 

1 - would appear to be best 

adapted to Philippine conditions. The p™* + - 

me committee does not feci 

Prepared, on the basis of its necessarily brief study of the 
problem, to suggest any specific program as - 0ein . ; ^ 
for the extension of agricultural credit at reasonable costs. 
It believes, however, that the most desirable results could prob- 
ably be obtained if a policy were adopted of attempting first to 
reduce the present needs for agricultural credit to the minii.um 
(through such means as increased crop diversification and in- 
proved marketing facilities) and secondly to devise a plan to 
supply at low cost only the regaining or irreducible credit re- 
quirements. 

The necessity of making a thorough study of the agricultural 
credit problems in the Philippines in order to find fundamental 
a;:d effective solutions, is demonstrated by the meager success 
of the numerous attempts that have been made to solve a great 
group of credit problems by attacking a few of their individual 
n&nifes tatio as. It nay he found that the solution of the agri- 
cultural credit problems is contingent to a great extent on find- 
ing a solution for the agricultural marketing and purchasing 
problem. 

k rjcultuml rArket? n-'- r f ind t^T-n^asiqg 

. *x i ^ w -,Jit it is believed that 
As in the case of agricultural crouit, it 

further study is advisable "a of or o wloptir.S W P lalla 

W.»nt of agricultural purcha^l a,d narrating facilities. 



-30- 

There 



is need for a convenient HVa**n, v 

Wtm Of public agricultural ware- 
houses throughout ffiost of the farrdn- * 

arising; districts in the Philippic; 

i probably their operation could be handled PM «i 

nan«ied readily as a special 

-«« perfor»d by an a Sr icul toal aarvloa Matiaa to ^ ^ 

* 0<JUally ° 1Sar U the AWit, of 4CTeloplns 0th9r 

aspects of marketing services eh fv rr-k-s ,0, 

fe ervices U1 ™ much a warehousing plan should 

be coordinated. 



and 

service 
ince; tut 



Lcras 



It is also believed that a study 0 f the marketing probli 
should include a careful analysis of the activities of The National 
Ilice and Corn Corporation in order to determine whether its organ- 
ization, facilities, or present objectives, could be sc developed 
as to aid rare effectively in the solution of both the present 
problems and those which eight be expected to arise from changes 
in Philippine agricultural conditions. 

The success in the United States and other countries of some 
of the agricultural cooperative associations in standardizing, 
packing, and marketing farm products should not be taken as in- 
dicative of the possibility of success under any cone it ions. For 
example, if the farmers in a district were illiterate or impover- 
ished, they might not be able to form and operate successfully an 
ordinary agricultural cooperative marketing or purchasing associa- 
tion. Consequently, in view of the present early stage of develop- 
ment in the educational and financial status of many Philippine 
farmers it might be desirable that, instead of encouraging the 
Wtion of farmers' cooperative marketing associations, the Gov- 
ernment should finance and operate a system of agricultural market- 
ing and purchasing organizations on a non-profit basis. 



-31- 

fajnitfrlTft 1 tenancy cnpfr iiiifl^ 

One of the most serious, and in a social sense the worst, of 
the agrarian problems in the Philippines at the present time arises 
fron the existing system of land tenancy. In substantial measure 
the future prevention of social unrest in the Philippines will 
probably be contingent on the ability of the Government to effec- 
tuate satisfactory solutions for that problem. 

It is undoubtedly true that in many instances the landlords or 
their agents take advantage of the ignorance and lack of bargaining 
power of tenants. Frequently/ a large share of the product of the 
land is taken by agents who act as middlemen between the tenants 
and landlords, and in seme districts there has accumulated a group 
of traditional and deep-rooted abuses. Apparently no agency other 
than the National Government possesses either the legal powers or 
the facilities required to find and enforce the necessary reme- 
dial measures. Those land- tenancy problems, like the agricultural 
credit and marketing problems with which they are closely inter- 
related, require thorough study by a competent technical economic 
organization. 

It would appear that the purchase of the large agricultural 
estates by the Philippine Government, for resale to the tenants, 
mm not of itself provide a solution for these problems, since 

o ^ot-ess arises from overcrowding 
of the fundamental causes of dishes, an 

^^,-1 1- +Tif»t t^e individual farm 
of tenants on such lands, with the result that t„e 

«i • n + fi furnish the tenant a reasonable 

Plots would remain too small to lurnisw 

^ ^ ^ -7cre given a much larger share 
standard of living even though he .vere ±x 



aoaic 



of the crop, ivbreover, in view of v f 

uoe i act that tae Government 

01 possesses a large supply of good agricultural lands in the 
public domain, it might well be considered whether from an ccon 
viewpoint it would be desirable tc appropriate public funds for th 
purchase of existing privately owned agricultural lands for resale 
to the present tenants. Such a policy would place a drain on the 
public treasury and would not solve the fundamental problon of 
serious overcrowding of tenants on large estates. The "basic solu- 
tion for the pr obi era would appear to be found in redistribution of 
the agricultural population. 

Distribution of agricultural p opulation 

It is estimated that only approximately one-third of the 
arable land in the Philippines is under cultivation. The oth 
thirds is included within the public domain, which comprises 
abundance of virgin agricultural soils of excellent quality. Taken 
as a Whole the Philippines are not densely populated. Yet in the 

n vtfli TMtjiilation and an abundance 
presence of a relatively snail total p^puia, 

i -F the most important agrarian 

of good agricultural lands, one .1 tne ros 

i mi-ibers of farn £ata>- 
problems in the Philippines is tnat large nuno 

. *. wvtranalv low standard of 
lies are compelled to subsist at an extreme^ 

/ \ rinnr Quality lands or (b) 
living because they farm either (a) poor qua! 

, „ tn- snail to use effectively a fam- 
Piots of good land which are to. snaix 

a militate the carrying out of 
ily's labor throughout the year and facil-ta 

diversified farming practices. 



.or two 
nprises an 



-33- 

This paradoxical condition exists ™h 

iSts PTii^arily as the result of 

three factors: (1) transportation facilities to ^ public lands 
me .eon either lacking or too expensive to bo utilized b y those 
vrho are Buffering most fror, either poor land or overcrowding 
(2) those farmers in the congested areas who are suffering most 
fronitho pressure of population on the local land supply, have 
not been able to f inance or carry out all the work necessary 
{which often includes the clearing of a heavy jungle growth from 
virgin land) to gain a foothold on a plot of good land available 
for homes teading; and (3) the areas legally open for settlement 
have lacked not only the transportation and communication facili- 
ties required for the narlcetinj of farr. prodiicts and the purchas- 
ing of supplies, but also those essentials, such as educational and 
medical facilities, which are aade available to farmers through the 
existence of conveniently located communities. 

In connection with the need for redistributing the agricul- 
tural population of the Philippines, the Government lias an oppor- 
tunity to make an important contribution to the -public welfare by 
Noting portions of its available funds and public domain to the 
development of well-planned resettlement projects on a large 

^ + . -r,rr land, or inefficiently small 
scale. Families now confined to poor iano, 

«*n*r h* eiven an opportunity to enjoy 
Plots of good land, could readily be given vi 

e t\B±r labor; and it is obvious that 
the full potential benefits of tne*r laoo 

• the -umber of families in tho over- 
a Significant reduction xn the ouraoe 

, nvtota substantially to the solution 
crowded districts would contribute suns 

, -vins those farmers who would 
P$ the land-tenancy problem by iP-Vin* 



renain in the present farrrf-n* 

aroas an opportunity +~ • 

^Kiyurminity to increase 

their incomes by cultivating lam* t*« + „ 

G ■"■ar^er plots of land. 

In order, however, to insure tiv, e 

insure the success of resettlement 

projects it is essential that considsrabi * *n 

t-onsiaerable planning and develop- 

*t wor* be carried out before the lands are occupied. Highly 
undesirable conditions often result from the kind of unplanned 
resettlement which follows automatically the opening of public 
roads through a new territory. In such instances a great deal 
of the most desirable public land is taken by speculators or fa- 
vored persons who have no intention of occupying or farming the 
property but who undertake to hold it by conforming merely to the 
ninioim homesteading requirements until such lands come to have a 
E&rket value which can be realized through their sale. Many fami- 
lies who take up plots along the roads built through a neT7 terri- 
tory perform a great deal of work in preparing land for cultiva- 
tion which, on account of either the nature of the soil or the 
extreme slope of the surface or its location at the head of a 
valley, never should be devoted to agricultural purposes hut 
should be loft as a natural watershed. It is also true that in 
nany oases the Baxlm* good efforts of sincere homesteading fami- 
lies are met with failure because of the lack of a good water sup- 

..oi^-io and other diseases. Fur t he r- 
Ply or the lack of control of raalaria an , o 

^ „ - -.ve-vnontal assistance very few individual 

sore, in the absence of ^over.iownwu 

• i ahilitv to subsist during the necessary 
families have the financial aoint. w 

, at best unaided settlers are alrost cer- 
clearing period, and even at OSS* 

• a *nd advantages that a well-planned 
tain to be denied the services and acvan , 

community of far us can render. 



For those reasons it io v., n . m , _ 

is believed that the Philippine Govern- 

nent may find it advisable not oniw « * v. . , 

onl - y t0 establish .well-planned re- 
settlement projects on a very i arro SCnn „ , 

iar t>° scale Out also to prevent the 

settlement of families en any portion of the public domain out- 
side regularly established resettlenent districts, it would ap- 
pear necessary in order to assure the success of resettlement 
projects that they be surveyed and subdivided In accordance with 
the requirements of the corxranity and the intended uses of the 
land, that a supply of potable water bo developed, that adequate 
disease control measures bo taken., that a portion of each plot be 
cleared for cultivation before it is turned over to the prospec- 
tive settlement family, and that at least the initial steps be 
taken in the establishment of harketing, purchasing, educational, 
and medical facilities. It nay also be necessary to provide some 
additional requirements such as livestock, equipment, and initial 
plantings. 

Traditionally, in both the United States and the Philippines, 

• u«<Ta onened for settlement under 

portions of the public domain have been openeu 

i • -u ~atrA Hie settlers an opportunity to 
hooesteading processes which (Save tne sew 

«u There my bo reason, however, 

acquire legal title to tfto land. I -ere y 

«+ ¥n consider whether under the pre- 
for the Philippine Government to consiae 

A * f iona it should continue the policy 
trailing and prospective conditions 

* ™,Mic lands which are made 
of divesting itself of title to pufllw 1*° 

available for resettlement. 



jvflmn v n na n t of Maim in.r, tm ^ - 

in view of the fact that the Philippines is Peking in son. 
of the principal factors, such as cheap power, an. abundant supply 
of technical training, and large internal i.sarl:et 8l which form the 
basis for the development of large scale industries in several of 
the temperate zone countries , it would no t appear possible to es- 
tablish in the Philippines, at the present stage of its develop- 
ment , reasonably efficient units of mass production industry. 

A number of articles are manufactured efficiently in the 
Philippines at the present time and the production of sane of 
these night be expanded. Ihere is reason to believe that a care- 
ful survey of other possibilities ^li^ht be expected to disclose 
other instances in which nramfacturing industries could be es- 
tablished with a reasonable prospect of success. If a thorough 

, . hT a corrpetcnt economic planning organiza- 

survey wore underta-ei. oj a wujjpwp 

t'nit -^miects would no t be 
Hon, there would he some assurance tnat ^rojccw 

, +, f^V jro iron the outset on account 
launched which were doomed to laila.e 

, ,,* +v aild also some assurance that no pos- 
of some basic inadaptability, c~vx aasj 

™^rrf*ln/> industries were being over- 
sibilities of establishing proira,i_ w 

«r«v of possibilities is de- 
loo>ed. Since a comprehensive survey of po 

, fn enumerate bore the industries which 
sirable, there is no neea to enumera 

r to be the best adapted to Philippine 
at present would appear t^ 

conditions. f 

it ni^bt be necessary ior 
• rircunstances, it flft*r 

under the existm. cxrc certain new 

v the initiative in esta.lisbm, 
the government to taK:e - ^ connection 

- Q *n the PhiliPP ineS ' 1 
manufacturing industries ** 



-37- 



it is suggested that an economic riLa***-, 

Planning organization should 

investigate thoroughly the present organization « v • 

u unionization, policies , and 

objectives of the National Ttewroi *. * 

01i8i development Company in order to de- 
termine whether their ada^t,-"hi iu.r + ^ +l 

aaapTiaDiiity to the present and future 

problems of economic adjustment could be increased. 

Improvement of tariff schedules 

The existing tariff schedules of the Philippines have been, 
in effect without substantial amendment for nearly thirty years. 
The present rates, classifications of commodities, and methods of 
valuation are not well adapted, in some respects, to current 
trade conditions. The need for a revision is indicated* The 
general revision, however, of a nation's tariff schedules entails 
so many possibilities of impairing the standard of living of the 
people, and of granting unjustifiable subventions to minority 
groups, that the work should not be undertaken without the advice 
of disinterested and competent technicians. 

Improvement V"™ ^ revemie._3ggtems 

Under their present revenue systems very few of the local 
governments in the Philippines can finance the essential ^» 

■ „c which 'nay appropriately be considered 
of those public services whi-n ■■>■>* - ■ - 

ibilities The completing and bringing up-to-date 
their resporisiuili^ 1 ^ • 

a -rd tax assessments would greatly assist 
of public land records and tax a 

• htrtnUK increased revenue. For the pur- 
the local governments in chaining 

• 9 .overrent revenues and facilitating the 
pose both of increasing goverr.me 

. Df economic adjustment, the government 
ution of the program oi econo 



-33- 



should expedite the land B iw w - a 

^ ^ the adj^ication of titles, 
and should also establish n^re equitably « 

equitable appraisal of property 
for the purpose of tax assessments. 

The general revenue system of feh« pv,-t ■ 

em 01 tne Philippine Government, 

like that of nearly all emv-t-^ 

^ -x- cou^tri^s, represents an uncoordinated 

accumulation of taxes which w na „ 4 

avo boen imposed by the legislature 

from time to time under variable cimiita+ D « n » B 

lc,Uil circumstances . Consequently a 

careful study of the taxation system by a technical economic plan- 
ning organization might be expected to disclose some instances in 
which it could be revised to make the levies better adapted to 
present conditions and especially to the problems of economic 
adjustment. 

The public interest would be served by a revision of the 
revenue system which would distribute the burden of taxation more 
nearly in proportion to the ability of persons to pay. The present 
Philippine rates of tax on large incomes are very much less than 
taxes in the United States on comparable incomes. A survey of the 
existing revenue system might also indicate that it would bo de- 
sirable to lower the tax burden on certain struggling industries 
which are handicapped in their development at the present time, 
and seek more revenue from levies on the m*t profitable indus- 
tries, in relation to the program of resettlement for the relief 
of the prevailing land-tenancy conditions, it night be ,ell to 

„ , a could be used to discourage the 

consider whether a special to* con^ 

- >«, land Into plots too small to moot 
Practice of distributing farm lam xuvo t 

„+' -i ririi vi dual families, 
reasonably the requirements of waaivica» 



-39- 

ypprnvwnt of Ti^] ^ en^ ^^^ 

Probably one of the m^t 

viio ibdsx inexpensive b>+ ,-vf-p , , . . 

* "»we out effective contribu- 
tions that can be made to thn 

th ° Reces sary adjustment of Philippine 

economy is to be found in the field of public health, m the 
final analysis, of course, the productivity, and thus the stan- 
dard of living, of a people depends on the quantity and the effi- 
ciency of labor applied to the natural resources; and in the case 
of the Philippines it is apparent that a great deal of labor is 
wasted or rendered inefficient by the prevalence of disease. It 
has been estimated , for instance, by one investigator that 85 
percent of the rural population is infested with round worms and 
hookworms. The death rate, although not higher than in other 
countries in the Orient, is approximately twice that prevailing 
in the United States. I4al nutrition is prevalent in many rural 
districts; and the mortality from tuberculosis is nearly three 
times that in the United States. The typical Philippine rural 
area appears to be caught in a vicious circle in which disease 
causes inefficiency, which in turn results in malnutrition and 
the impairment of disease resistance. 

Aside from the various opportunities which have been dis- 

. . ^^Hveness of such labor as is 
cussed for increasing x.hc effectiveness ^ 

„„,.„ i+ W nuld appear that a great 
applied to the natural resources, ^ vovsa a. p 

, v —A* in bringing about a progressive im- 
contributicn could be maoe in Drin&i © 

• • «n health, by eradicating the two chief 
provement of the national neai^-, "J 

s of parasitism, namely, ttW* water sup- 
agencies for the spread ol paras. 

aan if the Philippine Government 
Plies and improper waste axsposax. 



would undertake to provide wolla + ~ 

18 t0 "Wfty drinking water 

for additional small comities, and if ^ 

♦ ana if the construction of 
waste disposal facilities coul d h, 

«OUld be encouraged through education, 
public subsidies, and enforcement d-p ^ 

Snt 0f tne Present statutes, two 
basically important stet><? iTn-.ii ^ v 

steps srould nave been taken to improve the 

health and economic conditio^ of the pmh. • 

■ fl 01 tAe Philippine people. 

The substantial nur*er of deaths fro, beriberi could be de- 
creased considerably through the improvement of general educa- 
tion, which seems to be the aost effective means of raking people 
aware of the dangerous consequences of a diet confined largely to 
polished rice. Malaria ranks among the cost serious contagious 
diseases in the Philippines; it can be controlled effectively 
without great expense, and the Government might well extend such 
service to the inhabited districts which are now infested with 
aalaria- transmit ting mosquitoes as well as to any new areas that 
say be opened for settlement. 

No hospital facilities arc available for the communities in 
raany large districts in the Philippines; and of course in the ab- 
sence of hospitals it is practically impossible to prevent the 
spread of contagious disease by isolation of these infected. It 
is believed that the Philippine Government might well undertake 
the construction of public hospitals in those areas which now 
lack such facilities but in which there is a reasonable possi- 

u v . lt „ . -i Roi/erraaent would be able to support 
■alicy that the Provincial Go ^ — 

■ + „ -Fnnf f i nns as a first aid 
their operation. In addition to its functions as 

i,n^ hncmital in the Philippines 
and quarantine station, the public ho spit ax 



-Ui- 

could very well "oe cade the hcm^m*.*.* 

b wio Headquarters for still rare irportant 

pfclic health services, ,a,ol, , free or low _ cost dispen _ 
saries and rural nursing. It v*uld seen, likely that limited 
nedical services could ho supplied nost effectively and economi- 
cally in the rural districts of the Philippines, as they are 
supplied ia sone of the relatively inaccessible rountain dis- 
tricts in the United States, through a corps of traveling 
nurses who have received at least a practical araount of general 
medical education. 



g-OJULl J E H T T » T| 



REPORT OP 
THE JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 



OiT 



PHILIPPINE APPAIRS 



PART V 

RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OP THE UNITED STATES 
AND ITS CITIZENS IN THE PHILIPPINES AMD 
OP THE PHILIPPINES A1ID ITS CITIZENS IN 
THE UNITED STATES 



FAST V - aiGHTS ym T FTi-T? ; -t- ™ 

M« lag, ^nTMPPTWTOQ >H p 

US CITTgCTa T^r m TT^rrrn ^aagjg^L / 

1 . SiThts and j nt. ,» r B g * B f . . 

In a = 00rdall co ,-ith tho dcclr^ policy of uUi^t.iy anting 
Impendence to tho Philippic, tho IJnlted |tatw ^ ^ ^ 
Philippines increasing degree of autonomy, culminating in tho 

Independences Act of Mvvch. 2k l Qik ,i. nOT . <. _ , . , 

*wiwi <_h, i^jt, Uiider the terms of which the 

Uni tod States v ill rcl i - qui oh its so v e r c i ty 0 n July k , 19 kS . 
Under this grant of aatonoar, the Philippine authorities exorcise 
control in natters affecting the rights and interests of citizens 
of the United States in the Philippines. In connection with the 
admi nistration of t h is control by the Co mm nrteo.l th au tho r i t i e s , 
so no complaints have been saade that protection of the typo con- 
templated under the terns of the Act has not boon fully accorded. 
With regard to the rights and interests which, during the Comron- 
wealth period, citizens of the Philippines are to enjoy in the 
United States, the Independence Act contains no provision. 
Because of this and possibly for other reasons, there has developed 
in the United States a feeling and, in some instances, a legis- 

i t . ni tizers of the Philippines as if 

lative tendency, to consiaer citizu.-- 

they were aliens. 

+ -^r,- i7i>ich have thus developed in the 
In view of the situations vhic.i .i. 



,. 4fl here used to include corporations. 
II The tern "citizens" is nere 



-2- 



United States and in the Eb±l±wfi n ** u 

~ lppinos ' thG Corxritteo rGconmends 

that, during the Coornonwealth period +v 

P^iiou, the authorities of the 

two countries, in both lG-»i<?inH,.« a 

legislative and administrative action, 

should adhere to the policv ->f +- „„ *, . -, . 

poxxcj o± not curtailing the ri S hts and 

privileges which citizens of the United States enjoyed in the 

Philippines and which citizens of the Philippines enjoyed in 

the United States, prior to the inauguration of the OqOQmh 

wealth Government. 

2. United States Gov e rnment property in the 7-hili prunes 

The Independence Act contains several provisions in regard 
to the property and rights, including military and other reserva- 
tions, of the United States in the Philippines. Section 5 of the 
Act provides that all the property and rights in the Philippines 
acquired "by the United States under its treaties with Spain shall 
be granted to the Commonwealth Government except (a) such land or 
other property as had, prior to the passage of the Act, he en 
designated by the President as military or other reservations, 
and (b) such land or other property or rights or interests 

« t. nr otherwise disposed of in accord- 

therein as may have heer. sold or ounorwx^ v 

« / n n p t-uo Let provides that on July U, 
ance with law. Section 10 (a) ° r tiie ACX pru 

1Gl - „ a wn ourronder to the independent govern- 

l^o, the United States shall -urrc.iuo 

l(a11 ri , ht of possession, supervision, 
raent of the Philippines "all rx&i-^ - * 

onvsrei.-ity", then existing and excr- 
jurisdiction, control, or sovereigns* 

* . it ^rv end people of the Philippines, 
c ised in and over the territory ^ v 



including all military and other reservat^^ 

reservations, except naval 

reservations and fueling stations. 

In Section 2 (b) (n) it is nmv^«; +^ 4. 

. \ ■■) j-u is Piovided that the property rights 

of the United States and the Philipni np<? 0 ^,,i i v , 

- nxxj-ppin^s snail be promptly adjusted 

and settled— a provision which is not to become affective until 
the date of independence. The Committee recommends that, inasmuch 
as under Section 2 (b) (l) the question of adjustment and settle- 
ment in regard to equipment and improvements on the properties 
handed over to the independent government vill probably involve 
certain financial arrangements, the said adjustment and settle- 
ment be determined prior to July If, 1946, so that adequate 
preparations may be made. 

After the independent government is established on July U, 
191*6, the Government of the United States -."ill require, for its 
official establishments in the Philippines, properties such as a 
government normally maintains in the territory of a foreign 
country. For instance, the Government of the United States no. 
Contemplates the erection of certain buildings on a portion of 

,o-Mo- rer>r the city of Bagnio, 
the Camp John Hay Military Heser/ation, near 

**+«tives in the Philippines 
for the use of its official representatives 

^ +v period. Unless some 
during and following the Commonwealth P-r_o 

, W re the independent government cones into 
arrangement is made before tne 

„ part of a military reservation, 
existence, this property, <ns ±* 

, t to the independent government. In vie, at 
Oast be surrendered to the i«» 

, -m, will ^ W* 4 ° VOr t0 ^ 
the extensive properties whxen ■• 



independent government under exists 

ttieti^g i aWl the Committee also 

recon-nends, as a matter of equity, that, p rior tc tVn + . 

» prioi oC . the establish- 
no^ of that ^vornaent, some arrange no nt >,« , 

" • aGnGnt ° G r-^de under which 

title to such properties as the United cu-..* 

m» unixea States say require for 

the aforementioned purpose would either he retroceded to the 
United States without compensation, or be acquired by the United 
States through an exchange of properties. 



REPORT OP 
THE JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 
OK 

PHILIPPINE AFFAIRS 
PART VI 

BEARING OF THE DATE OF 1 1. DEPENDENCE OF 
THE PROGRAM OF ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT 



The date on which tho PM n ™< 

hlllppines wi H attain indopondenee 
nndar the taM, of the Independent Aot is July k , ^ By ^ 

" rtferenC0 ' °° mitt - — P-cluded Iroa r800maaai8s 

ary change in the date of irdeioendpnro mu « 

J. dependence. The Committee was directed, 

however, to consider the hearing which an advancement in the date 
of independence to 1 S3S or 1 9 39 would have on facilitating or re- 
tarding the execution of a program of economic adjustment in the 
Philippines. 

The two essential factors for the effectuation of a program 
of economic adjustment are time and funds. With regard to the 
first factor, the Committee assumes , for the purpose of this dis- 
cussion, that the period contemplated in its recommendations 
(extending through December 31, i960) would remain the same re- 
gardless of the date of independence. With regard to the second 
factor, however, the date of independence has an important bear- 
ing. Since it may he expected that the extraordinary revenues 
*hich now accrue from the remittances of United States excise 
taxes on sugar and coconut products will cease upon attainment 
of independence, any advancement of the date of independence 
*ould result in a reduction of the funds available for economic 

. . + -u a fintn of independence would 

adjustment. An advancement m the d^to 01 xi t> 

1 * >,« rinrived from export taxes required 

also reduce the revenue to he derivea xjtwj 

v , A t w-g deorive the Philippine Govern- 

b ? the Independence Act , and thu* aopn 

» rpireriue for deht retirement 
aent of an important source of revenue » 



ircaso 



^icient. n U t0 13 , uldate the ^^^^ ^ 

the e X Utin S PMUpp lne bonfl , d y ^ 

the Commonwealth Government would hav* *„ 

Uia We t0 complete within a 
shorter period its national flo-p 

al doien so program and other prepara- 
tions for its future independent status. The resulting inc: 
in expenditures for those purpose, would coincide with a decline 
in revenue, and thus reduce the funds available for carrying out 
the economic adjustment program. 

The Commit toe believes, therefore, that an advancement of 
the date of independence would materially increase the difficultie 
of the Philippine adjustment problem and result in a dolay in the 
att ai nrae nt of the ob j e c t i v e 3 c 0 at enrol a t e d i n t ho C 0 rami 1 1 o e ' s 
terms of reference. 



, , . - n doubt be imposed on Philip- 

1/ United States duties would no £L 

. . „.c p^i i - 001 ne expor b j,cx^^^. 
pme products in lieu ox £*nnipi»-" 



/ 

REPORT OF 
THE JOINT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE 
ON 

philippine aeeairs 
part vii 

REC0:,,SH3AH0:-,S *i-II> THEIR EFFECTUATION 



FART VII 



RECOmJHSTDATION S 



The principal recordations of the Ccittee are as 
follows : 

TRADE HEtLATinwa 
Commonwealth Pe riod - November 15. 1935 to 
A. General provisions 

1. During the Commonwealth period all Philippine 

products (except as specified belov: under 
B, 1 and 2) should be admitted into the 
United States free of duty, and all United 
States products should be admitted into the 
Philippines free of duty. 

2. Beginning January 1, 1941, the Philippine Gov- 

ernment should levy and collect for the account 
of the Philippine Treasury export taxes equiva- 
lent to 5f& of the then existing United States 
duties on all Philippine products exported to 
the United States (except as specified below 
under B, l) - These export taxes should be in- 
creased 'by an additional 5$ on January 1, 1942, 
and on each January 1 thereafter, until on 
January 1, 1945, they should be equal to 25j 
of the" then existing United States duties.-' 

+ „ * nw rn -hi-nmpnt_g_!^_ United Stat as 
3. Quota ■orovi siors ggygrn, am p.-^^ 

1. Quotas not subject to the export tax 

An afflWPllv declining duty-free quota com- 
C 5 nenc"^ ',1th 200,000,000 cigars for the 

m8 ? *° .roir 1940, should be imposed upon 
°Sortf of £iu£i>* cigars into the United 
import. 01 rn v „ houl ^i be free from ex- 
States. ^•f2^S P £ reduced by 5* of 
port taxes J**°J£ each succeeding cal^, 
the initial ""J* 6 als 150f 000,000 

endar yoar, until 1* 4 the 
cigars for the calendar y«arW 5 ^ 

period 1 ; Vl ^{d *9 one-half of the 
1946, the quota s-ovj-u ^ 

1/ Upon the recognition f*™^ l no longer be required by the 
on July 4, 1946, export taxc 
United States. 



-2- 



quota for the ^ereciir,, , 

Cigars. ShiDntenJp 4 ^ Y &r ' ° r 75 - 00 0.000 
mentioned 3?S Rycess of the 

states du t y 4\nrfo r :: r^n^ ted 

(b) An annually declining duty-free quota, com- 
mencing *ith 4,500,000 pounds for the cal- 
endar year 1940, should he imposed upon 
imports of Philippine scrap tobacco , cigar- 
ends , and stripped filler tobacco into tho 
United States. This quota should be free 
from export taxes, and should he reduced 
by 5% of the initial amount for each suc- 
ceeding calendar year, until it equals 
3,375,000 pounds for the calendar year 
1945. For the period January 1, 1946, 
through July 3, 1946, the quota should 
he one -half of the quota for the preceding 
year, or 1,587,500 pounds. Shipments in 
excess of the aforementioned quotas should 
also he free from er-rport taxes but subject 
to whatever United States duty may be in 
force at the time. 

(c) An annually declining duty-free quota, com- 
mencing with 200,000 long tons for the 
calendar year 1940 should be imposed upon 
imports of Philippine coconut oil into the 
United States. This quota should be free 
, from export taxes, and should be reduced by 
S* of the initial amount for eacn succeeding 
calendar year, until it equals 150 000 long 

IhfoUO^rSlJ be cnUalf of the quota for 
the ° U0T ^ 75,000 long tons. 

may he la force at the time. 

of Philippe peari i from 
° tates . This £jf5.". duM 4 by 5* 

•Wort '^^Tfor each succeeding 
of the initial 



-3- 



the calendar year 1^' \ QUals 637 • 500 S^sa for 
1946, through July T Jamary 1 * 

one-half of the JL*i i k qUOta sho ^ d be 
318,750 gross SH, Vr ^ P rec ^ing year, or 

-ntioned Sa 5 Slf also ?* 3f ° Te ~ 

niay De m force at the time. 
Quotas subject to the export taxes 

(a) An annual quota of 850,000 Ion- tons t commercial 

value, In any calendar year, should be imposed 
upon imports of Philippine sugar into the United 
States, of which quota not more than 50,000 long 
tons, commercial value, nay be refined sugar. 
Shipments in excess of the quota Ghoul d be free 
from export taxes but subject to whatever United 
States duty may be in force at the time. 

(b) Upon expiration of the Cordage Act--/ on May 1, 

1941, an annual quota of 6,000,000 pounds, in 
any calendar year, should be imposed upon imports 
into the United States of Philippine cordage, ex- 
clusive of binder twine. Shipments in excess of 
the quota should be free from export taxes but 
subject to whatever United States duty may be in 
force at the tine. 



Special nrovi sions 

1 teort taxes on shipments to the United States of Phil- 
gp^e ^broideries made of cloth ,hioh is the product 
of S United States should he passed on the Ws of 
the dutiable value as provided an the ff^^ 
Tariff Act of 1930, less the value ( c . i . f . the Philip 
pSs) of the cloth embodied in such 

3. The allocation of all quotas ^ 
should be ^sed on for^^alreav^ ^ 

In the absence o. any l0Gated among the aanu- 

the annual quotas should he gy™^ in 193V , on the 
facturers whose P™^" ^ ea ch manufacturer's mazi- 
basis of the proportion wbic ; (either 

production shiy — 



mum 



1/ 49 Stat. 340. 



-4- 



direetly or th-r ^ ,4.1 * 

during the fiw g hers) ia ari 
th. ^ ive "' ear Period, 197,3 



any calendar year 

the total of ^cr;Vi:^' 3 ^- iy33 ~ 1937 - lDears t0 

fr.cturer S ,l/ Jut Bhl P^nta of all manu _ 

Of these quotas sho^^ 3 " 1 ";' 1011 ° f the Nation 
exoort- in ,T 8 " ffrct ^ Philippine 

^sc^ioed\r^ r T Ce V '' ith ruleS and regulations 
prescribed by tne Government of the Philippines. 

The Philippine Government should agree to increase 
its import duties on evaporated milk, canned fish, 
and cotton textiles, as provided in Appendix III. 



Period of Tariff Pref gxej^s_,after_Inde jendence - 



July 4, 1945, through De cember 
a. General provisions 



31. 



1960 



On and after July 4, 1946, the Philippine Govern- 
ment should levy and collect on all United States 
products imported into the Philippines (except 
as specified below under 3) , 25~l of the then 
existing Philippine duties. This rate should be 
increased by 5% on each succeeding January 1 , 
until January 1, 1961, when the full Philippine 
duties should be collected and all preferences 
terminated. 

On and after July 4, 1946, the United States Gov- 
ernment should levy and collect on all Philip- 
pine products imported into the United States 
(except as specified helow under B), 2d,. 



1/ For example, assuming that the 



Quota a £ iven commo6it y 



is fixed at 800 unite 



Manufacturer 



A 

3 

_C 

Total 



shi^ged_to the. 
United St«+-** during 
n q.Ta-1937. 

Units 
200 (1933) 
30C (1935) 
500 (193?) 




Share 
of 
Total 



percent 
20 
30 
50 



Quota 




-5- 



of the t^en PY n <_•+ ^ 
This rate ^oSd ^if States 
succeeding C Vttnl " y 5 ' u ° n each 
when the fuH UniL/q? ! ^ amiar y 1. 1961, 

collected ard aU £ J dllties should be 

■ ana all preferences terminated, 

C&ota provisions 
1. Declining duty-free quotas 

(a) For the period July 4, 1946, through Decern- 

oer 31, 1945, a duty-free quota of 75,000,000 
Cigars should he imposed upon imports of Phil- 
ippine Cigars into the United States. The 
duty-free quota of 150,000,000 cigars imposed 
for the calendar year 1945 should he reduced 
"by 10,000,000 cigars (i.e., 5# of the initial 
ouatn of 200,000,000 cigars) for the calendar 
year 1947 and by the same amount for each 
succeeding calendar year, until 1961. Ship- 
ments in excess of the aforementioned quotas 
should he subject to whatever United States 
duty may be in force at the time. 

(b) For the period July 4, 1946, through Decem- 

ber 31, 1946, a duty-free quota of 1,687,500 
pounds should be imposed upon imports of 
Philippine scrap tobacco, cigar-ends, and 
stripped filler tobacco into the United 
States. The duty-free quota of 3,375,000 
pounds imposed for the calendar year 194o 
should be reduced by 225,000 pounds (i.e., 
5% of the initial quota of 4,500,000 
pounds) for the calendar year 1947, end by 
the sane amount for each succeeding calen- 
dar yetr, until 1961- Shipments in excess 



m 4- Philipoine Government will pass 

1/ It is expected that the p ^^" provide for the 

necessary legislation after ^depend t0 the united 
remission of export taxes C0 - L ^' * ro . vide d such shipments 
States made prior to Jul/ 4, xwto, v ^ there by become 

arrive in the United States af ter tt** ^ absence of such 

subject to United States import J»*iJ;' Unltefl states nould, for 
legislation, Philippic l° Qth philippic export taxes 

a limited period, be suoject ^ 
and United States import duties- 



-6. 



(c) 



wi 3 "t af ° r t mentione(1 T-'Otas should ^ 
ject to r-hatevcr United States duty may be 
xn force at the tine. 

F ! or the period July 4, 1946, through Decem- 
ber 31, 19-±6, a duty-free quota of 75,000 
long tons should be imposed upon imports of 
Philippine coconut oil Into the United 
States, The duty-free quote, of 150,000 
long tons imposed for the calendar year 
1945 should b? reduced by 10,000 tons 
(i.e. , 5$ of the initial quota of 200,000 
tons) for the calendar year 1947 and by the 
sane amount for eo,ch succeeding calendar 
year, until 1961. Shipments in excess of 
quotas should be subject to whatever United 
States duty may be in force at the time. 

(d) For the period July 4, 1946, through Decem- 
ber 31, 1945, a duty-free quota of 318,750^ 
gross should bo imposed upon imports of Phil- 
inoi^e pearl buttons into the United States. 
The duty-free quota, of 637,500 gross im- 
posed for the calendar year 1945 should be 
reduced by 42,500 gross (i.e. , SJ of the 
initial quota of 850,000 gross) for the 
calendar year 1947 and by the same amount 
for each succeeding calendar year until 
1961 " Shipments in excess of quotas should 
be Object to whatever United States duty 
nay be in force at the time. 

■ j t,,i ,r a 1946 through Decern- 
O T *$? f&ylf&V* of U 125, 000, 000 

V r r lull SioSw l>e tap°==d UP"" i^rts of 
cigarettes sljouia d * Philippines. 

anlt ed St. U. «*» ett, .» ^ qM ta 

For the calendar yew should be imposed, 

Df 2 , ioo , ooo, ooo fSf fj^ e f , O oo!ooo 

which quota shoul a ' 000 000 cigarettes, 

cigarettes (5/° of 3. ^ ghi ed t0 
which was tho approbate nu ^ succeeding 
the Philippics Shipments in excess 

calendar y«nr , ^ ° ^ * hatever Phil- 
of qu0 t f ■^fi^eat the time., 
i opine dut, 

, ll)1eot ,, declining tariff preferences 

2 - QU ° taS " " ' 4 t „ riw{ the On— calth 

, n > T he quota imposed ^ f w phil ippine sugar 



Sugar entering under tM a * , 
subject to the 2 • qUOta should be 

provided for .h P S SS1Ve im P ort d ^s 

C f b 0f the q - uota should be subiect tt 

TZV£ teA states 

Cb) The quota imposed during the Commonwealth 

period, after the expiration of the Cordage 
Act, upon imports of Philippine cordage into 
the United States should be continued. Cord- 
age entering under this quota should be sub- 
ject to the progressive import duties provided 
for above under A, 2. Imports in excess of 
the quota should be subject to whatever United 
States duty may be in force at the time. 

Special provisions 

1. In the assessment of progressive import duties, the 
dutiable value of imports into the United States 
of Philippine embroideries made of cloth which if? 
the product of the United States should be the 
dutiable value as provided in the United States 
Tariff Act of 1930, less the value (c.i.f. the 
Philippines) of the cloth embodied in such em- 
broideries . 

2 After th* independence of the Philippines is recog- 
nized by the United States on July 4, 1946, the 
United States excise tax rate applicable to coconut 
oil from whatsoever source derived, should be no 
higher than the rate applicable to palm oil (except 
for use in making tin plate) or to palm kernel oil. 

7 Th* allocation of all quotas recommended in this 
^Lort Should be based on formulae already pro- 
repoit snouia absence of any formulae, 

If tL foUo^ - asiS: the annual quotas should 
T ^ f llt amlng the manufacturers whose products 
be allocated amon, q{ thQ propor _ 

were exported J* £^ * g maxinmra production 

tion which each ' fl ff* a °™f" ( ei ther directly or 
shipped to United States (either ^ 

through others) !, - ^ tQ ^ total 

five-year perioa 1933 l « ■ mamifa cturers.- / 
of such maximum shipment, o. a 



1/ For illustration, 
Period. 



- „ « „nfler C 3-- Commonwealth 
see footnote above under u, 



-8- 



- ho ad ^inistratior of tu* n 

quotas should be effected fS°S??? n ° f ^ 

in accordance with m ^ ? ?hlll PP lne exports, 

V the Government of the S?^^ lation V Mescri * ed 

« oT^jsiyr^^ * y fche &overn - 

4. Products of the Philippines shipped to the United 

abates and manufactured into articles which are 
later exported to the Philippines should be sub- 
ject to a drawback of the United States preferen- 
tial duties paid cn such Philippine products. 

5. Products of the United States shipped to the Phil- 

ippines and manufactured into articles which are 
later exported to the United States should be 
subject to a drawback of the Philippine preferen- 
tial duty paid on such United States products, 
without thereby becoming subject to the then 
existing full United States duties . 

6. The recommendations of the Committee with respect 

to United States-Philippine trade relations after 
independence should be incorporated in a treaty 
to become effective July 4, 1946, and to continue 
in effect through December 31, I960, subject to 
denunciation upon two years' notice at any time 
after July 4, 1953. The negotiation of such a 
treaty should be undertaken as soon as practicaole. 



PIUAITCE 

A. Sggenues and n-rp and itur eg. 

1. During the Commonwealth period ^proceeds of 
any United States exci on , ^ 

coconut ^lfl 0 f eT Z lTo a special fund in 
continue to be cove ec to ^ d 

the Treasury oi the Jni pbilip p ine s, pri- 

over t0 the Treasury ? the adjust- 

marily for the P^^^/^ a position xndepend- 
ment of Philippine ^^f^^d States market: 
ont of f ^Hhe President of the United 
EE22i^' fr ' tV Treasury of the United 
States may direc tne e remit tances 

States to -tnhold or d ghould , in his 

in the event tti«~s 



-9- 



SEW areas f r — 

2. Inasmuch as the proceeds 

f erred to in i-vl tne excise taxes re- 

axtraor Lar, nut^r-P are of « 

Pini-oDinp pi /° r a tem P°rary period, the 

MU ?Tr! ^ 8hould adcpt ^ general 
t?on ■ USlnS these Proceeds in substitu- 

tion for ordinary government revenues. 

3. In connection with the formulation of the long- 

range economic adjustment program suggested in 
Part IV of this report, the Philippine Govern- 
ment should formulate plans for financing its 
adjustment program, the cost of which should 
be budgeted separately from other expenses, 
taking into consideration the need to provide 
funds to carry on the program after the date 
of independence when the extraordinary revenue 
now available and expected to be available only 
during the Commonwealth period shall have ceased. 

4. In ant ici oat ion of the future financial require- 

ments, not only of the Commonwealth Government 
but also of the independent government to be 
inaugurated on July 4, 1946, the Philippine 
Government should revise the existing Philip- 
pine revenue system, with a view to effecting 
a more equitable distribution of the tax burden, 
and in order to meet the increased expenditures 
that may be anticipated as a result of inde- 
pendence . 

B. Bonded indebtedness. 

1 The Philippine Government should continue to set 
l ' TJefrol its General Fund the interest and 

=Ln^ 

cities, and ^"^^^y^f Acts of Congress, 
May 1, 1934, under au hor i; } ( > Qf 

as is already provided Section W 
the Independence . t ^ ^ g (e) of 

of the export ^f^ct should be deposited in a 
the Independence Ac ta ^ rf thfl UnUed 

special account in the t sinking 



-10- 



SSdM^S n* ^.Pf lecture now applicable to the 
hand.ingof sinking funds of the Philippine Gov- 
ernment in the United States, this supplementary 
sinking fund may he used to purchase Philippine 
bonds which were issued prior to May 1, 1934, 
under authority of Acts of Congress. 

2. During the three months preceding July 4, 1946, 

the Philippine Government and the Treasury of the 
United States should confer to ascertain that 
portion of the Philippine bonded indebtedness, 
referred to in the preceding paragraph, which 
would "be outstanding after July 4, 1946; and, 
for that purpose, the Philippine Government 
should turn over to the Treasury of the United 
States, for custody pending ultimate destruction, 
all Philippine bonds issued prior to May 1, 1934, 
under authority of Acts of Congress, that may be 
held (cancelled or uncancelled) in any of its 
sinking funds. After such outstanding portion 
of this indebtednesj is thus determined, and 
before Julv 4, 1946, unless some other arrange- 
ment shall" have been made with the Government 
of the United States in regard to its liquidation, 
there should he set up in the Treasury of the 
United States, in the name of ^™^f^ 
r,-r *>ip P'-p li^pines , from the sihki^S 
p-ov eminent ol tne ra^ix^^ > 

funds mentioned in the preced P^gapn a 
sneclsl trust fund in an amount sufficient 
^Interest paints and to 

Purity (or earlier by ^ Pure has outst ; n 
lns bonds upon reouest gJJ to.- p0 

pendence Act* 

8 . The PWliPP 1 X B fl S2^>" ff^ 
aside from lt \ Gcn ^^ 0V , required by law m 

.inking *** f^g Sects and liabilities of 
aspect of all other £ and 

ie PhilipP ines ' ltj pr 



re 
th 



1/ 48 Stat. 929. 



-11- 



^unicipalities not •■ 

ceding paragraphs * £I n \ ded for ^ n ^ two pre- 



Section 2 (h) ( *\ J^Tt t\ T manner provided in 

Provided Sit 2 C5) ° f the ^dependence Act: 
rovio.e a, Tu a t whenever prior to Julv 4 ipar *« 

become, certain that there will he a surplut "in 

for S ^ '°' X Pr ° CSedS ° VSr the re£ir"d 
inLii^ 1 S that P° rti ^ n of Philippine Wed 
indebtedness provided for in the two preceding 
paragraphs, the Treasury of the United States may, 
upon the request of the Philippine Government, use 
this^ surplus to purchase, for deposit in a special 
sinking fund to he handed over to the independent 
government of the Philippines on July 4, 1946, any 
Philippine bonds that fall within the category 
described in the first sentence of this paragraph, 
aiid. Fr ov ids d further , That any balance that may 
remain in the Treasury of the United States on 
July 4, 1946, from the proceeds of the export 
tares after all actual or estimated claims upon 
these proceeds (as set forth in the two preceding 
paragraphs and in the first proviso of this para- 
graph) have been provided for, should be turned 
over to the Treasury of the independent govern- 
ment of the Philippines to be placed in a sinking 
fund to be used exclusively for the purpose of 
retiring the debts and liabilities referred to in 
this paragraph. 



G. Currency 



During the Commonwealth period, the Philippine 
Government should continue without fundamental 
chlr -e the policy of maintaining the existing 
dollar exchange standard, at the present legal 
ratio of two pesos to the dollar. 

Congress of Juie 1», ^ . ^ 
Ipplne nriW "serves n th rf ^ 

SISS dSriSMe ao-onwesat* period a. 



48 Stat. 1115. 



-12- 



tu5nod Le° h \f hUi PP^ Government, to be 
e^ment lt\ I ■ inde P end «* Philippine Gov- 

" " , ^imecUon with the final settlement 
llss \Jf L«T Phili PP^ bonded indebted- 

lies a_ilu Hnr;ptG^v v>^^^«._^^ , ^ ^ 



StlLr nGtary reserve s held in the United 



Banking 



In^connection with other studies which the Com- 
mittee has recommended should be made concerning 
matters of finance, the Philippine Government 
should undertake a study of the existing' banking 
system of the Philippines. 



ECCITOMIC ADJUSTMENT 



The Philippine Government should adopt a long-range 
economic" adjustment program. This program should be 
formulated by a technical planning organization, 
semi-permanent in nature, non-administrative in 
character, and adequately staffed with competent 
technicians. 

The objectives of the economic adjustment program 
should be not only to offset insofar as PO«i*£ 

The economic acijustnent ^^/^nica^aining, 
projects for the inprove^e mM! ufa=turing, 
transportation faoilit e.., « nue ^ eon _ 

tariff schedules, S»*"° . f natural resources, 
diticne, and the ^ nse fvation ° be observed in 

(The general program, and the Co-it- 

selecting projects ^estiona concern- 

t..-. various r.eo»o«4«t^« aai 86 part JV of m , 
ing certain projects, arc - 
report . ) 

EIGHTS^JiSSSSTS 

. the Philinnines, in both legie- 

E£ S 0-o»on«olth j e»f T : i - c r wh ? c h cities 
curtailing the rights 



-13- 



of the United States enjoyed in th,. p^-t 
and which citizens of the Phi ^ Phll «Pines, 
the United State,! prior to tl^llT ^ ^ ? 
Commonwealth Government 1M * wtiw of the 

B. Arrangements should be made prior to July 4 1<U 6 
tor the adjustment and settlement of the oroperty 
rights of the United States and the Philippines 
referred to in Section 2 (b) (l) of the Independence 
Act . 



C. Arrangements should he made prior to July 4, 1946, 
under which title to such properties as the United 
States may require for its official establishments 
in the Philippines after independence would either 
he retro ceded to the United States without compensa- 
tion, or be acquired by the United States through an 
exchange of properties. 



SITECTUATIOU OP RSC OMMEMDA.TIOHS 



If the Committee's recommendations are accepted, it will be 
necessary for both the United States and the Philippines to 
enact legislation to give effect to certain of the recommenda- 
tions applicable to the Commonwealth period, and to conclude a 

» . , Ho « to -ive effect to certain other recommenda- 

treaty or treaties to b 1VL L - 1 

7 nprind be^innin? July 4, 1946. 

tions applicable to the independence perxod begi 

,. tp a treaty or treaties for the 
In addition to the need to negotiate a treaty 

Actios 2 (a) and (b) of the Independ- 
af ore mentioned yjurpose, bectxoi- 

v,^ _v, srf . to be embodied 
of provisions which arc io 
ence Act specifies a numoer ol pro/ 



in a treaty. There are, rarecvor n „.,„i 

01 ' a nuribor of ether matters for 

,nich provision should he m de by treaty. The great my of 
ejects to bo dealt with ,**os it appear advisable to conclude 

a series of treaties covering seusrito 0 „v. ■ /_ 

' s separate suojects. (Sgo Appendix IX.) 

The Committee recommends, therefore, that negotiations with 
a view to concluding the necessary treaty or treaties be entered 
into with the Commonwealth Government prior to July k, 19U6, on 
the understanding that the exchange cf ratifications shall take 
place, and the treaties becoi.ie effective, on the day of the 
inauguration of the independent government. The Committee fur- 
ther recommends that the treaty er.ho dying its recommendations 
concerning trade relations during the period beginning July H, 
19^6, and ending with December 31 , i960, should be negotiated 
at the earliest practicable date, in order that the future 
trade relationship between the two countries may be definitely 
determined well in advance of independence. Such action would 
tend to ensure an orderly transition and a better opportunity 
for the adjustment of the Philippine national economy. 



J - V. A, IviacHurray, 
Chairman 



J* E Jacobs 



Jose Yulo 



Louis Doner at sky 



Joaquin Iff. Eli z aide 



Ben Dcrfnan 



Quint in Paredes 



B.C. McDonald 



Benito Razon 



Carl B- Rabbins 



Jos 6 E. Romero 



Frank A, Waring 



Laamiol Rozas 



ington, D- 0.. ^ 



. V* A. MacMnrray, 
Chairman 



Jose Yulo 



J. 3. Jacobs 



Joaquin U, Elizalde 



L oui s Do mer at z k 



Quintin Paredes 



Ben Dorfman 



"Benito Razon 



D, C. McDonald 



Jose E, Romero 



Carl 3. Bobbins 



Manuel Roxas 



Frank A, Waring 



r r Uf w 20, 1938 
Washington, D. C. , » y 



[Pdblic-- ITo. 127—734 Confess] 
[E.E. S573] 

ACT 



To provide for the complete independence of the Philippine Inlands, to 
provide for the adoption of a constitution and a form of govern- 
ment for the Philippine Islands, and for other purposes. 

3e it enacted lay the Senate and House of Representatives of th e 
United States of Americ a in Confess assembled , 

CONVERT IOi'1 $0 EFJUE CGKSE IS 1039 FOR PHILIPPICS ISLANDS 

SSCIiOSf 1. The Philippine Legislature is heresy authorized to 
provide for the election of delegates to a constitutional convention, 
^hich shall r,eet in the hall of the ho use of representatives m tne 
capital of the Philippine Islands, at so.cn t me as tne , .^f^f *. e 
legislature fix, out not later than October 1 19^, t ^.ulate 
and draft a constitution for ^^^f^^^^nB 
the Philippine Islands, sublet to *he condi o J Qyer all th> 

prescribed in this Act, which snail exorc _-e jur concluded 
territory ceded to ^nited ^^^^^° 0 ^ece^ 1898, 
between the United States and in Article III of said treaty, 
the boundaries of which are set ±0 ™ the treaty between Spain and 
together with those islands cmb raceo ^ ^ q£ lfcVGmloer 
the United States included, at , a sning ^ ^ necescary 

1900. The Philippine Leg 1 slat ore snai 
expenses of such convention. 

p^.c-m-rpmnoi^^iAi^TOHY PROVISIONS 
CHARACTER Oi 1 C0j.hSi a j.U1 iuh 

Ta + pri and drafted shall be 
SEC. 2. (a) The constitution ^r^^ and shall, either 
republican in form, shall conta in * thereto, contain provi- 

a 3 \ part thereof or xn an «*t*f£/S?nal and complete vnthdrav^l of 
sions to the effect that, P***?* £ 0VBr the Philippine Islands- 

t , * - ^ * : mralne Island s s»all W e 

(1) All citizens ox t,.e - - 

to the United States. of the 

. £ t" 1 e Co7ii!!iOnv/oaitn 01 

Eulippine Islands shall, beio ■ f of fioe, aoolarin,. 6 
■Mies" take and wb.*"" !^°a 00 epts the Buprame »f ^«ty o 
things, that he reoognl*" f * ^Lce to tte United 
WU1 naintain true - • , 

(3) Absolute toleration ° -^ atlon « «M»* 

and no inhabitant or relig^o^ 



person or property on account of religious belief or mode of TOhip. 

(h) Property owned by the United States, cemeteries, churches, 
and parsonages or convents appurtenant thereto, and all lands, -build- 
ings, and improvements used exclusively for religious, charitable, or 
educational purposes shall be exempt from taxation. 

(5) Trade relations between the Philippine Islands and the 
United States shall be upon the basis prescribed in section 6. 

(6) The public debt of the Philippine Islands and its sob ordinate 
branches shall not exceed limits now or hcroafter fixed by the Congress 
of the United States; and no loans snail be contracted in foreign 
countries without the approval of the President of the United States. 

(7) The debts, liabilities, and obligations of the present 
philipine government, its Provinces, municipalities, and instrumen- 
talities, valid and subsisting at the time of the adoption of the 
constitution, shall be assumed and paid by the new government. 

t&i Provision shall be made for the establishment and mairite- 
{b) revision -^vh- „ c hr,ois -primarily conducted in 

nance of an adequate system of publxc sc£©q.ls, f 

the English language. 

( 9 ) Act b affeot.ng ^^^^TSi?- 
iaaigration shall not become lav; until appro ma j 

the United States. 

„ . -u e vm-iBr the direct supervision and 

(10) Foreign affairs shall be un \si 
control of the United States. 

. 0 f the Commonwealth of 

(11) All acts passed by ^ * ^ Congress of the United 
the Philippine Islands shall bo icp.r 

States. 

i-cr* theri'ht of the United 

(12) The Philippine ^f^^^gic use's, to maintain mU itary 
Stat s to expropriate P^P^ty x°r pihl philW e S , and , JJ» 
and other reservations and ^f*^ service of such armed forces 
order of the President, oo call ^ i p bi iippine government. 

all military forces organized &3 the - 

- -• of the Commonwealth of wio 

(1 3 ) The decisions of ^ff^leview by the Supremo Court of 
ShiUppine islands ^^f^rugraph (6) of action 7 . 

the United States as provi . . - . ^odamation, exer- 

(lh) The United States may W *££ feflB of the ffjj^ * 
cise'the right to inter islands and for too 
the Commonwealth of ^ constitution .^ffj^ ? be dis- 

tho government as provider in W in , Uv , dual liberty and for 
protection of life, ^?f^tions under and in accordance 
charge of government °Y*; g 
provisions of the constitute- . 



-3- 



(1 5 ) The authority of the United States High Coiumissioner to the 
government of the Comnonwealtfc of the Philippine Islands, as provided 
in this Act, shall lie recognized. 

(16) Citizens and corporations of the United States shall enjoy 
:a the Couurionwealth ox the ?hilipp\ue Islands all the civil rights of 
the citizens and corporations, respectively, thereof. 

(h) The constitution shall also contain the following provisions, 
effective as of the date of the proclamation of the President r ecog- 
nizing the independence of the Philippine Islands, as hereinafter 
provided: 

(1) That the property rights of the United States and the 
Philippine Islands shall he promptly adjusted and settled, and that 
all existing property rights of citizens or corporations of the United 
States shall he aciaiowl edged, respected, and safeguarded to the same 
extent as property rights of citizens of the Philippine Islands. 

(Z) ' That the officials elected and serving under the constitu- 
tion adopted pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall g*?^ 
lional officers of the free and independent fluent of the Philip- 
pine islands and qualified to function ^ f^^^^lf 
directly under suon government , ana snail o^ivu 
office as prescribed in the constitution. 

^.-f ¥M& Phi li'omne Islands, 

ch 
e 

shall be valid and subsisting ax, ^ted* States, shall he assumed 
withdrawal of the sovereign^ oi %liQ Plli iip p ine islands; 

by the free and independent gJWJ» p Verity of an Act of 

and that where honds have be ex, ilippine Islands, or any 

Congress of the United States by J" t £j Philippine government 

Province, city, or municipality wwr flinds for the payment 

will make adeojoate provision ior ™ ol5liga tio»s shall he a first lien 
of interest and principal , *J U ^ islands, 

on the taxes collected in the PhUxppx 

c fnp Pl ilioT»ine Islands, on becoming 
(h) T hat the government ox K» ^ - - all con t inning obliga- 
xndependent of the United ff^J^ the treaty of peace with 
tions assumed by the United Sta-es « ^ e United statG3 , 
Spain ceding said Philip 6 

o v-e rover imcnt oi t*a>® 
( 5 ) „»* by v,ay of ^^iSneVovisions (except 
Fhilwpi.no Islands will f*°tth. toe United States. 
para^apH (2)) in a treaty wito - 

™- T0 THE HSS-B^ OF THS tUfflB 
SUEilSSIOH OF COM*"" - 10 OB 

^oval of the constitution * 
GEO. 3 . *on the <*^ n ^TiHppine Isiands, the 
the constitutional convention 




constitution shall "be submitted within t. 

0 f this Act to the President of the^iT-i tn* ITl* after tlle ena ctment 
,*«htt or not it conforms with the tov ^ionf nf'^° ff 1 d ! ter ^ 
president finds that the propoDoC con-tT^J- ! 5 Act * If the 

J* the provisions of thL ^he s fl To'cLufv^ f? S ^ Ua1 ^ 
General of the Philippine Islands, who shall so 2i~ 
Snal convention. If the Preeicent' f in f that S 1 I t T 1 

j> i 4** , j-JUii.LS TjilclL HiiS C OHSt i tilt LO n does 

M t conform wife the provisions of this Act he shall so a^vUe the 
Governor General of the Philippine islands, stating wherein in his 
judgment the constitution does not so conform and submitting provisions 
which will m his judgment make the constitution so conform. The 
Governor General shall in turn submit such message to the constitu- 
tional convention for further action by them pursuant to the same 
procedure hereinbefore defined, until the President and. the constitu- 
tional convention are in agreement. 



SUBMISSION OP CONSTITUTION TO FILIPINO PEOPLE 

SEC. H. After the President of the United States has certified 
that the constitution conforms with the provisions of this Act, it shall 
te submitted to the people ox the Philippine Islands for their ratifica- 
tion or rejection at an election to he held within four months after 
the date of such certification, on a date to he fixed by the Bailip- 
pine Legislature, at which election the qualified voters of the 
Philippine Islands shall have an opportunity to vote directly for or 
against the wenosed constitution and ordinances appended thereto. 
Sch election shall he held in such manner as may be; pr ascribed by 
the Philippine Legislature, to which the return ^^t tl t^ 
Varna*. P ?he Philippine ^^l^^^S^t^£i^ 
canvassing of the return and shall ^^^H statement of the 
General of the Philippine eland n r «J* tf 

votes cast, and a copy of °°?f £™ the constitution, sudi vote 

majority of the votes cast snail the 'neonle of the 

shall be deemed an ex Pr essl °V^?^oine independence, and the 
Philippine Islands in iavor oi ^^ Aa ys after receipt of U» 
Governor General shall, w:.tlun_ z "^£ ^ture, issue a proclamation 
certification from the Philippic® ^ 5«vnr-^«t of the Commonwealth 
for the election of officers of the go eg > ^ ox:S Citation. The 
Of the Philippine Islands provide a±o r : ,,, ritlas n0 r later than 

election shall take place BO* J« ^ Governor General ordering 
six months after tne proclamation by - fficer3 pro vided for under 
such election. When the ^ e ^ 1 ^,°^ resu lts determined, the Gov- 
the constitution has "been ^f/^ncLs shall certify the results of 
ernor General of the W^^J^ united States, who sha 11 there- 
the election to the President o, u ^ of th0 election, 
npon issue a proclamation g — Ration hy ^"^g^ 
and upon the issuance of suca j terminate and tne new go*- 

existLg Philippine government powers , and duties a .pro 

shall enter upon its ngnto, priv t government of the ^ ^ 

vided under the constitution. J^pr ^ ^ fwlctl0 n B 

Islands shall provide for ^ 



roverifflient . 



If a majority of the votes cast are p,^,^ «, 
m existing government ox the Philippine sLS^^ ™> 

out regard to the provisions of this Act. ncU Sila11 contmue with- 



MSFER OF PROPERTY J3D) EIGHTS TO PHILIPPIC COl#«MEH 

SSC 5. All the property and rights which cay have been acquired 
in the Philippine Islands by the United States -under the treaties 
mentioned in the first section of this Act, except such land or other 
property as has heretofore been designated by the President of the 
United States for Military and other reservations of the Government 
of the United States, and except such land or other property or rights 
or interests therein as may have been sold or otherwise disposed of 
in accordance with lav/, are hereby granted to the government of the 
CoEmonwealth of the Philippine Islands when constituted. 



iTOEIQNS WITH TEfi TjTJITED STATES ESEDIliG CO.-iPLiTS XlJDEPEKBEiJCS 

SEC. 6. After the date of the inauguration of the government of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands tr^de relations between 
the United States and the Philippine Islands shall be as now provided 
\>y law, subject to the following exceptions: 

(a) There shall be levied, collected, and paid on all refined 
sugars in excess of fifty thousand long tons, and on unrefined sugars 
in excess of eight hundred thousand long tons, coming into the United 
States from the Philippine Islands in any calendar ^»J*M?£ 
rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United States bo 
te levied, collected, and paid upon like articles unposted ±ror. 
for e ign c ountr 1 e s . 

Cb) There shall be levied, 
oil coming into the United States from the t foe same 

calendar year in excess of two hundr £ £ g£ % ni%e i states to 

rates of duty which are required by Xi-e * imported frcm 

te levied, collected, and paid upon li3» ai WU. 
to reign countries* 

f anc 1 paid on all yaxn, 

(c) There shall be levied, collectea^ j ^ tarredi wholly or 
twine, cord, cordage, rope and cable, w fiber£ , coming into 
in chief value of rnanila (abaca) °r ot ^r calendar year 
the United States from the Pl^PP^ 2l5a» pounds of all such 
excess of a collective total of three of duty w hi* are 
articles hereinbefore enumerated, %» «* tQ ^ levie d, collected, 
required by the laws of the Uniteo foreiga countries, 
and paid upon liice articles W r 

(d) in the event that in any year the 1,- 



in 

G 



-6- 



^ticle which may be exported to the iTnitAA 

preached by the Philippic Islanda °* ^ ^ates free of duty shall 
articles produced or rnanuf acturea in***« ? ■ or of such 

after that may be go exported to the IT^i tn^i^ in V Blind * 



facim-uib ^ huj.cs proper txonatelv on th« i,n r ™ 

Ration to the United Stat!, in tio ^ c pfttv-t 

in the case of unreimed su^ar V~o 1™™^ + ^ * 1 ^copt tn^t 
Anally to the United statis t SU Sf J°Jft "Eft* * 

„oduciBg .Hi, of the u^^^^^srt:^ 

tlioir average annual production for the calendar years l<m IqtP 
and 1933, and the amount of sugar from each mill which may be s o ' 
exported shall be allocated in each year between the mill and the 
planters on the basic of the proportion of sugar to which the mill 
and the planters are respectively entitled. The government of the 
Philippine Islands is authorized to adopt the necessary laws and 
regulations for putting into effect the allocation hereinbefore pro- 
vided. 



(e) The government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine 
Islands shall impose and collect an export tax on all articles that 
nay "be exported to the United States from the Philippine Islands free 
of duty under the provisions of existing law as modified by the 
foregoing provisions of this section, including the articles enumerated 
in sub divi s i 0 ns ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) , w i thi n t no lirai tat ion s there in 
specified, as follows: 

(1) Boring the sixth year after the inauguration of the 
new government the expert tax shall be 5 per centum oftne rates 
of duty which are required by the laws of the f , l ^J*f^ 
he levied, collected, and paid on like articles imported irom 

foreign countries; 

.*Fh vpnr /if tor the inauguration of tlie 

(2) During the seventh year after ^ ^ ^ 

new government the ezport t» shall he 10 & ^ 

of duty which are required V tie ^ ported from 

he levied, collected, and paid on 
foreign countries; 

■ * V( -^r after the inauguration of the 
(3) During the 15 per centum of the 

new government the export sax wj &f ^ rjnxted 

rates of duty which are re f i& on Utee articles in- 
states to be levied, collected, ana P 
ported from foreign countries, 

„ n „ r the inauguration of tne 
(U) During the ninth year ^ tor ^ ?q ^ of the 
new government the export tea: jnax ^ of ^ v ted 

rates of duty which are r a * id on like articles 
States to be levied, colla ^' 
imported from foreign countries, 



-7- 



(5) After the expiration of the ninth year after the 

s^-^'ws; iter F 4V* 

^ of the United state, t f b^lvleef oE^SkW 
on like articles imported from foreign countries. 

The government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands 
shall place all funds received from such export taxes in a slaking 
fund, and such funds shall, in addition to other moneys available for 
that purpose, be applied solely to the payment of the principal and 
interest on the bonded indebtedness of the Philippine Islands, its 
provinces, municipalities, and instrumentalities, until such in- 
debtedness has been fully discharged. 

When used in this section in a geographical sense, the term 
''United States" includes all Territories and possessions of the 
United States, except the Philippine Islands, the Virgin Islands, 
American Samoa, and the island of Guam. 

SEC, 7. Until the final and complete withdrawal of American 
sovereignty over the Philippine Islands — 

(1) Every duly adopted amendment to the constitution of the 
government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall be 
spitted to the President of the United States for approval. If 
the President approves the amendment or if the Pr esid ™* t o 
disapprove such amendment within six months from the „ime of its 
Emission, the amendment shall take effect as a par, of sue. con 
stitution, 

> ±„a nfnt „„ qjinii have authority to 

(2) The President o* «- t ^%t*£on ^ l- ( contract, 
suspend the taking effect of or w op ooamoftwealth of the 

or executive order of the f^^J^Jl^e suit in a failure 
Philippine Islands, wmcn in 01 s Philippine Islands to 

of the government of the Cormnonweai^i * indebtedness and inter- 
fulfill its contracts, or to meet JWJ" funds, or which soems likely 
est thereon or to provide for 1 s * f tJie currency of the 

to impair the reserves for the P^ e ^° nt will violate inter - 
PMlippine Islands, °V^i£ted s ^ f s< 

national obligations of the United _^ 

( 3) The Chief Executive of ^"^gSfirt Z Oo»*X «* 
islands shall make an annual ropor* *JxT potions of the government 
the United States of the Is iauds and shall make such 

of the Commonwealth of I: Cori ^ess way request. 

<U> », President ^Sf^^Go-iBBloner to* aovern- 

~» V«. Senate, * SS*fl»-?*Sf j5V£5£*« 

»<mt of the OomoOTealtU ofj ^ t alld B»*^»»$ft state s 

office at the pleas-are at ^AgXl be Unovro as tlio unitou 
appointed and qualif led - 



~8~ 



jjgb Commissioner to the Phili^ pino to-lA* tr , 
representative of the President of H ? shaU ^ e the 

pine islands and shall be recognized L ™2 h V ? tRS in the plllL ^P- 
the Commonwealth of the Philippine 1*1™^ v Sovermnent of 

officers of the military force! of the S?!.? 7 .?! *»"M^ 
civil officials of the United States in %1 n and by a11 

He shall have access to all records of tSf J^ llEpi ? e Islands ' 
ivision thereof, and shall oe ^lS^r*2T STJ ? ^ 
tne Commonwealth of the PMlippSe iSE^JSh 2^5""*^ ° f 
he shall request. " isianas Wlta SUCl1 i^mkoa as 

If the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islaids 
fails to pay any of its bonded or other indebtedness or the interest 
thereon when due or to fulfill any of its contracts, the United 
States High Commissioner shall immediately report the facts to the 
President, who may thereupon direct the High Commissioner to tate 
over the customs offices and administration of the same, administer 
the sane, and apply such part of the revenue received therefrom as nay 
be necessary for the payment of such overdue indebtedness or far the 
fulfillment of such contracts. The United Status High Commissioner 
shall annually, and at such other times as the president may require, 
render an official report to the President and Congress of the United 
States. He shall perform such additional duties and functions as nay 
be delegated to him from time to tine by the President -under the pro- 
visions of this Act. 

The United States High Commissioner shall receive the same 
compensation as is now received by the Governor General of the 
Philippine Islands, and shall have such staff and assistants as the 
President may deem advisable and as may be appropriated for by Con- 
gress, including a financial expert, who shall receive for subrus si on 
to the High Commissioner a duplicate copy of the reports of the 
insular auditor. Appeals from decisions of the ^^^^^ 
be taken to the Presi dent of the United States. Tne a ---^ 
expenses of the high Commissioner and no 
be paid by the United States. 

~r- i asioner aooointed under this 

The first United States High Connisfioner app rnrient 

Act shall take office upon the tne S ° 

of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Island.. 

4. * f*, R ro-monwealth of the Philippine 
(5) The government of the Oomw Eesicle nt Commissioner 

Islands shall provide for the selection o ^ offioe> He sn ail 
to the United States, and shall zix nis * tiie CorXl0 nwealth of the 
the representative of the S° ver ^ e "]\ offici al recognition as 
Philippine Islands and shall be eatxtieo. resident of ore- 

such by all departments upon Presentation ment . He shall 

toials signel by the <*f*%^ t ?„l of the United States, 
have a seat in the House of Bepresen* Qf voting . His 

Iththe right of debate, but ™l % y the government of 

flary and expenses shall be f«ea a jAg**^ ssi oner is 
*»» Philippine Islands. Until a Resice. 



-9- 

*fl nu^lif iei TOCter thin section, evi .ti^ i_ 
continue IB eiieci, . 

(6) Beview/by the Supreme Court of the United states of cases 
& ob the Philippine Islands shall he as now provided by law; and 
such review shall also extend to all cases involving the constitution 
0 f the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands. 

SEC, S, (a) Effective upon the acceptance of this Act "by concur- 
rent resolution of the Philippine Legislature or by a convention 
called for that purpose, as provided in section 17 — 

(1) For the purposes of the Immigration Act of 1917* the Immi- 
gration Act of 192-1- (except section 13 (c)), this section, and all 
other laws of the United states relating to the immigration, g elu- 
sion or expulsion of aliens, citizens of the Philippine Islands 
who" ere not" citizens of the United States shall be considered as if 
they were aliens. For such pur poses the Philippine Islands shall be 
considered as a separate country and shall have for each fiscal year 
a ouota of fifty. This paragraph shall not apply to a person coxing 
b F seeking to come to the Territory of Hawaii who does not apply 101 and 
secure an immigration or passport visa, but such i^gration 11 
te determined by the Department of the Interior on tno basis of .he 
needs of industries in the Territory 01 Hawaii. 

(2 ) Citizens of the ^lipP*- ^^J£^$2Z * 
He United States shall not be au.ni ^cu to Territory 
States from the Territory ox ^ (vhetne. "J™^,, ^ 
before or after the effective date b ^tion 3 of the 

belong to a class declared to be nonim i_ ^ ^ nonquota irami- 

toigration Act of ±9^ or to a \ f Gucb Act other than sub- 

grants under the provisions 01 r ^ c ^° admitted to such Territory 




. pre . 

such excepted classes. 

r be assigned to 
(3) toy Foreign Service officer may ^ ar officer , for 

*1±SJ islands, under a such regulations a. the 

such period as nay bo necessary a which assignment such 
Secretary of State W presc^e ^ - ^ a foreign country, ^t 
officer shall be considered as s*a ^ performance ox 

tie powers and duties ^V^a^oW services, whxen such 
of the official acts and notarial anc rf ^ agi^trat ^ 

officer might properly P erf ^ o ^ t0 a foreign country ae a 
the immigration laps if aGSl ^ the Secretary of State, 
officer, as may bo .authorized / Im nigration 

1 e of sections IS atoll be considered 

(U) For the ^ej of ine islands shall 

Act of 1917, as amoved,, 
to te a foreign country. 



-10- 



(b) The provisions of this section are in ^aa*+* * ^ 

^provisions of this section. Art alien, although admissible under 
the provisions o± this section, shall not be admitted to the United 
States if lie is excluded hy any provision of the immigration laws 
other than this section, and an alien, although admissible under the 
provisions of the immigration laws other than this section, shall 
not be admitted to the United States if he is excluded "by any provi- 
sion of this section. 

(c) Terns defined in the Immigration Act of I92U shall, whan 
used in this section, have the meaning a s signed to such terms in that 
Act, 

SEC. 9. There shall he no oh ligation on the part of the United 
States to neet the interest or principal of "bonds and other obliga- 
tions of the government of the Philippine Islands or of the Provincial 
and municipal governments thereof, hereafter issued during the oon- 
ti'ruance of United States sovereignty in the Philippine Islands: 
Provided, That such bonds and obligations hereafter issued atoll not 
from taxation in the United States or by authority of tto 

United States. 

AMERICAN SOVEREIGN** 

n-p Tulv immediately following the 
SEC. 10. (a) On f*J^%£ the date of the ins- 

piration of a period ox ten - titlltion provided for m 

tion of the new governr: ^ates shall by proclamation 
this Act the President of the uuiuea . supervision, jnns- 

withdraw and surrender all right oip lstlng and exercised fcy tne 
diction, control, or sovereignty then mi- *s Qf the p^i^ine 
United States in and over the tB ^f^^ e lervations of the Govern- 
Islands, including all military ^--; s (except such naval 
eent of the United States m tne philipp d ^ der section 5 ) , 

reservations and fueling stations a. jr rec0£ nize the independence 
and, on behalf of the United S^ £ ^ sGlf ^ over ning n-xon 
of the Philippine Islands as a separ the same of ™ 

andacWleage the authority ana <^ eof ^aer the constitution 
government instituted by the people t. 

then in force. authorized and 

(h) The President 
powered to enter into tW o years aft f ^ P for the 

Philippine Islands, not later Philippine Is lanos , erva - 

recognling the independence £ ^ UonS relating to ~£ 
adjustment and settlement of /^ e Vited States to W r ^ 
lions and fueling stations of J£ ^ and Ge ttlement the oa 
Islands, and pending ouch adjus . 



-11- 



awal reservations and fueling stations shall renain it 
Status. remain m its present 



HEUTRAL I ZAT 1 OK OP PHILIPPIC ISLANDS 

SSC. 11. The President is requested, at tlie earliest practicable 
^te, to en.er into negotiations with foreign powers with a view to 
the conclusion of a treaty f or the perpetual neutralization of the 
Philippine Islands, if and when Philippine independence shall have 
teen achieved. 

iJOTIFIGATIOH TO P02EIGSI GOVEEHMSUffiS 

SEC. 12, Upon the pi-oclamation and recognition of the independ- 
ence of the Philippine Islands, the President shall notify the govern- 
ments with which the United States is in diplomatic correspondence 
thereof and invite said governments to recognize the independence 
of the Philippine Islands. 

TARIPF DUTIES AFTER IrlDEPSFDSIICE 

SEC. 13. .After the Philippine Islands have become a free and 
independent nation there shall be levied, collected and paid upon 
all articles coming into the United States from the 
the rates of duty which are required to be levied, ^^. and 
paid upon like articles imported from ^^^^^f^^g Ac t 
Provided, That at least one year prior to *^ held 
r^Tlndependence of ^^nm^fS theinited States 

a conference of representatives oi w ? > iilip p in e islands, such 
and the government of the Commonwealth o± Uni ted States 

representatives to be appointed oy «i« * - Philippine Islands, 

a/d the Chief Executive of the ^°^^^J^tf^ as to 
respectively, for the purpose °* * ormu ^ ^ gtates 

future trade relations between ^J© Jf° pMlinnime glands, the time ' 
and the independent government of ^ f to be determined by the 
place, and maimer of holding such co.a - this proviso sh all 
President of the United States; but noting isioil 0 f this 

¥ construed to modify or ^f^^L to Philippine 1***^°^ 
Act relating to the procedure leading up ^ ^ indep endent. 

or the date upon which the JflW-UfiP"* 

SEC. 1U. Up on the final and ^tJ^S^^^^ 
sovereignty ove/the Ifc^f^. "'rson \^o U 
United states (including all f ^ apply to par ^ q£ 
Persons ineligible to oit«cA^P ^ ^ eztG;xt as m the 
torn in the philippic Island 
other foreign countries. 



main acABoaB ao^i^ 



15. E:;cept as in fcM s 1 *. •• 
or hereafter in force i n the pV^f • herwise provided th** i*» 
force in the Commonwealth of It K Jf T? 8 ^ cint^Tn ^ 
amended, or repealed by the Logiola\^n P ^ +n lands ^ lti:L altered, 
Philippine Islands or by the CoaXrtsTof fi, » of £ e 

references in such laws to the goverment ^ 5-®* Stat ° s » and a ^ 
Philippines or Philippine Island- XziT-t of ^cials of the 
applicable, to refer to the gover^t anl °° nst ™ d . insofar as 
respectively of the CoHoon^ealth ^ ?L St-n rr ° Spondill S officials 
government of the Commonwealth of the PhfiTi ? P1Il r n Iclands - ®» 
toed successor to the present go ver^t of ?L 5 SMU ' be 

and of all the rights and ohl^at" ^""A t K^PPine Islands 
provided in this let, all Sws^ Sts 08 otose 

present government of the Phlli^inf *i 5 1 i° WB 1 r ?i atille to tllG 
are hereby repealed as of the 'ate of SfS LS? ^J^ation 
cent of the cLnonwealth of ^^p^EK? 10 * ° f *" SW °^ 

SEC. 16. if any provision of this Act is declared unconstitu- 
tional or the applicability thereof to any person or cir cur. stance 
is neld invalid, the validity of tho remainder of the Act and tfcs 
applicability of such provisions to other persons and circumstances 
shall not be affected thereby. 



EFFECTIVE 

SEC, 17, Tlae foregoing provisions of this Act shall not take 
effect until accepted by concurrent resolution of the Philippine 
legislature or by a convention called for the purpose of passing 
upon that question as uay be provided by tho Philippine Legislature, 



Approved, March 2h, 193k. 



APPENDIX li 



DEPARTMENT CP GTAj 



FOR THE PRESS 



MAY E>U, 1937 



The following is the text of a letter from Ur. p^cis B Sayre 
Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee M fejiippine Affairs 
to Senator Tydmgs, Chairman of the Senate 'Committee " on Terri- 
tories and Insular Affaire,. A similar letter y&jfe sent to 
Leo Kocialhowski, Chairman of the House Coirmittec on Insular 
Affairs-. 



"Washington, D. C. 
May 2k, 1937. 

"The Honorable 

Millard E. Tydin.gs, 

United States Senate. 

My dear Senator Tidings: 

*As oromised in the conversation which the Secretary of War 
and I had" with you on February 23, 1S37, with regard to the an- 
Droaching visit of President Quezon of the Philippine Common- 
wealth and the expected discussions between him and tnc Inter- 
departmental Co.Wittec on PnUinhnc affairs, I now :viGfl -o 
acquaint you and the other members of the Sena ta Conmx e on 
Territories and Insular Affair, With f*££f **°Zl that it is 
of the discussions which ensuea. ^^'^ X od up to 
desirable to review son- 01 CXi - u -" 

these discussions ♦ 

t w a ^^ipr^e Act, ^ot>rovod on 
-The Sydin^-McDuffie J^P e ^ e ttfwhich control and 
March 2 U, 3.93U, provides ^ ^^n ^.^- fa cxists between 

-mide, until July 4, 19^6 ^^^the Commonwealth Govern- 
the Government of the United sta "" mber 15, 1935. This Act 
ment 01 the Philippines set uu oh -^til provisions 

did not become effective, as you ^ ^ , q p^i^pine Le -res- 

wore accented by conc^rent resolution ^ fttft ^ ^at, 

lature on May 1, 193^ ^ ^JjJ^ Ihe Legislature relied 
in accenting the Tydings-UcDu^ie Act , ^ to the 

unon a statement of President of furt her hearing 



Tilipino people reasonable pssuran.e. 



and due consideration of their views 1 . 1 



• The statement of President Roosevelt referred to Was that 
contained m his message to Congress on March p, 19.4 ITcoZT 
mending the enactment of the Tydings-McDoff ie Act, as* follows: 

'I do not believe that other provisions of the 
original law need he chared at this time. Where 
imperfections or inequalities exist, I am confident 
thr.t they can be corrected after proper hearing and 
in fairness to "both peoples. ,2 

"Provisions in the earlier Hare-Hares- Cut ti r.g Act to which 
the Fhilipoine Legislature tool: exception, in rejecting that Act, 
and which they hoped to have corrected in the Tydings-McDuff ie 
Act, related 'to inimigrat ion, military, and otlur reservations, 
p o'.".'C r s of the hi gL c onrni s s i o no r , and t re.de relations between the 
islands and the United States. '3 

"With regard to the Tydings-McDuf f ie Act, the Honorable 
Manuel L. Quezon, then President of the Philippine Senate and 
Chairman of the Philippine lndeperder.ee Delegation, in a letter 
to you, dated March 22, 1934, two d?.ys before the passage of 
the Act, stated as follows: 

'T*e**e are, of course, other provisions of the 
till zo which we object, but we are billing to take 
it as it is now, and V/e have given up any attempt at 
this time to have it in any way -ended b— - 
are relying upon the statement made by thePre si den 
in his message to Congress, ua-ca 1,^ 

„ fa ^-se seen the attitude of the 
'Furthermore, we ha*e seen ™ d the 

- • >,„+>. rnmnittees 01 Congre.^ i,u^^ 

cnairmen ox both com.. 11^ d ,., e }iave 

Filipino people's ireeaom an^ ; cl they 

no doubt that -J-VTiXSnc^can to panted 
shall have found that indepencun ^ wovisions of 
in a much shorter time ana ^ re commend to 

the bill need improvement, .he, nil 
the Congress. 



r4 



" ori ^pssion, page %» 

\,™ 7hth Congress, 2<3 5essJ- 
h House Document No. MOO, „«^ e sS, 2d Session. 

2. House Document Ho. 27?. ^^p^lQ. 74th Congress- 
3- Seriate Document No. 57* * p ' 1 g 

1st Session. „ _ ^72 March 22, 193 i 

K Congressional Record, Volume 7*. " 

pare 523 7* 



64. 



-3- 



"Moreover, Vice President John K Carrie ^ v, ■ 

the Joint Session, of the Phili^W llT^l * at 

q 35 (three days before the J ^ ^ T Novem ^ r l2 - 

i\ 1 i j . -ii^^gTiraLion of the Commonweal t>i 

Covenant . Wad « re fi ard to - totalities in STSfrrt*. 

'Our great President, Franklin P. Roosevelt, in sending 
the last independence hill to Congress, accompanied it 
with a recommendation that where there were inequalities 
in our trp.de relations, they should he adjusted "by a Com- 
mission representing hot! peoples who could- arrive at an 
equitable decision which would prove advantageous to our 
120,000,000 people and to your lU, 000, 000 people. '5 

"The statements quoted evidence a feeling on the part of 
responsible persons in both countries that certain ' imperfections 
or ine qual ities ' may be f ound , up o n fur the r s tudy , to exist in 
the Independence Act. These so-called imperfections or inequal- 
ities in regard to future relationships have been regarded as 
"being susceptible of adjustment through joint study and con- 
ference. 

"Contemporane ously with the recogv.it ion that imperfections 
and inequalities might exist in the Independence Act, an Inter- 
departmental Committee on Philippine Affairs vras sot up in 
December, 193^. Acting upon a suggestion made by you and 
Senators McKellar, UcAdoo and Gibson in a Joint telegram ,0 
President Eoosevelt, this Committee be-an in Janua ^J^^ 
study of United State e-Philippine trade ^^^^^V 
time, this Interdepartmental Commit.ee has been /Jud/xa ; ; b P 
nine problems and coordinating ISSee 
administrative departments and age^f ies ux reC ont 
Government concerned «i V^i^^delSrations of the 
discussions with president Quezon, attende( j by represents- 
Interdepartmental Committee have oe . _ jyeasnry, Agri- 
tives of the Departments or State > — ^/^ lt ia the opinion 
culture, Commerce, and the iai i ; t Q, ie20 n, that, in 

of this Committee, as well as 01 Presia * * . ineS) uncertainties 
justice to the United States and to t finical and economic 

and misconceptions in regard co t .10 1 ^ ror ,. 0 vod as soon as 

relations between the two c ^*f^nties are removed, necessary 
practicable. Until these ^ e ^ andg wi n be delayed, 
economic adjustments in the s 



lion. 



■hor-n aiven " , 
3 been ^ v U nder- 

Committee cannot, until ^^tiaents which shorn 

ject, recommend the speci j- ' ■ ____ slljeiei 

— rio-^OcT^^ 7U ?o,h° n So^ ^ Manila. 

|, House Document ^^ember ?1, ^ f 

b. Joint Telegram, da.ba *< 



tamn. nor cam. estimate the period of tlme wllich ^ 
^ired for ne,:i: , such adjustment,. Much study has been 
ieVO ted to a consideration of these otters by bok the united 
States and the Phil x^pxne Governments, hut no joint program has 
teen formulated r 



t'ln addition to the problems involved in the adjustment of 
the national economy of the Philippines, there are comparable 
problems involved in providing an adjustment of American exnort 
trade to a non-preferential, competitive position in the Philip- 
pine market. According to the terms of the Independence Act, 
American producers and export interests will "be faced with an 
abrupt transition, on July U, 19h6, from a condition of free 
access to the Philippine market to one in which full Philippine 
tariff duties apply. The problems involved in this adjustment 
should likewise be studied. 

11 A recognition of these problems led the Inter departmental 
Committee to the conclusion that it was desirable that a joint 
coirjnit tee of American and Philippine experts be sot up to study 
the problems and to formulate recommendations looking toward the 
correction of any 'imperfections or inequalities' which might be 
found to exist in the present arrangements. President Roosevelt 
concurred in the proposal that the committee he created and. 
amoved the appointment of the American memoers of the Committee. 
This Joint Committee held its first meeting on April 19, V&U 
and is now carrying on its studies. 

"The Joint Committee will conduct its ^^^SLm 
general understanding ^f^^^^^^i relations 
Committee and President Quezon) th ^ J W , 1X be terminated 
between the United States and tne ^^ lG ^ affcrdin g the 
at the earliest practicable date corslet w mt±cm ^ 
Philippines a reasonable °ppor£nit, to - ^ ^ iff rat 
economy. This does not mean that PJJ^^ „ rior to July U, 1^6, 
preferential excise rates will o« terms of the 

the date for complete ^6.^^f Committee will *e 

Independence Act. The stud ie s of J^-coc -ill be, turned 
based on the assumption that trade ?r having in 




of political independence to W - pre fer0 ncei 

mining the date of termination 



■5~ 



ljn ited States and the Philippine Island and on facilitating or 
warding the execution of a program of economic a.6 justment in 
the Philippines. Legislation by Congress would, of course be 
required to effect any change in the date of independence. 

"The functions of the Joint Committee, in general, are to 
consider proposals which have been made for changing the political 
and economic relations of the United States with the Philippines; 
to hold public hearings for interested parties "both in the United 
States and in the Philippines; to study the problem of making 
adjustments in Philippine economy; to prepare the way for a trade 
conference; and to make recommendat ions. Among the problems which 
will be given consideration by the Joint Committee are the fol- 
lowing: 

"The character of the trade preferences which 
should exist for a specified, limited period. 

"Tie precise arrangements for governing the trade 
relations between the United States and the Philippine 
Islands after the termination of preferential trade 
relations. 

-Economic adjustment, that could be ~ 
the Philippines and methods of executing and financing 
such adjustments. 
' * need or appropriateness of f * e 

Philippine curi,;.c ^ v ; : inde , tedjJfig8 

visions for servicing iiia?S for QCO nomic 
that may be requirea *° Co ^ itt ee, 
adjustment recommended by ^ 

nP i-^e rights and interests 
"Adequate protection of «« * ^ philipp ine S 
of the United States and its^o *^ ^ ^ ^ TJnited 
and of the Philippe lies an independence, 
rt'i i. + 7 re attainment o. ,. 

Spates ar^er hp-^ , 

• -un p negotiation ol 
.-The bearing £ Section H of 

neutralization agreement provi-d ^ w& ^ on the 

the Tydings-McDuiii- ui Corm.ittee. 

problems studied by the Joli nn ^ tion s of the 

and recoraaenaai;io» B 
■ It is antici^-ted thnt * ^ ^ before fee elos. , of 

Joint Committee / c ;; United States throng preGi dent 

1937 to the President of the V Aff&irs and to th 

departmental Co:rmittee onF hoped that this rp 

Of' the Commonwealth Covernme t . consid eration by Con^ 
be available in ample time - ^ autmm ana 

by the Philippine Assembly/ tn ■ 



r 



»Por over a quarter of a century successive administrations 
of our Government nave based their policy with reference to the 
?hilipP ine s upon an aoiaing confidence in the ability of the 
Philippine people ultimately to govern themselves as" a free and 
independent nation. The task is one which involves problems of 
great magnitude. These problems are not merely those relating to 
tre.de "between the two peoples hut political and economic considera- 
tions of far-reaching significance to the United States, to the 
Philippines, and to all nations having interests in tho Par East. 
Ihe attainment of the objectives which both peoples have had in 
Bind will require patience, a sense of fair play, and cooperation. 
It is believed that the leaders of both peoples, imbued with the 
highest ideals, will be able to surmount the difficulties that 
vet lie ahead of them. I can assure you that, with such ideals 
in mind, the Joint Committee will endeavor to make some contribu- 
tion toward the successful conclusion of this great undertaking. 

MIn view of the oublic interest in the problem, especially 
«t thi- time you may" care to make this letter and its enclo- 
.tes a Ste/of record for the information of Congress and tne 
public, 

"Sincerely yours, 

(Signed) "JBiKCIS B. SAYEE 
G hai man , Int e rdepar tmental 
Committee on Philippine 
Affairs. 



AFPEMDI X III 



Recommendations for incriMnn in Philippic j 



report Daties 



Philippine 
Tariff Act 
paragraph 

267 
212 



Present rate Recommended rate 



Evaporated milk 



10% ad 
valorem 



Fish., in cans, glass or jars - 
(a) Cod, herring, mullet, 

haddock, salmon, mackerel, 

sardines 15$ ad 

valorem 



(b) Other common preserved 
fish, shell -fish, and 
seafood 



- 20$ ad 

valo rem 



ad valorem 



25% ad valorem 



25$ ad valorem 



99, 100 Cotton textiles, as shown helow _/ 



Schedule 



(a) Up to 10 

(b) Over 10 

(c) Over 15 

(d) Over 20 

(e) Over 2H 

(f) Over 2S 

(g) Over 32 

(h) Over 36 
|i) Over kO 
Cj) Over 

(k) Over 42 
(l) Over 52 
(a) Over 
(a) Over 



t 

60 



threads 
to 15 
to 20 
to 2k 
to 2S 
to 32 
to 36 
to 140 
to kh 
to US 
to 52 
to 56 

to So 



P^r^grauh 97 
Pi-pRfint rate 

$0.10 

.10 

.10-. I 1 * 
.Ik 

.1U-.20 

.20-. 26 

.26 

.32 

.32 

-32 

.32 

.32 



Tte co mended rate 

$0.lU 
.16 

.19 
.22 
.26 
.30 

•35 
.140 

.50 

.60 

.65 
.70 



the Japanese Gentleman's Agreement 1 ded therei n, no long 

textiles to the PhiUPPi nes Wli1 ' 
be operative. 



-2- 



Seliodule 

(a) Up to 10 threads 

(b) Over 10 to 15 

(c) Over 15 to 20 

(d) Over 20 to 2U 

(e) Over 2U to 2S 
jjf) Over 2S to 32 

(g) Over 32 to 36 

(h) Over 36 to 40 

(i) Over 40 to UU 
(j) Over UU to 1+8 
Cfc) Over US to 52 
(l) Over 52 to 56 
(m) Over $S to 60 
(n) Over 60 



$0.18 
.IS 

. IS- . 27 

.27 

•27 

• 27-oif 
■34 

-3 1 4-. Mo 
.Uo 

.50 
.50 
.50 
.50 
.50 



$0.27 
.31 

• 35 
.40 

.45 
.50 

•55 
.61 

.67 
.73 
.79 

• «5 
.91 

• 97 



Schedule 



(a) Up to 10 
00 Over 10 

(c) Over 15 

(d) Over 20 

(e) Over 2U 
If) Over 2S 

(g) Over 32 

(h) Over 36 

(i) Over 40 
(j) Over UU 
(k) Over US 
(l) Over 52 
U) Over 56 
(a) Over 60 



threads 
to 15 
to 20 
to 2U 
to 23 
to 32 
to 36 
to Uo 
to kk 
to US 
to 52 
to 56 
to 60 



Pa ragraph 

Present rate 

$0.lU 
.Ik 

.14-. IS 

.IS 

.IS 

.13-. 24 

.24 

.24-. 30 

.30 

•34 

■34 

.34 

.34 

■ 34 



Recommended rate 

$0.21 
.24 
.28 
.32 
•37 
.43 
.49 

• 55 

.Si 

.67 
.73 

• 79 
.35 
.91 



-3- 



Schedule 



ft 
(c 

(d 
(e 

(f 
(S 
(h 
(i 

(; 

(i 
w 

Cn 



Up to 10 
Over 10 
Over 15 
Over 20 
Over 2k 
Over 28 
Over 32 
Over J>$ 
Over ilO 
Over kk 
Over 43 
Over 52 
Over 56 
Over 60 



threads 
to 15 
to 20 
to 24 
to 2S 
to 32 
to 36 
to 4o 
to 44 
to 43 
to 52 
to 56 
to 60 



£aragraph inn 
Presen t r ate 

$0.24 
.24 

.2!+-. 12 

.32 

.32 

.1+2 

.42 

.42-. 52 

. 60 
.60 
.60 

.So 
.60 



Recom mend ed rata 

$0,36 
.1ft 
.1* 

• 52 
.58 

.76 

.S3 
.90 

• 97 
l.Qk 
1*11 
1.18 



Surtaxes on Cotton Textiles 



Paragraphs 97 and 99 

Bleached and dyed in the piece 

Manufactured with dyed yarn — 

Stamped or printed 



Present rate Recommended rate 



None 
30 percent 
30 percent 



20 percent 
30 percent 
140 percent 



Paragrap h s Qg and 100 

Bleached and dyed in the piece 
Manufactured with dyad yarn 
Stamped or printed 



None 
I40 percent 
140 percent 



30 percent 
UO percent 
50 percent 



