
•: ) 








^IfiST CSi4i30R3aXi' ASM DSTf\CBMENT 
H#u(i quarters sixth Army 
APO 442 



31 October 1944 



CENSORSBIP PLAN 

PHILI.-PINS COJillON'.vmLIH GOVEEtWaNT 



GENERAL ; In eocord with policy set forth by the Commander in 
Chief Caeforence S.0»P«t Instruction y£6, Cfc'J, APO 500, dated 
9 October 1944) the following plan is contemplated for the- organ- 
ization and functions of civilian Censorship in liberated areas, 
to be effected in such manner that it may be turned over to the 
Philippine Civilian Government- Authorities at the earliest 
practicuble date* 

OBJtgT ; Ohe object of Censorship in the Philippines will be to 
collect, evaluate and disseminate information of an intelligence 
nature and to suppress and prevent the passage of information 
that will give aid or comfort to the enemy. 

RgSPOHSIBILITYi Ihe responelbili ggenoy for the organization of 
Civilian Censorship in the Philippine Islands is the first Censor- 
ship Area Dataohment, Hq VQAFFS, now on Teapora3?y Duty Hq Sixth 
ArcQr, operating under the Assistant Chief of staff, G-S. 

1* Initial Censorship of Civilian oomaunlcatlone is main- 
tained by 1st C. A. D. personnel, progressively. Civilian personnel 
* 

are investigated, employed and trained in Censorship procedure, 
with the ultimate goal of relinquishing responsibility to Common- 
wealth authority. 




1 




£*. Uie CiTlllan orgunlzation ia outlined as follows: 

Pixillpplne CoBiaonwealth Oovernment 
President s. OSiilu,A) 



Department of iiattonnl Defense 
(Communlootlone) 

(Uajor oeneral B. VALDSS) 



Ceasorsixip Liaison 
with 1st 
(Lt A. ACSBEDO} 



Director of Censorfikhip 
(.hlllpplne islands) 
(Hot yet appointed) 



proTlnoial Censorship Supervisor 
(One or laore i-rovinoes) 

(Temporary appointment: Mr A. TOOADO, Leyte) 



liuniolpal Censorship supervisor 
(One or more Muniolpulitios) 
(Hot yet ap ointed) 

i 

Lzaminers 

(Loeal) 

(In process of training) 



9 . r resent estimates indicate the eventual employment of the 

following for the i rovinoe of Leyte; 

I'Xrovincial Censorship supervisor - 1 

i«unioipal Censorship supervisors 5 

Censorship Examiners 36 

CiviXlon examiners and supervisors are now being trained by the 

1st C*A«D« Civilian censorship Lohool, located in Tacloban. it 

ia to be noted that this list does not include oleri|Cal help 

^*dxich will be re<iuired in funotlonai administration* 




- 8 • 



4 




4 . Hti9 let C.A*D. vfill aid wherever poselbl* in re-eatublisbins 
Civilian 00 *iunioationB os soon as tbs Military oituation pennlts. 
Trainlns will anticipate the requirements of liberated areas so 
that resumption of normal traffic my be resumed at the earliest 
possible date* 



Dlt>TKlBUT10i4 t 

AC of S, Cr-2, 3lAth Army, Ai^ 44£ 

Theater Censor, Hq UBaFyiS, i^PO 501 
0-5, UBvi, APO 500 

oeoretary of National ;jefense, Philippine Oommonvirealth 
first Censorship Area Detachment 



STIAIiLKT LAMBSHT 
Major, A.F. (Inf. ) 
Commanding Officer 




3 - 




