The 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




The Rebuilder 




The 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




The Rebuilder 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepefia 

Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 

Writers/Researchers 

Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong (lead writer) 
Gloria Georgina Jota 
Minerva Generalao 
Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzonlll 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 
Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Executive Director Maria Montelibano - RTVM 
Presidential Task Force on Earthquake Rehabilitation 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

Neda Secretariat - APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "The Rebuilder", focuses on President Aquino as a crisis man- 
ager who utilized her insight into human character to full advantage; as in the 



case of her designating the key people who successfully orchestrated the massive 
reconstruction and rehabilitation work necessitated by the 1990 killer quake that 
struck Luzon. It also relates how the President's men used the fast track approach 
to infrastructure projects, even as they were conscious of the need for upright 
managers who would exercise .stewardship over the vast financial resources at 
hand. 

This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is by 
no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of 
those not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
arts ° f the P eo P le s he touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabmet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"Every calamity tested the capacity of democracy 
to absorb distress, find relief and meet the absolute 
necessities of the people without the least curtail- 
ment of freedom or compromise of rights". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

State of the Nation Address 
1991 



Introduction 



COULD A MAJOR natural calamity bring about both burdens and blessings? 

At first glance, the earthquake of July 16, 1990 was merely a disaster, plain 
and simple. Lives were lost, buildings were leveled to the ground. Towns shrunk 
beneath loosened sand. Bridges collapsed. And survivors mourned even as they 
scanned a gray horizon in search for the answer to the question, "What will happen 
to us now?" 

The temblor could not have happened at a worse time. Just eight months be- 
fore, the country faced its most serious threat from right-wing elements, scaring off 
investors and aggravating the already sluggish pace of the economy. 

As if the aftermath of military adventurism was not sufficient to dent the gains 
of democracy, the proverbial political pot had then also begun to boil. It seemed 
that major leadership personalities could not get into the act of helping steer the 
ship of state. President Corazon Aquino keenly sensed the pervading socio-political 
malaise. 

On Independence Day 1990, she sounded a national call for trisectoral unity 
and cooperation - a partnership among national government agencies, local 
governments and nongovernment organizations. She launched the Kabisig Move- 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ment to give the partnership a name and energy. She had hoped that with the vehi- 
cle for cooperation, renewed vitality could be injected into the veins of our democ- 
racy. 



The President's call was, in a way, prophetic. While some personalities associ- 
ated with the traditional political leadership scoffed at the Kabisig, succeeding events 
would prove the President correct in her assertion that "we must finally get our act 
together". 



And the nation, led by the President, did get its act together following that 
cathartic temblor of July 16, 1990. 

Relief and rescue agencies, spearheaded by the National Disaster Coordinat- 
ing Council (NDCC) under then Defense Secretary Fidel V. Ramos was immediately 
on the ball. So were private volunteer organizations, religious groups, business enti- 
ties, and even foreign governments and international organizations. 

And so was Congress. Even while some of its members smarted from the illu- 
sory "alienating effect" of the Kabisig, Congress did act on the President's request for 
a P10 billion fund to rehabilitate the earthquake-damaged provinces and cities of 
Luzon. And it did so in record time. 

There were many more instances that showed the nation getting its act to- 
gether following the killer quake. In that respect, the natural disaster might as well 
be viewed as a blessing, too. 

The Aquino presidency brought back the devastated regions to their feet. But 
above that, she also rebuilt the Filipino spirit to work on what was perhaps the 
biggest rebuilding job ever faced by a Filipino president after the reconstruction 
period following the Second World War. 



This volume is dedicated to the memory of that young hero of Cabanatuan 
City: Robin Garcia. It will be remembered that Robin could have survived the 
collapse of the Christian Colleges of the Philippines. He was already safely outside 



The Rebuilder 



5 



the building, but he chose to go back, several times, to rescue his classmates. 
He was buried under the nibble on his fourth rescue try. 

Robin exemplified the spirit and the selflessness of the other men and women 
who worked silently with the President to rebuild both land and lives. 



The 
Killer Quake 
of 1990 



THE EARTHQUAKE STRUCK at 4:26 p.m., July 16, 1990. It registered at 
magnitude 7.7 on the open-ended Richter scale, and intensity 8 on the Rossi-Forel 
scale, near the epicenter. The impact of the quake approximated the explosion of 
some 45 atomic bombs similar to those dropped on Nagasaki and Hiroshima in 



After 45 seconds, nine cities and 39 municipalities in 15 provinces lay dam- 
aged; some, almost totally devastated. 

Included in the list of damaged areas were: the provinces of Ilocos Norte, Ilocos 
bur, La Union, and Pangasinan in Region 1; Nueva Vizcaya, Quirino, and Aurora in 
Region 2; Benguet, Ifugao, Kalinga-Apayao, and Abra in the Cordillera Administra- 
tive Region; Tarlac, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Bulacan, and Bataan in Region 3. 
Portions of some provinces in Region 4-A were also slightly damaged. 

Government buildings in the National Capital Region also suffered heavy 
damage. 

The affected major urban centers included: Dagupan City which suffered the 
worst physical damage; Cabanatuan City which saw one of the most tragic human 
dramas in a collapsed schoolbuilding; Baguio City which was transformed over- 



The Rebuilder 



7 



night from a tourist haven to a massive disaster area; and Agoo, La Union where 
treasured centuries-old structures crumbled. 

For a time, major arteries in the national highway system were cut. These in- 
cluded two historic roads: Kennon, which linked Rosario, La Union to the Summer 
Capital; and Dalton Pass, the gateway to the Cagayan Valley. Carmen Bridge in 
Rosales, Pangasinan - Luzon's longest span - also collapsed into the dry Agno river- 
bed looking like an ostrich with its head in the sand, hampering travel to the north. 

Major landmarks were either seriously damaged or totally wrecked. Hyatt 
Terraces, the famous Baguio watering hole, caved in at the height of the temblor; so 
did nearby Nevada Hotel. The roof and ceiling of the famed Cathedral of Agoo, La 
Union crashed down on its marble floors. 

The President described the human and physical toll before Congress on July 
23, 1990: "As of this morning, based on reports of the National Disaster Coordinat- 
ing Council, we have accounted for 899 fatalities, most of them from the cities of 
Baguio and Cabanatuan. We have counted 3,061 injured, with Dagupan City suf- 
fering the worst. Actual property damaged recorded so far is P2.6 billion. 

But we estimate the total damage to properties to reach from P10 to PI 5 bil- 
lion". 

She was correct. Indeed, it was a calamity of unprecedented proportion. 

Rehabilitation Begins 

The initial confusion in the first few days of the relief and rescue operations 
soon gave way to a more orderly and systematic activity, with the NDCC on top. 
The President, herself, noticed the initial lack of order. 

"Who is in charge here?" she snapped during her visit to Cabanatuan City where 
she comforted the injured and the bereaved near the site of the collapsed Christian 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Colleges of the Philippines. Flying back to the Palace, she directed the conduct of a 
more methodical approach to rescue and relief operations. 

Secretary Ramos explained the reason for the initial confusion: "Our problem 
was that many members of the local disaster coordinating councils were themselves 
victims of the calamity". 

Soon, however, the President's men were all over the affected areas, oversee- 
ing the difficult and often heart-rending task of rescuing survivors, retrieving the 
dead, and feeding evacuees. 

That phase of post-disaster activity gave the President a good view of her key 
people in field action: Philippine National Oil Company president Manuel Estrella 
in Nueva Ecija and Nueva Vizcaya; Presidential Coordinating Secretary Jose de 
Jesus in BaguioCity and Benguet; Health Secretary Alfredo Bengzon in Pangasinan 
and Dagupan City; Social Welfare Secretary Mita Pardo de Tavera and Secretary 
Ramos all over the place. 

Barely a week after the quake, the President mulled an important strategy to 
deal with the massive devastation. She underscored that the psychological make-up 
of the people in the affected areas - and of the nation as a whole - must be strength- 
ened. This is because the peoples' will to rebuild was an important component in the 
post-disaster scenario. They must see beyond the suffering and focus their eyes ~ 
the promise of a new tomorrow. 



on 



She alluded to this before Congress: 'To this day, rescue and relief work goes 
on But slowly and surely, our countrymen are gearing up for the next important 
task - that of rehabilitation. 



Our people are determined to go back to their normal lives within the next few 
days. Our farmers want to return to their fields. Our labor force wants to return to 
their work places. Our businessmen want to resume the conduct of trade and com- 
merce". 



Having said these words, the President emphasized the necessity of managing 
the human spirit. She made it clear that while money and machinery were keys to 



The Rebuilder 



9 



the rebuilding efforts, the psyche of those who will reconstruct the damaged land 
must be geared up - must be fit - for the task at hand. 

"Today, they are no longer asking us for gestures of pity," the President said, 
reflecting her longstanding aversion for the dole-out tendencies of government. 'They 
are asking for assistance - to help them get back on their feet," she added, reiterat- 
ing her policy that aid must come with dignity. 

The financial component of this aid came in handily. In her State of the Nation 
Address, exactly one week after the quake, she proposed to the legislature "the 
immediate passage of House Bill 31 448 appropriating PI 0 billion for aid, relief and 
rehabilitation, and for the repair and reconstruction of permanent infrastructure 
affected by the recent earthquake". 

Congress acted with dispatch. The House Appropriations Committee headed 
by Camarines Sur Congressman Rolando Andaya pushed for the passage of the bill 
in the halls of the Lower House. Senator Neptali Gonzales' Senate Finance Commit- 
tee carried the ball in the Upper Chamber. 

Within record time, the President signed the aforementioned bill into Republic 
Act 6960. The government, by then, was ready to begin rehabilitation work. 

A Rehabilitation Czar 

Now that the government had money to spend for rehabilitation, it needed 
someone who would manage such amount well. In addition, it needed a person 
who would wield the baton to ensure that the agencies which would take part in the 
work would do so in harmony. The President quickly inventoried her array of trusted 
men and found one who could fit the enormous shoes of a "rehabilitation czar". 

A rehab czar was indispensable. The President knew that action was needed to 
begin right away in the damaged areas, or the government would risk popular 
discontent stoked by the embers of political machinations. In addition, the President 
wanted normalcy to return to those areas within the soonest possible time. 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Furthermore, the President knew she needed someone with unquestionable 
integrity. The stewardship of PI 0 billion called for a man without guile and without 
his own political agenda. 

While most people guessed that the anointed one would be a Secretary of a 
front line department (Fiorello Estuar of Public Works and Highways and Alfredo 
Bengzon of Health were prominently mentioned), the President stamped her seal on 
Jose 'Ping' de Jesus, a self-effacing management and human resources development 
expert whom columnist Luis Beltran called "an obscure palace functionary". It 
seemed like a most unlikely choice. 

At the time of his appointment as Chairman of the Presidential Task Force for 
the Rehabilitation of Earthquake-affected Areas (PTFR), Ping was one of three Presi- 
dential Coordinating Secretaries - senior cabinet men whom the press dubbed as 
PECSmen. 

Ping's virtue was the very weakness of his public image then. He was soft- 
spoken. He shunned the limelight. He meticulously avoided media, except when he 
had to do post-Cabinet meeting briefings in 1989 when Press Secretary Teodoro 
'Teddyman' Benigno was out on a sabbatical. Even then, his press conferences 
seemed more like tortuous revalidas for the former seminarian. 

But if Ping spent less time talking, it was because he was spending it working. 
He was always at his office at the first floor of the Guest House at a little past seven 
m the morning. It would be lucky for his staff if he left for home before 10 in the 
evening. A regular dawn jogger, he had a lot of stamina which showed both in his 
long working hours and in his sprightly gait. He also worked Saturdays, Sundays, 
and holidays. He bluntly told his staff once: "We will take a vacation only by July 1, 



1992". 



His zeal, however, was not merely the product of an upright character. Ping 
was, and is, devoted to the President. He had a cause which he confided to his 
equally devoted Guest House staff of three: Imee Fojas, Celia Alba, and Belle Tagle. 
He said, "I want to help make the Aquino presidency the best presidency this coun- 
try would ever have". 



The Rebuilder 



His silent crusade found expression in his daily work at the Guest House. He 
was troubleshooter par excellence as evidenced by the fact that the President even 
chose him, at times, to help iron out serious disagreements between cabinet mem- 
bers. Ping's soothing equanimity provided a sober bridge between stances and per- 
sonalities. 

Prior to his PECS stint, Ping was Cabinet Secretary, a post he inherited from 
Natural Resources Secretary Fulgencio Factoran Jr. and which he later passed on to 
his protege, Aniceto M. Sobrepena. His Guest House office was often an oasis for 
tired souls weary from their Palace tasks and for those simply waiting, or hoping, to 
see the President. 

Most frequent among those who used to seek the comfort of his company were 
then Transportation Secretary Oscar Orbos, Public Works Secretary Estuar, Health 
Secretary Bengzon, Bulacan Governor Roberto Pagdanganan, and Pampanga Gov- 
ernor Bren Guiao. 

Ping's fatherly countenance, however, masked his deep-seated aversion for 
opportunists. He had this uncanny sense for detecting - almost without fail - if some- 
body, usually a politician, wanted to see the President for purely selfish reasons. He 
knew if one was double-talking. Yet his mien never betrayed the nauseous sensation 
that the vested-interest types probably caused him to feel. He was, however, capa- 
ble of blurting out his seething anger in private. But before 60 seconds would have 
gone by, the issue would leave him. He was never heard to speak ill even of those 
who deserved unkind verbiage. 

Ping was also protective of the President. He was thorough in his briefings for 
her, making sure that all her available options were made known. He would me- 
ticulously diagnose problems and issues that passed his desk. Those he could solve 
at his level almost always never reached the second floor of the Guest House. 

His gentle character and his troubleshooting acumen earned for Ping the Presi- 
dent's respect. She announced his appointment on July 29, 1990 in her Magtanong 
Sa Pangulo broadcast: "Ang pangunguna ng Task Force na ito ay iniatas ko kay 
Presidential Coordinating Assistant, Secretary Jose de Jesus, at siya ay aking hinirang 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



bilang special reconstruction and development coordinator ng Tanggapan ng 
Pangulo". 



The Task Force 



On August 1, 1990, the President signed Memorandum Order 31 1 officially 
creating the Presidential Task Force on the Rehabilitation of Areas affected by the 
July 16, 1990 earthquake. 

The President opted for the creation of a Task Force for several reasons. For 
one, she wanted a clear differentiation between the rescue and relief work overseen 
by the National Disaster Coordinating Council, and the next phase of work - purely 
rehabilitation. In fact, she outlined before the Cabinet the three stages of govern- 
ment responses following the quake: rescue and relief; rehabilitation; and the long- 
term reconstruction and development. While all three were necessarily interrelated, 
she wanted a differentiation for purposes of better management and public ac- 
countability. 

The other reason was the President's belief that a Task Force, with a good man 
at the helm, would effectively bring in the resources and capabilities of the partici- 
pating government agencies. 

In addition, a Task Force gave the rehabilitation efforts a face and a name. 

The President subdivided the Task Force into five areas, each headed by an 
undersecretary: Roads and Bridges Sector, under Public Works Undersecretary Jose 
Mabanta; Other Vital Infrastructure Sector, under Transportation and Communi- 
cation Undersecretary Jose Valdecanas; Livelihood and Emergency Employment 
Sector, under National Food and Agricultural Council Executive Director Tomas 
Lopez; Social Services Sector, under Health Undersecretary Rhais Gamboa; and 
Peace and Order Sector, under Defense Undersecretary Feliciano Gacis. 

The subdivision into five sectors also showed the President's priority in the 
rehabilitation work. Under each sector, she placed the following agencies: Roads 



The Rebuilder 



13 



and Bridges - Department of Public Works and Highways and the AFP Engineering 
Brigade; Other Vital Infrastructure - Department of Transportation and Communi- 
cation, Local Water Utilities Administration, National Electrification Administra- 
tion and the National Power Corporation; Livelihood and Emergency Employment 
- Department of Agriculture, Department of Trade and Industry, Technology and 
Livelihood Research Center, Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
and the Department of Science and Technology; Social Services - Department of 
Health, Department of Education, Culture and Sports, Department of Social Wel- 
fare and Development, National Housing Authority, the Housing and Urban Devel- 
opment Coordinating Council and the National Economic and Development Au- 
thority; Peace and Order - Department of National Defense, Department of Justice 
and the local police agencies. 

Ping asked the President for an Advisory Committee that would help him in 
major policy decisions. In response, the President created one composed of the chair- 
men of the five Cabinet Clusters. The five Cabinet Clusters corresponded to the five 
sectoral concerns earlier outlined in the Task Force. 

To provide Ping with the necessary elbow room, the President directed all de- 
partments, bureaus, offices, and government-owned and controlled corporations 
(GOCC) to provide all-out assistance and support to the Task Force. 

She also authorized Sec. de Jesus to grant, on her behalf, the prior authority 
required under Executive Order 380 for department secretaries and GOCCs to 
enter into negotiated contracts which exceeded the ceilings of E.O. 380. 

Finally, the President gave the Task Force only a period of six months to one 
year from the effectivity of Memorandum Order 311 to finish its work. Earlier, 
Congress gave the Executive only one year within which to appropriate the pro- 
ceeds of the PI 0 billion rehabilitation fund. 

Ping clearly knew it would be a race against time. 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Racing Against Time 

Given the very tight deadline - both for the allocation of the rehabilitation funds 
and the completion of the rehabilitation work - Ping knew he had to work with a 
lean but mean machinery. Here, he immediately put to work his talent for beating 
bureaucratic red tape. He was, after all, a leading figure in the President's program 
to energize the bureaucracy. The rehabilitation czar knew at the very start that the 
chronic lethargy within the bureaucracy could spell disaster to the efforts towards 
early work completion. As it was always- in the past, he would have none of it. 

The President had wanted Ping to dictate the pace of the rehabilitation work. 
She was confident that he would employ the usual relentless speed with which he 
performed his palace work. And to further ensure the successful conduct of the 
work, she furnished the seed money that was needed to mobilize immediately. 

It was clear in Ping's mind, however, that this was not going to be a routine 
Palace work. He was not just up against bureaucratic inertia or procedures. He was 
also up against attitudinal problems - the penchant of many of those who ran the 
cogs of government machinery to work at a snail's pace. 

In response to the President's direction for him "to dictate the pace", Ping im- 
mediately set up an Operations Center - a war room of sorts where the day-to-day 
work of the Task Force was planned, monitored, modified, and improved. It was to 
be the nerve center of the entire effort. It was to be Ping's all-important headquar- 
ters for the next 12 months. M 

Ping knew, however, that he would not be able to stay in the headquarters. The 
President had earlier asked him to be "present in the field" to establish "a real pres- 
ence of the Presidency" in the disaster areas. 

That meant that Ping had to get somebody he could really trust to man the 
operations from Manila. 

He did not have a hard time scouting for the perfect alter ego. The day he 
established the Operations Center, he appointed Rogelio 'Babes' Singson as Opera- 
tions Center coordinator. 



The Rebuilder 



15 



It was not difficult for Babes to know what Ping wanted done. Their associa- 
tion dated back to over a decade. The tandem used to run the sprawling Develop- 
ment Academy of the Philippines complex in Tagaytay City, where executive devel- 
opment and management courses for the government bureaucracy were held and 
conducted under their direction. 



When Victor Ziga ran for the Senate in 1987, the President appointed Ping to 
replace the Bicolano solon in the now-defunct Department of General Services. Ping 
took in Babes in the department. Together, they reviewed its mandate, examined its 
relevance, devolved its powers, and gifted the government with millions of pesos in 
savings by recommending its abolition. The President approved their recommenda- 
tion. 

Babes also provided Ping with efficient staff support when the latter went prov- 
ince-hopping, conducting the so-called Presidential Problem Solving Sessions with 
local executives and sectoral leaders. Earlier, Ping had spearheaded the Cabinet 
Committee for Implementation Action (CACIA), on-the-spot problem- solving sor- 
ties in the countryside where Ping first made his mark as an action man. Babes 
assisted him there, too. 

After the killer temblor struck, again the duo together manned the Mansion 
House in devastated Baguio City. There they directed the distribution of relief goods 
and the grim traffic of cadavers, all the while bolstering the morale of volunteers 
and helping out in the rescue operations. 

In many respects, Babes is a reflection of Ping - soft- spoken and worked long 
hours. He is known to be up at four in the morning and already attending to the 
papers in his briefcase. An industrial engineer by training, he has developed a keen 
mind for methods and procedures and a sharp eye for detail. 

Together, they made the perfect tandem. The President was confident she had 
men of action and integrity who would be willing to race against time. 

Immediately upon set up, Babes put into motion a work squad at the Center: 
field coordinators who would monitor the infrastructure projects and social serv- 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ices in the disaster areas; computer experts who designed the program for data 
monitoring and storage; and a public affairs section to handle public information 
and media relations. A noted penny-pincher where the people's money was involved, 
Babes equipped the Center by knocking on the doors of various agencies: computers 
from the Coordinating Council for the Philippine Assistance Program; vehicles from 
the Departments of Public Works and Local Governments; communications sys- 
tems from PLDT; and, people from the then Cabinet Secretariat. With Babes at the 
helm, the Center never had to purchase anything that could be sourced from other 
agencies. 

Ping, meanwhile, sallied forth into the field to oversee the work. Oftentimes, 
he was accompanied by Babes and his Operations Center Staff, orchestrating 
the work of the various agencies, cajoling laggards, and encouraging those who, 
by the quality of their work, showed that they understood the urgency of the task 
at harid. 

Ping translated the cruel deadline imposed by law into a rigid timetable for 
specific accomplishments. He presented the following target milestones to the Task 
Force: 

By April 1991, 40 percent of infrastructure-related work must be completed. 
Byjunel991,60 percent. 
By August 1991, 80 percent. 

And by March 1992, 1 00 percent of the work must be completed. 

The participating agencies concurred with Ping. With the proverbial one heart 
and one mind, they embarked on the job. They singlemindedly pursued the dead- 
lines, keeping to the tight schedules that had been set. 

Until the loopholes inherent in a massive reconstruction effort began to sur- 
face. 



The Rebuilder 



17 



Plugging The Loopholes 

First to give Ping a headache were the attempts by a handful of local govern- 
ment officials to pad the list of rehabilitation projects to be undertaken with the P10 
billion fund. 

Ping had earlier followed the President's instruction to allow for the widest 
participation by local government executives in the identification of these projects, 
and in the implementation of a number of them depending on the local govern- 
ment's capabilities. 

Ping's management style emphasized counterchecking; not that he mistrusted 
others, but simply because prudence is an essential characteristic of his work flow. 
He personally conducted the counterchecking, touring the areas where the projects 
were supposed to be located. To his utter disappointment, he noted that a good 
number of these projects were either overpriced or were not earthquake related. 

In a moment of frustration, Ping, seated at his Operations Center desk, coined 
the term that would describe the padding attempt: "fastbreak". 

"Not too fast," Ping, for once betraying his irritation at such ill-timed 
adventurism, aired a multimedia warning. The national and local press quic y 
picked up the term fastbreak. It was a term which Manila Times columnist Larry 
Sipin obviously thought was worth an entire column. 

Ping's warning was coupled with the institutionalization of checks. He asked 
the President to allow the Department of Public Works and Highways to hire con- 
sultants who would evaluate the infrastructure projects at different stages, an 
who would determine whether they really were earthquake related. 

Next, he directed his Operations Center personnel to do their own 
counterchecking. No fastbreak attempt escaped their eyes. In no time at all, the 
project lists were rid of fastbreaks. 

Ping's second headache were the snail-paced construction activities of some 
contractors. His frequent onsite inspections sometimes betrayed disparities between 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



status reports and the actual state of the projects. Showing consternation anew, his 
next warning over media was against those who were deliberately delaying the 
reconstruction work, either maliciously or through negligence. 

The pace of reconstruction in heavily-damaged Dagupan City became a par- 
ticular target of Ping's ire. Shortly after he was appointed Secretary of the Depart- 
ment of Public Works and Highways in January 1991, he publicly reflected the 
impatience of the people of Dagupan. Admonishing public works officials and con- 
tractors in the most civil way, Ping ordered them "to add a little more fire to our 
seemingly lackadaisical performance in the rehabilitation of Dagupan City". 

The rest of his words sounded gentle, but felt like burning coal: "Our contrac- 
tors' present accomplishment may be acceptable during normal times, but not dur- 
ing this period when the patience of our people are just about to run out". 

Such public gesture won the hearts of the people of Dagupan City. 

Again, Ping coupled his words with action. He institutionalized a new concept: 
"fast track". He recommended to the President that all critical public works projects 
be undertaken on a fast track basis. This meant that contractors had to undertake 
work on a 24-hour schedule. 

Those who would not comply and missed their deadlines faced the bleak pros- 
pect of being blacklisted. 

To ensure that the policy was followed strictly, Ping dispatched inspection- 
documentation teams which paid surprise visits to the construction sites. The Op- 
erations Center knew exactly where there was compliance and where there was 
plain recalcitrance. 

In no time at all, contractors joined the effort to beat deadlines. 

Quality, however, was not to be sacrificed for speed. Ping cautioned contrac- 
tors about substandard work, saying the completion of projects that did not con- 



The Rebuilder 



form to quality standards were not to be certified. In plain words, they will not be 
paid. 

Visiting Dagupan City, Ping also warned about the imposition of strict admin- 
istrative sanctions against officials and contractors involved in substandard imple- 
mentation of rehabilitation projects. 

Once again, Ping deputized Babes Singson to inspect various key projects to 
ensure that they conformed to quality standards. 

Furthermore, he ordered the retention of 15 percent of the total contract cost 
by the paying agency until a final inspection of the completed project has been 
undertaken by the consultants of the Task Force. That way, no substandard project 
could run away with the people's money. 

Ping, however, still had one last headache to deal with: political squabbles. 

Since the rehabilitation projects were being undertaken at a time when the 
political pot had already started to percolate, Ping oftentimes found himself caug 
in a crossfire. As in the case of several solons who did not want their governors 
implementing multimillion-peso infrastructure jobs. They argued that such wou 
mean added political mileage to potential 1992 rivals. 

. The 

Of this particular concern, Ping could only appeal to the warring fl S u ^. 
Philippine Star of February 11, 1991 reported this plea: "Public Works and High- 
ways Secretary Jose de Jesus over the weekend appealed to political leaders m cer- 
tain provinces and cities to set aside their differences for the faster implementation 
of rehabilitation projects in their areas of responsibility. 

De Jesus made the appeal following reports that a number of quake-damaged 
infrastructure projects were hampered due to disagreements among provincial lead- 
ers on who among them will implement the said projects". 

Ping, however, refused to name the provinces and cities where the said prob- 
lems occurred. He further refused to be part of the intramurals. 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



'The concerned officials should be left alone so they can thresh out their prob- 
lems and work out their own solutions," he declared. 

Fortunately, the local leaders did get their act together. 

From The Rubble 

The Task Force did meet its deadlines reasonably well. 

On July 10, 1991, almost one year after the killer quake struck central northern 
Luzon, Ping reported to the President that 53.72 percent of infrastructure related 
work corresponding to some 7,624 projects have been completed. 

Another 17.66 percent or 2,506 projects were ongoing. 

A total of 146,769 individuals had benefited from the various forms of assist- 
ance extended by government financial, medical, shelter, livelihood, and emergency 
employment. 

Eleven and a half months after the quake, the government had obligated a total 
of P6.459 billion from the funds appropriated by Congress. 

The Task Force also had, by then, reopened to normal commercial traffic all 
major roads damaged by the temblor, except Kennon Road. The historic pass to the 
bummer Capital was to be opened a few months later. 

Also repaired were the Teofilo Sison Bridge in Rosales, Pangasinan; Magsaysay 
Bridge in Dagupan City; and Siksikan Bridge in Talavera, Nueva Ecija. All these 
were major spans to the north. 

The physical side of rehabilitation of the earthquake- stricken areas was imme- 
diate, comprehensive, and massive. By June 1992, it was almost complete. 

It was also not surprising that the rebuilding task was not compounded by any 
outbreak epidemic despite the rough living conditions resulting from disruption in 



I 





Baguio Park Hotel in the 
aftermath. 




Victims of the quake line up 
for medicines being given 
away by Red Cross in down- 
town Baguio. 




Sec. Jose 'Ping' de Jesus and DND Secretary 
Fidel Ramos, Chairman of National Disaster 
Coordinating Center, listen intently to the 
situationer on the relief and rescue work 
being undertaken in various parts of 

Baguio City. 




Conrado Balweg of the CPLA stresses a point to 
former DAR Secretary Philip Juico and 
Appointments Secretary Margie Juico 
regarding the distribution of relief goods in Baguio. 




Blankets, 
tents, and mats 
at the Mansion 
House ready 
for distribu- 
tion,, 



REHAB CZAR AT WORK. Secre- 
tary de Jesus tries to make radio 
contact after the communications 
facilities in Baguio were 
destroyed by the quake. 



Next Page. President Aquino 
inspects damage on a resi- 
dential area in Paniqui, Tarlac 
on July 24, 1990. 




President Aquino assesses 
situation in Tarlac with Secretary 
Fiorello Estuar and local officials. 
With her is son Benigno 'Noynoy* 

Aquino III. 



President Aquino 
assures a mother from 
San Antonio, Zambales 
of government support 
during a visit to the 
province. The President 
handed out relief goods 
and sleeping mats to the 
people during her visit. 



Below: 

Luisa Mallorca, one of 
the two employees of 
PAGCOR who survived after 
being trapped eleven 
days underneath the 
wreckage of Hyatt Ter- 
races Hotel in Baguio. 

She is visited by the 
President at the Manila 
Doctors Hospital. 






REBUILDING. A year later, the President 
inspects open canals of the newly- 
constructed Tayabo Resettlement Site in 
San Jose City for the victims of the 
quake. Looking on are de Jesus, Con- 
gressman Simeon Garcia, Jr. and San 
Jose City Mayor Amor Belena. 




President Aquino inspects the boxes of 
milk donated by the Indonesian govern- 
ment for the victims of the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo. 





President Aquino views the various photo- 
graphs taken of Mt. Pinatubo during its 
eruption and the damage it wrought on the 
surrounding countryside during her visit to 
Pampanga last October 3, 1991. 



The President briefs residents and officials on rehabilitation 
work for areas affected by Mt. Pinatubo eruption. 




President Aquino thanks members of the 
diplomatic corps for their concern for victims of 
the Mt. Pinatubo eruptions. In photo (from I left) < are 
Bacolor Mayor Guillermo Balingit, Sta. Rita 
Mayor Carmelo Cruz (partly hidden), Rep. Oscar 
Rodriguez, Saudi Arabian Ambassador Fouad 
Hasan Faki, PROC Ambassador Huang Gu.fang, 
US Ambassador Frank Wisner, Pampanga Gov. 
Bren Guiao, Singapore Ambassador Edward Lee 
Japanese Ambassador Tosh.o Goto, Canadian 
Ambassador Andre Simard and European 
Community Ambassador Johannes Pieter Van R.j. 



r 



4 




CD 

Sm 



■ 



CD 
O 

co 

i— 

£ 

CD 

c 

o 

£ 
o 
o 

CD 

CO 

<D 
<D 
CO 

"D 
C 

CO 



2> CO 

■o co 



2^ 



CO 



CO C c "O <D 



2 



.2 -Q 

CO ^ 

3 g 

s; 

o o 

is 

■o '-5 

CD CL 

e 2 
* a> 

C CD 
O £ 

O CD 

^1 

^ CD 

CO HE 

(/) £ 
ti CO 
CO . 



CO 

CO 
CD 



CD 
CD 

o 

CO 

> 

CD 
< 



CD 

£ 'co 



£ 9 

CO H- 

CD 



— e. 



CD > 

— CO 

c2 

CD CO 

-O CD 
k. 

CO Q. 

CD 

£ CD 
CL £ 



.2 CD 

o o 
o. 

CD 
O 

c 
o 
o 

co" 




IN GLEE THIS TIME. Children of 
Nueva Ecija happily assist in carrying 
relief goods. 



Uchito Okuno, managing 
director of Daiichi Kosho 
Co., Ltd. of Japan hands 
a check of Y1 00,000,000 
(P20 million) to the 
President for the victims 
of the Mt. Pinatubo 
eruption. 




The Rebuilder 



21 



power and water supplies. Medical teams were in place and functioning efficiently 
right from the start. 

But government never forgot its central focus: the human side of rehabilitation. 
Shortly after the earthquake struck, the President herself became aware of the need 
to look after the psychological components of the earthquake aftermath. 

She stressed this during the launching of reconstruction bonds on October 4, 
1990: "We are all reaching to heal the wounds, calm the fears and rekindle the hopes 
of fellow Filipinos". 

The President directed the Department of Health (DOH) to undertake the hu- 
man aspect of the rehabilitation process. 

Health Secretary Alfredo Bengzon pointed out that this was probably the most 
important component of any rehabilitation. He said: "Where the most visible effects 
are physical, in terms of buildings, infrastructure as well as people, hurt and maimed, 
there is a tendency sometimes for people to forget that the more important focus is 
what happened to the individual himself as well as to the people around him". 
Disaster victims undergo emotional symptoms familiar to many of us: anxiety, de- 
pression, and some of the so-called spiritual symptoms like cynicism, and with- 
drawal. 

Precisely to meet rehabilitation needs in human terms, the DOH formed the 
Mental Health Task Force on Disaster Coordination with the UP. College of Medi- 
cine and other professionals. 

The Mental Task Force held Critical Incidents Stress Debriefing (CISD) in the 
areas stricken by the earthquake. The debriefing helped the victims go through the 
process of mourning and healed them of haunting memories. It involved group 
sharing. 

The debriefing allowed the participants to talk out their ordeal. This, in a way, 
helped them loosen up and easily accept what had transpired. In the end, they were 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



able to control their emotions. They became more courageous and more ready to 
relate to their traumatic experiences. 

From a core of 20 people, 70 faculty members from the affected schools were 
trained. Almost 3,000 students were immediately given psychological rehabilita- 
tion. 



Jessica Rangcapan was a second year high school student of the collapsed 
Christian Colleges of the Philippines in Cabanatuan City when the quake occurred. 
In the debriefing, she recounted how she survived. Many of those trapped with her 
were her cousin-classmates who perished. 

Jessica lied for safety. She said she had to lie when asked by the rescuers how 
many students were with her. There were actually only 14 of them trapped inside. 
She claimed they numbered 50. Jessica said she thought that by inflating the number, 
rescuers would hasten to save them. And save them hastily, the rescuers did. 

After the debriefing, there were no more sweaty and trembling hands. No more 
nightmares. No faltering voice nor fainting spells. The new Jessica had been rehabili- 
tated through the CISD or stress debriefing. She had begun to smile again. 

Whereas before, "Naiiyak ako, pag-naaalala ko (I used to cry whenever I recall 
the incident)" or "Mmsan hindi ako makatulog (sometimes I hardly can sleep)", she 
claimed that now she had recovered and "Normal na uli ako (I am now back to my 
normal self)". 

Psychological healing usually takes time. For most of the victims like Jessica, 
he debriefing sessions were sufficient to heal their troubled minds. Others who 
i F cuizea care were referred to professionals in Manila. But this num- 

As Ping de Jesus said, "Human component is actually far more weightier than 

any other infrastructure reconstrurU^" a , , • « , , i 

.. .... . . struct,on • And on this, Bengzon said: "The whole 

.dea behind rehabilitation is to hold a hand as it were of the individual during this 
very fragile period. Make him aware that such a reaction is not entirely unexpected. 



The Rebuilder 



23 



And then lead him through that difficult period by drawing on his own inner re- 
sources as well as getting the help of other individuals within his family and within 
his community". 

The President's legendary equanimity became the beacon light for her men in 
the task of rebuilding with the people. Her own faith in the strength of the spirit 
enabled them, and perhaps the whole nation as well, to rise above the rubble. 



Rebuilding Together 

The President's rehabilitation program received acclaim both here and abroad. 
An internationally-renowned disaster management center, for example, cited the 
Philippines for its "extremely rapid and efficient recovery operation" after the July 
1 6, 1 990 earthquake. This was contained in a congratulatory letter sent to the Presi- 
dential Task Force by Dr. Ian Davis, deputy director of the Disaster Management 
Center based in Oxford, United Kingdom. 

Davis specifically compared the country's case to that of Iran. Iran was stricken 
by a giant quake just three weeks before the killer temblor devastated Luzon. Davis 
noted that "although they (Iran) also made swift progress, there is no doubt that you 
are much further ahead, especially in the civil engineering field". 

In another letter, then Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos, who was also chairman 
of the National Disaster Coordinating Council, extended his congratulations to mg 
de Jesus. 

"Your exemplary performance as the chairman of the Task Force truly de- 
serves such a recognition," Ramos said. "This recognition also is a manifestation of 
the resiliency of the Filipino people . . . that we can always rise from the rubble to 
rebuild and start anew despite all the odds and adversities," he added. 



Finance Secretary Jesus Estanislao, on the other hand, informed the President 
as early as November 1990 that the international community, particularly the do- 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



nor countries, "are pleased with the manner and speed with which our government 
is carrying out the rehabilitation work". 

Such recognition by other countries had earlier been expressed by way of the 
US$560 million in grants, donations, and soft loans the donor community had ex- 
tended to the country for the rehabilitation program. 

Even media recognized the hard-earned accomplishments of the Task Force. 
What began almost as an adversarial treatment of the rehabilitation work turned 
out to be a partnership. Media heeded the regular calls aired by the Task Force for 
monitoring support of the rehabilitation work. What media reported, the Task Force 
acted on. Together, they were a formidable team that served as a deterrent to graft 
and corruption in the rehabilitation program. 

All in all, print media gave the Task Force a total of 3,452 column centimeters 
of positive publicity worth over a quarter of a million pesos if computed as adver- 
tising space. 

Perhaps one of the most important accolades received by the President for the 
rehabilitation program came from Congress itself. 

Soon after Republic Act 6960 was passed, the Lower House formed a House 
Oversight Committee that would monitor the progress of rehabilitation work. 
Headed by House Appropriations Committee Chairman Rolando Andaya, the group 
included the Congress representatives of the affected provinces and cities. They 
were supposed to be the "watchdogs" of the PI 0 billion fund. Ping made sure that 
they would be properly briefed on the developments in the program and on the 
utilization of the fund. 



Force 



The committee was briefed six times during the one-year life span of the Task 



On the first week of May 1991, the members of the committee, at the encour- 
agement of Pangasinan solon Jose de Venecia, passed a resolution expressing Con- 
gress' gratitude for the swift rehabilitation of the quake-damaged provinces. 



The Rebuilder 



25 



Veronica Uy of the Philippine Daily Inquirer reported: "Hectic construction in 
the devastated areas like Baguio, Dagupan and Cabanatuan is precisely propping 
up local business. Things are now looking bright in the devastated Cabanatuan. 
Armed with income from the construction activities, people are acquiring the spend- 
ing power. 

Mayor Honorato Perez sums up the mood in the city: The reconstruction is 
not only rehabilitation. It includes bigger things'. Already on the city planners' desks 
are blueprints for a Metro Cabanatuan, an expansion program designed to make 
the city as the trading center of Nueva Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya and Aurora provinces. 

In Baguio, except for the famous Kennon Road, all damaged infrastructure 
have been restored. One of the city's twin economic engines - education and tourism 
- which conked out as an aftermath of the earthquake is back in harness. Enrollment 
at the city's colleges and universities this year is back to its level before the disaster. 
Boarding houses are fully booked". (Philippine Daily Inquirer, July 16, 1991) 

The congratulations and commendations were appropriate as they were timely. 
By the time they were given, most of the people in the affected areas were already 
back on their feet. 

Ping, no doubt, was proud of the Task Force. But he summed up its capability 
this way: "We were effective because we had the full backing of the President, r 
were able to make men and machines move because our command was her voice . 

But the President's hand was not only felt through her <^*"*"^ 
She did not hesitate to directly intervene as when Ping approached her -for ^elp m 
acquiring land in Sta. Barbara, Pangasinan for rehabilitation purpose,. She immedi- 
ately facflitated it. The devastated areas were also given priority by the President in 
the allotment from her President's Social Fund. 

During the Cabinet Meeting of July 10, 1991, the President commended the 
Task Force for the institutionalization of rehabilitation mechanisms and for the crea- 
tion of a more permanent body that would be mobilized for rehabilitation pur- 
poses. 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Ping explained that the process of creating interim Task Forces and designat- 
ing the participating agencies "use up valuable time resource which could have 
otherwise been utilized to trigger the rehab process". Hence, the move to create a 
more permanent body. 

The drawing up of a comprehensive NGO-Private Sector Mobilization Plan 
was also urged in order to help better harness NGOs and private sector organiza- 
tions for a more effective participation in rescue, relief and rehabilitation work. This 
was more than a recommendation. In essence, it was a tribute to government, NGOs 
and private sector volunteers that the President and her Cabinet recognized. 

Such was a fitting tribute: these groups were on the scene on Day 1 of the 
disaster. They were among the long list of heroes who emerged in the aftermath of 
the killer quake. 

The list included the following: the young cadets of the Philippine Military 
Academy, the AFP Engineering Brigade, volunteer rescue workers from civic and 
religious organizations, mass media, and the silent partners of the rehabilitation 
efforts. They were, in reality, the President's Kabisig. 

Together with others not mentioned here, they provided the moving spirit which 
gave meaning and strength to the rehabilitation efforts. 



They were the rebuilders of the once devastated land. 



Epilogue 



On June 1991, not even a year after the earthquake, another disaster of awe- 
some magnitude struck the country. Mt. Pinatubo in Zambales woke up from six 
centuries of slumber and spewed boulders, ashes, lava, and lahar from its belly. 

The world was stunned. Strong winds brought by tropical storm Didmg 
at the time of eruption caused Mt. Pinatubo ash to envelope the globe's atmo- 
sphere. 

In Central Luzon, roofs caved in from the weight of the ashes. Towns were 
buried under the raging rivers of thick, steaming mud. Proud trees turned into 
scrawny silhouettes of branches and stems. Whole plantations and farms were wiped 
out. 

Ash fall covered kilometers of roads with up to 12 inches-thick of ash and 
sand. Rivers were no more as lahar disgorged from the volcano filled them. Six 
major bridges collapsed from poundings of mudflows. 



And the people, yes, the people. They suffered an initial shock. More than 900 
people died, one million more affected. 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



But this time, both the people and their government were battle-ready. The 
lessons learned in the earthquake of 1990 were fine-tuned to control the disaster, 
and to lift the spirits. 

The President created the Task Force on rehabilitation of affected areas. Secre- 
tary Guillermo 'Gem' Carague headed it. 

The Task Force was mandated to do the following: coordinate all rehabilitation 
activities of the national government; prioritize rehabilitation projects; monitor the 
progress of government and report to the public the latest updates received; liaise 
with all parties for necessary assistance/coordination; and submit regular status 
reports on relief and rehabilitation projects to the President. 

The DPWH, by then headed by Ping de Jesus, cleared ash fall from some 652 
kilometers of road within a week after the major eruptions on June 1 5, 1 991 . Emer- 
gency repairs were made on damaged approaches. Temporary bridges were built 
to facilitate rescue and relief efforts. 

Evacuation centers were set up. Thousands of evacuees had to be immediately 
fed. The continuing threat of lahar and mudflows had made the rehabilitation and 
rebuilding almost indefinite. By March 1992, more than 400,000 Filipinos had been 
served inside evacuation centers, while 545,759 were served outside these centers. 
By May 1992, DSWD continued to maintain 50 evacuation centers housing 80,766 
Filipinos who were continuously being provided with food-for-work and cash-for- 
work assistance. Families had begun to rise, literally, from the ashes. 

Today, Filipinos are building houses with cheap Pinatubo sand. Their burden 
they have turned into a blessing. 



