

Architects of the UNO — Shall their masterpiece disintegrate? . . . 



THE HUKS, Dr. LAUREL, Collaboration, ET AL. 

according to the Congressional Record of the United States. — Page 8 



At the Service of the Filipino Youth 



uezon 6 



ma 



as even 



/ 



mi 



FACULTIES AND COLLEGES OPERATING: 

FACULTY OF CIVIL LAW 
FACULTY OF PHILOSOPHY AND 

LETTERS 
FACULTY OF MEDICINE AND 

SURGERY 
FACULTY OF PHARMACY 
FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 

COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS 
COLLEGE OF COMMERCE AND 

BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
COLLEGE OF ARCHITECTURE 

AND FINE ARTS 
Conservatory of Music 
GRADUATE SCHOOL 

COLLEGE OF EDUCATION 
Department of Home Economics 
Normal School Department 
High School Department 



♦rr 



Second Semester Begins Nov. 3rd. 

FOR PARTICULARS, 

Communicate with 
The Secretary General 
or THE REGISTRAR 



University of Santo Tomas 



ESPANA, 
MANILA 



Dear Quezonian Reader 

We are reprinting for you 
in this issue a document.* we 
consider" of inestimable value, 
about the Huks, Dr. Laurel 
and the Collaboration issue, 
taken from the Congressional 
Record, of the United States. 
Considering the readership of 

the Record, it is probably the 
best known presentation of the 
facts of the three "hottest" is- 
sues in contemporary Philip- 
pine History. Which is reason 
enough to "force" it to Fili- 
pino ieadeng who should be 
interested in their own pro- 
blems as seen and interpreted 
by an American observer aw 
thoritative enough to merit a. 
landing in tfw Congressional 
Record. Whether you agree or 
disagree with the author } please 
do not hesitate \to relay to us 
your own opinions, and We 
will gladly publish them. . . . 

In this connection, we again 
appeal to you to have others 
share with your opinions, on 
what we print and. on what we 
leave unpfinted thru the pages 
of THE QUEZONIAN RE- 
VIEW. You may write them 
in any language, and we will 
do the rest. For, only in this 
way could we ever expect to 
form a real public . opinion , 
from which democracy and 
good government draw their 
very life-blood. 

We would like to ask you 
also to let us know your ques- 
tions and jx>ur problems, per- 
sonal as well as impersonal, 
and if \.hey have an answer 
and a solution, we will get 
them for- you. In our next issue 
we will inaugurate tw.o regular 
departments YOUR QVES- 
TIONS ANSWERED and 
YOUR PROBLEMS SOLVED 
Where representative questions 
and problems shall be handled- 
All others shall be by direct 
correspondence* 

Last but not least, will you 
lend us a helping hand to per- 
petuate the memory, and pro- 
pagate the ideals of the great 
Pres. Quezon, whose good ex- 
amples, if but vigorously .fol- 
lowed by every Filipino, Would, 
be the best guaranty to the 
stability and permanency of 
this our beloved country? 

Till then, 
mpm. 



THE 

QUEZONIAN REVIEW 

. and 
PHILIPPINE VIEWS 
of 

YESTERDAY, TODAY and TOMORROW 
... PUBLISHED IN ENGLISH, SPANISH & TA:GALOG 
For tlie Propagation of His Ideals 



Vol". 1 No. 10 



Manila, Philippines 



50 Ctvs. 



IN THIS ISSUE: 



2)o 



cumenti. 



Q 



uezon tana , 



The Huks, Dr. Laurel, Collaboration, etc. 
Secretary Marshall's Speech before the U N-O. 
Trealy between the U. S. & the Philippines 
Fil Hispano Amity Pact 



Profiles of Quezon & Osmena 

Rizal y Quezon. Hombres Providenciales de Ayer 



Articles: 



Chaos in Pampanga 
Communist's Double Talk 
Unrecognized Guerillas 



ure6: 



News , . . . Letters 
History . . . . The Republic 
Arts . . . . Fashion 
People .... The Home 
CJomments .... Editorials 



SUBSCRIPTION RATES PAYABLE IN ADVANCE 
Local: Foreign: 

i year PI 0.00 1 year F20.00 

6 mos 6.00 6 mos- 12.00 



zjCetterS to and 




from THE EDITOR 



Deai' Mr. EDITOR* 

I have read with interest the last issue of the 
QUEZONIAN REVIEW and with all sincerity, I can 
say that the Magazine is wholesome anl highly educatio- 
nal My attention was especially attracted by the great 
publicity it has given to the YLAC, of which High Coun- 
cil my humble person is the Spiritual Director. The con- 
linued interest and support of the QUEZONIAN RE- 
VIEW to our organization by way of publicity will mak<> 
it better known to our people whose cooperation we 
greatly need. 

The YLAC is a religious and social organization. Its 
primary purpose is to give material aid to the poor and 
clown trodden class of society. Although it is barely one 
year and a half old in the Philippines yet it has accom- 
plished much more than we had expected, especially in 
the establishment and maintenance of free parroquial 
schools. This accomplishment js partly a realization of 
the dream of our laic beloved President Manual Quezon 
for the "spiritual revival' ' of our people.* 

With God's help, the YLAC shall not fail in this 
task. It is a happy coincidence thai this unfinished task 
of our late President is zealously continued *by, his 
daughter Miss Maria Aurora Quezon our active and 
zealous President of iheYLAC High Council We need 
more girls of her talent and zeal ti join the Young Ladies 
Association of Charity. We need also the cooperation of 
ihe press like the QUEZONIAN REVIEW to help us win 
the people of good will whose generosit}' is indispensable 
to the welfare and life of our Association. 



Good luck and success to the 
VIEW. 

Sincerely yours 



Qf E7DN1AN RE 



Fr, Dr. Vicente P. Reyes 
Spiritual Director of THE YLAC 
HIGH COUNCIL & Parish 
Priest of San Miguel, Manila. 



TO THE REV. SPIRIT! Ah DIRECTOR OF THE YLAC 

Past, present and future benefactors of the Young 
Ladies Association of Charity (YLAC) have flooded us 
y with inquiries regarding the actual disbursement of its 
funds. They believe they have a right to know, and the 
general public must know this too, so as to avoid any 
shadow of unfavorable doubts. Hence, we suggest that the 
financial statements of the organization and its units be 
made available to tha press. On our part, we will be but 
too glad to publish them- We believe this necessary to 
make our cooperation effective. 



Santiago, Isabea 



Dear Editor: 



>We woidd like to order ten (10) sets of the previous 
issues of THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW, as we want to 
know more of this paper: Please send them at your earli- 
est convenience. 

Yours truly, 
V, PIMENTEL 



We are planning to have a reprint of the previ OUs 
issues as soon as we have a substantial order tor them 
Right now it is quite difficult to get them for you, so i x 
the meantime that we cannot send you back issues, \ Vo 
quote for you pertinent portions of our . declaration 
principle* and policies, as published in our initial number 

u Ther e is a dire need for reorientation to-day 
asscsment of values, reexamination of attitudes, and re 
direction of footsteps are all imperative for the success 
of the rehabilitation program now in full swing in our 
country y 

'It is incumbent on each and everyone to contribute 
his mite to the end that the overall objective shall be at* 
tamed. Nobody is exempted from this common under- 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



taking. Everybody is needed and has his proper- place in 
the movement. And no definite contribution to it is too 
ifisignificartf. to be of real value.*' 

"Conscious of this, we have decided to launch this 
fragile craft, as our humble contribution, moved more by 
the best of intentions, than by a sense of Worth, muchless, 
of proficiency. For we know our own limitations,, the 
effects of which we shall never shirk from owning. We 
canrtc{ f 9 however, leave our good intentions challenged 
indiscriminately, as, fdr our intents and purposes in this 
respect, they are sufficient: 9 



"In the exercise of our self-imposed obligations as 
public servants thru the press we shall be guided by the 
example of that great Filipino — tfv* late ' President 
Quezon. A beaconlight and an inspiration to us will al- 
ways i be tlie intensity of his devotion to duty, the ardor 
of his love for right anl justice, the intransigency of his 
stand on whatever he honestly believes to be trud and 
good, and finally, his consistent amenability to correc- 



X 



Quality Automobiles For Sale 




PACIFIC AUTO AGENCY 

- 114-16-18 Espana Blvd. 
===== MANILA ============= 



' * f„rs to face with the shortcomings oj 
tion, once Brought face tojace 

his own ways and means" 

- "Fairness, truthfulness and fearlessness form the 
i aire* , because we will xdways he 

triangle of ow ^ O-* > ^ q/ ^ ^ 

f Z'ZluUo ^olers the stone degree of freedom 
but carejui w b ^ Because 

in the expression ^ ^„ u as factual and 

we are *^J^%& to be so- And. because 
TZ^Zs" o»lr fear wrong and evil, and 
no more." 

;r,hj<;tice shall ever be committed in- 
t error nor in ^ commi$sion or hy ommis- 
tentionallr. either by direct ^ 
sion, thru and by his p ape r / ^ ^ 

tentionally, no relaxation m '. our T J >f 
ammends shall be allowed, until fulh satisfied. 

"THF OUEZONIAN REVIEW will come out in 
THE V u ** u Tnaalo* according to the particu- 
English, Spanish and Tagalo ^ 

lav language demands of ^ , use of any 

from the late President Qu-on ^ 

of these languages win h *» * 

more surely his points to wnere H 

them placed." 

"TJiis paper is absolutely non-sectarian, belonging 
to no political parity, and devoted only to the common 
iveal aVgiven those behind it to understand At all times 
and occasions, it will strive 10 serve as a clearing house 
for conflicting ideologies and cross-current interests, to 
the end that mutual understanding and common bene- 
volence may reign supreme, always and everywhere . 

In other words, our objective is to perpetuate the 
memory, and propagate the ideals of ^eK^dent 
Manuel L. Quezon, we consider the greatest FthpSno of 
modern times, whose footsteps every Filipino could 
easily follow, and must fellow. His life an* ideals must 
be REVIEWED; his struggles, and his spirit of uncon- 
q uerableness, neither by poverty, nor ' * ^^J* 
evil and other enemies of man, must be RECAPTURED 
by every Filipino- For these are his imperishable legacy 
to his people. 




SEPTEMBER, 1917 



I Am The Printing Press 

By ROBERT H. DAVIS 



I AM THE PRINTING-PRESS, BORN OF THE MOTHER 
EARTH. MY HEART IS OF STEEL, MY LIMBS ARE OF IRON, 
AND MY FINGERS ARE OF BRASS. 

I SING THE SONGS OF THE WORLD, THE ORATORIOS 
OF HISTORY, THE SYMPHONIES OF ALL TIME. 

^»n A ™J H , E J 0ICE OF TO-DAY, THE HERALD OF TO- 
MORROW J WEAVE INTO THE WARP OF THE PAST THE 

*f$?£,9£ THE FUT UR£- I TELL THE STORIES OF PEACE 
AND WAR ALIKE. 

^JJHn^I HE H UMAN HEART BEAT WITH PASSION OR 
L E It D v E Sn E ?£- 1 STI R T ^E PULSE OF NATIONS, AND 
MAKE BRAVE MEN DO BRAVER DEEDS, AND SOLDIERS 
DIE. 

I INSPIRE THE MIDNIGHT TOILER, WEARY AT HIS 
LOOM, TO LIFT HIS HEAD AGAIN AND GAZE, WITH FEAR- 
LESSNESS, INTO THE VAST BEYOND, SEEKING THE CON- 
SOLATION OF A HOPE ETERNAL. 

WHEN I SPEAK, A MYRIAD PEOPLE LISTEN TO MY 
VOICE. THE SAXON, THE LATIN, THE CELT, THE HUN, 
rHE SLAV, THE HINDU, ALL COMPREHEND ME. 

1 AM THE TIRELESS CLARION OF THE NEWS. I CRY 
YOUR fOYS AND SORROWS EVERY HOUR. I FILL THE DUL- 
LARD'S MIND WITH THOUGHTS UPLIFTING. I AM LIGHT, 
KNOWLEDGE, POWER. I EPITOMIZE THE CONQUESTS 
OF MIND OVER MATTER. 

I AM THE RECORD OF ALL THINGS MANKIND HA <? 
ACHIEVED. MY OFFSPRING COMES TO YOU IN THE CAN- 
DLE'S GLOW, AMID THE DIM LAMPS OF POVERTY THE 
SPLENDOR OF RICHES: AT SUNRISE, AT HIGH NOON 
AND IN THE WANING EVENING. "uun, 

I AM THE LAUGHTER AND TEARS OF THE WORl n 
AND I SHALL NEVER DIE UNTIL ALL THINGS RETURN TO 
THE IMMUTABLE DUST. * A 1 ° 

I AM THE PRINTING-PRESS. 



poem ici"-'"*''' 1 i,l,l,v <- «PpSaW on a bronze plaque in the reception room of THE NEW YORK. SUN- 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
QUEZON CITY 

OFFICE OF THE MAYOR 



m 



The publication of the "Quezonian Review" which aims to 
propagate the ideals and principles of the late Manuel L. Quezon 
fills a need which had been felt with increasing urgency since the 
demise of our illustrious leader. 

■ In life, Quezon propagated a set of principles which he hoist - 
ed before his people as ideological guideposts in their weary strug- 
gle toward free nationhood. He was tireless and uncompromising 
in the evangelization of these principles, especially among the 
youths \of the land. They were the age-long principles of freedom, 
human dignity, justice and decency. It is the mission of the "Re- 
view" to continue with the apostleship of these principles to which 
Quezon dedicated his life with the fervor of the early apostles. 

It must also be the object of the "Quezonian Review" to make 
tt searching study of and publish papers on unrevealed phases of 
Manuel L. Quezon's life, his labor and his times. Only thnoug/i 
knowledge and understanding of Quezon's character and his ac- 
complishments can we hope to keep aflame the glow of affection 
that our people has for him. 



September 16, 1947 



P. A. BERNARDO 
City Mayor 



The Huks, Laurel, Co 

The Philippines, i 



MR. HAGEN. Mr. Speaker, I have 
received a letter from P. W. Reeves, who 
served as Director of Personnel, Engi- 
neer Service, of the War Department in 
the Philippines, during the year 1946. 

His letter so dramatically expresses 
his own observations and views and de- 
scribes the conditions in the Philippines 
as he saw them that I feel it would be 
of interest to my colleagues and the 
readers of the CONGRESSIONAL 
RECORD. 

His letter follows: 

Washington, D.C, Jtcne 26, 1947. 
Hon. HAROLD C. HAGEN. 
Member of Congress, Washington, D.C. 

Dear Congressman: I have your -re- 
quest that I incorporate in a letter cer- 
tain facts gathered by me, as well as ob- 
servations I made, during my slay in the 
Philippines from April, 1946 until 
March, 1947. I am Very £iad to comply 
because I believe the information ob- 
tained will be of interest to you. 

The seeds of communism being sown 
all over the world also are being sown in 
the Philippines. The same subversive 
groups are in Manila and the Philippines 
just _as .they are in China, Greece, Po- 
land, Yugoslavia, Rumania, France, Ger- 
many, Italy, and some parts of South 
America. General Mac Arthur has been 
able tc stop the advance of communism 
in' Japan, but the followers of Marx and 
Stalin have a foothold in Korea. The 
Huks ar e the greatest menace to the 
Philippines today! The Huks are better 
known as Hukbalahaps, a militant rebel 
organization which was first organize:! 
in Central Luzon. Labor leaders came 
to Manila from China and organized the 
tenants (peasants) into units. These 
labor groups are being schooled in com- 
munistic theories, and they ara being 
taught military discipline. They are 
taught to hate all forms of capitalism. 
These Huks are anti-American and at 
their meetings they denounce the United 
States and praise Russia. It is an undis- 
puted fact that the Huks m the Philip- 
pines are linked with the 'Reds^ of China. 
The Huks are all supplied with arms 
and ammunitions. Their objective is the 
overthrow of the Philippine Government. 



ft 



EXTENSION OF REMARKS 
of 

Hon. HAROLD C HAGEN 

"'-of 
Minnesota, in the 
HmCse of Representatives 
Friday, June 27, 1947 



During the past few months the gov- 
ernment of the Philippines, with the aid 
of Philippine Army intelligence officers, 
conducted an investigation of the Huks 
and their activities. A .connection be- 
tween the Huks of the Philippines and 
Moscow was definitely established. The 
Philippine Army disclosed that documen- 
tary proof was found showing conclu- 
sively that the Huks of the Philippines 
have as their leaders well-known Com- 
munists, who receive their instructions 
from Moscow. 

At meeting places where the Huks as- 
sembled, communistic literature, pam- 
phlets, and so forth, were found in great 
quantities. In all of the meeting places 
of the Huks hammer and sickle flags 
were found. Captured Huks and Others 
who have surrendered admitted that the 
Huks were taught the principles and 
teachings of Lenin. "They were taught 
to organize an<} spread their ideology. 
They were taught that the solution of 
their ills, povery, and hardships is the 
overthrow of the Philippine Government 
and the establishment ri a Communitic 
dictatorship. What I am telling you can 
he verified by reference fee investigations 
made and reports' filed by the Philippine 
Government since President RoxTSs as- 
sumed the office of president. Congress 
man Villa real headed' the committee 
which conducted the inve tigation and 
made the report. The investigation and 
filing of the report consumed almost one 
year, and the report was released in 
Manila the 24th of May, 1947. 

Unlike the Communists in America, 
the Huks in the Philippines do not hesi- 
tate to resort to armed violence. Luis 
Tame, the Huk leader, has publidy anr 
nounced that he will very soon issue or- 



ders from Malacanan Palace in Manila. 
The Huks permit no opposition. The 
Huks have a meeting and then make un- 
reasonable demands upon the land-own- 
ers for money, rice, food, etc. If their 
"demand is denied they murder the land- 
owner and burn his home. Out in the 
provinces I saw many houses which had 
been burned or blown to bits by the 
Huks. In Manila I read daily accounts 
of brutal murders committed by Huks 
In July, 1946, Rev. Father Limlingan ad- 
dressed a group of Huks and urged them 
to cease their lawless activities. Xh e 
night following the afternoon on W>vi c ^ 
this priest addressed the Huks, he 
murdered. Yet; this, priest was mur- 
dered in such a way that would cau*^ 
the caveman to bow h's head in sham ^ 
Four carabaos were tied to the nriest Q * 
one carabao to each arm and on e * 
each leg, and the carabaos were drj v 
away in four directions. Thus tear* °^ 
the body of the priest into fo,Ur pa**^ 
This happened 50 miles from Manil' * 
July, 1946. 



Par t ^ 

in 



The peasants (tenants, -formerly 
ceived 40 per cent of all they produ * G 
An increase to 50 per cent was o r . « C ^« 
President Roxas granted anothe TVt ??- 
crease to 60 per cent, and then anotV^ 
increase to. 70 per cent. The Huks n . 
demanded 80 per cent of all they aV,Q 
duce. Their objective is to get 10o PlCU 
cent of everything they produce— ^a^* 
nothing for the owners of the land, 
taxpayers). The uprisings in th e Pr . 
inces have increased, and thus more f° V ~ 
lowers for the Huk army are made. 
Huks started out with a small organ* lo 
tion in Central Luzol. Their foil™ 
are now scattered, and i apidly in<»r 
ing, Ln many of the provinces. J ^ ^ 
oently read a statement from Gov a 
les David of the province of Parnn 
Governor David charged the ffufes 
spreading communistic doctri no - Xv it] Y 
Philippines and attempting to oVei*h 
^the Philippine Government. I qw v ^\v 
following from Governor David's ° ^ 
ment issued a few weeks ago: "* 
The Huk organization recognizes n " : 
but anarchy and lawlessness and h° ^ 
love of country because it advxf* * >0 
communistic principles, uses the red^ 5 



THE QUEZQNIAN 



aboration, et alia 
Land Of Opportunity 



in all of its demonstrations, and cele- 
brates November 7 (the . birth of the 
Third Internationale) every year with a 
big parade." 

We talk about Pearl Harbor, where, 
in a few minutes on December 7, 1941, 
the people of the United States were 
taught at terrible lesson in blood. We 
are reminded that our brave men died at 
Guadalcanal,- in New Guinea, at Tarawa, 
at Iwo Jima, at Bikini, and elsewhere. 
We are told about the men who died on 
the cruiser timiston in the Java Sea, 
and about the death-dealing submarines 
off Midway and in the Aleutian Islands. 
We have heard speeches about the bomb- 
ing of Dutch Harbor and about the loss 
of lives in the fall of Singapore. The 
death march of Bataan was grimly 
brought to our attention. But we treat 
onrushing tide of communism with in- 
difference. The greatest stronghold of 
the Communist Party outside of Ru sia) 
is China. The Communists are growing 
stronger in Brazil, Chile, and Cuba. 
(The Communists are in charge of the 
government in Hungary. Although Gen- 
oral MacArthur is doing a great job in 
J.apan, ami has to a certain degree 
checked the increase of the Communists 
in Japan, in 1946 there were 2,000,000 
party members (Communist Party) in 
Japan. 

We all know the objectives ot com- 
munism are the creation of strikes, 
chaos, disorder, unemployment, poverty, 
misery. It is easy to understand how 
easy it was for the Communists to 
launch the'}- movement in China. I saw 
Chinese in Shanghai grabbing garbage 
from barrels with their hands — and I 
saw them devour what they found like a 
pack of hungry wolves. The communists 
believe that the poverty-stricken peoples 
of the world will turn to communism be- 
cause of the glittering promises made 
by communistic leaders From the time 
of Lenin every Communist has been 
made to believe that mankind is divj led 
into two groups — Communis^ in one 
group and the vest of the world in the 
other group. 

To every people who worship God, He 
is the personification of their code of 
morals. AVhere there is no belief in God 

SEPTEMBER 1H1 



From the 
PROCEEDINGS & DEBATES 

of 

The 80th Congress 

of the 
UNITED STATES, 
First Session 



there is no ideal of virtue. The mo.t 
remote savage African tribes, the Tao- 
ists, the Buddhists, the Mohammedans, 
also the worshippers of Mumbo-Jumbo, 
all have their God and preserve their 
deity. In America those of us who pro- 
fess religion hold our deity inviolate. 
Upon God and the teachings of His Son 
are. based everything that w e hold pre- 
cious and necessary to a good life. Com- 
munism has legislated God out of exist- 
ence. Communism strives by force to 
drive God out of the hearts of men, not 
only our God but the gods of every other 
race and every other tribe. Creeping* 
over the world is a way of thinking 
which denies both the existence and ne- 
cessity of a God. This force is anti-God. 
The name of this force is communism. 
If this letter could be read by your col- 
leagues in the House it would cause 
them to think more about this menace of 
communism, as I have seen it. 

It has occurred to me that you might 
be interested in the geography of the 
Philippines, and what these little islands 
have to offer pioneering souls in the 
w.iy of opportunity. 

The Philippines are the largest, island 
group in the Malay Archipelago. They 
were discovered by Magellan in 1521. 
In 1565 they were conquered by Spain. 
The Portuguese contested Spain's right, 
to the archipelago until Spain and Por- 
tugal fin.ill\ united. In. 1577 Sir Fran- 
cis Drake arrived. Thomas Cavendish's 
expedition arrived in 1587. The Hutch 
fame in 159G. These expeditions were 
seeking trade rather than colonies. In 
1762 Manila was captured by a British 
expedition, In 1763, by the Treaty of 
Paris, Manila was restored to Spain. 
Not until 1814 were foreigners permitted 
to establish themselves in Manila. It 



was- difficult to foreigners to get trade 
on account of the constantly changing 
Spanish policy of opening ports to for- 
eign trade and then suddenly closing the 
ports to foreign trade. Finally on Dec- 
ember 10, 1898, by the Treaty of Paris, 
the Philippine Islands were turned over 
to the United States on payment of 
$20,000,000. 

Thus since 1898 the Philippines have 
been closely tied to America. The is- 
lands have wonderful natural resources 
and afford unlimited opportunities. The 
mountains are rich in minerals. Between 
the mountains and the sea are immense 
fertile plains, well watered. The average 
temperature is 78 degrees in winter and 
84 degrees in summer. There are 7,08o 
islands in the groups known as the Phil- 
ippines. Four hundred and sixty-two of 
these islands have an area of 1 square 
mile or more. Two thousand four hun- 
dred and forty-one of the islands are 
named. Four thousand six hundred and 
forty two of the islands are not named. 
The largest island is Luzon, on which 
Manila is situated, with 40,814 square 
miles.- Mindanao is the second largest 
island with 36,906 square miles. Panay 
Island has 4,448 square miles. Palawan 
Island i: next with :>,300 square miles. 
In 1939 the population of the principal 
cities were: Manila, 653,000; Cebu, 
145,000; Zamboanga, 132,700; Davao, 
97,000; Boilo, 88,000: Bacolod, 58,000; 
Baguio, 24,120. The total population of 
the islands in 1939 was estimated to be 
about 17,000,000. Th e population today 
is estimated to be between eighteen and 
nineteen million. 

There are many large banks in Mani- 
la, two of which are American-owned, 
National City Bank and the Bank of 
America. Freedom of the press and re- 
ligion and the right of assembly are 
guaranteed in the bill of rights. The 
chief agricultural products are unhus.ked 
rice, copra, hemp, sugarcane, corn, tobac- 
co, and ma-guey. The principal fruit is 
the banana. Other fruits are mangoes, 
papaya, lanzones, mandarins, chico, and 
ties of timber for cabinet and other 
household necessities. Rattan wood is 
made into many useful articles for the 
home. This is a large and g-rowing busi- 
ness, since the market for rattan-made 



articles is rapidly expanding. The min- 
ing of gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper, 
iron, coal, petroleum, chromite, asbestos, 
and manganese- is extensive throughout 
the islands. Clay, marble, and salt can 
be found in abundance. It is estimated 
there are between 80 and 100 square 
miles of coal fields containing lignite 
and bituminous. There are many 
American businessmen in the islands and 
there will be many more as soon as ma- 
chinery and equipment for contemplated 
new business concerns can be sent to 
Manila. 

Americans are not wanted in India, 
Japan, or China. On account of poverty 
and disease in India and because of 
China's civil war, Americans are disin- 
clined to live in or invest money in 
China and India. Certainly, Americans 
do not wish to live in or invest money 
in a destroyed and defeated nation like 
Japan. There is no hatred of Americans 
in the Philippines, and the Filipinos are 
eager for Americans to join them in 
their efforts to industrialize and rebuild 
their country. In the Philippines the 
corporation tax is 12 per cent as com- 
pared to 38 per cent in the United 
States. Income tax in the Philippines 
ranges from 3 to 60 per cent (in the 
large brackets) as compared to from 20 
to 91 per cent (i n the large brackets) 
in the United States. In the Philippines 
there is no excess-profits tax. Filipinos 
like American goods, American automo- 
biles, American movies. 

On account of the vast amount of mo- 
ney which was soent in the Philippines 
in gettincr ready for the attack on Japan — 
about $70(X000,0(X) — and on account of 
the huce Army and Navv installations 
maintained in the islands since liberation, 
there is more money in the Philippine* 
todav than at any tim* in the history of 
the Filipino people. The working class 
in the Philippines to dav has money to 
spend, and they are spending it for any- 
thing and everything that is for sale. 

On account of the bombardment of 
Manila by the American troops in driv- 
ing out the Japs, every Government build- 
ing in the city of Manila was wholly or 
partly destroyed. The Manila Hotel is 
the only first-class hotel left. About 40 
per rent of the homes in Manila were 
partly or entirelv reduced to shamble*. 
Practically all of the bridges and most 
of the roads were destroyed or fodly im- 
paired. If all of the laree construction 
companies in the United States wer P to 
£o to Manila to rebuild the city, they 
would have enough work to keep them 
busy for the next 5 yoars. Before the 
Japs occupied the Philippines there 
-ere about 50 suger centrals operating 
Today only 12 sugar centrals are in 
10 



operation. Until machinery is sent to 
the Philippines to rebuild and repair the 
sugar centrals the pre-war production of 
sugar (more than a million tons per 
year) cannot be maintained. The sugar 
production in the hPilippines at this time 
is estimated to be less than 100,000 tons 
per year. 

The Filipino people have an almost 
fanatic love for the same type of free- 
doms exemplified by America. They 
have great respect for the United States 
and its democratic processes. Wherever 
I travelled, I found Filipinos of all 
walks of life discussing with consider- 
able fervor and intelligence the various 
issues of the day. One of the most dis- 
cussed subjects were the charges hang- 
ing over the head of former President 
Laurel, who served his people as presi- 
dent during the Japanese occupation. 
He is being charged by his political ene- 
mies with collaboration with the Japs. 
Laurel has been trying unsuccessfully to 
bring his case to trial. 

Wherever I talked to a Filinino. the 
question alwavs arose, "What about that 
man Laurel who served as President dur- 
ing Japanese occupation?' So many dis- 
torted statements and so much misinfor- 
mation has been sent to America about 
Laurel. I have decided to cive vou some 
facts about Laurel and his 'illustrious 
and unparalleled service to hisi reonle. 
The facts which I have fathered in the 
Philippines will be a revelation to you. 

While living in Manila, during the 
'major part of 1937 I heard Dr. Laurel 
speak at a public function and I was fas- 
cinated by his great learning. When I 
returned to Manila in March 1946, to 
serve as Director of Personnel, Engineer 
Service, United States War Department. 
I sought an introduction to Laurel. I 
left Manila February 28, 1947. During 
my stay in Manila in 1946 and 1947 I 
discussed with many people the charges 
against Laurel. I talked with high Gov- 
ernment officials. I talked with mem- 
bers of the supreme court and former 
members of the supreme court. I visited 
in the homes of members of the Roxas 
cabinet and others who are close to 
President Roxas-. I talked with the mid- 
dle classes, the working classes, and 
with men in the streets who did not have 
jobs. T made a thorough investigation 
of the life of Laurel, particularly that 
part of his career which he served his 
people as President of the Republic dur- 
ing Japanese occupation. It wag mv 
pleasure to talk with President Roxa« 
on two occasions. Once I called on him 
when he was taking his rest and he re- 
ceived me in his pajamas. I visited in 
the home of Elpidio Quirino many times 
during 1937. Also after Quirino became 



Vice President of the Republic I talked 
with him in his home on four oecassions 
during 1946 and 1947. When I left Ma- 
nila in February, 1947, Mr. Quirino gave 
me his picture autographed "To my dear 
friend." 

In the Philippines there are millions 
who believed that, intellectually, Dr. 
Laurel has no peer among the living or 
dead. Laurel's enemies will not chal- 
lenge this statement. Laurel has more 
earned decrees (not honorary) than any 
other Filipino has ever received. A few 
of the certificates, diplomas, degrees, 
et cetera, which I noted on the walls of 
the study in Dr. Laurel's modest home 
are: A.B., LL.B. , LL.M', M.A., r> 
C. L., LL.D., and Ph. D. He has attend- 
ed and received degrees at the following 
places of learning: University of the 
Philippines in Manila University of Sto. 
Tomas in Manila, Tokyo Imperial Uni- 
versity in Tokyo, University of Paris in 
Paris, Yale University in New Haven, 
and Oxford University in England. Space 
will not permit my listing the honorary 
degrees which have been presented to 
him. He speaks and writes five differ 
ent languages fluently. 

My investigation causes me to express 
the opinion that no man has served his 
country more conspicuously and faith- 
fully than Laurel. From 1909 until I923 
when he was quite young he served hi s 
government as clerk, chief clerk, l a ^\ 
clerk, under secretary, secretary, et 
Gov. Gen. Leonard Wood appointed rj C ' 
Laurel as head of the Interior Depart 
ment in the famous 4< Wood Cabinet >? 
From 1925 to 1931 he sewed as a sen 
ator in the Philippine Senate. In 
he was a delegate to the Constitutional 
Convention and he was one of those se- 
lected by the convention to write th" 
Constitution for the Commonwealth 0 f 
the Philippines, which constitution w as 
adopted when the Philippine Republic 
came into being. In 1936 h e wasi ap . 
pointed by President Quezon to b e Ass 0 - 
ciate Justice of the Supreme Court. 0 p 
December 24, 1941, aftar war was de- 
clared on Japan, President Quezon again 
appointed Laurel— this time to one of 
the most important positions in Philip, 
pines— the post of secretary of justice. 
When President Quezon was preparing 
to go to Corregidor because of the immi- 
nence of the fall of Manila he (Quezon) 
named Jorge Vargas, Quezon's most 
trusted and loyal friend, to be ranking 
member of the Quezon cabinet. Quezon 
also made Vargas mayor of the city 0 * 
Greater Manila. Quezon sent for Dr 
Laurel and told him he wanted him to - 
accompany him in an advisory capacity 
Laurel hurriedly packed a bag and w as 
to go with Quezon. He wanted to 
(Continued on pctffic 33) 

THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



FIFTY YEARS AGO... TODAY i 



A Modern Woman Became 
A Missionary Foundress And 
A Modern Apostle 



In the bustling port of Marseil- 
les. France, on Sunday, September 
5, 189?, two Sisters boarded a ship, 
ihe u Oceanien", bound for the East. 
\n event, apparently insignificant 
enough, and yet all-important to us 
Theresians. For were it not for this 
sailing, St. Theresa's College would 
not exist today. Indeed, one of the 
Sister^ a (all. well-built woman of 




As a demure young lady 



about forty, the sparkle of enthus- 
iasm in her eye, 1 was Mother Marie 
Louise, the Foundress of the Miss- 
ionary Canonesses of St. Agustine, 
better known in the Philippines as 
the Belgian Sisters. 

Reverend Mother Marie-Louise 
was born Marie De Meester, in 



Roulers, Belgium, on April 8, 1857, 
and died in Louvain, October 10, 
L928. She is, therefore, a woman of 
our day. Moreover, she was un- 
doubtedly one of the most daring of 
the apostolic women of our modern 
times. With the patent help of God 
she started and firmly established a 
work which far exceeds the most op- 
timistic of human prospects, the 
most daring estimates, the most in- 
dustrious forces. In the hands of 
Divine Providence she was an .in- 
strument pliant and docile, and so 
Li was that her undertaking, cri- 
ticized a I first to be rash and silly, 
grew strong and vast, compelling the 
admiration and sympathy ol pVery- 
one • 

CALL TO THE MISSIONS 

When Marie De Meester was 
barely nineteen years, she distinctly 
heard the call of the Master, a call 
That sounded clearly in her pious 
soul. The life of a missioner ap- 
pealed to her. . .but that was in the 
year 1876, and in those days, the 
desire for the far away missions, in 
a young' woman was a rare thing not 
entirely free from the suspicion of 
a craving for a change. This ex- 
plains Why more than one person 
thought it a duty to dissuade her- So 
sfee entered the Convent of the 
Canonesses of St. Agustin, a teaching 
order, where her talents of mind 
and heart proved of great value. 

The students entrusted to her care 
wore irresistibly drawn towards this 
efficient teacher, who captivated 
them by her inspiring lessons, and 
whose radiant saintliness imparted 
lo them her own ardent love for 
God 'and souls. 

Then came the daj r when Father 
Victor Veleure working in South In- 
dia, answered u Yes, come quickly", 



By RACHEL ENRIGUEZ 
FIDELINO 




As a woman of God 

to the question, "Would some teach- 
ing Sisters be of any use lo him in 
his Missions?" No doubt, Dame 
Marie Louise volunteered to lead the 
expedition, but again, an unexpecteci 
decision shattered her fondest hopes: 
the community of which she was a 
member could not undertake the 
projected foundation and the Sisters 
had to renounce all hope of beteg 
a missionary. 

But man proposes and God dis- 
poses! He had chosen Marie Louise 
as an instrument, and He was with 
her always, and after overcoming all 
difficulties, she finally obtained the 
ecclesiastical permission to set put 
for India. 

INDIA, THE FIELD OF HER 
FIRST LABOR 

She arrived on October 20, 1897, 
in Quilon, and when some weeks 
later she made a triumphal entry in 
Mulagamudu, the entire village 
turned out to give a hearty welcome 
to this valiant woman who was sent 
by God. In her dwelling, so humble 
that poverty was at home in it she 



SEPTEMBER, 1947 



I] 



studied the Tamil, the only language 
she rould use in speaking to the or- 
phans and old women ha her care. 

Her virile energy and charming 
kindness won all hearts and did 
wonders in the mission field. The 
tree of the new Congregation she has 



Philippines where so much good 
work could be done. The tireless 
missionary, with the permission oi 
the Holy Father, Pope Pius X. em- 
barked with four of her Sisters, and 
<i month later arrived in Tagudin, a 
small coastal town in the Diocesis of 




the bloodiest battlefields of World 
War II, they started their work. 

TON DO: At the same time Lao 
Archbishop, of Manila importuned 
'.heir help,** proposing as their field 
oJ labor the" Tondo quarter in the 
Capita] itself, long ripe for missjon- 



J 





Br 



Std Theresa's College — alma mater of many a model Filipina 



planted at Mulagamudu spread its 
roots all over Southern India, and 
grew very vigorously into new trees. 

UNDER THE PHILIPPINE SKI£S 

The attention of the valiant 
foundress had been drawn to the 



Vueya Segovia- Some months later, 
we find her at Bontoc, atop a plateau 
in the Cordilleras. For days, tjte.se 
tireless women rode horse back to 
reach their new missions. In this 
tragic sector of the world's territory 
which w?is later lo become one of 



arv aclivitiy. Today it is no l*6iig^5j 
the case, but then, there was n ot 
Mitide Catholic School in Tondo £ *7 
its 50.000 inhabitants. A new fei^S 
p| reception awaited them: sp^** 
louglhes of the neighborhood j 1 ° 
(Continued ov )>-tr/ ( ' 1*4) v * 




ILORS 

MANILA 



'Style of the 



111 V wOMKZ. ()\ IM»o 



TOMAS G. ALINA 

4s ft- Manager 



SABAS C. D1ENTE 

Con. Manager 



. . . We stfll have homesites for sale in QUEZOIVJ 
CITY, UNIVERSITY, ESPAfiA, CAMP MURPHY _ 
and NEW MANILA. L<*s: 300 to 5,000 sq! m. 

20% down the rest payable in monthly in- 

stallments. 

MAGDALENA ESTATE, INC. 

211 CONSOLIDATED INVESTMENTS BLDC PLAZA GOlfj 



12 



THE QUEZONIAN HE\?i Ew 




SEPTEMBER, 1947 



13 



Fifty Years Ago . . . 

(Continued from page 12) 

loose a hail of stones on the old 
(Parish Convent . which "these for- 
eigners' 7 had just acquired. But it 
needed more than that to disturb 
erther the good prelate or the Cora- 
geous Mother. "It's a good sign", 
they said, "good things will be done 
here, since the devil is kicking up 

already." 

But a short time was needed to 
change "these foreigners'' into the 
"beloved Mothers" whom all Tondo 
came to love and revere. Thirty 
vears later the Saintly Mother could 
look down from Heaven on Tondo, 
which had developed into the center 
of a large Province busy with every 
sort of mission activitv; there, in 
1937, it found room within its spa- 
cious walls for the groups of young 
Tgorots, the children of recenf 
savages, who came down from the 
mountains to form the escort of their 
^cramenta] God in the triumphal 
procession which marked the closing 
of the XXXIII International Eucha- 
fistic Congress in Manila. 

The work kept spreading oul. In 
J 91 3. the house in Baguio was open- 
ed amid the spruces on the Mountain- 
ide in a kindly climate. It was in> 
tended as a rest house for much need- 
ed vacations. But there, too, worK 
was to be done, a school was soon 
opened, and 600 students are taught 
when the vacations are enjoyed. 

Merely to give each Foundation a 
page would soon fill a book. Some- 
lay, as a daughter of St. Theresa's, 
as one who deeply feels grateful to 
her for everything, we hope to be 
able to write the complete story of 
his miraculous expansion. Mean- 
while, we must limit ourselves to a 
simple mention of the names of the 
Philippine Foundations as of today 



and the damages that the War has 
wrought on their buildings: Com- 
pletely destroyed: (Manila) St. 
Theresa's College, Tondo Or- 
pahanage, Paco Catholic School; 
(Cebu) St. Theresa's College; 2— 
Jolo; D — (Baguio) St. Louis; (2). 
— San Fernando; (4). — Bontoc; (5). 
— Sabangan: (6). — Bauco; (7). — 
Banaue; ^8) — Carvantes; (9). — 

Siangan; (10). Pugo. Partially 

destroyed: (11) . — Baguio: Holy 




On u ani to her reward in the 
hereafter 

Family; (12). — Tubao. Intact: 
(13)— Carcar, Cebu; (14).— Tagu 
W, Hocos Sur; (15).— Lubuagan, 
Kalmga, Mt. Prov. ( 16) .—Leprosa- 
rium. New Foundations: (17).— 
Agoo, La Union ; (18) .— Silang, 
Cavite> 



A GLOBE ENCIRCLING VOYAGE 
—MIRACLES HAPPEN 

From the Philippines, Rev. Mother 
Louise went to India again, where 
she established more foundations. In 
June 1914, she left for the Danish 
West Indies keeping a promise to 
the Bishop of Roseay. The year 19- 
19 found her in Belgium, the United 
States, then back again to the Philip- 
pines. 

Should we, marvelling at the sight 
of such rapid and wide spread 
growth of a congregation whose low- 
ly beginnings we have considered, 
ask the heroine of this incredible tale 
how it was done, she would answer 
with our Lady's words: "He that is 
mighty hath done great things to 
me"— to God, then all honor arid 
glory: Without Him, what can the 
strongest do? 

A GREAT LIFE ENDS . . . 

It remains for us to consider Rev. 
Mother Marie Louise on the altar of 
her final immolation. So large Was 
the number of those who sought to 
enter her community, that the 
house in Louvain became small to 
hold them. u The good God will help 
us," the Foundress said with beauti- 
ful trust, as she dreamed of a place 
for her young Sisters. So the land 
was bought, the plans for the build- 
ing drawn and finally the spacious 
quarters at Heverle was installed. 
But the presence of the Reverend 
Mother was lacking to complete the 
happiness of the community, so ar- 
rangements were made to bring her 
there. October 6, 1928. saw excite- 
ment and befitting preparations to 
welcome the loved Mother. 

But it soon became evident that 
the precious days for this valiant 
{Continued on page 45) 



The Chest Clinic 

TUBERCULOSIS 

Complete X-RAY & FLUOROSCOPIC Examinations 
and Modern Treatment at reasonable prices. 

Dr. ML S. PURISIMA 



R-208 Central Hotel 
Rizal Ave. Azcarraga 



9:00—11:30 
3:00— 5::U) 



The Dental Office of 

A 

Dr. Juan C. Pangilinan 
) Dr. 'Jose S. del Carmen 



OFFICE: 
Room — 206 Second Floor 
Central Hotel Bldg\ 



HOURS: 
By Appointment 



THE QULZONIAN REVIEW 



Profiles 



Quezon 

By Sergio Osmefia 

Pres. Quezon and I have been associated together for 
many years, and I, no less than he, look, upon the long 
road through which we have travelled together .with a 
feeling of real satisfaction. 

I do not know what accomplishments could be ascribed 
to my credit at the time that a large share of the govern- 
mental responsibility fell on my shouders when, thanks 
to President Quezon, I was elected Speaker of the Philip- 
pine Assembly in .1907; but I am certain that if there 
were any achievements then, all of them were due prin- 
cipally to him, because) of his able collaboration and 
generous support. There was ' indeed an extraordinarily 
difficult situation at the beginning in the organization 
of the Assembly as a result of the lack of experience 
ajuong ourselves in the task which v/e Were about to as- 
sume; bu1 because of the intuitive and infallible instinct 
which guides nations in their struggle for liberty, there 
were not only elected to the first I'hilippine Assembly 
men of the old and the young generations, representing 
two important epochs in our national history, but, above 
all, these men constituted a very select group of great 
talent and proved patriotism- The presence of these men 
lightened the responsibility, which was given to me. of 
interpreting the sentiments and ideals of the Assembly 
and of the nation as a whole. 

I look upon the past with a deep feeling of gratitude 
appreciating the great help thai was extended to me not 
only by the Philippine Assembly and its members, but 
also by many in that anonymous group of efficient public 
servants who fortunately were aiways at our. disposal, 
and whose names are unknown but who have given, and 
are still giving, a .valuable contribution to the cause of 
the country. Among the men who helped and elevated 
me to the high and inimerited position which 1 held, 
who supported and encouraged me, none was more loyal 
and none rendered a greater service than he who is now 
President of the Philippines, then my colleague in the 
Philippine Assembly, 

President Quezon, with great heart and the analytical 
power that is peculiarly his,, has a theory to explain the 
disagreements we had — disagreements which never in- 
volved fundamental objectives. I wish to say in truth to 
you that during my leadership, there was not a single 
instance in which the President and I were not in accord 
on the fundamentals. It was remarkable indeed that 
throughout the long period of time during which W3 la- 
bored jointly and witn the many problems that arose, we 
were in agreement not only when he was here and served 
as my right hand in the Philippine Assembly, but also 
when he was in the United States as Resident Commis- 
sioner and gave me the benefit of his counsel on public 
problems. 

The main cause of our divergence of Views at one time 
was the situation created by the Jones Law, When that 



Osmena 



By Manuel L< Quezon 



Vice President Osmena is a born statesman. He was 
hardly 28 years old when he was elected to the First 
National Assembly, and even at that time he proved 
himself to be the greatest statesman of his day. Sergio 
Osmena will go down in history as one of the greatest. 
Filipinos. He had the ability to interpret to the American 
people the ideals and sentiments of the Filipino people, 
and to the Filipino people the purposes and objectives of 
the Unitd States in the Philippines. 

Sergio Osmena came to power as the leader of the Na- 
tionalist Party, and, therefore, as the spokesman of the Fi- 
lipino people in their struggle for independence. In his 
wisdom he so ablv presented to the United States those 
natural ambitions of his people which, from the beginning, 
America understood and appreciated; and m the thirst 
for freedom and liberty of the people oft this country, 
there was nol .invoked any antagonism or lll-leeimg to- 
ward the United States. On the other hand, he had ability 
to tell the Filipino people that America had come to the 
Philippines not to exploit or enslave them, but — m good 
faith — to help them attain the independence for which 
they had fought: Thus, ho became the man who made it 
possible for America and the Philippines to work to- 
gether and to accomplish that noble enterprise which is 
today the admiration of (he world and the source of gra- 
titude to the United States on the pari of the Philippines- 
When history is written, the main credit for this great 
accomplishment will be given to Sergio Osmena.. 

It so happened that the Vice President and I have been 
friends ever since we were in college. We entered politics 
in the same year. We were elected provincial governors 
on the same day, and we took our oath of oflice on the 
same day; we were elected to the Philippine Assembly 
on the same day, and we took our oath of office on the 
same) day. He was elected Speaker, the leader of that 
Assembly; and it was my privilege to cooperate with 
him. J. was his leader on the floor, but I must say in 
frankness that while then 1 cooperated with Speaker 
Osmena, it was he and he alone who conceived the po- 
licies of the party and determined how to carry them 
out. I am afraid that the majority of the young people 
now living have forgotten or have never known how 
much the Vice President has done for them, how much 
of the freedom and advancement they enjoy today are due 
to the vision and the unselfish service rendered to our 
common country by this man. Sergio Osmena, as Speaker 
of the House hi 1907, was practically the only man in 
that body who knew any tiring about legislative work, 
and the wonder of it all was that he had never been out- 
side of his country, that he had never seen a legislative 
body at work, that perhaps he had read very little about 
democracy and the workings of democracy; and yet, none 
of our Assemblies, from the first to the last, has ever 
excelled that First Assembly, either in the ability of its 
members, in the character of the work .accomplished, or in 



SEPTEMBER, 1947 



Quezon 



law was approved, he showed his clearness of political 
vision and at the same time his personal disinterestedness 
when he suggested that I should present my candidacy 
for the Senate with a view' to heading the upper cham- 
ber of the Philippine Legislature. Believing, however, in 
certain political theories' which I entertained, I thought 
that the right place for me was not the Senate"but the 
House of Representatives, because the leader of the 
• majority party, in my opinion, should be in the chamber 
which is more representative of, and more sensitive to, 
the fluctuations of public opinion. This was an error. 
From the first day of the opening of the Senate, it was 
felt that sooner or later there would be a clash in the 
ranks of the majority for the simple reason that the poli- 
tical structure of the country had been changed by the 
creation of two new organs which were both responsible 
for and representative of, the Filipino participation m the 
government matters- The Senate, as the upper chamber 
of the legislature,' wished to affirm its personality, its 
prerogatives, and the House of Representatives in turn 
was not inclined to surrender its position of leadership. 
And this, I believe, was the basic reason for our disagree- 
ment. I always said to him afterwards: "Neither you nor 
I, but political circumstances, were responsible for the 
issue/' 

Through the vicissitudes of politics, the man who was 
my principal supporter, who aided me so greatly in the 
past, became mv duet. After this change, I did not have 
die least hesitation in supporting him, because I recogniz- 
ed thai the country had placed him m the position ot 
leadership. And I wish to say to you that 1 have never 
been happier than in the days when I have followed the 
leadership of President Ouezon. And, as he had been most 
loyal to me in the past and had given me his uncondi- 
tional support — in realitv he made possible my carrer 
in the Assembv of Governors and later in the Philippine 
Assembly — I believed it was my duty to follow him when, 
he assumed leadership of the Government, no matter if 
I were not in agreement with him in some of his plans or 
ideas. As a good soldier I followed and supported him; 
and I do not hesitate to say tonight— which to me is a 
i light of gratitude and frankness— that, just as the 
President upheld me when I was the leader of the coun- 
try and just as he had the courage to fight slide by side 
with me and to face all kinds of responsibilities, so when 
the Senate had been organized and he became our leader, I 
was likewise disposed to appear before history as : his 
follower, believing in his leadership and willing to share 
his defeats as well as his triumphs. There has been no 
instance in wh'icH I have not been found by his 
side once events had returned t o their no r m a I 
course. I have always been disposed to s u s t a i n 



' THE SUPREMACY OF MODERN STUDIO : 

MOVIE SNAP STUDIO 



Prop. 
T. C. EISMA 



"Studio of Modern Portrait" 
17:^0 Rizal Avenue 

BART. V. DE JESUS 
Manager 



Developing 1 - Printing 1 
Enlarging * Coloring & Oil Painting 



the patriotic spirit with which it served. It was all due 
to Sergio Osmena. We were nothing but his collaborators. 

ft has been the irony of fate that it fell to my lot to 
have to fight his leadership after a long, continuous, and 
delightful association; but there had never been on my 
Part, nor I think on his part, any ill-feeling in any poll- 
tical struggle in which we were engaged- Each did what 
he thought was right and his duty- As I look back to the 
day when for the first time the* Vice President and B 
loving each ether as much as we did, found ourselves m 
opposite camps, the only explanation that I can find is 
the fact that we are temperamentally opposite. He is by 
nature an evolutionist, and I hav« been all my life a 
revolutionist- He always built, upon the past, while I al- 
ways wanted to jump. That and that alone was the cause 
of our misunderstandings. Inspired by a rebellious spirit, 
I always moved in a hurry, — never satisfied; I always 
wanted to go on without looking back; while he, ever 
measuring the distance, always looked ahead but without 
forgetting what was behind. It was only for this reason 
(hat we clashed; and so y6u find that at the* end of every 
struggle, since there were fundamentally no serious dif- 
ferences in our aims and purposes, it has always been 
possible for us to joht hands again. 

Since I have been elected President o\ the Philippines, 
I have had the good fortmie of having around. me men 
who are loyal to me and who have worked unselfishly 
for the sueeess of my administration; but nowhere have 
I found a more loyal and a more disinterested collabora- 
tor l han in my old friend, Vice-President Sergio Osmena. 

Mr. Vice President, I hope the Filipino people wall 
never forget how much they owe you- I know the Fili- 
pino people will never forget what they owe you. As for 
me nothing that I can do now or in the futhre w r ill ever 
repay you for the loyal cooperation you have given me. 



his leadership; no conflicts have arisen in 
vvhich he was not able to count upon my support; and 
whenever he has indicated to me my position to duty, 
T have never failed to fulfill my assignment, be it in the 
Philippines or in the United States, alone or with others. 
And now that h^ is the Chief Magnistrate of the nation, 
now that for the first time, the Chief of our Government 
is ours, of our own race, who has been elevated to his 
position by the will of our people, I believe that my duty 
ta be loyal is greater than ever- My regret is that I 
cannot, do more because of my limitations. But the Pre- 
sident knows that in the present situation when he is 
undertaking the gigantic task. of national rconstruction 
and of preparing the country for independence, he knows, 
I repeat that I am at his disposal at any time, and that 
neither the place nor the assignment matters. My loyalty 
r 12 iV S 1101 merel y personal, arising " from our old 
Jnendship and comradeship which began in our student 
days and Which has been maintained throughout the 
vicissitudes of our public career; it is based also on my 
iaith m his leadership, on my firm conviction that under 
the present circumstances the duty of every one who 
desires to contribute to the upbuilding of our nation is 
to cooperate firmly and resolutely with the present ad- 
ministration and thus assure its sSuccess 



18 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



uezon 



2). 



re ante 




"He dreamed and devised the 
construction of a magnificent ca- 
'pita 1 city, the crowning jewel of 
i.he fame that was to outlast him, ,? 
with the-e words President Ma- 
nuel A. Roxa s eulogized Manuel 
Luis Quezon, the city builder, a 
year ago. 

That is the Quezon City, the 
boom town extraordinary in the 
northeastern gateway to Manfa. 
t>e nation's capital, 

h Few cities btiitt 
by the genius of 
[man has a storv 
- as varied and in- 
teresting as the 
city that Quezon 
founded. Its ro- 
! mance is a me'l - 
ing pot story of 
! s o c ial justice. 
; coffee cups, war 
; death, and final- 
; iy reconstruction 
: _ : nism . 
In one of the early morning 
breakfasts a); Malacanan nine 
years ago, President Quezon and 
Don Alejandro Roces, Sr., were 
discussing ways ' and means of 
providing decent homes for the 
laborers in Manila's frayed and 
congested slums. 

"What about having the gov- 
ernment acquire a property in the 
outskirt of Manila?" suggested 
Don Alejandro. "It -can be con- 
verted into a barrio obrero where 
cheap tenement houses could be 
built and sold to the laborers," he 
added. 

The President saw quickly the 
feasibility of the proposition. He 
readily agreed. This has given 
rise to the s*'ory that Quezon City 
is perhar^ ■{ the only city in the 
world that was born on a break- 
fast table. ' 

Quezon had been seriously toy- 
ing with rhe idea day and night 
ynti* he had a definite mental 
blueprint of what his dream city 
ought to be — a metropolis splin- 
tered inro a fashionable residential 
section, a university towm, a go- 
vernment center and a barrio ob- 
rero. 

Like all history-making moves 
in his colorful career, Quezon had 
to contend against organized op- 

: SEPTEMBER, 19)7 



po-ition and intrigues to carry out 
his plan to build a new city. As 
has been aptly said, ".little minds 
see little things." The critics of 
the day saw hi the projed; the 
clever move* of an opportunist 
seeking immortality at the ex 
rense of the people's treasury. 
When Quezon tried to siphon part 
of the multi-million dollars ex- 
cise tax funds to hasten the car- 
pentry of the new city, staid, ur- 
bane Commissioner Sayre remind- 
ed 1 he Filipino leader that the ex- 
cise tax money was intended by 
the Congress of the United States 
for purposes other than the build 
inrr of new cities. 

Bi*T. Quezon was never impress- 
ed by obstacles once he has made 
up hi? mind. He prodded on ra- 
pidly to catch ut> with his time- 
table which set the year 1942 for 
the mammoth celebration of 'the 
first international exposition in 
the Far East in Quezon Citv. Then 
suddenly, like a thunderboY from 
the Fue, Mie w T ar hit our shores. 

The Japs came and they were 
not disposed to babv a new citv. 
especially, it bears the 1 name of the 
anti-Jap fugitive leader. The no- 
torious Jap spy mania was set to 
work upon the officials of Que- 
zon City who were Suspected as 
Quezon stooges. Before long the 
dreaded kemnetiai punched on 
; hem, threw Mayor Tomas Mora- 
tp and Engineer Ponci^no A. Ber- 
nardo and others into Fort San- 
tiago It was the signal for Que 
zxm's dream city to fold up and 
pa«s out of the geography* 

Eiphj- months ago the Oucroii 
Citv that was founded by Manuel 
L Quezon was restored back by 
Manuel ,A. Roxas. It has become 
a veritable boomTandia. It is an 
engineers' and builders' * orK- 
shop. Houses are springing up at 
the unprecedented rate of one 
house every \ L hree hours. The con- 
struction coasts of" these new 
structures sum up to several mil 
lion uesos. And. there i* yet a 
space for 50.000 houses— and even 
with these, Quezon Cnv couM still 
manage to be what its planners 
conceived it to be— a city of ma b - 
uit'iVent distances. ■ 

The current itempo is expected 



to reach iv L s peak as soon as the 
government starts to construct 
the handsome, cruciform P40,000.- 
000 capital building in Quezon 
City. 

A high insular official remark- 
ed that Quezon City "is the best 
governed citv in the coiini'Ty:" By 
and ?arge. this is true. 

At least, it is a model in goV- 
ermental economy. Twice the\size 
in Manila, it bversxte* r h e gdvern- 
ment on a P600.000 budget— more 
•than f^f+een times Vs than the 
operational ex^enesp of the na- 
tional capital. The efficiency rate^ 
of it* employees is gained no^ 
tfoveti *he cmaMtv nun quantity 
of the work performed but in fifae 
rh^vance of economv lii the use 
of office applies aijd 

The postwar swelling of cities 
^ ootiseoue^ mountm* of 

Varies Md ^ in ^f^c^i 
fice eqtiitrnient have not atieciea 

Quezon Citv. 

Loathe to mv.sky4u.eh renta s, 
thp city officials content /rhern- 
selve* ^ dispatching government 
bu«^ess in the pre-war market 
bnnrlin^ where even the mayors 
off ir e is as accessible as a tele- 
i>hor>R booth. 

Much of J+ he civic improvements 
iu the city todav have been pos- 
sible through the a^resvive civic 
sriirit of its inhabitants. Its me 
dical health ceri'er* are housed in 
Quarters donated by ladies asso- 
ciation* in the citv. Tts fir*t city 
hieh school was finalfy establish- 
ed through i he concerted assist- 
ance of district parents-teacher 
as^noiations. 

There is not enough mazurna 
in the city treasury. This is nat- 
ural in a cS'y where there are no 
emporiums of trade and busi 
ness, no industrial or manufac- 
turing plants or any other subs- 
tantial 1 tax revenues. It does not 
have much retail ^rade to sneak 
about. Its most telling statistic 
*s probably the fact thn' there is 
less number in Chinese or aMen 
retainers per square mile in Que- 
zon City than anywhere in the 
country. Whi^e in other cities, life 
ha* become a nisrhtmare of stav. 
incr off rbe wolf from treasurer 3 
(Continued tin r<*'g p 27 ) 



17 



The National Flower 



A Review Of "Adeudato Agbayani's 
Authentic History of the Sampaguita" 

By MARIA TEVES 



" Three Women made the Sam- 
pagui a Tell a Lie Before the De- 
legate* of 12 Nations in the Flow- 
ery Empire of Japan" is the 
sma'l truth about the Sampaguita. 
a Hindu Flower that became the 
National Flower of the Philippines, 
which at first was unauthorized 
and prematurely adonted 7 ater as 
our national fTower withal, ratified 
by the Philiopine Government 
after a Proclamation officially 
signed by Frank Murphy, Asso- 
ciate Justice of the U. S. Sunreme 
Court, while still a 'Governor 
General of the Phf ippines, Feb. 1, 
1934. 

Mrs. Conrado Berates. Pre^- 
idpnf of the Phih'nnine Women's 
XJrnv^rsitv. pvnf Rnmona Tfroria, 
fhe Tafp Mr«? Lois Stwprt 
Oahorn of the University of the 
Philimrines made the unauthorized 
adoption of Sampaenita act the 
National Flower of our Country, 
together wfl^h 12 nations in the 
Institute of Pacific Relations 
Conference heM at Kyoto. Japan. 
A Souvenir of the I. P.R. Con- 
ference was prepared including 
the autographs of all national 
dePePT^es inscribed in a silk scroll, 
a white one containing a large 
round space inside (symbolic of 
the round table conference) 'of 
aW the National Flowers of the 
Nations in Conference. Lady 
Windham of the Souvenir Com- 
mittee met Mrs. Osborn and ask- 
ed a simole innocent question 
which embarassed the educators 
of our Country . . . "Will you 
please te 1 ! me what is the Na- 
tional F 7 ower of the Philippines? 
"Before answering your question, 
T wi*h to consult the Filipino la- 
dies of our group", evasively 
answered Mrs. Osborn, who was 
sorely sure /that no flower was' 
ever formally adopted by the Phil- 



ippines as her national flower. 
Mrs. Osborn told herself that 
morning: "We (Philippine dele- 
gates) could not be a floral 
blank" Putting the mati'er to 
Mrs, Benitez and Miss Tirona. .. . 
''The sampaguj a, of course," was 
the immediate answer of Mrs. 
Beniterz "it is the National flower 
of the Philippines." "I took that 
answer for erranted". Miss Tirona 
recalled. Thirteen yea* ago . 
the Sampaguita became >'he histo- 
ric national flower of the Philip- 
pines. Miss Tirona sketched the 
flower from memory and gave the 
de-crintion. Upon her return to 
our Country the said delegate 
noticed her mistake in maldn<? the 
m*;^ f 7 ower a SAMPAGUITA 
DOBLE whfe the buds were of 
the tvpical ordinary sampaeuita. 
Dr. Leon Maria Guerrero. ' famed 
Filipino botanist with Eulosrio 
R Rodieruez, Dr. Quisumbing 
Eduardo. F^orencio Tamesis. Dr. 
Tore. K. Santos of 'the U.P. 
Botanv Department, and with this 
snecial committee on national 
flower, Jorge B. Vargas, then 
secretary to fche Late President 
Manuel L. Quezon, recommended 
in his capacity as acting Secretary 
of AgricuTture and Commerce, the 
adoption % of the SAMPAGUITA, 
proclaimed by Frank Murphy be- 
cause of the sentimental connec- 
tion of this floral bit of heaven, 
adapted to the customs and clime 
of Jhe populace of the Philippines 
in genera 1 and the national gov- 
ernment have adopted this Hindu 
flower to be 'the NATIONAL 
FLOWER -of the Philippines. 

Brought and introduced by Fer- 
nao (Ferdinand ( MageVan) the 
sampaguita. native of India be- 
came an adapted plant of the 
'•'Seven Thousand Emerald Is- 
land" (Fili'pinas) . The. word 



; 'sampaguita' ' does not appear in 
od dictionaries and vocabularies 
We find "Sa-mpaga",- Tagalog and 
Pampango word for '"Flower"; 
"guita" meaning small, Eulo^io 
B. Rodriguez theorized on the 
origin of the word SAMPAGUI- 
TA. Webster's New Internatio- 
na 1 Dictionary defines the Sanip a , 
guita as the "Arabian Jasmine**. 
Discovered by LineauS, lai^er r e * 
classified by Aiton in 1789, the 
sampaguita is known by the name 
of Ja..°minum sanibac; this flower 
is found aP< over the tropics, gl^ 
broils and subscandent. leaves ob- 
tuse, acute or ovate, glos^v and 
often'Mme* 6 to 12 centimeters 
long: member of the Oleacca or 
Olive or Jasmine family; u«ed as 
"scenting* tea"' in China. 40 lb 8 0 f 
sampaguita to make 100 %^ tea* 
when a friend places a Samt>agui'- 
ta garland around your neck, it j s 
a mark of friendship and esteem"; 
a sampaguita lei used to decorate 
heroes after a personnal # triumph 
so copied from the Hawaiian cus- 
tom. 

MARIA ANA CHAVEZ wrote 
about the S AMPAGUITA : 

Litt 7 e Sampaguita, 
With a wondering eye. 
Did a tiny fairy 
Drop you tvhere yoik lie? 
In the witching hour 
Of a tropic night 
Did a careless moonbeam 
Leave you in its flight? 

CALF/A (MARIA TEVES 0 f 
the GSP) adds a few lines to all 
said about the SAMPAGUITA. 

. .Oft, beautiful Sampaguita 
the flower of love, 
Til dream of you 

while the stars arc up above. 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Do You Feel Sorry For Yourself? 

Are you one of those who indulge in orgies of self-pity? Are you ob- 
sessed with the idea that life has given you a dirty deal, and that no one 
else has troubles that can he compared to yours? If you are, then, try all 
of the follounng suggested cures, designed td brighten yx>u up or start you 
about face. 

1. — Go to your room and weep. Preferably, weep before a mirror, and 
if )X>u do not get disgustd with yourself after several ?ninutes. then something 
is wrong with you. Consult a psychiatrist. 

2. — Go and call on somebody, a friend who is ill or suffering some 
bereavement- Listening to someone's trouble 'will make you forget your own. 

3. — Try reading a book on the sufferings of people in war-ravished 
countries- Their heartaches will make you forget or rather, will make you 
ashamed, you ever admitted to yx>ur self that your lot is a hard one. 

4. — Have a new hair-do . Buy a new dress or a new pair of shoes. Make 
over your appearance. Then watch out for the ?'esults. You will like it. 

5. — Get very busy, too busy you would not have time to think of your- 
self. Do something different, even if U were only trying new recipe you read- 
about last Lveeh 



'our 



Are You Spoiling Your Baby? 

It may be thai without your know ing you arc spoiling your child. Per- 
haps you are not as good a mother as you think you are, or maybe yau are 
better. In anyway, check the following items according to your conduct as a 
mother- The correct answers are listed bellow. As a rule do you: 

1. — Praise him for good behaviour? , 

2. — make fuss over his illness? 

3. — pet and make much over him? 

4. — assure him that he is superior to others? 
£ „ buy everything he wants? 

6. — let him see his importance? 

7. — always defend him against other children? 

8— allow yourself to give in to something you had with good reasons 

refused? ' L« 

' (An&wer <yji page 52) 






*h^our ^.MlciLr-clo... 



-TO MAKE YOU YOUNG AND 
SWEET. BRUSH YOUR SHOULDER- 
LENGTH CURLS UP TO THE 
CROWN OF YOUR HEAD AND 
FASTEN WITH BOB-PINS OR 
COMB. TIE A RIBBON LOOSELY 
AROUND CURLS AND HOLD IN 
PLACE WITH HAIR PINS. 

-For girls who want hair covering neck- 
line, this netted chignon! . . . There are 
gaily colored nets in town; hold in place 
with ribbon <or flowers. 

-For evening wear . . . a psyche knot. 

• Pull hair right up to top of head ... tie 
icith narrow ribbon and hold bob-pins 
Work Hair into a circular roll. A hair 
filler will give extra body. 

-The feather cut .. .depends upon ex- 
pert cutting and a soft-natural looking 
permanent. Then frequent shampoos, 
and lots of brushing! 

-For a regal look — these coronet braids! 
Part hair in center from forehead to 
neckline. Start braiding just above lin- 
ear, join ends with hair pins. Or insert 
through the braid. 





■tOu 




30 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Choose-To Suit Your Typ 



Doubtless you long to dress better. If so, please take stock of your- 
self. Find out your good points and emphasize them; then be honest! Reco- 
gnize your bad ones and disguise the m. Once your type is decided, try to 
avoid pitfalls. Here we take three usu al types and suggest a generally be- 
coming dress particularly suited to each type. First the average women. Do 
not resent the word average, but the truth is most of us are just that.. You 
will wear to perfection the shirt waist dress, and none is better thaji the 
dress below. You may have long or short sleeves as you please. 

THE SHORT WOMAN- We cannot over-emphasize the importance of 
vertical lines, and best of all, princess lines .... 

OUR THIRD TYPE, the tall, slender woman. For her, horizontal lines ^ 
are best, to cut her height. Her waistline must be dropped as low as possible 




Your Home 




Easy Ways To Brighten Your Rooms. 



There is no reason why your 
plain or upholstered, straight back 
chairs should look drab and worn. 
When thev do, it is high time you 
do something about it- Got thai 
family "rag-bag" out. That is all 
you need to bring back that bright 
look in your rooms. You will be 
surprised at this ingenious camou- 
flage. 

Gather up ail remnants that 
measure at least a yard in length 
and decide . whether you prefer tfie 
f ruffled or quilted styles. If you ivant 
to slip cover several chairs and find 
you haven't enough fabric around, 
combine stripes and floral design, 



or stripes with plain cottons. In fact, 
even small pieces can be utilized 
to make attractive old-fashioned 
designs. 

To begin, make a pattern of the 
chair seat with, using old newspapers, 
and write the measurements with 
pencil. B e sure you carry the line 
around to the back where the back 
supports join the seat- Then, cut 
along penciled line, allowing 3/4 
inch for seam joinings. The type of 
closing used depends on the style 
you have chosen. The buttoned or 
snapped closing is good for the box- 
slipped cover, while the "twill tape" 
or "self fabric tie 1 * is pix>jyer for 
tfke ruffled type- 



septhwbkw; mi 




—While this doesn't say 

Mania Clara 
it's the latest trend in Mi- 
lady's evening ensemble. 



Evenings — 

sequins, tulle and deli- 
cate lace — the exotic gown 
for the cocktail party— 



* THE QUtZOMAN REVflSW 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
DEPARTMENT' 0<F INSTRUCTION 
MANILA 




m 



By Hon. MANUEL V. GALLEGO 
Secretary of Instruction 

It U well that, in these crucial days, we renew as it were our 
affinity with the late Manuel L. Quezon. It is well indeed that ive 
encourage our people to steep themselves in his unquenchable spirit, 
s.ense the integrity of his leadership, and derive profit from his vi- 
rile program of public service. If, as I understand, "The Que- 
zonian Review" is dedicated to some such enterprise as this, I 
shall be happy to assist it in even way 1 can. 



Chaos In Pampanga 



Pampanga has hit the headlines 
again this last forthnight. Yes, it 
was also about a fight. But «this 
fight was a different one and 
therefore more interesting. It was 
not between the government and 
the huks, as usual, it was between 
two government agencies or to be 
exact, between Gov. Pablo Angeles 
David and Major Napoleon Va'e- 
riano, MP provincial commander, 
and his men. It was a house di- 
vided against itself. 

The controversy of Gov. Ange- 
les David with Maj. Va'eriano, 
with its attending animosity, 
could not have come at a worse 
time. Even without this contro- 
versy, Pampanga is already in an 
awful chaos, and its coming has 



made confusion worse confound 
ed. Until months ago, Pampanga 
was divided into only two cleany 
drawn camps, namely, the huks 
and the anu-huks. The arj.i-huks, 
as is well known, had the day and- 
tne huks were either in jail, in 
hiding or just laying low. Now 
the anti-huks are divided over the 
choice of the candidate for tne 
provinces executive post and the 
animosity between these two 
groups is as much or more than 
the animosity between the anti- 
huks and the huks. 

The division of the arjVi-huks 
over the choice of the candidate 
for governor was reportedly due 
to Governor Ange'es David when 
he withdraw his support from 
Col. Jose B. LingacL because of an 
unfortunate personal misunder- 
standing that occurred some time 
ago between his son and some or 
Col. Lingad's followers. Long be- 
fore the elections. Col. Lingari 
and the province had been given 
to understand that once Governor 
Ange'es David leaves the gover- 
norship of Pampanga, he (Coi. 
Lingad) who had helped most in 
<:he pacification campaign and 
who has the will and power to 
maintain the deficate peace and 
order situation in the province, 
should be the successor. Col. Li- 
ngad has the solid backing of the 
province's veteran politicians, the 
upper class, the guerrilla veterans 
and all the peace loving citizens. 
The support of Gov. Angeles Da- 
vid was transferred to a dark 
horse, Mr. Urbano Dizon, an ex- 
Mayor of San Fernando, a we'l 
known middle roader and a good 
mixer as his principal assets, 
whose will and competence to 
maintain i'he peace and order in 
Pampanga. which is the po'itical 
issue, is said to be much doubted 
by the majority. Pampanga was 
declared a free, zone by the LP 
when no compromise was possible 
between the two parties. 

Here 13 how -the cross current-; 
of feelings are in Pampanga now. 
The huks are against everybody; 
Gov. Angeles David's faction) is 
supposed' y sore against the huks. 
the MPs and Col. Lingad's fac- 
tion; Maj. VaTeriano and the MPs 
are against the hdks and hurt by 



Gov. Angeles David. Quite a mess 
indeed which paves the way for 
the dreaded return of the huks. 

Gov. Angeles David's violent 
rapping against the MPs and hisi 
petition for the transfer of Maj. 
Valeriano on the heels of the ar- 
rest of the Mayors of San Luis and 
San Simon, was a surprise to 
many people in and out of Pam- 
panga. This was a complete voltd 
facie from his former stand, with 
which he has won the support and 
admiral ion of the province. Pie 
has been consistently in favor of 
'he mailed fist policy against the 
huks In picking his mayors, hd 
used as the best criterion, their 
uncompromising stand against 
the communistic huk organiza- 
tion And wo e betide the mayor 
found slack in i-he campaign 
again 1 the huks or worse, iC 
playing ball with them. He show- 
ed them no' consideration, he just 
had them fired immediately. Se- 
ven mayors were fired this way, 
incuding the antecessors of the 
two accused mayors of San Luis 
and San Simon. People arc wond- 
ering why Gov. Angeles David 
resented the arrest of those two 
mayors by the MPs with due pro- 
cess of law since they were just- 
serving a warrant of arrest*; given 
by the court of Pampanga. Some 
sectors of the press attributed ii 
to politics inasmuch as Gov. An- 
gles David is at present a sena- 
torial candidate. But another 
likely explanation is that Gov. An- 
gees David has been motivated 
by the noble sentiment of esprit 
de corps — to stand by his subor- 
dinates through thick and thin, or 
at least while they are not si'ill 
proved guilty. 

The comment of the pub v ic in 
Pampanga on the action of the 
MP's arrest of >':he two mayors 
can be summed up to these opi- 
nions of two men. One said," The 
MPs should have been more care- 
ful and slow before arresting gov- 
ernment officials.'' The other 
countered, "Why should they, after 
all this is supposed to be a govern- 
ment of laws and not of men. Wei', 
yes, this, is the chaos that is Pam- 
panga again. 

—Isagani de A&is 
THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



ARE YOU 
PLANNING 
TO TRAVEL? 

We are booking agents for all 
airlines & steamship com- 
panies. 

MANILA-SAN FRANCISCO 
One way Round rip 
PAA $726 $1305.80 

PAL $700 $1260.00 

By Ship $375 

Ex. Tax 

NEXT ALL-EXPENSE 
TOUR TO AMERICA 

Leaving Oct. 15 

* Service Free * 

Passports. Visas & All papers 
necessary for Travel — Secured 
promptly - Save Tim*' & Effort. 

FOR 60 DAYS 
FOR P — 5000 



Under the management 

of 

J. LIMJOCO 




FAR EASTERN 
TRAVEL AGENCY 

Grd. Floor, Calvo Bid., Eecolta 



!r mm Here And There 



FEU L 
Strikes 



Faculty Pampanga Free Zone 



WILL PROVE TRAGIC TO THE 
LIBERAL PARTY 
By SEVERINO S. SIMVNDO 



One out of every five collet 
indents in Manila you meet is en- 
rolled in the Far Eastern Universitv. 
Among commerce students the pro- 
portion is even higher. FEU is a 
prodigy in the Philippines private 
educational field- Its rise within 
barely ten years of existence as a 
University, both in the number of 
students and in academic standards 
is spectacular and unequalled in the 
Philippines. This year's enrollment: 
is over 20.000 which is the biggest 
attendance in this country, and per- 
haps in the entire Far East. 

Of course this growth was due in 
great part to one man: the late Dr. 
Wcanor Reves, its founder and lift- 
time president, a good educator and 
administrator. Some wags wpre 
even saying that without his guid- 
ance, FEU would wane. Yet after 
liberation a record enrollment was 
registered by the School until this 
year. 

Lately, another unusual spectacle 
was revealed within the FEU cam- 
pus and this time not quite compli- 
mentary. Excepting two, the whole 
professorial staff of its Institute of 
Law headed by the acting President 
of the University, Dr. Monson, 
tented notice to the Board of Direc- 
tors that they were resigning en 
masse, due to unsettled differences 
with the University Administration, 
on November 1947, the end of the 
first semester of this school year. 
Among the striking professors is 
senatorial candidate Lorenzo Tana- 
da. 

The University Administration, to 
otfset perhaps the adverse publicity 
of this proposed strike, has an- 
nounced further expansion program- 
The new Board of Directors against 
whom the law professors are striking 
is composed of Jose Coiuanco, as 
< buirman; Dean Belen Enrile-Gutier- 
**ez, as vice-chairman: Nicanor Re- 
yes, Jr., as secretary-treasurer, and 
Angel Palanca and Dr. Lauro Pan- 
ganihan as members. 

The charges of the strikers were, 
tliat the Presidency was uncertain: 
that professors can be dismissed 
summarily, and commercialism. It 



That a house divided cannof stand, 
should prove a good warning to the 
present three cornered LP criiberna- 
fryrial race in Pampanga. Unless the 
Executive Committee decides on a 
lone candidate to face the Nacional- 
ista standard bearer, the 'Liberals 
vieing for the province's executive 
position may be defeated in the Nov- 
ember' election. 

Presently, four gubernatorial 
candidates; one Nacipnalista, three 
Liberals, may share Pampanfea's 
80.000 votes^ a landslide of which 
had gone to the minority in the 
election of 194(S. The Nacipnalista 
candidate now is expect'X 1 to have 
ihe big backing of the links who 
have surrendered to the authorities 
and are now devotino- their time to 
cron productions and other indus- 
trial enterprises as well as many 
votes from non-Huk sjmpa tinkers. 
How thesp votes may be obtained in 
polling places can be gleaned front 
tho basic strength of the minority. 

In th^ last election, the Huks had 
raven Omen* 67,000 votes against 
floxas, 7,000 votes identified as 
flved-in-the wool anti-Huks suppor- 
ters. However, with the restoration 

is alleged that the FEU is a rich Uni- 
versity, the valuation of its campus 
alone with its five finished build- 
ings, and an auditorium under con- 
struction runs into six figures. And 
the stocks of the University corpora-' 
tion are more sought than the best 
mining shares, and thev can be 
bought only at the blnck market. 
It's no <ecret that the FEU is living 
luVh dividends to its stockholders. 

This is not the first time the Far 
Eastern Universitv has been charged 
with commercialism. Senator Sotto 
pnuod his Bill that made a rumpus 
in its day. primarily against the 
FEU when he charged" in the floor of 
the Senate some "private schools of 
commercialism. But the FEU 
countered that it does not force any 
student to enroll in its schools — 
besides nobody can deny that stu- 
dents get their money's worth 
with the high standard of instruction 
and facilities. 



of normalcy and the continous paci- 
fication drive, these Liberal vote£ 
may be enhanced due to the people's 
anti-communist attitude toward the 
Huks in the province today. Also, 
with the creation of the Republican 
Social Movement and the peasant's 
adherence to its tenets, as well as 
assertion of the political leadership 
of Hon. Pablo Angeles David, the 
present majority party's strength, 
may greatly reduce the minority 
votes to over 50 f ^ 

Inspite of the tremendous depre- 
ciation of the minority votes, inde 
pendent political fence-sitters who 
are in the know of the present "free* 
for-all" Liberal Party fiefci fear the 
collapse of the said candidates at the . 
hands of Dr. Emilio Cortez, Nacio- 
nalista's best Man. 

Dr. Cortez intimated to this writer 
that hp need not ca'mpaign to win 
the ejection on November with 
three challengers against him. Flow- 
ever, he claimed, if Ins Opponent is 
Hon. Pab^o Angeles David, he said, 
he may be compelled to make the 
rounds of the rural Mks in the pro- 
vince, an advantage, he claimed, 
his three challengers can't have due 
to risk and personal danger. 

In the meanwhile, the three Li- 
beral candidates are now running 
their political machineries in full 
blast, leaving no stone unturned in 
their drive v to swing th e people to 
their sides each optimistic of victory 
in the rolls. These three candidates 
are, Col. Jose B. Lingad. Liberal 
candidate, right wing, Baluyut fac- 
tion, Urbano Dizon, another Libera), 
David faction, left wing, and Hon. 
Fausto Gonzalos-Siorco who left an 
eight hundred pesos-job to run for 
governor. 

Col. Lingad is assured of the 16,- 
000 votes from the War Veterans 
Legion alone, the RSM and with 
the help of such strong leaders as 
mti. Baluyut, Hon- Pedro Valde 
Liongson, Dr. Diosdado Macapagal, 
Atty. Jose Bahazar and many others 
plus the influence of President Ro- 
xas. Speaker ^Perez, Zulueta and 
also votes from the MPC. Lingad is 
also expected to carry the votes of 



SEPTEMBER, 1947 



the Tglesia Ni Cristo, anti-communist 
religious sect and other voting fac- 
tors in the province. 

On the other hand, Hon. Urban d 
Dizoru is the most popular political 
fierire in Pampanga politics today. 
His hat in the ring was tossed up by 
the Bacolor big gun, Hon. Pablo 
Angeles David, senatorial candidate 
on the LP ticket. 

Dizon's climb to political emi- 
nence in the province was brought 
abou* by his fair play and his ac- 
cessibility to rural folks and pro- 
minent hacenderos of the province. 
During the occupation when the 
landlords fled the province to find 
refuge in the City of Manila and 
Baguio, Dizon r a wealthy hacendero 
was left behind to face and witness 
the raw brutality of the Japanese. 
As mayor of San Fernando, his reign 
of power in the local government 
was a high success. This was attri- 
butable to his intellectual leadership 
and able captaincy of the town's 
sound finances and other public 
improvements as well as era of peace 
and order which prevailed during 
his administration. A good mixer of 
the first degree, he is assured also 



of the province's big votes. During 
the occupation, he was appointed 
mayor, then governor. With the 
Huks as bitterest enemy of the Japs, 
Dizon's task was delicate, a failure 
on one side would spell his doom. 
But Dizon was able to overcome 
countless eventualities. On many 
occasions, his residence in San Jose 
was filled up with Huks from Cala- 
basa and other barrios, intervening 
on their behalf to save them from 
castigation by the kempei-tai as 
well as worked in the release of so 
many Huks taken in by the Japa- 
nese. ' 

When the PKM was at the 
height of its power in Pampanga, 
Dizon was picked up by representa- 
tives of over 150,000 huks to act as 
liason man between the landlords 
and Huk chieftains to straighten out 
'agrarian misunderstandings. Now 
Dizon is looked upon as a diplomat- 
plenipotentiary, a man of the people 
looking upon him for salvation of 
the too much mutilated, civil-strife- 
ridden Pampanga. 

The third man in the LP ring is 
the multi-degreed, Hon. Fausto Gon- 
zales Sioco- He is a menace to the 
victory of either Lingad or Dizon 



over Dr. Cortez. He tossed his hat 
in the political ring with the premise 
that Pampanga 7 s sickness is also 
that of the Nation, and that he said, 
such kind of sufferings should be 
cured by a political sciencetist and 
sociologist. He claims to be the right 
sociologist to cure the sickness of 
the state. He is being back up by 
Col. Banal of the Banal Regiment, 
with the support of 29,000 votes. 
This Pampanga sociologist, he will 
tell you he is, once revealed to this 
writer that he is not infavor of the 
present administration policy in 
Pampanga which cost so much lives 
already. He is opposed, he said, to 
the killings, right and left. Com- 
munism, he .declared, can be cured 
by killing the principles instead of 
the believers in its doctrines. This 
can be applied, he said, in Pampanga. ' 

As it looked now, only the Exe- 
cutive Committee of the Liberal 
Party can save the disintegration of 
Liberal votes in the province. If 
said committee will tolerate the 
presence of three fighters against 
the minority, the November election 
is a sure bait to Dr. Cortez who is 
popidarly expected to pull big votes 
to defeat any of his opponents. 



NOW SHOWING AT THE 

BOULEVARD THEATRE 

(HOME OF REPUBLIC PICTURES) 



DRY SEALS # RUBBER STAMPS 
I ■ — — ^ 1 — ' — • — ~ — — — ' 

AUTOGRAPH & PHOTO ALBUMS 



MECII. DRAWING INSTRUMENTS 




FILE CARDS # FOLDERS 
MEMO & NOTEBOOKS 





Prices 
Beat! 



HARRY CAREY -BRlM CABOT - (RENE RICH - LEE DIM 

•i-dCTEPHEN GRANT • TOM POWER j • PAUL HURST 

WMien and Directed by James Edward Grant 

A iOMN WAYN£ PRODUCTION 




VASQUEZ 1%% INC. 



MAIN OFFICE-STORE: 
740-742 R. Hidalgo 



DOWNTOWN STORE; 

Sta. Cruz Bldg\ 



26 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Selection Of Ipo-Novaliches Area For Capitol Site 



The committee appointed by 
President Roxas to determine the 
best site for the proposed capitol 
city of the Republic has recom- 
mended, in its report released Sa- 
turday in Malacanan, the Ipo-Nova- 
liches area near Quezon City as the 
most preferred place among the 16 
areas sconsidered and investigated. 

The committee rating of a place 
was based on consideration of ge- 
neral sanitation, public works deve- 
lopment, strategic points, scenic 
resources and administrative coordi- 
nation. 

On the basis' of these tests the Ipo- 
Novaliches area has the highest 
composite rating of 72.5 per cent; 
Baguio comes second, with G8.3 per 
cent. The first choice covers a part 



of the Quezon City area extending 
northward along the Marikina river 
to the upper limits -of Novaliches 
reservoir watershed, thence west to 
the boundary line of Rizal and Bula- 
can, and down to meet the boundary 
line again of Quezon City. 

(The Ipo-Novaliches site has an 
approximate total area of 16,200 
hectares, one-fourth of which is 
owned b}- the government- The 
capitol building, the executive man- 
sion, and executive offices and other 
administration buildings will be lo- 
cated on rolling ground with an 
elevation of approximately 300 feet 
above sea level. Floods, such as the 
one in Manila last August will be 
almost impossible in this proposed 
capitol site. 



The City That Quezon Dreamed 

{Con turned from page 17) 



door, Quezon City has no record 
of ordinances designed to make 
sucker of its citizens or any I rick 
for the extracting 1 of coins from 
its taxpayers. 

If President Quezon were a'ive 
/ 0-day, he would be delighted to 
find his dream city free from the 
festering sore that make modern 
metropolis seem like "cities of 
brotherly "oct" It does not have 
a nuisance and dust problem; beg- 
' garism and racketeering are un- 
known; no Crime wave of any 
sort; its streets are never choked 
by death dealing traffics, commer- 
cialized pro titution and vices are 
nil; juvenile delinquency and ma- 
chine politics are non-exisl'ent. 
Politica 1 malpractices like nepo- 
tism, the awarding of lush con- 
trast to political courtiers, assess- 
ment of properties to suit friends 
and enemies, police incompetence 
and graft which are gnawing at 
the vita: s of municipal govern- 
ments in thi« country are absent. 

Quezon City is primarily a 
home place. It is n&. a Mecca for 
thrill-seekers. Life is unruffled 
hv the hurly-burly of modern ci- 
tteft Government "big-shots" and 
real estate magnates come to 
Quezon City ) L o live in a sort of 
feudal suburban glory. 

SEPTEMBER. 1947 



There is an exodus to Quezon 
City today because as a casual 
visitor remarked. "It may be a 
sad city to behoTd but dandy place 
to live in/' Street lighting is 
spotty but to offset this deficiency 
thoroughfares are really quiet 
afl er nine at night. 

The executive of this booming 
city of 100,000 people is young, 
energetic Ponciano A. Bernardo 
who is a'so the acting city en- 
gineer. He has two-man sized 
jobs. For a city with ambitious 
projects and with so much limited 
resources, Mayor Bernardo is 
making- quite a record in munici- 
pal craftsmanship. He had a hand 
in the prenn ration of the plan 
of Quezon City before the war. It 
is a tribute to the ability of the 
man that hi<* name has been late- 
ly mentioned for rossibV transfer 
to the more important job of may- 
or of Manila. 

Some people may think Quezon 
City is just a common place. Did 
not Gen. Aguinaldo opined that ik 
is the worst site for the national 
capital? A high government func- 
tionary remarked that "it is the 
funnybone of the mother metro- 
polis — Manila" But to the loyal 
residents, Quezon City is the plea- 
sari' est place to live in this side 
of heaven. 



The following sites were propos- 
ed to the committee, and technical 
studies were made on the bases ot 
topography, public works develop- 
ment, sanitation, and military de- 
fense advantages: Bataan, Quezon 
City, North Novaliches, North Mon- 
talban, San Mateo, Antipolo, Nag- 
carlan-Lilio, Santo Tomas-Tanauan, 
Canlubang, Tagaytay, Baguio, San 
Pablo, Los Banos, Sibul and Mc- 
Kinley. 

In its report to the President cer- 
tifying to the Ipo-Novaliches area as 
the best site for the capitol city, the 
committee recommended that the 
present Quezon city be extended so 
as to include all the area of the Ipo- 
Novaliches site thus making the 
latter an integral part of Quezon 
city. The committee recommends the 
capitol city be called Quezon City. 

Another recommendation is that 
all public lands covered by the area 
be immediately declared as not open 
to sale, Jease or homestead, and that 
those sold before the outbreak of the 
war be reacquired by eminent do- 
main. 

The undeveloped private estates 
within the proposed boundary of the 
capitol city site shall be expropiiated 
for public buildings, parks, play- 
grounds, markets, school sites, and 
other public uses, to avoid specula- 
tion, the committee also recommend- 
ed. 

The site of the University of the 
Philippines will remain as already 
determined. 

Issuance of P20,000,000 bond, 
exempt from taxation, will be made 
for the acquisition of private estates 
subdivision of the area, and consi ruc- 
tion of public works and sewerage 
system in this capital site- The 
money from the bond issue will be 
used as a revolving fund. 

The committee that made an in- 
tensive study of the site for the 
Philippine capitol is composed of 
Senator Melecio Arranz, chairman, 
Jose Paez, vice-chairman, and Sena- 
tors Salipada Pcndatum and Pedro 
Ilernaez, Reps. Raul Leuterio, 
Maximo Noel, and Anastacio Agan. 
Undersecretary Sergio Bayan, An- 
tonio Toledo, Juan Arellano, Per fee- 
to M. Vasquez, and Lino Gutierrez. 
Manuel Manosa is the secretary of 
the committee. 



A Speech That Is Ro 



The following is the text of (J. S. Secretary of State Mar- 
shall's speech delivered at the opening session of the U. N< on 
September 17, 1947, which is still being 'hotly discussed every- 
where, 

—Editor 



"The situation we face today may be summarized 
by a statement that more than two years after the end 
nf the war the fruits of peace and victory are still beyond 
our grasp. Men look anxiously toward the future, won- 
dering whether a new and more terrible conflict will en- 
gulf them. We have not yet succeeded in establishing the 
basis for peace with Germany and Japan nor have we 
restored Austria as an independent state. 

Reconstruction lags everywhere. The basic re- 
auliremonts of life are scarce. There is desperate need 
throughtout great areas . . . In the place of peace and 
liberty and economic security we find the menace of 
repression and dire want- A supreme effort is required 
from all of us if we are to succeed in breaking through 
the! vicious circles of deepening" political and economic 
crisis. That is why the United States has placed on the 
agenda of this assembly the question of threats to the 
political independence and territorial integrity of 
Greece 

"One permanent member of the security council has 
three times vetoed efforts of the council to deal with the 
situation. This assembly cannot stand by as a mere spec- 
tator while a member of the United Nations is endanger- 
ed by attacks from abroad. 

"If the United Nations should fail to protect the 
i'nteo-ritv of one small state the security of nil smnll states 
wnild ho placed in jeopardy. The inability of the se- 
curity council to take effective action in this case passes 
the grave rsponsibility to the general assembly. 

"I am confident that the general assembly will not 
foil to meet this responsibility. It must do so if the or- 
ganization is to carry out its fundamental purposes. The 
United States delegation will therefore submit to the as- 
sembly a resolution which will contain the finding of 
responsibility; will call upon Albania, Bugaria and 
Yugoslavia to cea-e and desist from rendering further 
assistance or support to the guerrillas in Greece; to esta- 
blish a commission to assist in the implementation of 
rhese recommendations and to investigate the facts with 
regard to compliance therewith: and make other appro- 
28 



Pnate recommendations to the states concerned... The 
special committee on Palestine is to be highly commend- 
ed for its contribution to the solution of this problem. . . 
We realize that whatever is the solution recommended 
by the gonerai assembly it cannot be ideally satisfactory 
to either of the two great peoples primarily concerned. . . 
The Government of the United States gives great weight 
not only to the recommendations which met with una- 
nimous approval' of the special committee but also those 
v^hich have been approved by a majority of that com- 
mittee. 

"The preponderant majority of the atomic energy 
commission has made real progress in spelling out in 
detail the functions and powers of the international con- 
trol agency which would provide a framework for ef- 
fective atomic energy control. Two nations, however, 
have been unwilling to join in the majority of the con- 
clusions reached. This is a disturbing and ominous fact 

"In dealing with facts presented by the advent of 
atomic energy, th e majority has devised a system of con- 
trol for which while it is daring and bold is in our view 
essential for security against atomic warfare. The mino- 
rity has evidently been unwilling to face these same 
facts realistically. 

"Since the United States realizes fully the conse- 
quences of failure to attain effective international control, 
we stall continue our efforts in the atomic energy com- 
mission to carry foward our work along the lines of the 
majority views... if ' the minority persists in refusing 
to join with the majority, th Q atomic energy commission 
soon may be faced with the conclusion that it is unable 
to complete the task assigned it under the terms of re- 
ference laid down in the general assembly resolution of 
Jan- 24, 1946. 

The United States also recognizes the importance 
Gl the regulation of conventional armaments. We regret 
mat much more progress has not been made in tins 

' ' • lIus is a serious matter which should not be a 
subiect of demagogic appeals and irresponsible propa- 
ganda. 



Tin*: QUEZONIAN REYIEW 



cing The Whole World 



"I say frankly to the general assembly that it is thq 
conviction of my government that a workable sj^stem 
for regulation of armaments presupposes enough inter-, 
national understanding to make possible a settlement of 
the peace terms with Germairy and Japan, the implemen- 
tation of aggreements putting militar}' forces and facilities 
at the disposal of the security council, and international 
agreement for the control of a tonne energy. 

"Nevertheless, w^e believe it is important not to 
delay the formulation of a system of arms regulation for 
implementation when conditions permit. 

Thp exercise of the veto power in the scuritv coun- 
cil has closest bearing on the success and vitality of the 
United Nations. In the past the United States had been 
reluctant to encourage proposals for changes in the system 
of voting in the security council. . . W e wished to permit 
full! opportunity for practical testing. We, were always 
fully *ware that the successful operation of unanimity 
would require the exercise of restraint by the permanent 
niembers. . 

<<Tttie government, of the United States has come to 
the conclusion that th e only practicable method for im- 
proving this 1 situation is the liberalization of the voting 
procedure* in the council. 7fli e United States would be 
wiling to accept, by whatever means may b e appropriate, 
elimination of the unanimity requirement with respect 
to matters arising under Chapter Six of the charter and 
nirh matters as applications for membership... We 
shall propose that this matter be referred to a special 
committee for study and report to the next session of the 
assembly. The measure should be pressed concurrently 
jn the security council to bring about improvements with- 
in the existing provisions of the charter through amend- 
ments to the rules of procdure or other feasible means . . . 

"j aTT1 proposing today that this assembly proceed at 
this ses ion to create a standing committee of the general 
assemb'y which might be known as the interim commit- 
tee on peace and security to serve until the beginning of 
its third regular session next September. The committee 
vvould not, of course, impunge on meters which primarily 
are the responsibility of the security council or of the 
special commission but subject to that, it might consider 
situations and disputes impairing friendly relations 
brought to its attention by member states or by the secur- 
ity council pursuant to Articles 11 and 14 of the charter 



and report to the assembly or to the security council 
that. 



on 



"I recommend to the members the calling of special 
sessions of the general assembly when necessary and 
might report at the next regular session on the desiraMlity 
of establishing such a committee on a permanent basis. 
In our opinion, every member of the United Nations 
should be seatd on that body. . . Our aims can be accom- 
plished only if untapped resources of the United Nations 
are brought to bear with full effect through the general 
assembly and in otfier organs... Large powers bear 
special responsibilities because of their strength and re- 
sources. 

"While these responsibilities bring with them special 
advantages, the great powers must recognize that res- 
traint is an essential companion of power and privilcgo. 
The 'United Nations wall never endure if there is insis- 
tence on privilege to the point of frustration of the collec- 
tive will . . . The government of the United States 
believes that the surest foundation for permanent peace 
lies ill the extension of benefits arid restraints of the rillc 
of law to all peoples and to all governments. This is the 
heart of the charter and of the structure of the United 
Nations. It is the best hope of mankind." 

-0O0 



VISHINKY'S CHARGES 



SEPTEMBER, 1917 



(1) The Truman doctrine to bolster small Euron^nM 
countries against Communism laid dow r n last March 
marked the first step by the United States to break nwv 
from the unanimity of the great powers in the United 
Nafi'ons. 

(2) The Marshal economic plan to aid Europe 
merely an extension of the Truman doctrine to cover all 
EuropH. 

(3) The United States and Britain are responsible 
for thp delay in setting up atomic energy controls. 

(4) Soviet Russia wfl stand firmly against anv p'- 
tompts to disrupt the unanimity of the great powers — in 
other words, the veto right must stand. 

(5) Official and private circles in the United States 
are accusing Russia or getting ready for a war and this 

is untrue. 

29 



RELIGION and LITERATURE 



The Catholic Spirit Of Longfellow 



Clad in the garments of holiness, 
poetry runs along the high road to 
Paradise. When degraded from this 
eminent estate, she too often leads 
the way to the Inferno. It is, then, 
the beautiful business of the teacher 
of youth to cull the flowers of celes- 
tial song from the pages of the 
poets, and by offering them to the 
children, thus direct their hearts to 
God. If the minds of the young are 
filled with lovely thoughts, there 
will be no room in them for ugly 
ones. Children like poetry naturally, 
and they learn its lessons readily. 
The more sing-song its rhythm is 
and the obviousness of much of the 
poetry of Henry Wadworth Long- 
fellow may be the reasons why he is 
the poet best-beloved of children. 

It is almost a truism that a poet 
turns Catholic when be writes reli- 
giously, and it certainly is true of 
J .ongfellow. Joyce Kilmer, without 
apology, includes several passages 
from Longfellow's poetry in his an- 
thology, "Catholic Flowers". Long- 
fellow, though he falls short of true 
greatness, has justly been called the 
poet of the hearth and home; and 
pne might even go so far as to call 
him the poet of the Catholic home. 
I lis poems are chiefly meditative, 
impressive in their earnestness, sel- 
dom rising to the heights of passion, 
end often embodying or illustrating 
significant truths. In many ways 
mey are a mirror of his blameless 
lite. I have selected a few illustra- 
tions of the Catholic spirit in his 
poetry, not at all with the intention 
of ; exftflusting the subject but only 
mtIa the hore of inspiring others, 
especially other teachers of litera- 
ture, to seek further for Calholicsira 
xn h ls writings and of other poets as 

WO! 1 . 1 

English literature is so largely bv 
Protestant authors that we who 
teach it must search it painstaking- 
ly lor the truths we would wish 
our students to learn and keep. It 
seems that if we are to teach litera- 
ture at all w e must, for the greater 
part, teach Protestant literature Yet 
much of this supposedly Protestant 
•'oratnre, especially the literature 
ot poetry, is in reality surprisingly 
Catholic m message and setting. 

30 



Here is the almost Puritanical Long- 
fellow, for example, steeping himself 
in Dante, in Catholic ritual, in me- 
dieval monasticism, so as to write 
his "Christus"; here is he, descen- 
dant of those who taught that faith 
alone is sufficient, teaching that 
faith without good works is dead; 
here^ is he, kin to those who accuse 
us Catholics of adoring Mary writ- 
ing with understanding sympathy of 
the Incarnation; "here is he, amid 
those who fear everything Romish, 
calling the Pope the bridge from 
earth to Heaven and creating priests 
and nuns who are ideals. Longfellow 
is only another evidence that poets 
must turn Catholic when they write 
of religious themes, for the "simple 
reason that poetry itself is at its best 
the voice of truth. 

The Catholic Chruch has always 
insisted upon the necessity of good 
works in addition to faith; particular- 
ly, in accordance with our Lord's 
teaching, does she stress the value 
of the corporal works of mercy. The 
doctrine that faith without good 
works is dead is set forth in 'The 
Legend Beautiful," an exquisite ex- 
tract from the "Tales of a Wayside 
Inn', one of the poet's most preten- 
tions works. The monk, praying in 
contrition for his sins of indecision 
and asking the grace of greater self- 
denial, is vouchsafed the Vision of 
our Lord. Rapt in adoration he 
hears the bell which summons him 
to distribute alms to the poor at the 
convent gate; and though loath to 
leave the Master he goes to answer 
it. The poor have long been 
accustomed to alms refused or care- 
lessly given but on tltfs day there 
seems to be something sacramental 
in the bread and wine dispensed 1c 
them. His duty done, the mo*ih 
returns to his cell, questioning him 
self as to whether he would have 
adored our Lord had He com e in 
beggarly guise instead of in splendor. 
TCieix he finds the Vision awaiting 
him, and he understands fully th* 

JMs* *- 

This legend is the most beautiful 
among the tales told by the guests 
of the inn. .The characters introduc- 
ed and described in this series of 



stories, which are moulded together 
in an interesting framework of place, 
time, circumstances, represent a 
high average of respectability. In 
the stories Longfellow seems to have 
dipped his pen a few times into the 
cloudy ink of prejudice. "Torque- 
made" is a perversion of truth, un- 
reliable in its authority and its mis- 
understanding of the purpose and 
administration of the Inquisition- 
"The Cobbler of Hagenau" has in it 
a thorough misconception of indul- 
gences. Yet these are tales in cha- 
racter with their authors in the 
Rroup gathered together by the poet- 
Longfellow might b e criticized also 
from the Catholic point of view for 
attempting to poetize his stupid and 
blasphemous nothings against the 
^hurch. Yet here again, doubtless, 
he is simply allowing the apostate 
pnest to speak in character. 

Everybody knows the tale of 
King Robert of Sicily", with its 
thoroughly Catholic setting and its 
theme. Deposuit potentes de sede, et 
exahavit humiles; and any child in 
the world will love it and learn its 
lesson. In 'The Nun of Nidaros", 
5 the be *t part of "The Sage 
of King Olaf", w e find the teaching 
mat sorrow is necessary in life's 
w e*r y turner, and therefore should 
be sweetened by resignation and 
nope and childlike trust in God. 

These are only a few of the tales, 
an d yet there is much Catholicity 
already. Of course there' is a gen- 
erous measure of the anti-Catholic 
as wel but that is to be expected, 
^onglellow gives us much less reason 
lo quarrel with him in "The Chris- 
ms t which dominated his whole 
literary Jif e . The Catholic heart at- 
wevs looks for Our Lady when Our 
ifrd ls Portrayed. The author fails 
to give us all we desire in the rich 
artl . s tically-arranged narrative, 
lihe Divine Tragedy", from "The 
^nnstus ' and yet his one mention 
ot Mary i n < The Marriage in Cana' 
brings her sweetly close. Longfellow 
Keeps to the simple Biblical manner 
m relating the incidents of Christ's 
tirst miracle. In the second pa't 
ot th e poem "The Golden Leeend" 
mere is a passage uttered by Prince 
(Continued on page 39) 

THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Mutya Ng Tugtugin Bureau 01 labor Director 



Tayoy dapat pasalamat 

sa 'ting mahal na Alcalde 
Pagka't kanyang tincmgkilik 

ang Municipal Symphony, 
Sa ginawa niyang iyan 

ar atin ngang masasabv. 
"Ang puson'ya'y may musica. . 

ang diwa rtya ay may arte:' 

Bawa't bayan sa daigdig 

ay may kanikanyang himig : 
Tulaci \ din ng bawa't tap 

na may kani-hanyang hilig; 
Jto'y tunay, pagkat akong 

alipin ng tula' t aw it — , 
Sa puso ko, iyang Si?iing 

ang lagi nang panaginip. 

Binibining ADELAIDA, 

isang Mutyang pinagpala, 
Naging Reyna ng Tugtugirk 

sa piling ng mga tola; 
Tignan ninyo — , kahii Hindi 

isang tunay na makata, 
Nang dahil lamang sa kanya — , 

ako'y nangahas tumula! 

Sa taglay na kagandahan 

nitong Mutya ng Tugtugin, 
Ay magiging kalabisan 

kang akin pang pupurihin, 
Ngunit di ko matkiis 

na sa inyo'y di sabi/iirzg 
S y ya ngayon ang "inspiration" 

sa bawat pagtugtog nwnitu\ 

Nang dahilan sa paghanga 

at pagsamba sa Alindog, 
Di mabilang ang tugtuging 

sa mundo ay napatampok; 
Isa na ryan halimbawa 

ang marikit na Vienna Woods, 
Sa tulong ng paralumdy 

nalikha ni Johann Strauss. 

Iyang bantog nasi Schubert 

na nabuhay sapagsinta. 
Sa tulong ng kagandahdy 

gumawa ng Serenata* 
Kahii malaon nang patay 

siya, ngayon ay buhay ]hl 
Sa Having maririnig natin 

ang kanyang Ave Maria. 

Nang dahil din sa pagsuyo't 

pagibig sa isang dilag, 
Ay naisulat ni Franz List 

cutg malungkot na Dream of Love; 
Ano pa ngdt kung maraming 

■ariistd ang napatanyag 
£ }VV dahil s akagandahang 

lagi nang napapangarap. 



By: Severino S. Simundo 

Three out of ten potential candidates to fill up the 
post of the Director of Labor, now f vacant, are under 
^deration for appointment by ^^ Xa ^S 
the three candidates, Antonio K Abad, Chief, D^ r *e 
ment and Property Division, Phil. Senate, was consider^ 
one of the strongest to fill up the position^ Th<, two othe s 
are Felipe E. Jose, member. Agrarian Commission, and 
Mrs Sieves Baens del Rosario, Acting Chief, Workmen s 
Compensation Division, Bureau of Labor. 

Abad, a former labor leader was for 14 years Dis- 
trict Chie Clerk, Bureau of Public Works, and a hi - 
orical researcher For three years he was special mves^ 
Satt,^ of Labor, in a fact-finding survey 

in Central Luzon. 19364938. 

When the socialists were at the height of their P o- 
»* SSm we on .he of ^ j. "ft |» 

Bahay-Pare, Candaba. ^M^^^^^^ s mediators and 
now Secretary to the ^ d ^^gg the const abrilai^ 
the purported «^ 1.000 
was setled amicably. He mediated on e ^ & , 

socialists. who attempted to ^ awa> t ^ ,g ^ 
the then Speaker Jose \u]o m his out 
blanca in 1941. The socialists were not able tc ^ca > 
their plan and withdrew without causing damage 
bloodshed. 

Abad's invaluable mediation in Central Luzon cata- 
pulted him to a special investigators job W tne 
partment of Public works on graft and scandal througttoui 
the Philippihes. In carrying the social justice program 01 
President Quezon, Abad also appeased the revolting 
socialists of Panipanga and averted their attempt to burn 
the town of Mabalacat with the help of Mr. Sixto P. 
Lustre, a former school supervisor in Nueva Ecija. 

Back to Manila when the La Yebana cigar workers 
staged a walk-out, Abad became one of the organizers of 
the "Katubusan", a manufacturing company of cigars 
and cigarettes.- He was also a leader and Secretary 
General of the labor organization known as "Magbubukid 
Sa Nueva Ecija", And Shortly before tha war, he was 
orator and speaker of the National Information Board 
:fwm 1938 to M 941. 



Kami sana'y patnubayan 

Paraluman ng Tugtugin, 
Diwa namin. ay I an gl a wan 

sa madiUni na landasin; 
Pagkdt nananalig akong 

maaaring sa tugtugin, 
Ay ibangon iyang puri 

at dangal ng Bayan natin 

UaJidon kav 

Bb. Adelaida de Pascual 
(Muse of Music) 

ni Levi Colon no 



SEPTEMBER, 1947 



COMMUNIST'S DOUBLE TALK 



Recently Judge Guflermo Gue- 
varra published an article in a lo- 
cal paper pointing some evils of 
Communism. Promptly he was 
^aken to task in the same paper by 
comrade Jorge A. Frianeza, Gen- 
eral Secretary of the Communist 
Party in the Philippines, who is 
the counterpart of Joe Stalin in 
our Country. In his artice com- 
rade Frianeza refuted whal L he 
called "misrepresentations" of 
Judge Guevarra and then rave his 
own version of communism and 
communists, which contains ?o 
much double talk tha.* r^av be con- 
fusing to the uninitiated in the 
cp^vtinunist menta: T itv nn^ so^e 
whi^h is hard to reconcile wi^h hte 
facts. 

Herbert Morrison, a member of 
the Atfee Labor Cab'net who un- 
de*tands very well th^ commun- 
isms, said to th*m : 'The troche 
with the communi^tq ig fhnt tJ>ev 
have d"ai nurno^e mi^ds. Thev 
sav one thinor ar ,d m °an a n^the>\ M 
This description fits ^auare^y 
Comrade Frianeza, as if it was 
made to order, bv viif u e of his 
published exposition of commun- 
ism. ' pi > ' 

Here are some statements of 
comrade Frianeza that would be 
mtficult to reconcile with the 
tacts. He said, "Unlike all pre- 
vious society, communism i s a so- 
ciety without oppresor and op- 
pressed. ■ According to this state- 
ment, in Russia, the land of the 
first communist experiment, there 
should be no oppressor and op- 
pressed. But the contrary is un-) 
fortunately Jtrue. There is a moun- 
tain of evidence that show that 
never has such a callous tyranny 
and cruel despotism been seen in 
the history of the world as |l he 
poor "Russians are suffering under 
the Soviet rulers. Former Rus- 
sian communists who had been 
desiHisioned of communism like 
Alexander Barnine and Victor 
Cravchenko and many others who 
have been in Russia conservatively 
estimate thait around fifteen mil- 
lions people, men and women, old 
and young Russians, are actually 



enslaved in concentration camps 
which in cruel ty have nothing to 
envy from the much publicized 
Dachau and Belsen concentration 
camps of '.he Nazis. These peo- 
ple were condemned to a living 
death without tria?, most of the 
time under the most futile reasons 
and many times w;Ih no other 
reason than because the soviet 
slave pool of workers needs re- 
plenishment. And what about 
the other citizens free from the 
concentration camps? They T ive 
in constant dread of being arrett- 
ed every day by the 'omnipresent 
NKVD or Soviet Police. The four 
freedoms? Do not ask about them 
in Russia. And this is not otmres- 
sion enough? Comrade Frianeza 
fui her added that Soviet dictator- 
ship is r,ot a dictatorship. Then 
what is dictatorship? 

Another statement of Comrade 
frianeza that can nd: be recon- 
ciled with history was this one: 
"The communists are fervent be- 
lievers in the democratic way of 
?ife. they are most ardent defend- 
ers of an orderly process of change 
because l c hey represent the ma- 
jority." Has comrade Frianeza 
forgotten (his communist histoy) 
how the communists came into 
power in Russia? It can not be 
said that ily was by an "orderly 
process of change". And it is still 
too recent to forget, how did the 
communists come into pwer in 
Rumania, Poland, Bulgaria, and 
Hungary With l L he help of the 
Russian bayonet. Neither this 
can be cabled "an orderly process 
of change". It is another false- 
hood to say that the communists 
are the majority unless comrade 
Frianeza wants to include al\. the 
peasants, laborers and wage earn- 
ers under the ^abel of communis. 
Why even in Russia after thirty 
years of power the communists 
are still an insignificant' 1 - minority, 
numbering only five minions in a 
population of nearly two hundred 
millions. 

Now the samples of double talk. 
"The communists champion the 
rights to own private property". 



This is the statement which is al- 
so pedd'ed to the peasants in Cen- 
tral Luzon that is why these poor 
people are easily won to commun- 
ism. But*- any communist student 
knows that such is exactly against 
the economic theory of commun- 
ism and as the unfortunate "ku- 
laks" or small Russian landown- 
ers came, to know. These kulaks 
were a 7 so told thrj- they shall be- 
resrerted in their ownership fl^' 1 
at first, while the Soviets where 
not strong enough they were *ofc 
di-turhpd in their ^os-essions. But 
when the Soviet had enough "Pow- 
er, f^y PY^ronriatp'd t,V»e lands of 
the "kulak" \o establish the state 
cWlective farms and the "kulnks ,; 
who resisted were simnlv liauidal- 
ed or sent to concentration camns. 
Conirade Frianeza further said: 
"The Philippines communists do 
not advocefe the establishment of 
a soviet system in the Philip- 
pines." What good is a commu- 
nist who does not want to establish 
a communist or soviet system? Of 
course this is just to allay the fear 
of the people while the commu- 
nists are not yet strong enough. 

Bui': where comrade Frianeza 
reaches the height of candidness 
was when he said: "It is precisely 
further development of capitalism 
that the communists advocate''. 
'Risum teneai:is," hold your laugh, 
friends. Wei!, this is so obviously 
funny to need a comment. We 
would not be more tickled to hear 
than that next time ifc will be said 
that our most prominent business- 
man Andres Soriano is really ad- 
vocating further development of 
communism 



Whafc comrade Frianeza actual- 
ly said was mostly communist 
heresy. We hope that he has the 
party s okay when he said that, 
or he will be purged. The coim- 
munists are trained to use doubfe 
talk and falsehoods as weapons of 
Propaganda. But comrade Friane- 
za should use them more clever 1 v 
next time to be of use. 

Escolastico Fernandez 
THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



The Hulcs, Laurel, Collaboration../ 



(Continued from, page 10) 



remain with his people but he had never 
failed to answer the call of his country 
in time of need, and he was ready to go 
with Quezon on the flight to Australia. 
However, at the last hour Quezon de- 
cided, on ^account of Laurel's popularity 
with the Filipinos, that Laurel should 
stay in Manila, and he, therefore, in- 
structed him to remain and help protect 
the people. Quezon took Justice Santos 
with him. Quezon told Laurel -to do 
whatever was necessary to protect the 
people short of taking the oath of alle- 
giance to Japan. Upon invitation from 
President Quezon, Dr. Laurel accompa- 
nied President and Mrs. Quezon to the 
boat that was^to take them to Corregi- 
dor. Quezon's instructions to Laurel 
were given with the knowledge and ap- 
proval of General MaeArthur. Mac- 
Arthur's instructions were that the Fili- 
pino officials could serve in the Japa- 
nese-sponsored organization in order to 
better protect the people, but he admon- 
ished them that they must not take the 
oath of allegiance to Japan, otherwise 
they would be shot by his order Upon his 
return to the Philippines. 

From the fall of Corregidor on May 
19*2> until October, 1943, Jorge Var- 
as ^ vas head of the ^kilippine Executive 
Commission. During this same period, 
p r . Laurel served as Commissioner (or 
' ^ of Justice. This was the same 



head) 



post which Laurel held under Quezon by 
appointment in December, 1941. In 
October, 1943 Laurel was made Presi- > 
dent of the Republic of the Philippines 
by order of the Japanese who were occu- 
pying Manila. Laurel was carrying out 
Quezon's instructions to remain and co- 
operate with the Japanese in order to 
better protect the people. Laurel served 
aS President from October, 1943 until 
February, 1945, when, over his protest, 
h e was taken by the Japanese to Tokyo. 

The late President Quezon was a pa- 
triot of the highest order. No man ever 
accused Quezon of being a traitor. When 
the J a P s weie approaching Manila, thou- 
sands of Filipinos fled to Baguio and to 
the mountains. It is a matter of record 
that Quezon, in the presence of several 
prominent Filipinos, requested Laurel to 
remain in Manila and help the people. 
This was a signal honor paid Laurel by 
the famous Filipino President. Here is 
further proof as to the high regard 
which Quezon entertained for Laurel. 
Mr. Sotero Laurel, a law graduate of 
Harvard University, and who is now tak- 
ing a post-graduate course at Harvard, 

SEPTEMBER, 1947 



is the son of Dr. Jose P. Laurel. At the 
time announcement was made in the 
press that Dr. Jose P. Laurel had been 
'selected as President of th e Philippine 
Kepublic by the Japanese, Mr. Sotero 
Laurel was serving in an official capa- 
city with the Commonwealth Government 
of Philippines in Washington, D. C. At 
this same time President Manuel Quezon 
was residing at the Hotel Shoreham in 
Washington, D. C. Under date of Sep- 
tember 27, 1943, Sotero Laurel sent a 
letter to President Quezon, from which I 
quote the following paragraph: 

"I am sure that Your Excellency will 
. understand my feelings. Despite my 
firm belief in the honesty, courage, and 
patriotism of my father, I feel that I 
have no right, as his son, to stay within 
the Commonwelath Government because 
of reasons of delicacy and because it 
might be embarrassing to you and the 
the Commonwealth Government. In this 
situation, I feel that I should resign, but 
I have thought it best to first submit the 
matter for your personal consideration. 
Anything you might decide, I am sure, 
will be for the best." 

Under date of September 30, 1943 
PresK lent Quezon sent a reply to Sotero 
Lamel, fzx>m which I quote the follow- 

"Your letter of September 27 touched 

18 a traitor either * the 

Wv him personally and have been 
closely connected with him officially for 
many years. I believe he is doing what 

rest of the Filipino people for the time 
being. After saying what I have said, 
it iB a matter for you to decide what you 
should do. If you are loyal to AmeS 
and to my Government, sta y on the job. 
it you are not, resign and I will accept 
your resignation forthwith." 

Further proof that President Quezon 
did not question Laurel's integrity or 
patriotism, and that he appreciated the 
service Laurel was rendering the Filipi- 
no p-ople during Japanese occupation, 
can be found in the book: The good 
Fight which was personally written by 
the late President Quezon just before 
his death. 

In February, 1947, 1 dined in th e horn - 
of one of the most outstanding Filipinos 
in Manila. This man held a high post 
under President Quezon and President 



Osmena. In 1946 he was appointed to a 
high post by President Koxas. When I 
asked this man what he thought of Lau- 
rel, he replied: "Laurel is one of our 
greatest patriots. He has devoted his 
life and has given the best there is in 
him for the betterment of his people." 

I sailed from Manila February 28, 
1947. Just 10 days before I left, I called 
at the home of Hon. Elpidio Quirino, 
Vice Fresicient, Philippine Republic. I 
was accompanied by Justice Sabino Pa- 
dilla, a member of the Supreme Court of 
the Philippines. During our talk I show- 
ed Mr. Quirino a photograph which had 
been given to me by Justice Padilla. It 
was a photograph of three young Filipi- 
nos who were classmates and bosom 
friends at college. The three young men 
were devoted friends in youth before en- 
tering college, and their friendship and 
admiration for each other has remained 
steadfast down through the years up' to 
the present time. These three men have 
been honored with high offices many 
times by the Filipino people. Justice 
Padilla served 10 years as assistant at- 
torney general. He served 17 years as a 
judge of the court of appeals. He is now 
serving as justice of supreme court* 
Philippine Kepublic, by appointment of 
President Koxas. Thus Padilla served 
under President Quezon, President Os- 
mena, and President Roxas. Hon. Elpi- 
dio Quirino was a member of President 
Quezon's Cabinet, and he is now Vice 
President of the Philippine Repub- 
lic, having- been elected on the same 
ticket at the last election with Presi- 
dent Roxas. Dr. Jose Laurel, the third 
man in the photograph, was a State sen- 
ator for 6 years. He was selected by the 
constitutional convention to help write 
the constitution when the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines was formed. In 1936 
he was appointed by President Quezon as 
associate justice of the supreme court. 
On December 24, 1941, after war was 
declared on Japan, Quezon appointed 
Laurel to his Cabinet as Secretary of 
Justice, a very important post in the 
Quezon Cabinet. As has been stated, 
just before leaving Manila, President 
Quezon's last act was to designate Lau- 
rel to remain- and help protect the peo- 
ple. The Japanese, upon entering Ma- 
nila soon learned that Laurel was the 
idol of his people. The Japanese wanted 
to win over the Filipino people to their 
cause, and they thought the appoint- 
ment of Laurel as President would help 
them in this objective. The Japs made 
Laurel President of the Philippine Re- 
public. As Vice President Quirino held 
the photograph in his hand on Sunday, 
February 16, 1947, he aaids "Yea, we 
have worked hard and have gone quite 

S3 



far, Tout, my dear friend Beeves, of t&e 
three of lis who started out together, 
Laurel has outshone us, has rendered 
greater service, and has gained more 
glory" At should be borne in mind that 
the foregoing statement was made by 
the No. 2 man in the Philippines, the 
Vice President of the Philippine Repub- 
lic,, and the statement was made on 
February 16, 1947, after the evidence 
against Laurel was widely known and 
discussed by all. 

The people of Manila had their 
places of business destroyed, their homes 
blasted to shambles. Fathers, mothers, 
husbands, wives, brothers, sisters, and 
loved ones were killed. And yet when 
Laurel was brought back to Manila in 
July, 1046, the streets of Manila were, 
lined with countless thousands screaming 
words of praise for Laurel. Banners 
were carried by many thousands an- 
nouncing "Laurel is back." Circulars 
were scattered throughout the entire 
city of Manila. Here is one of the cir- 
culars which I picked up on the streets: 

"Laurel has returned to his beloved 
country. In times of stress he stood for 
us and with us. He fought for us in 
every step when the Japs would have to- 
tally destroyed us. When all seemed to 
be lost he still tried to defend us against 
great odds. He did all within his power 
to prevent a greater evil upon his bo- 
beloved country and his beloved people. 
Most of us are alive tod<ay because Lau- 
rel was the wall that delayed our whole- 
sale martyrdom. He is back. The least 
we can do is show our appreciation for 
him.' 

On August 18, 1946, the people of 
Laurel's home province of Batangas paid 



Laurel £he highest honor he had received 
throughout his eventful career. A mass 
demonstration and parade in honor of 
Laurel took place in Manila. All Manila 
streets were filled to overflowing. What 
pleased Dr. Laurel most was the fact 
that many thousands of residents of Ba- 
tangas came to Manila to participate in 
the parade. Additional thousands from 
fax-flung provinces of IIocos, Cagayan 
Valley, Bicol Peninsula, and Pangasinan 
poured into Manila. For 2 days before 
the Laurel parade in Manila there was a 
continuous stream of cars and various 
forms of vehicles on all roads leading * 
from Batangas to Manila. And with 
tears rolling down his cheeks, Dr. Lau- 
rel said to me; "Mr. Reeves, that was 
and that is my answer to the charges 
which some have brought against me." 

An unusual story appeared in a Ma- 
nila newspaper. It described an ima- 
ginary conversation which could have 
taken place in Manila in July, 1946 if 
President Roxas had met Dr. Laurel 
when he returned to Manila. Actually 
President Roxas did not go to the air- 
port to meet Dr. Laurel. Here is the 
story which 1 copied from the newspa- 
per : 

"Roxas. Welcome, Joe. It is good 
to see you again. We are free, Joe! 
The Philippine flag flies all alone! 

"Laurel. Hello, Manoling! During 
my time the Philippine flag also flew 
alone, except in Japanese military instal- 
lations. 

"Roxas. I have a Council of State, 
"Laurel. So did I. 

"Roxas. have called into service Qui- 



rino, Rodriguez, Tmma, Yulo, Zulueta, 
Abello. 

"Laurel. So did I, and remember, Ma- 
noling, you also served in my cabinet* 

In January, 1947 a leading physician 
of Manila told me; 

"During our period of reconstruction 
and rehabilitation, we need Laurel to 
guide us now as never before. President 
Quezon was pro-Spanish and a large 
number of his appointments to high 
places were given to Spaniards who 
changed their citizenship and became 
citizens of the Commonwealth. Presi- 
dent Osmena was pro-Chinese because he 
is part Chinese. He favored the Chinese 
at every opportunity, and, as a result, 
the Chinese have a strong foothold in 
Manila's business world today. President 
Roxas is pro-American *md seems more 
anxious to please Americans than Fili- 
pinos. The people know Laurel is a 
statesman, an intellectual giant, a fighter. 
His aims are to serve his country and 
his people. Filipinos worship Laurel be- 
cause he is pro-Filipino." 

One of the most badly damaged dis- 
tricts in the Philippines was represented 
in Congres% by Hon. Jose B. Laurel, son 
of Dr. Jose P. Laurel. The people in 
this district were embittered because of 
the damage done to their people and 
their property by the Japanese. Because 
of the fact that his father was in Su- 
gamo Prison in Japan, Congressman 
Laurel was undecided about making the 
campaign for reelection^ to Congress. 



CROSS —URBAN 

SKATING RINK 

$10 (Interior) Raon St., Manila 

SCHEDULE OF SESSIONS 

We<lks Da * s Saturdays, Sundays, Religious and Legal Holidays 

2:00 p.m. ,o 3:30 p. m 8:00 ..„. to 9:30 ,. m . . 3:45 p . m . to g^g . 

fSfS' ■ I?'' 0 " n:30a. m .» l:00a. m . 7:15 p.m. » 8:45 U- 

0 !ft P m ' „ ■ " 9:00 p.m. " 10:30p.m. 

9:00 p.m. 11:00 p.m. 2:00 a m. M 3:30 a.m. 10:45 p.m- " 12:15 p-m- 

.Saturday morning sessions will he exclusively for children* 

At other hours, the Rink may he reserved for exclusive use of Clubs, parties, etc., who may want to charter it. 

I II I II II II I J ■ ■ - || I ll ll I I i i I l i "J* I I 



THE QUEZONUPf BEVXKV 



- Hispano Amity Pact Signed 



. As a subtle rebuff, maybe, to the Soviets' viewpoint now en- 
dangering the peace of the world, the Philippines signed on Sep- 
tember 27, 1947 a pact of amity and friendship with Spain, trre- 
■conciliable enemy of the U.S.S.R. 



El Piesidente Roxas Habla- El Ministio Aguilai Contesta 



"En una de los mas bellos y admirables lienzas que 
cngalanan los rnuros de este historico palacio el genio de 
Juan Luna y Novicio ha inmortalizado, con la magia de 
su pincel, un emocionante episodio de los primeros diets 
de la conquista, aquel en que, segun describe Cecilio 
Apostol, otro genio de nuestra raza, en bizarros versos 
castellanos, , 

u para pactar su alianza 

juntaron y bebieron a la nativa usanza 

sus sangres en un vaso Legazpi y el Raja. 

"Aquel 'pacto de sangre' tuvo existencia ef inter a por- 
que no lo inspiraron y mativaron identicos sentimientos 
y propositus, ni la esperanza de los mismos logtos. ni la 
conciencia de un 'com in destino. 

"Tres sighs han pasado, henchidos de fenomenos 
historicos de extraordinaria trascendencia para nuestra 
nation, que no hace.falia recajntular en este momento, 
y he aqui que al cabo de ettos Espana y Filipinos, en un 
piano de absoluta igualdad, en el ejercicio de sus respec- 
tivos derechos de soberania, se dhn las manos, con sus 
corazoncs en ellas, y concluyen un pacto de amistad, pero 
no al ntodo de Sihatuna y Legazpi, no oponiendo la astu- 
cia a la'fuerza, sino obedeciendo a esos nobles impulsos 
que solo pueden dictar la amistad ? el desinteres, el mutuo 
respeto y el deseo reciproco de hdeir el bicn. 

u Entre los tesoros espirituales que hsjilipinos guar- 
damos avaramente estan vuestra religion, vuestra cultura, 
vuestro idioma, f vuestra institution familiar, piedras 
angulares que sustentan el edificio de nuestra nacionah- 
dad y proclaman y sellan, por encima de pactos y tratados, 
nuestra amistad con Espana, nuestro entronque con lo 
mejor de su tradition. El docurnento historico que aca- 
bamos de fifrnar es solo el cumplimiento de una formali- 
dad diplomatica, porque los sentimientos que expresa 
preexisten en el coraz,on del pueblo fitipim" 

SEPTEMBER, 1947 



-Sr Preiemej, Vice **~**"» « 
del Exterior, Senores: ' . ■ H(ir hl honrosa 
"Con honda emocion acab \f J Q con f e rida para de- 

jar consagrado lo que de sglos pe ^ provtdenaa 

nuestro corazon desde que su culture, pro- 

eligieron a Espana para expand" ^ UI A. en & a lma 
pagar su idioma e infundit su fe catolica 

filipina- r ^ n j n a $u pue- 

"Los espanoles nos quieren, ^l°?J"™£° Sr . Quezon, 
bio, queiarL amaba, el Justre ^t^M title paso 
hallandose en trance en el ff.\%°!?J au eMcierracon 
porgue el cspiritu se eleva aDios.Vcu , hadn 

exactitud incontestable el sentir del pueblo ispa 
el pueblo filipinq- . „imma cinendome 

•To puedo asegurar sin jacUmo a alguna^ 
tambien cstriclamerte a ^ ^^f^panoles al expresa, 
fid portavoz del Gobierno y PffJ 0 /^ " motivo del acta 
3 ,Lenso jubilo que nos ^ja^on^ ^ Um 

T ha * **tetd 'q^suZtidode compren- 
ganada mayorw de \^^J hlo Tlort eamericano quiso y 
sion y hu *™^/ a £Zd P e7ul mismo piano, luciendo 
s up o reconocer f a a ' ^ . imlepcnde ncia respicto 
sus me/ores galas de ™ * 7 [(i f orluna d e acunarla 
de la Nacidn que hare , p na^lOf ^ 

en M b4buceos « ^^So en lo mas intimo de 

^iS^^ fM de Amistad asi lo anun- 

Cim '-En nornbre del Jefe del. Estado espanol y en el del 
Gobierno y pueblo espanoles formu o los votos mas fer- 
intcs por la prospendad y grander de este querido 
pueblo liermano y del muy ilustre primer Magistrado que 
rige con tan4o aoierfo sus des^tos:' - 



Mucleo Cervantino 




Samo! l V' U , eated ) M>. Lorono, Dayrit and Abad 
** Uxcquiel Santos, Jose, David 

©imClRS AND M EM RERS OF THE NUCLEO 
CERVANTINO 



President 

V »ce-President ^ n Verier oso Dayrit ' 

Advise). " Honesto Abad Santos 

rreasurer Pablo Angeles Lorona 

V ' crr tf>r.v l\ Jose B. David 

' ' Exequiel Santos 

aa* x -Members: 

•: p . ] Abi 'd SantOS Jiir r 

cl > r I-oro Uzo «W. Ernesto Paras 

Cannelita Div j - Vicente Abad Santos 

Auritn GonJZ "» ? enn y Dayrit 

" ivr • ,llJHle s ., Leon Lozano 

Jviarja I,nj Sa Yosuim - A "gusto Gamboa 

ulco Arnaldo Dayrit 



The Spanish Language Shall 
Not Die In The Philippines 

More and more Filipinos realize the necessity of pre- 
serving the Spanish language in this country, as they go 
deeper into the history and cultural background ot their 
newlv emancipated Nation. They/ discover that this is 
the language used by the early builders of their n atl °n- 

hood the products of the Schools and Colleges and the 

University of Santo Tomas. They see that 'the outpour* 
ings of their soul were expressed in Spanish, so as their 
demands and pleadings for justice. And the solidarity of 
the nation was forged in their inter-communications, all 
carried 'in this tongue. 

To many, the entire History of the Philippines and 
the Filipino people is still unwritten, and it can only be 
written by Filipinos who know well Spanish in which 
the original records are preserved. Spanish is, as if it 
were the master key to the spiritual legacy of the Fili, 
pino race. 

Positive efforts on the part of private citizens to culti ; 
vate this language, in the face of official indifference if 
not apathy, are not wanting. A national ■ ° r ^^£^ 
LA ASOCIACION DE HISPANISTAS FILIPINOS' 
headed by such wellknown contemporary personalities 
as Senator Sotto, Justice Briones, Mrs. Pum Villanueva 
de KaJaw, Commissioner Luz, Justice RoVira, Don 
Eduardo Tan Kiang and others, is carrying on its share 
of the work. 

Less known altho not to be outdone in enthusiasm and 
effectiveness Sin their respective spheres ot action ar<§ 
c 0 mo provincial organizations- In this category is the 
"NUCLEO CERVANTINO" of San Fernando, Pampanga- 
Its membership is composed mostly of the cream of the 
cream of the Province's younger generation. And its pro- 
cedure is to hold social affairs where everybody is re- 
quested to speak "Spanish, even the mere beginners, who 
are assisted and encouraged sympathetically by the 
more proficient in the language. 



Lilia Nicdao 
Lina Gonzales 
Esperanza Lorenzo 
Lucila Capati 
Rogelia Guinto 
Agapita Aniceta 
Alma del Rosario 
Hilde Manaloto 
Luisa Vergara 
Consolacion Nicdao 
Conchita Vergara 
Ea -Inula Miranda 
Axirora Diienas 
Titus Palma 
Oarthy Baron 



Pedro Sengson Jr. 
Miguel Dizon 
Eduardo Dayrit 
Arsenio Dizon Jr. 
Gregorio Castor 
Antonio Dayrit 
Tomas Lazatin 
Jose Yosaico 
Quirino Abad Santos Jr. 
Jose Miranda, 
Jacinto Guinto 
Leonardo Nicdao 
Pablo Lazatin 
Felipe Yosuico Jr. 
Manuel Lazatin 
Jesus Velez 
Jesus Lazatin 
Gabriel Aniceta 
Odon Gopiao 



TtfK QUKZONIAN REVIEW 



Q. 



uezon 



j-^rovidenciaied de ~^~\ 



er 



(Discurso proniunciado por DON GUILLERMO GOMEL 
en la ocasion del programa especial del Departamento de 
Hacienda, con motivo del 69 o aniversaric del natalicio 
del President MANUEl L. QVWlON ante la Estqeion 
KZFM el Agosto 19 1947). 



Quiero conienzar dando las gracias aJ Departamento de 
Hacienda do Filipinas por hafcenrie honrado sendada- 
mente al invitarme a hablar esta noche en este su pro- 
grams destinado a coninemorar el natalicio de nuestro 
Uorado Presidente Quezon. Ha sido tan l^rga v tan cor- 
dial mi associacion durante la riiayor parte de mi vida 
• con este ramo del servicio publico y es tan grande. mi 
afecto a los hombi*es que lo componen, que, aunque seguro 
de mi insuficiencia, aceplo el encargo humildemente. 

Hoy se cumpien 69 ahos desde aquel dia en que vio 
por vez primera la luz de nupStrd sol el honibre predes- 
tinado, como lo fue Moises para el pueblo hebreo, a con- 
fiucir al pueblo filipino desclo la caulividad del colomaje 
hasta los mismos umbrales do la tierra de promisio" de 
su libertad- No cabe duda deque la Providencia Diviua 
interviene en la marcha de la humanidad para ayudarla 
a conseguir sus asp'iraciones cuaiido estas se encaminan ai 
logro de altos ideales de progreso y de justicia. El medio de 
quo se vale para prestar tal ayuda consiste aparentomon- 
te en hacer que nazcan en el seno de los pueblos, cn 
epocas oportunas, esos hombres que llamamos acertada- 
mente "providenciales", a quienes inspira y a quienes 
dota de las cualidades necesarias para guiar a los grupo> 
humanos por el camino que habra de conducirles al iogro 
del noble fin apetecido. Ellos recogen el sentir del pueblo, 
la pox populi y la articulan y la proclaman convirtiendola 
en vox Dei, a voz de Dios. 

Estudiando la Historia y observando los rasgos que ca- 
racterizan a estos conductores de pueblos, se riota como 
caen naturalmente en dos c^tegorias: una, la de los softa- 

SEPTEMBER, 1947 



dores, romajiticos \ visional ios, propugnadores mas c me- 
nos absifactos de reformas religiosas, econoniicas, politicas 
o sociales: y otra, la de los hombres de accion que. ein- 
papados en la teoria de los misticos precursores, la llevan 
a la practica, la estructuran, la establecen y la imponen 
dandola carne de realidad. En Filipinas, por la gracia 
de Dios, hemos leniclo en nuestra etapa de coloniaje hom- 
bres de ias dos clasp, en el tiempo oportuno y con las 
cualidades liecesarias para cumplir sus misiones respec- 
livas: Rizal, que predico la adoracion a la patria, y Quezon 
que nos alecciono a libertarla y a servirla. Sin aquel, la 
obra de este careceria de solido cimiento; sin este la la- 
bor de aquel estaria tal vez aun incompleta. 

Yd hubo de decirlo Rizal en aquellos sus profeticos 
versos de Ml RETIRCT: 

Y conlio en que llegara el dia 
En que venza la idea a la fuerza brutal 
Que despues de la lucha y la lenta agonia 
Otra voz mas sonora, mas feliz que la una 
Sabra entonar entonces el cantico triunfal." 
Y en efecto, fueron otros los acentos que cantaron el lum- 
no victorioso: el de Quezon cuandd se inauguro el <4 COM- 
MOiWEALTlT' autonorno con la solemne proniesa de in- 
dependecia a plazo fijo, y e l de Roxas cuando so proclamo 
la Republica en 1946 con plena soberania sohre la tierra 
tdipina que en aquel momento sacudio de su cuerpo los 
ultimos restos de la crisalida colonial para volar por su 
cuenta bajo el espacio azul, al fin senora y duena de su 
destino, . - ...... : 

Aquel acto fue la culminacion de la obra a la 
dieara su vida entera el llorado Presidente, cuya tiga™ 



17 



va agigantandose de dia en dia segun el transcurso del 
tiempo nos va capacitando a percibir, en con)unto y con 
perspectiva que permite Ja distancia, la totahdad de su 
labor. Esa figura llenara las paginas de nuestra Historia 
corresponlientes a las cuatro primeras decades del siglo 
actual. En ellas se le llamara el u Padre' de |a Indepen- 
dencia" al recordar como, por lo rectilineo de su conducta, 
por la infiexibilidad de su fe, por la energia de su verbo, 
pudo arrancar del sobera^o la concesion suprema de la 
manumision de su patria. 

Y se llamara tambien el "Padre de la Democracia en 
Rlipinas 1 ' al recordar como fue suya la inicia^fiva de esta- 
blecer bases mas justas en las relaciones entre las diversas 
clases sociales del pais, elevando el nivel economico de 
las clasrs desheredadas- Tan pronto empunaron sus ma- 
nos las riendas del gobierno autonomo, sus ideas, inspi- 
radas en su lionda piedad, en su amor evangelico hacia el 
demlido y hacia el explotado, cualidad que es, en ultimo 
anali^. el mas alto cuartel de nobleza del corazon huma- 
no, se reflejaron en mue^tra legislacion en nuestra admi- 
nistracion de justicia. en las soluciones de conflictos obre- 
ros y disputas agrarias. El primer magistrado de la na- 
cion, al proclamarse paladin del proletario, realizo lo que 
los sociologos llaman "Revolucion desde arriba", que es 
pacifica e incruenta, en contraste con la que se produce 
c *desde abajo" la cual suele proceder por explosiones san- 
grientas y destrueioras. De ellas nos salvo su acortada 
vision politica y sii gran sentido de justicia. 

Persoiialmente. como mas me agrada recordarle es co- 
mo le vi im dia que me toco asistir a una sesion del Ga- 
binete presidida por el. Hallabase enfermo, atacado por 
un mal doloroso que le impedia estar sentado o de' pie. 
Tendido en el lecho alzabase un tanto el torso sostenido 
por almohadones- Muy cerca Da. Aurora y una e"fermera 
mquielas vigilaban, y a "los Iados y al pie de la cama 
sentabanse en semicirculo los secretarios de despacho y 
los taquigrafos. Duro una hora la sesion que el mismo 
Presidente dirigio con su acostumbrada lucidez, sin mas 
que hgeras hitehTupciones causadas por la aplicacion de 
medicmas o por las intermitentes punzadas de dolor que 
n ispaban G l rostro del enfenno sin apenas alterar su con- 
neme altivo y sereno. Aquella figura escualida y ya- 
kM* im ] lm i presiono co * ^ucha mayor fuerza que si 

32 r Y le m hombre er g uido y colosal > y tod ° el 

Durer g f° Ser asunto de im g^bado en madera de 

Muert/del SSt^ * T"" de h 

Trinnfn I i $ 7 que pudo habers * titulado "El 

ria. ' . W"** se borrara de mi memo. 

*Y asi 5 sereno v alf" i 

[ & * <k Julio di loir °' V1 aqUella memorable manana 
el "homh ro ^ 7 ' CUando al izar el Presidente Roxas, 
noaibre providential" 



el iti ° d ' 194 ^ Cuan doali 

* prtr 1 '' ^ hoy > u h ^ m * 

™%«ro„ distinguix arriT de avasalladora emocio »> 
< elaje las figuv h' ^ Un £ lonoso rompimiento del 

Wenrialey- de a ,4. JOSF mVl'r 1<>S d ° S " h ° mbreS *M> 
5 JOSE BTZAL y MANUEL QUEZON. 



LABOR 

and 
CAPITAL 

By Hon. PEDRO MAGSALIN 
Secretary of Labor 

This is a time when there is vital need for unity 
among our laboring masses, when factional rivalries 
should be forgotten and laid aside in the larger interests 
both of labor itself and of industrial peace. There- must 
be a unified labor movement so that the rights, the recog- 
nition and the strength that labor has won and acquired 
may not be lost again- Who can deny that splits and dis- 
sensions in the ranks and file of labor weaken labors 
position* m the struggle for' economic betterment? Who 
c*m deriy that such weakening increases correspondingly 
the strength m capital's position? These are fundamental 
iaets and Li is well to remember them. The bargaining 
power of labor suffers whenever labor unions fight among 
themselves, and if capital takes advantage of rivalries and 
divisions in the ranks of labor, the latter has only itself 
to 1)1 ame. 

But in the unification of the Philippine labor move- 
moot, meticulous care should be taken in the choice of 
men as movement leaders. So long as human nature 
remains as it is, the success of great undertakings will 
depend m a large measure upon the quality of leadership 
of the men at the top. Experience has shown how plans 
motivated by the best of ideas and commenced With high 
expectations, have been doomed to failure by the incapa- 
city of those called upon to lead m the execution of such 
plans, 

Hm 2^f me ". in lJle Opines whose sincerity, 
X i lr ,1Sm "I"" 01 be d0U «; men whose 

T^tho v ° / he ? m ^ e lab - movement 
s Without any vest,ge of selfishness. We know or al 
ieast we have heard nf ^now, or ai 

V fore, mention ffilS?^ f d 1 " e « l not ' ^ 
> improvement ft* have done for the 

are living testhnonials to x *™ k W* en * «W country 
Imbued with genuine lov t °* ^ ^ 4 ^ > 

- the Justice of Ivor's I ^ ^ f abidi ^ ^ 
ed much to the elev-.L 1 ^ mm haVe 
it is now. On tL ttnt T 1 laW t0 ^ 

ipp-s men who ^^^^ « the Phil- 
aie tond of C all ln g themselves labor 
(Continued on page 53) 



PHE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



The Catholic Spirit Of... 



(Continued from page 30) 



Henrv on his entrance into Italy 
which conveys perfectly the Catholic 
idea of the Blessed Virgin's power 
with God and her wiling interces- 
sion for her children. He concludes 
by saying that if the Catholic faith 
had given nothing more than Mary, 
it would have proved itself higher 
and truer than all the creeds the 
world has known. And he does not 
fail us in his story of the Incarna- 
tion. This work as a whole, in set- 
ting forth an ideal Catholic character 
in little Elsie and in sowing the 
ultimate triumph of good over evil, 
is thoroughly Catholic. This, despite 
the winehibbing monks in the Con- 
vent of Hirschau, for, after their 
revelry in which Lucifer participat- 
ed, they were sent in disgrace to take 
the discipline. , 

'The Christus" is Longfellow's su- 
preme effort and he gives us his best. 
There is nothing lacking m his treat- 
ment of St. Peter as Head of the a- 
postles and cornerstone of the church. 
The introduction to "Covered Bridge 
at Lucerne" is a remarkable concep- 
tion for a non-Catholic, in its des- 
cription of the Pope as "The .chief 
builder and architect of the invisible 
bridge that leads from earth to 
heaven." In this poem Longfellow 
has caught the spirit of holy Mother 
Church. There is a peculiar drama- 
tic contrast in the ceremonies and 
liturgical phrases by which the 
Church celebrates her joyful myste- 
ries, such as Christinas, Easter, and 
Our Lady's feasts, and in those by 
which she shrouds in sorrow Good 
Friday and the burial service. Long- 
• felow has imitated this contrast in 
the framework that he weaves about- 
"The Marriage in Cana" with the 
rapturous music of the Canticle of 
Canticles, and in the bed scene at 
Jairus' home with the heart-breaking 
minor strains of the minstrels and 
mourners. One might go on almost 
endlessly to point out the Catholic 
spirit in the first two parts of 
"Chritus", but I shall note only one 
more selection that embodies this 
spirit. It is the story of Bartimeus. 
Blind since the birth of his child, he 
is healed by Christus and in human 
way turns first to the loved Chilion 
and then to God. He begs God's 
1 ardon for this offense, reminding 
Him that He is Himself a Father 
f.nd therefore can undershn id. There 

SEPTEMBER, 1947 



is nothing of the Puritan in this idea 
of God. If is sweetly Catholic. 

Longfellow goes astray in "The 
Dunoniac of Gadara", by stating thai 
numberless: evil spirits, including 
Cain and Belshazzar, had possession 
of the unfortunate demoniac. These 
are discarnate souls, and as such can 
not enter human bodies. Despite 
this and other errors, however, the 
whole poem is Catholic in tone and 
setting. 

In the American epic "Hiawatha" 
Longfellow gives us a true tvpe of 
the priesthood in the Black-robe 
Chief. In "Evangeline'' he paints 
the Sister of Mercy as she really is; 
one who lives for others and follows 
meekly with reverent steps the sa- 
cred feet of Christ. Manv other 
shorter poems also show the Catholic 
spirit in Longfellow's poetry. 



One can but wonder that this sing- 
er of songs who understood the mess- 
c ge of the Angel Gabriel to the 
Blessed Virgin, who could leave his 
brrdens behind the cathedral door 
where "the eternal ages watch and 
wait", who seems to have been 
directed by the great principles of 
the moral law. who knew what St. 
Phet means to the true Church of 
Christ, who entered into the mean- 
me: of the functions of the priesthood, 
and who found no difficulty in the 
consecration of women to the relig- 
ions life-aU stumbling-blooks to the 
ordinary Protestant — one can hut 
wonder that he was not moved to ero 
further and pronounce his "Credo" 
in the whole of Catholicism. Perhaps 
he is only another illustration that 
the poet, as well as the px-ophet, 
often sings of truths which he does 
not jfuBv understand. Perhaps the 
"fine frenzy" of inspiration is not 
altogether a mvth. Be that as it 
may, much of Lonqfellow's poetry 
belongs to our Catholic chidren as 
their right. 



OFFICE & RESIDENCE 
of Atty. & Dr. RAMON 
BALMACEDA at 

DeJ Monte Ave., Q. C. 

FOR 

ONLY 



?8,000 





RESIDENCE OF CHEMIST 
4 ISOCELES PASCUAL 
at ISLA DE BALOT 
SUBDIVISION 

FOR 

f 6,000 only 



Ij 



FOR YOU: 



LET US MAKE YOUR HOUSE 
PLAN: FOR ECONOMY AND 
BEAUTY WE HAVE COMPET 
ENT ARCHITECTS, ENGINEERS, 
AND CONTRACTORS. 



TRY US 



LOMOTAN CONSTRUCTION 

ROOM 211 CALVO BLDG.. 60 ESCOLTA 



39 



Good Food: 



The Chinese Nine Course Di 



By LING AN 



CHINESE dinners are given 
for a 1 1 the usual occasions : a mar- 
riage, a birthday, to honor a 
friend or to celebrate success in 
some enterprise. The guests re- 
ceive invitations in the form of a 
folded red cardboard with the 
name inscribed on a loose leaf in- 
side Written inside the folder 
m black characters are the time of 
the dinner, where it is to be 
piven, the purpose of the celebra- 
tion and the names of the hosts. 

, t _ If i 7 0u arrive at the pi'ace at 
the time ?et you are likely ^;o find 
yourself the only one present. The 
dinner may actually begin one to 
three hours after the time an- 
nounced. 

GraduaLy the other guests drift 
"i. You chat with them, getting 
hunger all the time. Mosfr of the 
^ocia> diversions of a Chinese din- 

fftli^ rty come before th e dinner 
itself i s served . Frequency the 

w V 1 ¥Ji nd Ro dir ectly home: 
nveisation during the dinner it- 

vot^ /i ime at the table bei "e- de- 
SlfS evasively to eniov- 

"realh nf° 0d - 1 Sil611Ce is "<*' a 

Ster $ Ti manner *> th e 

Patter nf T th *? spoons anA the 
Patter ot chopsticks fa heard. 

the number of tables, 
f'omfort-)^ J 1 ten quests 

fore i nut- ] T 1 ' Pa^. i^here- 
l>orate S ^f^d ela- 

«tools rathe?than h o e nXfe Sit °" 

* ^ 

'orations i„ iv, th ?' e are n o de- 
there will center - a * s <*>» 
thing as fl 'ver's'TJ 01 ' 

U1 *nes of dried 

AO 



watermelon seeds, Chinese sugared 
f mil's, dried cured chicken livers, 
cakes and fresh fruit. There is al- 
so a typically shaped pitcher of 
soyu or Chinese sauce and perhaps 
a jug of light wine. 

At each place is laid a pair of 
chopstiks, a china spoon, a plate 
about the size of a but} er chip 
and another about the size of a 
efeucer. There ' is also a bowl 
about six inches i n diameter. 
A r l the food is esfen from this 
one bowl, portions from each 
larsfe dish brought in is dipped in- 
to it as desired. 

The stoa?J plate is used to hold 
soyu or Chinese sauce. A morsel 
of food is picked uo with the 
cho^sti-ks. dinned into the sauce 
and <"\hen nut into the mouth. The 
saucer-^ized plate is used to hold 
bits of bone or anything else dis- 
carded. 

About half way through the 
dinner, boWs filled with plain 
boiled rice are brought in. This 
rice h eaten plain, no food or 
sauce being poured over it. Al- 
most si) the end of the mea, 1 small 
tea bow/ fl s filled with steaming tea 
are brought in along- with the 
teapot. Several bow ] s of tea are 
usually sipped to conclude the 
meal, corresponding to the demi 
tasse. The practice of serving tea 
in the beginning is a western in- 
novation. 

The guests take their pfaces 
si the tables, frequently the men 
being all together and the women 
likewise. The sweets and water- 
melon seeds and other things on 
the table are nibbled until the 
first course appears. 

The dinner is usually described 
as *"he ''nine course', although 
this is not strictly adhered to. 



Each main dish is counted as one 
course, although there may be 
special sauces or other accompani- 
ments to increase the actual 
number of dishes served. The large 
dishes are tf'aced one by one in the 
middle of the table, at intervals 
so that there is time for each one 
i'o be sampled before the next one 
appears. One can return for a se- 
cond or third helping of any of the 
dishes which one particularly likes. 

About the time the first dish is 
put on the table some one, acting 
as host if the host is else-where 
pours wine from an earthen wine 
jue into liny wine bowl's, each one 
holding about a large tab'espoon- 
ful. All the ffuesN drink together 
and thereafter the bow^s are kept 
fi^ed and sins are taken as deseed. 
Seldom are more than three or four 
of the^e tiny bowl s emotied by an 
individual in the course of a meal. 

The dinner reverses Hhe western 
order, running from sweet* to *oun 
instead of the reverse The first 
course, served after the appetizers. 
to usually bird's nest soup, which 
, more lme a stew J han a soup, 
the courses tha); folfow can be 
anything desired provided they 
have variety and contrast. The 
final course is a thin soup and 
is not accounted one of the nine. 

The fol/owing recipes form the 
Popular items in a nine-course 
dinner program: 

BIRD'S NEST SOUP 

, Soak one pound bird's nest 
in cdld water over night. Drain 
the cold water and cook in boil- 
ing water. Drain again. Do 
this twice. Clean the bird's 
nest, being sure to take out ail 
feathers and loose particles. 

Put bird's nest into pot, cover 
with water to make a soup. 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



I r T — »— — 




Theresian celebrants with some of their distinguished 
guests including Mrs. Quezon and Vice-President Quirifio 



Chop one-half pound pork into 
a hash and add to the bird^s 
nest. Cook over sPbw fire for 
two hours. Add one tablespoon 
Chinese sauce and dash of salt. 

Pour into bowl garnish with 
shredded chicken and cooked 
ham, and green Chinese parsley. 

STEAMED CHICKEN 

Clean a chicken, cover with 
water and boil until tender. 
This makes a soup which is 
generally uspd as stock for 
other courses. 

Remove chicken. Dissect in- 
to small pieces, which are heap- 
ed into a bowl. Garnish with 
slices of ham, black mushrooms 
cooked in soup s*ock, and green 
pars'ey. 

WHOLE DUCK 

Clean a cluck. Cut an open- 
ing below neck and remove the 
meat from the bones. 

Make this mixture: one+half 
Pork, one-fourth-pound ham, 
one cup white chestnuts, one 
cup chestnuts, one cup water 
chestnuts.v one-half cup mush- 
rooms. Chop fine a 1 !, and add 
saPt and pepper. 

Stuff duck with this mixture, 
place i n a pan and steam for 
two hours. 

Serve it, garnish with green 
parsTey. 

FRIED PIGEON 

Clean pigeons, it will require 
three to make one bowl. Wipe 
dry. Cook the third in boiling 
oil. 

Place lettuce on bottom of 
bowl before you place the cook- 
ed bird in it. Garnish w^h wiui- 
tun chips. 

This dish tastes best when 
eaten with a special Chinese 
3aJt called wai-yim. 

FRIED FROG LEGS 

Cut two frogs in pieces, 
dip in a mixture of three eggs, 
three tablespoons cornstarch, 
four tablespoons Chinese sauce, 
and a little wine. Fry 'the 
frogs' legs in hot fat, dipping 
one piece at a time, as you 
would for doughnuts. 

Serve garnished with caiili- 
flower, bamboo shoots, and Hol- 
land peas cooked in a Hbtle soup 
stock, and green parsley. 



SHARK'S FINS 

Soak sharks' fins over night. 
Clean out apl the loose particle.-. 
Cover with water and boil for 
two hours, adding two table- 
spoons Chinese sauce, one cup 
chicken soup stock, dash of 
salt, and one tab'espoon corn- 
starch. 

Serve garnished with shred- 
ded chicken, already cooked, 
and green parsley. 

OYSTER SPECIAL 

Soak one-half pound dried 
oysters in hot water. Remove 
and grind into hash, together 
with one-fourth pound fish cake 
(scraped raw fish), one-fourth 
pound ham, one cup water 
chestnuts, one cup whitemush- 
rooms, and a few bamboo 
shoots. 

Make thumb-size sausages of 
this hash, by enclosing each 
with the clinging fat of pork. 
Dip each sausage into egg and 
then fry in he*; fat. 

Serve garnished with green 
parsley. 

DEEP SEA ABALONE 

Soak one and one-half pounds 
Chinese dried abalone in water 
over night. Drain and wash 
clean. 

Cover with water and boil 
for six hours until abalone be- 
comes fluffed and soft. 

Remove and s^ice. Into the 
broth left place one cup sliced 
chestnuts. Put in the slices of 



aba' 7 one. Add two tablespoons 
fuls sugar, two tablespoonfuls 
cornstarch, four tablespoons- 
fitfs Crinese sauce. 
Simmer for half an hour. 

Serve garnished with green 

parsley. 

SEASONED PORK SLICED 

Boil two and one-fourth 
pounds pork for ha^f an hour. 
Use the part of pork that is 
used for making bacon. 

Remove pork and drain. 
Wipe dry. Fill frying pan with 
peanut oil and cook the pork 
in it. Remove and wash in cold 
water. Wipe dry. 

Make a seasoning of narm- 
yai (red bean sauce) and slice 
with this seasoning. 

Heap slices of pork in deep 
bowl over sEices of cooked lotus. 
Place bowl in covered kettle and 
steam for one hour. 

WHIT MUSHROOM CHICKEN 
Clean chicken. Remove bones. 
Cut meat into pieces. Cover 
with a seasoning made of 'ten 
tablespoons of Chinese sauce, 
two tablespoons of sugar,, and 
five tablespoons of cornstarch. 

Cover one can of white mush- 
rooms with water in pot. When 
soup comes to a boil, add the 
seasoned chicken. Cook for one 
hour and a half, adding a little 
soup stock. 

Pour into serving howl, gar- 
nish with cooked shredded ham 
and green parsley. 



SEPTEMBER, 1947 



SOLDIE&S OF DEMOCRACY: 



ANOTHER UNRECOGNIZED GUERILLA 
LEADER SPEAKS 



By Lt. Col. D. V. Baquilar, FAIT 



Where there's the fight and where 
the fight was thickest — there were the 
the Guerrillas, and if the Guerrillas 
weren't around they can be had and will 
be on their way in no time. They had 
been as ubiquitous as ripening bananas 
in a banana plantation at that. 

With the fall of Bataan went the last 
vestiges of our hope for freedom. I've 
never ^een such a national gloom descend 
upon a people. And, looking- hack four 
years ago, almost right after the fall of 
Bataan the people looked about them- 
selves and started the underground 
movement to resist the Japs. 

It wasn't as easy as it all seemed to 
be. And to get in with the Guerrillas 
was rather a masterpiece of amateurish 
diplomacy, care and extreme caution or 
right at the very start you could have 
poked yourself into your own untimely 
funeral. 

Such a gargantuan organization as the 
Philippines underground that has 
caught the spirit of the whole nation 
must certainly incur some unavoidable 
expenditures. The Guerrillas voluntarily 
pooled their meager resources to try to 
finance the constantly needing Guerril- 
las. The FAIT (FIL- AMERICAN IR- 
REGULAR TROOPS,) which I helped 
organized rn Batangas is stretched in 
. six of its towns, incurred expenditures to 
the tune of several thousands. Obviously 
we figured out that these expenses will 
be reimbursed by the government as 
soon as it's tat home again. 

At the close of the organized defense 
of the government troops to the Jap in- 
vaders in 1942, the people of Nasugbu 
had already done something for the new 
underground movement when the Q-Boat 
Agusan III was forced to be beached by 
its crew after a running right with Jap 
ships and planes. 

Against the penalty of death the peo- 
ple of Nasugbu who later became the 
nucleus of the FAIT Guerrillas in this 
town, successfully hid and repatriated 
the (^Boat's crew to theit destination at 
the risk of everyone's life. 



The three years of resistance move- 
ment in our sector which exacted a 
heavy toll on our forces in untold suf- 
ferings, sacrifices, expenses and finally 
a number of casualties is about our 
nearest dream of what people today po- 
pularly call reward. 

Again, when American airmen raided 
the city for the first time on Sept. 21, 
1944, the FAITs in our sector in Ba- 
tangas saved Lt. (jg) William Rising, Lt. 
(jg) William Miller, and John Montgo- 
mery gunner. At various sections in the 
mountains of Batangas and on Nasugbu 
Bay, the FAITs and other Guerrillas 
saved eight flyers altogether which I 
accompanied part of their way to Min- 
doi 3 and back to their base. 



(One of the most delicate issues^ 
on which fringes much of the 
future of the ideal of Fil-Amcri- 
c^jnisin, in so far as the Filipino 
side Of it is concerned, is the of- 
ficial recognition, of deserving 
ri'crrUIas. Hundreds of thousands, 
if not millions of these, who took 
at their face value the big pro- 
miscs dished out by the Psycholo- 
gical Warfare Branch of the Allied 
War effort, thru Kh c radio and 
titft&t means of pro Uganda-, have 
■tetnolbj turned sOUr and cynical 
when, event up to now, they believe 
nothing is being done for them. 

In the belief that the ideal of 
Fit- Americanism must be preserv- 
ed, at all cost, and thaK the proper 
4 solution of the very t-ouehy prob- 
lem of the unrecognized guerrillas 
is a very important fader in its 
preservation, toe have decided to 
establish a department devoted 
to it in this paper. We are very 
eager to Jvelp ifii throwing out some 
light over this issue, so tve are 
placing this entire department at 
the disposal of all the interested 
parties — the unrecognized tmits as 
well the authorities charged with 
the duty of giving or denying this 
recognition — Ed.) 



You cotM ImagSne the magnanimity o£ 
transporting such a strange carg* inside 
enemy territory at the time. 

Besides the intelligence and port in- 
formations we furnished allied intelli- 
gence operators that were surreptitiously 
landed in our sector ahead of D-Day in 
Nasugbu, Capt. Tomas Fernandez of 
Wawa did a lot who was a real sea cap- 
tain and a local mariner by profession. 

The FAIT was partly activated which 
included myself and served with the 11th 
AIRBORNE DIVISION when this 
American unit landed in our sector. Wo 
stuck with the 11th AIRBORNE DIV. 
until V-J, 

Taps has been sounded and as I was 
one of the first to become a Guerrilla, in 
my capacity as an organizer and a field 
commander later, 1 will .still be among 
the first to welcome peace and return to 
civil pursuits. 

Inspite of the fact that th e psycolo- 
gical Warfare Branch (PWB) has 
bombarded us with radio broadcast and 
leaflets in our mountain hideouts while 
we were carrying on the underground 
resistance that "all Guerrillas will be 
recognized and be amply rewarded" 
which heartened and strengthened our 
spirits during those tortuous days in the 
mountains. 

What we Guerrillas failed to under- 
stand was that, and-all that was only a 
part of this psychological warfare to 
case our hardships and sacrifices while 
resisting in the mountains. 

"Now, we who have carried the under- 
ground resistance since 1942, who have 
fought alone and when the liberators 
finally came, we who fought again with 
our American comrades and did our level' 
best and after the fight subsided and as 
we retired to wait expectantly for that 
reward, w e were finally told, out of the 
blue, the government agency in charge of 
the recognition of the Guerrillas has not 
favorably considered for recognition 
by that headsuarters, the 9th Inf., FAIT, 
Caiaca, Batangas, in so far as my com- 
mand Avas concerned. 

Then, If 1 may hazard, who are the 
fortunate Guerrillas that can hope to 
survive the government's criterion of re- 
cognition? Maybe, they ar e the sacred 
sons of heaven, a select and a favored 
few— a very undemocratic exception and 
rather a questionable policy in this day 
and age. 

In that resistance movement weVe 
(Continued on ruge 52) 



42 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Movieland Views 



TAYUG, Ang Bayang Api 

"TAYUG. Ang Bayang Api" 

Produced hy Pedro Vera. Jr 

Written by Alex Sunga and Ricardo Brilliantes 

Directed by Gerardo de Leon 

Players: Leopoldo Salcedo, Arsenia Francisco, Maria 
Luisa, Gerardo de Leon and others. 

The movie is not a story of the town of Tayug, 
Pangasinan. It is the story of peasants of Tayug who 
want to have a farm to work on and live peacefully. As 
a matter of fact it is the story of a peasant. It is proof 
that the main root of all agrarian troubles in the Philip- 
pines is the feudalistic system of relationship between 
landlord and tenant, a system to which some landed 
parties today still cling for survival. 

This is a moving picture with a message. And the 
message is ideological. And on that score alone movie 
audiences should see it and get asides from the excite- 
ment and entertainment fare, an uplifting insight into 
some mora] and social evils that had and still continue 
to cancer the Filipino community. The movie shows 
how human weaknesses, ignorance and greed can not 
help fashion a better world for the masses here or any- 
wher else. 

The picture revolves around the story of Pedro 
Kalosa alias Pedring Colorum of Tayug, who led the 
infamous abortive uprising in that town several years 
ago. And the story of Pedring Colorum might well be 
the story of many a hapless Filipino peasant all over the 
Islands today. . 

The movie is powerful in scope and execution. Por- 
trayal of Gerardo de Leon as Pedring Colorum leaves 
nothing to be desired. Salcedo as the Constabulary 
lieutenant is the usual fiery Salcedo performance on the 
screen Brilliantes' showing, however, stands out as 
something that can not be ignored. 

This comment can not be complete without a word 
of admiration and encouragement to its producer. What 
local movies need today are more producers with pro- 
gressive attitude, intelligence and courage of young Pedro 
Vera Jr. Unlike most local movie productions Pedro 
Vera Jr's picture can not be referred to as just a mere 
waste of film material, money and energy. Film produc- 
tion must have more worthwhile purposes other than the 
lowbrow intent of entrtainment. 

This picture and pictures of its kind should make 
money in the box office. They should be encouraged. 
They are movies we need, to show us basic things that 
really make up for belter living and a better world. 

— Fidel de Casfro 



= N. AREVALO STUDIO = 

ARTIST PHOTOGRAPHER 
TRAINED ABROAD 

Expert in Posing, LipMltff, & Composition 
Latest Styk- in modern photography 
.1226 Rizal Ave. 



SEPTEMBER, 1947 



Alias SAKIM 

It is reassuring to note that the leaders of the fast 
growing Philippine Movie Industry are not only good 
businessmen but also, and over and above all* good citi- 
zens- One feels with this assurance that they are rearing 
delicately and carefully the adolescent industry, not so 
much- for the sake of making money as for that of ma 
king it do justice to its maior role in the cultural and 
oducational upliftment of the great mass < of Filipinos 
They are conscious* of its high mission. And having tlm 
means, the ability and the moral strength behind ttrk 
consciousness, they are decided not to make it fail. 

Tho c e who are concerned with the "spiritual revival" 
of the Filipino people, which was the greatest preocupa- 
tion of the late Presidente Quezon to his death, look up 
to the Philippine Movie Industry \Vith high hopes- It's 
up to the producers then, who. after all, are its real 
captains, to chart its way along this line of their expec- 
tations. 

• Indicative of the sensitiveness of these producers to 
the new social demands of their public are the more recent 
films. These carry a noble message that is brought forth 
entertainingly, catering as much as is possible to the 
just demands of the artist and lover of the beautiful and 
good, that is in every human being. 

A representative specimen is the "ALIAS. SAKIM*' 
iust released by the PREMIERE PRODUCTIONS. INC. 
But for minor shortcomings due to inadequate equipment 
and proper personnel in the supporting cast, and for 
pardonable incongruities in the aesthetic making up of 
the whole from its varied parts, this picture would easily 
get top ratings, anywhere and anytime. For it has a noble 
message to deliver that is in consonance with the general- 
ly accepted moral standards of its public. And while de- 
livering it, it goes into great pains to make its audience 
laugh, think, love and hate and forgive, all without over 
dosage. 

In the opinion of this observer, ALIAS SAKIM, 
marks definitely the coming of age of the Philippine 
Movie Industry. And as £uch it has promise of becoming 
a' pioneer in the production of other pictures that will 
eventually reach the ideal perfect type. 

Now. as to what this prototype is, here are our 
canons: 

t. — A picture, in all its parts as well as in its tota- 
lity, must forcefully elevate man, and not debase 
him. It must spiritualize, and not brutalize him. 
2. — It must inject noble ideals in man, and urge 
him to live by these ideals. 

It must captivate him by being pleasant and 
entertaining. It must be realistic and natural, es- 
pecially in human situations and actuations. 
— M. P. Malupa 



Any Itf&UbU 






, Dr. E. MONSOD 


OPTOMETRIST — OPTICIAN 


1128 Kizal Ave. 


Eye-sight Specialist 


Manila 


* 33 years Experience 



GOVERNMENT MOVIES * 



Pick any place in America today, 
and ask Mr. John Doe what he 
knows of the Philipoines, and the 
chances are he knows very little 
if at all, of our country, its people, 
culture and achievements- And what 
little he knows may be the wrong 
kind of knowledge he should have 
cn the subject. In Europe what does 
the average European knows about 
the Philippines? 

A crying need for the Philippines 
today is publicity and nood publicity 
at that. A lot of this may well be 
achieved through the medium of the 
printed word, or the radio. But ima- 
gine what movies could do? 

Only a government with vision 
and intelligence can realize to what 
unlimited and effective service the 
?)Ower of movies can render towards 
"selling ' the Philippines to the 
worM. Not only for purposes of com- 
batting misinformation about our 
country and people abroad, and of 
establishing goodwill and prestige 
with other nations, but also of help- 
ing towards the maintenance and 
preservation of universal peace. 

Movies possess an easy attraction 
upon the public, regardless of creed 
and color, and movies hold the secret 
of good propaganda in that the im- 
pHed function is comouflaged by the 
expected entertainment value. Mo- 
vie influence is surefire and potent 
because of its plastic hold upon the 
human sensibilities. 

As an educational medium films 
are of unlimited possibilities. By its 
very freedom from factual details, 
the feature film achieves clarity of 
theme which enables it to make its 
point clear, easy and direct. Even 



By Fidel de Castro 

more important, audience identifica- 
tion with imaginary characters is a.i 
va 1 uable asset in developing audi- 
ence understanding of a problem- • 
These film virtues were adequate- 
Iv exploitd by the U. S. government, 
in its handling of wartime emer- 
gencies during the last war. In pres- 
ing problems like mobilization for 
an all-out effort, indoctrination of 
the American public into the dif- 
ferent aspects of the war and what 
America was fighting for, in the 
evaluation and dissemination of in- 
formation regarding the strength and 
ideologies of the enemy, the urgent 
demand of maintaining and strength- 
ening of American tie*-; with the 
Allies, the planning and execution 
of the administration's plans, poli- 
rios and efforts towards the success- 
ful prosecution of the war, in all 
these critical problems movies were" 
tried and proven to have played a 
maior and significant role. 

The Philiprine government there- 
fore may we 1 ] try solving its pro- 
blems abroad by exhibiting gov't, 
made movies for world consumption. 
It nan make or sponsor short movie 
features on subjects like, lor good 
propaganda and prestige. The Story 
of Philippine Independence, Rizal 
<'url or Other Philippine heroes inclu- 
ding the late Quezon, The Story of 
Domnrrfi'.;y in Bataan; or for good- 
will and forging of diplomatic ties, 
scenic movies, like the Hollywood 
travelogue features, highlighting 
heauty spots in our country, or in- 
dustrial and economic film essays 
about our country that will lure in 
foreign capital. The subjects are 
many, varied and interesting, and in 



manner of beauty and effectively of 
presentation and developmnt of Sub- 
lette* no other medium can 
urpass the fluidity, e oquence and 
brilliance of the film strip 

The present government can pro- 
ducP newsreels or educational films 
on the achievemnts of the adminis- 
tration towards the reconstruction 
and rehabilitation of the country 
during the few vears after liberation- 
Films intended to clarify collabora- 
tion issues in the country. Movies on 
the state of Fil-Amencan friendship 
obtaining in the Islands today. All 
these films if circulated abroad will 
set many a rightthinknig foreigner- 
on what to believe and what not to 
be lieve about our country and peo- 
ple. 

The Philippine government also 
may well take a hand at movie mak- 
ing to help tide the administration 
in crises of local emergencies., Today 
the government is assailed with 
varied and pressing problems de- 
manding not onl} r immediate consi- 
deration and solution but also. intel- 
ligence and sparkle in their effective 
liquidation. -These are propitious 
times for the government to stan 
availing itself of the virtues of mo- 
vies to power its planning and execu 
Lion of national policies, programs 
and remedial efforts. 

In pre-war history of Philippine 
movies the late President Quezon 
. revealed enthusiasm in the project oi 
utilizing movies, for governmental 
purposes when he endorsed in the 
movie entitled "Buenavista" the in- 
corporation of his entire speech proc- 
laiming his intentions and plans re- 
garding the solution of the agrarian 
problem then critical in Central 




COMPLIMENTS OF 

ominad^ 



or 



(REGIMENTAL COMMANDER) 
3rd Regiment, 51st Infantry 

G. Del Pilar Division 

BARKER UNIT 

USAFFE Luzon Guerrilla 
Army Forces 



Apalit, Pampanga 



ECLGA 



FIREARMS LICENSE SOLICITOR 



J. C A R P 1 0 

NI< KEL & CHROMIUM PLATING 
I 1 REARMS — AMMUNITION 
REPAIR SHOP 

1945 Azcarraga, corner Quezon Blvd. 



Manila 



44 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Luzon, The government today can 
j&ven go further than that. 

Government movies oh the ad- 
ministration's policies regarding the 
still critical agrarian situation, films 
on the government's program aim 
ed at the amelioration of the masses, 
movies that will help in the main- 
tenance and preservation of peace; 
all these to mention a few. if pro- 
duced and exhibited all over the 
Hands especially in places where 
they are most urgently needed, will 
help a great deal not only in educa- 
ting the peasants and thus lead them 
ai ight into being good and upright 
citizens, but also in bringing the 
government closer to its people and 
thus gain the people's Irusi, faith 
and support 

This is an example of political 
necessity as a primary source ol 
educational films, but it is a political 
necessity other than partisan. This 
alliance has a great deal to do with 
the vitality and the future of edu- 
cation and art. Thus it can be said 
that the film's contribution to edu- 
cation and art here will be derived 
almost entirely from the political 
Jiecesities intrinsic in rehabilitation 
and reconstruction, health and wel- 
fare, agricultural instruction and 
rural sociology, labor-management 
relations and regional planning and 
industrial research for full employ- 
ment, and other questions' of the 
kind now assailing the country. 

The pres.ent government, believ- 
ing in the radio as an effective 
weapon of propaganda and educa- 
tion, is now utilizing its own radio 



■ 




1 



TTieresiuas^ !o the four wind to soiv the seeds of ideal icomuntiood 



station, tf ths administration believes 
in the unlimited efficacy of movies 
towards 'the solution of current alien 
diid local problems demanding im- 
mediate attention and solution, it 
should by now be making movies 
•-for local potency, and Films for uni- 
versal consumption. There is no 
tenable, reason why the Philippines 
should not keep abreast with other 
progressive nations like America, 
England, Russia, France, Holland, 
Belgium, Australia, Norway and 
Sweden and certain South American 
Republics in the matter of exploit- 




SEPTEMBER, mi 



Sla. Theresa's College rises again 



Fifty Years Ago . . . 

(Continued front page 14) 
woman were numbeied- u l would 
be happy to do so/ 4 when asked to 
receive again the last Sacraments. 
On the 1 1 Hi of October 1928, at four 
o'clock a sudden silence marked the 
end. The Servant of the Master had 
entered into the joy of her Lord. So 
it came about that her mortal re- 
mains were conducted with funeral 
pomp into the new buildings, made 
into a mortuary chapel by the event, 
and where silence was broken by 
tears and prayers alone. 
* Into that garden, to the loved 
tomb there, the departing missiona 
ries still go for blessing. There too«j 
each day. tile now generation ol 
novices eager for apostolate and its 
sacrifice, goes to learn the lessosn^ 
ot a fruitful humility, boundless 
charity, and most praise worthy he- 
roism. 

And today, as th Congregation 
celebrates its Golden Jubilee, the 
Rev. Mother Marie Louise de Me- 
ester, must be lookii/g down from 
heaven upon these selected group of 
women the Missionary Canonessess 
of St. Agustine marching joyfully in 
the footsteps of their Mother and 
Foundress along the Highway of 
Prayer and Sacrifice. 

(Adapted from the "Orion" 
and the u Modern Apostle") 

ing moves to its full advantages a* 
an indispensable governmental me- 
dium of education and propaganda. 



Treaty Of General Relations Between 
The United States Of America And 
The Republic Of The Philippines 



The United States of America and the 
republic of the Philippines, being- an- 
imated by the desire to cement the rela- 
tions of close and long friendship exist- 
ing between the two countries, and to 
provide for the recognition of the Inde- 
pendence of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines as of July 4, 1946 and the relin- 
quishment of American sovereignty over 
the Philippine Islands, have agi'eed upon 
the following articles: 

ARTICLE I 

The United States of America agrees 
to withdraw and surrender, and does 
hereby withdraw and surrender, all 
right of possession, supervision, juris- 
diction, control or sovereignty existing 
and exercised by the United States of 
America in and over the territory and 
the people of the Philippine Isands, ex- 
cept the use of such bases, necessary ap- 
purtenances to such base?, and the 
rights incident thereto, as the Unitad 
States of America, by agreement with" 
the Republic of the Philippines, may 
deem necessary to retain for the mutual 
protection of the United States of Amer- 
ica and of the Republic of the Philip- 
ppines. The United States of America 
further agrees to recognize and does 
hereby recognize, the independence of 
the Republic of the Philippines as a se- 
parate self-governing nation and to ac- 
knowledge, and does hereby acknowledge, 
the authority and control over the same 
of the Government instituted by the peo- 
ple thereof, under the Constitution of 
the Republic of the Philippines. 

ARTICLE II 

The diplomatic representatives of each 
country shall enjoy in the territories of 
the other the privileges and immunities 
derived from generally recognized inter- 
national law and usage. The consular 
representatives of each country, duly 
provided with exequatur, will be permit- 
ted to reside in the territories of the 
other in the places wherein consular re- 
presentatives are by local laws permitted 
preside; they shall enjoy the honorary 
privileges and the immunities accorded 
to such officers by general international 
usage; and they shall not be treated in 
a manner less favorabe than similar of- 
ficers of any other foreign country. 

46 



ARTICLE III 
Pending the final establishment of the 
requisite Philippine Foreign Service es- 
tablishments abroad, the United States 
of America and the Republic of the 
Philippines agree that at the rekuest of 
the Republic of the Philippines the 
United States of America will endeavor, 
in so far as it may be practicable, to re- 
present through its Foreign Service the 
interests of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines in countries where there is nt> Phil- 
ippine representation. The two coun- 
tries further agree that any such ar- 
rangements are to be subject to termina- 
tion when in the judgment of either 
country such arrangements are no longer 
necessary. 

ARTICLE IV 

The Republic of the Philippines agrees 
to assume, and does hereby assume, all 
the debts and liabilitiesof the Philippine 
Islands, its provinces, cities, municipali- 
ties, which shall be valid and subsisting 
on the date hereof. The Republic of the 
Philippines will make adequate provision 
for the necessary funds for the payment 
of interest on and principal of bonds is- 
sued prior tto May 1, 1934 under auth- 
ority of an Act of Congress of the 
United States of America by the Philip- 
pine Islands, or any province, city or 
municipality therein, and such obligat- 
ions shall be a first lien on the taxes 
collected in the Philippines. 

ARTICLE 
The United States of America and 
the Republic of the Philippines agree 
that all cases at law concerning the 
Government and people of the Philip- 
pines which, in accordance with Section 
7 (6) of the Independence Act of 1934, 
are pending before the Supreme Court 
of the United States of America at the 
date of the granting of the Independence 
of the Republic of the Philippines shall 
continue to be subject to the review of 
the Supreme Court of the United States 
of America for such period of time after 
independence as may be necessary to ef- 
fectuate the disposition of the cases at 
hand. The contracting parties also 
agree that following Ihe disposition of 
such cases the Supreme court of the 
United States of America will cease to 
have the right of review of cases origin 
ating in the Philippine Island s. 



ARTICLE Vt 

In so far as they are not covered by 
existing legislation, all claims of th« 
Government of the United States of 
America or its nationals against the 
Government of the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines and all claims of the Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines and 
its nationals against the government of 
the United Saes of America shall be 
promptly adjusted and settled. The 
property rights of the United States of 
America and the Republic of the Philip-, 
pines shall be promptly adjusted and 
settled by mutual agreement, and all ex- 
isting property rights of citizens and 
corporations of the United States of 
America in the Republic of the Philip- 
pines and of citizens and corporations of 
the Republic of the Philippines in the 
United States of America shall be ac- 
knowledged, respected and safeguarded 
to the same extent as property rights of 
citizens and corporations of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines and of the United 
States of America respectively. Both 
Governments shall designate representa- 
tives who may in concert agree on mea- 
sures best calculated to effect a satis- 
factory and expeditious disposal of such- 
claims as may not be covered by exist- 
ing legislation. 

ARTICLE VII 
The Republic of the Philippines agree, 
to assume all continuing obligations as- 
sumed- by the United States of America 
under the Treaty of Peace between the 
United States of America and Spain con. 
eluded at Paris on the 10th day of^Dec- 
mber, 1889, by which the Philippine Is- 
lands were ceded to the United States of 
America, and under the Treaty between 
the United States of America and Spain 
concluded at Washington on the 7th day 
of November, 1900. 

ARTICLE VIII 
This treaty shall enter into force on 
the exchange of instruments of ratifica- 
tion. 

This Treaty shall be submitted for ra- 
tification i n accordance with the consti- 
tutional procedures of the United States 
oi America and of the Republic of the 
Philippines; and instruments of ratific- 
ation shall b e exchanged and deposited 
at Manila. 

Signed at Manila this fourth day of 

July, one thousand nine hundred fortv- 
six. * 

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF 
THE UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA: 

(Sgd.) PAUL V. McNUTT 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF 
THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHIL- 
IPPINES: 

(Sgd.) MANUEL A. ROXAS 

THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



The Huks, Laurel . • . 

(Continued from page 34) 
Those who were trying to crucify Dr. 
Jose P. Laurel (father of Congressman 
Laurel) were bitterly opposing the Con- 
gressman. Just 1 month before the elec- 
tion (the same election which elected 
Roxas as President), Congressman Lau- 
rel launchd his campaign for reelection. 
The charges against his father were is- 
sues in that campaign. When Congress- 
man Laurel was overwhelmingly reelect- 
ed to Congress, he stated: "My great 
triumph was achieved because of the 
great admiration which our people still 
have for my father." 

Friends of mine in Manila told me 
about this campaign of Congressman 
-Laurel. When I mentioned the subject to 
Dr. Laurel, he said to me: "Mr. Reeve?, 
if you had been in that congressional dis- 
trict and heard the charges made against 
me, you would have thought I was run- 
ning for Congress instead of my son. 
That* great victory won by my son made, 
my heart feel good/' 

In the campaign of Dr. Laurel's son 
for reelection to Congress, the issues 
against the father were presented to the 
people by the opponent of Dr. Laurel's 
son. The verdict of the voters speaks 
for itself. 

When Rafael Alunan, a member of 
President Laurel's Cabinet w'^s tried in 
M-arila in 1947, the trial was- in reality 
a trial of Dr. Jose P. Laurel rather 
than the trial of Alunan. Mr. Alunan 
•was acquitted on all charges. 

An interesting report on Laurel was 
made by Capt. R. Bspiritu a guerrilla 
leader who was an operative of the 
Allied Intelligence Bureau. This report 
is on file in the prosecutor's office in 
Manila today. In 1944 President Lau- 
rel offered to Col. Alejandro D. Gama 
the position of Governor of Nueva Ec'ja, 
Col. Garcia was undecided about accept- 
ing the post. He told President Laurel 
he would like to take up the matter w Hi 
General MacArthur. However, his 
doubts about accepting the post were 
dispelled when President Laurel handed 
him a piece of paper on which were 
written the following words: "My loyalty 
to America can only be removed by cut- 
ting off my head. (Signed) Laurel. 
Colonel Garcia was later taken prisoner 
by the Japs. The note above quoted m& 
found by Captain Espiritu when he dis- 
covered some private papers and effects 
which Colonel Garcia had left behind. 
Colonel Garcia was working under cover, 
receiving instructions from President 
Laurel, when he was taken prisoner 
and shot. Supposing Colonel Garcia lrid 
lived. No doubt, some would charge him 

SFPTFHVfBER 1947 



w,ith collaboration just as some have 
charged Laurel. Suppose Laurel had 
been killed while carrying out instruc- 
tions given to him by Quezon to cooper* 
ate as best he could and help protect the 
people. I hardly think anyone would 
- have charged Quezon with being a col?.- 
borationist. To say that Laurel colla- 
borated with the Japs is to impugn the 
motives and challenge the patriotism of 
Quezon. 

Rafael Alunan was appointed by Lau- 
, rel as a member of the Laurel Cabinet 
during Jap occupation. After liberation 
by tho American troop?, Alunan was 
charged with collaboration and treason. 
Alunan insisted on a trial. The same 
facts, the same evidence brought out 
against Laurel were used in th e tral 
against Alunan. On February 26, 1947, 
\lunan was acquitted and completely 
exonerated. Alunan did not have the fol- 
lowing which Laurel has. Laurel has in- 
sisted on a trial. The political enemies- 
of Laurel are holding off the trisl be- 
cause they know Laurel will be acquitted 
and vindicated. The Intelligence of the 
Army and the Navy and the United 
States Office of Strategic Service have 
investigated and have tried unsucces^ 
fully to pin something on Laurel. The 
enemies of Laurel in Manila-thc Poli- 
tical enemies who fear his increasing 
power and popularity-have turned 
heaven and earth to blacken the name 
If Laurel. They have all reached the 
me tad end of the «** The facts 
dug up have conclusively proven that 
Laurel is a true patriot and not a tr»i- 
^ From October, 1943, until Febru- 
arv 1945, ( during the period of Jap oc- 
cupation when Laurel was President, the 
searchlight has been turned on every 
move, every act of Laurel. Every docu- 
ment he signed and every order he is- 
sued as President has been carefully 
scrutinized by th6 ? e who have under- 
taken to stop Laurel. They h*ve given 
up all hope of convicting Laurel. The 
handful of men still fluting Laurel 
have concentrated their efforts on pre- 
venting the trial taking place. 

It is a matter of record that while 
Laurel was President the Japs were in- 
sistent that Laurel arrest and punish 
members of the Philippine coustabu ary 
X are connected with the guemks 
President Laurel promised the Japs that 
an investigation would be made, but the. 
record discloses that no arrests were 
ever made. It is common knowledge in 
Manila that Laurel was aware that 
many officers in Laurel's presidential 
guard were active in the guerrilla move- 
ment. On one occasion the Japs insisted 
arresting Major Vargas, who was one 
of Laurel't guards in Malacanan Palace. 



Laurel declined to surrender Major Var- 
gas to the Japs. When the Japs came 
to Malacanan Palace to take Major Var- 
gas, Laurel gave instructions to the head 
of the presidential guard, Colonel Sal- 
gado, to line up his men and resist the 
Japs. 

The Japs demanded that President 
Laurel declare war on the United States. 
The Japs also wanted conscription in the 
Philippines. In October, 1943, Premier 
To jo called President Laurel to Tokyo 
and reiterated Ms demands about war 
and conscription. "Tojo wanted the Phil- 
ippines to follow the steps of Burma. 
Laurel used all of his resourcefulness to 
thwart the will of the Japs. Laurel ex- 
plained to Tojo that the Filipinos could 
be made to fight the Americans. He 
pointed out that Japan would lose much 
and would destroy in the minds of the 
Filipinos the estimation of the 'inde- 
pendence" which Japan had so gracious- 
ly granted to the Philippines. With 
great courage. Laurel stood before Tojo 
and unhesitatingly and unflinchingly 
presented his reasons for failure to com- 
ply with Tojo's orders. According to 
Filipinos who were present at the eon- 
ference between Tojo and Laurel. Lau- 
rel displayed iron strength and courage 
in his argument to Tojo, and he finally 
convinced Tojo that he. Laurel, was 
right. After Davao and Legaspi were 
bombed by the Americans, the Japs 
again demanded that Laurel declare war 
against the United States. Laurel called 
his cabinet together and advise!! there 
were three courses open. One course 
would be to refuse and flee to the moun- 
tains. The second course was to make 
a stand" at Malacanan Palace with the 
presidential guard. The first course 
was ruled out, because the Japs had 
placed guards around the President and 
all members, of his cabinet. Flight to 
the mountains was. impossible. The sec- 
ond course would mean sure death to 
Laurel and every member of his cabi- 
net. Dr. Laurel told me that death was 
not the determining factor that caused 
abandonment of the first two courts. 
Laurel knew that the Filipinos would 
suffer by his death. Laurel knew that 
when he and his cabinet were wiped out, 
the Japs would take over .and govern di- 
rectly, or would name some rabid pro- 
Japanese to succeed him as President of 
the Philippine Government. The third 
and only course left open was to "play 
ball" and declare a state of war by Pres- 
idential proclamation. Laurel's clever 
mind was too much for the cunning Japs 
to cope with. Laurel issued the procla- 
mation, but added there would be no con- 
scription of man-power. Laurel knew 
that a presidential proclamation recog- 
nizing that a state of war existed, with- 



47 



out conscription of man-power, would be 
a mere joke* The Japs were thus satis- 
fied but thoroughly out generated "by 
Laurel. Laurel points with pride to his 
next act which was the cleverest act per- 
formed by him during his role as Pres- 
ident He went on the air and by radio 
told the Filipino people there would be no 
conscription. Laurel's 'purpose, as his 
friends ftilly understood and as he ex- 
plained to me recently, was to tie his 
own hands so he could not later disavow 
the promise he had made to his people 
that there would be no conscription. In 
all his life Laurel had never failed to 
keep a promise made to his people. He 
had an ace in the hole in case the Japs 
insisted on conscription. Laurel wanted 
to be in a position to tell the Japs that 
if he went back on his word to his people 
his usefulness as President and leader 
would be at an end. The Japs were 
again fooled by Laurel's cleverness. By 
Laurel's act in refusing to order con- 
scription, the lives of hundreds of thou- 
sands of Filipinos were saved. When the 
Americans landed in Manila, from aU 
directions they were met by hundreds 
and hundreds of thousands of Filipinos, 
all waving American flags and scream- 
ing with joy. One Army officer In Ma- 
nila told me that if the Filipinos had 
had guns in their hands instead of Ame- 
rican flags when the Americans arrived, 
at least 20.000 ^Filipinos would ha^e 
been slaughtered. Another Army officer 
told me that Laurel's wonderful leader- 
shin saved the lives of possibly 300.000 
Filipinos. Yes. Laurel fed, protected, 
and saved the lives of his people while 
he was President during Jap occupation. 

* Another incident during the' reign of 
Laurel which showed the side he was on 
was related to me by a prominent man 
in Manila who is a member of Roxas' of- 
ficial family. Certain accused persons 
were brought before the bar of justice 
for trial. They were Japanese sympa- 
thizers. The Japanese would endeavor 
to have the accused acquitted or have 
the indictments thrown out of court. 
Also in some ca*es the Japanese were 
anxious that certain persons be convict- 
ed, and the higher Jap officials would 
talk to the judges and prosecutors. The 
judges and prosecutors i x esented this in- 
terference. Also President Laurel did not 
like it. President Laurel issued a cir- 
cular and placed it in the hands of all 
Jap officials to the effect that there 
would be no more meddling in courts af- 
fairs. When the circular was issued, 
Laurel was taken to Fort Santiago for 
questioning by the Jap military police. 
Fort Santiago was known as the "butch- 
er shop" and 09 "per cent of Filipinos 
who were called to Fort Santiago never 



returned. Laurel's friends thought he 
would not return. At Fort Santiago 
Laurel was told to withdraw the circular. 
Laurel refused to withdraw the circular 
and he was able to convince the Japs 
that the circular was necessary. 

During Japanese occupation a mad- 
dened guerrilla went out of his mind 
and tried to murder laurel. Three 
shots were fired into Laurel's body and 
all hope of saving his life was given up. 
There are millions of Filipinos who be- 
lieve that Laurel lived so that he might 
save his country. The guerrilla who 
tried to assassinate Laurel stated he 
thought Laurel was trying to favor the 
Japanese The only purpose in relating 
this story of the attempted assassination 
is to bring out the fact that the chief de- 
fender of Laurel was Manuel Roxas, 
now President of the Phil'ppines. Gen- 
eral Roxas told the guerril'a that Laurel 
was not a traitor but a true patriot. 

The Japanese offered Manuel Roxas 
many posts. Roxas refused to accept all 
offers on the grounds that he was a 
very sick man. The Japs went to Lau- 
rel and told him they had made up their 
minds to liquidate Roxas. Laurel was 
Roxas' friend. Laurel was alarmed' 
over the fear that his friend Roxas 
would be killed. So Laurel persuaded 
Roxas to accept the position as chair- 
man of the Economic Planning Board. 
As such he was an ex-of f icio member of 
Laurel's cabinet. The Japs were not 
satisfied. They had commenced to be 
suspicious of Laurel. Again the.Japs 
went to Laurel and demanded the head 
of Roxas. The chief of the Japanese 
military police told Laurel that Roxas 
must die. It was then that Laurel showed 
more of the steel of which he is made. 
His ultimatum to the Japs was that be- 
fore he would surrender Roxas, they 
would have first have to shoot him — 
Laurel. 

The food shortage in the islands was 
a difficult problem for Laurel to handle. 
In the provinces the production of rice 
had fallen down terribly. Another prob- 
lem ,was the lack of transportation. 
Again Laurel called on Roxas for assist- 
ance. Laurel and Roxas worked out a 
plan that materially helped the short- 
age, of food. They saw to it that Lxe 
needy received rice rations. Th 0 record 
which I have seen and the facts which I 
developed while in Manila are convin- 
cing proof that Laurel was not a puppet 
or a quisling or a collaborationist or a 
traitor. He was, indeed, a great patriot. 
You cannot say Laurel* is a collabora- 
tionist without including Roxas. You 
cannot say Laurel collaborated without 
making the same charge against Quezon, 
the man who asked Laurel to co-operate 



as best he could and help protect the 
people. Laurel and Roxas collaborated 
to help the Filipino people. During Jap 
occupation Laurel and Roxas worked to- 
gether in many ways — and that is why, 
up to this good hour, President Roxas 
has uttered not one word of criticism or 
condemnation of his friend Laurel. 

Finally the Japs commenced to learn 
the truth. They went to Laurel and told, 
him of their discontent, dissatisfaction, 
and disappointment over the way he was 
handling affairs. They demanded that 
Laurel give key positions in the Laurel 
government to Japanese sympathizers 
Laurel refused to favor pro-Japanese 
with appointments. He did make one or 
two minor appointments, but this was 
not satisfactory to the Japs. The Japs 
finally decided to take drastic action. 
They organized the "Makapili" which 
was supposed to be a military organiza- 
tion only. Soon the Makapili seized all 
civil power in a great many of t\e mu- 
nicipalities. By force the Jans to Dk 
President Laurel, also his cabinet, also 
General Roxas, together with other 
ranking officials, to Baguio. At Baguio 
they were held as prisoners. Thereafter, 
with the exception of Manila, it was the 
Makapili which ran the government of 
the Philippines. At Baguio it was un- 
derstood that the Laurel government 
would be dissolved and the government 
of Makapili would be created. The 
timely return of the American forces 
prevented either plan being carried out. 

Laurel stood foursquare to every wind 
that blew. He faced one crisis after an- 
other. He never faltered. He never com- 
promised with the truth. He never sur- 
rendered h ; s convictions. He never' failed 
to show the true steel in his make-up. 
He ranks by the tide of Rizal. Laurel 
has just reason to feel proud of the 
faithful service h e has rendered to his 
people— all throughout his 1 wonderful 
life. 

Many outstanding members of the 
legal profession in Manila has volun- 
teered to defend Laurel— if and When !^e 
is brought to trial. Pedro C. Mendiola, 
a prominent, lawyer of Manila, was one 
of the first to offer his services in the 

defense ° T f Lau ^ Senate Floor Leader 
Vicente J Francisco « ^ 

offered his service, to aid the defen 
The Lawyer's League of Manila has 
jounced it will aid in the defense^ 
Lamel Congressman Timoteo MeoTter 
moso of Marinduque held the rank of 
Major in the Philippine Army. 

aCt ! Ve S ™ « T ^bas, Marindu'e 
and m Manila. He was awarded Z- 
bronze medal for gallantry in action I 

™d * sta T n1 a,i0Ut 

1 ?ead m a Manila newspaper, froni 



se. 
an- 



Tip! Q! J /OMAN REVIEW 



which I quote the following: 

"Dr. Laurel is not a traittff tu his 
country. Wisdom dictated his course of 
action to 'play balP with the vicious and 
cunning Japs. No one . else could have 
done differently under the same circum- 
stances. At heart, Dr. Laurel is a true 
Filipino imbued with deeprooted patriot- 
ism and sincere love and devotion for 
his country. Dr. Laurel in his acts and 
pronouncements clearly revealed his 
courage, bravery and patriotism." 

Laurel is not afraid to face triel. For 
months he has pleaded for an early trial. 
The politicians know that the people are 
solidly behind Laurel. The charges of 
collaboration have come from people who 
fled to the hills when the Japs poured 
into Manila. An over whelming major- 
ity of the people who did not flee n the 
hills but who remained in Manila to face 
the Japs know that Laurel is not guilty 
of any charge which has been brought 
against him. This is not a trial of one 
man — Laurel. The trial concerns from 
18 to 20 millions of Filipinos who bene- 
fited from the patriotic service which 
this patriot of patriots rendered. 

An elder statesman of Manila, a man 
who is respected by everybody, told me 
that in order to appreciate the high re- 

• gard in which this former Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court, is held, one has 
but to remind himself of the references 
made to Laurel in the classes in the 

'universities and law college*, m the 
V „f hfttice and in other branches 
courts oi justice, u*w*A +v.o 

He mentioned the 

of the government. 
following references which -e of 
quoted: "According to Laurels A m.n 
istrative Law and Practice etc. . 
Sienc^ is made to Laurel's Cases on 
PoHtical Law, etc."; "The Su^me 
Cora s speaking through Lauren ho. U 
etc- -Laurel's Procedural Reforms in 
Philippines, etc."; "Laurel speaking for 
the Supreme Court, says:" 

Ariston de los Trinos, an attorney of 
Manila, s<mt a letter to a Manila news- 
paper, I wish to quote the letter: 

-Laurel's name is linked with the pro- 
endive administration of justice in the 
Philippines and strengthens the faith of 
the people in the courts as dispenser c» 
that justice, His pen is the miffhties, 
and most powerful in the Philippines- 
His terms as a member of th e supreme 
court enhanced the prestige and honor 
of our courts and gave lustre and dig- 
nity to Philippine jurisprudence such 4* 
it never before enjoyed. 

Law professors in the colleges and 
universities in the Philippines have a 
prepared textbook of Laurel decision, 
and these decisions are used in teaching 

• law students. Some of the more # celeb- 
rated- decisions of Laurel are m the 

SEPTEMBER, 19*7 



cases: Plauas v. GU; w Elect- 

orttl Com,,iix&oii; Cristobal v. Labrador; 
Gate* kg v. miliums Many other noted 
Laurel decisions could be mentioned but 
space will not permit 

After the waV ended Laurel was Reel- 
ed as chancelor of the National Teachers 
College of Manila a leading educational 
institution of Manila. It is hardly prob- 
able that he would have been thus hon- 
ored by an educational institution if taint 
' surrounded his name. 

From the Manila Bulletin of February 

17 1947, I read that Dr. Laurel was in- 
vited by the Mapa High School of Ma- 
nila to make the principal address. Dr. 
Laurel made the address, which clo-c-d 
with the-e lines: ( I plead with all stu- 
dents to be true to God, to countrv. to 
themselves and to their fellowmen and 
the consequences will take care of them- 
selves." Many other invitations have, 
been extended to Laurel since liberation. 

In the Manila Bulletin of February 

18 l f >4? reference was made that Dr. 
l aurel was elected Honorary President 
of the Young Democrats League as a 
result of his speech before the student 
body of Mapa High School on February 
17 1047 I read in the Manila Times of 
February 16, 1947, that Dr. Laurel had 
accepted an invitation to speak at Bohol 
Junior College in Manila and would be 
the guest of honor on February 22, 1947. 
In the Manila Bulletin of February 24, 
1D47, mention was made that the Univer-. 
sity of the Philippines Lawyers' Circle 
would hold its round table forum at the 
Manila Hotel on March 1, 1947, and 
that Dv. Laurel would be the guest 
speaker. 1 could cite many instances 
during 1946 and 1947 when Dr. Laurel 
was the guest speaker or the guest of 
honor at various functions in Manila. 
These invitation?, these honors, put at 
rest the charges that Laurel was a col- 
laborator. 

My talks with Filipinos in all walks 
of life convinced me that Laurel is the 
most loved' man in the Philippines. J 
Si that I have shown by the facts I 
have produced that Laurel was not a 
collaborator, a quisling, a puppet, or a 
traitor He was selected by the Japa- 
nese to head up the Philippine Govern- 
ment because the Japs knew they had to 
select a man who would be able to,guida 
the Filipinos. The Filipinos tru-ted 
Laurel before the Japs arrived in Ma- 
nila. They trusted him during the Japa- 
nese occupation. They trust and love 
him today. The Filipinos are better able 
to pass. judgment on Laurel and Laurel's 
acts than a small group of powerseek- 
ing politicians who challenged Laurel's 
patriotism, My study of Laurel and my 
investigation of his record pitflnpts my 



prediction that 7 out of every 10 Filipino 
voters will vote for Laurel for any office 
within the gift of his people, I talked 
with many Americans in Manila and 
other parts of the islands. They all 
readily admit that Laurel ruled justly, 
fairly* honestly, and with the welfare of 
the Filipino people uppermost in his 
mind at all times. They were all willing 
to concede that he has the most bril- 
liant- mind in the Philippines today. They 
also admitted that he saved thousands 
and thousands of lives by his courageous 
acts. I talked with hundreds and hun- 
dreds of Filipinos and not a single Fili- 
pino uttered a* word of criticism against 
Laurel. They acclaimed him as their 
savior. 

Before I close this letter I should like 
to briefly refer to the chief charge which 
was brought against Laurel — ,the charge 
of being* a collaborationist. What is col- 
laboration? Collaboration implies will- 
ingness. The facts I have gathered, and 
from which I wrote the foregoing letter, 
do not disclose any willingness on the 
part of Laurel to work against the in- 
terests and the welfare of the Filipino 
people, The Filipinos were inadequately 
prepared and were quickly beaten by the 
Japs. Notwithstanding the Filipinos 
were at the mercy of a ruthless enemy, 
they remained loyal to America. Some of 
the Filipinos "played ball" with the ene- 
my because they knew that eventually 
they would be liberated. Some Filipinos 
disguised their real feelings in order to 
survive until liberation came. Yes; some 
few Filipinos "played ball" with the Japs 
because they thought the Japs would be 
victorious. Those few made a lot of 
money. The record will show that Laurel 
dealt* brutally with this latter group of 
traitors. This small group of Filipinos 
who thought the Japs would win are bit- 
ter against Laurel and they have charged 
him with being a traitor. W-hen the war 
ended Laurel was a poor man. Today he 
lives in a small house, poorly furnised, 
hut his conscience is clear. He holds 
his head high and looks in the faces of 
his fellow men because his fellow men 
love and trust him. 

On February 25, 1947, just 2 days be- 
fore I left Manila, Dr. Laurel asked fffc 
to have lunch with him at a sraall, not 
too-impressive restaurant in downtown 
Manila. When we walked into tho res- 
taurant all who were sitting at tables 
and at the lunch counter crowded around 
their idol, the man they loved, the man 
who had saved them during Japanese oc- 
cupation, I was seated at a table and I 
waited almost 30 minutes for Dr. Laurel 
to join me. He just could not get sway 
from his friend* Finally; ^h«n he 
reached my table and we star-tad to h*ve 



tfur ianch* I asked Br. laurel for a state- 
ment. He asked for a piece of paper and 
started to write rapidly and . without a 
pause. The following is the statement 
which this great man handed me: 

"Before the Pacific war I was an. As- 
sociate Justice of our Supreme Court. 
After the outbreak of the war I was 
made Secretary of Justice and thus be- 
came a member of Mr. Quezon's war 
Cabinet. I was to accompany him on 
his flight from Manila, but at the last 
hour he asked me to stay and help the 
ranking member of his Cabinet (who 
was his executive secretary, Jorge Var- 
gas) protect the civilian population. 

"President Quezon left the Filipino 
leaders behind with instructions .to do 
their best to protect the people, and he 
authorized us to do whatever was neces- 
sary to this end, short of taking oath of 
allegiance to Japan. This was done with 

JSSS!^ aPPr ° Val ° f 

f/Tlt FilipIno leato s endeavored and 
tned their best under the circumstances. 

milita,.,. 1° • e Ja P ar >ese in their 
i'L!^ 0 ,VeS ' and if anything was 

^ne either indev I tMs Was 

occuitL 01 ' dUleSS Under 
instance, i„ thl S ' S evident - fo <' 

* a sta'te U w a ; aSe ? the decl ^«- 
lea ders refused ^ ^ ere the Filipino 
of t,.,. ocu LO authors 



purposes of 



° f th * Filipinos L M° riZe ascription 
mentioned. V more instances can 

th * People to li ve ♦ * 8 *° 6nable 
^termination bv tT Prevent theil ' 
" Us enemy. Th £ „ 6 Cluel and barbar- 

Of «... " 1S5 NV »S not nr.l,r 



of munm f VaS u n0t ° nly ^ duty 

"J?* oblig-ation of'thTT? 1 ' 68 ' bUt the 
a f ter the Fil ini ° , ^ e Um ted states 

'°.thei, fate w 6 w d . b6en ab andoned 



5? sit «ation;;:; v v ; e , an ac . 

; d be St u nd e . J*? the ° rie? > and we 
ou * P.eople. 61 God a nd in i oya% to 



thei n m my retiv* 11 c °nflnue to servo 
cou^, -tnement with fc^J 

Or. Laurel i s a . J ° Se P - Laurel." 
great lea,,*. dee £ thinker „ 

-« e United Nati 7 ' he said: 
machinery t+ . tl0n s needs oil • . 

#ood if reorganized anH ° a of 

the United 



50 



Nations and Russia should be saade fco 
understand this in plain language. If 
Russia wishes to oppose all free peoples 
then it is better for the world to have 
Russia outside the family of United Na- 
tions." 

Laurel's greatest obsession is his un- 
compromising opposition to communism. 
He is alarmed because a number of 
former liberty-loving countries are 
shifting or have shifted to socialism. One 
day when we were driving along Dewey 
Boulevard on the ocean front, he looked 
into the open- sea and said: 

"Mr. Reeves, communism is the great- 
est menace to the world today. Com- 
munism has spread throughout Europe 
and it is gaining rapidly in Asia. It has 
ruined China and reports indicate it has 
a strong foothold in South America. 
Thank God, MacArthur has not permit- 
ted it to make any headway in Japan." 
I told Dr. Laurel that communism would 
not make any headway in the United 
States, whereupon he added : "You Ame- 
ricans seem to think this Red movement 
cannot take root in your country because 
of your great wealth. Red infiltration 
has made considerable headway in Bra- 
zil, the richest country in South Amer- 
ica." 

This man Laurel seems to have been 
endowed with.. that extraordinary clarity 
of vision, that vivid imagination, which 
is the mark of the truly great man. 
There is not a coarse fiber in his make- 
up. He is kind, humane, and quiet- 
spoken. He loves children. On one oc- 
casion I found him in the rose garden 
in front of his home. He was wearing 
khaki shirt and khaki trousers, watch- 
ing a little girl romp and play among 
the flowers. 

The example set by Dr. Laurel will 
forever stand out as a beacon light, typi- 
fying the quality and character that go 
to make up a great man in all senses 
of the word. He fought for the Filipi- 
nos before the commonwealth was estab- 
lished. He fought for Philippine inde- 
pendence. He fed, he clothed, he guided, 
he protected his people during Japanese 
occupation. Today he is using his en- 
ergy and resourceful mind to oppose the 
onrushing tide of communism. Before 
the war and during Japanese occupation 
the name of Laurel was a living symbol 
of national assertiveness, of dignity and 
of patriotic ardor which enrich the main- 
springs of a noble heritage. T-he war 
did not change the genuine metal of his 
greatness. Today he has more, friends 
throughout the Philippines tha n he had 
before the Japs arrived in Manila. 

Laurel has used his great talents to 
advance the cause of justice. He has 



given his all to the cause of righteous- 
ness. His only concern is the triumph of 
justice. He has fought againgt every 
form of oppression and discrimination. 
He has used his wisdom, his influence, 
his energy, and what material means he 
had to assist those who needed his help 
and guidance. His inteligence, his 
strength, his greatness has not caused 
him to lose the common touch. His pulse 
beats for the common man. He is the 
champion of the common man; in the 
Philippines today. He represents the 
ideals which Rizal fought for. By his 
devotion to principle, his austerity, his 
refusal to compromise, his love of 
country, he has won millions of followers 
to his banner. He spent himself utterly, 
with never a thought of his own comfort 
or his own welfare. Th e one impelling 
force which has guided this man through- 
out his life has been his desire to help 
his people. 

When Laurel's time has come to an 
end historians of the future will present 
the true size and stature of this great 
patriot. They will rank him with Rizal 
Bonifacio, General Luna, Mabini, and 
Quezon. It will be said that his under- 
standing mind, his profound sympathy, 
his human kindness, his moral courage 
his iron will, his rugged fearlessness will 
serve as an inspiration for unborn gen- 
erations to come, and an illustration of 
how a great personality can utilize the 

lTved ,tUnitieS ° f land he S ° d * e * ] y 
Whatever verdict awaits cannot dis- 
turb Laurel's consience. Justice cannot 
tail this great man whose sacrificial ser 
vice now shines in the fulness of its 
grandeur within the contemplation of a 
fateful people. Laurel thinks that what 
hechd was for the best interests of hts 
People and he has publicly stated he 
would do it all over again Surh * 
of stPPi urin ni a e*m. kuch a man 
ot steel will always remain i n the hearts 
of his people. wwjib 

This has been a long letter, Harold 
-d I hope that you have taken 
read it tnrough carefully. The wp tV 
of the Philipines and 

Stl11 * *^ter of vital importancfth.n 
we may now realize. It would be £j 
ter to his country if Laurel's ef f ec itvt 
-ess as a leader were in any g^fe" 
Paired. There may be a time 7% T 

Regards, 

W. REEVES. 



TBE QUEZONUN REVIEW 



Wsth The Editor 



The serpent of subversion, anarchy and sedition 
thrives best in a mass of ignorant and illiterate people. It 
fattens on the miserable existence of the uninitiated in 
the good life of the civilized portion of mankind. And 
it gathers its virulence from the gospel of rebellion by 
demagogues and professional agitators who usually find 
haven amidst these masses. 

li can never be crushed to death with but the stick 
of physical power. This can only force it to go tempo- 
rarily into hiding meanwhile amassing more venom for 
its next attack against its victims. And this is because 
the root, of the evil is not physical but ideological and 
spiritual. 

Open warfares against anarchy, sedition and subversion 
can become mortally effective only if and when they are 
spearheaded with psychological campaigns. These alone 
can deliver Melting blows at the root of the evil itself . . . 
Battles with lethal weapons alone can reach at best the 
most superficial manifestations of the evil, but can never 
penetrate the very foundation of its essence. 

The mteness of the very ideology of subversion must 
be laid bare before the people*. Its poison and its evil 
effects must be exposed without equivocations, without 
any let-up until the masses team to hate the very stinch 
of it. 

Subver&veness must be eradicated by education, not by 
mere physical compulsion. Intensive and extensive pro- 
paganda must be undertaken to uncover the guiles and 
subtle sophistries of the provocateurs and professional 
demagogues- The people must be initiated into the ways 
and means of order and peace and constitutional methods 
of redress from whatsover abuses and injustices. 

Hand in hand 'with this educational method of eradica- 
tion must go the righting of whatever wrong, has been 
committed either by error of the mind or of the heart. 
An aggrsive implantation of the ideals of Social Justice {n 
the community must complement the counter propagan- 
da undertaken. And there is no doubt the serpent of sub- 
version wul be crushed to its death with such a tri~dimcn- 
sional offensive- 

— — o 

Communism i$ the perfect ctr&ith&sis of democracy. For 
it is a way of life based on the negation of the divine 
beginning and the heavenly end of each and very indivi- 
dual bring. Democracy, on the other hantL derives ih; 

SEPTEMBER, W7 



La serpiente de la subversion* anarquia y sedicion vive 
mejof en la masa de ignorantes y analfabetos, que en 
' cualquier otro lugar< Se engorda de la miserable exis- 
tp.ncia de los desafortunados fuera del circulo de la porcion 
civilizada de la humanida. Y recoge su virus del 
evanpelio de rebelion propagado por los demagogos y 
agitadores profesionales que vegetan en medio de esas 
masas. 

Con la vara sola de la fuerza brut a jamas se puede puU 
verizar la cabeza de esta serpiente. Esta solo la puede 
ahuyentar a un escondite temporal donde, recogef mas 
veneno para su ataque siguiente contra sus victimas. Y 
es porque la raiz del mal de esta serpiente no es fisicd 
sino ideologica y espfiritual. 

Batallas abiertas contra la anarquia, sedicion y subver- 
sion pueden ser mortalrneiite efectivas solo cuando van 
re spald adas con campahas psicologicas . Est as son las Ulri- 
cas que pueden llegar a la misma raiz del mal. Aquellas 
pueden tocar solamente sus manifesitaciones super ficiales 
pero jamas penetrar la base de su esencia. 

La corrupcion de la misma ideologia subversiva debe 
exponerse abiertamente al pueblo. Su veneno y sus mal- 
sanos efectds deben desdubrirse sin equivocacies m fe- 
lajacion hasta que las masas hayan aprendido a odiar, 
aim su apariencia. 

Debe desarraigarse la subiersion por medio de la edu- 
cakrn, no raedianie la compulsion fisica- Propagandas in- 
tensive y extensivas deben tniciarse para exponer lamen- 
Lira y los sofismas sutilcs de sus prevaricadores y dema 
gogos. Y el pueblo debe amoidarse a los ^os y mane 
rasde la paly orden y de los metodos conslituctonales en 
el remedio de cualquier abuso o wjushaa. 

Juntamente con eMe metodo educational %J«^£o 
aebe ir una corrcceion debida de ^ff f^J^T' 
ya por error de la rnente o bien par el del corayi Una 
^plantation agrcsira en la conunuiad Se los l decdesde 
la Justida Social debe acompanar y anunarla prop^an- 
da proyectad, Y con tal ofenswet ^rn^oml^ 
podra sin duda alguna arollar a muerte esa nefanda ,a 
piente de la subversion. 

El conmnisnio es la perfecta ant'itesis de la democracia. 
Y es erne es un sis tenia de vida basado sobre la negacion 
,lel origin v fin divinos de los indiViduos hunianos M 
democracia on , -.amino, dcriva su misma esencu, de la ie en 

51 



With The Editor 



Con el Editor 



very essence from a faith in the predestination of man 
as a creature made in the image and likeness of his viry 
Master. Hence, this t elevates man to Ms natural destiny 
as the king of Creation, while that, degrades him into 
the category if a mere beast of burden and as a cog of 
the wlwSl of automatons expendable in the service* of thd 
communistic state. 

These two antagonistic ways of life are not only irre- 
concilable, but are inevitably bound to a crucial clash. 
The supremacy of one over the other, in fact, has beSn, 
from sometime now to the present, a subject of moves 
and counter moves in the arena of ideological conflicts. 

In the Philippines this conflict has already reached the 
dangerous paint of explosiveness. For this reason, it is in- 

c£l2L UP ° n ?L those who stiU lov * democratic 
Hon fe /° take ^nizance of the real situa- 

and' prosed f U * f or them *> initiate 

,miSh a definite and P ositi ™ *»» 
that nm^V^J^u U T° U ° f those fundamental causes 
make the growth of communism possible. 

* counter propa- 

and systematic i ZJrnt' € *Tl and te ^city, decision 
dertaken imZd^Xf™ °* ° f th ^ enemy be un- 



la predestinacioii del hombre como criatura hecha en la 
iinagen y sem^janza de su Senor. Por lo tanto este le 
eleva'al hombre a su destino natural como rey de la Crea- 
don mientras que aquel le degrada a la mera categoria 
de bestia de carga y de ser unidad de la masa de automa- 
tas esclavizados en el servicio del estado comunista. 

Estos dos modos de vida aiiitagonicos no solo son irre- 
conciliables-: son destinados ademas a una luclia mortal. 
De hecho, la supremacia de uno sobre el otro ha estado 
motivando desde hace tiempo ya movimientos encruzados 
en la arena de los conflictos ideologicos. 

En Filipinas ya esta actualmente esto en su punto pe~ 
Hgroso de explosividad. Por lo que es urgentisima una ao 
cion aunada de todos aquellos que aprecian aim el modo 
cristiano democratico de vida, antes que se cojan despreve- 
nidos. Esta en ellos el iniciar y proseguir hasta su fin 
una estralegia definitiva y vigorosa para destmir todo£ 
aquellos motSvos que predisponen el arraigambre del co* 
munismo. 

Gon respecto a esto sometemos que se lleve a cabo, sin 
perdida de tiempo, una contra propaganda, caracterizada 
con el mismo celo } r teson, decision y apostolocidad del 
enemigo, para desarraigar el comunismo aqui. 



Are You Spoiling Your Baby? 



(Continued from pa,gc 19) 



ANSWERS- 



1.- 



puri^JncJJor C bad UCt * e f' ecl,rr in Racier building than 

*es, this is pood' It 

wise of security nJJ/Jtt* £ cm Y thln g give your child a 

m needed for his mental health, this is it! 

rity whe^h^po^tp vonceited > P^ing his way to unpopula- 

d better sense^ofnr ^^'.Y^ing he wants, within reason, develops 
something he '■tmn^°t tU>n than those who do noL 7 / he yearns for 
>f only he could hai e n rT*' he is likel - y 10 Evince himself that 
\ re satisfied he disco IP f J Voidd be ha PPY- When «U fa cravings 
Key to happiness, rs f° r himself that possesion alone is not the 

fj J 0$; </ child''; d 

should be ^LredThcTll Z l ^ pother is a fail. He, in turn, 



yr fiio rriuitiur to u jiui. 

°^\ivei^hs everything with her. 



Another... 

(Continued from page 42) 

spent several thousands, now who shall 
we turn to for-reimbursement? How 
^hall we take care of our several casual- 
ties? What shall we tell their unfor- 
tunate beneficiaries? 

It's about time the government come 
out in the open and tell us that all that 
was a necessary adjunct to ease our suf- 
ferings in the mountains a bed time 
story, though. 

And the reward— was a pie in the sky. 

After that I was given the order to 
return my command to civilian status 
after all this anxious waiting at that. 
Among other things in that order was 
to- collect and return all U.S. Army 
ecfuipment given us during that hectic 
campaign. 

Looking about myself Tvq a uniform 
without headgear, underwear, a pair of 
socks and jungle shoes. To turn 'em in, 
between my skin and the whole world 
those were th e only ones I hav e at the 
time. And from that day on, I could've 
been as naked as the day when I was 
born— that was my nearest dream of 
that reward after all. So help me God. 

TITE QUKZOMAN ttEVIEW 



Labor and Capital 

{Continued from- page 38) 
leaders, but who, guided by selfish motives and interests, 
instead of leading labor to green pastures of economic 
sufficiency and well-being have attempted to sow the 
seeds of discord among the ranks and files of labor to the 
grave detriment of the country as a whole. Some of them 
have had the courage to preach ideologies antagonistic to 
those of a democratic country, ideas subversive to a go- 
vernment like ours, which is a government of laws. Given 
a chance, those pseudo labor leaders would destroy this 
democratic regime and build upon its ruins a government 
where individual liberty arid free enterprise will forever 

be eliminated. 

I want to repeat for the sake of emphasis that there 

must be, because we need, a unified PPhilippine labor 
movement; but that in the unification, meticulous care 
should be taken in the choice of men as movement leaders- 
We must see to it that the^men who are elevated to the 
top ranks of labor are men whose integrity and sincerity 
are beyond suspicion — men who embrace the principles 
of democracy without mental reservation. 

Before I close, 1 want to make an appeal once more 
to the working men in this country to place their com- 
plete faith and confidence in the present administration. 
The Government has done much, in the face of almost 
insurmountable difficulties, to improve the lot of our 
working people, and is still considering ways and means 
thru which their economic well-being can be enhanced. 
The records speak lor themselves. The amendment of die 
Rice-Share Tenancy Act so as to enable tenants in rice 
producing provinces to receive 70% of the rice crops 
harvested by them; the purchase by the Government of 
big landed estates for distribution to landless people; the 
organization of the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation 
(RFC) to enable people everywhere to rehabilitate them- 

I selves; the grant by the U. S, government of P300,000 
for the repair of the Tenement, houses in Vitas as a 
measure to ameliorate the housing situation in the City 
of Manila; the proposed construction thru the appropria- 
tion of P1,000,000 of a "Barrio Obrero" near the Manila 
North Harbor; the loan granted to Filipino fanners to 
enable them to buy seeds and working animals and there- 
by work their lands: these are but a few of the achieve- 
ments of this government during the last fiscal year which 
must have telling salutary effects upon the economy of 

our people- 1 know that I make no mistake in appealing 
to the working population to place complete faith and 
confidence in the present administration. And capital 
must do the same. It must cooperate with the govern- 
ment in the great task of bringing economic sufficiency 
to the great masses of our people. It must cooperate with 
the Government in whatever undertaking the govern- 
ment- may embark upon to achieve the greatest good for 
the greatest number. 

SEPTEMBER, 1047 



RELAX---/ 

.In his snug litle parlor the old clergyman was pointing 
out to a little company of his parishioners the manifest 
virtue of industry and application as opposed to mere 
cleverness. 

ci Now, ve take the Mc Xab brothers, for instance/' he 
explained! ' % Jack was a clever, handsome chieL Harry 
was a fine, plodding worker. The clever lad was left 
behind in the race for life. Jjhe worker was able to leave 
his widow over sixty thousand pounds." 

And then the minister's matter of fact wife spoiled it 
bv observing; "Ay, that is true. And I heard yesterday 
tliat the bright lad ik going to many the widow/' 

( Wall St. Journal) 



No Need For "\Yarry 

Before an important dinner party the hostess called the 
new waitress aside. 

"When you arc in the dining room tor&ght \ she- whis- 
pered, "/ want you to be careful that you don't spill any- 
thing. 9 ' 

The maid .smiled knowingly — f 
"Don't worry, ma'am" she said. 'I don talk much! > 

James R. Redmond 



Definition 

A Negro met an acquaintance of his, also colored, on 
the street and was surprised to see that his friend had on 
a new suit, new hat, new shoes and other evidences of 
prosperity. 

vt Hey. bogrj he said, '-how come you dressed up this 
way? Is you got a job?** 

Tse got somethin' better'u any job/' replid the other- 
c Tse got a profession' . 

"What is It"? 

'Tse a orator/ 7 

"What's a orator"? the shabby friend asked. 

"Don't you know y replied the resplendnt one in sur- 
prise. "Well, T il tell you. If you was to walk up to an 
ordinary guy and ask: him how much was two and two, 
he'd say v "fonr , \ but if you was to ask x>ne of us orators 
how much was two and two, he'd say," When in the 
course of human events it becomes necessary to take 
denumeral of do second denomination and add it to cTe 
figger two, 1 says unto you and I says without fear of 
successful contradiction, dat de result will invar'bly be 
four." Dat's a orator. (Therese Schiling) 



It All Depends 

Being interested in performing his civic duty in an ap- 
proaching election, a newcomer to a small town called on 
the village clerk. 

"How long must a man reside in this town hfore fte 
can vote 39 ? he inquired. 

"What ticket"? asked the clerk promptly- {The Sign) 



The Quezonian 
Review 



(L-diboriald 



For the Propagation of His Ideah \ COOPERATIVES, OUR ECONOMIC SALVATION 

The potentialities of the co operative system in our economic order can never be over- 
emphasized- Preaching its doctrine, in season and out of season, is called for> in v/eiv of 
the degree of our shallow indoctrination*, as betrayed by the anemic existence of f our co- 
operative associations. ... . 

There seems to be a great need for more intensive and extensive educational promotion 
to ivin our people over to the cooperative way of life and hitman endeavors. For the success 
of the cooperative projects depends wholely on how deeply the ideology of the whole system 
is rooted in the very soul of our people. If the past efforts have not met with the success 
that was expected, it t is high time to look into the basic causes of their dismal failures: 

We congratulate the different representatit es of the cooperative associations who are 
showing themselves as apostles of the movement, by their presence and by their 'conduct at 
the Cooperative Institute, just brought to a successful end under the auspices: of the Nat- 
ional Cooperative Administration. And if permitted to aire to those who attended a patting 
word, we would say y paraphrasing the Divine Master "Go ye forth and preach to all crea- 
tures the Gospel oj Love and Cooperation". MP hi 



M. P. MALUPA 
Editor & Publisher 

D V. BAQUILAR 

Art Editor 

C. Fa. ALVEAR 
A. DUENAS RAFAEL 
S. S. SIMUNDO 
Associate ' Editors 



ATTY. RACHEL ENRIQUEZ 
— FIDELINO 

Legal-Researc/i 



N. C. PINEDA 
Office Manager 

R. B. GUHL 
Advertising Manager 

f: r. rubillos 

Circulation Manager 



Editorial & Business Offices: 
313 Center Theatre Bldg. 
Quezon Boulvd.j Manila 



Subscription Rates Payable in Ad- 
vance : 

Local -- 1 year f>10.00; 6 inoe. P6.00 
Foreign — 1 year ?20.00; 6 mos. 
P12.00. 



Entered in the Bureau of Posts* as 
second class mail matter on Sept. 
29 1947. 



MORAL SPEECH FOR WOMEN 

Because 'woman carries a 'man' in her name is not enough reason for her to use such 
profane speech supposedly all tight for our men-folks, 'for speech is the integral factor- 
determiner of man's finery. An 'unrefined-speaking woman is unfit to be called the future 
madonna of her children. Adapting especially., such 'slanguage' as now common among our 
many army men-folks and civdian fraters althodoing it unconsciously becomes rather seeming- 
ly natural: this fact is too sorrowfully humiliating on the part of our people. This could 
not he an excuse for this 'social ill 9 now affecting our masses. 

Direct your eyes to a mother and her child for a few moments. A little later her child 
happens to have erred. At once a 'profane word' comes out from that mother instead of a 
uord of admonition or sympathy. I) hat a sad picture! What a humiliation f 

"Moral is hut man's great divine power to achieve all filings on earth-because it is life " 
once was said by a Filipino leader of the Crusader's World Army, 

is is much 
er emanate an im- 



Being a popular man of the community is not a license to immoral speech, th 

e true to the 'pedestalized' sex. From that which is adored should never cman 

al uord or a non-moral word. 

A "reconstruction of our minds ' after the psychical effects of • t • 

iii #■ " 1,0 "/ u<ir is something 

iamental to a growing nationhood, therefore let's begin the crusade n,^m rv rii* 



fundai 

THING iri: DO WE MUST BE MORAL* -C fa Alvear 



BASIS OF FIL-AMERICANISM 

The beautiful ideal of I'd Americanism was not brought about by the Krag, neither by 
the carbine, nor by the tommy gun y nor even by the atomic bomb. It came to be by the 
association of two peoples, each, conscious of their human dignity and essential eauality 
before God and before His Laws. equamy 

It was not nourished by the arrogant superiority complex of either one or i I 
ties, because of shin pigmentation, or blue-blooded ascendants, and or other aCc'd 7 Mf 
ferences. It Was nurtured by the spirit of {t tk*«n44*ke*, bom of the realhati! ' 7 
men were created equal united in (me brotherhood in the overall fatherh A T' / 
tor of all (f ° l the Crw 

Abuses of ^unofficial I- j& a?nbassadors\ that mortify the self-respect and 



racial dig- 



nity of Filipinos, can only hasten the bankruptcy of that ideal. For they a 
acids that uoih into the molecular fissures of that steel of friendship foj^^b^^^^ 
decades of intimate association between America and the Philippine. ^ 

// that ideal is to be kept for the good of both, it is absolutely necessary that tl 
canons of mutual respect and consideration be observed by both parties but more < . 
so, by the official and unofficial ambassadors of both countries. MPM ' ^ (S P*ciaUy 



THE QUEZONIAN REVIEW 



Smoke Tabacalera Cigars & Cigarettes 



BEST OF THE BEST 



THEY SATISFY' 




Pigtail 
Conde de Guell Senior 
Conde de Guell Junior 
Coronas 
High Life 
Vice Presidentes 
Rositas 
Pagkakaisa 





Don't Miss To See.... 

PREMIERE PRODUCTIONS — Producers of Box Office H itS 

BAGONG SINDERELA 

NGAYON at KAILAN MAN 
CAPRICHOSO 

ISANG DAKOT NA BIGAS 
PERFIDIA 



otninff Soon at i^out°»*** 

FAVORITE THEATRE 



1 



